Z *" -I 2 ^~"^ -J Z 
IES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNI NVIN0SH1IIAIS S3IHV; 
e </> - — </> k - - 
LSNI NVIN0SH1IIAIS S3IHVH9n LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITl 
z c/> 2: -,..
^> z v^- 
I ES^SMITHSONIAN^ INSTITUTI0N^N0linillSNI_NVIN0SHlllMS^S3 I U V 
LSNI^NVINOSHIIWS^SB I UVH 8 H^LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIANJNSTITI 
X\ * n^?% ^ [|ff ^A * [Iff ^*\ => JM^yr* > 
I ES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTITUTION^NOIiniilSNI NVIN0SH1IWS S3 I HV 
(/> z * c/> z 
ISNI^NVlNOSHllWS^SBIUVUan^LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN JNSTIT 
z * x -j z — -I z 
tIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNI NVIN0SH1IWS S3lb\ 
IISNI^NVINOSHIINS S3 I U VH a l"l~~L I B R AR I ES SMITHSONIAN"~INSTn 
z ^ ^ z .y..
^ z <* 
p - 
CO 
./ 
^ 
N^\ 
RIES SMITHSONIAN^INSTITUTION NOIinillSNI^NVINOSHllWS S3IH 
|JLSNI~NVIN0SH1IWS S3!dVyan~LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN~INSTr 
Z f> Z .,..-..
t/> 2 %s 
R I ES < "sMITHSONIAN_ INSTITUTION N0l±nJLI±SNI_NVIN0SHilWS < ' > S3 I U 
USNI^NVINOSHIIIAIS S3IHVUail LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN^INSTI 
r- z 
o 
1 
R I ES^SMITHSONIAN'lNSTITUTION^NOIinillSNl'NVINOSHllWS S3 I U 
z .
w z 
to ^^ 
liisni2nvinoshiiws ot S3 i a va a I l\l B RAR I es^smithsonian jnsti 
Z _J Z ^ Z 
RIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIIOIUSNI NVIN0SH1IIAIS S3I* 
z r- z 
UlSNrNVINOSHllWS S3 I U VH a !T _ LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTI 
"* ,rk Z ~v £ Z 
i/% 
9 
HANDBOOK 
OF 
THE BRITISH FLORA.
ILLUSTEATED.
Sob 
5h?
'i 6 ", 5 HANDBOOK 
THE BRITISH FLORA; 
A DESCEIPTION 
OF 
THE FLOWERING PLANTS AND FERNS 
INDIGENOUS TO, OE NATtTBALIZED IN, 
%\t §ritblj $sl*s.
JOK THE USE OF BEGINNEBS AND AMATEURS.
GEORGE BENTHAM, F.R.S., 
PRESIDENT OP THE LINNEAN SOCIETY.
TOtlj illustrations from Original Braining* fcg 89, JFitcfr* 
VOL.
I. 
LONDON : 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., X 5, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
1865.
PRINTED BY 
JOHN EDWARD TAYLOR, LITTLE QUEEN STREET, 
LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS.
PREFACE.
The favour with, which the * Handbook of the British Flora ' has been 
received by the Public, renders it unnecessary here to repeat the reasons 
which originally induced the preparation of a work specially destined 
r to assist the unscientific botanist in the determination of British plants.
In the present edition, in order still further to facilitate that object, the 
publishers have called in aid the experienced talent of Mr. W.
Fitch, 
who has supplied original drawings of every species included in the 
Flora.
In bringing these illustrations within a compass which should 
enable their being printed in with the text, the Artist has had to contend 
not only with the general difficulty of expressing the characteristic fea- 
tures of a plant on so reduced a scale, but also of representing, within 
spaces nearly uniform in compass, specimens which in nature are so 
enormously different in size.
This he has endeavoured in some mea- 
sure to accomplish by including in the figure a larger or smaller portion 
of the plant ; but circumstances do not admit of this being done to any 
great extent.
In order to give the prominent characters of the species 
it was necessary to adopt a scale of reduction varying almost for each 
one.
The reader must therefore be careful, in judging of the relative 
size of the foliage, flowers, etc., of two species, not to be misled by their 
apparent size in the illustrations, without checking it by the dimen- 
sions given in the text.
The dissections which accompany each figure 
have been generally taken from the artist's own specimens, the organs 
selected by him for illustration being those which appeared to him the 
most characteristic of the species or genus.
VI PREFACE.
The text has undergone a careful revision, by the Author correcting 
such errors as a frequent practical use of the work, as well as the sug- 
gestions of friends, have pointed out.
A few alterations have been made 
in some of the Analytical Keys, in cases where difficulties had been 
experienced in arriving at the names of anomalous species.
In the 
stations or habitats, those connected with the Irish Flora have been 
considerably modified, chiefly in consequence of the valuable notes 
communicated by Mr. Isaac Carroll, of Cork.
The Author has also 
availed himself of important hints received from Professor Oliver and 
from Mr. E.
Skepper, of Bury St. Edmund's, as well as of detached 
observations on the part of numerous friends and correspondents, or 
gleaned from published criticisms of the ' Handbook/ 
In the general arrangement of the families and genera, although the 
progress of the investigations undertaken in conjunction with Dr.
Hooker for the * Genera Plantarum ' have suggested several alterations, 
these have not appeared to be of sufficient importance to disturb the 
order previously adopted, excepting in the case of the Purslane Family 
{Portulacece) and theParonychia Family, which have been removed from 
Calyciflorse, to be placed, the former next to the Pink Family {Caryo- 
jphyllece), the latter next to the Amaranth Family, among Mono- 
chlamyds.
The Author regrets that it was not till after the publica- 
tion of the eighth part (pp.
281-320) that a detailed examination of 
Haloragese for the 'Australian Flora ' had convinced him that recent 
botanists were correct in removing that group to some distance from 
the (Enothera Family (Onograriece), under which they are still here 
included, after the example of the earlier followers of the Jussieuan 
method.
The great reduction in the number of supposed species adopted in 
the * Handbook ' has been severely criticized and strongly condemned 
by botanists of eminence, chiefly among those who have devoted them- 
selves to the investigation of the Flora of Europe alone or of its separate 
States.
On the other hand, the Author has more than ever reason to 
believe that the line he has adopted is in strict conformity with the 
PREFACE.
Vll 
views of several of the first botanists of the day, who have been in the 
habit of considering each species with reference to the forms it may 
assume over the whole extent of its area.
There is no doubt that in 
the case of a large number of common and widely-spread plants, such 
as the Water Crowfoots, the Briar Hoses, the Brambles, Hawkweeds, 
Willows, etc., there are numerous races of greater or less permanency, 
which are more or less positively distinct, and well worthy of being 
studied as such by those who have leisure and patience to devote them- 
selves to the subject, and which should by no means be neglected by 
the botanist who would be thoroughly grounded in his knowledge of 
plants ; yet it is believed, that with the general advance of science, the 
conviction is gradually spreading that the raising these races to the 
rank of species is giving them an undue importance, and that it is at 
once more philosophical and more practically convenient, as well to the 
general botanist in the higher branches of the science as to the more 
superficial amateur, to retain for the meaning of a species the limits 
affixed by the original principles of Linnaeus.
The only change which 
the Author has made in this respect in the present edition is the ad- 
mission as species of the Ivy Ranunculus (i£.
liederaceus) and the green 
Spleenwort {Asplenium viride), in which cases his own opinions may 
not be sufficiently established to interfere with the authority of general 
custom, and of the intermediate Bladderwort {Utricularia media), on 
the authority of Irish botanists, the Author himself being very imper- 
fectly acquainted with the plant.
With regard to the charge of having 
based his views upon the study of herbarium specimens alone, the Au- 
thor can only reply that this is a mistake, and repeat from his former 
Preface that his generalizations are chiefly "founded on personal ob- 
servation of living plants, made during many years' residence on the 
Continent as well as in this country, and on repeated comparison of 
specimens collected from the most varied and distant points of the 
geographical areas of the several species." 
Four species have been added in the present edition : the Claytonia, 
introduced from America, but now generally established as a weed of 
Vlll PREFACE.
cultivation in many English counties ; the Earthnut Pea (Lathy r us 
tuberosus), perhaps originally introduced, but now shown to have been 
long established in Essex cornfields ; and the Bermuda Sisyrinchium 
and two-leaved Smilacina (May-Lily), which have been proved to be 
truly indigenous.
The Allsihe Clover (Trifolium hybridum) is now be- 
coming in several counties so common along roadsides and ditches, that 
it will probably in future have to be included in our Floras.
The cha- 
racters and circumscription of the small Sparganium and one or two 
other species, which were in some respects mistaken in the first edition, 
have been corrected in the present one.
The Outlines of Botany, serving also as a Glossary of technical terms, 
included in the Introduction to the first edition, are here again inserted 
in the revised form sanctioned by Sir William Hooker for the series 
of Colonial Floras now publishing, embodying the amendments first 
proposed by Dr. Harvey in the Introduction to his Cape Flora.
CONTENTS.
Page 
Introduction xi 
I. Outlines of Botany, with Special Reference to Local Floras .
xi 
Chap.
I. Definitions and Descriptive Botany xi 
§ 1.
The Plant in General xii 
§ 2.
The Root xiv 
§ 3.
The Stock • xiv 
§ 4.
The Stem xv 
§ 5.
The Leaves xvi 
§ 6.
Scales, Bracts, and Stipules xx 
§ 7.
Inflorescence and its Bracts xxi 
§ 8.
The Flower in General xxiii 
§ 9.
The Calyx and Corolla or Perianth xxv 
§ 10.
The Stamens xxvii 
§ 11.
The Pistil xxviii 
§ 12.
The Receptacle and Relative Attachment of the Floral Whorls .
xxxi 
§13.
The Fruit xxxii 
§ 14.
The Seed xxxiv 
§ 15.
Accessory Organs xxxv 
Chap.
II.
Classification, or Systematic Botany xxxvi 
Chap.
III.
Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology xxxviii 
§ 1.
Structure of the Elementary Tissues xxxviii 
§ 2.
Arrangement of the Elementary Tissues, or Structure of the 
Organs of Plants xl 
§ 3.
Growth of the Organs xlii 
§ 4.
Functions of the Organs xliv 
Chap.
IV.
Collection, Preseryation, and Determination of 
Plants xlv 
II.
Index of Terms, or Glossary Hi 
III.
Arrangement of the Text and Abbreviations lvii 
IV.
Analytical Key to the Natural Orders and Anomalous 
Genera of the British Flora lix 
V. Arrangement of the Natural Orders in the present 
Work lxix 
Flora : 
Class I.
Dicotyledons to Composite, inclusive .
. .
Vol. I.
p. 1 to 504 
,, Campanulaceae to the end Vol. II.
p. 505 
Class II.
Monocotyledons 774 
Class III.
Cryptogams 1017 
Index of Names 1063 
INTRODUCTION.
I OUTLINES OF BOTANY, 
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO LOCAL FLORAS.
Chap.
I.— Definitions and Descriptive Botany.
1. The principal object of a Flora of a country, is to afford the means of 
determining (i.
e. ascertaining the name of) any plant growing in it, whether 
for the purpose of ulterior study or of intellectual exercise.
2. With this view, a Flora consists of descriptions of all the wild or native 
plants contained in the country in question, so drawn up and arranged that 
the student may identify with the corresponding description any individual 
specimen which he may gather.
3. These descriptions should be clear, concise, accurate, and characteristic, 
so as that each one should be readily adapted to the plant it relates to, and to 
no other one ; they should be as nearly as possible arranged under natural 
(184) divisions, so as to facilitate the comparison of each plant with those 
nearest allied to it ; and they should be accompanied by an artificial key or 
index, by means of which the student may be guided step by step in the ob- 
servation of such peculiarities or characters in his plant, as may lead him, with 
the least delay, to the individual description belonging to it.
4. For descriptions to be clear and readily intelligible, they should be ex- 
pressed as much as possible in ordinary well-established language.
But, for 
the purpose of accuracy, it is necessary not only to give a more precise technical 
meaning to many terms used more or le3s vaguely in common conversation, 
but also to introduce purely technical names for such parts of plants or forms 
as are of little importance except to the botanist.
In the present chapter it is 
proposed to define such technical or technically limited terms as are made use 
of in these Floras.
5. At the same time mathematical accuracy must not be expected.
The 
forms and appearances assumed by plants and their parts are infinite.
Names 
cannot be invented for all; those even that have been proposed are too numerous 
for ordinary memories.
Many are derived from supposed resemblances to well- 
known forms or objects.
These resemblances are differently appreciated by 
different persons, and the same term is not only differently applied by two 
different botanists, but it frequently happens that the same writer is led on 
different occasions to give somewhat different meanings to the same word.
The botanist's endeavours should always be, on the one hand, to make as near 
an approach to precision as circumstances will allow, and on the other hand to 
Xll INTRODUCTION.
avoid that prolixity of detail and overloading with technical terms which tends 
rather to confusion than clearness.
In this he will be more or less successful.
The aptness of a botanical description, like the beauty of a work of imagination, 
will always vary with the style and genius of the author.
§ 1.
The Plant in General.
6. The Plant, in its botanical sense, includes every being which has vege- 
table life, from the loftiest tree which adorns our landscapes, to the humblest 
moss which grows on its stem, to the mould or fungus which attacks our pro- 
visions, or the green scum that floats on our ponds.
7. Every portion of a plant which has a distinct part or function to perform 
in the operations or phenomena of vegetable life is called an Organ.
8. What constitutes vegetable life, and what are the functions of each organ, 
belong to Vegetable Physiology ; the microscopical structure of the tissues 
composing the organs, to Vegetable Anatomy ; the composition of the substances 
of which they are formed, to Vegetable Chemistry ; under Descriptive and Sys- 
tematic Botany we have chiefly to consider the forms of organs, that is, their 
Morphology, in the proper sense of the term, and their general structure so far 
as it affects classification and specific resemblances and differences.
The terms 
we shall now define belong chiefly to the latter branch of Botany, as being 
that which is essential for the investigation of the Flora of a country.
We 
shall add, however, a short chapter on Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology, as 
a general knowledge of both imparts an additional interest to and facilitates the 
comparison of the characters and affinities of the plants examined.
9. In the more perfect plants, their organs are comprised in the general 
terms Root, Stem, Leaves, Flowers, and Fruit.
Of these the three first, 
whose function is to assist in the growth of the plant, are Organs of Vegetation ; 
the flower and fruit,, whose office is the formation of the seed, are the Organs of 
Reproduction.
10.
All these organs exist, in one shape or another, at some period of the 
life of most, if not all, flowering plants, technically called phcenogamous or pha- 
nerogamous plants ; which all bear some kind of flower and fruit in the bota- 
nical sense of the term.
In the lower classes, the ferns, mosses, fungi, moulds 
or mildews, seaweeds, etc., called by botanists cryptogamous plants, the flowers, 
the fruit, and not unfrequently one or more of the organs of vegetation, are 
either wanting, or replaced by organs so different as to be hardly capable of 
bearing the same name.
11.
The observations comprised in the following pages refer exclusively to 
the flowering or phsenogamous plants.
The study of the cryptogamous classes 
has now become so complicated as to form almost a separate science.
They are 
therefore not included in these introductory observations, nor, with the excep- 
tion of ferns, in the present Flora.
12.
Plants are 
Monocarpic, if they die after one flowering- season.
These include An- 
nuals, which flower in the same year in which they are raised from seed ; and 
Biennials, which only flower in the year following that in which they are 
sown.
Caulocarpic, if, after flowering, the whole or part of the plant lives through 
the winter and produces fresh flowers another season.
These include Her- 
baceous perennials, in which the greater part of the plant dies after flowering, 
leaving only a small perennial portion called the Stock or Caudex, close to or 
within the earth ; Under shrubs, suffruticose or suffrutescent plants, in which 
the flowering branches, forming a considerable portion of the plant, die down 
after flowering, but leave a more or less prominent perennial and woody base ; 
Shrubs (frutescent or fruticose plants), in which the perennial woody part 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
xin 
forms the greater part of the plant, but branches near the base, and does not 
much exceed a man's height ; and Trees {arboreous or arborescent plants) 
when the height is greater and forms a woody trunks scarcely branching from 
the base.
Bushes are low, much-branched shrubs.
13.
The terms Monocarpic and Caulocarpic are but little used, but the 
other distinctions enumerated above are universally attended to, although 
more useful to the gardener than to the botanist, who cannot always assign to 
them any precise character.
Monocarpic plants, which require more than two 
or three years to produce their flowers, will often, under certain circumstances, 
become herbaceous perennials, and are generally confounded with them.
Truly perennial herbs will often commence flowering the first year, and have 
then all the appearance of annuals.
Many tall shrubs and trees lose annually 
their flowering branches like undershrubs.
And the same botanical species 
may be an annual or a perennial, a herbaceous perennial or an undershrub, an 
undershrub or a shrub, a shrub or a tree, according to climate, treatment, or 
variety.
14.
Plants are usually terrestrial, that is, growing on earth, or aquatic, i.
e. 
growing in water ; but sometimes they may be found attached by their roots 
to other plants, in which case they are epiphytes when simply growing upon 
other plants without penetrating into their tissue, 'parasites when their roots 
penetrate into and derive more or less nutriment from the plant to which they 
are attached.
15.
The simplest form of the perfect plant, the annual, consists of — 
(1) The Root ; or descending axis, which grows downwards from the stem, 
divides and spreads in the earth or water, and absorbs food for the plant 
through the extremities of its branches.
(2) The Stem, or ascending axis, which grows upwards from the root, 
branches and bears first one or more leaves in succession, then one or more 
flowers, and finally one or more fruits.
It contains the tissues or other channels 
(217) by which the nutriment absorbed by the roots is conveyed in the form of 
sap (192) to the leaves or other points of the surface of the plant, to be elabo- 
rated or digested (218), and afterwards redistributed over different parts of the 
plant for its support and growth.
(3) The Leaves, usually flat, green, and horizontal, are variously arranged 
on the stem and its branches.
They elaborate or digest (218) the nutriment 
brought to them through the stem, absorb carbonic acid gas from the air, ex- 
haling the superfluous oxygen, and returning the assimilated sap to the stem.
(4) The Flowers, usually placed at or towards the extremities of the 
branches.
They are destined to form the future seed.
When perfect and com- 
plete, they consist: 1st, of a pistil in the centre, consisting of one or more 
carpels, each containing the germ of one or more seeds ; 2nd, of one or more 
stamens outside the pistil, whose action is necessary to fertilize the pistil or 
enable it to ripen its seed ; 3rd, of a perianth or floral envelope, which usually 
encloses the stamens and pistil when young, and expands and exposes them to 
view when fully formed.
This complete perianth is double : the outer one, 
called Calyx, is usually more green and leaf-like ; the inner one, called the 
Corolla, more conspicuous, and variously coloured.
It is the perianth, and 
especially the corolla, as the most showy part, that is generally called the flower 
in popular language.
(5) The Fruit, consisting of the pistil or its lower portion, which persists or 
remains attached to the plant after the remainder of the flower has withered 
and fallen off.
It enlarges and alters more or less in shape or consistence, 
becomes a seed-vessel, enclosing the seed until it is ripe, when it either opens 
to discharge the seed or falls to the ground with the seed.
In popular language 
the term fruit is often limited to such seed-vessels as are or look juicy and 
eatable.
Botanists give that name to all seed-vessels.
XIV INTRODUCTION.
16.
The herbaceous perennial resembles the annual during the first year of 
its growth ; but it also forms (usually towards the close of the season), on its 
stock (the portion of the stem and root w r hich does not die), one or more buds, 
either exposed, and then popularly called eyes, or concealed among leaves.
These buds, called leaf -buds, to distinguish them from fioiver-buds or un- 
opened flowers, are future branches as yet undeveloped ; they remain dormant 
through the w r inter, and the following spring grow r out into new stems bearing 
leaves and flowers like those of the preceding year, whilst the lower part of the 
stock emits fresh roots to replace those which had perished at the same time as 
the stems.
17.
Shrubs and trees form similar leaf- buds either at the extremity of their 
branches, or along the branches of the year.
In the latter case these buds are 
usually axillary, that is, they appear in the axil of each leaf, i.
e. in the angle 
formed by the leaf and the branch.
"When they appear at any other part 
of the plant they are called adventitious.
If these buds by producing roots (19) 
become distinct plants before separating from the parent, or if adventitious 
leaf-buds are produced in the place of flowers or seeds, the plant is said to be 
viviparous or proliferous.
§ 2.
The Root.
18.
Roots ordinarily produce neither buds, leaves, nor flowers.
Their 
branches, called fibres when slender and long, proceed irregularly from any 
part of their surface.
19.
Although roots proceed usually from the base of the stem or stock, they 
may also be produced from the base of any bud, especially if the bud lie along 
the ground, or is otherwise placed by nature or art in circumstances favourable 
for their development, or indeed occasionally from almost any part of the plant.
They are then often distinguished as adventitious, but this term is by some 
applied to all roots which are not in prolongation of the original radicle.
20.
Roots are 
fibrous, when they consist chiefly of slender fibres.
tuberous, when either the main root or its branches are thickened into one 
or more short fleshy or woody masses called tubers (25).
taproots, when the main root descends perpendicularly into the earth, 
emitting only very small fibrous branches.
21.
The stock of a herbaceous perennial, or the lower part of the stem of an 
annual or perennial, or the lowest branches of a plant, are sometimes under- 
ground and assume the appearance of a root.
They then take the name of 
rhizome.
The rhizome may always be distinguished from the true root by the 
presence or production of one or more buds, or leaves, or scales.
§ 3.
The Stock.
22.
The Stock of a herbaceous perennial, in its most complete state, in- 
cludes a small portion of the summits of the previous year's roots, as well as of 
the base of the previous year's stems.
Such stocks will increase yearly, so as at 
length to form dense tufts.
They will often preserve through the winter a few 
leaves, amongst which are placed the buds which grow out into stems the fol- 
lowing year, whilst the underside of the stock emits new roots from or amongst 
the remains of the old ones.
These perennial stocks only differ from the per- 
manent base of an undershrub in the shortness of the perennial part of the 
stems and in their texture usually less woody.
23.
In some perennials, however, the stock consists merely of a branch, 
which proceeds in autumn from the base of the stem either aboveground or 
underground, and produces one or more buds.
This branch, or a portion of 
it, alone survives the winter.
In the following year its buds produce the new 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XV 
stem and roots, whilst the rest of the plant, eyen the branch on which these 
buds were formed, has died away.
These annual stocks, called sometimes 
hybernacula, offsets, or stolons, keep up the communication between the annual 
stem and root of one year and those of the following year, thus forming alto- 
gether a perennial plant.
24.
The stock, whether annual or perennial, is often entirely underground or 
rootlike.
This is the rootstock, to which some botanists limit the meaning of 
the term rhizome.
When the stock is entirely root-like, it is popularly called 
the crown of the root.
25.
The term tuber is applied to a short, thick, more or less succulent root- 
stock or rhizome, as well as to a root of that shape (20), although some bota- 
nists propose to restrict its meaning to the one or to the other.
An Orchis 
tuber, called by some a knob, is an annual tuberous rootstock with one bud at 
the top.
A potato is an annual tuberous rootstock with several buds.
26.
A bulb is a stock of a shape approaching to globular, usually rather 
conical above and flattened underneath, in which the bud or buds are concealed, 
or nearly so, under scales.
These scales are the more or less thickenened bases 
of the decayed leaves of the preceding year, or of the undeveloped leaves of the 
future year, or of both.
Bulbs are annual or perennial, usually underground 
or close to the ground, but occasionally buds in the axils of the upper leaves 
become transformed into bulbs.
Bulbs are said to be scaly when their scales 
are thick and loosely imbricated, tunicated when the scales are thinner, broader, 
and closely rolled round each other in concentric layers.
27.
A corm is a tuberous rootstock, usually annual, shaped like a bulb, but 
in which the bud or buds are not covered by scales, or of which the scales are 
very thin and membranous.
§ 4.
The Stem.
28.
Stems are 
erect, when they ascend perpendicularly from the root or stock ; twiggy 
or virgate, when at the same time they are slender, stiff, and scarcely 
branched.
decumbent or ascending, when they spread horizontally, or nearly so, at 
the base, and then turn upwards and become erect.
procumbent, when they spread along the ground the whole or the greater 
portion of their length ; diffuse^ when at the same time very much and rather 
loosely branched.
prostrate, when they lie still closer to the ground.
creeping, when they emit roots at their nodes.
This term is also frequently 
applied to any rhizomes or roots which spread horizontally.
tufted or ccespitose, when very short, close, and many together from tho 
same stock.
29.
Weak climbing stems are said to twine, when they support themselves 
by winding spirally round any object ; such stems are also called voluble.
When 
they simply climb without twining, they support themselves by their leaves, or 
by special clasping organs called tendrils (169), or sometimes, like the Ivy, by 
small root-like excrescences.
30.
Suckers are young plants formed at the end of creeping, underground 
rootstocks.
Scions, runners, and stolons, or stoles, are names given to young 
plants formed at the end or at the nodes (31) of branches or stocks creeping 
wholly or partially aboveground, or sometimes to the creeping stocks them- 
selves.
31.
A node is a point of the stem or its branches at which one or more 
leaves, branches, or leaf-buds (16) are given off, An internode is the portion 
of the stem comprised between two nodes.
32.
Branches or leaves are 
XVI INTRODUCTION.
opposite, when two proceed from the same node on opposite sides of the 
stem.
whorled or verticillate (in a whorl or verticil) , when several proceed from 
the same node, arranged regularly round the stem ; geminate, ternate, fascicled, 
or fasciculate when two, three, or more proceed from the same node on the 
same side of the stem.
A tuft of fasciculate leaves is usually in fact an axil- 
lary leafy branch, so short that the leaves appear to proceed all from the same 
point.
alternate, when one only proceeds from each node, one on one side and 
the next above or below on the opposite side of the stem.
decussate, when opposite, but each pair placed at right-angles to the next 
pair above or below it ; distichous, when regularly arranged one above another 
in two opposite rows, one on each side of the stem ; tristichous, when in three 
rows, etc.
(92).
scattered, when irregularly arranged round the stem ; frequently, however, 
botanists apply the term alternate to all branches or leaves that are neither 
opposite nor whorled.
secund, when all start from or are turned to one side of the stem.
33.
Branches are dichotomous, when several times forked, the two branches 
of each fork being nearly equal ; trichotomous, when there are three nearly 
equal branches at each division instead of two ; but when the middle branch 
is evidently the principal one, the stem is usually said to have two opposite 
branches ; umbellate, when divided in the same manner into several nearly 
equal branches proceeding from the same point.
If however the central branch 
is larger than the two or more lateral ones, the stem is said to have opposite or 
whorled branches, as the case may be.
34.
A culm is a name sometimes given to the stem of Grasses, Sedges, and 
some other Monocotyledonous plants.
§ 5.
The Leaves.
35.
The ordinary or perfect Leaf consists of a flat blade or lamina, usually 
green, and more or less horizontal, attached to the stem by a stalk called a foot- 
stalk or petiole.
When the form or dimensions of a leaf are spoken of, it is 
generally the blade that is meant, without the petiole or stalk.
36.
The end by which a leaf, a part of the flower, a seed, or any other organ, 
is attached to the stem or other organ, is called its base, the opposite end is its 
apex or summit, excepting sometimes in the case of anther-cells (115).
37.
Leaves are 
sessile, when the blade rests on the stem without the intervention of a 
petiole.
amplexicaul or stem-clasping, when the sessile base of the blade clasps the 
stem horizontally.
perfoliate, when the base of the blade not only clasps the stem, but closes 
round it on the opposite side, so that the stem appears to pierce through the 
blade.
decurrent, when the edges of the leaf are continued dow T n the stem so as 
to form raised lines or narrow appendages, called wings.
sheathing, when the base of the blade, or of the more or less expanded 
petiole, forms a vertical sheath round the stem for some distance above the 
node.
38.
Leaves and flowers are called radical, when inserted on a rhizome or 
stock, or so close to the base of the stem as to appear to proceed from the root, 
rhizome, or stock ; cauline, when inserted on a distinct stem.
Radical leaves 
are rosulate when they spread in a circle on the ground.
39.
Leaves are 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XV11 
simple and entire, when the blade consists of a single piece, with the mar- 
gin nowhere indented, simple being used in opposition to compound, entire in 
opposition to dentate, lobed, or divided.
ciliate, when bordered with thick hairs or fine hair-like teeth.
dentate or toothed, when the margin is only cut a little way in, into what 
have been compared to teeth.
Such leaves are serrate, when the teeth are re- 
gular and pointed like the teeth of a saw ; crenate, when regular and blunt or 
rounded (compared to the battlements of a tower) ; serrulate, and crenulate, 
when the serratures or crenatures are small ; sinuate, when the teeth are broad, 
not deep, and irregular (compared to bays of the coast) ; toavy or undulate, 
when the edges are not flat, but bent up and down (compared to the waves of 
the sea).
lobed or cleft, when more deeply indented or divided, but so that the 
incisions do not reach the midrib or petiole.
The portions thus divided take 
the name of lobes.
When the lobes are narrow and very irregular, the leaves 
are said to be laciniate.
The spaces between the teeth or lobes are called 
sinuses.
divided or dissected, when the incisions reach the midrib, or petiole, but 
the parts so divided off, called segments, do not separate from the petiole, even 
when the leaf falls, without tearing.
compound, when divided to the midrib or petiole, and the parts so divided 
off, called leaflets, separate, at least at the fall of the leaf, from the petiole, as 
the whole leaf does from the stem, without tearing.
The common stalk upon 
which the leaflets are inserted is called the common petiole or the rhachis ; the 
separate stalk of each leaflet is a petiolule.
40.
Leaves are more or less marked by veins, which, starting from the stalk, 
diverge or branch as the blade widens, and spread all over it more or less 
visibly.
The principal ones, when prominent, are often called ribs or nerves, 
the smaller branches only then retaining the name of veins, or the latter are 
termed veinlets.
The smaller veins are often connected together like the meshes 
of a net, they are then said to anastomose, and the leaf is said to be reticulate or 
net-veined.
When one principal vein runs direct from the stalk towards the 
summit of the leaf, it is called the midrib.
When several start from the stalk, 
diverge slightly without branching, and converge again towards the summit, 
they are said to be parallel, although not mathematically so.
When 3 or 5 or 
more ribs or nerves diverge from the base, the leaf is said to be 3-nerved, 5- 
nerved, etc., but if the lateral ones diverge from the midrib a little above the 
base, the leaf is triplinerved, quintuplinerved, etc.
The arrangement of the 
veins of a leaf is called their venation.
41.
The Leaflets, Segments, Eiobes, or Veins of leaves are 
pinnate (feathered), wmen there are several succeeding each other on each 
side of the midrib or petiole, compared to the branches of a feather.
A pinnately 
lobed or divided leaf is called lyrate when the terminal lobe or segment is 
much larger and broader than the lateral ones, compared, by a stretch of 
imagination, to a lyre ; runcinate, when the lateral lobes are curved backwards 
towards the base of the leaf ; pectinate, when the lateral lobes are numerous, 
narrow, and regular, like the teeth of a comb.
palmate or digitate, when several diverge from the same point, compared 
to the fingers of the hand.
ternate, when three only start from the same point, in which case the dis- 
tinction between the palmate and pinnate arrangement often ceases, or can only 
be determined by analogy with allied plants.
A leaf with ternate lobes is called 
trifid.
A leaf with three leaflets is sometimes improperly called a ternate leaf: 
it is the leaflets that are ternate ; the whole leaf is trifoliolate.
Ternate leaves 
are leaves growing three together.
pedate, when the division is at first ternate, but the two outer branches 
b 
XV111 INTRODUCTION.
are forked, the outer ones of each fork again forked, and so on, and all 
the branches are near together at the base, compared vaguely to the foot of a 
bird.
42.
Leaves with pinnate, palmate, pedate, etc., leaflets, are usually for short- 
ness called pinnate, palmate, pedate, etc., leaves.
If they are so cut into seg- 
ments only, they are usually said to be pinnalisect, palmatisect, pedatisect, 
etc., although the distinction between segments and leaflets is often unheeded 
in descriptions, and cannot indeed always be ascertained.
If the leaves are so 
cut onlv into lobes, they are said to be pinnatifid, palmatifid, pedatifid, etc.
43.
The teeth, lobes, segments, or leaflets, may be again toothed, lobed, 
divided, or compounded.
Some leaves are even three or more times di- 
vided or compounded.
In the latter case they are termed decompound.
When twice or thrice pinnate (bipinnate or tripinnate), each primary or se- 
condary division, with the leaflets it comprises, is called a pinna.
"When the 
pinna of a leaf or the leaflets of a pinna are in pairs, without an odd terminal 
pinna or leaflet, the leaf or pinna so divided is said to be abruptly pinnate ; if 
there is an odd terminal pinna or leaflet, the Laf or pinna is unequally pinnate 
(imparipinnalum) .
44.
The number of leaves or their parts is expressed adjectively by the fol- 
lowing numerals, derived from the Latin : — 
uni-, bi-, tri-, quadii-, quinque-, sex-, septem-, octo-, novem-, decern-, multi- 
1-.
2-, 3-, 4-, 5-, 6-, 7-, 8-, 9-, 10-, many- 
prefixed to a termination, indicating the particular kind of part referred to.
Thus— 
unidentate, bidentate, multidentate, mean one- toothed, two -toothed, many- 
toothed, etc.
bifid, trifid, rnultifid, mean two-lobed, three-lobed, many -lobed, etc.
unifoliolate, bifoliolate, multifoliolate, mean having one leaflet, two leaflets, 
many leaflets, etc.
unifoliate, bifoliate, multifoliate, mean having one leaf, two leaves, many 
leaves, etc.
biternate and triternate, mean twice or thrice ternately divided.
unijugate, bijugate, multijugate, etc., pinnae or leaflets, mean that they are 
in one, two, many, etc., pairs (Juga).
45.
Leaves or their parts, when flat, or any other flat organs in plants, are 
linear, when long and narrow, at least four or five times as long as broad, 
falsely compared to a mathematical line, for a linear leaf has always a per- 
ceptible breadth.
lanceolate, when about three or more times as long as broad, broadest be- 
low the middle, and tapering towards the summit, compared to the head of a 
lance.
cuneate, when broadest above the middle, and tapering towards the base, 
compared to a wedge with the point downwards ; when very broadly cuneate 
and rounded at the top, it is often called flabellijorm or fan-shaped.
spathulate, when the broad part near the top is short, and the narrow taper- 
ing part long, compared to a spatula or flat ladle.
ovate, when scarcely twice as long as broad, and rather broader below the 
middle, compared to the longitudinal section of an egg ; obovate is the same 
form, with the broadest part above the middle.
orbicular, oval, oblong, elliptical, rhomboidal, etc., when compared to the 
corresponding mathematical figures.
transversely oblong, or oblate, when conspicuously broader than long.
falcate, when curved like the blade of a scythe.
46.
Intermediate forms between any two of the above are expressed by com- 
bining two terms.
Thus, a linear-lanceolate leaf is long and narrow, yet broader 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XIX 
below the middle, an:"!
tapering to a point ; a linear-ohlong one is scarcely narrow 
enough to be called linear, yet too narrow to be strictly oblong, and does not 
conspicuously taper either towards the summit or towards the base.
47.
The apex or summit of a leaf is 
acute or pointed, when it forms an acute angle or tapers to a point.
obtuse or blunt, when it forms a very obtuse angle, or more generally w T hen 
it is more or less rounded at the top.
acuminate or cuspidate, when suddenly narrowed at the top, and then 
more or less prolonged into an acumen or point, which may be acute or obtuse, 
linear or tapering.
Some botanists make a slight difference between the acu- 
minate and cuspidate apex, the acumen being more distinct from the rest of the 
leaf in the latter case than in the former ; but in general the two terms are used 
in the same sense, some preferring the one and some the other.
truncate, when the end is cut off square.
retuse, when very obtuse or truncate, and slightly indented.
emarginate or notched, when more decidedly indented at the end of the 
midrib ; obewdate, if at the same time approaching the shape of a heart with 
its point downwards.
mucronate, when the midrib is produced beyond the apex in the form of 
a small point.
aristate, when the point is fine like a hair.
48.
The base of the leaf is liable to the same variations of form as the apex, 
but the terms more commonly used are tapering or narrowed for acute and 
acuminate, rounded for obtuse, and cordate for emarginate.
In all cases the 
petiole or point of attachment prevent any such absolute termination at the 
base as at the apex.
49.
A leaf may be cordate at the base whatever be its length or breadth, or 
whatever the shape of the two lateral lobes, called auricles (or little ears), 
formed by the indenture or notch, but the term cordiform or heart-shaped leaf 
is restricted to an ovate and acute leaf, cordate at the base, with rounded 
auricles.
The word auricles is more particularly used as applied to sessile and 
stem-clasping leaves.
50.
If the auricles are pointed, the leaf is more particularly called auriculate ; 
it is moreover said to be sagittate, when the points are directed downwards, 
compared to an arrow-head ; hastate, w r hen tbe points diverge horizontally, 
compared to a halbert.
51.
A reniform leaf is broader than long, slightly but broadly cordate at the 
base, w r ith rounded auricles, compared to a kidney.
52.
In a peltate leaf, the stalk, instead of proceeding from the lower edge of 
the blade, is attached to the under surface, usually near the lovver edge, but 
sometimes in the very centre of the blade.
The peltate leaf has usually several 
principal nerves radiating from the point of attachment, being, in fact, a cor- 
date leaf, with the auricles united.
53.
All these modifications of division and form in the leaf pass so gradually 
one into the other that it is often difficult to say which term is the most appli- 
cable — whether the leaf be toothed or lobed, divided or compound, oblong or 
lanceolate, obtuse or acute, etc.
The choice of the most apt expression will 
depend on the skill of the describer.
54.
Leaves, when solid, Stems, Fruits, Tubers, and other parts of 
plants, when not flattened like ordinary leaves, are 
setaceous or capillary, when very slender like bristles or hairs.
acicular, when very slender, but stiff and pointed like needles.
subulate, when rather thicker and firmer like awls.
linear, when at least four times as long as thick ; oblong, when from about 
two to about four times as long as thick, the terms having the same sense as 
when applied to flat surfaces.
b2 
XX INTRODUCTION.
ovoid, when egg-sliaped, with the broad end downwards, obovoid, if the 
broad end is upwards ; these terms corresponding to ovate and obovate shapes 
in flat surfaces.
globular or spherical, when corresponding to orbicular in a flat surface.
Mound applies to both.
turbinate, when shaped like a top.
conical, when tapering upwards ; obconical, when tapering downwards, if 
in both eases a transverse section shows a circle.
pyramidal, when tapering upwards ; obpyramidal, w T hen tapering down- 
wards, if in both cases a transverse section shows a triangle or polygon.
fusiform, or spindle-shaped, when tapering at both ends ; cylindrical, w T hen 
not tapering at either end, if in both cases the transverse section shows a circle, 
or sometimes irrespective of the transverse shape.
terete, when the transverse section is not angular ; trigonous, triquetrous, 
if the transverse section shows a triangle, irrespective in both cases of longitu- 
dinal form.
compressed, when more or less flattened laterally ; depressed, when more 
or less flattened vertically, or at any rate at the top ; obcompressed (in the 
achenes of Compositce), when flattened from front to back.
articulate or jointed, if at any period of their growth (usually when fully 
formed and approaching their decay, or in the case of fruits when quite ripe) 
they separate, without tearing, into two or more pieces placed end to end.
The joints where they separate are called articulations, each separate piece an 
article.
The name of joint is, in common language, given both to the articu- 
lation and the article, but more especially to the former.
Some modern bota- 
nists, however, propose to restrict it to the article, giving the name of joining 
to the articulation.
didymous, when slightly two-lobed, with rounded obtuse lobes.
moniliform, or beaded, when much contracted at regular intervals, but not 
separating spontaneously into articles.
55.
In their consistence Leaves or other organs are 
fleshy, when thick and soft ; succulent is generally used in the same sense, 
but implies the presence of more juice.
coriaceous, when firm and dry, or very tough, of the consistence of leather.
membranous, when thin and not stiff.
scarious or scariose, when very thin, more or less transparent and not 
green, yet rather stiff.
56.
The terms applied botanically to the consistence of solids are those in 
general use in common language.
57.
The mode in which unexpanded leaves are disposed in the leaf-bud is 
called their vernation or prafoliation ; it varies considerably, and technical 
terms have been proposed to express some of its varieties, but it has been 
hitherto rarely noticed in descriptive botany.
§ 6.
Scales, Bracts, and Stipules.
58.
Scales (Squama) are leaves very much reduced in size, usually sessile, 
seldom green or capable of performing the respiratory functions of leaves.
In 
©ther words, they are organs resembling leaves in their position on the plant, 
but differing in size, colour, texture, and functions.
They are most frequent 
on the stock of perennial plants, or at the base of annual branches, especially 
on the buds of future shoots, when they serve apparently to protect the dormant 
living germ from the rigour of winter.
In the latter case they are usually short, 
broad, close together, and more or less imbricated, that is, overlapping each 
Other like the tiles of a roof.
It is this arrangement as well as their usual shape 
that has suggested the name of scales, borrowed from the scales of a fish.
Im- 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXI 
bricated scales, bracts, or leaves, are said to be squarrose, when their tips are 
pointed and very spreading or recnrved.
59.
Sometimes, however, most or all the leaves of the plant are reduced to 
small scales, in which case they do not appear to perform any particular func- 
tion.
The name of scales is also given to any small broad scale-like appendages 
or reduced organs, whether in the flower or any other part of the plant.
60.
Bracts (Bractece) are the upper leaves of a plant in flower (either all 
those of the flowering branches, or only one or two immediately under the 
flower), when different from the stem-leaves in size, shape, colour or arrange- 
ment.
They are generally much smaller and more sessile.
They often partake 
of the colour of the flower, although they very frequently also retain the green 
colour of the leaves.
When small, they are often called scales.
61.
Floral leaves or leafy bracts are generally the lower bracts or the upper 
leaves at the base of the flowering branches, intermediate in size, shape, or ar- 
rangement, between the stem -leaves and the upper bracts.
62.
Bracteoles are the one or two last bracts under each flower, when they 
differ materially in size, shape, or arrangement from the other bracts.
63.
Stipules are leaf-like or scale-like appendages at the base of the leaf- 
stalk, or on the node of the stem.
When present there are generally two, one 
on each side of the leaf, and they sometimes appear to protect the young leaf 
before it is developed.
They are however exceedingly variable in size and 
appearance, sometimes exactly like the true leaves except that they have no 
buds in their axils, or looking like the leaflets of a compound leaf, sometimes 
apparently the only leaves of the plant ; generally small and narrow, sometimes 
reduced to minute scales, spots, or scars, sometimes united into one opposite 
the leaf, or more or less united with, or adnate to the petiole, or quite de- 
tached from the leaf, and forming a ring or sheath round the stem in the axil 
of the leaf.
In a great number of plants they are entirely wanting.
64.
Stipellce, or secondary stipules, are similar organs, sometimes found on 
compound leaves at the points where the leaflets are inserted.
65.
When scales, bracts, or stipules, or almost any part of the plant besides 
leaves and flowers are stalked, they are said to be stipitate, from stipes, a stalk.
§ 7.
Inflorescence and its Bracts.
66.
The Inflorescence of a plant is the arrangement of the flowering 
branches, and of the flowers upon them.
An Inflorescence is a flowering 
branch, or the flowering summit of a plant above the last stem-leaves, with its 
branches, bracts, and flowers.
67.
A single flower, or an inflorescence, is terminal when at the summit of 
a stem or leafy branch, axillary when in the axil of a stem-leaf, leaf-opposed 
when opposite to a stem-leaf.
The inflorescence of a plant is said to be terminal 
or determinate when the main stem and principal branches end in a flower or 
inflorescence (not in a leaf-bud), axillary or indeterminate when all the flowers 
or inflorescences are axillary, the stem or branches ending in leaf-buds.
68.
A Peduncle is the stalk of a solitary flower, or of an inflorescence ; that 
is to say, the portion of the flowering branch from the last stem-leaf to the 
flower, or to the first ramification of the inflorescence, or even up to its last 
ramifications; but the portion extending from the first to the last ramifications 
or the axis of inflorescence is often distinguished under the name of rliachis.
69.
A Scape or radical Peduncle is a leafless peduncle proceeding from the 
stock, or from near the base of the stem, or apparently from the root itself.
70.
A pedicel is the last branch of an inflorescence, supporting a single 
flower.
71.
The branches of inflorescences may be, like those of stems, opposite 
XX11 INTRODUCTION.
alternate, etc.
(32, 33), but very often their arrangement is different from that 
of the leafy branches of the same plant.
72.
Inflorescence is 
centrifugal, when the terminal flower opens first, and those on the lateral 
branches are successively developed.
centripetal, when the lowest flowers open first, and the main stem con- 
tinues to elongate, developing fresh flowers.
73.
Determinate inflorescence is usually centrifugal.
In determinate in florescence 
is always centripetal.
Both inflorescences may be combined on one plant, for 
it often happens that the main branches of an inflorescence are centripetal, 
whilst the flowers on the lateral branches are centrifugal : or vice versa 
74.
An Inflorescence is 
a Spike, or spicate, when the flowers are sessile along a simple undivided 
axis or rhachis.
a Raceme, or racemose, when the flowers are borne on pedicels along a 
single undivided axis or rhachis.
a Panicle, or paniculate, when the axis is divided into branches bearing 
two or more flowers.
a Head, or capitate, when several sessile or nearly sessile flowers are col- 
lected into a compact head-like cluster.
The short, flat, convex or conical axis 
on which the flowers are seated, is called the receptacle, a term also used for 
the torus of a single flower (135).
The very compact flower-heads of Composites.
are often termed compound flowers.
an Umbel, or umbellate, when several branches or pedicels appear to start 
from the same point and are nearly of the same length.
It differs from the 
head, like the raceme from the spike, in that the flowers are not sessile.
An 
umbel is said to be simple, when each of its branches or rays bears a single 
flower ; compound, when each ray bears a partial umbel or umbellule.
a Corymb, or corymbose, when the branches and pedicels, although starting 
from different points, all attain the same level, the lower ones being much 
longer than the upper.
It is a flat-topped or fastigiate panicle.
a Cyme, or cymose, when branched and centrifugal.
It is a centrifugal 
panicle, and is often corymbose.
The central flower opens first.
The lateral 
branches successively developed are usually forked or opposite (dichotomous 
or trichotomous), but sometimes after the first forking the branches are no 
longer divided, but produce a succession of pedicels on their upper side forming 
apparently unilateral centripetal racemes ; whereas if attentively examined, it 
will be found that each pedicel is at first terminal, but becomes lateral by the 
development of one outer branch only, immediately under the pedicel.
Such 
branches, when in bud, are generally rolled back at the top, like the tail of a 
scorpion, and are thence called scorpioid.
a Thyrsus, or thyrsoid, when cymes, usually opposite, are arranged in a 
narrow pyramidal panicle.
75.
There are numerous cases where inflorescences are intermediate between 
some two of the above, and are called by different botanists by one or the other 
name, according as they are guided by apparent or by theoretical similarity.
A spike-like panicle, where the axis is divided into very short branches form- 
ing a cylindrical compact inflorescence, is called sometimes a spike, sometimes a 
panicle.
If the flowers are in distinct clusters along a simple axis, the inflores- 
cence is described as an interrupted spike or raceme, according as the flowers 
are nearly sessile or distinctly pedicellate ; although when closely examined the 
flowers will be found to be inserted not on the main axis, but on a very short 
branch, thus, strictly speaking, constituting a panicle.
76.
The catkins (amenta) of Ameyitacea, the spadices of several Monocoty- 
ledons, the ears and spikelets of Grasses are forms of the spike.
77.
Bracts are generally placed singly under each branch of the inflores- 
OUTLINES OP BOTANY.
XX111 
cence, and under each pedicel ; bracteoles are usually two, one on each side, on 
the pedicel or close under the flower, or even upon the calyx itself ; but bracts 
are also frequently scattered along the branches without axillary pedicels ; and 
when the differences between the bracts and bracteoles are trifling or immaterial, 
they are usually all called bracts.
78.
When three bracts appear to proceed from the same point, they will, 
on examination, be found to be really either one bract and two stipules, or one 
bract with two bracteoles in its axil.
When two bracts appear to proceed from 
the same point, they will usually be found to be the stipules of an undeveloped 
bract, unless the branches of the inflorescence are opposite, when the bracts 
will of course be opposite also.
79.
When several bracts are collected in a whorl, or are so close together as 
to appear whorled, or are closely imbricated round the base of a head or um- 
bel, they are collectively called an Involucre.
The bracts composing an in- 
volucre are described under the names of leaves, leaflets, bracts or scales, ac- 
cording to their appearance.
Phyllaries is a useless term, occasionally applied 
to the bracts or scales of the involucre of Compositce.
An Involucel is the 
involucre of a partial umbel.
80.
When several very small bracts are placed round the base of a catyx or of 
an involucre, they ha^e been termed a calycide, and the calyx or involucre said 
to be calyculate, but these terms are now falling into disuse, as conveying a 
false impression.
81.
A Spatha is a bract or floral leaf enclosing the inflorescence of some 
Monocotyledons.
82.
Palece, Pales, or Chaff, are the inner bracts or scales in Composite, 
Graminece, and some other plants, when of a thin yet stiff consistence, usually 
narrow and of a pale colour.
83.
Glumes are the bracts enclosing the flowers of Cyperacece and Graminea.
§ 8.
The Flower in General.
84.
A complete Flower (15) is one in which the calyx, corolla, stamens, and 
pistils are all present ; a perfect flower, one in which all these organs, or such 
of them as are present, are capable of performing their several functions.
There- 
fore, properly speaking, an incomplete flower is one in which any one or more 
of these organs is wanting ; and an imperfect flower, one in which any one or 
more of these organs is so altered as to be incapable of properly performing 
its functions.
These imperfect organs are said to be abortive if much reduced 
in size or efficiency, rudimentary if so much so as to be scarcely perceptible.
But, in many works, the term incomplete is specially applied to those flowers in 
which the perianth is simple or wanting, and imperfect to those in which either 
the stamens or pistil are imperfect or wanting.
85.
A Flower is 
dichlamydeous, when the perianth is double, both calyx and corolla being 
present and distinct.
mono chl amy d eons, when the perianth is single, whether by the union of 
the calyx and corolla, or the deficiency of either.
asepalous, when there is no calyx.
apetalous, when there is no corolla.
naked, when there is no perianth at all.
hermaphrodite or bisexual, when both stamens and pistil are present and 
perfect.
male or staminate, when there are one or more stamens, but either no pistil 
at all or an imperfect one.
female or pistillate, when there is a pistil, but either no stamens at all, or 
only imperfect ones.
XXIV INTRODUCTION.
neuter ', when both stamens and pistil are imperfect or wanting.
barren or sterile, when from any cause it produces no seed.
fertile, when it does produce seed.
In some works the terms barren, fer- 
tile, and perfect are also used respectively as synonyms of male, female, and 
hermaphrodite.
86.
The flowers of a plant or species are said collectively to be unisexual or 
diclinous when the flowers are all either male or female.
monoecious, wdien the male and female flowers are distinct, but on the 3ame 
plant.
dioecious, when the male and female flowers are on distinct plants.
polygamous, when there are male, female, and hermaphrodite flowers on 
the same or on distinct plants.
87.
A head of flowers is heterogamous when male, female, hermaphrodite, 
and neuter flowers, or any two or three of them, are included in one head ; homo- 
gamous, when all the flowers included in one head are alike in this respect.
A 
spike or head of flowers is androgynous when male and female flowers are mixed 
in it.
These terms are only used in the case of very few Natural Orders.
88.
As the scales of buds are leaves undeveloped or reduced in size and al- 
tered in shape and consistence, and bracts are leaves likewise reduced in size, 
and occasionally altered in colour ; so the parts of the flower are considered as 
leaves still further altered in shape, colour, and arrangement round the axis, 
and often more or less combined with each other.- The details of this theory 
constitute the comparatively modern branch of botany called Vegetable Meta- 
morphosis, or Homology, sometimes improperly termed Morphology (8).
89.
To understand the arrangement of the floral parts, let us take a complete 
flower, in which moreover all the parts are free from each other, definite in 
number, i.
e. always the same in the same species, and symmetrical or isomerous, 
i.e. when each whorl consists of the same number of parts.
90.
Such a complete symmetrical flower consists usually of either four or five 
whorls of altered leaves (88), placed immediately one within the other.
The Calyx forms the outer whorl.
Its parts are called sepals.
The Corolla forms the next whorl.
Its parts, caSled petals, usually alternate 
with the sepals ; that is to say, the centre of each petal is immediately over or 
within the interval between two sepals.
The Stamens form one or two wdiorls within the petals.
If two, those of 
the outer whorl (the outer stamens) alternate with the petals, and are conse- 
quently opposite to, or over the centre of the sepals ; those of the inner whorl 
(the inner stamens) alternate with the outer ones, and are therefore opposite to 
the petals.
If there is only one whorl of stamens, they most frequently alter- 
nate with the petals j but sometimes they are opposite the petals and alternate 
with the sepals.
The Pistil forms the inner whorl ; its carpels usually alternate with the inner 
row of stamens.
91.
In an axillary or lateral flower the tipper parts of each whorl (sepals, 
petals, stamens, or carpels) aie those which are next to the main axis of the 
stems or branch, the loiver parts those which are furthest from it ; the inter- 
mediate ones are said to be lateral.
The words anterior (front) and posterior 
(back) are often used for lower and upper respectively, but their meaning is 
sometimes reversed if the writer supposes himself in the centre of the flower 
instead of outside of it.
92.
The number of parts in each whorl of a flower is expressed adjectively by 
the following numerals derived from the Greek : — 
mono-, 
di-, 
tri-, 
tetra-, 
penta-j 
hexa •, 
hepta, 
octo-, 
ennea- 
deca-, etc., poly- 
1-, 
2; 
3-, 
4-, 
5-, 
6-, 
7; 
8-, 
9-, 
10-.
many- 
prefixed to a termination indicating the whorl referred to.
OUTLINES OF BOTANY, XXV 
93.
Thus, a Flower is 
disepalous, trisepalous, tetrasepalous, polysepalous, etc., according as there 
are 2, 3, 4, or many (or an indefinite number of) sepals.
dipetalous, tripetalous, polyp etalous, etc., according as there are 2, 3, or 
many petals.
diandrous, triandrous, polyandrous, etc., according as there are 2, 3, or 
many stamens.
digy notes, trigynous, polygynous, etc., according as there are 2, 3, or many 
carpels.
And generally (if symmetrical), dimerous, trimerous, polymerous, etc., ac- 
cording as they are 2, 3, or many (or an indefinite number of) parts to each 
whorl.
94.
Flowers are unsymmetrical or anisomerous, strictly speaking, when any 
one of the whorls has a different number of parts from any other ; but when 
the pistils alone are reduced in number, the flower is still frequently called 
symmetrical or isomerous, if the calyx, corolla, and stamina] whorls have all the 
same number of parts.
95.
Flowers are irregular when the parts of any one of the whorls are un- 
equal in size, dissimilar in shape, or do not spread regularly round the axis at 
equal distances.
It is however more especially irregularity of the corolla that 
is referred to in descriptions.
A slight inequality in size or direction in the 
other whorls does not prevent the flower being classed as regular, if the corolla 
or perianth is conspicuous and regular.
§ 9.
The Calyx and Corolla, or Perianth.
96.
The Calyx (90) is usually green, and smaller than the corolla ; some- 
times very minute, rudimentary, or wanting, sometimes very indistinctly whorled, 
or not whorled at all, or in two whorls, or composed of a large number of 
sepals, of which the outer ones pass gradually into bracts, and the inner ones 
into petals.
97.
The Corolla (90) is usually coloured, and of a more delicate texture 
than the calyx, and, in popular language, is often more specially meant by the 
flower.
Its petals are more rarely in two whorls, or indefinite in number, and 
the whorl more rarely broken than in the case of the calyx, at least when the 
plant is in a natural state.
Double flotvers are in most cases an accidental de- 
formity or monster in which the ordinary number of petals is multiplied by the 
conversion of stamens, sepals, or even carpels into petals, by the division of 
ordinary petals, or simply by the addition of supernumerary ones.
Petals are 
also sometimes very small, rudimentary, or entirely deficient.
98.
In very many cases, a so-called simple perianth (15) (of which the parts 
are usually called leaves or segments) is one in which the sepals and petals are 
similar in form and texture, and present apparently a single whorl.
But if 
examined in the young bud, one-half of the parts will generally be found to be 
placed outside the other half, and there will frequently be some slight difference 
in texture, size, and colour, indicating to the close observer the presence of both 
calyx and corolla.
Hence much discrepancy in descriptive works.
Where one 
botanist describes a simple perianth of six segments, another will speak of a 
double perianth of three sepals and three petals.
99.
The following terms and prefixes, expressive of the modifications of 
form and arrangement of the corolla and its petals, are equally applicable to the 
calyx and its sepals, and to the simple perianth and its segments.
100.
The Corolla is said to be monopetalous when the petals are united, 
either entirely or at the base only, into a cup, tube, or ring ; polypetalous when 
they are all free from the base.
These expressions, established by a long usage, 
are not strictly correct, for monopetalous (consisting of a single petal) should 
XXVI INTRODUCTION.
apply rather to a corolla really reduced to a single petal, which would then be 
on one side of the axis ; and polypetalous is sometimes used more appropriately 
for a corolla with an indefinite number of petals.
Some modern botanists have 
therefore proposed the term gamopetalous for the corolla with united petals, 
and dialypetalous for that- with free petals j but the old established expressions 
are still the most generally used.
101.
When the petals are partially united, the lower entire portion of the 
corolla is called the tube, whatever be its shape, and the free portions of the 
petals are called the teeth, lobes, or segments (39), according as they are short or 
long in proportion to the whole length of the corolla.
When the tube is ex- 
cessively short, the petals appear at first sight free, but their slight union at the 
base must be carefully attended to, being of importance in classification.
102.
The fBstivation of a corolla is the arrangement of the petals, or of 
such portion of them as is free, in the unexpanded bud.
It is 
valvate, when they are strictly whorled in their whole length, their edges 
being placed against each other without overlapping.
If the edges are much 
inflexed, the aestivation is at the same time induplicate ; involute, if the margins 
are rolled inward; reduplicate, if the margins project outwards into salient 
angles ; revolute, if the margns are rolled outwards ; plicate, if the petals are 
folded in longitudinal plaits.
imbricate, when the whorl is more or less broken by some of the petals 
being outside the others, or by their overlapping each other at least at the top.
Five-petaled imbricate corollas are quincuncialhj imbricate when one petal is 
outside, and an adjoining one wholly inside, the three others intermediate and 
overlapping on one side ; bilabiate, when two adjoining ones are inside or out- 
side the three others.
Imbricate petals are described as crumpled {corrugate) 
when puckered irregularly in the bud.
twisted, contorted, or convolute, when each petal overlaps an adjoining one 
on one side, and is overlapped by the other adjoining one on the other side.
Some botanists include the twisted aestivation in the general term imbricate; 
others carefully distinguish the one from the other.
103.
In a few cases the overlapping is so slight that the three aestivations 
cannot easily be distinguished one from the other ; in a few others the aestiva- 
tion is variable, even in the same species, but, in general, it supplies a constant 
character in species, in genera, or even in Natural Orders.
104.
In general shape the Corolla i3 
tubular, when the whole or the greater part of it is in the form of a tube 
or cylinder.
campanulate, when approaching in some measure the shape of a cup or 
bell.
urceolate, when the tube is swollen or nearly globular, contracted- at the 
top, and slightly expanded again in a narrow rim.
rotate or stellate, when the petals or lobes are spread out horizontally 
from the base, or nearly so, like a wheel or star.
hypocrateriform or salver-shaped, when the lower part is cylindrical and 
the upper portion expanded horizontally.
In this case the name of tube is re- 
stricted to the cylindrical part, and the horizontal portion is called the limb, 
whether it be divided to the base or not.
The orifice of the tube is called its 
mouth or throat.
infundibuliform, or funnel-shaped, when the tube is cylindrical at the base, 
but enlarged at the top into a more or less campanulate limb, of which the 
lobes often spread horizontally.
In this case the campanulate part, up to the 
commencement of the lobes, is sometimes considered as a portion of the tube, 
sometimes as a portion of the limb, and by some botanists again described as 
independent of either, under the name of throat (fauces).
Generally speaking, 
however, in campanulate, infundibuliform, or other corollas, where the lower 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXV11 
entire part passes gradually into the upper divided and more spreading part, 
the distinction between the tube and the limb is drawn either at the point 
where the lobes separate, or at the part where the corolla first expands, accord- 
ing to which is the most marked.
105.
Irregular corollas have received various names according to the more 
familiar forms they have been compared to.
Some of the most important are 
the 
bilabiate, or two-lipped corolla, when, in a four- or five-lobed corolla, the 
two or three upper lobes stand obviously apart, like an upper lip, from the 
two or three lower ones or under lip.
In Orchidece and some other families 
the name of lip, or labellum, is given to one of the divisions or lobes of 
the perianth.
personate, when two-lipped, and the orifice of the tube closed by a pro- 
jection from the base of the upper or lower lip, called a palate.
ringent, when very strongly two-lipped, and the orifice of the tube very 
open.
spurred^, when the tube or the lower part of a petal has a conical hollow 
projection, compared to the spur of a cock ; saccate, when the spur is short and 
round like a little bag ; gibbous, when projecting at any part into a slight 
swelling.
resupinate or reversed, when a lip, spur, etc., which in allied species is 
usually lowest, lies uppermost, and vice versa.
106.
The above terms are mostly applied to the forms of monopetalous 
corollas, but several are also applicable to those of polypetalous ones.
Terms 
descriptive of the special forms of corolla in certain Natural Orders, will be ex- 
plained under those Orders respectively.
107.
Most of the terms used for describing the forms of leaves (39, 45) are 
also applicable to those of individual petals ; but the flat expanded portion of a 
petal, corresponding to the blade of the leaf, is called its lamina, and the stalk, 
corresponding to the petiole, its claw {unguis).
The stalked petal is said to be 
tm^uiculate.
§ 10.
The Stamens.
108.
Although in a few cases the outer stamens may gradually pass into 
petals, yet, in general, Stamens are very different in shape and aspect from 
leaves, sepals, or petals.
It is only in a theoretical point of view (not the less 
important in the study of the physiological economy of the plant) that they can 
be called altered leaves.
109.
This usual form is a stalk, called the filament, bearing at the top an 
anther divided into two pouches or cells.
These anther-cells are filled with 
pollen, consisting of minute grains, usually forming a yellow dust, which, when 
the flower expands, is scattered from an opening in each cell.
When the two 
cells are not closely contiguous, the portion of the anther that unites them is 
called the connectivum.
110.
The filament is often wanting, and the anther sessile, yet still the sta- 
men is perfect ; but if the anther, which is the essential part of the stamen, is 
wanting, or does not contain pollen, the stamen is imperfect, and is then said 
to be barren or sterile (without pollen), abortive, or rudimentary (84), accord- 
ing to the degree to which the imperfection is carried.
Imperfect stamens are 
often called staminodia.
111.
In unsymmetrical flowers, the stamens of each whorl are sometimes 
reduced in number below that of the petals, even to a single one, and in several 
Natural Orders they are multiplied indefinitely.
112.
The terms monandrous and polyandrous are restricted to flowers which 
have really but one stamen, or an indefinite number respectively.
Where several 
stamens are united into one, the flower is said to be synandrous.
XXV111 INTRODUCTION.
113.
Stamens are 
monadelphous, when united by their filaments into one cluster.
This 
cluster either forms a tube round the pistil, or, if the pistil is wanting, occupies 
the centre of the flower.
diadelphous, when so united into two clusters.
The term is more espe- 
cially applied to certain Leguminosce, in which nine stamens are united in a 
tube slit open on the upper side, and a tenth, placed in the slit, is free.
In some 
other plants the stamens are equally distributed in the two clusters.
triadelphous, pentadelphous, polyadelphous, when so united into three, 
five, or many clusters.
syngenesious, when united by their anthers in a ring round the pistil, the 
filaments usually remaining free.
didynamous, when (usually in a bilabiate flower) there are are four sta- 
mens in two pairs, those of one pair longer than those of the other.
tetradynamous, when (in Crucifera) there are six, four of them longer 
than the two others.
exserted, when longer than the corolla, or even when longer than its tube, 
if the limb be very spreading.
114.
An Anther (109) is 
adnate, when continuous with the filament, the anther-cells appearing to 
lie their whole length along the upper part of the filament.
innate, when firmly attached by their base to the filament.
This is an ad- 
nate anther when rather more distinct from the filament.
versatile, when attached by their back to the very point of the filament, so 
as to swing loosely.
115.
Anther-cells may he parallel or diverging at a less or greater angle ; or 
divaricate, when placed end to end so as to form one straight line.
The end 
of each anther-cell placed nearest to the other cell is generally called its apex or 
summit, and the other end its base (36) ; but some botanists reverse the sense 
of these terms.
116.
Anthers have often, on their connectivum or cells, appendages termed 
bristles (setae), spurs, crests, points, glands, etc., according to their appearance.
117.
Anthers have occasionally only one cell : this may take place either by 
the disappearance of the partition between two closely contiguous cells, when 
these cells are said to be confluent; or by the abortion or total deficiency of one 
of the cells, when the anther is said to be dimidiate.
118.
Anthers will open or dehisce to let out the pollen, like capsules, in valves, 
pores, or slits.
Their dehiscence is introrse, when the opening faces the pistil; 
extrorse, when it is towards the circumference of the flower.
119.
Pollen (109) is not always in the form of dust.
It is sometimes col- 
lected in each cell into one or two little wax-like masses.
Special terms used in 
describing these masses or other modifications of the pollen will be explained 
under the Orders where they occur.
§ 11.
The Pistil.
120.
The carpels (91) of the Pistil, although they may occasionally assume, 
rather more than stamens, the appearance and colour of leaves, are still more 
different in shape and structure.
They are usually sessile; if stalked, their 
stalk is called a podocarp.
This stalk, upon which each separate carpel is sup- 
ported above the receptacle, must not be confounded with the gynobasis (143), 
upon which the whole pistil is sometimes raised.
121.
Each carpel consists of three parts : 
1. the Ovary, or enlarged base, which includes one or more cavities or 
cells, containing one or more small bodies called ovules.
These are the earliest 
condition of the future seeds.
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXIX 
2. the Style, proceeding from the summit of the ovary, and sup- 
porting — 
3. the Stigma j which is sometimes a point (or punctiform stigma) or 
small head (a capitate stigma) at the top of the style or ovary, sometimes a 
portion of its surface more or less lateral and variously shaped, distinguished 
by a looser texture, and covered with minute protuberances called papillce.
122.
The style is often wanting, and the stigma is then sessile on the ovary, 
but in the perfect pistil there is always at least one ovule in the ovary, and 
some portion of stigmatic surface.
Without these the pistil is imperfect, and 
said to be barren (not setting seed), abortive, or rudimentary (81), according 
to the degree of imperfection.
123.
The ovary being the essential part of the pistil, most of the terms re- 
lating to the number, arrangement, etc., of the carpels, apply specially to their 
ovaries.
In some works each separate carpel is called a pistil, all those of a 
flower constituting together the gynoecium ; but this term is in little use, and 
the word pistil is more generally applied in a collective sense.
When the 
ovaries are at all united, they are commonly termed collectively a compound 
ovary.
124.
The number of carpels or ovaries in a flower is frequently reduced below 
that of the parts of the other floral whorls, even in flowers otherwise symme- 
trical.
In a very few genera, however, the ovaries are more numerous than the 
petals, or indefinite.
They are in that case either arranged in a single whorl, 
or form a head or spike in the centre of the flower.
125.
The terms monogynous, digynous, polygynous, etc.
(with a pistil of one, 
two, or more parts), are vaguely used, applying sometimes to the whole pistil, 
sometimes to the ovaries alone, or to the styles or stigmas only.
Where a more 
precise nomenclature is adopted, the flower is 
monocarpellary , when the pistil consists of a single simple carpel.
bi-, tri-, etc., to poly-carpellary, when the pistil consists of two, three, or 
an indefinite number of carpels, whether separate or united.
syncarpous, when the carpels or their ovaries are more or less united into 
one compound ovary.
apocarpous, when the carpels or ovaries are all free and distinct.
126.
A compound ovary is 
unilocidar or one-celled, when there are no partitions between the ovules, 
or when these partitions do not meet in the centre so as to divide the cavity 
into several cells.
plurilocular or several-celled, when completely divided into two or more 
cells by partitions called dissepiments {septa), usually vertical and radiating from 
the centre or axis of the ovary to its circumference.
bi-, tri-, etc., to multi-locular, according to the number of these cells, two, 
three, etc., or many.
127.
In general the number of cells or of dissepiments, complete or partial, 
or of rows of ovules, corresponds with that of the carpels, of which the pistil is 
composed.
But sometimes each carpel is divided completely or partially into 
two cells, or has two rows of ovules, so that the number of carpels appears 
double what it really is.
Sometimes again the carpels are so completely com- 
bined and reduced a3 to form a single cell, with a single ovule, although it really 
consist of several carpels.
But in these cases the ovary is usually described as 
it appears, as well as such as it is theoretically supposed to be.
128.
In apocarpous pistils the styles are usually free, each bearing its own 
stigma.
Very rarely the greater part of the styles, or the stigmas alone, are 
united, whilst the ovaries remain distinct.
129.
Syncarpous flowers are said to have 
several styles, when the styles are free from the base.
one style, with several branches, when the styles are connected at the base, 
XXX .
IXTKODITTIOX.
but separate below the point where the stigmas or stigmatic surfaces com- 
mence.
one simple style, with several stigmas, when united up to the point where 
the stigmas or stigmatic surfaces commence, and then separating.
one simple style, with a branched, lobed, toothed, notched, or entire stigma 
(as the case may be), when the stigmas also are more or less united.
In many- 
works, however, this precise nomenclature is not strictly adhered to, and con- 
siderable confusion is often the result.
130.
In general the number of styles, or branches of the style or stigma, is 
the same as that of the carpels, but sometimes that number is doubled, espe- 
cially in the stigmas, and sometimes the stigmas are dichotomously or pinnately 
branched, or penicillate, that is, divided into a tuft of hair-like branches.
All 
these variations sometimes make it a difficult task to determine the number of 
carpels forming a compound ovary, but the point is of considerable importance 
in fixing the affinities of plants, and, by careful consideration, the real as well as 
the apparent number has now in most cases been agreed upon.
131.
The Placenta is the part of the inside of the ovary to w T hich the ovules 
are attached, sometimes a mere point or line on the inner surface, often more or 
less thickened or raised.
Placentation is therefore the indication of the part of 
the ovary to which the ovules are attached.
132.
Placentas are 
axile, when the ovules are attached to the axis or centre, that is, in pluri- 
locular ovaries, when they are attached to the inner angle of each cell ; in uni- 
locular simple ovaries, which have almost always an excentrical style or 
stigma, when the ovules are attached to the side of the ovary nearest to the 
style ; in unilocular compound ovaries, when the ovules are attached to a 
central protuberance, column, or axis rising up from the base of the cavity.
If 
this column does not reach the top of the cavity, the placenta is said to be free 
and central.
parietal, when the ovules are attached to the inner surface of the cavity of 
a one-celled compound ovary.
Parietal placentas are usually slightly thickened 
or raised lines, sometimes broad surfaces nearly covering the inner surfaee of 
the cavity, sometimes projecting far into the cavity, and constituting partial 
dissepiments, or even meeting in the centre, but without cohering there.
In 
the latter case the distinction between the one-celled and the several-celled ovary 
sometimes almost disappears.
133.
Each Ovule (121), when fully formed, usually consists of a central 
mass or nucleus enclosed in two bag-like coats, the outer one called primine, the 
inner one secundine.
The chalaza is the point of the ovule at which the base 
of the nucleus is confluent with the coats.
The foramen is a minute aperture in 
the coats over the apex of the nucleus.
134.
Ovules are 
orthotropous or straight, when the chalaza coincides with the base (36) of 
the ovule, and the foramen is at the opposite extremity, the axis of the ovule 
being straight.
campy lotr op ous or incurved, when the chalaza still coinciding with the base 
of the ovule, the axis of the ovule is curved, bringing the foramen down more 
or less towards that base.
anatropous or inverted, when the chalaza is at the apex of the ovule, and 
the foramen next to its base, the axis remaining straight.
In this, one of the 
most frequent forms of the ovule, the chalaza is connected with the base by a 
cord, called the rhaphe, adhering to one side of the ovule, and becoming more 
or less incorporated with its coats, as the ovule enlarges into a seed.
amphitropous or half-inverted, when the ovule being as it were attached 
laterally, the chalaza and foramen at opposite ends of its straight or curved axis 
are about equally distant from the base or point of attachment.
OUTLINES UV BOTANY.
XXXI 
§ 12.
The Receptacle and Relative Attachment of the Floral Whorh.
135.
The Receptacle or torus is the extremity of the peduncle (above the 
calyx), upon which the corolla, stamens, and ovary are inserted.
It is some- 
times little more than a mere point or minute hemisphere, but it is often also 
more or less elongated, thickened, or otherwise enlarged.
It must not be con- 
founded with the receptacle of inflorescence (74).
136.
A Disk, or disc, is a circular enlargement of the receptacle, usually in 
the form of a cup (cupular), of a flat disk or quoit, or of a cushion (pulvinate) .
It is either immediately at the base of the ovary within the stamens, or between 
the petals and stamens, or bears the petals or stamens or both on its margin, or 
is quite at the extremity of the receptacle, with the ovaries arranged in a ring 
round it or under it.
137.
The disk may be entire, or toothed or lobed, or divided into a number 
of parts, usually equal to or twice that of the stamens or carpels.
When the 
parts of the disk are quite separate and short, they are often called glands.
138.
Nectaries, are either the disk, or small deformed petals, or abortive sta- 
mens, or appendages at the base of petals or stamens, or any small bodies 
within the flower which do not look like petals, stamens, or ovaries.
They 
were formerly supposed to supply bees with their honey, and the term is fre- 
quently to be met with in the older Floras, but is now deservedly going out of 
use.
139.
"When the disk bears the petals and stamens, it is frequently adherent to, 
and apparently forms part of, the tube of the calyx, or it is adherent to and ap- 
parently forms part of, the ovary, or of both calyx-tube and ovary.
Hence the 
tliree following important distinctions in the relative insertion of the floral 
whorls.
140.
Petals, or as it is frequently expressed, flowers, are 
hypogynous (i.e. under the ovary), when they or the disk that bears them 
are entirely free both from the calyx and ovary.
The ovary is then described 
as free or superior, the calyx as free or inferior, the petals as being inserted on 
the receptacle.
perigynous (i.e. round the ovary), when the disk bearing the petals is quite 
free from the ovary, but is more or les3 combined with the base of the calyx- 
tube.
The ovary is then still described as free or superior, even though the 
combined disk and calyx-tube may form a deep cup with the ovary lying in the 
bottom ; the calyx is said to be free or inferior, and the petals are described 
as inserted on the calyx.
epigynous (i.e. upon the ovary), when the disk bearing the petals is com- 
bined both with the base of the calyx-tube and the outside base of the ovary ; 
either closing over the ovary so as only to leave a passage for the style, or leav- 
ing more or less of the top of the ovary free, but always adhering to it above the 
level of the insertion of the lowest ovule (except in a very few cases where the 
ovules are absolutely suspended from the top of the cell).
In epigynous 
flowers the ovary is described as adherent or inferior, the calyx as adherent or 
superior, the petals as inserted onov above the ovary.
In some works, however, 
most epigynous flowers are included in the perigynous ones, and a very dif- 
ferent meaning is giveu to the term epigynous (144), and there are a few cases 
w T here no positive distinction can be drawn between the epigynous and perigy- 
nous flowers, or again between the perigynous and hypogynous flowers.
141.
When there are no petals, it is the insertion of the stamens that de- 
termines the difference between the hypogynous, perigynous, and epigynous 
flowers.
142.
When there are both petals and stamens, 
in hypogynous flowers, the petals and stamens are usually free from each 
other, but sometimes they are combined at the base.
In that case, if the petals 
XXXll INTRODUCTION.
are distinct from each other, and the stamens are monadelphous, the petals are 
often said to be inserted on or combined with the stamina!
tube ; if the corolla is 
gamopetalous and the stamens distinct from each other, the latter are said to be 
inserted in the tube of the corolla.
in perigynous flowers, the stamens are usually inserted immediately within 
the petals, or alternating with them on the edge of the disk, but occasionally 
much lower down within the disk, or even on the unenlarged part of the re- 
ceptacle.
in epigynous flowers, when the petals are distinct, the stamens are usually 
inserted as in perigynous flowers ; when the corolla is gamopetalous, the sta- 
mens are either free and hypogynous, or combined at the base with (inserted in) 
the tube of the corolla.
143.
When the receptacle is distinctly elongated below the ovary, it is often 
called a gynobasis, gynophore, or stalk of the ovary.
If the elongation takes 
place below the stamens or below the petals, these stamens or petals are then 
said to be inserted on the stalk of the ovary, and are occasionally, but falsely, 
described as epigynous.
Really epigynous stamens (i.
e. when the filaments are 
combined with the ovary) are very rare, unless the rest of the flower is epi- 
gynous.
144.
An epigynous disk is a name given either to the thickened summit of 
the ovary in epigynous flowers, or very rarely to a real disk or enlargement of 
the receptacle closing over the ovary.
145.
In the relative position of any two or more parts of the flower, whether 
in the same or in different whorls, they are 
connivent, when nearer together at the summit than at the base.
divergent, when further apart at the summit than at the base.
coherent, when united together, but so slightly that they can be separated 
with little or no laceration ; and one of the two coherent parts (usually the 
smallest or least important) is said to be adherent to the other.
Grammatically 
speaking, these two terms convey nearly the same meaning, but require a dif- 
ferent form of phrase ; practically however it has been found more convenient 
to restrict cohesion to the union of parts of the same whorl, and adhesion to the 
union of parts of different whorls.
connate, when so closely united that they cannot be separated without 
laceration.
Each of the two connate parts, and especially that one which is 
considered the smaller or of the least importance, is said to be adnate to the 
other.
free, when neither coherent nor connate.
distinct is also used in the same sense, but is also applied to parts dis- 
tinctly visible or distinctly limited, 
§ 13.
The Fruit.
146.
The Fruit (15) consists of the ovary and whatever other parts of the 
flower are persistent (i.
e. persist at the time the seed is ripe), usually enlarged, 
and more or less altered in shape and consistence.
It encloses or covers the 
seed or seeds till the period of maturity, when it either opens for the seed to 
escape, or falls to the ground with the seed.
When stalked, its stalk has been 
termed a carpophore.
147.
Fruits are, in elementary works, said to be simple when the result of a 
single flower, compound when they proceed from several flowers closely packed 
or combined in a head.
But as a fruit resulting from a single flower, with 
several distinct carpels, is compound in the sense in which that term is applied 
to the ovary, the terms single and aggregate, proposed for the fruit resulting 
from one or several flowers, may be more appropriately adopted.
In descrip- 
tive botany a fruit is always supposed to result from a single flower unless the 
contrary be stated.
It may, like the pistil, be syncarpous or apocarpous (125) j 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXX1J1 
and, as in many cases carpels united in the flower may become separate as they 
ripen, an apocarpous fruit may result from a syncarpous pistil.
148.
The involucre or bracts often persist and form part of aggregate 
fruits, but very seldom so in single ones.
149.
The receptacle becomes occasionally enlarged and succulent ; if when 
ripe it falls off with the fruit, it is considered as forming part of it.
150.
The adherent part of the calyx of epigynous flowers always persists 
and forms part of the fruit; the free part of the calyx of epigynous flowers or 
the calyx of perigynous flowers, either persists entirely at the top of or round 
the fruit, or the lobes alone fall off, or the lobes fall off with whatever part of 
the calyx is above the insertion of the petals, or the whole of what is free from 
the ovary falls off, including the disk bearing the petals.
The calyx of hypo- 
gynous flowers usually falls off entirely or persists entirely.
In general a calyx 
is called deciduous if any part falls off.
When it persists it is either enlarged 
round or under the fruit, or it withers and dries up.
151.
The corolla usually falls off entirely ; when it persists it is usually 
withered and dry (marcescent), or very seldom enlarges round the fruit.
152.
The stamens either fall off, or more or less of their filaments persists, 
usually withered and dry.
153.
The style sometimes falls off or dries up and disappears ; sometimes 
persists, forming a point to the fruit, or becomes enlarged into a wing or other 
appendage to the fruit.
154.
The Pericarp is the portion of the fruit formed of the ovary, and what- 
ever adheres to it exclusive of and outside of the seed or seeds, exclusive also of 
the persistent receptacle, or of whatever portion of the calyx persists round the 
ovary without adhering to it.
155.
Fruits have often external appendages called wings (alae), beaks, crests, 
awns, etc., according to their appearance.
They are either formed by persistent 
parts of the flower more or less altered, or grow out of the ovary or the per- 
sistent part of the calyx.
If the appendage be a ring of hairs or scales round 
the top of the fruit, it is called a pappus.
156.
Fruits are generally divided into succulent (including fleshy ^ pulpy, and 
juicy fruits) and dry.
They are dehiscent when they open at maturity to let 
out the seeds, indehiscent when they do not open spontaneously but fall off with 
the seeds.
Succulent fruits are usually indehiscent.
157.
The principal kinds of succulent fruits are 
the Berry, in which the whole substance of the pericarp is fleshy or pulpy, 
with the exception of the outer skin or rind, called the Epicarp.
The seeds 
themselves are usually immersed in the pulp ; but in some berries, the seeds 
are separated from the pulp by the walls of the cavity or cells of the ovary, which 
form as it were a thin inner skin or rind, called the JEndocarp.
the Drupe, in which the pericarp, when ripe, consists of two distinct por- 
tions, an outer succulent one called the Sarcocarp (covered like the berry by a 
skin or epicarp), and an inner dry endocarp called the Putamen, which is either 
cartilaginous (of the consistence of parchment) or hard and woody.
In the latter 
case it is commonly called a stone, and the drupe a stone-fruit.
158.
The principal kinds of dry fruits are 
the Capsule or Pod* which is dehiscent.
When ripe the pericarp usually 
splits longitudinally into as many or twice as many pieces, called valves, as it 
contains cells or placentas.
If these valves separate at the line of junction of the 
carpels, that is, along the line of the placentas or dissepiments, either splitting 
them or leaving them attached to the axis, the dehiscence is termed septicidal ; 
if the valves separate between the placentas or dissepiment, the dehiscence is 
* In English descriptions, fori is more frequently used when it is long and 
narrow ; capsule, or sometimes pouch, when it is short and thick or broad.
C 
XXXIV INTRODUCTION.
loculicidal, and the valves either bear the placentas or dissepiments along their 
middle line, or leave them attached to the axis.
Sometimes also the capsule 
discharges its seeds by slits, chinks, or pores, more or less regularly arranged, 
or bursts irregularly, or separates into two parts by a horizontal line ; in the 
latter case it is said to be circumsciss.
the Nut or Achene, which is indehiscent and contains but a single seed.
When the pericarp is thin in proportion to the seed it encloses, the whole 
fruit (or each of its lobes) has the appearance of a single seed, and is so called 
in popular language.
If the pericarp is thin and rather loose, it is often called 
an Utricle.
A Samara is a nut with a wing at its upper end.
159.
Where the carpels of the ovary are distinct (125) they may severally 
become as many distinct berries, drupes, capsules, or achenes.
Separate carpels 
. are usually more or less compressed laterally, with more or less prominent inner 
and outer edges, called sutures, and, if dehiscent, the carpel usually opens at 
these sutures.
A Follicle is a carpel opening at the inner suture only.
In 
some cases w T here the carpels are united in the ovary they will separate when 
ripe ; they are then called Cocci if one-seeded.
160.
The peculiar fruits of some of the large Orders have received special 
names, which will be explained under each Order.
Such are the siliqua and 
silicule of Crucifera?, the legume of Leguminosoe, the pome of Pyrus and its 
allies, the pepo of Cucurbitacese, the cone of Coniferee, the grain or caryopsis 
of Grraminese, etc.
§ 14.
The Seed.
161.
The Seed is enclosed in the pericarp in the great majority of flowering 
plants, called therefore Angiosperms, or angiospermous plants.
In Coniferce 
and a very few allied genera, called Gymnosperms, or gymnospermous plants, 
the seed is naked, without any real pericarp.
These truly gymnospermous plants 
must not be confounded with Labiatce, Boraginece, etc., which have also been 
falsely called gymnospermous, their small nuts having the appearance of seeds 
< 158 )- 
162.
The seed when ripe contains an embryo or young plant, either filling or 
nearly filling the cavity, but not attached to the outer skin or the seed, or more 
or less immersed in a mealy, oily, fleshy, or horn-like substance, called the 
albumen, or perisperm.
The presence or absence of this albumen, that is, the 
distinction between albuminous and exalbuminous seeds, is one of great impor- 
tance.
The embryo or albumen can often only be found or distinguished when 
the seed is quite ripe, or sometimes only when it begins to germinate.
163.
The shell of the seed consists usually of two separable coats.
The outer 
coat, called the testa, is usually the principal one, and in most cases the only 
one attended to in descriptions.
It may be hard and crustaceous, woody or 
bony, or thin and membranous (skin-like), dry, or rarely succulent.
It is some- 
times expanded into ivings, or bears a tuft of hair, cotton, or wool, called a coma.
The inner coat is called the tegmen.
164.
The funicle is the stalk by which the seed is attached to the placenta.
It is occasionally enlarged into a membranous, pulpy, or fleshy appendage, 
sometimes spreading over a considerable part of the seed, or nearly enclosing it, 
called an aril.
A strophiole or caruncle is a similar appendage from the testa 
by the side of or near the funicle.
165.
The hilum is the scar left on the seed where it separates from the fu- 
nicle.
The micropyle is a mark indicating the position of the foramen of the 
ovule (133).
166.
The Embryo (162) consists of the Radicle or base of the future root, 
one or two Cotyledons or future seed-leaves, and the Plumule or future bud 
within the base of the cotyledons.
In some seeds, especially where there is no 
albumen, these several parts are very conspicuous, in others they are very diffi- 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXXV 
cult to distinguish until the seed begins to germinate.
Their observation, how- 
ever, is of the greatest importance, for it is chiefly upon the distinction between 
the embryo with one or with two cotyledons that are founded the two great 
classes of phaenogamous plants, Monocotyledons and Dicotyledons.
167.
Although the embryo lies loose (unattached) within the seed, it is 
generally in some determinate position with respect to the seed or to the whole 
fruit.
This position is described by stating the direction of the radicle next to 
or more or less remote from the hilum, or it is said to be superior if pointing 
towards the summit of the fruit, inferior if pointing towards the base of the 
fruit.
§ 15.
Accessory Organs.
3 68.
Under this name are included, in many elementary works, various ex- 
ternal parts of plants which do not appear to act any essential part either in 
the vegetation or reproduction of the plant.
They may be classed under four 
heads : Tendrils and Hooks, Thorns, and Prickles, Hairs, and Glands.
169.
Tendrils (cirrhi) are usually abortive petioles, or abortive peduncles, 
or sometimes abortive ends of branches.
They are simple or more or less 
branched, flexible, and coil more or less firmly round any objects within their 
reach, in order to support the plant to which they belong.
Hooks are similar 
holdfasts, but of a firmer consistence, not branched, and less coiled.
170.
Thorns and Prickles have been fancifully called the weapons of 
plants.
A Thorn or Spine is the strongly pointed extremity of a branch, or 
abortive petiole, or abortive peduncle.
A Prickle is a sharply pointed ex- 
crescence from the epidermis, and is usually produced on a branch, on the 
petiole or veins of a leaf, or on a peduncle, or even on the calyx or corolla.
When the teeth of a leaf or the stipules are pungent, they are also called prickles, 
not thorns.
A plant is spinous if it has thorns, aculeate if it has prickles.
171.
Hairs, in the general sense, or the indumentum (or clothing) of a plant, 
include all those productions of the epidermis which have, by a more or less 
appropriate comparison, been termed bristles, hairs, doivn, cotton, or wool.
172.
Hairs are often branched.
They are said to be attached by the centre, 
if parted from the base, and the forks spread along the surface in opposite di- 
rections ; plumose, if the branches are arranged along a common axis, as in 
a feather j stellate, if several branches radiate horizontally.
These stellate 
hairs have sometimes their rays connected together at the base, forming little 
flat circular disks attached by the centre, and are then called scales, and the 
surface is said to be scaly or lepidote.
173.
The Epidermis, or outer skin, of an organ, as to its surface and indu- 
mentum, is 
smooth, when without any protuberance whatever.
glabrous, when without hairs of any kind.
striate, when marked with parallel longitudinal lines, either slightly raised 
or merely discoloured.
furrowed (sulcate) or ribbed (costate) when the parallel lines are more 
distinctly raised.
rugose, when wrinkled or marked with irregular raised or depressed lines.
umbilicate, when marked with a small round depression.
umbonate, when bearing a small boss like that of a shield.
viscous, viscid, or glutinous, when covered with a sticky or clammy exu^ 
dation.
scabrous, when rough to the touch.
tuberculate or warted, when covered with small, obtuse, wart-like protu- 
berances.
muricate, when the protuberances are more raised and pointed but yet 
short and hard.
c 2 
XXXVI INTRODUCTION .
echinate, when the protuberances are longer and sharper, almost prickly.
setose or bristly, when bearing very stiff erect straight hairs.
glandular -setose, when the setae or bristles terminate in a minute resinous 
head or drop.
In some works, especially in the case of Roses and Rubus, the 
meaning of setce has been restricted to such as are glandular.
glochidiate, when the setae are hooked at the top.
pilose, when the surface is thinly sprinkled with rather long simple hairs.
hispid, when more thickly covered with rather stiff hairs.
hirsute, when the hairs are dense and not so stiff.
doivny or pubescent, when the hairs are short and soft ; puberulent, when 
slightly pubescent.
strigose, when the hairs are rather short and stiff, and lie close along the 
surface all in the same direction ; strigillose, when slightly strigose.
tomentose or cottony, when the hairs are very short and soft, rather dense 
and more or less intricate, and usually white or whitish.
woolly (lanate), when the hairs are long and loosely intricate, like wool.
The wool or tomentum is said to befloccose when closely intricate and readily 
detached, like fleece.
mealy (farinose), when the hairs are excessively short, intricate and white, 
and come off readily, having the appearance of meal or dust.
canescent or hoary, when the hairs are so short as not readily to be distin- 
guished by the naked eye, and yet give a general whitish hue to the epidermis.
glaucous, when of a pale bluish-green, often covered with a fine bloom.
174.
The meanings here attached to the above terms are such as appear to 
have been most generally adopted, but there is much vagueness in the use 
practically made of many of them by different botanists.
This is especially the 
case with the terms pilose, hispid, hirsute, pubescent, and tomentose.
175.
The name of Glands is given to several different productions, and 
principally to the four following : — 
1. Small wart-like or shield-like bodies, either sessile or sometimes stalked, 
of a fungous or somewhat fleshy consistence, occasionally secreting a small 
quantity of oily or resinous matter, but more frequently dry.
They are gene- 
rally few in number, often definite in their position and form, and occur chiefly 
on the petiole or principal veins of leaves, on the branches of inflorescences, or 
on the stalks or principal veins of bracts, sepals, or petals.
2. Minute raised dots, usually black, red, or dark-coloured, of a resinous 
or oily nature, always superficial, and apparently exudations from the epidermis.
They are often numerous on leaves, bracts, sepals, and green branches, and 
occur even on petals and stamens, more rarely on pistils.
When raised upon 
slender stalks they are called pedicellate (or stipitate) glands or glandular 
hairs, according to the thickness of the stalk.
3. Small, globular, oblong or even linear vesicles, filled with oil, imbedded 
in the substance itself of leaves, bracts, floral organs, or fruits.
They are often 
very numerous, like transparent dots, sometimes few and determinate in form 
and position.
In the pericarp of Umbelliferce they are remarkably regular and 
conspicuous, and take the name of vittce.
4. Lobes of the disk (137), or other small fleshy excrescences within the 
flower, whether from the receptacle, calyx, corolla, stamens, or pistil.
Chap.
II.
— Classification, or Systematic Botany.
176.
It has already been observed (3) that descriptions of plants should, as 
nearly as possible, be arranged under natural divisions, so as to facilitate the 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXXV11 
comparison of each plant with those most nearly allied to it.
The descriptions 
of plants here alluded to are descriptions of species; the natural divisions of the 
Flora refer to natural groups of species.
177.
A Species comprises all the individual plants which resemble each 
other sufficiently to make us conclude that they are all, or may have been all, 
descended from a common parent.
These individuals may often differ from each 
other in many striking particulars, such as the colour of the flower, size of the 
leaf, etc., but these particulars are such as experience teaches us are liable to 
vary in the seedlings raised from one individual.
178.
When a large number of the individuals of a species differ from the 
others in any striking particular they constitute a Variety.
If the variety 
generally comes true from seed, it is often called a Mace.
179.
A Variety can only be propagated with certainty by grafts, cuttings, 
bulbs, tubers, or any other method which produces a new plant by the develop- 
ment of one or more buds taken from the old one.
A Mace may with care be 
propagated by seed, although seedlings will always be liable, under certain 
circumstances, to lose those particulars which distinguish it from the rest of the 
species.
A real Species will always come true from seed.
180.
The known species of plants (now near 100,000) are far too numerous 
for the human mind to study without classification, or even to give distinct 
single names to.
To facilitate these objects, an admirable system, invented by 
Linnaeus, has been universally adopted, viz.
one common substantive name 
is given to a number of species which resemble each other more than they 
do any other species ; the species so collected under one name are collectively 
called a Genus, the common name being the generic name.
Each species is 
then distinguished from the others of the same genus by the addition of an 
adjective epithet or specific name.
Every species has thus a botanical name of 
two words.
In Latin, the language usually used for the purpose, the first word 
is a substantive and designates the genus ; the second, an adjective, indicates 
the species.
In English, the adjective specific name comes before the sub- 
stantive or generic one* 
181.
The genera thus formed being still too numerous (above 6000) for study 
without further arrangement, they have been classed upon the same principles ; 
viz.
genera which resemble each other more than they do any other genera, 
have been collected together into groups of a higher degree called Families or 
Natural Orders, to each of which a common name has been given.
This 
name is in Latin an adjective plural, usually taken from the name of some one 
typical genus, generally the best known, the first discovered, or the most marked 
(e.g. Ranunculacece from Ranunculus).
It is rendered in English by the ad- 
dition of the word plants to a plural adjective, or by adding the word family 
or order to the name of the typical genus taken acljectively, as Ranunculaceous 
pi ants or the Ranunculus family (or order).
This is however for the purpose of 
study and comparison.
To speak of a species, to refer to it and identify it, all 
that is necessary is to give the generic and specific names.
182.
Natural Orders themselves (of which we reckon near 200) are often 
in the same manner collected into Classes ; and where Orders contain a large 
number of genera, or genera a large number of species, they require further 
classification.
The genera of an Order are then collected into minor groups 
called Tribes, the species of a genus into Sections, and in a few cases this inter- 
mediate classification is carried still further.
The names of these several groups 
the most generally adopted are as follows, beginning with the most comprehen* 
sive or highest : — 
Classes.
Tribes.
Subclasses or Alliances.
Subtribes.
Natural Orders or Families.
Divisions.
• 
Suborders.
Subdivisions.
XXXV111 INTRODUCTION.
Genera.
Subsections.
Subgenera.
Species.
Sections.
Varieties.
183.
The characters (3) by which a species is distinguished from all other 
species of the same genus are collectively called the specific character of the 
plant ; those by which its genus is distinguished from other genera of the Order 
or its Order from other Orders, are respectively called the generic or ordinal 
character, as the case may be.
The habit of a plant, of a species, a genus, etc., 
consists of such general characters as strike the eye at first, such as size, colour, 
ramification, arrangement of the leaves, inflorescence, etc., and are chiefly de- 
rived from the organs of vegetation.
184.
Classes, Orders, Grenera, and their several subdivisions, are called na- 
tural when, in forming them, all resemblances and differences are taken into 
account, valuing them according to their evident or presumed importance ; arti- 
ficial^ when resemblances and differences in some one or very few particulars 
only are taken into account independently of all others.
185.
The number of species included in a genus, or the number of genera 
in an Order, is very variable.
Sometimes two or three or even a single species 
may be so different from all others as to constitute the entire genus ; in others, 
several hundred species may resemble each other so much as to be all included 
in one genus ; and there is the same discrepancy in the number of genera to a 
Family.
There is moreover, unfortunately, in a number of instances, great dif- 
ference of opinion as to whether certain plants differing from each other in certain 
particulars are varieties of one species or belong to distinct species ; and again, 
whether two or more groups of species should constitute as many sections of 
one genus, or distinct genera, or tribes of one Order, or even distinct Natural 
Orders.
In the former case, as a species is supposed to have a real existence 
in nature, the question is susceptible of argument, and sometimes of absolute 
proof.
But the place a group should occupy in the scale of degree is very arbi- 
trary, being often a mere question of convenience.
The more subdivisions upon 
correct principles are multiplied, the more they facilitate the study of plants, 
provided always the main resting-points for constant use, the Order and the 
Genus, are comprehensive and distinct.
But if every group into which a genus 
can be divided be erected into a distinct genus, with a substantive name to be 
remembered whenever a species is spoken of, all the advantages derived from 
the beautiful simplicity of the Linnsean nomenclature are gone.
Chap.
III.
— Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology.
§ 1.
Structure and Growth of the Elementary Tissues.
186.
If a very thin slice of any part of a plant be placed under a microscope 
of high magnifying power, it will be found to be made up of variously shaped 
and arranged ultimate parts, forming a sort of honeycombed structure.
These 
ultimate parts are called cells, and form by their combination the elementary 
tissues of which the entire plant is composed.
187.
A cell in its simplest state is a closed membranous sac, formed of a sub- 
stance permeable by fluids, though usually destitute of visible pores.
Each 
cell is a distinct individual, separately formed and separately acting, though 
cohering with the cells with which it is in contact, and partaking of the common 
life and action of the tissue of which it forms a part.
The membranes separating 
or enclosing the cells are also called their icalls.
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
XXXIX 
188.
Botanists usually distinguish the following tissues : — 
(1) Cellular tissue, or parenchyma, consists usually of thin-walled cells, more 
or less round in form, or with their length not much exceeding their breadth, 
and not tapering at the ends.
All the soft parts of the leaves, the pith of stems, 
the pulp of fruits, and all young growing parts, are formed of it.
It is the first 
tissue produced, and continues to be formed while growth continues, and when 
it ceases to be active the plant dies.
(2) Woody tissue, or prosenchyma, differs in having its cells considerably 
longer than broad, usually tapering at each end into points and overlapping 
each other.
The cells are commonly thick-walled ; the tissue is firm, tenacious, 
and elastic, and constitutes the principal part of wood, of the inner bark, and 
of the nerves and veins of leaves, forming, in short, the framework of the 
plant.
(3) Vascular tissue, or the vessels or ducts of plants, so called from the mis- 
taken notion that their functions are analogous to those of the vessels (veins and 
arteries) of animals.
A vessel in plants consists of a vertical row of cells, which 
have their transverse partition-walls obliterated, so as to form a continuous 
tube.
All phsenogamous plants, as well as ferns and a few other cryptogamous 
plants, have vessels, and are therefore called vascular plants ; so the majority of 
cryptogams having only cellular tissue are termed cellular plants.
Vessels have 
their sides very variously marked ; some, called spiral vessels, have a spiral fibre 
coiled up their inside, which unrolls when the vessel is broken ; others are 
marked with longitudinal slits, cross bars, minute dots or pits, or with trans- 
verse rings.
The size of vessels is also very variable in different plants ; in some 
they are of considerable size and visible to the naked eye in cross sections of 
the stem, in others they are almost absent or can only be traced under a strong 
magnifier.
189.
Various modifications of the above tissues are distinguished by vegetable 
anatomists under names which need not be enumerated here as not being in 
general practical use.
Air-vessels, cysts, turpentine-vessels, oil-reservoirs, etc., 
are either cavities left between the cells, or large cells filled with peculiar 
secretions.
190.
When tissues are once formed, they increase, not by the general en- 
largement of the whole of the cells already formed, but by cell- division, that is, 
by the division of young and vitally active cells, and the enlargement of their 
portions.
In the formation of the embryo, the first cell of the new plant i3 
formed, not by division, but around a segregate portion of the contents of a 
previously existing cell, the embryo-sac.
This is termed free cell-formation, 
in contradistinction to cell-division.
191.
A young and vitally active cell consists of the outer wall, formed of a 
more or less transparent substance called cellulose, permeable by fluids, and of 
ternary chemical composition (carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen) ; and of the cell- 
contents, usually viscid or mucilaginous, consisting of protoplasm, a substance 
of quaternary chemical composition (carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen), 
which fills an important part in cell-division and growth.
Within the cell 
(either in the centre or excentrical) is usually a minute, soft, subgelatinous 
body called the nucleus, whose functions appear to be intimately connected with 
the first formation of the new cell.
As this cell increases in size, and its walls 
in thickness, the protoplasm and watery cell-sap become absorbed or dried up, 
the firm cellulose wall alone remaining as a permanent fabric, either empty or 
filled with various organized substances produced or secreted within it.
192.
The principal organized contents of cells are 
sap, the first product of the digestion of the food of plants ; it contains the 
elements of vegetable growth in a dissolved condition.
sugar, of which there are two kinds, called cane-sugar and grape-sugar.
It usually exists dissolved in the sap.
It is found abundantly in growing 
parts, in fruits, and in germinating seeds.
Xl INTRODUCTION.
dextrine, or vegetable mucilage, a gummy substance, between mucilage 
and starch.
starch or fecula, one of the most universal and conspicuous of cell-con- 
tents, and often so abundant in farinaceous roots and seeds as to fill the cell- 
cavity.
It consists of minute grains called starch- granules, which vary in size 
and are marked with more or less conspicuous concentric lines of growth.
The 
chemical constitution of starch is the same as that of cellulose ; it is unaffected 
by cold water, but forms a jelly with boiling water, and turns blue when tested 
by iodine.
When fully dissolved it is no longer starch, but dextrine.
chlorophyll, very minute granules, containing nitrogen, and coloured green 
under the action of sunlight.
These granules are most abundant in the layers 
of cells immediately below the surface or epidermis of leaves and young bark.
The green colouring matter is soluble in alcohol, and may thus be removed 
from the granules.
chromule, a name given to a similar colouring matter when not green.
wax, oils, camphor, and resinous matter, are common in cells or in cavities 
in the tissues between the cells, also various mineral substances, either in an 
amorphous state or as microscopic crystals, when they are called JRaphides.
§ 2.
Arrangement of the 'Elementary Tissues, or Structure of the Organs of 
Plants.
193.
Leaves, young stems, and branches, and most parts of phsenogamous 
plants, during the first year of their existence consist anatomically of 
1, a cellular system, or continuous mass of cellular tissue, which is de- 
veloped both vertically as the stem or other parts increase in length, and hori- 
zontally or laterally as they increase in thickness or breadth.
It surrounds or 
is intermixed with the fibro-vascular system, or it may exist alone in some parts 
of phsenogamous plants, as well as in cryptogamous ones.
2, a fibro-vascular system, or continuous mass of woody and vascular tissue, 
which is gradually introduced vertically into, and serves to bind together, the 
cellular system.
It is continued from the stem into the petioles and veins of 
the leaves, and into the pedicels and parts of the flowers, and is never wholly 
wanting in any phsenogamous plant.
3, an epidermis, or outer skin, formed of one or more layers of flattened 
(horizontal), firmly coherent, and usually empty cells, with either thin and 
transparent, or thick and opaque walls.
It covers almost all parts of plants 
exposed to the outward air, protecting their tissues from its immediate action, 
but is wanting in those parts of aquatic plants which are constantly submerged.
191.
The epidermis is frequently pierced by minute spaces between the cells, 
called Stomates.
They are oval or mouth-shaped, bordered by lips, formed of 
two or more elastic cells so disposed as to cause the stomate to open in a moist, 
and to close up in a dry state of the atmosohere.
They communicate with in- 
tercellular cavities, and are obviously designed to regulate evaporation and 
respiration.
They are chiefly found upon leaves, especially on the under sur- 
face.
195.
When a phsenogamous plant has outlived the first season of its growth, 
the anatomical structure of its stem or other perennial parts becomes more 
complicated' and very different in the tw r o great classes of phamogamous plants 
called Exogens and Endogens, which correspond with very few exceptions to 
the two classes Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons (167), founded on the struc- 
ture of the embryo.
In Exogens (Dicotyledons) the woody system is placed 
in concentric layers between a central pith (198, 1), and an external separable 
bark (198, 5).
In Endogens (Monocotyledons) the woody system is in separate 
small bundles or fibres running through the cellular system without apparent 
order, and there is usually no distinct central pith, nor outer separable bark.
196.
The anatomical structure is also somewhat different in the different 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
Xli 
organs of plants.
In the Root, although it is constructed generally on the 
same plan as the stem, yet the regular organization, and the difference between 
Exogens and Endogens, is often disguised or obliterated by irregularities of 
growth, or by the production of large quantities of cellular tissue filled with 
starch or other substances (192).
There is seldom, if ever, any distinct pith, 
the concentric circles of fibro- vascular tissue in Exogens are often very indistinct 
or have no relation to seasons of growth, and the epidermis has no stomates.
197.
In the Stem or branches, during the first year or season of their growth, 
the difference between Exogens and Endogens is not always very conspicuous.
In both there is a tendency to a circular arrangement of the fibro-vascular 
system, leaving the centre either vacant or filled with cellular tissue (pith) only, 
and a more or less distinct outer rind is observable even in several Endogens.
More frequently, however, the distinction is already very apparent the first 
season, especially towards its close.
The fibro-vascular bundles in Endogens 
usually anastomose but little, passing continuously into the branches and leaves.
In Exogens the circle of fibro-vascular bundles forms a more continuous cylinder 
of network emitting lateral offsets into the branches and leaves.
198.
The Exogenous stem, after the first year of its growth, consists of 
1, the pith, a cylinder of cellular tissue, occupying the centre or longitudi- 
nal axis of the stem.
It is active only in young stems or branches, becomes 
dried up and compressed as the wood hardens, and often finally disappears, or 
is scarcely distinguishable in old trees.
2, the medullary sheath, which surrounds and encases the pith.
It abounds 
in spiral vessels (188, 3), and is in direct connection, when young, with the.
leaf- buds and branches, with the petioles and veins of leaves, and other ramifi- 
cations of the system.
Like the pith, it gradually disappears in old wood.
3, the ivood, which lies immediately outside the medullary sheath.
It is 
formed of woody tissue (188, 2), through which, in most cases, vessels (188, 3) 
variously disposed are interspersed.
It is arranged in annual concentric circles 
(211), which usually remain active during several years, but in older stems the 
central and older layers become hard, dense, comparatively inactive, and usually 
deeper coloured, forming what is called heart-wood or duramen, the outer, 
younger, and usually paler-coloured living layers constituting the sapwood or 
alburnum.
4, the medullary rays, which form vertical plates, originating in the pith, 
and, radiating from thence, traverse the wood and terminate in the bark.
They 
are formed of cellular tissue, keeping up a communication between the living 
portion of the centre of the stem and its outer surface.
As the heart-wood is 
formed, the inner portion of the medullary rays ceases to be active, but they 
usually may still be seen in old wood, forming wdiat carpenters call the silver 
grain.
5, the baric, which lies outside the wood, within the epidermis.
It is, like 
the wood, arranged in annual concentric circles (211), of which the outer older 
ones become dry and hard, forming the corky layer or outer bark, which, as it 
is distended by the thickening of the stem, either cracks or is cast off with the 
epidermis, which is no longer distinguishable.
Within the corky layer is the 
cellular, or green, or middle bark, formed of loose thin-walled pulpy cells con- 
taining chlorophyll (192) ; and which is usually the layer of the preceding 
season.
The innermost and youngest circle, next the young w T ood, is the liber 
or inner bark, formed of long tough woody tissue called bast-cells.
199.
The Endogenous stem, as it grows old, is not marked by the concentric 
circles of Exogens.
The wood consists of a matrix of cellular tissue irregu- 
larly traversed by vertical cords or bundles of woody and vascular tissue, which 
are in connection with the leaves.
These vascular bundles change in structure 
and direction as they pass down the stem, losing their vessels, they retain only 
their bast- or long wood-cells, usually curving outwards towards the rind.
The 
xlii INTRODUCTION.
old wood becomes more compact and harder towards the circumference than in 
the centre.
The epidermis or rind either hardens so as to prevent any increase 
of diameter in the stem, or it distends, without increasing in thickness or split- 
ting or casting off any outer layers.
200.
In the Leaf, the structure of the petioles and principal ribs or veins is 
the same as that of the young branches of which they are ramifications.
In 
the expanded portion of the leaf the fibro-vascular system becomes usually very 
much ramified, forming the smaller veins.
These are surrounded and the in- 
terstices filled up by a copious and very active cellular tissue.
The majority of 
leaves are horizontal, having a differently constructed upper and under surface.
The cellular stratum forming the upper surface consists of closely-set cells, 
placed vertically, with their smallest ends next the surface, and with few or no 
stomates in the epidermis.
In the stratum forming the under surface, the cells 
are more or less horizontal, more loosely placed, and have generally empty 
spaces between them, with stomates in the epidermis communicating with these 
intercellular spaces.
In vertical leaves (as in a large number of Australian 
plants) the two surfaces are nearly similar in structure.
201.
When leaves are reduced to scales, acting only as protectors of young 
buds, or without taking any apparent part in the economy of vegetable life, 
their structure, though still on the same plan, is more simple ; their fibro-vas- 
cular system is less ramified, their cellular system more uniform, and there are 
few or no stomates.
202.
Bracts and floral envelopes, when green and much developed, resemble 
leaves in their anatomical structure, but in proportion as they are reduced to 
scales or transformed into petals, they lose their stomates, and their systems, 
both fibro-vascular and cellular, become more simple and uniform, or more 
slender and delicate.
203.
In the stamens and pistils the structure is still nearly the same.
The 
fibro-vascular system, surrounded by and intermixed with the cellular tissue, is 
usually simple in the filaments and style, more or less ramified in the flattened 
or expanded parts, such as the anther-cases, the walls of the ovary, or carpellary 
leaves, etc.
The pollen consists of granular cells variously shaped, marked, or 
combined, peculiar forms being constant in the same species, or often in large 
genera, or even Orders.
The stigmatic portion of the pistil is a mass of loosely 
cellular substance, destitute of epidermis, and usually is in communication with 
the ovary by a channel running down the centre of the style.
204.
Tubers, fleshy thickenings of the stem or other parts of the plant, 
succulent leaves or branches, the fleshy, woody, or bony parts of fruits, the 
albumen, and the thick fleshy parts of embryos, consist chiefly of largely de- 
veloped cellular tissue, replete with starch or other substances (192), deposited 
apparently in most cases for the eventual future use of the plant or its parts 
when recalled into activity at the approach of a new season.
205.
Hairs (171) are usually expansions or processes of the epidermis, and 
consist of one or more cells placed end to end.
When thick or hardened into 
prickles, they still consist usually of cellular tissue only.
Thorns (170) contain 
more or less of a fibro-vascular system, according to their degree of develop- 
ment.
206.
Glands, in the primary sense of the word (175, 1), consist usually of a 
rather loose cellular tissue without epidermis, and often replete with resinous 
or other substances.
§ 3.
Growth of the Organs.
207.
Boots grow in length constantly and regularly at the extremities only 
of their fibres, in proportion as they find the requisite nutriment.
They form 
no buds containing the germ of future branches, but their fibres proceed irre- 
gularly from any part of their surface without previous indication, and^ when 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
xliii 
their growth has been stopped for a time, either wholly by the close of the 
season, or partially by a deficiency of nutriment at any particular spot, it will, 
on the return of favourable circumstances, be resumed at the same point, if 
the growing extremities be uninjured.
If during the dead season, or at any 
other time, the growing extremity is cut off, dried up, or otherwise injured, or 
stopped by a rock or other obstacle opposing its progress, lateral fibres will 
be formed on the still living portion ; thus enabling the root as a whole to 
diverge in any direction, and travel far and wide when lured on by appropriate 
nutriment.
208.
This growth is not however by the successive formation of terminal cells 
attaining at once their full size.
The cells first formed on a fibre commencing 
or renewing its growth, will often dry up and form a kind of terminal cap, 
which is pushed on as cells are formed immediately under it ; and the new cells, 
constituting a greater or lesser portion of the ends of the fibres, remain some 
time in a growing state before tbey have attained their full size.
209.
The roots of Exogens, when perennial, increase in thickness like stems 
by the addition of concentric layers, but these are usually much less distinctly 
marked ; and in a large number of perennial Exogens and most Endogens the 
roots are annual, perishing at the close of the season, fresh adventitious roots 
springing from the stock when vegetation commences the following season.
110.
The Stem, including its branches and appendages (leaves, floral organs, 
etc.), grows in length by additions to its extremity, but a much greater pro- 
portion of the extremity and branches remains in a growing and expanding 
state for a much longer time than in the case of the root.
At the close of one 
season, leaf-buds or seeds are formed, each containing the germ of a branch or 
young plant to be produced the following season.
At a very early stage of the 
development of these buds or seeds, a commencement may be found of many 
of the leaves it is to bear ; and before a leaf unfolds, every leaflet of which it is 
to consist, every lobe or tooth w r hich is to mark its margin, may often be traced 
in miniature, and thenceforth till it attains its full size, the branch grows and.
expands in every part.
In some cases however the lower part of a branch, and 
more rarely (e.g. in some Meliacece) the lower part of a compound leaf, attains 
its full size before the young leaves or leaflets of the extremity are yet formed.
211.
The perennial stem, if exogenous (198), grows in thickness by the addi- 
tion every season of a new layer or ring of wood between the outermost prece- 
ding layer and the inner surface of the bark, and by the formation of a new layer 
or ring of bark within the innermost preceding layer and outside the new ring of 
wood, thus forming a succession of concentric circles.
The sap elaborated by 
the leaves finds its way, in a manner not as yet absolutely ascertained, into the 
cambium-region, a zone of tender thin-walled cells connecting the wood with 
the bark, by the division and enlargement of which new cells (190) are formed.
These cells separate in layers, the inner ones constituting the new ring of 
wood, and the outer ones the new bark or liber.
In most exogenous trees, in 
temperate climates, the seasons of growth correspond with the years, and the 
rings of wood remain sufficiently distinct to indicate the age of the tree ; but in 
many tropical and some evergreen trees, two or more rings of wood are formed 
in one year.
212.
In endogenous perennial stems (199), the new wood or woody fibre is 
formed towards the centre of the stem, or irregularly mingled with the old.
The stem consequently either only becomes more dense without increasing in 
thickness, or only increases by gradual distention, which is never very consider- 
able.
It affords therefore no certain criterion for judging of the age of the 
tree.
213.
Elowers have generally all their parts formed, or indicated by protu- 
berances or growing cells at a very early stage of the bud.
These parts are 
then usually more regularly placed than in the fully developed flower.
Parts 
xliv INTRODUCTION.
which afterwards unite are then distinct, many are present in this rudimentary 
state which are never further developed, and parts which are afterwards very 
unequal or dissimilar are perfectly alike at this early period.
On this account 
flowers in this very early stage are supposed by some modern botanists to be 
more normal, that is, more in conformity to a supposed type ; and the study 
of the early formation and growth of the floral organs, called Organogenesis, has 
been considered essential for the correct appreciation of the affinities of plants.
In some cases, however, it would appear that modifications of development, not 
to be detected in the very young bud, are yet of great importance in the dis- 
tinction of large groups of plants, and that Organogenesis, although it may 
often assist in clearing up a doubtful point of affinity, cannot nevertheless be 
exclusively relied on in estimating the real value of peculiarities of structure.
214.
The flower is considered as a bud {flower-bud, alabastrum) until the 
perianth expands, the period of flowering (anthesis) is that which elapses from 
the first expanding of the perianth, till the pistil is set or begins to enlarge, or, 
when it does not set, until the stamens and pistil wither or fall.
After that, the 
enlarged ovary takes the name of young fruit.
215.
At the close of the season of growth, at the same time as the leaf-buds 
or seeds are formed containing the germ of future branches or plants, many 
plants form also, at or near the bud or seed, large deposits, chiefly of starch.
In many cases, — such as the tubers of a potato or other root-stock, the scales 
or thickened base of a bulb, the albumen or the thick cotyledons of a seed, — 
this deposit appears to be a store of nutriment, which is partially absorbed by 
the young branch or plant during its first stage of growth, before the roots are 
sufficiently developed to supply it from without.
In some cases, however, such 
as the fleshy thickening of some stems or peduncles, the pericarps of fruits 
which perish long before germination (the first growth of the seed), neither the 
use nor the cause of these deposits has as yet been clearly explained.
§ 4.
Functions of the Organs.
216.
The functions of the Root are, — 1.
To fix the plant in or to the soil, or 
other substance on which it grows.
2. To absorb nourishment from the soil, 
water, or air, into which the fibres have penetrated (or from other plants in 
the case of parasites), and to transmit it rapidly to the stem.
The absorption 
takes places through the young growing extremities of the fibres, and through 
a peculiar kind of hairs or absorbing organs which are formed at or near those 
growing extremities.
The transmission to the stem is through the tissues of 
the root itself.
The nutriment absorbed consists chiefly of carbonic acid and 
nitrogen or nitrogenous compounds dissolved in water.
3. In some cases roots 
secrete or exude small quantities of matter in a manner and with a purpose not 
satisfactorily ascertained.
217.
The Stem and its branches support the leaves, flowers, and fruit, trans- 
mit the crude sap, or nutriment absorbed by the roots and mixed with pre- 
viously organized matter, to the leaves, and re-transmit the assimilated or 
elaborated sap from the leaves to the growing parts of the plant, to be there 
used up, or to form deposits for future use (204).
The transmission of the 
ascending crude sap appears to take place chiefly through the elongated cells 
associated with tne vascular tissues, passing from one cell to another by a pro- 
cess but little understood, but known by the name of endosmose.
218.
Leaves are functionally the most active of the organs of vegetation.
In 
them is chiefly conducted digestion or Assimilation, a name given to the pro- 
cess which accomplishes the following results : — 1.
The chemical decomposition 
of the oxygenated matter of the sap, the absorption of carbonic acid, and the 
liberation of pure oxygen at the ordinary temperature of the air.
2. A counter- 
operation by which oxygen is absorbed from the atmosphere and carbonic acid 
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
xlv 
is exhaled.
3. The transformation of the residue of the crude sap into the 
organized substances which enter into the composition of the plant.
The ex- 
halation of oxygen appears to take place under the influence of solar heat and 
light, chiefly from the under surface of the leaf, and to be in some measure 
regulated by the stomates ; the absorption of oxygen goes on always in the 
dark, and in the daytime also in certain cases.
The transformation of the sap 
is effected within the tissues of the leaf, and continues probably more or less 
throughout the active parts of the whole plant.
219.
The Floral Organs seldom contribute to the growth of the plant on 
which they are produced ; their functions are wholly concentrated on the for- 
mation of the seed with the germ of a future plant.
220.
The Perianth (calyx and corolla) acts in the first instance in protecting 
the stamens and pistils during the early stages of their development.
When 
expanded, the use of the brilliant colours which they often display, of the sweet 
or strong odours they emit, has not been adequately explained.
Perhaps they 
may have great influence in attracting those insects whose concurrence has been 
shown in many cases to be necessary for the due transmission of the pollen 
from the anther to the stigma.
221.
The pistil, when stimulated by the action of the pollen, forms and 
nourishes the young seed.
The varied and complicated contrivances by which 
the pollen is conveyed to the stigma, whether by elastic action of the organs 
themselves, or with the assistance of wind, of insects, or other extraneous 
agents, have been the subject of numerous observations and experiments of the 
most distinguished naturalists, and are yet far from being fully investigated.
Their details, however, as far as known, would be far too long for the present 
outline.
222.
The fruit nourishes and protects the seed until its maturity, and then 
often promotes its dispersion by a great variety of contrivances or apparently 
collateral circumstances, e.g. by an elastic dehiscence which casts the seed off 
to a distance ; by the development of a pappus, wings, hooked or other appen- 
dages, which allows them to be carried off by winds, or by animals, etc., to 
which they may adhere ; by their small specific gravity, which enables them to 
float down streams ; by their attractions to birds, etc., who taking them for 
food drop them often at great distances, etc.
Appendages to the seeds them- 
selves also often promote dispersion.
223.
Hairs have various functions.
The ordinary indumentum (171) of stems 
and leaves indeed seems to take little part in the economy of the plant besides 
perhaps some occasional protection against injurious atmospheric influences, 
but the root-hairs (216) are active absorbents, the hairs on styles and other 
parts of flowers appear often materially to assist the transmission of pollen, and 
the exudations of glandular hairs (175, 2) are often too copious not to exercise 
some influence on the phenomena of vegetation.
The whole question, however, 
of vegetable exudations and their influence on the economy of vegetable life, is 
as yet but imperfectly understood.
Chap.
IY.
— Collection, Preservation, and Determination of Plants.
224.
Plants can undoubtedly be most easily and satisfactorily examined when 
freshly gathered.
But time will rarely admit of this being done, and it is more- 
over desirable to compare them with other plants previously observed or col- 
lected.
Specimens must, therefore, be selected for leisurely observation at home, 
and preserved for future reference.
A collection of such specimens constitutes 
a Herbarium, 
xlvi INTRODUCTION.
225.
A botanical Specimen, to be perfect, should have root, stem, leaves, 
jloivers (both open and in bud) and fruit (both young and mature).
It is not, 
however, always possible to gather such complete specimens, but the collector 
should aim at completeness.
Fragments, such as leaves without flowers, or 
flowers without leaves, are of little or no use.
226.
If the plant is small (not exceeding 15 in.) or can be reduced to that 
length by folding, the specimen should consist of the whole plant, including the 
principal part of the root.
If it be too large to preserve the whole, a good 
flowering branch should be selected, with the foliage as low down as can be 
gathered with it ; and one or two of the lower stem-leaves, or radical leaves, 
if any, should be added, so as to preserve as much as possible of the peculiar 
aspect of the plant.
227.
The specimens should be taken from healthy uninjured plants of a me- 
dium size.
Or if a specimen be gathered because it looks a little different from 
the majority of those around it, apparently belonging to the same species, a 
specimen of the more prevalent form should be taken from the same locality 
for comparison.
228.
For bringing the specimens home, alight portfolio of pasteboard, covered 
with calico or leather, furnished with straps and buckles for closing, and another 
for slinging on the shoulder, and containing a few sheets of stout coarse paper, 
is better than the old-fashioned tin box (except, perhaps, for stiff prickly plants 
and a few others) .
The specimens as gathered are placed between the leaves of 
paper, and may be crowded together if not left long without sorting.
229.
If the specimen brought home be not immediately determined when 
fresh, but dried for future examination, a note should be taken of the time, place, 
and situation in which it was gathered ; of the stature, habit, and other parti- 
culars relating to any tree, shrub, or herb of which the specimen is only a por- 
tion ; of the kind of root it has ; of the colour of the flower ; or of any other 
particulars which the specimen itself cannot supply, or which may be lost in 
the process of drying.
These memoranda, whether taken down in the field, or 
from the living specimen when brought home, should be written on a label 
attached to the specimen or preserved with it.
230.
To dry specimens, they are laid flat between several sheets of bibulous 
paper, and subjected to pressure.
The paper is subsequently changed at in- 
tervals, until they are dry.
231.
In laying out the specimen, care should be taken to preserve the natural 
position of the parts as far as consistent with the laying flat.
In general, if the 
specimen is fresh and not very slender, it may be simply laid on the lower 
sheet, holding it by the stalk and drawing it slightly downwards ; then, as the 
upper sheet is laid over, if it be slightly drawn downwards as it is pressed 
down, it will be found, after a few trials, that the specimen will have retained a 
natural form with very little trouble.
If the specimen has been gathered long 
enough to have become flaccid, it will require more care in laying the leaves flat 
and giving the parts their proper direction.
Specimens kept in tin boxes will 
also often have taken unnatural bends, which will require to be corrected.
232.
If the specimen is very bushy, some branches must be thinned out, but 
always so as to show where they have been.
If any part, such as the head of a 
thistle, the stem of an Orobanche, or the bulb of a Lily, be very thick, a portion 
of what is to be the underside of the specimen may be sliced off.
Some thick 
specimens may be split from top to bottom before drying.
233.
If the specimen be succulent or tenacious of life, such as a Sedum or an 
Orchis, it may be dipped in boiling water all but the flowers.
This will kill the 
plant at once, and enable it it to be dried rapidly, losing less of its colour or 
foliage than would otherwise be the case.
Dipping in boiling water is also 
useful in the case of Heaths and other plants, which are apt to shed their leaves 
during the process of drying.
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
xlvii 
234.
Plants with very delicate corollas may be placed between single leaves 
of very thin unglazed tissue-paper.
In shifting these plants into dry paper the 
tissue-paper is not to be removed, but lifted with its contents on to the dry 
paper.
235.
The number of sheets of paper to be placed between each specimen or 
sheet of specimens, will depend, on the one hand, on the thickness and hu- 
midity of the specimens ; on the other hand, on the quantity and quality of 
the paper one has at command.
The more and the better the paper, the less 
frequently will it be necessary to change it, and the sooner the plants will dry.
The paper ought to be coarse, stout, and unsized.
Common blotting-paper 
is much too tender.
236.
Care must be taken that the paper used is well dried.
If it be likewise 
hot, all the better ; but it must then be very dry ; and wet plants put into hot 
paper will require changing very soon, to prevent their turning black, for hot 
damp without ventilation produces fermentation, and spoils the specimens.
237.
For pressing plants, various more or less complicated and costly presses 
are made.
None is better than a pair of boards the size of the paper, and a 
stone or other heavy weight upon them if at home, or a pair of strong leather 
straps round them if travelling.
Each of these boards should be double, that 
is, made of two layers of thin boards, the opposite way of the grain, and 
joined together by a row of clenched brads round the edge, without glue.
Such 
boards, in deal, rather less than half an inch thick (each layer about 2^ lines) 
will be found light and durable.
238.
It is useful also to have extra boards or pasteboards the size of the 
paper, to separate thick plants from thin ones, wet ones from those nearly dry, 
etc.
Open wooden frames with cross-bars, or frames of strong wire-work lat- 
tice, are still better than boards for this purpose, as accelerating the drying by 
promoting ventilation.
239.
The more frequently the plants are shifted into dry paper the better.
Excepting for very stiff or woody plants, the first pressure should be light, and 
the first shifting, if possible, after a few hours.
Then, or at the second shifting, 
when the specimens will have lost their elasticity, will be the time for putting 
right any part of a specimen which may have taken a wrong fold or a bad di- 
rection.
After this the pressure may be gradually increased, and the plants 
left from one to several days without shifting.
The exact amount of pressure 
to be given will depend on the consistence of the specimens, and the amount of 
paper.
It must only be borne in mind that too much pressure crushes the de- 
licate parts, too little allows them to shrivel, in both cases interfering with their 
future examination.
240.
The most convenient specimens will be made, if the drying-paper is 
the same size as that of the herbarium in which they are to be kept.
That of 
writing demy, rather more than 16 inches by 10|- inches, is a common and very 
convenient size.
A small size reduces the specimens too much, a large size is 
both costly and inconvenient for use.
241.
When the specimens are quite dry and stiff, they may be packed up in 
bundles with a single sheet of paper between each layer, and this paper need not 
be bibulous.
The specimens may be placed very closely on the sheets, but not 
in more than one layer on each sheet, and care must be taken to protect the 
bundles by sufficient covering from the effects of external moisture or the attacks 
of insects.
242.
In laying the specimens into the herbarium, no more than one species 
should ever be fastened on one sheet of paper, although several specimens of the 
same species may be laid side by side.
And throughout the process of drying, 
packing, and laying in, great care must be taken that the labels be not separated 
from the specimens they belong to.
243.
To examine or dissect flowers or fruits in dried specimens it is necessary 
xlviii INTRODUCTION.
to soften them.
If the parts are very delicate, this is best done by gradually 
moistening them in cold water ; in most cases, steeping them in boiling water or 
in steam is much quicker.
Very hard fruits and seeds will require boiling to be 
able to dissect them easily.
244.
For dissecting and examining flowers in the field, all that is necessary is 
a penknife and a pocket-lens of two or three glasses from 1 to 2 inches focus.
At home it is more convenient to have a mounted lens or simple microscope, 
with a stage holding a glass plate, upon which the flowers may be laid ; and a 
pair of dissectors, one of which should be narrow and pointed, or a mere point, 
like a thick needle, in a handle ; the other should have a pointed blade, with 
a sharp edge, to make clean sections across the ovary.
A compound micro- 
scope is rarely necessary, except in cryptogamic botany and vegetable anatomy.
For the simple microscope, lenses of i, -J, 1, and 1J inches focus are sufficient.
245.
To assist the student in determining or ascertaining the name of a plant 
belonging to a Flora, analytical tables are in this work prefixed to the Orders, 
Genera, and Species.
These tables are so constructed as to contain, under each 
bracket, or equally indented, two (rarely three or more) alternatives as nearly as 
possible contradictory or incompatible with each other, each alternative referring 
to another bracket, or having under it another pair of alternatives further in- 
dented.
The student having a plant to determine, w 7 ill first take the general 
table of Natural Orders, and examining his plant at each step to see which al- 
ternative agrees with it, will be led on to the Order to which it belongs, he w T ill 
then compare it with the detailed character of the Order given in the text.
If 
it agrees, he will follow the same course with the table of the genera of that 
Order to find the genus, and again with the key of the species of that genus to 
find the species.
Suppose the plant to be a Dandelion, a Daisy, or a Thistle.
On opening 
what appears to be the flower, we see at once that each part, which we may at 
first have taken for a petal, contains a separate style, and has a separate ovary 
(appearing like a seed) under it, but no separate calyx, all these florets being 
collected within a common involucre.
The flower is therefore compound.
Our 
attention is also called to the anthers.
They may at first escape the beginner, but 
with a little care they will be discovered forming a ring round the style.
We 
may then conclude that our plant agrees with the first alternative which refers 
to the second bracket.
We must now look to the ovary under any one of the 
florets, cut it open, and, finding but a single ovule or seed, we are referred to the 
great Order of Composites.
This second bracket is only necessary to exclude 
two or three Campanulaceous plants {Phyteuma and Jasione), which have the 
united anthers and heads of flowers of Composites, but are most readily known 
by the numerous small ovules or seeds in their ovary or fruit.
On turning to 
the description of the Order Composites, we are cautioned against confounding 
with them two or three other plants which have similar heads of flowers, and 
being satisfied we are right, we proceed in the same manner to find out the 
genus of our plant.
Suppose the plant to be a Violet.
Although the anthers are united in a ring, 
the flowers are quite separate, each with its own calyx, and we are referred by 
the second alternative to the third bracket, the double perianth refers us to the 
fifth, the free ovary to the sixth, the single ovary to the seventh, the irregular 
corolla to the forty-first, the spur to one of the petals to the forty-second, the 
five stamens to the forty-third, under which the five sepals and petals indicate at 
once the genus Violet.
We then compare our plant with the description of 
the genus in the Flora, before we proceed to ascertain the species.
In making 
use of these descriptions, the beginner must be careful not to be misled by the 
popular meaning of terms to which a technical sense has been given by botanists, 
and in all cases of doubt he should refer to the definitions through the Index 
of Terms.
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
xlix 
After a little habit, this mechanical process will be much abridged.
The 
great divisions of the general analytical table will be at once recognized, and 
very soon the large Orders and genera will become so familiar, that in most 
cases the amateurs will only have to commence with them.
Yet in all cases 
of doubt and hesitation, wherever the plant does not agree perfectly with the 
generic character and description, he must revert to the beginning, and carefully 
go through every step of the investigation before he can be satisfied.
And notwithstanding the care that has been bestowed on the framing of the 
analytical keys of the present work, and the number of cases in which they have 
been verified, specimen in hand, through every stage, it cannot be hoped that 
they have been rendered so precise as to preclude doubt.
The beginner es- 
pecially will often be at a loss as to which alternative agrees the best with the 
plant he is examining, and one false step may lead him faraway from the object 
he is seeking.
But let him not be discouraged ; perseverance, a fresh examina- 
tion of his specimen, or of others of the same plant, a critical consideration 
of the meaning of every expression in the characters given, may lead him 
to detect some minute point overlooked or mistaken, and put him in the right 
way.
Even experienced botanists, provided with the most detailed descrip- 
tions in systematic works of the highest repute, are occasionally led into false 
determinations.
Species vary within limits which it is often very difficult to 
express in words.
In making an analytical table, it often proves impossible so 
to divide the genera or species which have to come under one bracket, as that 
each alternative must exclude all that come under the other one.
In such 
cases it has been found expedient to make both alternatives lead to the doubt- 
ful genus or species, although for brevity's sake this has been avoided when not 
thought absolutely necessary.
246.
In those Floras where analytical tables are not given, the student is 
usually guided to the most important or prominent characters of each genus or 
species, either by a general summary prefixed to the genera of an Order or to 
the species of the genus, for all such genera or species ; or by a special sum- 
mary immediately preceding the detailed description of each genus or species.
In the latter case this summary is called a diagnosis.
Or sometimes the 
important characters are only indicated by italicizing them in the detailed de- 
scription.
247.
It may also happen that the specimen gathered may present some oc- 
casional or accidental anomalies peculiar to that single one, or to a very few 
individuals, which may prevent the species from being at once recognized by its 
technical characters.
It may be useful here to point out a few of these anoma- 
lies which the botanist may be most likely to meet with.
For this purpose we 
may divide them into two classes, viz.
: 
1. Aberrations from the ordinary type or appearance of a species for which 
some general cause may be assigned.
A bright, light, and open situation, particularly at considerable elevations 
above the sea, or at high latitudes, without too much wet or drought, tends to 
increase the size and heighten the colour of flowers, in proportion to the sta- 
ture and foliage of the plant.
Shade, on the contrary, especially if accompanied by richness of soil and 
sufficient moisture, tends to increase the foliage and draw up the stem, but to 
diminish the number, size, and colour of the flowers.
A hot climate and dry situation tend to increase the hairs, prickles, and other 
productions of the epidermis, to shorten and stiffen the branches, rendering 
thorny plants yet more spinous.
Moisture in a rich soil has a contrary 
effect.
The neighbourhood of the sea, or a saline soil or atmosphere, imparts a 
thicker and more succulent consistence to the foliage and almost every part of 
the plant, and appears not unfrequently to enable plants usually annual to live 
d 
1 INTRODUCTION.
through the winter.
Flowers in a maritime variety are often much fewer, but 
not smaller.
The luxuriance of plants growing in a rich soil, and the dwarf stunted cha- 
racter of those crowded in poor soils, are too well known to need particularizing.
It is also an everyday observation how gradually the specimens of a species be- 
come dwarf and stunted as we advance into the cold damp regions of the sum- 
mits of high mountain-ranges, or into high northern latitudes ; and yet it is 
frequently from the want of attention to these circumstances that numbers of 
false species have been added to our Enumerations and Floras.
Luxuriance 
entails not only increase of size to the whole plant, or of particular parts, but 
increase of number in branches, in leaves, or leaflets of a compound leaf ; or 
it may diminish the hairiness of the plant, induce thorns to grow out into 
branches, etc.
* Capsules which, w T hile growing, lie close upon the ground, will often become 
larger, more succulent, and less readily dehiscent, than those which are not so 
exposed to the moisture of the soil.
Herbs eaten down by sheep or cattle, or crushed underfoot, or otherwise 
checked in their growth, or trees or shrubs cut down to the ground, if then ex- 
posed to favourable circumstances of soil and climate, will send up luxuriant 
side-shoots, often so different in the form of their leaves, in their ramification 
and inflorescence, as to be scarcely recognizable for the same species.
Annuals which have germinated in spring, and flowered without check, will 
often be very different in aspect from individuals of the same species, which, 
having germinated later, are stopped by summer droughts or the approach of 
winter, and only flower the following season upon a second growth.
The latter 
have often been mistaken for perennials.
Hybrids, or crosses between two distinct species, come under the same cate- 
gory of anomalous specimensfrom a known cause.
Frcquentas they are in gardens, 
where they are artificially produced, they are probably rare in nature, although 
on this subject there is much diversity of opinion, some believing them to be 
very frequent, others almost denying their existence.
Absolute proof of the 
origin of a plant found wild, is of course impossible ; but it is pretty generally 
agreed that the following particulars must always co-exist in a ivild hybrid.
It 
partakes of the characters of its two parents ; it is to be found isolated, or al- 
most isolated, in places where the two parents are abundant ; if there are two 
or three, they will generally be dissimilar from each other, one partaking more 
of one parent, another of the other ; it seldom ripens good seed ; it will never 
be found where one of the parents grows alone.
Where two supposed species grow together, intermixed with numerous in- 
termediates bearing good seed, and passing more or less gradually from the one 
to the other, it may generally be concluded that the whole are mere varieties of 
one species.
The beginner, however, must be very cautious not to set down a 
specimen as intermediate between two species, because it appears to be so in 
some, even the most striking characters, such as stature and foliage.
Extreme 
varieties of one species are connected together by transitions in all their cha- 
racters, but these transitions are not all observable in the same specimens.
The 
observation of a single intermediate is therefore of little value, unless it 
be one link in a long series of intermediate forms, and, when met with, should 
lead to the search for the other connecting links.
2. Accidental aberrations from the ordinary type, that is, those of ivhicli the 
cause is unknown.
These require the more attention as they may sometimes lead the beginner 
far astray in his search for the genus, whilst the aberrations above-mentioned 
as reducible more or less to general laws, affect chiefly the distinction of 
species.
Almost all species with coloured flowers are liable to occur occasionally with 
them all white.
OUTLINES OF BOTANY.
li 
Many may be found even in a wild state with double flowers, that is, with a 
multiplication of petals.
Plants which have usually conspicuous petals will occasionally appear without 
any at all, either to the flowers produced at particular seasons, or to all the 
flowers of individual plants, or the petals may be reduced to narrow slips.
Flowers usually very irregular may, on certain individuals, lose more or less 
of their irregularity, or appear in some very different shape.
Spurs, for in- 
stance, may disappear, or be produced on all instead of one only of the petals.
One part may be occasionally added to, or subtracted from, the usual number 
of parts in each floral whorl, more especially in regular polypetalous flowers.
Plants usually monoecious or dioecious may become occasionally hermaphro- 
dite, or hermaphrodite plants may produce occasionally unisexual flowers by the 
abortion of the stamens or of the pistils.
Leaves cut or divided where they are usually entire, variegated or spotted 
where they are usually of one colour, or the reverse, must also be classed 
amongst those accidental aberrations which the botanist must always be on 
his guard against mistaking for specific distinctions.
d2 
Hi 
INDEX OF TERMS, OR GLOSSARY.
The figures refer to the Paragraphs of the Outlines.
PAR.
Aberrations 247 
Abortive 84 
Abruptly pinnate ...
43 
Accessory organs .
. .168 
Acicular 54 
Achene 158 
Aculeate 170 
Acuminate, acumen .
. 47 
Acute 47 
Adherent ....
140, 145 
Adnate ....
63, 145 
Adnate anther ....
114 
Adventitious .
. .17, 19 
Aerials growing in the air.
Estivation 102 
Aggregate fruit ....
147 
Alabastrum (bud) .
. .
214 
Alae (wings) ...
37, 155 
Alate= having wings.
Albumen, albuminous .
162 
Alburnum 198 
Alliances 182 
Alternate 32, 90 
Amentum = catkin ...
76 
Amphitropous ....
134 
Ample xicaul 37 
Amygdaloid = almond-like.
Amyloid 192 
Anastomose 40 
An tropous 134 
Androgynous ....
87 
Angiospermous ....
161 
Anisomerous 94 
Annuals 12 
Anterior 91 
Anther ....
109, 114 
Anthesis (flowering pe- 
riod) 214 
Apetalous 85 
Apex ....
36,47,115 
Apiculate=with a little 
point.
PAR.
Apocarpous 125 
Aquatic = growing in water 14 
Arboreous or arborescent 
plants 12 
Aril, arillus 164 
Arillate (having an aril) .
164 
Aristate 47 
Article, articulate, arti- 
culation 54 
Artificial divisions and 
characters .
. .
.184 
Ascending 28 
Asepalous 85 
Assimilation ....
218 
Auricle 49 
Auriculate=having auri- 
cles .......
50 
Axil, axillary ....
17 
Axile (in the axis) .
. .
132 
Bark 198 
Barren 85, 110 
Base ....
36,48,115 
Bast-cells 198 
Berry 157 
Bi- (2 in composition) .
44 
Bicarpellary ....
125 
Bidentate 44 
Biennials 12 
Bifid 44 
Bifoliolate 44 
Bijugate 44 
Bilabiate (two-lipped) 102, 105 
Bilocular 126 
Bipinnate 43 
Bisexual 85 
Biternate 44 
Blade 35 
Bracts, bracteae .
60, 77, 202 
Bracteate= having bracts.
Bracteoles 62 
Bristles, bristly .
. .
.173 
PAR.
Bud 16 
Bulb 26 
Bush 12 
Caespitose= tufted ...
28 
Callous s=r hardened and 
usually thickened.
Calycule, calyculate .
. 80 
Calyx 15, 90, 96 
Cambium-region .
. .
211 
Campanulate .
. .
.104 
Campylotropous .
. .
134 
Canescent 173 
Capillary = hair-like .
. 54 
Capitate 74 
Capsule 158 
Carpel 15, 123 
Carpophore 146 
Cartilaginous = of the con- 
sistence of cartilage or 
of parchment.
Caruncule, carunculate .
164 
Caryopsis ......
160 
Catkins ......
76 
Cauline (on the stem) .
38 
Caulocarpic 12 
Cells (elementary) .
. 186 
Cells (of anthers) .
. .109 
Cells (of the ovary) .
. 121 
Cellular system .
. .
.193 
Cellular tissue ....
188 
Cellulose 191 
Centrifugal 72 
Centripetal 72 
Chaff 82 
Chalaza 133 
Character 183 
Chlorophyll .....
192 
Chromule 192 
Ciliate 39 
Circumsciss 158 
Cirrhus= tendril .
. .169 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS.
liii 
PAB.
Class .
182 
Claw (of a petal) .
. .107 
Climbing stem ....
29 
Coats of the ovule .
. .133 
Coats of the seed .
. .163 
Coccus 159 
Coherent ......
145 
Collateral = inserted one 
by the side of the other.
Collection of specimens .
224 
Coma 163 
Common petiole ...
39 
Complete flower ...
89 
Compound leaf ....
39 
Compound flower ...
74 
Compound fruit .
. .
147 
Compound ovary .
. .
126 
Compound umbel ...
74 
Compressed 54 
Cone .
. .
. .
. .
160 
Confluent 117 
Conicle 54 
Connate 145 
Connective, connectivum 109 
Connivent 145 
Contorted, convolute .
. 102 
Cordate 49 
Cordiform 49 
Coriaceous 55 
Corky layer 198 
Conn 27 
CoroUa ....
15, 90, 97 
Corrugate (crumpled) .
102 
Corymb, corymbose .
. 74 
Costate 173 
Cotton, cottony .
. .173 
Cotyledons 166 
Creeping 28 
Crenate, crenulate ...
39 
Cristate =• having a crest- 
like appendage.
Crown of the root ...
24 
Crumpled 102 
Cryptogamous plants .
. 10 
Culm 34 
Cuneate ......
45 
Cupular (cup-shaped) .
136 
Cuspidate 47 
Cylindrical 54 
Cyme, cymose ....
74 
Deca- or decern- (10 in 
composition) .
. .
44, 92 
Deciduous calyx .
. .
152 
Decompound ....
43 
Decumbent 28 
Decurrent 37 
Decussate ...
. .
32 
PAH.
Definite 89 
Definitions .
. .
(p.
iii.) 
Dehiscence, dehiscent 118, 156 
Dentate 39 
Depressed 54 
Descriptive Botany .
(p.
xi.) 
Determinate 67 
Determination of plants .
245 
Dextrine ......
192 
Di- (2 in composition) .
92 
Diadelphous .
. .
. .113 
Diagnosis 246 
Dialypetalous .
. .
.100 
Diandrous .....
93 
Dichlamydeous ....
85 
Dichotomous ....
33 
Diclinous .86 
Dicotyledonous plants .
167 
Didymous .
. .
s .
54 
Didynamous 113 
Diffuse .
28 
Digitate 41 
Digynous ....
93, 125 
Dimerous 93 
Dimidiate 117 
Dioecious 86 
Dipetalous .....
93 
Disepalous 93 
Disk 136 
Dissepiment 126 
Dissected 39 
Distichous 32 
Distinct 145 
Divaricate .....
115 
Diverging, divergent 115, 145 
Divided 39 
Dorsal = on the back.
Double flowers ....
97 
Down, downy .
. .
.173 
Drupe 157 
Dry Fruits 158 
Ducts 188 
Duramen 198 
Ear 76 
Echinate 173 
Elaborated sap ....
217 
Elementary cells and tis- 
sues 186 
Elliptical 45 
Emarginate 47 
Embryo ....
162, 166 
Endocarp 157 
Endogens, endogenous 
plants 195 
Endogenous stem .
. .
199 
Endosmose 217 
Ennea- (9 in composition) 92 
PAR.
Entire 39 
Epicarp .157 
Epidermis .
. .
173, 193 
Epigynous .....
140 
Epigynous disk ....
144 
Epiphyte 14 
Erect 28 
Exalbuminous (without 
albumen) 162 
Examination of plants .
243 
Exogens,exogenous plants 195 
Exogenous stem , .
. 198 
Exserted 113 
Extrorse 118 
Falcate 45 
Families 181 
Farinose t 173 
Fascicled, fasciculate .
• 32 
Fastigiate .....
74 
Fecula 192 
Female 85 
Fertile 85 
Fibre .......
18 
Fibrous root 20 
Fibro-vascular system .
193 
Filament 109 
Filiform = thread-like.
Fimbriate = fringed.
Flabelliform= fan-shaped 45 
Fleshy 55 
Floccose 173 
Floral envelope .
. .
. 15 
Floral leaves 61 
Flowers .
.15,84,213,219 
Flowering plants ...
10 
Foliaceous = leaf-like.
Follicle 159 
Foramen 135 
Forked 33 
Free .
. 89,132,140,145 
Fruit .
. .
.15, 146, 222 
Frutescent, fruticose .
. 12 
Function 7 
Funicle (funiculus) .
. 164 
Funnel-shaped ....
104 
Furrowed 173 
Fusiform = spindle-shaped 54 
Gamopetalous ....
100 
Geminate 32 
Genus, genera ....
180 
Germ, germination .
.215 
Gibbous 105 
Glabrous ......
173 
Glands 175, 206 
Glandular setose .
. .
173 
Glaucous 173 
liv 
INTRODUCTION.
PAR.
Globose, globular ...
51 
Glochidiate 173 
Glume 83 
Glutinous 173 
Grain 160 
Gymnospermous .
. .
1G1 
Gynobasis, gynophore .
113 
Habit 183 
Hairs .
. .
171, 205, 223 
Hastate 50 
Head 74 
Heart-wood 198 
Hepta- (7 in composition) 92 
Herbaceous perennials .
12 
Herbarium 221 
Hermaphrodite ....
85 
Heterogamous ....
87 
Hexa- (6 in composition) 92 
Hilum 165 
Hirsute .
. .
. .
.173 
Hispid .
173 
Hoary .
173 
Homogamous .
. .
. 87 
Hooks 169 
Hybernaculum ....
23 
Hybrids 247 
Hypocrateriform (salver- 
shaped) 104 
Hypogynous 140 
Imbricate, imbricated 58, 102 
Impari-pinnate ....
43 
Imperfect 84 
Incomplete 84 
Indefinite 92 
Indehiscent 156 
Indeterminate ....
67 
Indumentum ....
171 
Induplicate 102 
Inferior 140 
Inferior radicle .
. .
,167 
Inflorescence .
. .
. QQ 
Infundibuliform (funnel- 
shaped) 104 
Innate anther ....
114 
Insertion 140 
Internode 31 
Interrupted spike or ra- 
ceme ......
75 
Introrse 118 
Involucre, involucel .
. 79 
Involute 102 
Irregular 95 
Isomerous 89 
Joint, joining .
. 
Jugum, juga=pairs 
54 
44 
PAB.
Kernel 157 
Knob 25 
Labellum 105 
Laciniate 39 
Lamina ....
35, 107 
Lanate = woolly ....
173 
Lanceolate 45 
Lateral 91 
Leaf, leaves .
15, 35, 200, 218 
Leaf-bud 16 
Leaflet 39 
Leaf-opposed ....
67 
Legume 160 
Lepidote 172 
Liber 198,211 
Ligulate = strap- shaped.
Limb 104 
Linear 45, 54 
Lip, lipped 105 
Lobe, lobed 39 
Loculicidal 158 
Lower 91 
Lunate = crescent-shaped.
Lyrate 41 
Male 85 
Marcescent 151 
Mealy 173 
Medullary rays and sheath 198 
Membranous .
. .
. 55 
Micropyle .
. .
. .165 
Midrib 40 
Monadelphous ....
113 
Monandrous 112 
Moniliform 54 
Mono- (1 in composition) 92 
Monocarpellary .
. .
125 
Monocarpic 12 
Monochlamydeous ...
85 
Monocotyledonous plants 167 
Monoecious 86 
Monogynous 125 
Monopetalous .
. .
.100 
Morphology ....
8, 88 
Mucronate 47 
Multi- {many, or an inde- 
finite number, in com- 
position) 44 
Muricate ......
173 
Naked 85,161 
Natural divisions and 
characters 184 
Natural Order .
. , .181 
Navicular =boat-shaped.
Nectary 138 
Nerve 40 
PAH.
Net-veined 40 
Neuter 85 
Node 31 
Novem- (9 in composition) 44 
Nucleus of a cell .
. .
191 
Nucleus of the ovule .
.133 
Nut ........
158 
Obcompressed ....
54 
Obconical 54 
Obcordate 47 
Oblate 45 
Oblong 45, 54 
Obovate 45 
Obovoid 54 
Obpyramidal ....
54 
Obtuse 47 
Oct- or octo- (8 in com- 
position) .
. .
. 44, 92 
Offset 23 
Opposite 32 
Orbicular 45 
Order 181 
Organ ....'..
7 
Organogenesis ....
213 
Organs of vegetation and 
reproduction ....
9 
Orthotropous ....
134 
Oval 45 
Ovary 121 
Ovate 45 
Ovoid 54 
Ovule 121,133 
Palate 105 
Palea, palese 82 
Paleaceous = of a chaffy 
consistence.
Palmate 41, 42 
Palmatifid, palmatisect .
42 
Panicle, paniculate .
. 74 
Papillse 122 
Pappus .......
155 
Parallel veins ....
40 
Parasite 14 
Parenchyma .
. .
. .
188 
Parietal 132 
Pectinate 41 
Pedate 41, 42 
Pedatifid, pedatisect .
. 42 
Pedicel 70 
Pedicellate = on a pedicel.
Peduncle 68 
Pedunculate = on a pe- 
duncle.
Peltate 52 
Penicillate 130 
Penta- (5 in composition) 92 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS.
lv 
PAR.
Pepo 160 
Perennial 12 
Perfect flower ....
84 
Perfoliate 37 
Perennials 12 
Perianth .
15, 98, 202, 220 
Pericarp 154 
Perigynous 140 
Perisperni 162 
Persistent 146 
Personate 105 
Petal 90 
Petiole 35 
Petiolule 39 
Phaenoganions, phanero- 
gamous 10 
Phyllaries 79 
Phyllodium = a flat petiole 
with no blade.
Pilose t 173 
Pinna 43 
Pinnate 41, 42 
Pinnatifid, pinnatisect .
42 
Pistil .
15, 90, 120, 203, 221 
Pistillate 85 
Pith 198 
Placenta, placentation .
131 
Plant 6 
Plicate 102 
Plumose 172 
Plumule 166 
Pluri- = several, in com- 
position.
Plurilocular 126 
Pod 158 
Podocarp 120 
Pollen 109, 119 
Poly- (many, or an in- 
definite number, in 
composition) ....
92 
Polyadelphous .
. .
.113 
Polyandrous ...
92, 112 
Polygamous .....
86 
Polygynous ...
92, 125 
Polypetalous 100 
Pome 160 
Posterior 91 
Prsefoliation 57 
Preservation of speci- 
mens 224 
Prickles 170 
Primine 133 
Procumbent 28 
Proliferous 17 
Prosenchyma ....
188 
Prostrate 28 
Protoplasm 191 
Pubescent, puberulent .
173 
PAR.
Pulvinate (cushion- 
shaped) 136 
Punctiform=:like a point 
or dot.
Putamen 157 
Pyramidal 54 
Quadri- (4 in composi- 
tion) 44 
Quineuncial 102 
Quinque- (5 in composi- 
tion) 44 
Quintuplinerved ...
40 
Eace .
. .
. .
. .178 
Raceme j racemose ...
74 
Eachis 39, 68 
Eadical 38 
Eadicle 166 
Eaphe 134 
Eaphides 192 
Eeceptacle ...
74, 135 
Eeduplicate 102 
Eegular 95 
Eeniform 51 
Eesupinate 105 
Eeticulate 40 
Eetuse 47 
Eevolute 102 
Ehachis 39, 68 
Ehaphe 134 
Ehizome 21, 24 
Ehomboidal 45 
Eibs 40 
Eibbed 173 
Eingent 105 
Eoot .
15, 18, 196, 207, 216 
Eoot-stock 24 
Eostrate=beaked.
Eosulate 38 
Eotate 104 
Eudimentary ....
84 
Eugose 173 
Euncinate 41 
Eunner 30 
Saccate 105 
Sagittate 50 
Salver-shaped ....
104 
Samara 158 
Sap 192 
Sap wood 198 
Sarcocarp 157 
Scabrous 173 
Scales .
. 58, 59, 172, 201 
Scaly bulb 26 
Scaly surface ....
172 
Scape 69 
PAR.
Scariose, scarious .
. .
55 
Scattered 32 
Scion 30 
Scorpioid cyme ....
74 
Section 182 
Secund 32 
Secundine 133 
Seed 161 
Segment 39 
Sepals 90 
Septem- (7 in composi- 
tion) 44 
Septicidal 158 
Septum = partition .
. .
126 
Serrate, serrulate ...
39 
Sessile 37 
Seta, seta?
(bristles) .
. 173 
Setaceous (bristle-like) .
54 
Setose (bearing bristles) 173 
Sex- (6 in composition) .
44 
Sheathing 37 
Shrubs 12 
Silicule, siliqua .
. .
.160 
Silver grain 198 
Simple 39 
Sinuate 39 
Sinus 39 
Smooth ......
173 
Spadix 76 
Spatha 81 
Spatulate 45 
Species 177 
Specimen 225 
Spherical ......
54 
Spike, spicate ....
74 
Spikelet 76 
Spinous 170 
Spiral vessels ....
188 
Spur, spurred ....
105 
Squamae = scales ...
58 
Squarrose 58 
Stamens .
.15, 90, 108, 203 
Staminate 85 
Staminodia .....
110 
Starch 192 
Stellate 104 
Stellate hairs ....
172 
Stem .
15, 28, 197, 210, 217 
Stem-clasping ....
37 
Sterile 85 
Stigma 121 
Stipella 64 
Stipes, stipitate ...
65 
Stipules 63 
Stock 16,22 
Stole, stolon ....
23, 30 
Stomates 194 
Stone, stone-fruit .
. 157 
lvi 
INTRODUCTION.
PAE.
Striate 173 
Strigose, strigillose .
. 173 
Strophiole, strophiolate .
164 
Style 121 
Sub == almost, or under in 
composition.
Subclass, suborder .
. 182 
Submerged= under water.
Subulate 54 
Succulent 55 
Succulent fruits .
. .
157 
Sucker 30 
Suflrutescent, suffruticose 12 
Sugar 192 
Sulcate 173 
Superior 140 
Superior radicle .
. .167 
Superposed = inserted one 
above the other.
Suture 159 
Symmetrical 89 
Synandrous 112 
Syncarpous 125 
Syngenesious .
. .
.113 
Systematic Botany (p.
xxxvi.) 
Taproot 20 
Teeth 39,101 
Tegmen 163 
Tendril ....
29, 169 
Terete 54 
Ternate 32,41 
Terrestrial = growing on 
the earth 14 
Testa 163 
Tetra (4 in composition) 92 
Tetradynamous ....
113 
Thorns 170 
Throat 104 
PAR.
Thyrsus, thyrsoid ...
74 
Tissues (elementary) .
. 186 
Tomentose 173 
Toothed 39 
Torus 135 
Trees .......
12 
Tri- (3 in composition) 44, 92 
Tribe 182 
Trichotomous ....
33 
Trifid 41 
Trifoliolate 41 
Trigonous 54 
Tripiunate 43 
Triplinerved 40 
Triquetrous 54 
Tristichous 32 
Truncate 47 
Trunk 12 
Tube 101,104 
Tuber, tuberoua 20, 25, 204 
Tuberculate 173 
Tubular 104 
Tufted 28 
Tunicated bulb ....
27 
Turbinate = top-shaped .
54 
Twiner 29 
Twisted 102 
Type, typical .
. .
.181 
Umbel, umbellate, um- 
bellule 33, 74 
Umbilicate 173 
Umbonate 173 
Uncinate =hooked.
Cndershrubs ....
12 
Undulate 39 
Unequally pinnate .
. 43 
Unguiculate 107 
Unguis (claw) ....
107 
PAH.
Uni- (1 in composition) .
44 
Unilateral (one-sided) ra- 
cemes 74 
Unilocular 126 
Unisexual 86 
Unsymmetrical ....
94 
Upper 91 
Urceolate 104 
Utricle 158 
Valvate .
. 
Valves .
. .
Variety .
. 
Vascular tissue 
Vegetable Anatomy 
Vegetable Chemistry 
Vegetable Homology 
Metamorphosis .
, 
Vegetable Physiology 8 
Veins, veinlets, venation 
Vernation .
. 
Versatile anther 
Verticil, verticillate 
Vessels .
. , 
Virgate = twiggy 
Viscid, viscous 
Vitta, vittoe .
Viviparous 
Voluble .
. 
Wart, warted 
Wavy .
. .
Whorl, whorled 
Wing, winged 
Wood .
. .
Woody tissue 
Wool, woolly 
37: 
102 
158 
178 
188 
,186 
207 
40 
57 
114 
32 
188 
28 
173 
175 
17 
29 
173 
39 
32 
155 
198 
188 
173 
ARRANGEMENT OF TEXT.
lvii 
III.— ARRANGEMENT OF THE TEXT, AND ABBREVIATIONS 
USED IN THE PRESENT WORK.
In the following pages the name of each Family or Order (for the two words 
may be indiscriminately used) is given in English and in Latin.
The English 
name is always in two words, exclusive of the particle.
Where the first word 
is not the name of a genus also, it may be used alone to designate the family 
by putting it in the plural, as Crucifers for the Crucifer family ', Waterlilies 
for the Waterlily family.
Where however it is also the name of a genu3, and 
it is wished to designate the family by a single word, in order to avoid confu- 
sion, either the Latin name must be taken, or it must be Anglicized by some 
of the modes which have been proposed, such as substituting the terminations 
ids for idea, and anths or ads for acece, as : Orchids for Orchidece, Ranunculanths 
or Ranunculads for Ranunculacece.
After the name of the family, the first paragraph, in large type, is the cha- 
racter of the family ; the second, in ordinary type, contains remarks on its 
geographical distribution and affinities.
This is followed, in small type, by the analytical key of the British genera 
belonging to the Order, as above explained, p.
30 ; and short memoranda are 
occasionally subjoined on commonly cultivated plants belonging to exotic 
genera.
Each genus commences with the name, in English on the left, in Latin on 
the right.
Where there is no English name suitable for the genus, the Latin 
one is repeated, as it must in that case be used as English.
Then follow the generic character, a paragraph of remarks, an analytical key 
of species, and occasional memoranda on exotic cultivated species, all in the 
same form as in the case of the families.
Each species commences with the name, consisting, both in English and in 
Latin, of two words.
In English, the first word indicates the species, the 
second the genus ; but both must be used in naming the plant, excepting in a 
few cases where the first word is a popular name applied to no other plant : the 
generic name may then, for ordinary purposes, be dispensed with, as : Charlock 
Brassica may be called simply Charlock.
In Latin, the first word indicates 
the genus, the second the species ; and the name is generally followed by the 
indication, in abbreviation, of the botanist who first fixed the name for the 
species in question.
In these abbreviations, Linn, stands for Linnceus ; Br. for 
Robert Brown; DC.
for Be Candolle ; Sm. for Sir James Smith.
Other 
names are usually abbreviated by giving the first syllable with the first letter of 
the second syllable, as Hook, for Hooker.
After the name is a parenthesis, in which reference is given to the plate in 
Smith and Sowerby's ' English Botany ' where the species is figured, and to any 
name, different from the one here adopted, under which the species may be 
described in the English Botany, in Hooker and Arnott's c British Flora,' or in 
Babington's ' Manual of British Botany.' Thus, under the Lesser Thalictrum, 
" (Eng. Bot.
t. 11 ; T.
majus, Eng. Bot.
t. 611 ; and Tflexuosum, Bab. Man.)" 
means, that the species is figured under the name here adopted {Thalictrum 
minus) at plate 11 ; that what is here considered as the same species includes 
the plant figured plate 611 of that work under the name of Thalictrum majus, 
and the plant described in Babington's Manual, under the name of Thalictrum 
flexuosum.
So under the Yellow Corydal, or Corydalis lutea, the reference 
lviii INTRODUCTION.
" (Fumaria, Eng. Bot.
t. 588) " means, that the species is figured in ' English 
Botany ' under the name of Fumaria lutea, the specific name not being different 
is not repeated in the reference.
In these synonyms, as such references are 
commonly called, Hooker and Arnott's ' British Flora ' is designated by the 
abbreviation Brit.
Fl. The references to ' English Botany ' repeated from the 
former edition of the Handbook were retained in the early numbers of the pre- 
sent one chiefly as synonyms, and have been continued for the sake of uni- 
formity, although their utility has been much diminished, as well by the figures 
of every species now introduced into our text, as by the new edition of * English 
Botany ' now publishing, in which the plants are systematically arranged.
Po- 
pular names of the species are also included in the same parenthesis.
The synonyms are followed by a paragraph describing the species.
In these 
descriptions it will be observed that when another species of the same genus is 
referred to, the generic name is, for shortness, indicated by its initial letter, and 
the specific one is printed in italics, to avoid confusion with a descriptive 
epithet.
Thus under the Yellow Thalictrum, "fewer than in the lesser T." 
means, fewer than in the species called the Lesser Thalictrum.
The next paragraph contains : 1st, The indication of the geographical area 
of the species.
This has only been done in a very general manner, and more 
especially with regard to its distribution in countries the nearest to Britain ; 
for it would have been quite foreign to the purpose of this work to attempt to 
fix, with any precision, the limits of the areas remote from Britain.
Generally 
speaking, the species indicated as extending to southern Europe penetrate 
more or less into Africa : if reaching the Caucasus, they often advance more 
or less into Persia and Arabia, etc.
2ndly, The distribution in Britain.
These 
are also given in general terms, the object being to give the reader some indi- 
cation whether the species to which he refers the plant he has been examining, 
is likely to have been growing in the place where he found his specimen.
Direc- 
tions to precise localities occupy too much space for any but very local 
Floras, or Botanists' Guide-books.
Exceptions are of course made for plants 
only known in a single locality.
In all these indications Britain is meant to 
include Ireland.
The Channel Island plants are only mentioned when they are 
not also found on the main British Isles.
These stations are followed, in the same paragraph, by the period of flower- 
ing, printed in italics.
The season is generally given rather than the month, as 
the flowering of plants always varies with the season.
A spring flower which 
may appear in the beginning of March in a favoured situation on the south 
coast of England, may not open till May in the Highlands of Scotland.
These 
periods of flowering, derived from personal observation or from the best sources 
I had at hand, must however betaken with considerable allowance, for they are 
liable to much variation, according to local or temporary influences ; and at any 
rate they can never be depended on for specific distinctions.
In general, spring 
flowers may be said to blow in March, April, or May, in the south of Engand ; 
summer flowers in June, July, or part of August ; autumnal ones in the end 
of August, September, or part of October.
After the middle of October, and 
until the beginning of March, there are but few besides occasional stragglers in 
flower : towards the North, the flow T ering season is much shorter, and parti- 
cularly the early flowers open later.
Observations on varieties, etc., are reserved for the conclusion of the para- 
graph.
The plants described as species in the ' British Flora,' or in the 'Manual 
of British Botany,' and not adopted as such in the present work, are mentioned 
or referred to either in these concluding observations or among the synonyms 
immediately under the specific name.
All other species inserted in the above 
works and not included or alluded to in the present one, are omitted, because 
they are believed not to grow wild in the British Isles.
ANALYTICAL KEY.
lix 
IV.— ANALYTICAL KEY 
To the Natural Orders and Anomalous Genera of the 'British Flora.
The heads of division adopted in the following Key are necessarily artificial, 
being solely intended to assist the beginner in finding out the name of his plant, 
and its place in the system, like the letters of the alphabet in an index.
They 
are not classes or groups of Orders, for the same Order will be found re- 
peated under different heads.
At the same time, it has been the endeavour so 
to frame them as to call the student's attention to some of the most prominent 
characters of the great natural divisions.
I. FLOWEK1NG PLANTS.
(Flowers compound, consisting of several florets in a common invo- 
lucre, without separate calyces.
Anthers united in a cylinder round 
the style 2 
Flowers distinct, or if in a head, having the anthers free ....
3 
|" Ovary and fruit containing a single seed, and appearing like a seed 
2 < under the floret Composite Fam.
(p.
407.) 
[ Ovary and fruit two-celled, with several seeds .
Jasione Gen.
(p.
507.) 
f Perianth double, consisting of a calyx (sometimes reduced to a scarcely 
3 < prominent ring) and a corolla 4 
[ Perianth single (its segments all calyx-like or all petal-like) or none 85 
. J Corolla consisting of several distinct petals 5 
\ Corolla of one piece, the petals united, at least at the base ....
8 
- f Ovary free, within or above the petals ...........
6 
\ Ovary inferior, adherent to the base of the calyx, and below the petals 46 
fi f Ovaries several in the same flower, the carpels distinct or deeply divided 9 
\ Ovary solitary (simple or compound) entire or slightly divided ...
7 
,_ J Corolla regular, the petals equal and similar to each other .
. .
. 15 
\ Corolla irregular 41 
s f Ovary inferior or adherent, below the insertion of the corolla ...
51 
X Ovary superior or free, within the tube or base of the corolla ...
57 
Polypetals with several free, distinct ovaries or carpels.
C Stamens united in a ring or column enclosing the style.
Ovaries in a 
qj ring round the axis 10 
] Stamens free.
Ovaries quite free, each with a distinct style or stigma, 
L without a central axis 11 
1n J Stamens 5 or 10, shortly united at the base.
Geranium Fam.
(p.
158.) 
\ Stamens indefinite, united in a column .
. .
Mallow Fam.
(p.
151.) 
f Stamens definite in number (as many, twice, or thrice as many as the 
11 ^ petals) .
12 
(_ Stamens indefinite 13 
19 f Leaves fleshy.
Sepals and petals 4 or more .
Crassula Fam.
(p.
291.) 
\ Aquatic plants not fleshy.
Sepals and petals 3.
Alisma Fam.
(p.
793.) 
,„ J Leaves without stipules.
Stamens inserted on the receptacle ...
14 
\ Leaves with stipules.
Stamens on the calyx .
• .
Rose Fam.
(p.
234.) 
..^ J Sepals or petals, or both, 4 or more .
. .
Ranunculus Fam.
(p.
1.) 
\ Sepals and petals, 3 each Alisma Fam.
(p.
793).
15 
16-!
lx INTRODUCTION.
Regular Polypetals with one free, simple, or compound ovary.
{More than 10 stamens 16 
10 stamens or fewer 22 
Calyx of 2 distinct sepals.
Petals 4 Poppy Fam.
(p.
28.) 
Calyx of one piece, with 5 or more teeth.
Petals 5 or 6.
Stamens 
abont 12 17 
Calyx of 3 to 5 sepals or lobes.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous .
. 18 
Calyx of several sepals.
Petals and stamens numerous.
Aquatic 
plants Waterlily Fam.
(p.
26.) 
" Petals distinct.
Ovary sessile Lythrum Gen.
(p.
287.) 
17 K Apparent petals really appendages to the involucre.
Ovary appa- 
L rently stalked Spurge Gen.
(p.
727.) 
, £ / Leaves opposite 19 
1 Leaves alternate 20 
f Sepals 3, with or without two small outer ones.
Style simple.
19 \ Cistus Fam.
(p.
91.) 
^Sepals 5, nearly equal.
Styles 3 or 5, distinct.
Hypericum Fam.
(p.
139.) 
(Trees or shrubs.
Stamens free 21 
Herbs.
Stamens free Baneberry Gen.
(p.
24.) 
Herbs or undershrubs.
Stamens united in a column round the pistil.
, Mallow Fam.
(p.
151.) 
{Petals and stamens inserted on the receptacle.
Flower-stalk winged 
by an oblong bract Lime Fam.
(p.
157.) 
Petals and stamens inserted on the calyx.
Flower-stalk not winged.
Rose Fam.
(p.
234.) 
22 f Leaves opposite 23 
\ Leaves alternate, or radical, or none 30 
9Q f Trees or shrubs 24 
^1 Herbs • 25 
f Stamens 2.
Leaves pinnate Ash Gen.
(p.
554.) 
24 \ Stamens 4 or 5.
Leaves ovate, toothed .
. Celastrus Fam.
(p.
177.) 
[_ Stamens about 8.
Leaves broadly lobed or angular.
Maple Gen.
(p.
175.) 
f Petals inserted on the tubular calyx, near the top.
25 \ Lythrum Fam.
(p.
287.) 
(^Petals inserted within the base of the calyx "26 
2fi f Leaves divided, cut, or toothed Geranium Fam.
(p.
158.) 
\ Leaves quite entire 27 
{Capsule one-celled, with a central placenta and several seeds.
Pink Fam.
(p.
100.) 
Capsule with a single seed Paronychia Fam.
(p.
685.) 
Capsule and ovary divided into several cells 28 
{Petals 3 or 4, with twice as many stamens.
Flowers very minute.
Elatine Gen.
(p.
138.) 
Petals 4 or 5.
Stamens the same, or rarely one or 2 additional 
ones 29 
f Calyx tubular, five-toothed Frankenia Gen.
(p.
100.) 
29 \ Calyx many-toothed.
Flowers very small .
. Radiola Gen.
(p.
151.) 
L Sepals 5, quite free Cathartic Flax (p.
150.) 
[ Trees or shrubs 31 
qq J Low procumbent heath-like undershrub, with 3 petals and stamens.
| Crowberry Gen.
(p.
738.) 
l^Herbs rarely slightly woody at the base 34 
("Petals and stamens 6.
Berry one- or two-seeded.
31 \ Barberry Gen.
(p.
26.) 
^Petals 4 or 5.
Stamens as many, or twice as many 32 
«{!
ANALYTICAL KEY.
lxi 
(^Branches twiggy, with small green scale-like leaves.
Capsule one- 
o 9 J celled.
Seeds cottony Tamarisc Gen.
(p.
137.) 
^ ] Shrubs or trees, with flat leaves.
Ovary and fruit (usually a berry) 
L divided into cells 33 
f Petals white, alternating with the stamens .
. Holly Gen.
(p.
552.) 
33 <{ Petals very small, green and behind the stamens, or none.
L Buckthorn Gen.
(p.
178.) 
~ Petals 4 35 
. Petals 5 36 
f Leafless herbs, with brown scales.
Stamens 8.
Monotrope Gen.
(p.
534.) 
35 «{ Herbs with entire or divided leaves.
Stamens 6, of which two are 
shorter, or rarely wanting Crucifer Fam.
(p.
38.) 
L Herb with compound leaves.
Stamens 4.
. .
Epimede Gen.
(p.
26.) 
ofi f Stamens 10 37 
ob 1 Stamens 5 38 
r Style single, with a broad stigma.
Leaves entire or minutely toothed.
Wintergreen Gen.
(p.
531.) 
37 \ Two styles or two distinct stigmas.
Leaves often toothed or divided.
Saxifrage Gen.
(p.
304.) 
^Five styles.
Leaves of three leaflets ....
Oxalis Gen.
(p.
171.) 
£ I Leaves all radical, or only one on the stem 39 
\ Stem-leaves several, entire 40 
("Styles 3 to 5, each one deeply divided.
Leaves fringed with glandular 
hairs Sundew Gen.
(p.
315.) 
39 \ Stigmas 4, sessile.
Leaves broad, entire, one on the stem.
Parnassia Gen.
(p.
314.) 
^Styles 5.
Leaves all radical, entire .
. .
Plumbago Fam.
(p.
677.) 
r Styles 3.
Procumbent plant, with very small white and green flowers.
40 \ • Corrigiole Gen.
(p.
686.) 
[ Styles 5.
Flowers blue Flax Gen.
(p.
148.) 
Irregular Folypetals with one free, simple, or compound ovary.
., J Flowers with a spur or pouch at the base 42 
\ Flowers not spurred .
. 44 
"Stamens numerous Larkspur Gen.
(p.
22.) 
42 \ Stamens 6, united in two clusters ....
Fumitory Fam.
(p.
35.) 
^Stamens 5 ...
* 43 
f Sepals 5.
Petals 5, spreading, one of them spurred.
Violet Gen.
(p.
94.) 
43 \ Outer sepals 2.
One inner sepal, large, hooded, and spurred.
Petals 
L one outer, entire, 2 inner lobed .
. .
. .
Balsam Gen.
(p.
172.) 
"Petals small, deeply cut.
Stamens more than 8, free.
Mignonette Gen.
(p.
88.) 
Petals 5, papilionaceous.
Stamens 10, all or 9 united.
44 \ Peaflower Tribe (p.
180.) 
Petals and sepals in pairs or in fours.
Stamens 6 45 
I Sepals 5, of which 2 are large.
Petals 3 or 5, small.
Stamens 8, 
I united in two clusters Milkwort Gen.
(p.
98.) 
/"Petals 4 ; spreading, 2 large and 2 small.
Stamens free.
45 J Crucifer Fam.
(p.
38.) 
Petals 4, small, erect in two pairs.
Stamens united in two clusters.
Fumitory Fam.
(p.
35.) 
\ 
Ixii INTRODUCTION.
Polypetals with an inferior ovary.
f Stamens 10 or fewer, of the same number or twice the petals ...
47 
46-^ Stamens 12 Lytheum Gen.
(p.
287.) 
[^Stamens indefinite, usually numerous 50 
f Petals 5.
Stamens 10 Saxifeage Gen.
(p.
304.) 
| Petals 5.
Stamens 5 48 
47 <{ Petals 3.
Aquatic plants with diclinous flowers.
Hydeociiaeis Fam.
(p.
801.) 
^Petals 2 or 4.
Stamens 2, 4, or 8 49 
f Herbs.
Fruit separating into two dry one-seeded carpels.
Umbellate Fam.
(p.
318.) 
48 <| Shrubs.
Fruit a berry, with several seeds .
. .
Ribes Gen.
(p.
300.) 
Evergreen climber.
Fruit a berry, with 2 to 5 seeds.
I Ivy Gen.
(p.
373.) 
,J Fruit a berry.
Shrubs or herbs Cornel Gen.
(p.
376.) 
\ Fruit dry, capsular.
Herbs ......
GEnotheea Fam.
(p.
273.) 
I" Calyx of 2 sepals Purslane Fam.
(p.
135.) 
50 < Calyx of 4, 5, or twice that number of teeth or divisions.
[ Rose Fam.
(p.
234.) 
Monopetals with an inferior ovary.
{Leaves alternate or radical 52 
Leaves opposite or whorled 54 
""Shrubs.
Stamens 8 or 10.
Fruit a berry.
Yaccinium Gen.
(p.
518.) 
Climber.
Flowers dioecious.
Stamens 5, combined into 3.
Fruit 
a berry Beyony Gen.
(p.
290.) 
Herb with ternately divided leaves.
Stamens 8 or 10.
Fruit aberry.
Moscatel Gen.
(p.
378.) 
^Herbs.
Stamens 5.
Fruit a capsule 53 
^Stamens inserted within the base of the corolla.
Campanula Fam.
(p.
505.) 
Stamens inserted in the tube of the corolla.
Flowers small, white.
Samole Gen.
(p.
547.) 
Leaves in whorls of four or more Stellate Tribe (p.
385.) 
Leaves opposite 55 
_- J Stamens 1, 2, or 3 Yaleeian Fam.
(p.
396.) 
Di) 1 Stamens 4 or 5 .
. 56 
^Flowers numerous, in heads, with a common involucre.
Fruit dry, 
one-seeded.
Stem herbaceous Teasel Fam.
(p.
403.) 
Flowers distinct or few together, without a common involucre.
Fruit 
often succulent.
Stem usually shrubby or climbing.
Honeysuckle Fam.
(p.
378.) 
51 
52^ 
53 
54 
56 
{: 
Monopetals with a free ovary.
Ltj f Stamens twice as many as the lobes of the corolla 58 
\ Stamens equal in number to the lobes of the corolla or fewer ...
61 
p, R f Flowers regular.
Stamens distinct 60 
X Flowers very irregular.
Stamens united 59 
f Leaves much divided Fumitoey Fam.
(p.
35.) 
59 -s Leaves with 3 leaflets Clovee Gen.
(p.
196.) 
[ Leaves entire Milkwoet Gen.
(p.
98.) 
T Ovary single, of several cells.
Leaves not peltate.
Heath Fam.
(p.
517.) 
60 < Ovaries several, distinct.
Radical leaves, peltate, fleshy.
L Cotyledon Gen.
(p.
292.) 
65-] 
ANALYTICAL KEY.
lxiii 
f Ovaries divided into two or four, resembling naked seeds in the bot- 
61 -{ torn of the calyx, with the style arising from between them ...
62 
[_ Ovary entire, of one or more cells, the style or stigma at the top .
. 63 
^Leaves all opposite.
Corolla two-lipped, or seldom nearly regular.
fi9 j Labiate Fam.
(p.
640.) 
' ' 1 Leaves alternate (except sometimes the floral ones) .
Corolla regular 
L or rarely oblique Borage Fam.
(p.
573.) 
r „ J Corolla regular 64 
} \ Corolla irregular 80 
["Stamens opposite the lobes of the corolla, and of the same number.
64 <J Primrose Fam.
(p.
535.) 
L Stamens alternating with the lobes of the corolla, or fewer in number 65 
^Staines 2.
Leaves opposite .
. 66 
,, j Stamens 3.
Small herb, with minute white flowers.
Montia Gen.
(p.
136 ) 
Stamens 4 67 
[_ Stamens and divisions of the corolla 5 or more 72 
nn j Trees or shrubs Jessamine Fam.
(p.
553.) 
bb \ Herb.
Corolla rotate ........
Veronica Gen.
(p.
621.) 
f]So leaves.
Stems thread-like, adhering to other plants.
fi *J Dodder Gen.
(p.
571.) 
] Leaves alternate or radical 68 
(^Leaves opposite 71 
£ Q J Shrubs with evergreen leaves ........
Holly Gen.
(p.
552.) 
b *t Herbs 69 
f Corolla scarious, deeply four-lobed.
Stamens longer than the corolla.
69 <{ Plantain Fam.
(p.
681.) 
[_ Corolla of the consistence of petals.
Stamens shorter than the corolla 70 
* n J Leaves narrow, entire .
Limosel Gen.
(p.
618.) 
\ Leaves orbicular, crenate Siuthorpia Gen.
(p.
619.) 
,_, f Leaves entire Gentian Fam.
(p.
558.) 
[ Leaves toothed or cut Yervein Gen.
(p.
676.) 
f79 i Fruit a berry 73 
\ Fruit a capsule 74 
„,- J Shrubs with evergreen leaves Holly Gen.
(p.
552.) 
\ Stem or branches herbaceous Solanum Fam.
(p.
591.) 
\. ± I Leaves opposite, entire 75 
I Leaves alternate, or none 76 
f Trailing plants, with evergreen leaves.
Two ovaries joining at the top 
into one style Periwinkle Gen.
(p.
556.) 
75 -j Small procumbent shrub, with very small evergreen leaves.
Ovary 
single Loiseleuria Gen.
(p.
524.) 
(^Herbs.
Ovary single Gentian Fam.
(p.
558.) 
-„ J Leaves divided 77 
\ Leaves undivided or none 78 
f'Leaves of three leaflets.
Corolla hairy within.
Aquatic plant.
qjj Buckbean Gen.
(p.
565.) 
I Leaves pinnately cut.
Corolla smooth.
Erect herb.
Polemonium Gen.
(p.
567.) 
fAquatic plant with floating orbicular leaves.
Limnanth Gen.
(p.
566.) 
,_£ j Twining or procumbent plants.
Corolla campanulate.
Seeds 2 or 4 
j in each capsule Convolvulus Fam.
(p.
568.) 
l^Tall erect plants.
Seeds numerous 79 
f Corolla nearly rotate, the upper lobes overlapping the lower ones.
79 J Mullein Gen.
(p.
604.) 
j Corolla campanulate, or with a distinct tube, the lobes folded in the bud.
^ Solanum Fam.
(p.
591.) 
hdv INTRODUCTION.
f Stamens 5, free 79 
OA j Stamens 3.
Small plant with minute white flowers.
bU i Montia Gen.
(p.
136.) 
[_Stamens 2 or 4 81 
£..
f Corolla with a spur 82 
\ Corolla without a spur 83 
R9 f Two stamens.
Capsule one-celled .
. .
Pinguicula Fam.
(p.
548.) 
\ Four stamens.
Capsule two-celled .
. Sceophulaeia Fam.
(p.
602.) 
ftq f One or two seeds in the ovary or capsule .
. Veevein Gen.
(p.
676.) 
\ Several seeds in the capsule, or at least several ovules in the ovary .
84 
("Plant leafless, except scales of the colour of the stem.
Capsule one-celled.
84 < Beoomeape Fam.
(p.
595.) 
(^Leaves green.
Capsule two-celled .
. Sceophulaeia Fam.
(p.
602.) 
Perianth simple or none.
/Floating or submerged plants 86 
Terrestrial herbs, or, if aquatic, erect from the bottom of the water, and 
projecting from it 93 
Trees or shrubs 141 
1. Floating Aquatic Flants.
[ Small leaf-like fronds, attached two or three together, and floating 
86 <j without any stem Duckweed Gen.
(p.
780.) 
[_ Leaves and flowers growing out of a distinct stem 87 
Leaves deeply divided into capillary lobes 88 
Leaves entire 89 
"Leaves pinnately divided.
Perianth 4-lobed.
Myeiophyll Gen.
(p.
284.) 
Leaves repeatedly forked.
Perianth none or many-lobed.
Ceeatophyll Gen.
(p.
739.) 
Leaves opposite or whorled 90 
Leaves in a radical submerged tuft 137 
Leaves radical in floating tuft3 Feogbit Gen.
(p.
802.) 
Leaves alternate 92 
Tube of the flower long and thread-like, resembling a pedicel.
Elodea Gen.
(p.
801.) 
Flowers sessile, or nearly so, in the axils of the leaves, or in stalked 
heads or spikes, without any stalk-like tube 91 
' One four-lobed ovary.
Two styles .
. .
Calliteiche Gen.
(p.
740.) 
Four ovaries, with distinct styles or stigmas .
. Naiad Fam.
(p.
782.) 
One simple ovary and style Maeestail Gen.
(p.
285.) 
Flowers axillary.
Perianth none, or of four small scales.
Naiad Fam.
(p.
782.) 
Flowers in globular heads, the upper head male, the lower female.
Perianth none, or of 1 to 6 small scales.
Spaeganium Gen.
(p.
776.) 
I Flowers glumaceous.
Stamens 2 or 3 .
. Floating Sciepus (p.
897.) 
Perianth of 6 parts.
Stamens 6 Jointed Rush (p.
873.) 
^Perianth of 5 parts.
Stamens about 5.
Amphibious Polygonum (p.
719.) 
2. Terrestrial Herbs, or, if aquatic, erect.
f Flowers hermaphrodite, containing one or more ovaries and one or 
more stamens 94 
qo j Flowers diclinous, the stamens and ovaries either in separate pe- 
rianths, or intermixed or variously arranged on the same spike, or 
| within the same involucre, but separated by single scales only, with- 
in out distinct perianths .
125 
85 < 
I 
87 1 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 <j 
99, 
100- 
ANALYTICAL KEY.
lxv 
q .
f Stamens more than 6 95 
\ Stamens 6 or fewer 102 
f Stamens indefinite, usually numerous 96 
95 < Stamens about 12 97 
I Stamens 7 to 10 98 
(" Stamens inserted on the receptacle.
Ovaries numerous.
96 < Banunculus Fam.
(p.
1.) 
[ Stamens on the calyx.
Ovaries few or single .
. Rose Fam.
(p.
234.) 
["Perianth three-lobed.
Capsule sessile .
. .
Asaeum Gen.
(p.
726.) 
97 < Perianth (involucre) with five small lobes or teeth.
Capsule stalked.
[ Spuege Gen.
(p.
727.) 
Q£ f Leaves radical, or in a single whorl on the stem 99 
[ Leaves alternate or opposite 100 
^Leaves once or twice ternately divided.
Flowers in a small terminal 
head Moscatel Gen.
(p.
378.) 
Leaves entire, rush-like, radical.
Flowers in a terminal umbel.
Plant 
aquatic Butome Gen.
(p.
794.) 
Leaves entire, in a single whorl of four or five.
Flowers solitary, ter- 
minal Paeis Gen.
(p.
844.) 
"Leaves orbicular, crenate.
Capsule inferior, many-seeded.
Cheysosplene Gen.
(p.
313.) 
Leaves entire.
Capsule several-seeded ....
Pine: Fam.
(p.
100.) 
Leaves entire.
Capsule one-seeded 101 
-JQ-.
f Leaves small, opposite.
Capsule inferior.
, Sclebanth Gen.
(p.
688.) 
\ Leaves alternate, with sheathing stipules.
. Polygonum Gen.
(p.
714.) 
f Perianth coloured, and looking like a corolla 103 
102 < Perianth herbaceous, and looking like a calyx or scales, or entirely 
L wanting Ill 
{One or two anthers sessile on a central column or style.
One of the 
six divisions of the perianth different from the others.
Oechid Fam.
(p.
803.) 
Three to six stamens distinct from the style 104 
1Q4 f Leaves opposite or in whorls 105 
\ Leaves alternate or radical 107 
f Stamens 6.
Capsule two-celled, with several seeds.
Peplis Gen.
(p.
289.) 
105 <j Stamens 5 or fewer.
Ovary inferior 54 
[ Stamens 5.
Ovary superior 106 
{Capsule one-seeded.
Stigmas small, scarious.
Paeon ychia Fam.
(p.
685.) 
Capsule several- seeded, one-celled.
No stipules Glatjx Gen.
(p.
544.) 
f Leaves pinnate, with stipules Sanguisoeb Gen.
(p.
258.) 
107 <j Leaves pinnate or divided, without stipules.
Umbellate Fam.
(p.
318.) 
[ Leaves entire 108 
{Stipules forming sheaths or rings round the stem.
Nut superior, 
one-seeded Polygonum Fam.
(p.
705.) 
No stipules 109 
f Stamens and divisions of the flower 4 or 5 110 
109 J Stamens and divisions of the flower 3 or 6.
Leaves with parallel 
[ veins 154 
f Styles 5.
Ovary and capsule superior .
. Plumbago Fam.
(p.
677.) 
110 J Styles 2.
Ovary inferior Umbellate Fam.
(p.
318.) 
I Style 1.
Ovary inferior Thesium Gen.
(p.
724.) 
{Leaves opposite or whorled 112 
Leaves alternate or radical 117 
Fleshy, articulate, maritime plants, without leaves.
Stamens 1 or 2.
Salicoen Gen.
(p.
691.) 
lxvi INTRODUCTION.
-| 12 f Leaves linear, whorled.
Stamen 1.
. .
. Maeestail Gen.
(p.
285.) 
\ Leaves opposite.
Stamens 4, 5, or 6 113 
-...of Ovary and capsule one-seeded 114 
\ Ovary and capsule several-seeded 115 
-I14 f Leaves small, with scarious stipules .
. Paronychia Fam.
(p.
685.) 
I No stipules Goosepoot Fam.
(p.
690.) 
-.-.K J Ovary inferior.
Stamens 4 Ludwigia Gen.
(p.
281.) 
\ Ovary superior 116 
'Calyx 6-toothed.
Stamens 6.
Capsule 2-celled.
Peplis Gen.
(p.
289.) 
Calyx five-lobed.
Stamens 5.
Capsule one-celled, several-seeded.
Glaux Gen.
(p.
544.) 
Calyx of 4 or 5 sepals.
Stamens 4 or 5.
Capsule 1-celled, several- 
seeded Pink Fam.
(p.
100.) 
f Flowers glumaceous, consisting of chaffy scales alternating with each 
other, enclosing the stamens.
Leaves linear.
Stamens 2 or 3 .
165 
117 <J Perianth entire, oblique, projecting on one side into a lip.
Stamens 6 
Aristolochia Fam.
(p.
726.) 
L Perianth 4-, 5-, or 6-merous.
Stamens 4, 5, or 6 118 
-..J Two or more ovaries Eose Fam.
(p.
234.) 
\ A single ovary 119 
-j-jq J Perianth of 4 or 5 parts or teeth.
Stamens usually 4 or 5 .
. .120 
\ Perianth of 6 divisions.
Stamens 6 124 
, 20 f Ovary inferior Thesium Gen.
(p.
724.) 
\ Ovary superior 121 
121 I ^ ee ^ s seYera l m the capsule Plantain Gen.
(p.
681.) 
\ Seeds solitary 122 
f Stipules leafy.
Leaves broadly lobed or divided .
Eose Fam.
(p.
234.) 
122 <j Stipules membranous, sheathing the stem .
Polygonum Fam.
(p.
705.) 
(^Stipules minute or none 123 
123 i Stamens 4 Pellitory Gen.
(p.
743.) 
1 Stamens 5 Goosefoot Fam.
(p.
690.) 
f Stem leafy.
Stipules sheathing.
Nut enclosed in three of the pe- 
124 «{ rianth-lobes Docs Gen.
(p.
706.) 
^Leaves linear, mostly radical.
Capsule with 3 or more seeds .
. 161 
f Stamens and pistils in distinct globular or cylindrical masses without 
: perianths 166 
125 <j Stamens about 12, with one pistil in a calyx-like involucre.
Spurge Gen.
(p.
727.) 
L Flowers, male or female, each with a distinct perianth 126 
{Stems long and climbing 127 
Stems parasitical on trees, with hard green forked branches.
Mistletoe Gen.
(p.
375.) 
Stems terrestrial or aquatic, but neither climbing nor floating .
. .
129 
f Leaves opposite.
Capsules in a head concealed by leafy bracts.
127 «{ Hop Gen.
(p.
744.) 
l_Leaves alternate.
Berries red 128 
{Leaves angular or lobed.
Stem climbing by tendrils.
Perianth 5-lobed.
Bryony Gen.
(p.
290.) 
Leaves entire, shining.
Stem twining, without tendrils.
Perianth 6-lobed.
Tamus Gen.
(p.
841.) 
f Flowers glumaceous, consisting of chaffy scales enclosing the stamens 165 
129 < Flowers of both sorts, or at least the males, with a distinct perianth, 
L of 3, 4, or more divisions 130 
^3q| Male and female flowers on the same plant 132 
\ Male and female flowers on separate plants 131 
131 1 T 
Hi 
ANALYTICAL KEY.
lxvii 
Flowers all male * .
. 132 
lowers all female 140 
[ale perianth of 3 to 5 divisions 133 
*" \ Male perianth of 6 divisions , 139 
-|oo f Stamens as many as the divisions of the perianth 134 
1 Stamens indefinite 138 
{Male flowers in globular heads in a terminal raceme.
Females ax- 
illary, joined two together in a large prickly burr, with incurved 
points Bueweed Gen.
(p.
456.) 
Flowers, male and female, distinct, or in heads, not prickly .
. .135 
- oc , J* Male perianth of 4 parts 136 
[ Male perianth of 5 or 3 parts Gooseeoot Fam.
(p.
690.) 
{Leaves all radical, linear and fleshy, or transparent.
Marsh or water 
plants 137 
Stems leafy.
Leaves flat Nettle Fam.
(p.
741.) 
pMale flowers one or two on a stalk, with very long stamens.
Females 
sessile Littorel Gen.
(p.
685.) 
Male and female flowers minute, mixed together in a small terminal 
L head Eriocaulon Gen.
(p.
883.) 
-o 8 J Leaves opposite, simple Mercury Gen.
(p.
736.) 
\ Leaves alternate, pinnate Poteritjm Gen.
(p.
259.) 
^Leaves alternate, with sheathing stipules.
Stamens 6.
Nut enclosed 
in the calyx Dock Gen.
(p.
706.) 
Leaves small and fine, in tufts.
Stamens 6.
Fruit a berry.
Asparagus Gen.
(p.
849.) 
139 <j Leaves small and heath-like.
Stamens 3.
Fruit a berry.
Crowberry Gen.
(p.
738.) 
I Leaves radical, long, arrow-shaped.
Stamens and carpels numerous.
L Aquatic plant Arrowhead Gen.
(p.
794.) 
'"Perianth 2- or 4-cleft.
Stigma sessile, tufted.
Leaves opposite, 
stinging i Nettle Gen.
(p.
742.) 
Perianth 3-cleft.
Styles 2, simple.
Leaves opposite, not stinging.
Mercury Gen.
(p.
736.) 
Perianth 6-cleft, the 3 inner segments larger.
Styles 3, with short 
fringed stigmas.
Leaves alternate or radical .
Dock Gen.
(p.
706.) 
3. Trees or Shrubs.
1 ...
/Leaves opposite 142 
\ Leaves alternate or in tufts 145 
-tAoJ Leaves divided, lobed or angular, deciduous 143 
\ Leaves entire, evergreen 144 
{Leaves lobed or angular.
Stamens about 8.
Fruit with 2 diverging 
wings Maple Gen.
(p.
175.) 
Leaves pinnate.
Stamens in pairs, collected in clusters.
Fruit with 
one erect wing .
. Ash Gen.
(p.
554.) 
{Parasitical shrub with green dichotomous stems.
Fruit a berry.
Mistletoe Gen.
(p.
375.) 
Erect branching shrub with shining leaves.
Fruit a few-seeded capsule.
Box Gen.
(p.
737.) 
f Male flowers in catkins, separated by scales only.
Females solitary 
145 •< or in clusters, or in catkins, usually different from the males .
. 146 
[ Flowers hermaphrodite or diclinous, each with a distinct perianth .
147 
{Leaves entire and mostly evergreen, needle-like, or narrow or scale- 
like.
Anthers sessile on the catkin-scales .
. Pine Fam.
(p.
770.) 
Leaves flat, mostly toothed.
Stamens distinct from the scales.
Catkin Fam, (p.
747.) 
140 
lxviii INTEODUCTION.
f Flowers dioecious.
Male perianth of 2 or 6 scales 148 
147 < Flowers hermaphrodite or polygamous.
Perianth regular, of 3 to 5 
L divisions 149 
f Erect shrub.
Male perianth of 2 scales .
. Hippophae Gen.
(p.
723.) 
148 <[ Procumbent undershrub.
Perianth of 6 scales.
^ Crowberry Gen.
(p.
738.) 
{Trees.
Stamens opposite the lobes of the perianth.
Fruit thin, like 
a small leaf Elm Gen.
(p.
745.) 
Evergreen climber.
Fruit a berry Ivy Gen.
(p.
373 ) 
Shrubs.
Fruit a berry 150 
-irnj Flowers on the under side of the leaves .
. .
Buscus Gen.
(p.
850.) 
\ Flowers on the stem or branches 151 
i Flowers very small, green and open.
Stamens 4 or 5 alternating 
with the lobes of the perianth .
. .
Buckthorn Gen.
(p.
178.) 
Flowers with a conspicuous tube, often coloured.
Stamens 8.
Daphne Gen.
(p.
722.) 
152 
Monocotyledons.
C Perianth, or at least the inner segments, coloured and looking like a 
corolla, or, if green, soft and yellowish 153 
Perianth dry, green or brown, or reduced to mere scales, or none at 
L all 159 
{One or two anthers sessile on a central column or style.
One of 
the six divisions of the perianth different from the others.
Orchid Fam.
(p.
803.) 
Thr3e or more distinct stamens 154 
( Ovaries several, quite distinct, or if cohering, each with a distinct 
154 <J style or stigma Alisma Fam.
(p.
793.) 
I^Ovary single, 3-celled 155 
1 -k J Ovary inferior 156 
\ Ovary superior Lily Fam.
(p.
842.) 
-iKn\ Floating or submerged plants ....
Hydrocharis Fam.
(p.
801.) 
\ Terrestrial or marsh plants 157 
.. g,_ f Stamens 3 Iris Fam.
(p.
831.) 
[ Stamens 6 158 
-ikq J Climbing plant with alternate net-veined leaves.
Tamus Gen.
(p.
841.) 
\ Bulbous herbs Amaryllis Fam, (p.
837.) 
f Floating or submerged plants 86 
159 ^ Terrestrial plants, or, if aquatic, erect from the bottom of the water 
L and projecting above it 160 
r Leaves in a single whorl of 4 or 5, with netted veins.
Perianth seg- 
160 s ments, and stamens, 8 or 10 Paris Gen.
(p.
844.) 
I Leaves radical or alternate, linear or cylindrical, with parallel veins 161 
f Perianth of 6 or 4 segments.
Stamens as many or half as many .
. 162 
| Flowers glumaceous, consisting of alternate chaffy scales, enclosing 
161 -{ the stamens and pistil in the same or distinct scales 165 
Stamens and pistils in dense heads or spikes, without distinct pe- 
rianths 166 
""One style with 2 or 3 linear stigmas 163 
162 <[ One ovary with 3 distinct styles or stigmas 164 
L Three distinct ovaries Scheuchzeria Gen.
(p.
798.) 
""Flowers minute, unisexual, in a globular head.
163 J Eriocaulon Gen.
(p.
883.) 
] Flowers complete, distinct, or clustered, or panicled.
Rush Fam.
(p.
869.) 
NATURAL ORDERS.
lxix 
.. n i J Three short styles Toeieldia Gen.
(p.
867.) 
\ Three sessile stigmas Triglochin Gen.
(p.
799.) 
f Flowers with a single scale under each set of stamens and pistil.
Sheath of the leaves closed round the stem .
Sedge Fam.
(p.
884.) 
Flowers enclosed in two or more scales.
Sheath of the leaves split 
open on the side opposite the blade ....
Grass Fam.
(p.
936.) 
f Fruit berry.
Leaves usually broad ....
Arum Fam.
(p.
778.) 
166 <j Fruit a dry nut.
Leaves linear and sedge-like.
[_ Bulrush Fam.
(p.
775.) 
II.
CRYPTOGAMS.
(No stamens or pistil.) 
'"Plants with distinct roots and stems or roots tocks, with leaves or 
green branches 2 
Plants variously shaped, without distinct roots, stems, and leaves, sel- 
dom green unless aquatic .
. .
Cellular Cryptogams (p.
1018.) 
"Fructification in terminal spikes 3 
Fructification radical or in the axils of small leaves 4 
Fructification on the back of the leaves or leaf-like branches.
Fern Fam.
(p.
1031.) 
^Sterns leafless, jointed, simple, or with whorled branches.
Equisetum Gen.
(p.
1024.) 
Stems bearing numerous small leaves .
. .
Clubmoss Gen.
(p.
1019.) 
Stem bearing a simple or branched leaf below the spike.
Fern Fam.
(p.
1031.) 
J Capsules sessile Clubmoss Fam.
(p.
1019.) 
\ Capsules stalked 5 
p, f Capsules globular or urn-shaped, opening with a lid .
Mosses (p.
1018.) 
\ Capsules opening in valves Hepatioe (p.
1018.) 
1< 
3<!
V.— ARRANGEMENT OF THE NATURAL ORDERS IN THE 
PRESENT WORK.
The very unequal manner in which the several Natural Orders are represented 
in the British Isles, renders it impossible, in a work confined to British plants, 
to give any fair idea of the subclasses into which these Orders have been grouped, 
or of the principles which have guided the authors of the linear arrangement the 
most generally followed.
The following recapitulation is therefore merely in- 
tended as a sort of table of contents, showing the order in which the families 
follow each other in the present work ; at the same time that the attention is 
called to one or two of the most striking, the most important, or the easiest ob- 
served features of each one.
These characters are however general, not always 
without exception, and sometimes specially applicable to British genera only.
CLASS I.— DICOTYLEDONS.
In the germination of the seed the plumula arises between two (rarely more) 
lobes or cotyledons of the embryo, or from a terminal notch.
Subclass 1.
Thalamiflores.
— Petals distinct from the calyx, and from each 
other, seldom wanting.
Stamens usually hypogynous or nearly so.
apocarpous, 
I. Ranunculus family.
Petals definite.
Stamens indefinite.
1XX INTRODUCTION.
II.
Barberry family.
Perianth and stamens in twos or threes, or their mul- 
tiples.
Anthers opening by recurved valves.
III.
Waterlily family.
Aquatic plants with indefinite petals and stamens, 
the inner petals passing gradually into the outer stamens.
## Ovary syncarpous.
Placentas parietal {except in the Milkwort Family).
IV.
Poppy family.
Perianth regular, in twos or fours.
Stamens indefinite.
V. Fumitory family.
Perianth very irregular, in twos or fours.
Stamens 6, 
in two sets.
VI.
Crucifer family.
Sepals and petals 4 each.
Stamens 6, of which 2 
shorter.
VII.
Mignionette family.
Petals small, unequal, some divided.
Stamens 
few but indefinite.
Capsule open at the top before it is ripe.
VIII.
Cistus family.
Sepals 3, equal, or with additional small ones.
Petals 
5, regular.
Stamens indefinite.
IX.
Violet family.
Stamens 5 ; the anthers on the inner face, of very short 
broad filaments, usually united in a ring.
Capsule three-valved.
X. Milkwort family.
Perianth very irregular.
Stamens 8 in two parcels; 
petals united with them.
Capsule 2-celled.
XI.
Frankenia family.
As in the Pink family, except the parietal placentas.
# ** Ovary syncarpous.
Placentas axile.
XII.
Pink family.
Leaves opposite, entire.
Flowers regular.
Stamens de- 
finite.
Capsule one-celled, with a free central placenta.
XIII.
Purslane family.
As in the Pink family but only 2 sepals and 5 or 
more petals.
XIV.
Tamarisc family.
Shrubs with alternate green scale-like leaves.
Flowers regular.
Capsule one-celled.
Seeds with a tuft of wool.
XV.
Elatine family.
As in the Pink family, but the capsule divided into cells.
XVI.
Hypericum family.
Leaves opposite.
Flowers regular.
Sepals im- 
bricate.
Flowers indefinite, in 3 or 5 clusters or bundles.
XVII.
Flax family.
Leaves entire.
Petals convolute, distinct.
Stamens 
definite.
Capsule separating into carpels without leaving a central axis.
XVIII.
Mallow family.
Sepals valvate.
Petals convolute, adhering at the 
base to the staminal tube.
Stamens indefinite, monadelphous, with one-celled 
anthers.
XIX.
Lime family.
Trees.
Sepals valvate.
Petals free.
Stamens in- 
definite.
XX.
Geranium family.
Leaves opposite, toothed or divided.
Petals con- 
volute.
Stamens definite.
Capsule with several cells and lobes round a per- 
sistent central axis.
(Balsam genus.
Perianth very irregular.
Stamens 5, the anthers cohering 
in a ring.
Capsule opening elastically.) 
XXI.
Maple genus or tribe (of Sapindacece) .
Trees.
Leaves opposite.
Sta- 
mens definite, but seldom isomerous.
Fruit separating into 2 (rarely 3) winged 
nuts.
Subclass 2.
Calyciflores.
— Petals usually distinct, and stamens perigynous 
or epigynous.
* Stamens and petals mostly perigynous (except in the Oenothera, Gourd, 
and Rib es families).
XXII.
Celastrus family.
Shrubs or trees, with small regular green flowers.
Stamens alternating with the petals, on a disk lining the base of the calyx.
XXIII.
Buckthorn family.
As in the Celastrus family, but the stamens are 
opposite the small concave or scale-like petals.
NATURAL ORDERS, lxxi 
XXIY.
Peaflower tribe (of the Leguminous family).
Flowers very irregular, 
papilionaceous.
Stamens 10, all, or 9 of them, combined.
Ovary of one 
carpel.
XXV.
Hose family.
Flowers regular.
Stamens indefinite.
Ovary (at least 
when young) apocarpous.
XXVI.
(Enothera family.
Perianth in twos or fours.
Stamens definite.
Ovary inferior.
One style.
XXVII.
Ly thrum family.
Stamens usually definite, inserted with the 
petals at the top of the calyx-tube.
Ovary syncarpous within the base of the 
tube.
One style.
Lower leaves opposite.
XXVIII.
Grourd family.
Climbers with tendrils.
Flowers unisexual.
Ovary inferior.
XXIX.
Crassula family.
Leaves succulent.
Sepals, petals, stamens of one 
or two rows, and free carpels, all isomerous.
XXX.
Kibes genus or family.
Shrubs.
Flowers regular.
Stamens definite.
Ovary inferior.
Placentas parietal.
One style.
XXXI.
Saxifrage family.
Flowers regular.
Stamens definite.
Ovary syn- 
carpous at the base, but a separate style for each carpel.
* # Petals and stamens epigynous (round an epigynous disF), 
XXXII.
Umbellate family.
Leaves alternate.
Fruit dry, separating from 
the axis into seed-like carpels.
XXXIII.
Aralia family.
Leaves alternate.
Fruit succulent.
Carpels often 
more than two, and not separating.
XXXIV.
Mistletoe family.
Parasites.
Stamens on, or opposite to the 
petals.
Leaves usually opposite.
Ovary one-celled.
XXXV.
Cornel family.
Leaves usually opposite.
Stamens alternate with 
the petals.
Style one.
Subclass 3.
Mofopetals.
— Petals united (at least at the base) into a single 
corolla.
§ 1.
Corolla epigynous, bearing the stamens.
XXXVI.
Honeysuckle family.
Leaves opposite.
No stipules.
Ovary 2- 
or more celled.
XXXVII.
Stellate tribe (of the Madder family) .
Stipules like the leaves in 
appearance, and forming whorls with them round the stem.
Ovary 2-celled, 
with one seed in each cell.
XXXVIII.
Valerian family.
Stamens fewer than the lobes of the corolla.
Ovary and fruit one-seeded.
XXXIX.
Teasel family.
Florets in compact heads or spikes.
Stamens iso- 
merous.
Anthers free.
Ovary and fruit 1-seeded.
XL.
Composite family.
Florets in compact heads.
Stamens isomerous.
Anthers united in a ring round the style.
Ovary and fruit one-seeded.
§ 2.
Stamens free from the corolla.
XLI.
(Vol. II.) Campanula family.
Herbs.
Stamens as many as the corolla- 
lobes.
Anthers opening longitudinally.
XLII.
Heath family.
Shrubs.
Stamens usually twice as many as the 
corolla-lobes.
Anthers opening in pores or cross valves.
§ 3.
Corolla hypogynous, bearing the stamens.
* Placenta free central.
XLIII.
Primrose family.
Stamens isomerous and opposite the corolla- 
lobes.
lxxii INTRODUCTION.
XLIY.
Pinguicula family.
Corolla very irregular.
Stamens fewer than the 
lobes and alternate with them.
# * Placentas parietal, or in the axial angle of the cells, 
a. Corolla regular, or nearly so.
XLV.
Holly family.
Trees or shrubs, flowers small.
Ovary 4- or more 
celled, with one ovule in each cell.
XL VI.
Jessamine family.
Trees or shrubs.
Stamens 2, alternating with 
the 2 ovary-cells, and having no constant relation to the corolla-lobes.
XL VII.
Periwinkle family.
Corolla contorted.
Stamens isomerous.
Ovary 
of 2 carpels, usually distinct, whilst the styles are united at the top.
XLVIII.
Gentian family.
Bitter plants.
Corolla contorted.
Stamens 
isomerous.
Placentas parietal, rarely meeting in the axis.
XLIX.
Polemonium family.
Corolla contorted.
Stamens isomerous.
Ovary 
3-celled, with several seeds.
L. Convolvulus family.
Corolla plaited.
Stamens isomerous.
Ovary 2- or 
3-celled, with 2 (rarely 1) ovules in each, often separated by an additional false 
partition.
LI.
Borage family.
Stamens isomerous.
Ovary 2- or 4-lobed, with one 
ovule in each lobe.
LII.
Solanum family.
Stamens isomerous.
Corolla plaited or imbricate.
Ovary 2-celled, with several ovules in each cell.
)8.
Corolla irregular.
Stamens one less or three less than the lobes.
LIII.
Broomrape family.
Leafless parasites.
Placentas parietal, or rarely 
meeting in the axis.
LIV.
Scrophularia family.
Ovary 2-celled, with several ovules in each 
cell.
LV.
Labiate family.
Ovary 4-lobed, with one ovule in each lobe.
LVI.
Vervein family.
Ovary entire, 2- or 4-celled, with one ovule in 
each cell.
*## Anomalous families.
LVII.
Plumbago family.
Ovary with one cell and ovule, but several styles.
LVIII.
Plantain family.
Corolla scarious.
Stamens isomerous.
Subclass 4.
Monochlamyds.
— Perianth really or apparently simple, or 
none.
LIX.
Paronychia family.
Perianth small, often scarious.
Ovary with one 
cell and ovule, but 2 or more styles or style-branches.
Leaves usually opposite 
with scarious stipules.
LX.
Groosefoot family.
Perianth small ; stamens opposite to its lobes.
Ovary with one cell and ovule, but 2 or more styles, or stigmas.
No stipules.
LXI.
Polygonum family.
Perianth small.
Ovary with one cell and ovule, 
but 2 or more styles or.
stigmas.
Stipules sheathing.
LXII.
Daphne family.
Stamens inserted in the tube of the perianth, and 
usually double the number of its lobes.
Ovary free, with one pendulous ovule.
One style.
LXIII.
Elaeagnus family.
Shrubs or trees, with scurfy leaves.
Flowers 
mostly unisexual.
Ovary free in the bottom of the perianth-tube, with one 
erect ovule.
LXIV.
Sandalwood family.
Perianth -lobes valvate.
Ovary inferior, 1- 
celled with 2 or 3 pendulous ovules.
Styles simple.
LXV.
Aristolochia family.
Perianth irregular, or 3-lobed.
Stamens 6 or 
12.
Ovary inferior, 3- or 6-celled, with numerous ovules.
NATUEAL ORDERS.
Ixxiii 
LXVI.
Spurge family.
Flowers unisexual.
Fruit separating into 3 (rarely 
2 or more) carpels, leaving a persistent axis, each carpel containing one or two 
pendulous seeds.
LXVII.
Empetrum genus or family.
Differs from the Spurge family in 
the ovules and seed erect.
LXVIII.
Ceratophyll and Callitriche.
Anomalous aquatic genera.
Peri- 
anth none.
Ovary with 1 or 4 cells, and one seed in each.
LXIX.
Nettle family.
Flowers unisexual, small and green.
Stamens op- 
posite the perianth-divisions (usually 4).
Ovary free, with a single ovule, and 
2 (rarely 1) styles or stigmas.
LXX.
Elm tribe or family.
Trees.
Flowers often bisexual, the stamens 
opposite the lobes.
Ovary free, 2-celled, with one erect ovule in each cell.
LXXI.
Catkin family.
Trees or shrubs.
Flowers unisexual, the males in 
catkins with an imperfect perianth, or none at all.
Fruit of the females one- 
celled.
LXXII.
Pine family or class.
Trees or shrubs with stiff or scale-like leaves.
Flowers unisexual, the males in catkins without perianth.
Ovules and seeds 
the females not enclosed in any ovary or pericarp.
CLASS II.— MONOCOTYLEDONS.
In germination the plumule is developed from a sheath-like cavity on one 
side of the embryo.
# Perianth none, or of 4 small sepals or bracts.
LXXIII.
Bulrush family.
Flowers unisexual, intermixed with bracts in 
dense heads or spikes.
Fruit a dry nut.
LXXIV.
Arum family.
Flowers unisexual, often intermixed with bracts, in 
dense heads or spikes, mostly in a spatha.
Fruit usually succulent.
LXXY.
Duckweed genus.
No distinct stem.
Flowers (very scarce) on the 
edge of the small leaf-like floating fronds.
LXXVI.
Naias family.
Floating or submerged plants.
Flowers distinct, 
or in loose spikes.
Stamens 1, 2, or 4.
Ovaries 1, 2, or 4.
** Perianth tvholly or partially petal -like.
Ovary apocarpous.
LXXYII.
Alisma family, the only known British one.
### Perianth wholly or partially petal-like.
Ovary inferior.
LXXYIIL Hydrocharis family.
Floating or submerged plants.
Flowers 
usually unisexual.
Perianth regular, with a slender tube.
LXXIX.
Orchid family.
Perianth very irregular.
Anther 2-celled, com- 
bined with the style in an axile column.
LXXX.
Iris family.
Like the Amaryllis family, but stamens 3.
Leaves 
often in two opposite rows.
LXXXI.
Amaryllis family.
Terrestrial plants.
Perianth of 6 divisions.
Stamens 6.
LXXXI I.
Yam family.
Twining plants.
Flowers unisexual.
Perianth 
regular, of 6 divisions.
### Perianth regular.
Ovary syncarpous, superior.
LXXXIII.
Lily family.
Perianth petal-like.
LXXXI Y.
Rush family.
Perianth stiff, or calyx- like.
Capsule 3-celled, 
with several seeds, or one erect seed in each cell.
/ 
lxxiv INTRODUCTION.
LXXXV.
Eestio family.
Perianth calyx-like.
Flowers unisexual.
Ovary 
with one pendulous ovule in each cell.
#*## Perianth rudimentary or none, replaced by chaffy scales or bracts enclosing 
the flowers.
LXXXVI.
Sedge family.
Leaf-sheaths entire.
Each flower in the axil of 
one bract.
LXXXVII.
Grass family.
Leaf-sheaths split open opposite the blade.
Each flower enclosed in two bracts.
CLASS III.— CRYPTOGAMS.
No true flowers ; that is, no stamens or pistils.
LXXXVIII.
Clubmoss family.
Spores in closed capsules on the stem, or in 
the axils, or in the base of the leaves.
LXXXIX.
Equisetum family.
Stems jointed, with whorled branches.
Spores 
under peltate scales, in terminal ;^ads or spikes.
XC.
Fern family.
Spores in minute cases or capsules clustered on the back 
or margins of the fronds.
The remaining families of British Cryptogams are not included in the present 
Flora.
Class I.
DICOTYLEDONS.
Stem, when perennial, consisting of a pith in the centre, of one 
or more concentric circles containing fibrous tissue, and of the 
bark on the outside.
Seeds with two cotyledons, the young stem 
in germination proceeding from between the two lobes of the em- 
bryo, or from a notch in its summit.
The above characters are all that can be said to be constant to sepa- 
rate Dicotyledons from Monocotyledons.
They are however in most 
cases very difficult to observe, and yet the distinction is essential, for 
these two great classes have each their peculiar aspect, which, after a 
very little habit, the botanist will in most cases recognize at a glance.
All British trees and shrubs are Dicotyledons, so also are all plants with 
opposite, or whorled, or netted-veined leaves (except Paris and a few 
aquatic plants), and almost all those which have the parts of the flower 
in fours, fives, or eights.
I. THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
RANUNCULACEJE.
Herbs with alternate or radical leaves, or, in one genus, climbers 
with opposite leaves, the leaf-stalk in both cases generally dilated 
at the base without stipules, the leaf often cut, and the flowers 
solitary or in terminal racemes or panicles.
Sepals distinct, more 
than 2 (usually 5).
Petals distinct, usually 5, but sometimes 
either deformed or very minute, or altogether wanting.
Stamens 
indefinite, usually numerous, inserted on the receptacle.
Carpels 
several, distinct or partially united (very rarely reduced to a single 
one), each bearing a distinct style and enclosing a single cell, with 
one or more ovules or seeds attached to the base or to the inner 
angle of the cavity.
Seed containing a copious albumen, with a 
minute embryo.
Although, from the variable nature of the flowers, especially of the 
petals, the above character may be somewhat vague, yet the great ma- 
vol.
i. n 
Z THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
jority of Itanunculacece are easily distinguished by their numerous, 
free, hypogynous stamens, and by their distinct carpels.
Where, as in 
Mousetail, the stamens are few, the carpels are numerous ; and, on the 
other hand, if in Actcea and some Larkspurs the carpels are solitary, 
they are unilateral, with the ovules attached to one side or angle of 
their single cell, showing that they are simple, not composed of the 
union of several, as is the case with the central ovaries of the Poppy 
and Cistus families, which have either several cells or several rows of 
ovules.
Another very distant Order, which may at first sight be con- 
founded with the present one, is that of the Alismas, among Monoco- 
tyledons: but besides the microscopical character derived from the 
embryo, there are but three petals and sepals, as in most other Mono- 
cotyledons, a rare circumstance in the Ranunculus family.
Ranuncu lacece are widely diffused over the globe, but more especially 
in temperate or cool climates.
Within the tropics they are, with the 
exception of Clematis, almost confined to high mountain-ranges.
Most 
of the principal genera are represented in our Flora.
Climber with opposite leaves.
Carpels one-seeded.
Sepals 
coloured 1.
Clematis.
Herbs with alternate or radical leaves, rarely opposite on 
runners.
Carpels several or numerous, short, one-seeded.
Flowers 
always regular.
Sepals 4, 5, or more, often coloured and petal-like, 
but no real petals.
An involucre of three leaves outside the flower or 
on the stalk 3.
Anemone.
No involucre.
Floral leaves alternate.
Stamens 
longer than the sepals 2.
Thalictrum.
Petals 5 or more, usually more conspicuous than the 
sepals.
Carpels very numerous, in a long, cylindrical column.
Petals very small, with a tubular claw ...
5. Mousetail.
Carpels in a globose or oblong head.
Petals flat.
Petals (usually yellow or white) with a little scale, 
or a thickened hollow spot at the base of 
each 6.
Ranunculus.
Petals (usually red) without any scale or thickened 
spot at the base 4.
Adonis.
Carpels several, each with several seeds.
Flowers very irregular or spurred.
Upper sepal helmet-shaped, without a spur .
. .
12.
Aconite.
Upper sepal with a long spur at the base ....
11.
Larkspur.
Sepals flat and regular.
Petals with a spur at the 
base of each 10, Columbine.
Flowers regular.
I. EANUNCULACEiE.
Sepals large, often coloured.
Petals small or none.
Sepals bright yellow and petal-like.
Real petals 
none 7.
Caltha.
Sepals pale yellow and petal-like.
Petals small, 
flat, and linear 8.
TrollittS.
Sepals greenish.
Petals small and tubular .
. 9.
Hellebore.
Sepals green, smaller than the large red or white 
petals ' 14.
Vmotsy.
Cartels solitary, with several seeds.
Fruit a capsule.
Flowers spurred 11.
Larkspur.
Fruit a berry.
Flowers nearly regular, small .
. .
13.
Actjea.
Among old inhabitants of our gardens, which may sometimes be 
found to spread spontaneously, are the exotic genera JErantliis (Winter 
Aconite of our gardeners) and Isopyrum, both closely allied to Helle- 
bore and Nigella (Devil-in- the-bush), which differs from Hellebore in 
the more petal-like sepals, and the carpels closely connected together 
to the middle, but diverging at the top into five long points.
I. CLEMATIS.
CLEMATIS.
' 
Stem usually climbing, and often woody at the base.
Leaves op- 
posite.
Sepals 4 or 5, valvate in the bud, coloured and petal-like.
No 
real petals.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels numerous, 1-seeded.
A numerous genus, well characterized, widely spread over the globe, 
and almost the only representative of the Order in tropical climates.
Several European, Asiatic, and North American species are among the 
hardy climbers cultivated in our gardens.
1. Common Clematis.
Clematis Vitalba, Linn.
(Fig. 1.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 612.
Traveller s Joy, Old Mans Beard.) 
A large climber, the only indigenous 
plant which may give a faint idea of the 
bush-ropes of the tropics.
Its woody 
stems will attain even the thickness of 
the wrist and a length of several yards, 
whilst the young branches spread to a 
great extent over shrubs and trees, cling- 
ing by their twisted petioles.
Leaves 
pinnate, usually with five ovate stalked 
segments.
Flowers greenish-white, in 
loose panicles at the ends of short, axil- 
lary or terminal branches.
Carpels, when 
ripe, very conspicuous from the persistent styles, which grow out into 
long, feathery awns.
Fie. 1.
4 
THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
In hedges, thickets, and open woods in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus.
Abundant in several of the southern and some of the 
central counties of England, and naturalized in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
II.
THALICTRUM.
THALICTRUM.
Herbs with a short, perennial rootstock, annual, erect stems, and much 
divided leaf-stalks, bearing distinct segments or leaflets.
Sepals 4 or 5, 
small, coloured and petal-like, but no real petals.
Stamens numerous, 
with long anthers projecting beyond the calyx.
Carpels several, 1- 
seeded, furrowed, and usually acute at both ends.
A considerable genus generally diffused over the northern hemisphere, 
distinguished from Actcea by the distinct one-seeded carpels, from all 
others of the Order by the thin texture of the sepals, almost concealed 
by the prominent stamens, and the peculiar foliage.
The species are 
very variable and difficult to characterize.
They have also been much 
multiplied by modern botanists, but if many of their forms be considered 
as mere varieties, and the British species limited to three, their cha- 
racters are more striking.
Stem simple, seldom 6 inches high 1.
Alpine T.
Stem one or more feet high.
Leaflets roundish ; panicle diffuse ; flowers mostly drooping 2.
Lesser T.
Leaflets obovate or wedge-shaped ; panicle compact ; flowers 
mostly erect 3.
Yellow T.
Some foreign European species are to be met with in old gardens, 
especially the tall, handsome T.
aquilegi folium.
1. Alpine Thalictrum.
Thalictrum alpinum, Linn.
(Eig. 2.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 262.) 
Stem usually simple and almost leaf- 
less, from 4 to 6 inches high.
Leaves 
mostly radical, about half the height of 
the stem, with the footstalk twice divided 
into three or five branches ; leaflets 
small, roundish and crenate or lobed.
Panicle nearly reduced to a simple ra- 
ceme.
Elowers few and drooping, each 
with 4 small sepals.
Stamens from 10 to 
20.
Carpels generally reduced to 2 or 
3. Pedicel of the fruit recurved, as well 
as that of the flower.
An alpine plant, frequent in the mountains of northern Europe and 
1. EANUNCULACEiE.
O 
Asia, and at considerable elevations in the great mountain- chains of 
central and southern Europe and central Asia.
Abundant in the High- 
lands of Scotland; more local in Ireland, in northern England, and 
North "Wales.
Fl. summer.
2. Lesser Thalictrum.
Thalictrum minus, Linn.
(Eig. 3.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 11.
T. majus, Eng. Bot.
t. 611, and T.
flexuosum, 
Bab. Man.) 
A very variable species ; in dry lime- 
stone soils often not more than a foot 
high, of a glaucous hue, or slightly 
downy ; in moist, rich situations (where 
however it is seldom found) it is much 
larger and greener, but readily distin- 
guished from the following species by 
its loose panicle occupying a great part 
of its height ; the pedicels also are as 
long as or longer than the flower, and re- 
curved at least before the flower is ex- 
panded, although they become erect as 
the fruit ripens.
Stem usually in zigzag, making a bend at every 
node.
Petioles, especially of the lower and root-leaves, three or four 
times divided, with very numerous, small leaflets, roundish or broadly 
wedge-shaped, trifid and toothed.
Elowers usually of a pale greenish- 
yellow, with a pink tinge on the sepals.
Stamens numerous, with long, 
narrow anthers.
Carpels from 3 to 5 or 6, very acute and strongly 
furrowed.
In dry situations, chiefly in limestone countries, throughout Europe 
and Russian Asia, except the extreme north.
Scattered over Britain, 
chiefly in Scotland and north-western England, but not common.
Fl.
summer.
Several varieties, distinguished by size, colour, pubescence, 
luxuriance of foliage, etc., or by the lower leaves being fully developed 
or reduced to mere sheaths, have been described as species by Conti- 
nental botanists ; and three or four of these forms have been men- 
tioned as British, but their characters are exceedingly vague and un- 
certain.
Fig. 3.
3. Yellow Thalictrum.
Thalictrum flavum, Linn.
(Eig. 4.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 367.
Meadow Rue.) 
The largest of the British species, being generally from 2 to 3 feet 
in height and of a deeper green than the last.
Stem stout and fur- 
rowed.
Leaves large, the stalks two or three times divided, the 
THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
whether 
the base 
leaflets much fewer than in the lesser 
T., but larger, being often an inch in 
length, obovate or wedge-shaped at the 
base.
Panicle compact and rather corym- 
bose.
Pedicels short and erect even be- 
fore the flower expands.
Flowers, es- 
pecially the stamens, decidedly yellow." 
In moist meadows, and along ditches, 
in Europe and Russian Asia, scarcely 
extending so far north as the lesser T.
Found in England, Ireland, and south- 
ern Scotland, but not very common.
Fl.
summer.
Here again some botanists dis- 
tinguish several species, according as the 
rootstock is more or less creeping, or 
sessile leaflets resembling stipules are or are not formed at 
of the branches of the petiole.
Fig. 4 
III.
ANEMONE.
ANEMONE.
Rootstock perennial.
Leaves radical.
Flower-stem naked, except- 
ing an involucre of three leaves usually at a considerable distance 
from the flowers.
Sepals 5 or more, frequently 6, coloured and 
petal-like, longer than the stamens.
No petals.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels numerous, one-seeded, pointed or ending in a long feathery 
awn.
A large genus, found in almost all temperate regions of the globe, 
chiefly characterized by the three leaves placed in a whorl, from half- 
way up the flowering stem to very near the flowers, according to the 
species.
When much divided, these leaves may appear at first sight to 
be more numerous, but they always form a single whorl, and when 
closely examined they will always be found united at the base into 
three.
Flowers purple, silky outside.
Carpels ending in feathery 
awns 1.
Pasque A.
Flowers white or pink, glabrous.
Carpels ending in a 
point 2.
Wood A.
Several species from continental or southern Europe are cultivated 
in our gardens, especially the A.
pratensis, the llepatica (A.
Hepatica), 
which has the involucre so close to the flower as to assume the appear- 
ance of a calyx.
Two other South European species, the Apennine A.
I. EANUNCULACE.E.
/ 
(A.
apennina, Eng. Bot.
t. 1062) and the yellow A.
(A.
ranunculoides, 
Eng. Bot.
t. 1484), both, with the habit and carpels of the wood A., 
but the one with bright blue, the other with yellow flowers, appear to 
have occasionally strayed into our woods and plantations, and have 
therefore been included in most British Floras.
1. Pasque Anemone.
Anemone Pulsatilla, Linn.
(Fig. 5.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 51.
Pasque-flower.) 
Eootstock thick and woody.
Radical 
leaves on long stalks, covered when 
young with silky hairs, and two or three 
times divided into long linear segments.
Elower-stalk 5 to 8 inches high, with the 
involucre at first near the flower, but 
becoming gradually more remote as the 
fruit ripens, and consisting of three ses- 
sile leaves, deeply cut into linear seg- 
ments.
Flowers solitary, large, with 6 
sepals of a dull violet-purple, very silky 
outside.
Awns of the carpels long and 
feathery, like those of a Clematis.
In open limestone pastures, in the greater part of Europe and 
sian Asia, but not very far northwards.
Distributed over several 
of England, but wanting in Scotland.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 5.
Eus- 
parts 
2. Wood Anemone.
Anemone nemorosa, Linn.
(Fig. G.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 355.) 
Eootstock black and horizontal, emit- 
ting from its extremity two or three 
leaves and a single flower-stalk, all gla- 
brous or but slightly downy.
Leaf-stalks 
long, with three ovate or lanceolate leaf- 
lets, toothed or lobed, or often divided 
almost to the base into three similarly 
shaped segments.
Peduncle 3 to 6 or 8 
inches high, the involucral leaves at about 
two-thirds of its height, like the radical 
ones, but smaller, with shorter stalks.
Sepals 6, white or reddish outside, and 
perfectly glabrous.
Carpels downy, with Fig. 6.
a point nearly as long as themselves, but not feathery.
Common in and near woods, throughout Europe and Eussian Asia, 
8 
THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
except in the extreme north.
Abundant in Great Britain.
Fl. early 
spring.
IV.
ADONIS.
ADONIS.
Characters those of Ranunculus, except that the petals have no nec- 
tary, although they are often more deeply coloured at the base, and 
that the seed is suspended, not erect, in the carpel.
The species are few, chiefly from southern Europe and western Asia, 
and have mostly red or straw-coloured flowers.
1. Common Adonis.
Adonis autumnalis, Linn.
(Fig. 7.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 308.
Pheasant's Eye) 
An erect annual, from 8 inches to a 
foot or rather more, glabrous or slightly 
downy.
Leaves finely divided into nu- 
merous narrow linear segments.
Sepals 
green or slightly coloured.
Petals 5 to 
8, rather longer than the calyx, of a 
bright scarlet, with a dark spot at the 
base.
Carpels numerous, and rather 
large, arranged in a head at first ovate 
or oblong, but which often lengthens 
considerably and becomes cylindrical as 
the fruit ripens.
In cornfields, in central and southern 
Europe and western Asia.
Not very common in Britain, but appears 
occasionally, especially in the warmer counties of England and Ireland, 
and sometimes in Scotland.
Fl. summer and early autumn.
A variety 
with larger flowers was formerly much cultivated in flower-gardens 
under the name of Flos Adonis.
Fig. 7.
Y. MOUSETAIL.
MYOSURUS.
Annuals with entire leaves.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, small, linear, with 
tubular claws.
Stamens few.
Carpels small, one-seeded, very nume- 
rous, arranged in a long and dense cylindrical spike.
Ovule attached 
near the top of the cell.
A genus containing besides the European species but one other one 
from western America, and chiefly distinguished from the small-flowered 
Ranunculuses by the tubular claw of the petals, and from most of that 
genus by the attachment of the ovule.
I. EANUNCULACEiE.
1. Common Mousetail.
Myosurus minimus, Linn.
(Fig. 8.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 435.
Mousetail.) 
A small annual with linear radical 
leaves, sometimes not an inch long, some- 
times attaining 2 or even 3 inches, in- 
cluding their long footstalk.
Peduncles 
also radical, rather longer than the 
leaves, often enlarged and hollow at the 
top, with a single small yellowish flower.
Sepals prolonged below their insertion 
into a kind of spur.
Petals rarely longer 
than the calyx, and very narrow.
Car- 
pels very numerous, forming a head 
which lengthens into a close slender 
spike, 1 or even 2 inches in length.
In moist sandy or gravelly fields and waste places, in Europe, Rus- 
sian Asia, northern and western America, and Australia.
JNot uncom- 
mon in the south and south-east of England, rare in Scotland, and not 
yet detected in Ireland.
Fl. spring.
Big. 8.
YL RANUNCULUS.
RANUNCULUS.
Annual or perennial herbs, sometimes entirely aquatic.
Leaves en- 
tire or more or less divided.
.Flowers usually yellow or white.
Sepals 
5, very rarely reduced to 3.
Petals 5, or sometimes more, each with a 
thickened hollow spot at the base, often covered by a minute scale.
Stamens usually numerous.
Carpels numerous, without awns, in a 
globular or oblong head, each containing a single ovule attached near 
its base.
A numerous genus, widely spread over the temperate regions of the 
globe and even found under the tropics.
It is easily distinguished from 
Anemone by the want of the involucre.
The so-called nectary at the 
base of the petals, which separates it from Adonis, is sometimes re- 
duced to a slightly discoloured, concave spot.
In the small-flowered 
species one or more of the petals are often wanting, and the stamens 
reduced to very few.
Flowers white.
Carpels transversely wrinkled.
Plant 
floating in water or creeping in mud.
Lower leaves or all the leaves finely cut.
Receptacle 
usually hairy 1.
Water R.
All the leaves rounded with broad lobes.
Recep- 
tacle glabrous 2.
Ivy R.
10 THE KANUNCULUS FAMILY.
Flowers yellow.
Carpels smooth or tuberculate.
Plant 
terrestrial or not floating.
Leaves all undivided.
Petals 5, or fewer.
Carpels with a stout beak.
Stem erect, 2 feet 
or more.
Flowers large 3.
Great R.
Carpels with a short point.
Stems seldom 
above a foot, often decumbent.
Flowers 
little more than half an inch in diameter 
or smaller.
Petals much, longer than the calyx.
Leaves 
mostly narrow 4.
Spear R.
Petals very small.
Leaves mostly ovate or 
broad lanceolate ........
5. Snake-tongue R.
Petals more than 5, usually 8 or 9 6.
Figivort R.
Leaves divided or deeply cut.
Carpels smooth or slightly tuberculate near the 
edge.
Rootstock (in all but 7 and 12) peren- 
nial.
Leaves glabrous or very slightly downy.
Petals conspicuous, bright yellow.
Carpels 
downy, in a globular head .*....
8. Wood R.
Petals very small.
Carpels small, numerous, 
in an ovate or oblong head 7.
Celery-leaved R.
Leaves hairy.
Calyx spreading but not reflexed.
Stems erect without runners.
Lower leaves 
palmately divided 9.
Meadow R.
Runners creeping and rooting.
Central 
division of the lower leaves projecting 
beyond the others 10.
Creeping R.
Calyx closely reflexed on the peduncle.
Rootstock or thickened base of the stem 
perennial.
Carpels perfectly smooth 11.
Bulbous R.
Annual.
Carpels marked with a few tu- 
bercles within the margin ....
12.
Hairy R.
Carpels covered with tubercles or prickles.
An- 
nuals.
Leaves glabrous, segments narrow.
Carpels very 
prickly.
Plant erect 14.
Corn R.
Leaves hairy, segments broad.
Carpels tuber- 
culate.
Stems weak 13.
Small-Jlowered R.
The showy double Ranunculus of our gardens belongs to a Levant 
species {JR.
asiaticus).
Double-flowered varieties of several others, 
especially of our common yellow Buttercups, and of the white-flowered 
Continental JR.
aconitifolius, are known to our gardeners under the 
name of Bachelor s buttons.
I. EANUNCULACEiE.
11 
1. Water Ranunculus.
Ranunculus aquatilis, Linn.
(Fig. 9.) 
A most variable species, but easily 
known by its stem either floating in 
water or creeping along mud, by its 
white flowers, and very small ovoid car- 
pels marked with transverse wrinkles.
It is glabrous in all its parts, excepting 
sometimes the carpels and their recep- 
tacle.
The lower leaves and sometimes 
all, remaining under water, are divided 
into numerous very fine linear segments, 
whilst those which spread on the surface 
are rounded and more or less cut into 3 H *£• 
or 5 wedge-shaped, obovate, or rounded lobes.
Flower-stalks axillary 
and 1-flowered.
Petals 5 or sometimes more, without any scale over 
the spot at their base.
Tn ponds, streams, and wet ditches throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, North America, and Australia.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. the 
whole season.
Many of the forms it assumes are striking, and have 
been distinguished as species, but the characters, although often to a 
certain degree permanent, appear at other times so inconstant, and 
even to depend so much on the situation the plant grows in, that we 
can only consider them as mere varieties.
The following are the most 
prominent.
a. Floating water B.
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2870.) All the leaves sub- 
merged and finely cut, the segments long and parallel.
Flowers large, 
on long stalks.
— Chiefly in running streams.
b. Capillary water B.
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2869.) All the leaves 
submerged and finely cut, but with shorter segments spreading in every 
direction.
Flowers large.
— Chiefly in deep still waters.
c. Common water B.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 101.) Lower leaves submerged 
and finely cut ; upper leaves floating, rounded and broadly lobed.
Flowers very variable in size.
— The commonest state of the plant, pass- 
ing into all the other varieties.
2. Ivy Ranunculus.
Ranunculus hederaceus, Linn.
(Fig. 10.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2003.) 
Yery closely allied to the water B., and probably, as given in the 
first edition of the ' Handbook,' a variety of that species, but as in our 
own country, at least, it is very constant, and the question of its origin 
admits of considerable doubt, I here admit it in deference to the opinion 
of others.
It never appears to produce the finely cut leaves of the 
water B., but, creeping on mud or floating in shallow water, it roots 
12 
THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
at every joint, bearing rounded and 
broadly-lobed leaves, like the upper 
ones of the water It. The flowers are 
usually very small, the petals scarcely 
exceeding the sepals, and the carpels 
and receptacles are quite glabrous.
Chiefly in wet ditches in western and 
northern Europe, common in Britain.
It. coenosus is a variety with much larger 
flowers, rare in Britain, but more com- 
mon as we proceed to southern Europe, 
where forms occur closely connecting 
the ivy It. with the water It. Several 
of these are designated under the name of It. tri/partitios.
Fig. 10.
3. Great Ranunculus.
Ranunculus Lingua, Linn.
(Eig. 11.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 100.
Great Spearioort.) 
Hootstock emitting a dense mass of 
fibrous roots, and perennial by means of 
creeping runners.
Stems erect, stout, 
and hollow, 2 or 3 feet high, the lower 
nodes emitting whorls of fibrous roots.
Leaves long, lanceolate, entire or with 
only a few small teeth at the edge, gla- 
brous, with a few nearly parallel veins.
Elowers above an inch in diameter, in a 
kind of loose panicle ; the petals of a 
bright shining yellow.
Carpels ending 
in a short broad flat beak.
In marshes, wet ditches, and on the 
edges of lakes, over the greater part of 
Europe and Asia, but not an Arctic 
plant.
Pretty frequent, though by no means general in England, Ire- 
land, and Scotland, as far north as Moray.
Fl. summer.
Eig. 11.
4. Spear Ranunculus.
Ranunculus Flammula, Linn.
(Fig. 12.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 387.
Spearwort.) 
A glabrous perennial of short duration, or frequently only annual, 
much smaller and more slender than the great It. Stems usually 
more or less decumbent at the base, and rooting at the lower joints, 
seldom above a foot high, with a few loose branches.
Lowest leaves 
often ovate, the remainder lanceolate or linear, and all entire or slightly 
I. RANUNCULACE^.
13 
toothed.
Mowers yellow, on long peduncles, seldom more 
an inch in diameter, and often much 
smaller.
Carpels in a small globular 
head, each with a very short, usually 
hooked beak.
In marshes and wet pastures, and on 
the borders of lakes and ponds, common 
throughout Europe, except perhaps the 
southern extremity, extending all over 
Russian Asia, and, at high latitudes, 
into North America.
Abundant in Bri- 
tain.
Fl. the whole summer.
It varies 
much in the size of its parts, the breadth 
of the leaves, etc.
; and a not uncommon 
form, with slender creeping stem and 
small flowers, has been published as a 
species under the name of It. rejptans.
than half 
5. Snaketongue Ranunculus.
Ranunculus ophioglossi- 
folius, Vill.
(Fig. 13.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2833.) 
Very nearly allied to the spear _5., but 
said to be always annual.
The stem is 
more erect and branched, the lower 
leaves broadly ovate, and sometimes 
slightly cordate, and all broader in pro- 
portion than in the spear It., and the 
flowers smaller, the petals scarcely ex- 
ceeding the calyx.
Carpels minutely 
granulated.
In marshes in southern Europe, ex- 
tending northward through western 
France to St. Peter's marsh in Jersey, 
where it was found by Mr. Babington.
Fl. June.
Fig. 13.
G. Figwort Ranunculus.
Ranunculus Ficaria, Linn.
(Eig. 14.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 584.
Lesser Celandine.) 
Itootstock small, emitting a number of oblong or cylindrical tubers, 
which are renewed annually.
Leaves mostly radical, cordate, obtuse, 
angular or crenate, thick, smooth, and shining.
Elower-stems usually 
scarcely longer than the root-leaves, bearing one or two small leaves 
14 
THE EANUNCULUS FAMILY.
Fig. 14.
and a single flower, with 3 sepals and 8 
or 9 oblong petals, of a bright glossy 
yellow.
Carpels rather large, in a glo- 
bular head.
In fields, pastures, and waste places, 
a very common weed throughout Europe 
and western Asia.
Abundant in Britain, 
except perhaps the west Highlands of 
Scotland.
Fl. spring, one of the earliest 
that appears.
It varies occasionally with 
a slightly branched creeping stem of 8 
or 9 inches or even more.
Celery-leaved Ranunculus.
Ranunculus sceleratus, Lirm.
(Kg. 15.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 681.) 
/fy An erect, much branched annual, 
usually under a foot, but sometimes near 
two feet high, glabrous or nearly so.
Stem thick and hollow.
Lower leaves 
^ stalked, divided into three or more ob- 
tusely toothed or lobed segments, the 
upper ones sessile, with three narrow 
segments.
Elowers small and numerous, 
the petals pale yellow, scarcely longer 
than the calyx, and without any scale 
over the hollow spot at their base.
Car- 
pels very small and numerous, in a dense 
head, which becomes oblong as the fruit 
m S- !5.
ripens.
On the sides of pools and wet ditches, over nearly the whole of Eu- 
rope and Russian and central Asia, and now spread into North America.
Scattered pretty frequently through the chief part of Britain.
Fl.
summer.
8. Wood Banunculus.
Ranunculus auricomus, Linn.
(Fig. 16.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 624.
Goldiloeks.) 
A perennial, with the large bright yellow flowers of the meadow JR., 
but not so tall, more glabrous,having only a few appressed hairs, es- 
pecially in the upper parts, and the lower leaves less cut and more ob- 
tuse.
Stem seldom above a foot high, erect and branched.
Eadical 
I. RANUNCULACE2E.
15 
leaves on long stalks, rounded or reni- 
form and but little cut.
Stem-leaves 
few, sessile, divided to the base into nar- 
row segments, which are entire or slightly 
toothed.
Carpels of the size of those of 
the meadow _K., but downy.
In woods and bushy places in northern 
and central Europe and Russian and 
western Asia.
Erequent in England and 
Ireland, less so in Scotland, and scarce 
in the Highlands.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 16.
9. Meadow Ranunculus.
Ranunculus acris, Linn.
(Eig. 17.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 652.
Crowfoot.
Buttercups*) 
A perennial, very variable in size, but 
generally one of the tallest of our species, 
more or less covered with soft hairs, 
which are mostly spreading, but deflexed 
on the lower parts of the stem, and ap- 
pressed on the peduncles.
Stems erect, 
often 2 or 3 feet high, but in poor or 
mountain stations sometimes not 6 inches.
Leaves nearly all stalked and deeply di- 
vided into 3, 5, or 7 palmate segments, 
which are again cut into 3 toothed lobes, 
the divisions lanceolate and acute, those 
of the lower leaves broader and some- &* 
times wedge-shaped, the upper ones narrower and fewer.
Elowers 
rather large, bright yellow, on long terminal peduncles, forming usually 
large loose panicles.
Sepals yellowish-green, concave, shorter than the 
petals, spreading horizontally, but not reflexed on the peduncle.
Car- 
pels ovate, compressed, glabrous, in a globular head.
In meadows and pastures, cultivated and waste places, very common 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, and naturalized in North Ame- 
rica.
Very abundant in Britain.
Fl. early summer, and sometimes 
till late in autumn.
In mountain pastures it is often small, with only 
one or very few flowers.
10.
Creeping Ranunculus.
Ranunculus repens, Linn.
(Fig. 18.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 516.) 
With the flowers and fruit of the meadow H., this species is easily 
distinguished by the runners shooting from among the radical leaves, 
# These names are popularly applied to nearly all the specie3 of Ranunculus 
with bright yellow flowers and divided leaves.
16 
THE EANUNCULUS FAMILY.
rapidly rooting and forming fresh plants 
at every node, by the flowering stems 
seldom above a foot high and less 
branched, by the hairs generally lon- 
ger and looser, and by the leaves di- 
vided into three stalked segments, each 
one lobed and toothed, but the central 
one projecting considerably beyond the 
others, so as to give the whole leaf an 
ovate form, not the rounded one of the 
meadoio JR.
S* 8 * In pastures, cultivated and waste 
places throughout Europe, Russian Asia, and a portion of North Ame- 
rica.
In Britain almost as abundant as the meadow JR., and a very 
troublesome weed in rich soils.
Fl. all summer, and often till late in 
autumn.
11.
Bulbous Ranunculus.
Banunculus bulbosus, Linn.
(Fig. 19.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 515.) 
A perennial, much smaller and usually 
more hairy than the meadow B., of which 
it has the bright yellow petals.
Stem 
seldom above a foot high, and usually 
thickened at the base into a kind of bulb.
Leaves more like those of the creeping 
B. t but smaller, divided into three seg- 
ments more or less cut, but broader than 
in the meadoio B.
It is moreover dis- 
tinguished from all but the hairy B.
by 
the sepals, which, as soon as the flower 
expands, are closely reflexed on the pe- 
duncle.
Carpels glabrous and smooth.
In meadows, pastures, and waste places over the greater part of 
Europe, but disappearing in the north-east, scarcely penetrating into 
western Asia, but naturalized in North America.
Abundant in Eng- 
land, Ireland, and southern Scotland, rare, if really wild, in the north.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 19.
11.
Hairy Banunculus.
Banunculus philonotis, Ehrh.(Eig. 20.) 
(B.
hirsutus, Eng. Bot, t.
1504.) 
An erect annual, much branched from the base, six inches to near a 
foot high, with the foliage and reflexed calyx of the bulbous B., but the 
I. EANUNCULACEiE.
17 
flowers more numerous, rather smaller, 
and of a paler yellow, and the hairs of 
the stem usually fewer and looser, al- 
though in this respect both species are 
variable.
Carpels marked with a series 
of minute tubercles (visible especially 
when dry) within the rather broad 
margin.
In fields, cultivated and waste places, 
in central and southern Europe, extend- 
ing eastward to the Caucasus, and north- 
ward to southern Sweden.
In most parts 
of England and southern Scotland, but 
not generally common, and rare in Ireland.
Fig. 20.
FL summer.
13.
Small-flowered Ranunculus, Ranunculus parviflorus, 
Linn.
(Eig. 21.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 120.) 
A hairy annual, with weak, prostrate 
or ascending stems, from a few inches 
to about a foot in length.
Leaves nearly 
orbicular, the lower ones 5-lobed or cre- 
nate, the upper ones divided into 3 or 
5 segments, which are more or less lobed, 
but generally less so than in the hairy 
R. Peduncles short, mostly opposite to 
the leaves.
Elowers small and yellow, 
the petals narrow, seldom exceeding the 
calyx.
Carpels covered with small tu- 
bercles.
In cultivated and waste places in western and southern Europe, and 
apparently the same species in Australia and New Zealand.
Not com- 
mon in Britain, although occurring in many parts of England and Ire- 
land ; not known in Scotland.
FL spring and summer.
Fig. 21.
11.
Corn Ranunculus.
Ranunculus arvensis, Linn.
(Eig. 22.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 135.) 
An erect, branching, nearly glabrous annual, of a pale green, 6 to 
18 inches high.
Leaves deeply cut into narrow segments.
Elowers 
small, of a pale yellow.
Carpels few, rather large, much flattened, co- 
YOL.
I. c 
18 
THE EANUNCULUS FAMILY.
vered on both sides with conical, straight 
or hooked prickles.
A common and troublesome cornfield 
weed, in central and southern Europe 
and west central Asia.
Very abundant 
in slovenly farms in southern England,- 
but decreasing northwards.
FL and 
ripens its seed with the corn.
Fig. 22.
a£\ 
VII.
CALTHA.
CALTHA.
Glabrous herbs, with a perennial stock and annual stems.
Sepals 
about 5, large and yellow like the petals of Ranunculus, but no real 
petals.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels 5 to 10, laterally compressed, 
each with several seeds.
A genus of very few species, inhabitants of temperate and cold re- 
gions in both the northern and southern hemispheres.
1. Marsh Caltha.
Caltha palustris, Linn.
(Eig. 23.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 506.
Marsh Marigold.) 
A perennial, forming large tufts, with 
a thick almost tuberous rootstock.
Stems 
about a foot long, erect or decumbent, 
often rooting at the lower nodes, and 
but slightly branched.
Leaves mostly 
radical, on long stalks, orbicular or kid- 
ney-shaped, cordate at the base and cre- 
nate on the margin.
Flowers large, of a 
bright golden-yellow.
• 
In marshy places, the sides of brooks, 
etc., throughout Europe, northern and 
central Asia, and northern America.
Abundant in Britain.
FL spring, com- 
mencing early and often lasting till sum- 
mer.
A small mountain variety, with 
a more decumbent stem, rooting at the 
joints, and a smaller flower, has been described as a species, under 
the name of C.
radicans (Eng. Bot.
t. 2175).
Fig. 23.
I. RANUNCULACEiE.
19 
VIII.
TROLLIUS.
TROLLIUS.
Perennial herbs, with divided leaves and yellow flowers.
Sepals 5 to 
15, large and coloured like petals.
Real petals about as many, small, 
linear, and flat.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels several, with several 
seeds in each.
Besides our species, the genus comprises but very few, all from north- 
ern Asia or America.
1. Globe Trollius.
Trollius europseus, Linn.
(Fig. 24.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 28.
Globejloiver.) 
A glabrous, erect plant, 1 to 2 feet high, 
the stem simple or nearly so.
Radical 
leaves not unlike those of the meadow 
Ranunculus, palmately divided into 3 or 
5 segments, which are again lobed and 
cut.
Stem-leaves few, smaller, and nearly 
sessile.
Flowers large, of a pale yellow, 
with 10 to 15 broad concave sepals con- 
verging into a kind of globe, usually con- 
cealing the petals, stamens, and carpels.
In moist woods and mountain pastures, 
in northern and central Europe, and in 
the great mountain ranges of the South 1 °' 
to the Caucasus.
Not a common plant generally in Britain, yet 
pretty frequent from Wales to the Grampians, and in Ireland.
Fl.
IX.
HELLEBORE.
HELLEBORUS.
Perennial herbs, with palmately or pedately divided leaves, of a paler 
green and more rigid than in most other Ranunculaceous plants.
Sepals 5, 
large, greenish (in the British species), remaining till the fruit is nearly 
ripe.
Real petals 8 to 10, very small, tubular, 2-lobed at the top.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels several, rather large, each with several 
seeds.
A well-marked genus, but not numerous in species, chiefly south 
European and west Asiatic.
Flowers many, in a large panicle, with large ovate bracts.
Sepals converging 2.
Fetid H.
Flowers usually 3 or 4.
Sepals spreading 1.
Green H.
c2 
20 
THE EANQNCULUS FAMILY.
The Winter Aconite of our gardens, which has been occasionally met 
with in England, apparently wild, but probably only the remains of 
cultivation, was formerly considered as a species of Hellebore, but now 
forms the genus Eranthis, It is a small plant, with narrow, petal-like, 
yellow sepals, surrounded by an involucre of green, divided leaves.
The white Christmas Rose is a true Hellebore (If. niger), from south- 
eastern Europe.
1. Green Hellebore.
Helleborus viridis, Linn.
(Eig. 25.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 200.) 
Radical leaves large, on long stalks, di- 
vided into 7 to 11 oblong, acute, toothed 
segments, 3 to 4 inches long, the central 
ones free, the lateral ones on each side 
connected together at the base so as to 
form a pedate leaf.
Stem scarcely ex- 
ceeding the leaves, bearing usually 2, 3, 
or 4 large, drooping flowers, of a pale 
yellowish green, and at each ramification 
a sessile leaf, much less divided than the 
radical ones, and the segments usually 
digitate.
In pastures and thickets, especially in 
calcareous soils, and about old walls and 
ruins in western and central Europe, 
but not extending to the eastern frontier, nor far to the north.
He- 
corded from many parts of England, but in most cases introduced.
It may however be really indigenous in some of the southern and east- 
ern counties.
Fl. early spring.
Fig. 25.
2. Fetid Hellebore.
Helleborus foetidus, Linn.
(Eig. 26.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 613.
Bears-foot.) 
Lower leaves not all radical, but mostly raised on the short peren- 
nial base of the stems, forming a larger and thicker tuft than in the 
green H., their segments narrower, less toothed, stiffer, and more shin- 
ing, their outer lobes at a less distance from the central ones.
Flower- 
stem above a foot high, with a large, close panicle of drooping flowers, 
of a pale green often tinged with purple, the concave sepals giving 
them a globular form.
Bracts at the ramifications of the panicle ovate 
and entire, or shortly two-lobed at the summit.
I. EANUNCULACE^.
21 
In stony places, chiefly in limestone 
districts, in southern Europe, extend- 
ing here and there into central Europe, 
but neither a northern nor an eastern 
plant.
It has been found in several 
parts of England, and is said to be 
really wild in Hampshire, but, like the 
last, it is in most cases an introduced 
plant.
Fl. early spring.
Tier.
26.
X. COLUMBINE.
AQUXLEGIA.
Perennial herbs with the leaves chiefly radical, ternately divided, 
with distinct stalked segments or leaflets.
Sepals 5, coloured.
Petals 
5, each terminating below in a horn-shaped spur, projecting below the 
calyx.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels 5, each with several seeds.
A small but very distinct genus, widely spread over the temperate 
regions of the northern hemisphere, especially in mountain districts, in 
the new as well as in the old world.
1. Common Columbine.
Aquilegia vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 27.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 297.) 
Radical and lower leaves in a large 
tuft, each with a long stalk, once, twice, 
or even three times ternately divided, 
the segments broad, 3-lobed, and cre- 
nate, of a glaucous-green, glabrous, or 
with a few hairs underneath.
Elower- 
stem 1\ to 2 feet or more high, bear- 
ing a loose panicle with a few leaves 
at its ramifications much less divided 
than the lower ones.
Elowers large, 
drooping, blue, or of a dull purple.
In coppices and open woods in cen- 
tral and southern Europe and central 
Asia, extending northwards into Scan- j?i<r.
27.
22 
THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
dinavia.
In Britain, often introduced, but now not uncommon, and 
believed to be really indigenous in several counties of England, Ireland, 
and southern Scotland.
Fl. early summer.
In our gardens it sports* 
much in the forms and colours assumed by the flowers.
The Canada C.
(A.
canadensis), and some other exotic species, are 
occasionally cultivated in our flower-gardens.
XI.
LARKSPUR.
DELPHINIUM.
Annual or perennial herbs, with much divided leaves, the segments 
usually palmate and narrow.
Sepals 5, coloured, terminating below 
in a hollow spur.
Petals, in the British species 2, combined into 1, 
which is lengthened into a spur within that of the calyx ; in some exotic 
species the petals are 4, the two upper ones forming a spur.
Carpels 1 
to 5, each with several seeds.
A considerable genus, widely spread over the northern hemisphere 
without the tropics.
It is as well marked as the Columbines and the 
Aconites, by the peculiar irregularities of the calyx and corolla.
1. Field Larkspur.
Delphinium Consolida, Linn.
(Fig. 28.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1839.) 
An erect annual, not above a foot high, 
glabrous or slightly hairy, the branches 
few and spreading.
Radical leaves 
shortly stalked, the stem ones sessile, all 
divided into fine, linear, deeply cut seg- 
ments.
Mowers blue, or sometimes red- 
dish or white, not numerous, in loose ra- 
cemes, forming sometimes an irregular 
panicle.
Spur of the calyx as long as the 
rest of the flower (each about 6 lines).
Petals two only, their appendages united 
on the under side into an inner spur 
open along its upper edge.
Carpel soli- 
tary.
A common weed of cultivation in the 
greater part of Europe and Russian Asia, 
and probably of south European origin.
In Britain, abundant only in some of the eastern counties, but appearing 
occasionally in cornfields in other parts of England.
Fl. with the corn, 
or later on the stubble.
The common annual Larkspur of our gardens will also occasionally 
Fig. 28.
I. RANUNCULACEiE.
23 
sow itself.
It differs chiefly from icefield L.
in its long dense spike, 
its shorter spur, and in some marks at the base of the united petals, 
which have been compared to the letters A I A I, whence the name of 
D. Ajacis, Some larger perennial species are also cultivated in flower- 
gardens.
XII.
ACONITE.
ACONITUM.
Perennial herbs, with much divided leaves, the segments palmate.
Sepals 5, coloured, the upper one helmet-shaped, the two lateral ones 
broader than the two lower.
Petals 2 to 5, concealed within the calyx, 
the two upper ones forming small and irregular spurred bodies, on 
long stalks within the upper sepal, the three lower very small and 
linear, or wanting.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels 3 to 5, each with seve- 
ral seeds.
A natural genus, consisting chiefly of mountain plants, spread over 
the greater part of Europe and central Asia, represented also in north- 
ern America by a very few species.
1. Common Aconite.
Aconitum Wapellus, Linn.
(Fig. 29.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2730.
Aconite, Monkshood, or Wolfsbane.) 
Stem firm and erect, 1\ to 2 feet high.
Leaves stalked, or the upper ones nearly 
sessile, of a dark green, glabrous or 
slightly downy, divided to the base into 
5 or 7 deeply cut, linear, pointed seg- 
ments.
Flowers large, dark blue, on 
erect pedicels, forming a handsome, 
dense, terminal raceme.
The upper 
helmet-shaped sepal at first conceals the 
lateral ones, but is ultimately thrown 
back.
Spur of the small upper petals 
short, conical, and more or less bent 
downwards.
Carpels 3, often slightly 
united at the base.
In moist pastures and thickets and 
waste places, in mountainous districts, 
in central and southern Europe and 
Russian and central Asia, extending &' 
northward into Scandinavia.
In Britain perhaps only an introduced 
plant, but apparently wild in some shady places in western England 
and south Wales.
Fl, summer.
24 
THE RANUNCULUS FAMILY.
, Two or three exotic species are often cultivated in our perennial 
borders.
XIII.
BANEBERRY.
ACTtEA.
Perennial herbs, with the leaves chiefly radical, their stalk divided, 
the segments or leaflets distinct.
Sepals 4, small, petal-like.
Petals 
4, small, on distinct claws.
Stamens numerous, as long as or longer than 
the petals, with small anthers.
Carpels solitary, becoming a berry 
when ripe, with several seeds.
A small genus spread over the northern hemisphere, with much of 
the general habit of Thalictrum, but differing in the presence of both 
sepals and petals, in the anthers and fruit.
1. Common Baneberry.
Actsea spicata, Linn.
(Fig. 30.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 918.
Baneberry.
Herb Christopher.) 
Radical leaves large, not unlike those 
of several Umbellifers, the stalk usually 
twice divided into 3 or 5 pinnately ar- 
ranged branches, the segments or leaflets 
ovate, pointed, often 3-lobed,and coarsely 
toothed, of a deep green, and quite gla- 
brous.
Stem 1 to 2 feet high, with few 
leaves, much smaller than the radical 
ones.
Flowers small, nearly white, in a 
short, loose, oblong, terminal raceme.
Berries small, nearly black.
In mountain woods and pastures, in 
central and eastern Europe, Russian 
Asia, and northern America, extending 
to the Arctic circle.
In Britain very 
Fig. 30.
local, and only in northern England.
Fl. May.
XIY.
PiEONY.
P^ONIA.
Large perennials, the leaves chiefly radical, with divided stalks and 
distinct segments or leaflets, the flowers large and handsome.
Sepals 
5, herbaceous.
Petals 5 or more, much larger.
Stamens numerous, 
inserted on a fleshy disk.
Carpels 2 to 5, each with several seeds.
A very distinct genus, consisting of but very few species, indigenous 
in southern Europe and temperate Asia.
BERBERIDE2E.
25 
1. Common Pseony.
Paeonia officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 31.) 
(P.
corallina, Eng. Bot.
t. 1513.) 
Rootstock emitting a cluster of thick 
tuberous roots, Stem 1 to 2 feet high.
Radical leaves twice ternate, the seg- 
ments ovate, entire or divided into 2 or 
3 deep lobes.
Flowers deep red.
Carpels 
large and thick, very downy, and, when 
ripe, more or less recurved.
In hilly districts, in southern Europe 
and central Asia, from the Pyrenees to 
the Caucasus and Himalaya.
Not in- 
digenous to Britain, but appears to have 
been naturalized in the rocky elefts of 
the " Steep Holme " Island, in the Se- 
vern.
Fl. May or June.
The variety 
there found is the one usually considered   t!l S- S1 * 
as a species, under the name of P.
corallina, the name of P.
officinalis 
being reserved for some of the garden Pseonies, which are however 
mostly varieties produced by cultivation.
The half-shrubby Moutan is 
a very distinct species, from China.
The Magnolias and Tulip-trees of our plantations belong to the 
Magnolia family, which has no European representative.
They have, 
like the Ranunculacece, several distinct sepals, petals, stamens, and pis- 
tils, but they are always trees or shrubs, their leaf-buds are enclosed in 
membranous stipules, and the carpels usually cohere in a kind of cone.
II.
THE BARBERRY EAMILY.
BERBERIDE^E.
Shrubs or herbs, with alternate or radical leaves, and no sti- 
pules.
Sepals and petals distinct, 2, 3, 4, 6, or 8 each, but never 
5. Stamens the same number as the petals, and opposite to 
them.
Anthers opening by a valve or lid turned upwards.
Ovary 
of a single carpel, with two or more ovules attached to the bottom 
or to one side of the cavity.
Seeds albuminous.
A small family, spread over the temperate regions or tropical moun- 
tains of the globe.
It is universally admitted by botanists, although 
the connection between the Barberry and the herbaceous genera asso- 
ciated with it appears at first sight rather artificial.
There are how- 
26 
THE WATEKLILY FAMILY.
ever none of them British.
The Epimedium alpinum (Eng. Bot.
t. 438) 
has indeed been admitted into our Floras as growing in some moun- 
tainous spots in the north of England, but, as it is said, only where it 
had been planted.
It is a native of south-eastern Europe.
A Japanese 
Epimedium is also cultivated in our gardens.
I. BARBERRY.
BERBERIS.
Sepals, petals, and stamens, 6 
Shrubs, with usually prickly leaves.
each.
Eruit a berry.
A rather numerous genus, chiefly Asiatic and American.
Many 
exotic species are cultivated in our gardens, either with simple leaves, 
like our ow r n, or belonging to a section with pinnated leaves, sometimes 
considered as a genus, under the name of Malwnia.
1. Common Barberry.
Berberis vulgaris, Linn.
(Eig. 32.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 49.) 
A glabrous pale-green shrub, attaining 
6 or 8 feet, the branches arched and 
hanging at the ends, armed with 3-lobed 
thorns at the base of the tufts of leaves.
Leaves alternate or clustered, ovate, 
rather stiff, sharply toothed.
Elowers 
yellow, in elegant drooping racemes, with 
a disagreeable smell.
Berries small, red, 
oval or oblong, containing two or three 
seeds.
In hedges, thickets, and open woods, 
over the greater part of Europe and 
temperate Asia, to the Himalaya.
In 
Europe it extends northwards into Scan- 
dinavia, but has been so frequently 
x °' ** planted, that the real limits of its area 
cannot be ascertained.
Scattered over Britain, but probably not really 
indigenous.
Fl. spring or early summer.
III.
THE WATERLILY FAMILY.
NYMPH^EACE^E, 
Aquatic herbs, with a prostrate submerged rootstock, orbicu- 
lar or peltate floating leaves, and large solitary flowers.
Sepals 
few.
Petals numerous, in several rows, passing gradually into 
the stamens, which are also very numerous, their anthers aduate.
NYMPHiEACEA 1 .
27 
Carpels numerous, but either imbedded into the receptacle, or 
combined together so as to form a single ovary with many cells, 
each terminating in a sessile stigma.
Seeds albuminous, in the 
British genera, with a very small embryo.
Waterlilies, although not numerous in species, are to be found float- 
ing on shallow, still, or gently running waters, in almost all parts of the 
world.
They form an exceedingly natural group, of which several are 
in cultivation in our hothouses, including the gigantic Victoria, from 
tropical America, and the elegant Nelumbo, from tropical Asia.
Sepals greenish outside, about the size of the outer (white) 
petals 1.
Nympilea.
i yellow, concealing the much smaller petals ....
2. Nuphar.
I. KYMPHiEA.
NYMPH2EA.
Sepals about 4, like the outer petals, but greenish outside.
Carpels 
numerous, imbedded in the thick receptacle so as to form as many cells, 
radiating from a common centre, whilst the petals and stamens are at- 
tached to the outside of the receptacle, nearly as high as the top of the 
cells.
Stigmas as many as the cells, radiating on the surface of the 
ovary, each one extended into an erect, incurved, linear appendage, 
whilst the centre of the flower is occupied by the small conical summit 
of the receptacle.
Fruit slightly pulpy, indehiscent.
This genus, generally spread over the globe, includes the greater 
number of the species of the Order, with white, blue, or red flowers.
1. White Nymphsea.
Nymphsea alba, Linn 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 160.
White Waterlily) 
Leaves deeply cordate, glabrous, 
usually about 6 or 8 inches in diameter.
Flowers lying on the surface of the 
water, white, scentless, usually 3 to 4 
inches in diameter.
In lakes or still waters, and slow rivers, 
extending all over Europe and northern 
and central Asia, although absent from 
particular localities.
Generally distri- 
buted in Britain.
Fl. summer.
It may 
be occasionally seen with smaller flowers, 
and several varieties have been distin- 
guished by minute but uncertain cha- 
racters, in the forms of the anthers and 
stigmatic appendages.
(Fig. 33.) 
28 
THE POPPY FAMILY.
II.
NUPHAR.
NUPIIAE.
Sepals about 5 or 6, concave, yellow, much larger than the outer pe- 
tals.
Carpels numerous, and radiating as in Waterlily, but united into 
an ovary, raised on the top of the receptacle, and not imbedded in it.
Stigmas as many as the cells, their appendages united into a flat disk 
upon which the stigmas themselves radiate.
The genus, besides the European species, comprises but one North 
American one.
1. Yellow Nuphar.
Nuphar lutea, Sm.
(Fig. 34.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 159.
Yellow Waterlily.) 
Leaves very nearly as in the white 
Waterlily.
Flowers yellow, raised two 
or three inches above the water, much 
less expanded and faintly scented, the 
concave sepals assuming a more globular 
form.
Petals and stamens very numerous, 
but scarcely more than half the length of 
the sepals.
Fruit globular, crowned by 
the stigmatic disk, indehiscent or burst- 
ing irregularly.
Fully as common, and in many places 
more so, than the white Waterlily, with 
the same geographical range ; certainly 
more general in Britain.
Fl. all sum- 
mer.
It varies much in size, and in the 
number of the stigmatic rays.
A very 
*£' ' small form, with a more indented stig- 
matic disk, found in the lakes of the north of Scotland, has been dis- 
tinguished as a species under the names of N.
pumila and N.
minima 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2292).
IV.
THE POPPY FAMILY.
PAPAVERACE^].
Herbs, with alternate or radical leaves, usually much divided, 
and no stipules.
Flowers regular.
Sepals 2, rarely 3, falling 
off as the flower expands.
Petals (in the European genera 4) 
crumpled in the bud.
Stamens numerous, distinct.
Ovary really 
1-celled, with several many-seeded parietal placentae; but these 
placentae often project so far into the cavity, as almost, or even 
quite, to meet in the centre, dividing the ovary into as many im- 
PAPAVEEACE2F.
29 
perfect cells.
Fruit capsular, opening in pores or valves.
Seeds 
albuminous, with a small embryo.
The Poppy family belongs almost exclusively to the north temperate 
zone, in both the old and new world, a single species, the Mexican Ar- 
gemone, or Prickly Poppy, having spread as a weed all over the tropics.
The combination of 2 sepals and 4 petals easily distinguish the British 
genera from all other Polyandrous plants.
Ovary and fruit globular or oblong.
Stigmas radiating on a sessile flat disk 1 .
Poppy.
Stigmas supported on a short but distinct style ....
2. Meconopsis.
Ovary and fruit linear.
Seeds crested.
Flowers small, yellow 3.
Celandine.
Seeds not crested.
Seacoast plant, withthickish leaves andlarge yellow flowers 5.
G-latjcitjm.
Cornfield weed, with rather large violet flowers ...
4. Rcemeria.
The Californian JEscJiscJioltzias, now so common in our gardens, be- 
long to this family.
Platystemon, a curious annual from the same 
country, also not unfrequently cultivated, is intermediate, as it were, 
between the Poppy and the Ranunculus families.
I. POPPY.
PAPAVER, 
Capsule globular, ovoid or slightly oblong, crowned by a circular 
disk, upon which the stigmas radiate from the centre, internally divided 
nearly to the centre, into as many incomplete cells as there are stigmas, 
and opening in as many pores, immediately under the disk.
Flowers 
rather large, red, white, or purplish in the British species, or pale yel- 
low in some exotic ones.
A small genus, extending over Europe and temperate Asia, and in- 
troduced among weeds of cultivation into other parts of the world.
Plant glabrous and glaucous.
Leaves toothed or slightly 
lobed, clasping the stem at their base 1.
Opium P.
Plant green, usually with stiff hairs.
Leaves once or twice 
pinnately divided.
Capsule glabrous.
Capsule globular 2.
Field P.
Capsule oblong 3.
Longheaded P.
Capsule more or less hispid with stiff hairs or bristles.
Capsule nearly globular.
Bristles numerous and 
spreading 4.
Hough P.
Capsule oblong or obovoid.
Bristles few and erect .
5. Pale P.
The yellow-flowered P.
nudicaule, from the mountains of northern 
and central Europe and Asia, is occasionally cultivated in our gardens.
30 
THE POFPY FAMILY.
Opium Poppy.
Papaver somniferum, Linn.
(Pig. 35.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2145.
Garden Poppy.) 
An erect annual of a glaucous green, 
glabrous, or with a few hairs on the pe- 
duncle, scarcely branched, about 2 feet 
high or more when cultivated.
Leaves 
clasping the stem by their cordate base, 
oblong, irregularly toothed, and slightly 
sinuate or lobed.
Mowers large, usually 
of a bluish- white, with a purple base.
Filaments slightly dilated at the top.
Capsule large, globular, and glabrous.
A native of southern Europe and the 
Levant, but much cultivated in European 
gardens, and occasionally establishes 
itself in waste places.
In Britain it 
assumes the appearance of a wild plant 
in several parts of England, especially 
near the sea, and in the fens of the 
eastern counties.
FL summer.
It is 
the species which supplies Opium and 
Poppy heads, and in our gardens varies much in the colour of the 
flowers, which are often very double.
Fig. 35.
2. Field Poppy.
Papaver lihoeas, Linn.
(Fig. 36.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 645.) 
An erect, branched, annual, 1 to 2 feet 
high or rarely more, with stiff spreading 
hairs or bristles.
Lower leaves large, 
stalked, once or twice pinnately divided, 
the lobes lanceolate, pointed and more or 
less cut.
Flowers large, of a rich scarlet, 
with a dark eye, the filaments of the 
stamens not dilated.
Capsule perfectly 
smooth, globular, or slightly top-shaped, 
with 10 or more stigmatic rays.
In waste and cultivated places, in cen- 
tral and southern Europe and western 
Asia, disappearing in the north.
In 
Britain chiefly a cornfield weed, abun- 
dant in England and Ireland, less so in 
Scotland, and scarce in the Highlands.
FL all summer.
Double- 
flowering varieties are often cultivated.
Fig. 36.
PAPAVEKACE2E.
31 
3. Long-headed Poppy.
Papaver dubium, Linn.
(Fig. 37.) 
(Eng. Bat.
t. 614.) 
Very near the field P., but generally 
smaller and more slender, the leaves 
more cut, with narrower lobes, the hairs 
less spreading, and the flowers rather 
smaller.
It is also more essentially dis- 
tinguished by the capsule, which is ob- 
long, often twice as long as broad, nar- 
rowed at the base, with fewer stigmatic 
rays.
In waste and cultivated places in Eu- 
rope and western Asia, extending fur- 
ther north than the field P., but not so 
generally common.
In England and 
Ireland less frequent, but in Scotland 
said to be more so than the field P.
Fl.
summer.
4. Bough Poppy.
Papaver hybridum, Linn.
(Fig. 38.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 43.) 
Nearly as tall as the field P., but ge- 
nerally less branched, the leaves smaller, 
with stiffer and shorter segments, the 
hairs few and short.
Flowers smaller, 
of a purplish red, usually with a dark 
spot in the centre.
Filaments of the 
stamens dilated from the middle up- 
wards.
Capsule nearly globular, covered 
with stiff spreading bristles a little 
turned upwards at their points.
In waste and cultivatedplaces in central 
and southern Europe to the Caucasus, 
disappearing in northern Germany.
In 
Britain rather rare, chiefly in sandy or 
chalky fields in England and Ireland.
Fl. summer.
5. Pale Poppy.
Papaver Argemone, Linn.
(Fig. 39.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 643.) 
The weakest, and often the smallest of our red Poppies, the segments 
32 
THE POPPY FAMILY.
of the leaves few and narrow, and flowers 
rather small, of a pale red, often with 
a dark spot.
Filaments of the stems di- 
lated as in the rough P.
Capsule oblong, 
contracted at the base, bearing, espe- 
cially towards the top, a few stiff hairs 
or bristles, more erect from the base 
than in the rough P.
Stations and geographical range about 
the same as those of the field P., but 
much less common in Britain and cen- 
tral Europe.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 39.
II.
MECONOPSIS.
MECONOPSIS.
Ovary ovoid, with a short but distinct style, and a slightly dilated 
stigma of 4 to 6 rays.
Capsule opening at the top in as many short 
valves, the placentas inside lining the cavity, but not projecting to the 
centre.
A small genus, containing besides the European species, a few others, 
from central Asia and north-western America.
1. Welsh Meconopsis.
Meconopsis cambrica, Vig.
(Eig. 40.) 
(Papaver, Eng. Bot.
t. 66.
Welsh Poppy.) 
Stock perennial, forming, when old, 
large tufts, with thick, tapering roots.
Stems erect, about a foot high.
Leaves 
on long stalks, pale green and slightly 
hairy, pinnate, the segments distinct or 
slightly decurrent along the leafstalk, 
ovate or lanceolate, toothed or pinnately 
lobed.
Flowers rather large, pale yellow, 
on long peduncles.
Capsules narrow 
ovate or oblong, glabrous.
In rocky woods and shady 'places, in 
the hilly districts of western Europe, 
from Spain to Ireland, Wales, and a few 
2^ / , of the western counties of England.
Fl.
summer.
PAPAVERACE7E.
33 
III.
CELANDINE.
CHELIDONIUM.
Ovary linear, ending in a short style, with a small, slightly 2-lobed 
stigma.
Capsule long and linear, opening from the base upwards in 
two valves, the placentas inconspicuous.
Seeds with a small crest-like 
appendage next the hilum.
A genus now reduced to a single species.
1. Common Celandine.
Chelidonium majus, Linn.
(Fig.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1581.) 
Eootstock perennial.
Stems erect, 
slender, branching, 1 to 2 feet high, full 
of a yellow fetid juice, and generally 
bearing a few spreading hairs.
Leaves 
thin, glaucous underneath, once or twice 
pinnate, the segments ovate, coarsely 
toothed or lobed, the stalks often dilated 
into a kind of false stipules.
Elowers 
small and yellow, 3 to 6 together, in a 
loose umbel, on a long peduncle.
Pod 
nearly cylindrical, glabrous, 1J to 2 
inches long.
Onroadsides and waste places, through- 
out Europe and Eussian Asia, except the 
extreme north.
In Britain, chiefly near 
villages and old ruins.
Erequent in 
England and some parts of Ireland, less 
so in Scotland.
Fl. all summer.
41.) 
Fig. 41.
TV.
RCEMERIA.
ECEMERIA.
Ovary linear, with a sessile stigma of 3 or 4 short rays.
Cap- 
sule long and linear, opening from the summit downwards in 3 or 4 
valves, the placentas inconspicuous.
Seeds without any crest-like ap- 
pendage.
A genus of two or three species, from the east Mediterranean region, 
perhaps all mere varieties of one.
1. Common Roemeria.
Rcemeria hybrida, DC.
(Eig. 42.) 
(Chelidonium, Eng. Bot.
t. 201.) 
An annual very much resembling the pale Poppy in habit and fo- 
TOL.
T. X) 
34 
THE POPPY FAMILY.
liage, and in its pale purplish flowers, 
but differing widely in its linear capsule, 
1^ to 2 or 3 inches long, bearing a few 
erect, stiff hairs, and not divided into 
cells inside.
A Mediterranean species, appearing 
occasionally as a cornfield weed in cen- 
tral Europe, and said to be established 
as such in Cambridgeshire.
Fl. with the 
Fig, 42.
Y. GIiAlXCXUM.
GLAUCIUM.
Ovary linear, contracted at the top into a 2-lobed stigma.
Cap- 
sule linear, opening in 2 valves, leaving 2 free linear placentas, form- 
ing a thin, dry, spongy substance, in which the seeds are more or 
less imbedded.
The very few species comprised in the genus besides the British one, 
are from the Mediterranean region.
1. Yellow G-laucium, Glaucium luteum, Scop.
(Fig. 43.) 
(Chelidonium Glaucium, Eng. Bot.
t. 8.
Horned Poppy.
Sea Poppy.) 
A stout annual, with hard spreading 
branches, very glaucous in all its parts.
Leaves thick, the radical ones stalked, 
pinnately lobed or divided, the lobes 
ovate or lanceolate, sinuate or lobed, 
rough with short thick hairs ; the upper 
ones shorter, broader, less divided, and 
smoother.
Flowers on short peduncles, 
large and yellow, the petals very fuga- 
cious.
Pods 6 to 10 or 12 inches long, 
crowned by the spreading lobes of the 
stigma.
On sandy seashores, common all 
round the Mediterranean, and up the 
western coast of Europe to Scandinavia.
*%' Frequent on the coasts of England and 
Ireland, but decreasing much in Scotland.
Fl. summer.
FQMARIACE2E.
35 
V. THE FUMITORY FAMILY.
FUMARIACE^B.
Delicate glabrous herbs, either annual or with a perennial root- 
stock; the leaves much divided into distinct segments, and no 
stipules.
Flowers very irregular.
Sepals 2, small and scale-like 
Petals 4, in two pairs, the two outer united at the base and often 
one or both spurred ; the two inner narrow, their crested tips 
united over the stigma.
Stamens 6, hypogynous, united into 2 
sets of 3 each, the middle anther of each set having 2 cells, the 
lateral ones 1 cell each.
Ovary of a single cell, with 2 placentas 
and several ovules, at least in a very young stage.
Fruit a 1- 
seeded nut, or a pod with several seeds.
Embryo small, at the 
base of the albumen.
A small family, spread over the temperate regions of the northern 
hemisphere, scarcely penetrating into the tropics, but reappearing in 
southern Africa.
It may be considered as a tribe of the JPopjoy family, 
with which it agrees in the parts of the flower being in twos and in the 
structure of the ovary, but differs in the irregular flowers and definite 
stamens.
Fruit a small roundish nut with one seed 1.
Fumitory.
Fruit an elongated pod with several seeds 2.
Corydal.
Some species of Dicentra or Dielytra, a North American and east 
Asiatic genus, are cultivated for the beauty of their flowers.
I. FUMITORY.
FUMAKIA.
One of the outer petals has a pouch or spur at its base.
Eruit a 
small roundish green nut with a single seed, although the very young 
ovary is said to have three or four ovules, of which one only remains at 
the time of flowering.
A genus of very few species, all apparently indigenous to the Medi- 
terranean region, although the common one is now so widely spread 
over the globe.
1. Common Fumitory.
Fumaria officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 44) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 589.) 
A delicate annual, perfectly glabrous, and of a pale green colour, 
usually forming, when it commences flowering, a dense tuft of a few inches 
in height, but the stem will often grow out to the length of from 1 to 2 
or 3 feet ; it is then generally weak or trailing, and sometimes slightly 
climbing, supported by the twisted petioles.
Leaves much divided 
36 
THE FUMITORY FAMILY.
into numerous segments, generally 3- 
lobed, the lobes varying in shape from 
narrow-linear to broadly lanceolate or 
oblong.
Flowers in racemes of 1 to 2 
inches, either terminal or opposite the 
leaves, dense at first, but often lengthen- 
ing much as the flowering advances.
Pedicels short, in the axil of a very small, 
scale-like, white or coloured bract.
Se- 
pals small, white, or coloured like the 
bracts, and often toothed.
Petals oblong- 
linear, closed so as to form a tubular 
corolla, with dark-coloured tips, the spur 
at the base giving it the appearance of 
&* ' being attached laterally to the pedicel.
Nut usually about a line in diameter, not quite globular, being some- 
what compressed laterally.
Common in cultivated and waste places in Europe and central Asia, 
disappearing at high northern latitudes, but carried out as a weed of 
cultivation to many parts of the globe.
Abundant in England and 
southern Scotland, but decreases much in the north.
Fl. all summer 
and autumn.
It varies much in the form of the leaf- segments, in the 
size and colour of the flower, white or red, in the size and shape of the 
sepals, and in the precise shape of the nuts ; and several distinct species 
are generally admitted, but they run so much one into another, that 
there is every probability of their being mere varieties.
The most pro- 
minent British forms are — 
a. Rampant Fumitory (F.
capreolata, Eng. Bot.
t. 943).
A large 
luxuriant form, attaining a length of 2 or more feet ; leaflets broad ; 
flowers 4 or 5 lines long, white or pale red, the sepals rather large, the 
nut nearly orbicular.
About hedges and walls, much more common 
and more marked in southern Europe than in Britain.
b. Common Fumitory.
Leaf-segments neither very broad nor very 
narrow ; flowers red, about 3 lines long ; nuts very blunt, or even de- 
pressed at the top, rather broader than long.
Connected both with 
the preceding and the following by numerous intermediates, some 
of which are considered as species under the names of F.
media, F.
agra- 
ria, etc.
c. Close-Jloioered Fumitory (F.
densijlora or F.
micranlha, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2876).
Leaf-segments usually small; flowers smaller and in 
closer racemes than in the common variety, the sepals remarkably 
large in proportion to the corolla.
Not uncommon in southern Europe, 
and scattered here and there over Britain and other parts of the area 
of the species.
d. Small Fumitory (F.
jparviflora, Vaillantii, etc., Eng. Bot.
t. 590, 
COKYDALIS.
37 
and Suppl.
t. 2877).
Leaf- segments narrow ; flowers scarcely 2 lines, 
white, or rarely red, sepals very small, sometimes quite minute.
Very 
common in hot countries ; rare, but occasionally met with in Britain.
II.
CORYDAL.
CORYDALIS.
One of the outer petals has a pouch or spur at the base as in 
Fumitory, but the fruit is a narrow pod, opening in two valves and 
containing several seeds, bearing near their hilum a little crest-like ap- 
pendage.
The species are rather numerous, spread over Europe, Hussian and 
central Asia, and northern America.
The two British ones belong to 
the section Capnoides, in which the stems are branched and leafy, with- 
out tubers to the root.
The bulbous C.
(C.
solida, Eng. Bot.
t. 1471), 
from continental Europe, often met with in our flower-gardens, has 
occasionally remained from cultivation in groves and shady places in 
some parts of England.
It is a small plant, with a tuberous rootstock, 
sinmle stems, and rather large purplish flowers, belonging to the section 
JBulbocapnos.
Stems short, erect, much branched.
Flowers yellow 
Stem long, slender, climbing.
Flowers whitish .
. 
1. Yellow C.
2. Climbing C.
1. Yellow Corydal.
Corydalis lutea, DC.
(Fig. 45.) 
{Fumaria, Eng. Bot.
t. 588.) 
An erect or spreading plant 6 or 8 
inches high, either annual or forming a 
tufted stock of several years' duration.
Leaves delicate and pale green, much di- 
vided, the segments ovate or wedge- 
shaped, and cut into two or three lobes.
Flowers in short racemes, pale yellow, 
about 6 lines long, with a short broad 
spur.
Pod 3 or 4 lines long.
In stony places, in southern Europe, 
but having been long cultivated in flower 
gardens, it has become naturalized on 
old walls and rubbish much further to the north, on the continent of 
Europe, as well as in some parts of England.
FL summer.
Fig. 45.
2. Climbing Corydal.
Corydalis claviculata, DC.
(Fig. 46.) 
{Fumaria, Eng. Bot.
t. 103.) 
An annual with slender intricate stems, 1 to 2 feet long, climbing by 
,38 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
means of the leaf- stalks, which usually 
terminate in delicate tendrils.
Leaf- 
segments small, ovate or oblong, and 
often toothed or cut.
Racemes or spikes 
short and compact at the extremity of 
the peduncles.
Flowers small, white, with a slight yel- 
low tinge, and a very short spur.
Pod 2 
or 3 lines long.
In hilly districts and stony situations, 
in western Europe, penetrating eastward 
into northern Germany, and here and 
there along the Mediterranean.
Widely distributed over Britain, but 
not common, except in some parts of western and northern England, 
Ireland, and southern Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 46.
VI.
THE CEUCIFER FAMILY.
CRUCIFER.E.
Herbs, or rarely undershrubs, with alternate leaves and no 
stipules; the flowers in terminal racemes, which are generally 
very short or reduced to a corymb when the flowering com- 
mences, but lengthen out as it advances.
Sepals 4.
Petals 4, 
equal, or two (on the outer side) larger.
Stamens 6, of which two 
are generally shorter or very rarely deficient.
Ovary solitary, 
2-celled.
Style single, often very short or almost none, with a 
capitate or 2-lobed stigma.
Fruit a pod, divided into 2 cells by a 
thin partition, from which the valves generally separate at ma- 
turity ; or, in a few genera, the pod is one-celled or indehiscent, 
or separates transversely into several joints.
Seeds without al- 
bumen, attached, in each cell, alternately, to the right and left 
edges of the partition.
An extensive and very natural family, widely spread over the globe, 
but chiefly in the northern hemisphere ; scarce within the tropics, and 
in some districts entirely unknown.
The number of sepals, petals, and 
stamens readily distinguish Crucifers from all other British plants, but 
the discrimination of the numerous genera into which they are distri- 
buted is a much more difficult task.
The characters are necessarily 
derived chiefly from the pod and the seed, and are often very minute.
It is therefore absolutely necessary, in order to name a Crucifer, to have 
the specimen in fruit, and to examine the seed it must be ripe ; it 
should then be soaked and the outer coating carefully taken off, in 
CRUCTFERiE.
39 
order to lay bare the embryo, and observe the position of the radicle on 
the cotyledons, which is now considered as the most essential among 
the generic characters.
A few terms specially made use of in describing plants of this family 
may require some explanation.
The calyx is said to be bisaccate when 
two of the sepals, a little outside the two others, are broader at the 
base, forming little protuberances or pouches.
The pod is termed a 
siliqua or siliqiiose when linear, at least three or four times as long as 
broad ; a silicule or siliculose when short and broad — not twice as long 
as broad; and a lomentum or lomentose when it does not open in valves.
The nerves on the pod, often used as a generic character, can be best 
seen on dried specimens ; they are even sometimes quite imperceptible 
on the fresh pod.
The seeds are said to be in one roiv when, from the 
narrowness of the pod or the length of the seed-stalk, they occupy the 
centre of the cell, the two rows being as it were blended into one ; or 
in two rotes, when the two rows are distinct without overlapping each 
other.
In the embryo, the radicle is said to be accumbent when it is 
bent down on the edge of the cotyledons, incumbent when bent over 
the back of one of them ; in the latter case the cotyledons are either 
flat or conduplicate, that is, folded longitudinally over the radicle.
It must be admitted, however, that, notwithstanding all these nice 
distinctions, the genera of Crucifers, as at present defined, are often 
as artificial as they are difficult.
But as the remodelling them is not a 
work to be undertaken in a local Mora, I have selected, from those 
adopted in the best modern Floras, such as have appeared to me the 
most natural.
The following Table is founded, as much as possible, on 
less minute characters, but even in the few British species it is feared 
that the examination of the seed cannot always be wholly dispensed 
with.
rPod with a longitudinal partition, generally opening in two valves .
. 2 
1-j Pod not dehiscent, with one seed, or with several seeds placed end to 
L end and separated by transverse partitions (Lomentose) .
. , .30 
9 J Pod at least 3 or 4 times as long as broad (Siliqttose) 3 
I Pod not 3 times as long as broad (Siliculose) 15 
o q / Flowers white, purple, or red (never yellow) ....
4 
I Flowers yellow 11 
r Petals large, on long claws, purple or rarely white.
Stigmas 2, very 
4 -I short, erect and parallel ,5 
I Petals small, or the claws scarcely longer than the calyx.
Stigma entire 6 
r Leaves hoary and soft.
Stigmas thickened at the base.
(Cotyledons 
- j accumbent) 1.
Stock.
i Leaves green, with coarse hairs.
Stigmas not thickened.
(Cotyledons 
<- incumbent) 8.
Hespekis.
fi f Leaves all undivided 7 
I Leaves, at least the lower ones, pinnate 8 
11 
40 THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
tj f Leaves all stalked, large and broad 10.
Alliaria.
I Upper leaves sessile or auricled 5.
Rockcress.
fSeeds in two distinct rows in each cell.
Pod rather short and curved.
8 I 4.
Watercress.
i Seeds blended into one row in each cell.
Pod straight, long, or 
^- slender 9 
q J Stem-leaves undivided, narrow at the base 5.
Rockcress.
I Leaves all pinnate or divided 10 
rPod linear.
Leaves without bulbs 6.
Bittercress.
10 <j Pod lanceolate-linear.
Leaves usually with bulbs in their axils.
L 7.
Toothcress.
rAll the leaves entire, or toothed only.
Plant pale or hoary with 
minute appressed hairs 12 
. Leaves, at least the lower ones, pinnate or lobed at the base.
Plant 
v- glabrous, or hairy with rough or spreading hairs 13 
-. o f Pod flattened.
Cotyledons accumbent 2.
Wallflower.
I Pod nearly quadrangular.
Cotyledons incumbent .
. 11.
Erysimum.
""Cotyledons accumbent.
Pods ending in a style seldom above a line 
long.
Plant glabrous, with lyrate or pinnate leaves 14 
Cotyledons incumbent.
Yalves of the pod opening to close under the 
stigma.
Plant hairy or glabrous, the leaves deeply pinnate.
9. Sisymbrium.
Cotyledons conduplicate.
Pod ending in a beak or conical style, 1 to 
6 lines long.
Leaves irregularly pinnate, or lyrate, or the upper ones 
undivided 12.
Brassica.
f Pods not 6 lines long, on slender spreading pedicels .
4. Watercress.
I Pods an inch or more, on stiff short pedicels .
...
3. Wintercress.
{Pod globular or oblong, or compressed.
The valves 
flat or convex, parallel to the broad partition ...
16 
Pod compressed or flattened laterally, at right angles to 
the narrow partition.
The valves boat-shaped .
. 23 
-. „ J Pod nearly globular or cylindrical 17 
I Pod evidently compressed or flattened 21 
, f.
J Minute aquatic plant with subulate leaves 17.
Awlwort.
I Terrestrial plant with flattened leaves 18 
" Flowers white.
Cotyledons accumbent 19 
. Flowers yellow 20 
r Plant glabrous.
Pod globular or shortly ovoid .
. .
13.
Cochlearia.
19 <j Plant hoary or rough with short hairs.
Pod somewhat flattened or oblong.
L 14.
Alyssum.
'Leaves pinnately lobed, or, if entire, narrowed at the base.
(Coty- 
ledons accumbent.) 4.
Watercress.
20 <j Leaves linear, in dense radical tufts.
Flower-stems leafless.
15.
Draba.
| Leaves entire or toothed, the upper ones auricled and clasping the 
stem.
(Cotyledons incumbent.) 16.
Camelina.
91 J" Petals deeply divided.
(Dwarf annual.) 15.
Draba.
I Petals entire or notched 22 
13 
14 
18{ ] 
30 LOMENTOSE < 
CRUCIFERiK.
41 
22 f Pod nearly orbicular 14.
Alyssum.
1 Pod considerably longer than broad 15.
Draba.
9 „ f Two or more seeds in each cell of the pod 24 
i One seed only in each cell 28 
04 f Leaves entire 25 
I Leaves more or less pinnate ^ 26 
rPod winged all round.
(Cotyledons accumbent.) .
. 18.
Pennycress.
25 <{ Pod obcordate or wedge-shaped, not winged.
(Cotyledons incumbent.) 
L 22.
Capsel.
2fi J" Two seeds in each cell 27 
I Many seeds in each cell.
(Cotyledons incumbent.) ...
22.
Capsel.
g^ f Pod slightly winged, orbicular.
(Cotyledons accumbent.) 19.
Teesdalia.
I Pod not winged, oval.
(Cotyledons oblique.) .
. .
.21.
Hutchinsia.
("Pod opening in two valves.
Upper leaves undivided 29 
28 <j Pod indehiscent, or separating laterally into two nuts.
Trailing plant, 
L with all the leaves pinnate 24.
Senebiera.
oq r Two adjoining outer petals much larger than others .
30.
Candytuft.
I Petals all equal 23.
Cress.
Pod flattened 31 
Pod globular, cylindrical, or conical 32 
„, f Pod oblong, pendulous.
Tall plant, with yellow flowers .
. 25.
Woad.
I Pod small, broad.
Trailing plants, with small white flowers 24.
Senebiera.
("Pod globular, one-seeded, raised on a short, thick stalk within the calyx.
27.
Crambe.
32 <j Pod of two joints, the upper mitre-shaped and one-seeded, the lower 
spike-shaped, with an imperfect ovule » 26.
Cakile.
LPod of several seeds, separated by transverse partitions .
. 28.
Radish.
These genera are distributed into the following Tribes : — 
1. Ar abided.
Pod siliquose.
Cotyledons accumbent.
Genera : — 1.
Stock ; 
2. Wallflower ; 3.
Wintercress ; 4.
"Watercress ; 5.
Roczcress ; 6.
blttercress ; 7- toothcress.
2. Sisymbrieje.
Pod siliquose.
Cotyledons incumbent.
Genera :— 8.
Hesperis ; 9.
Sisymbrium ; 10.
Alliaria ; 11.
Erysimum.
3. Brasstce-S:.
Pod siliquose.
Cotyledons conduplicate.
Genus : — 12.
Brassica.
4. Alyssine^:.
Pod siliculose, the partition across the broadest diameter.
Cotyledons accumbent.
Genera : — 13.
Cochlearia ; 14.
Alyssum ; 15.
Draba.
5. Cameline^:.
Pod sihculose, the partition across the broadest diameter.
Cotyledons incumbent.
Genera: — 16.
Camelina ; 17.
Awl wort.
6. ThlaspidEjE.
Pod siliculose, the partition across the narrowest diameter.
Cotyledons accumbent.
Genera :— 18.
Pennycress ; 19.
Teesdalia ; 20.
Candytuft.
7. Lepidine^:.
Pod siliculose, the partition across the narrowest diameter.
Cotyledons incumbent, or nearly so.
Genera : — 21.
Hutchinsia ; 22.
Cap- 
sel ; 23.
Cress ; 24.
Senebiera.
YOL.
I. E 
42 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
8. Lomentos^:.
Pod lomentose.
Genera : — 25.
Woad ; 2G.
Cakile ; 27.
Crambe ; 28.
Radish.
Several European and Asiatic Crucifers belonging to otlier genera 
are cultivated in our gardens ; among them the most common are the 
Honesty (Lunaria) and an Eastern species of Aubrietia, both belonging 
to the Alyssinece.
I. STOCK.
MATTHIOLA.
Annuals or perennials, more or less hoary, the leaves entire or sinuate, 
the flowers rather large, usually purple, never yellow.
Calyx erect, 
distinctly bisaccate.
Petals spreading, on long erect claws.
Pod long 
and narrow, compressed or nearly cylindrical.
Stigmas sessile, short, 
but erect, and parallel to each other, having sometimes a horizontal 
horn at the base of each.
Seeds more or less flattened, usually sur- 
rounded by a narrow wing, forming one row.
Radicle accumbent.
Mostly seacoast plants from the shores of western Europe and the 
Mediterranean.
They formerly formed one genus with the Wall- 
flowers, from which they are chiefly distinguished by the erect stigmas, 
and the colour of the flowers.
Stem erect, much branched.
Leaves entire 1.
Common S.
Stem spreading.
Lower leaves sinuate, or coarsely toothed .
2. Sea S.
1. Common Stock.
Matthiola incana, Br.
(Fig. 47.) 
{Cheiranthus, Eng. Bot.
t. 1935.
Stock.
Gilliflower.) 
An erect herb, usually perennial, and 
almost woody at the base, but not of 
long duration, 1 to 2 feet high, with hard, 
slightly spreading branches.
Leaves 
oblong-linear, obtuse, quite entire, soft 
and hoary on both sides with short 
crisped hairs.
Elowers purple or reddish, 
rather large, the petals obovate.
Pod 4 
or 5 inches long, crowned by short 
stigmas, which are rather thickened at 
the base.
On cliffs and stony places on the sea- 
coast, round the Mediterranean, and up 
western Europe, at least to Bayonne.
In Britain fully established as a wild 
plant on cliffs in the Isle of Wight, and perhaps some other parts of 
the south coast, although probably originally escaped from cultivation.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 47.
CRUCIFERffi.
43 
2. Sea Stock.
Matthiola sinuata, Br.
(Fig. 48.) 
{Cheiranthus, Eng. Bot.
t. 462.) 
Like the last, a perennial of short du- 
ration, and covered all over with a 
short hoary down, which is however 
much softer and more dense.
Branches 
very spreading.
Lower leaves deeply 
sinuate.
Mowers nearly as in the com- 
mon 8., but the pods more compressed, 
usually more or less covered with glan- 
dular protuberances, and the stigmas 
very short, scarcely thickened at the 
base.
On sandy seashores, common all 
round the Mediterranean, and up the 
west coast of Europe to Ireland, and 
many points of the south and west coasts 
of England and Wales.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 48.
II.
WALLFLOWER.
CHEIRANTHUS.
Habit and character of the Stoch, except that the flowers are orange 
or yellow, the pod more distinctly flattened, the very short stigmas 
spreading horizontally, not erect, and usually borne on a distinct style, 
and the seeds not winged.
The genus is reduced by some to a single species, by others made to 
include also a very few species from southern Europe and the Canary 
Islands.
1. Common "WaUflower.
Cheiranthus Cheiri, Linn.
(Eig. 49.) 
(C.fruticulosus, Eng. Bot.
t. 1934.
Wallflower.
Gilliflower.) 
A perennial of longer duration and more woody than the common 
Stock, more branched and less hoary, the hairs forked at the base, and 
closely pressed on the surface, or often quite green and nearly glabrous.
Leaves narrow, pointed, quite entire.
Elowers rather large, generally 
of a rich orange yellow, and sweet-scented, but varying from pale yel- 
low to a deep red.
Pods 2 to 3 inches long, the valves marked by a 
slightly prominent midrib.
44 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
A native of rocky situations, in south- 
ern Europe, but spreads rapidly from 
cultivation, and is now abundant, ap- 
parently wild, on walls, old buildings, 
and rocky places near habitations, in 
many parts of central and even northern 
Europe.
In Britain very frequent under 
similar circumstances.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 49.
III.
WINTERCRESS.
BAKBAREA.
Herbs, only differing from the yellow-flowered Watercresses by their 
longer pod, the midrib more conspicuous, and the seeds apparently ar- 
ranged in a single row, and from Erysimum and Sisymbrium, in the 
radicle accumbent on the edge of the cotyledons, not incumbent on the 
back of one of them.
A small genus, generally spread over temperate regions of the globe.
1. Common Wintercress.
Barbarea vulgaris, Br.
(Fig. 50.) 
{Erysimum Barbarea, Eng. Bot.
t. 443.
Wintercress.
Yellow 'Rochet.) 
A perennial of short duration, stiff and 
erect, green and glabrous, sparingly 
branched, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves 
mostly pinnate, with the terminal lobe 
large, broad, and very obtuse, whilst the 
lower ones are few, small and narrow ; 
very rarely all the lobes are narrow, or 
some of the leaves oblong and undivided, 
but deeply toothed at the base.
Flowers 
rather small, bright yellow.
Pods usually 
very numerous, erect or slightly spread- 
ing, and crowded in a long dense raceme, 
each one from f to 2, or even 3 inches 
long, terminated by an erect, usually 
pointed style, varying from \ a line to 2 
lines in length.
Hedges, or pastures and waste places, 
common all over Europe, in Eussian Asia 
and northern America.
Frequent in 
Britain.
FL spring and summer.
It varies much in the relative size 
of the lobes of the leaves, in the size of the flowers, in the length and 
thickness of the pod, in the length of the style, etc.
A form with a very 
Eig. 50.
CRUCIFEEjE.
45 
short and thick style, is often considered as a species, under the name 
of B.
prcecox (Eng. Bot.
t. 1129), but it passes by every gradation into 
those which have a pointed style of 2 lines, and which have again been 
distinguished under the name of B.
stricta.
IV.
WATERCRESS.
NASTURTIUM.
Glabrous perennials or annuals, with the leaves often pinnate, or 
pinnately lobed, and small white or yellow flowers.
Calyx rather loose.
Stigma capitate, nearly sessile.
Pod linear or oblong, and usually 
curved, or in some species short like a silicule, the valves very convex, 
with the midrib scarcely visible.
Seeds more or less distinctly arranged 
in two rows in each cell, and not winged.
Radicle accumbent on the 
edge of the cotyledons.
A small genus, but widely spread over the whole area of the family.
It 
differs from Sisymbrium, only in the position of the radicle in the embryo ; 
and the white-flowered species are only to be distinguished from Bitter- 
cress by the seeds forming two distinct rows in each cell of the pod.
Pod usually half an inch long or more.
Flowers white 1.
Common W.
Flowers yellow .2.
Creeping W.
Pod usually \ inch long or less.
Flowers yellow.
Pod oblong, curved.
Petals scarcely longer than the calyx 3.
Marsh W.
Pod ovoid, straight.
Petals longer than the calyx ...
4. Great W.
1. Common Watercress.
Nasturtium officinale, Br.
(Fig.
{Sisymbrium Nasturtium, Eng. Bot.
t. 855.) 
Stem much branched, sometimes very 
short and creeping, or floating in shal- 
low water ; sometimes scrambling on 
banks or bushes to the length of 2 feet 
or more.
Leaves pinnate, with distinct 
segments, the terminal one usually long- 
er, ovate or orbicular.
Flowers small and 
white, in short racemes.
Pods about 6 
or 8 lines long or rather more, on spread- 
ing pedicels, but slightly curved upwards, 
the double rows of the seeds very distinct.
Along brooks and rivulets, throughout 
Europe and Russian Asia, except the ex- 
treme north, and naturalized in North 
America and some other countries.
Abun- 
dant in Britain except in some of the 
Scotch Highlands.
FL the whole sum- 
mer.
Fig. 51.
51.) 
46 
THE CBUCIFER FAMILY.
2. Creeping Watercress.
Nasturtium sylvestre, Br.
(Fig. 52.) 
{Sisymbrium^ Eng. Bot.
t. 2324.) 
Stem creeping at the base, the flower- 
ing branches erect or ascending, a foot 
high or more.
Leaves all or most of them 
deeply pinnatifid or almost pinnate, the 
lower lobes distinct and narrow, the ter- 
Pl minal one often larger and broader.
h Mowers yellow and small, although the 
petals are considerably longer than the 
calyx.
Pod nearly that of the common 
W., but rather more slender, and the two 
rows of seeds rather less distinct.
On river-banks and in wet places, dis- 
tributed over Europe and Russian Asia, 
but apparently not so far north as the 
common W.
Sparingly scattered over 
England and Ireland, and still more rare 
in Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 52.
3. Marsh Watercress.
Nasturtium palustre, DC.
(Fig. 53.) 
{Sisymbrium terrestre, Eng. Bot.
t. 1747.
Nasturtium terrestre, 
Brit.
Fl. Yellow Cress.) 
Much resembles the creeping W., but 
usually weaker and not so tall, the lobes 
of the leaves rather broader and more 
toothed, the petals seldom exceed the 
calyx, and the pod is seldom above 3 
lines long, slightly curved, the seeds 
much crowded, in two distinct rows in 
each cell.
In muddy and watery places, through- 
out Europe and Russian Asia, from the 
Mediterranean to the Arctic regions, 
in North America, and in Australia.
Pretty frequent in England and Ireland, 
but decreasing considerably in Scotland.
FL summer and winter.
Fig. 53.
CltVCIFEUM.
47 
4. Great Watercress.
Nasturtium amphibium, Br.
(Fig. 54.) 
(Sisymbrium, Eng. Bot.
t. 1840.
Armoracia, Brit.
Fl. Yellow Cress.) 
A taller and more erect plant than 
either of the two preceding, attaining 2 
or 3 feet.
Leaves less divided, some- 
times narrow lanceolate, 3 to 4 inches 
long, and only slightly toothed, more 
frequently deeply toothed or pinnately 
lobed, sometimes divided to the midrib 
into narrow segments.
Flowers yellow, 
larger than in the two last, the petals 
longer than the calyx.
Pod straight, 
elliptical, about 2 lines long, or some- 
times shorter and almost globular, the 
style much longer than in the other 
species.
In moist meadows and watery places, 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia.
Generally distributed over England, Fig. 54.
Ireland, and southern Scotland, but not very common.
Fl. summer.
The shortness of the pod in this and some varieties of the marsh W.
has induced some botanists to remove them to Siliculosce, and associate 
them with the Horseradish in the genus Armoracia or Morijpa, a junc- 
tion which appears purely artificial.
Y. ROCKCRESS.
ARABIS.
Annuals or perennials, usually erect and hairy, at least at their base, 
with a spreading tuft of radical leaves, which are occasionally lobed, 
the stem-leaves undivided, sessile or stem-clasping ; the flowers white, 
or, in a few exotic species, purple.
Pods long and linear, the stigma 
nearly sessile, the valves flat or slightly convex, often marked with a 
distinct midrib or several longitudinal veins.
Seeds more or less flat- 
tened, often winged.
Radicle accumbent on the edge of the cotyledons 
or rarely obliquely incumbent.
A numerous genus, spread over the temperate regions of the northern 
hemisphere, with a few extratropical species in the southern one.
Stem-leaves undivided, rounded, or auricled at the base.
Tall plants with pods 3 inches or more long.
Ripe pods erect or spreading.
Plant glabrous.
Auricles of the leaves pointed.
Pods numerous, 
erect, crowded, the valves flat 1.
Glabrous R.
48 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
Auricles of the leaves rounded.
Pods loosely 
spreading, valves with a prominent midrib .
Eastern Erysimum.
Ripe pods turned downwards.
Plant usually hairy .
2. Tower R.
Plant seldom above afoot.
Pod seldom 2 inches long.
Upper leaves clasping the stem 3.
Hairy R.
Upper leaves sessile, but not clasping the stem.
Nearly simple perennial, with erect pods ...
4. Fringed R.
Slender branching annual, with spreading pods .
5. Thale R.
Stem-leaves narrowed at the base, the lower often pinnately lobed.
Stems nearly simple.
Radical leaves hispid, in a close 
tuft 6.
Bristol R.
Stems branching at the base, in a loose tuft .
. .
. 7.
Northern R.
Arabis albida or grandiflora, a south Russian species or variety of 
the A.
al/pina, is common in our gardens among the early-flowering 
perennials.
The eastern Erysimum, which might be mistaken for the 
glabrous Eockcress, is mentioned below under Erysimum, of which it 
has the pod and seeds.
1. Glabrous Rockeress.
Arabis perfoliata, Lam.
(Pig. 55.) 
{Turritis glabra, Eng. Bot.
t. 777.
Brit.
Fl. Tower Mustard.) 
An erect annual or biennial, 2 feet or 
more high, perfectly glabrous except a 
few soft hairs at the very base, and 
usually glaucous.
Radical leaves spread- 
ing but withering early, obovate-oblong, 
sinuate or pinnately lobed, with a few 
forked hairs.
Stem-leaves oblong-lan- 
ceolate, entire, clasping the stem by 
pointed auricles.
Flowers small, white 
or pale straw-colour.
Pods very long 
and narrow, erect and crowded in a long 
narrow raceme.
On banks and roadsides and in open 
woods, generally distributed over Europe 
and Russian Asia, except the extreme 
north, in northern America, and in Aus- 
tralia.
Irregularly scattered over Eng- 
land and southern Scotland, but not re- 
g * corded from Ireland.
Fl. summer.
The 
genus Turritis, which formerly comprised many species of EocJccress, 
is still maintained by some botanists for this species and a few American 
ones, which have the two rows of seeds rather more distinct than in 
other JRockcr esses.
crucifem:.
49 
2. Tower Rockcress.
Arabis turrita, Linn.
(Fig. 50.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 178.
Towercress.) 
A tall, stiff, erect biennial, approach- 
ing in size and appearance to the last 
species, but rough and somewhat hoary 
with very short forked or stellate hairs.
Radical leaves spreading and stalked, 
stem-leaves oblong-lanceolate, sessile, 
and clasping the stem by their rounded 
auricles, all slightly toothed.
Flowers 
small, of a dirty yellowish-white.
Pods 
above 3 inches long, on short, erect pedi- 
cels, but all curved downwards to one 
side, forming a long, dense, nodding ra- 
ceme.
Seeds oblong, with a membran- 
ous border.
In hedges, on shady banks, and under 
rocks, in the hilly districts of central 
and southern Europe, and establishes 
itself readily on old walls further north, reappearing, truly indige- 
nous, in the Australian Alps.
Indicated at Oxford, at Cambridge, 
and in Kent, but evidently only introduced into Britain.
Fl. spring 
or early summer.
Fig. 56 
3. Hairy Rockcress.
Arabis hirsuta, Br 
{Turritis hirsuta, Eng. Bot.
t. 51.) 
A rather stiff, erect annual or biennial, 
attaining a foot or rather more in height, 
but often shorter, usually simple, and 
rough with short hairs.
Radical leaves 
spreading, obovate or oblong, and 
slightly toothed ; stem-leaves generally 
erect, oblong or lanceolate, all, or at 
least the upper ones, clasping the stem 
by short auricles.
Flowers small and 
white.
Pods slender, 1 to 2 inches long, 
erect and crowded in a long raceme.
Seeds without any wing.
On walls, banks, and rocks, common 
in the greater part of Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia, but not in high northern 
latitudes.
Not an abundant plant in 
Britain, although occurring in numerous 
localities even in the north of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
(Fig. 57.) 
50 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
Fringed Rockcress.
Arabis ciliata, Br.
(Fig. 58.) 
(Turritis alpina, Eng. Bot.
t. 1746.) 
Very near the hairy H., but not above 
6 inches high ; the stem usually glabrous, 
and the leaves only fringed with a few 
stiff hairs on their edge, the upper ones 
rounded at the base and not auricled.
The flowers are rather larger, and the 
pods less erect.
In stony and rocky places, in the 
mountains of central Europe.
In Britain, 
only by the seaside at Rinville, Cunne- 
mara, in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
There 
is some doubt whether the Irish and 
the Continental plants are the same ; but probably both are mere va- 
rieties of the common hairy R.
Fig. 58.
5. Thale Hockeress.
Arabis Thaliana, Linn.
(Fig. 59.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 901.
Sisymbrium, Brit.
Fl. Thalecress.
Wallcress.) 
A slender, erect, branching annual, 
usually about 6 inches high, but some- 
times attaining a foot, clothed with short, 
spreading, stiff hairs, or sometimes nearly 
glabrous.
Leaves mostly radical and 
spreading, oblong, with a few coarse 
teeth from | to 1 inch long.
Stem-leaves 
few, small, and sessile.
Flowers small 
and white.
Pods on spreading pedicels, 
in slender racemes, narrow linear, vary- 
ing from 4 or 5 lines long to twice that 
length.
Seeds small, the two rows blended into one ; the cotyledons 
placed obliquely, so that the radicle is almost incumbent on the back 
of one of them.
On old walls, dry banks, and stony waste places throughout Europe 
and Russian Asia, extending into northern America.
Frequent in 
Britain.
Fl. early spring, and occasionally also in summer and autumn.
On account of the position of the radicle, this species is referred by 
some to Sisymbrium, with which it has little else in common.
Fig. 59.
6. Bristol Rockcress.
Arabis stricta, Huds.
(Fig. 60.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 614.) 
A perennial, but probably of few years' duration, resembling in some 
CBUCIFER^.
51 
respects the northern M.
Radical leaves 
in a small spreading tuft, pinnatelylobed, 
and hispid with stiff hairs.
Stems about 
6 inches high, erect, and nearly simple, 
with very few small leaves narrowed at 
the base.
Petals narrow and erect.
Pods 
erect, about an inch long.
The Continental distribution of this 
species is uncertain, as the name is often 
given to plants quite different from ours ; 
but it appears to be a native of lime- 
stone rocks in the mountains of western 
Europe.
In Britain, only on St. Yin- 
cent's Rocks, near Bristol, where it is 
getting very scarce, and it will probably soon have to be expunged 
from our Floras.
Fl. spring.
7. Northern Rockcress.
Arabis petrsea, Lam.
(Fig. Gl.) 
(Cardamine hastulata.
Eng. Bot.
t. 469.) 
A small perennial, in some respects 
intermediate between Rockcress and 
Bittercress.
Stems branched at the 
base, loosely tufted, or shortly diffuse, 
or almost creeping, but seldom above 6 
inches long.
Radical and lower leaves 
obovate or oblong, and stalked, mostly 
pinnately divided, with the terminal lobe 
largest, or some of them nearly entire ; 
the upper leaves few, narrow, almost 
entire, tapering at the base.
Flowers 
few, considerably larger than in the 
hairy R., white, or slightly purplish.
Pods spreading, rather more than half 
an inch long, the seeds apparently in 
single rows.
In the mountains of northern Europe, 
and in the higher ranges of central Europe, extending all across Rus- 
sian Asia.
In Britain, frequent on the higher mountains of northern 
and western Scotland, and has been found also in Cumberland and 
North Wales.
FL summer.
VI.
BITTERCRESS.
CARDAMINE.
Herbs, either annual or with a perennial rootstock, glabrous, or bear- 
52 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
ing only a few simple hairs ; the leaves pinnate, or, if undivided, on 
long stalks ; the flowers white or pink.
Stigma capitate, or small.
Pod 
narrow-linear; the valves flat, without any conspicuous midrib, and 
usually opening with elasticity.
Seeds apparently in a single row in 
each ceil ; radicle accumbent on the edge of the cotyledons.
A large and natural genus, widely spread over the temperate and 
colder regions of both the northern and southern hemispheres.
The 
white flowers and pinnate leaves distinguish it from all British Cru- 
cifers, except the common Watercress and the Toothcress, both of which 
differ in their pods.
Petals large, obovate or oblong, spreading.
Stem weak.
Segments of the stem-leaves broad.
Rootstocks slender, with creeping offsets.
All 
the leaves pinnate 1.
Bitter B.
Rootstock thick and knotted.
Upper leaves nearly 
entire, often with a bulb in their axil .
Bulbiferous Toothcress.
Stem stiff and erect.
Segments of the stem-leaves 
narrow .
. 2.
Meadow B.
Petals small, nearly erect.
Stem tall and erect.
Leafstalk with stipule-like 
appendages at the base 3.
Narrow-leaved B.
Stem low and weak, or much branched.
No sti- 
pular appendages 4.
Hairy B.
1. Large Bitter cress.
Cardamine amara, Linn.
(Fig. 62.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1000.) 
Rootstock slender, with creeping off- 
sets.
Stem a foot high or more, weak 
and ascending, or nearly erect.
Leaves 
pinnate, with 5 or 7 distinct segments, 
all ovate or orbicular, irregularly angled 
or toothed, the terminal one often an 
inch long.
Racemes few-flowered.
Petals 
nearly as large as in the meadow B., 
slightly spreading, of a pure white.
Pod 
about an inch long.
In wet meadows, and along brooks 
and streams, generally distributed over 
Europe and Russian Asia, except the 
extreme north, becoming a mountain 
plant in the south.
Widely spread over 
Britain, but not a common or frequent 
Fl. spring and early summer.
Fig. 62.
plant.
CEUCIFEE^E.
53 
2. Meadow Bittereress.
Cardamine pratensis, Linn.
(Fig. 63.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 776.
Bittereress.
Ladies' Smock.
Cuckooflower:) 
Rootstock short and perennial, often 
bearing small fleshy scales or tubers, like 
the Toothcresses.
Stem erect, simple or 
branched, near a foot high.
Leaves pin- 
nate, the segments of the lower radical 
ones ovate or orbicular, the terminal one 
the largest, those of the stem-leaves nar- 
row-oblong or linear.
Flowers large and 
showy; the petals obovate and spread- 
ing, sometimes of a pure white, but more 
frequently tinged with a pinkish purple.
Pods more than an inch long.
In moist meadows, and along brooks 
and streams, common throughout Eu- 
rope, Russian Asia, and arctic America.
Abundant in Britain.
FL spring and early summer.
Fig. 63.
3. Narrow-leaved Bittereress.
Cardamine impatiens, Linn.
(Fig. 64.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 80.) 
An annual, with a stiff, erect, leafy 
stem, a foot and a half high, simple, or 
with a few erect branches.
Leaves pin- 
nate, with numerous lanceolate or almost 
ovate segments, J to \ inch long, and 
often deeply toothed or cut; the com- 
mon leafstalk has, on each side, at its 
base, a curved linear appendage em- 
bracing the stem, and resembling a sti- 
pule.
Petals very minute, and some- 
times wanting.
Pods numerous, about 
an inch long, the valves rolling back at 
maturity, with much elasticity.
On moist rocks, and in shady waste 
places, over a great part of Europe and 
Russian Asia.
In Britain, scattered over 
central and northern England and south- 
ern Scotland, but not recorded from Ire- 
land.
FL summer.
Fig. 64.
54 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
4. Hairy Bittercress.
Cardamine hirsuta, Linn.
(Fig. 65.) 
(Eng. Eot.
t. 492.) 
An annual, of a deep green colour, 
often much branched at the base, with 
ascending or erect stems, sometimes a 
foot high, but usually not half so much, 
with a few scattered hairs, which, how- 
ever, are often very inconspicuous.
Leaves pinnate, the segments small, 
those of the lower leaves ovate or 
rounded, and angularly toothed, the up- 
per ones narrower and more entire.
Flowers small and white, the petals sel- 
dom twice the length of the very small 
sepals.
Pods in a rather loose raceme, 
about 6 lines to 1 inch long.
On moist or shady banks, waste and 
cultivated places, throughout the tempe- 
rate regions of the globe.
Abundant in 
Britain.
Fl. spring and all summer.
It 
varies much, like other Bitterer esses, in 
the length and thickness of the style ; 
and in the common small form the stamens are usually reduced to 4.
A large luxuriant variety, with 6 stamens, is sometimes distinguished 
as a species, under the name of C.
sylvatica.
Fig. 65.
VII.
TOOTHCRESS.
DENTAKIA.
Perennials, with a horizontal, fleshy, and toothed or knotted root- 
stock, and simple stems, with a few rather large pinnate or stalked 
leaves, and bearing rather large white or purple flowers ; the other cha- 
racters those of Bittercress, except that the pod is rather broader 
and tapering at the top, and the little seedstalks are usually flat and 
broad.
A genus of several species, with a somewhat peculiar habit, all con- 
fined to the northern hemisphere.
1. Bulbiferous Toothcress.
Dentaria bulbifera, Linn.
(Fig. 66.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 309.
Coralroot.) 
Stem weak, 1 to 1\ feet high, bearing several leaves, often with a 
CEUCIFER/E.
55 
small OYoid bulb in their axil, the lower 
ones pinnate, with 5 or 7 segments, 
the upper ones with fewer segments, or 
quite undivided ; all the segments lan- 
ceolate, entire or toothed, tapering at 
the base, mostly 1% to 2 inches long.
Mowers few, rather large.
The pod is 
seldom formed, as the plant usually pro- 
pagates by the axillary bulbs falling to 
the ground, and there growing.
In damp woods, and shady places, 
chiefly in mountain districts, spread over 
Continental Europe from Scandinavia 
and central France to the Caucasus.
In 
Britain, confined to some of the metro- 
politan counties of England.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 6G.
VIII.
HESPERIS.
HESPERIS.
Coarse, erect herbs, more or less hairy, with toothed leaves, and 
rather large, purple flowers, resembling those of the Stocks.
Calyx 
erect.
Petals on long claws.
Pods long and linear, nearly cylindrical ; 
the stigma oblong, erect, and very shortly divided into two parallel 
lobes.
Seeds not winged, apparently in a single row in each cell ; the 
radicle incumbent on the back of one of the cotyledons.
A small genus, confined to Europe and northern Asia, nearly allied 
to the Stocks, but with a somewhat different habit, and the radicle in- 
cumbent, not accumbent.
1. Common Hesperis.
Hesperis matronalis, Linn.
(Fig. 67.) 
(H.
inodora, Eng. Bot.
t. 731.
Dames Violet.) 
Stem 2 to 3 feet high, usually slightly branched.
Leaves shortly 
stalked, or tapering at the base, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, 2 to 3 
inches long, or the upper ones smaller.
Flowers usually fragrant in 
the evening.
Pods 2 to 4 inches long, nearly cylindrical, but much 
contracted between the seeds.
In hedges, bushy places, and open woods, in central and southern 
Europe, and all across Russian Asia, and, having been long cultivated 
56 
THE CEUCIFER FAMILY.
in cottage gardens, is frequently met 
with, apparently wild, further to the 
north.
In Britain, probably only as an 
outcast from gardens.
Fl. early sum- 
mer.
The Virginia Stock of our gardens, 
a seacoast plant of southern Europe, is 
said to have been found on our own 
shores near Dover.
It belongs to the 
genus Malcolmia, only differing from 
Hesperis in the more pointed lobes of 
the stigma, and the pod slightly thick- 
ened at the base.
Fig. 67.
IX.
SISYMBRIUM.
SISYMBKIUM.
Annual, or rarely perennial, erect herbs, glabrous, or with spread- 
ing hairs ; the flowers small, yellow, or in some exotic species, white.
Pod linear, nearly cylindrical, the lateral nerves of the valves more or 
less distinct; the stigma entire, small or capitate, closely sessile on the 
summit of the valves.
Seeds apparently in a single row, ovoid or 
oblong, not flattened ; the radicle incumbent on the back of one of the 
cotyledons.
A numerous genus, spread over the northern hemisphere, with the 
yellow flowers and habit of Wintercress and Brassica, but differing 
essentially from both in the position of the radicle.
Several species of 
the three genera are popularly known by the name of Roclcet.
Leaves deeply pirmatifid.
Terminal lobe of the leaves broad and very obtuse, 
nmeh larger than the others Common Wintercress.
Lobes of the leaves lanceolate, the lower ones often 
curved backwards.
Pods short, downy, closely pressed against the axis 1.
Common S.
Pods long, glabrous, spreading, and often turned 
to one side 2.
Broad S.
Leaves twice or thrice pinnate, with numerous small 
linear segments 3.
Fine-leaved S.
Besides the above, the S.
polyceratium, from Continental Europe, 
is said to have established itself in the streets of Bury, in Suffolk.
It 
has the foliage of the broad S., with numerous shorter pods crowded in 
the axils of the upper leaves.
CEUCIFERiE.
57 
1. Common Sisymbrium.
Sisymbrium officinale, Scop.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 735.
Sedge Mustard.) 
An erect annual, more or less downy, 
a foot high or rather more, with very 
rigid, spreading branches.
Leaves 
deeply pinnatifid, with few lanceolate, 
slightly toothed lobes, the terminal one 
from 1 to 1| inches long, the others 
smaller, often curved backwards towards 
the stem ; the upper leaves sometimes 
undivided and hastate.
Flowers very 
small and yellow.
Pods about 6 lines 
long, thick at the base, tapering to the 
point, more or less hairy, almost sessile, 
and closely pressed against the axis, in 
long, slender racemes, the midribs of the 
valves almost as prominent 8L$inJErysimum.
In waste places, and by roadsides, 
common throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, except the extreme north.
Abun- 
dant in Britain, excepting the northern 
extremity of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
(F.68.) 
Fig, 68.
2. Broad Sisymbrium.
Sisymbrium Irio, Linn.
(Fig. 69.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1631.
London Rocket.) 
An erect annual, with a hard stem, a 
foot high or more, and glabrous or nearly 
so.
Leaves deeply pinnatifid or pinnate, 
the lobes or segments lanceolate, more 
numerous and larger than in the common 
S. Flowers small and yellow.
Pods on 
more or less spreading pedicels, 1\ to 2 
inches long, often all turned to one side, 
forming a dense, erect raceme.
In waste places, and by roadsides, in 
central and southern Europe to the 
Caucasus.
Rare in Britain, and chiefly 
recorded from the neighbourhood of 
London, Berwick, Dublin, and some 
other towns.
Fl. summer.
VOL.
i. 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
Fine-leaved Sisymbrium.
Sisymbrium Sophia, Linn.
(Fig. 70.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 963.
Flixweed.) 
An erect annual, a foot high or rather 
more, not so coarse as the two last, and 
somewhat hoary with a very short down.
Leaves two or three times divided into 
numerous short linear segments.
Flowers 
small and yellow.
Pods slender and 
glabrous, 9 to 12 lines long, on slender, 
spreading pedicels, forming loose, ter- 
minal, erect racemes.
In waste places, by roadsides, etc., in 
Europe and northern Asia, from the 
Arctic Circle to the Mediterranean, the 
Caucasus, and Himalaya, and in north- 
ern America ; thinly scattered through 
Britain.
El. summer.
Fig. 70.
X. ALLIARIA.
ALLIARIA.
A single species, associated by some with Sisymbrium, by others 
with Erysimum ; differing from the former by the valves of the pod 
with a prominent midrib, as in Erysimum; from the latter by white 
flowers, and a more cylindrical pod ; from both by a peculiar habit of 
foliage, and by the striate seed of which the short stalk is more dis- 
tinctly expanded (within the pod) into a broad, white membrane.
1. Common Alliaria.
Alliaria officinalis, DC.
(Fig. 71.) 
(Erysimum Alliaria, Eng. Bot.
t. 796.
Garlic mustard.
Sauce-alone.) 
An erect annual or biennial, or sometimes of longer duration, 1 to 3 
feet high, emitting a strong smell of garlic when rubbed, glabrous, or 
with a few long hairs on the stem and the edges of the leaves.
Lower 
leaves on long stalks, orbicular and crenate; those of the stem on 
shorter stalks, cordate-ovate, or triangular, coarsely toothed, 2 to 3 inches 
long and broad.
Flower small and white.
Pods on short, spreading 
CRUCIPEEjE.
59 
stalks, stiff and glabrous, 1 to 1^ inches 
long, nearly cylindrical, but with a very 
prominent midrib on each valve.
Under hedges, in shady waste or cul- 
tivated places, over the greater part of 
Europe and western Asia, but not an 
Arctic plant.
Frequent in Britain gene- 
rally, but decreasing much in northern 
and western Scotland.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 71.
XL EYSmUM.
EKYSIMUM.
Erect annuals or perennials, pale or hoary with closely appressed 
hairs, rarely quite glabrous ; the leaves entire, or slightly toothed.
Flowers yellow, or rarely yellowish- white.
Pod linear, nearly quad- 
rangular from the very prominent midrib of the valves.
Stigma broadly 
capitate, or with short, spreading lobes.
Seeds ovoid or oblong, the 
seedstalk not flattened, the radicle incumbent on the back of one of the 
cotyledons.
A rather numerous genus in the northern hemisphere, differing from 
Wallflower in the seeds, from Sisymbrium by the midrib of the valves 
of the pod more prominent than in all the species of that genus except 
the common S.
Plant slightly hoary.
Leaves tapering at the base ....
1. Common -E r .
Plant glabrous and glaucous.
Leaves clasping the stem, and 
rounded at the base 2.
Eastern E.
1. Common Erysimum.
Erysimum cheiranthoid.es, Linn.
(Fig. 72.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 942.
Treacle Mustard.) 
A stiff, erect annual, 1 to 2 feet high, slightly hoary with closely ap- 
pressed hairs.
Leaves numerous, of a pale green, broadly lanceolate, 
entire or slightly toothed, tapering into a short stalk at the base.
f2 
60 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
Flowers small, pale yellow.
Pods nume- 
rous, on spreading pedicels, seldom an 
inch long, the stigma slightly dilated.
In waste and cultivated places, in 
northern and central Europe, Russian 
Asia, and northern America, becoming 
rather a mountain plant in southern 
Europe.
Diffused over a great part of 
Britain, but probably in many cases in- 
troduced.
FL summer and autumn.
Fig. 72.
2. 
Eastern Erysimum.
Erysimum orientale, Br.
(Fig. 73.) 
{Brassica, Eng. Bot.
t. 1804.
Hares-ear.) 
An erect, perfectly glabrous, and 
somewhat glaucous annual, a foot high 
or rather more.
Radical leaves obovate 
and stalked, the stem-leaves oblong, 2 
or 3 inches long, quite entire, and em- 
bracing the stem with prominent rounded 
auricles.
Flowers pale yellow, or whit- 
ish.
Pods 3 or 4 inches long, slender, 
in a loose raceme, the midrib of the 
valves very prominent.
In stony fields and waste places, in 
central and southern Europe, and west- 
ern Asia, extending northwards to the 
Baltic.
In Britain it has been gathered 
occasionally, near the southern and east- 
ern coasts of England, but appears 
scarcely to be permanently established.
Fl. spring and summer.
Fig. 73.
CKUCIFERiE.
61 
XII.
BRASSICA.
BRASSICA.
Annuals or perennials, either glabrous or with stiff or rough hairs, 
the lower leaves usually deeply pinnate, or lyrate, the upper ones some- 
times entire, the flowers yellow.
Pod linear, cylindrical or nearly so, more 
or less beaked at the top beyond the end of the valves, the beak con- 
sisting either of the conical style alone, or including a portion of the 
pod itself, with one or more seeds in it.
Seeds globular, ovoid, or some- 
what flattened, the cotyledons folded longitudinally over the radicle.
A numerous genus, spread over Europe and northern and central 
Asia, comprising the Brassica and Sinapis of Linnaeus, and divided by 
other botanists into from three to six or even more genera, variously 
defined, according to the peculiar views entertained by each, but all 
aptly united into one by Boissier.
It is distinguished from Sisymbrium 
and Wintercress essentially by the folded cotyledons, and in most 
cases by the beak of the pod.
Even in the two first species, and in the 
blade _Z?., where the beak is not so distinct, the persistent style is more 
conical at the base than in the Wintercress, and very much longer than 
in the Sisymbrium.
Upper stem-leaves entire, sessile or clasping the stem.
All the leaves glabrous and glaucous, the upper ones not 
auricled 4.
Cabbage B.
Radical leaves more or less hispid, the upper ones auricled 
at the base 5.
Field B.
All the leaves pinnately cut or stalked.
Six or fewer seeds in each cell of the pod.
Pods slender and short, closely pressed against the axis 
of the raceme.
Beak small.
Pods ending in a slender style, slightly conical at the 
base 8.
Black B.
Pods ending in a distinct beak, thickened at the base 9.
Hoary B.
Pods more or less spreading in a loose raceme.
Beak large.
Pod very hispid, rather shorter than the long flat beak 6.
Mustard B.
Pod glabrous, or rough, rather longer than the conical 
beak 7.
Charlock B.
Ten, twelve, or more seeds in each cell of the pod.
Pod 1| to 2 inches, the beak distinct, with 1 or 2 seeds 3.
Isle of Man B.
Pod slender, not 1^ inch long.
The beak very short, 
without seeds.
Branched and leafy perennial, a foot high or more .
1. Wall B.
Low annual, the leaves mostly radical 2.
Sand B.
1. Wall Brassica.
Brassica tenuifolia, Boiss.
(Eig. 74.) 
(Sisymbrium, Eng. Bot.
t. 525.
Diplotaxis, Brit.
El. Rocket.) 
A loosely branched or bushy perennial, 1 to 2 feet high, perfectly 
62 
THE CftUClFEB FAMILY.
glabrous and somewhat glaucous, emit- 
ting a disagreeable smell when rubbed.
Leaves very variable, mostly irregularly 
pinnate, 2 to 4 or 5 inches long, with a 
few lanceolate or oblong, entire or 
coarsely toothed segments, the upper 
leaves often entire or nearly so.
Flowers 
rather large, lemon-coloured.
Pods in 
a loose raceme, about 1J inches long, 
slender, spreading, with numerous small 
seeds distinctly arranged in two rows.
On old walls, ruins, and waste places, 
in central and southern Europe to the 
Caucasus, extending northwards to 
southern Sweden.
In Britain, chiefly 
in southern England and near the sea.
FL the whole summer.
Fig. 74.
2. Sand Brassica.
Brassiea muralis, Boiss.
(Fig. 75.) 
(Sisymbrium,, Eng. Bot.
t. 1090.
Diplotaxis, Brit.
Fl.) 
An annual, branching from the base, 
usually about 6 inches high, with the 
same smell as the last.
Leaves mostly 
radical, or crowded at the base of the 
stems, less deeply divided than in the 
wall B., and often only sinuate.
Flowers 
much smaller, the pods and seeds simi- 
lar, but also smaller.
In fields, cultivated and waste places, 
very common in southern, and scattered 
over central Europe.
In Britain, abun- 
dant in some of the southern counties of 
England and Ireland, and appearing oc- 
casionally further north, especially near 
the sea.
FL all summer.
Fig. 75.
CBUCIFERiG.
63 
3. Isle of Man Brassica.
Brassica monensis, Huds.
(Fig. 7G.) 
(Sisymbrium, Eng. Bot.
t. 962.) 
Either an annual or forming a stock 
of two or three years' duration, glabrous, 
or bearing a few stiff hairs at its base.
Stems sometimes barely 6 inches high, 
with the leaves mostly radical, some- 
times loosely branched above a foot high, 
and more leafy.
Radical leaves pin- 
natifid or pinnate, the lobes or seg- 
ments short and broad, and marked by 
a few coarse teeth, the upper leaves 
more deeply divided, with narrower seg- 
ments.
Flowers rather large, pale yellow.
Pods spreading, 1\ to above 2 inches 
long, terminating in a thick beak, vary- 
ing in length from a fifth to above a 
third of the whole pod, and usually con- 
taining 1 to 3 seeds above the valves.
In western Europe, and chiefly in the Pyrenees and south-western 
Alps, but extending up the west coast of France to Britain.
FL 
summer.
The smaller and more stunted state is the most frequent in 
sandy places on the western coasts of Great Britain as far north as 
Bute, but the more luxuriant variety, often distinguished as a species, 
under the name of Sinapis or Brassica Cheiranllius (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2821), has also been found in South Wales and the Channel 
Islands.
Fig. 76.
4. Cabbage Brassica.
Brassica oleracea, Linn.
(Fig. 77.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 637.) 
In the wild state the Cabbage has a thick, almost woody stock, pro- 
bably of two or three years' duration, branching into erect stems 1 to 
2 feet high.
Leaves glabrous and glaucous, the lower ones large, 
stalked, broad, sinuate, or lobed at the base, the upper ones oblong, 
usually sinuate, clasping the stem by their broad base, but not project- 
ing into auricles.
Flowers rather large, pale yellow.
Pod spreading, 
1| inches or more in length.
On maritime cliffs, indigenous round the Mediterranean, and re- 
64 
THE CRUCIFEK FAMILY.
appearing in several places on the coasts 
of northern France and of England and 
Ireland, but probably in many northern 
localities, originally escaped from culti- 
vation.
Fl. early summer.
The culti- 
vated forms of this species include the 
Cabbage, Cauliflower, 'Broccoli, Kale, 
Kolilrabbi, etc., of gardeners.
Fig. 77.
5. Field Brassica.
Brassica campestris, Linn.
(Fig. 78.) 
(Eng. Bot, t.
2146, 2176, and 2234.) 
In its wild state this is an erect, sim- 
ple, or scarcely branched annual, 1 to 
2 feet high.
Lower leaves green and 
slighly glaucous, more or less pinnately 
divided, with a large terminal lobe, and 
rough with stiff hairs, which are some- 
times very copious, and rarely entirely 
wanting ; upper leaves narrow-oblong 
or lanceolate, clasping the stem with 
rounded projecting auricles.
Flowers 
and pods much like those of the Cabbage, 
but the petals are usually of a brighter 
yellow.
On borders of fields, and waste places, 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia.
A frequent weed of cultivation in Britain.
Fl. spring and summer.
The cultivated 
varieties include the Turnip (B.
Napus), 
the Bapeseed or Colza (B.
Bapa), and 
probably also the Swedish Turnip.
Fig. 78.
CRUCIFERiE.
65 
6. Mustard Brassica.
Brassica alba, Boiss.
(Fig. 79 
(Sinapis, Eng. Bot.
t. 1677.
Cultivated Mustard.) 
Stem 1 to 2 feet high, glabrous, or with 
spreading, stiff hairs.
Leaves pinnately 
lobed or divided, more or less rough, the 
lobes ovate or oblong, coarsely toothed, 
the terminal one the largest.
Flowers 
rather large, fruit-pedicels spreading.
Pod f to 1 inch long, but more than 
half occupied by a stout flattened beak, 
often curved, with a single seed in its 
base, the valves and lower part of the 
beak very hispid with stiff white hairs 
concealing the prominent nerves.
In waste and cultivated places, in 
temperate and southern Europe and 
western Asia, and often cultivated for 
salad or forage.
Not unfrequent in some 
parts of England and Ireland, more rare 
in Scotland.
Fl. all summer.
j^ yg t 
7. Charlock Brassica.
Brassica Sinapistrum, Boiss.
(Fig. 80.) 
(Sinapis arvensis, Eng. Bot.
t. 1748.
Charlock.
Wild Mustard.) 
A coarse annual, 1 to 2 feet high, with 
a few stiff spreading hairs.
Leaves 
rough with very short hairs, the lower 
ones usually with one large oval or ob- 
long coarsely -toothed segment, and a few 
smaller ones along the leafstalk, the up- 
per ones often undivided, oblong or 
lanceolate.
Flowers rather large.
Pods 
more or less spreading, \ to 1\ inches 
long, of which rather more than a third 
is occupied by a stout beak, often con- 
taining a seed in its base ; the valves 
glabrous, or rough with stiff renexed 
hairs, the lateral nerves prominent.
A native probably of southern Europe, 
but now one of the most abundant weeds 
of cultivation throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia, and but too common all 
over Britain.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 80.
66 
THE CRUCIFBR FAMILY.
Black Brassica.
(SinapiS) Eng.
Fig. 81.
England, and abundant on 
in Scotland, and probably 
cultivation.
FL summer.
Brassica nigra, Boiss.
(Fig. 81.) 
Bot. t.
9C9.
Black Mustard.) 
Less hairy than the two last species, 
and sometimes entirely glabrous, espe- 
cially in the upper part, but the lower 
leaves and stem are generally slightly 
hispid.
Stem 2 feet high or more.
Leaves 
mostly deeply divided, with one large 
terminal ovate or oblong lobe and a few 
small lateral ones, the upper leaves often 
small and entire.
Flowers rather smaller 
than in the Charlock .
Pods on short 
pedicels, closely pressed against the axis 
of the long slender racemes, glabrous, 
seldom more than half an inch long, with 
a slender style, slightly conical at the base, 
the valves marked with a strong midrib.
On banks, under hedges, in waste and 
cultivated places, in central and southern 
Europe and central Asia, and much cul- 
tivated for its seed.
Scattered over 
some points of the south coast, more rare 
introduced onlv into Britain from or with 
9. Hoary Brassica.
Brassica adpressa, Boiss.
(Eig. 82.) 
(Frucastrum incanum, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2848.
Sinapis, Brit.
El.) 
Very like the black ~B.
in habit and 
foliage, but more frequently biennial, 
the stem stiffer and harder at the base, 
the leaves less divided, and more or less 
hoary with short rough hairs.
Pods 
short and closely pressed against the 
axis, as in the black B.
9 but they ter- 
minate in a short thick beak, with a 
seed in the base, instead of a slender 
style.
Seeds rather ovoid, not globular.
On sandy or arid places near the sea, 
in southern Europe, extending up the 
west coast of the Channel Islands.
FL 
CRUCIFEKiE.
07 
XIII.
COCHIiEARIA.
COCHLEAKIA.
Annuals or perennials, usually glabrous, with undivided leaves, and 
white flowers.
Filaments of the stamens without appendages.
Pod 
globular, ovoid or shortly oblong, with a broad partition ; the valves 
very convex.
Seeds several in each cell, not bordered, the radicle ac- 
cumbent on the edge of the cotyledons.
Besides the common northern species, the genus contains several 
Asiatic and south European ones, some of them intermediate, in ap- 
pearance, between the two rather dissimilar ones here associated.
The 
pod is very different from that of any other British white-flowered 
Crucifer.
Tall erect plant, with very large oblong radical leaves .
. 1.
Horseradish C.
Low diffuse plant, the leaves small and thick 2.
Scurvy C.
Horseradish Cochlearia.
Cochlearia Armoracia, Linn.
(Fig. 83.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2323.
Armoracia rusticana, Brit.
Fl. Horseradish.
Rootstock tapering into a long root.
Radical leaves on long stalks, often 6 
inches to a foot long, and 4 to 6 inches 
broad, sinuate and toothed at the edges, 
glabrous, but rough.
Stems 2 to 3 feet 
high, erect ; the leaves smaller and nar- 
rower than the radical ones, the lower 
ones often deeply toothed or almost pinna- 
tifid.
Flowers small and white, in numer- 
ous racemes, forming a terminal panicle.
Pods on slender pedicels, ovoid or ellip- 
tical, without any prominent nerve.
A plant of south-eastern origin, intro- 
duced by cultivation only into northern 
and western Europe.
It has become 
perfectly naturalized in several parts of 
Britain, especially near the sea.
Fl.
summer.
The pod seldom comes to per- 
fection in this country.
Fig. 83.
2. Scurvy Cochlearia.
Cochlearia officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 84.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 551, and C.
grcsnlandica, t.
2403.
Scurvy -grass.) 
A low, diffuse, quite glabrous, and somewhat fleshy annual or biennial, 
the stems seldom above 6 inches long.
Lower leaves stalked, orbicular 
68 
THE CEUCIFER FAMILY.
or reniform, entire or angularly toothed ; 
the upper ones sometimes similar, some- 
times ovate or oblong, and often quite 
sessile.
Flowers in short racemes, the 
petals obovate and spreading.
Pods 
globular or ovoid, varying from 2 to 3 
lines in diameter, pointed by the short 
style, the midrib of the valves very pro- 
minent when dry.
In stony, muddy, or sandy soils, all 
^p around the Arctic Circle, on the sea- 
coasts of northern and western Europe, 
and at considerable elevations in the 
great mountain chains of Europe.
Not 
uncommon on the shores of England and 
Ireland, still more abundant on those of 
Scotland, penetrating inland along some 
of its rivers, and in the Highland moun- 
tains.
Fl. all summer.
It varies much in the size and shape of the 
leaves, in the size of the flowers, and the size and shape of the pods, 
and has been divided into two, three, or even eight or nine species.
The most prominent varieties are the C.
danica (Eng. Bot.
t. 696), with 
all the leaves stalked, and the C.
anglica (Eng. Bot.
t. 552), with large 
flowers and pods.
Fig. 84.
XIV.
ALYSSUM.
ALYSSUM.
Annuals or low branching perennials, with a hoary or short stellate 
down, and white or yellow flowers.
Filaments of the stamens, or the 
shorter ones only, usually winged near the base, or thickened, or fur- 
nished with small teeth.
Pod sessile within the calyx, orbicular or 
oval, the partition broad, the valves convex and not veined.
Seeds 1 
to 4, or very rarely more, in each cell.
[Radicle accumbent on the edge 
of the cotyledons.
An extensive genus, ranging over Europe and northern Asia, and 
tolerably natural, distinguished from Draha chiefly by the short few- 
seeded pod, with more convex valves, or by the appendages to the base 
of the filaments, one or other of these characters being observable in all 
the species.
They have also usually a stifFer, more leafy habit, and 
even the annuals often look woody.
Sepals persisting round the pod.
Petals minute, yellowish-white.
Seeds 2 in each cell 1.
Small A.
CRUCIPERiK.
69 
Sepals falling off after flowering.
Petals spreading, pure white.
Seeds 1 in each cell 2.
Sweet A.
The A.
incanum, often separated as a genus under the name of JBer- 
teroa, having longer pods with more seeds, a common annual in central 
and eastern Europe, is said to have been occasionally found near Lewes 
and near Weymouth, but does not appear to be permanently esta- 
blished.
The yellow-flowered A.
saxatile, from southern Europe, is 
among the perennials long established in our rock-gardens.
1. Small Alyssum.
Alyssum calycinuin, Linn.
(Eig. 85.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2853.) 
A small, hard annual, often simple, 3 
or 4 inches high, or, when very luxuriant, 
branching at the base, and 6 inches high.
Leaves oblong-linear, much narrowed at 
the base.
Petals inconspicuous, of a 
pale yellow.
Pods in a long raceme, on 
short pedicels, nearly orbicular, the nar- 
row herbaceous sepals persisting round 
them till they are ripe.
The filaments of 
the shorter stamens have each a small 
fine tooth or appendage at their base.
In waste places, dry pastures, on the 
edges of fields, etc., in central and south- 
ern Europe, from Sweden to the Cau- 
casus.
In Britain, recently found in a 
few localities in England, Ireland, and southern Scotland.
and early summer.
Fig. 85.
FL 
spring 
2. Sweet Alyssum.
Alyssum maritimum, Linn.
(Eig. 86.) 
(Eng, Bot. t.
1729.
Koniga, Brit.
Fl.) 
A hard annual or perennial, with much-branched procumbent or 
ascending stems, from 4 or 5 inches to near a foot long.
Leaves nar- 
row-lanceolate or linear, narrow at the base, or stalked.
Flowers 
white, with a honey scent, rather small, but the petals obovate, spread- 
ing, and conspicuous.
Pods orbicular or slightly oval, with only one 
seed in each cell ; the calyx deciduous.
The filaments are without 
appendages.
In waste places and dry pastures, chiefly near the sea ; very abun- 
dant round the Mediterranean.
Much cultivated in our flower-gar- 
70 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
dens, and sowing itself readily, it has 
become more or less established as a 
weed of cultivation in some parts of 
England.
Fl. all summer.
Often dis- 
tinguished as a genus, under the name of 
Koniga.
Fig. 86.
XY.
DRABA.
DEABA.
Small annuals or perennials, usually hairy or hoary with spreading 
or tufted radical leaves, entire or toothed, the stem-leaves few or none.
Flowers white or yellow.
Filaments of the stamens without appen- 
dages.
Pod oblong or elliptical, from one and a half to near three times 
as long as broad, more or less flattened ; the partition broad ; the valves 
flat or convex, their midrib usually distinct.
Seeds several in each 
cell.
Padicle accumbent on the edge of the cotyledons.
A considerable genus, ranging over the northern hemisphere, ascend- 
ing to the greatest elevations and to high Arctic latitudes, and extend- 
ing along the great mountain chain of America into the southern hemi- 
sphere.
The species mostly differ from Alyssum in their longer pod, 
and in a peculiar habit approaching that of the Hockcresses ; from the 
latter genus they are distinguished by the pod, which, though long for 
a siliculose Crucifer, is still much shorter, in proportion to its width, 
than in the shortest Roclccress.
Flowers yellow (stiff tufted' perennial) 1.
Yellow D.
Flowers white.
Biennials or perennials.
Pedicels short and stiff.
Stem with a few leaves, the radical ones spreading .
. 3.
Hoary D.
Stem almost leafless, the radical leaves tufted ....
2. Rock D.
CRUCJFEE.IO.
7] 
Annuals.
Pedicels slender, spreading.
Stem dwarf, erect, leafless.
Petals deeply divided .
. 5.
Common I).
Stem weak, ascending, leafy.
Petals entire 4.
Wall D.
1. Yellow Draba.
Draba aizoides, Linn.
(Fig. 87.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1271.) 
Stock perennial and branched, cover- 
ed with closely-packed leaves, forming 
dense tufts of 2 or 3 inches in diameter.
The leaves 3 or 4 lines long, sessile, 
linear, of a bright green, edged with 
stiff white hairs.
Peduncles leafless, 1 
to 4 or even 5 inches high, bearing a few 
rather large yellow flowers.
Pods about 
4 lines long, glabrous or slightly hairy, 
with a rather long style ; the valves more convex than in the rest of the 
genus.
" 
In clefts of rocks, and stony places, in the mountain districts of cen- 
tral and southern Europe.
Long cultivated in our rock-gardens, it 
has established itself in considerable abundance on rocks and old walls 
about Pennard Castle, near Swansea.
Fl.
.spring.
Fig. 87.
2. Hock Draba.
Draba hirta, Linn.
(Fig. 88.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1338.
D. rupestris, Brit.
Fl.) 
Stock shortly tufted and perennial, 
but not of long duration.
Leaves crowd- 
ed, 3 to 5 or 6 lines long, narrow-oblong 
or lanceolate, entire or slightly toothed, 
with a few stiff, simple or stellate hairs.
Peduncles usually 1 or 2 inches, and 
leafless ; in luxuriant specimens twice as 
long, with one or two small ovate leaves.
Flowers few and small, but larger than 
in the hoary D.
Pods 2 to 3 lines long, 
on short stiff pedicels, usually slightly 
hoary with a few very minute hairs.
In the mountains of the northern or Arctic regions of Europe, Asia, 
and North America.
Hare on some of the higher mountain summits 
of Scotland.
Fl. July.
The specimens with slightly hoary pods (as 
are the Scotch ones) are by some distinguished, under the name of D.
rupestris, from the original D.
hirta of Linnseus (not found in Britain), 
in which they are almost or quite glabrous.
Fig. 88.
72 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
3. Hoary Draba.
Draba incana, Linn.
(Fig. 89.) 
(Eng. Bot.
1. 388, a luxuriant garden specimen.) 
Nearly allied to the rock JD.
t but very 
different in appearance.
Often only a 
biennial, with the radical leaves spread- 
ing, and seldom forming branched tufts ; 
the whole plant hoary with short, single 
and stellate hairs.
Stems erect, 6 inches 
high or more, with several small, sessile, 
oblong or lanceolate leaves.
Flowers 
small, and white.
Pods 3 to 5 lines long, 
on short, stiff pedicels, glabrous, or 
sprinkled with a few stellate hairs ; the 
valves flat, or the whole pod slightly 
twisted.
In rocky situations, in northern and 
Arctic Europe and Asia, far more com- 
mon than the rock _D., and descending to lower elevations.
Not un- 
frequent in the Scotch Highlands, and extending into northern Eng- 
land, north Wales, and northern Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 89.
4. Wall Draba.
Draba muralis, Linn.
(Fig. 90.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 912.) 
A slender, erect, but weak annual, 
from a few inches to a foot high, simple 
or slightly branched, green, but rough 
with short hairs.
Radical leaves spread- 
ing, ovate or oblong, toothed, \ to 1 inch 
long.
Stem-leaves smaller, ovate, clasp- 
ing the stem by their cordate or auricled 
base.
Petals white, entire, and very 
minute.
Pods about 2 lines long, on 
spreading pedicels, in a long slender ra- 
ceme, each containing about 6 seeds.
On rocks and walls, in limestone hilly 
districts, in the greater part of Europe 
and Russian Asia, from the Mediter- 
ranean to Scandinavia, and said to extend to the Arctic Circle.
In 
Britain, sparingly scattered over several parts of England and southern 
Scotland.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 90.
CRUCIFERJft.
73 
5. Common Draba.
Draba verna, Linn.
(Fig. 91.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 586.
Whitlow- grass) 
A dwarf animal, lasting but a few 
weeks, the leaves all radical, ovate or 
oblong, seldom above half an inch long, 
and closely spreading on the ground.
Peduncles slender, erect and leafless, 1 
to 3 or rarely 4 inches high.
Petals 
small, white, and deeply cleft.
Pods on 
rather long slender pedicels, about 3 lines 
long, containing numerous minute seeds, 
on stalks of very unequal length.
On walls, rocks, dry banks, and stony places, throughout Europe and 
western Asia, except the extreme north.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl.
early spring.
Distinguished by some as a genus, under the name of 
Erophila.
A variety with remarkably inflate capsules occurs on Ben 
Lawers.
Fig. 91.
XVI, CAMELINA CAMELINA.
Erect and more or less hispid annuals, with sagitatte or auricled 
stem-leaves, and small yellow flowers.
Pod obovoid, the partition broad, 
the valves very convex, with the midrib distinct, the edges flattened, 
forming a narrow margin round the pod.
Style slender.
Seeds several.
The radicle incumbent on the back of the cotyledons.
A genus consisting of two or three European and north Asiatic spe- 
cies, perhaps all reducible to a single one, separated from Cochlearia 
on account of their yellow flowers and incumbent cotyledons.
Cameline.
Camelina sativa, Crantz.
(Eig. 92.) 
Bot.t. 1254.
C.fcetida, Bab. Man.
Gold of Pleasure.) 
or slightly branched, 1 to 2 feet high.
Lowest leaves 
ones sessile, clasping the stem with pointed auri- 
entire or toothed, 1 to 2 inches long.
Pods about 
pedicels about twice that length, in a long, loose ra- 
1. Common 
(Alyssum, Eng.
Stem simple, 
stalked, upper 
cles, lanceolate, 
3 lines long, on 
ceme.
In cultivated and waste places, in central and southern Europe, and 
VOL.
I. G 
74 
THE CRUCJFER FAMILY.
the temperate parts of Russian Asia; 
further north only as a weed of cultiva- 
tion.
In Britain, appearing occasionally 
in corn and flax fields in England and 
Ireland.
Fl. with the corn.
Fig. 92.
XVII.
AWLWORT.
SUBULARIA.
A dwarf aquatic annual, with the pod of a Draba, but the valves 
more convex, and the radicle incumbent on the back of the cotyledons, 
which are linear, and the bend is, as in Senebiera, above the base of 
the cotyledons, not at their junction with the radicle, as in the rest of 
Crucifers.
The genus is limited to a single species.
1. Water Awlwort.
Subularia aquatica, Linn.
(Fig. 93.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 732.) 
The whole plant is but 1 to 2, rarely 
3, inches high, and perfectly glabrous, 
usually growing entirely under water.
Leaves all radical, nearly cylindrical, 
slender and pointed, \ to 1 inch long.
Flowers few, with minute white petals.
Pods about a line and a half long, 
and oblong, or sometimes shorter, and 
nearly globular, with 5 or 6 seeds in 
each cell.
In the shallow edges of alpine ponds and lakes, in northern Europe, 
Asia, and America, and more rarely in central Europe.
Scarce in Bri- 
tain, in the mountains of Scotland, north-western England, and north 
Wales.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 93.
CEUCIFERiE.
75 
XYIII.
FENNYCRESS.
THLASPI.
Annuals or low perennials, the leaves usually undivided, the upper 
ones clasping the stem, the flowers small and white.
Petals equal, or 
nearly so.
Pod orbicular or obovate, flattened laterally at right angles 
to the narrow partition, the valves boat-shaped, their midrib or keel 
more or less expanded into a green wing surrounding the pod.
Seeds 
two or more in each cell.
Radicle accumbent on the edge of the coty- 
ledons.
A small genus, spread over Europe, northern and central Asia, and 
north-western America, distinguished from Candytuft and Cress by 
having more than one seed in each cell of the pod, from all others by 
the winged pod.
Pod (including the broad wing) orbicular, about 6 lines broad 1.
Field P.
Pod obovate or obcordate, not 3 lines broad.
Annual.
Pod nearly as broad as long, with about 4 seeds 
in each cell 2.
Perfoliate P.
Biennial or perennial.
Pod longer than broad, with 6 or 
8 seeds in each cell 3.
Alpine P.
1. Meld Pennycress.
Thlaspi arvense, Linn.
(Fig. 94.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1659.
Pennycress, Mithridate Mustard.) 
An erect, glabrous annual, 6 inches to 
a foot high or rather more, simple or 
branched in the upper part.
Radical 
leaves stalked, but soon disappearing.
Stem-leaves oblong or lanceolate, usually 
marked with a few coarse teeth ; the 
lower ones narrowed at the base, the 
upper clasping the stem with prominent 
auricles.
Pods in a long raceme, about 
half an inch in diameter, including a very 
broad wing, deeply notched at the top, 
with a very minute style in the notch.
Seeds usually 6 in each cell.
In cultivated and waste places, through- 
out Europe and Russian Asia.
Widely 
scattered over various parts of Britain, 
but not so common with us as on the 
Continent.
Fl. spring and summer.
Fig. 94.
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
2. Perfoliate Pennycress.
Thlaspi perfoliatum, Lian.
(En 
Fig. 95.
(Fig. 95.) 
g. Bot. t.
2354.) 
A glabrous annual, branching at the 
base, or nearly simple, the stem ascend- 
ing or erect, 3 to 6 inches high.
Radical 
leaves spreading or tufted, stalked, ovate 
or orbicular ; upper stem-leaves ovate or 
oblong, clasping the stem with rather 
large, rounded auricles.
Pods not half 
the size of those of the field P., with 
narrower wings, and the notch at the 
top much broader and more open.
Style 
nearly as long, or longer than the notch.
Seeds usually 4 in each cell.
In stony pastures and waste places, 
chiefly in limestone districts, in central 
and southern Europe, and temperate 
Russian Asia.
In Britain, apparently 
confined to a few localities in Oxford- 
shire and Gloucestershire.
Fl. spring.
3. Alpine Pennycress.
Thlaspi alpestre, Linn.
(Fig. 96.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 81.) 
A glabrous biennial or perennial, form- 
ing a shortly-branched or tufted stock, 
with obovate, oval, or oblong, stalked, 
radical leaves.
Stems simple, erect or 
ascending, about 6 inches high ; the 
leaves narrow, clasping the stem with 
small auricles.
Flowers usually larger 
than in the two last.
Pod about 3 
lines long, but not so broad as in the 
perfoliate P., especially at the base, the 
wings rounded at the top, leaving a broad 
but not a deep notch between them.
Style prominent.
Seeds 6 or 8 in each 
cell.
In mountain pastures, in limestone 
districts, in central and southern Europe, 
extending northward to southern Swe- 
den, and eastward to the Russian fron- 
Fig. 96.
tier.
In Britain, chiefly in the north of 
CEUCIPER*:.
77 
England, but found also in some other parts, as well as in Wales and 
Scotland.
Fl. summer.
A slight variety, with rather larger flowers, 
has been distinguished as a species, under the name of T.
virens.
XIX.
TEESDALIA.
TEESDALIA.
Dwarf annuals, with white flowers, two petals larger than the two 
others, as in Candytuft; but the longer filaments have a scale-like ap- 
pendage near their base, and the pod has 2 seeds in each cell.
A genus confined to two European species.
1. Common Teesdalia.
Teesdalia nudicaulis, Br.
(Fig. 97.) 
(Iberis, Eng. Bot.
t. 327.) 
Leaves radical and spreading, about 
half an inch long or but little more, 
usually pinnate, the terminal lobe larger, 
obovate or orbicular, glabrous, or with a 
few stiff hairs.
Flower-stems 2 or 3 
inches high, erect and leafless, or the 
lateral ones rather longer, ascending, 
with one or two small entire or pinnate 
leaves.
Flowers very small.
Pods in 
short racemes, nearly orbicular, about 
\\ line in diameter, flat, with a narrow 
wing round the edge, and a small notch at the top.
On sandy and gravelly banks and waste places, in central and southern 
Europe and western Asia.
Bather generally distributed over England 
and southern Scotland, though not a very common plant, and not in 
Ireland.
Fl. at any time from spring to autumn.
Fig. 97.
XX.
CANDYTUPT.
IBEEIS.
Glabrous or minutely downy annuals or branching perennials, with 
narrow or pinnatifid leaves, and white or pink flowers ; two adjoining 
exterior petals larger than the two others.
Filaments without appen- 
dages.
Pod orbicular or oval, laterally flattened (at right angles to 
the narrow partition), notched at the top, the valves boat-shaped, the 
keel or midrib expanded into a wing.
One seed only in each cell, the 
radicle accumbent on the edge of the cotyledons.
78 
THE CEUCIFJER FAMILY.
A genus of several south European and western Asiatic species, some 
of which are cultivated in our flower-gardens under the name of Candy- 
tufts, and all readily known by the unequal petals.
1. Bitter Candytuft.
Iberis amara, Linn.
(Fig. 98.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 52, the inflorescence too much elongated) 
An erect, rather stiff annual, 6 inches 
to near a foot high, with a few erect 
branches forming a terminal flat corymb.
Leaves oblong-lanceolate or broadly 
linear, with a few coarse teeth, or slightly 
pinnatifid, seldom quite entire.
Flowers 
white.
Pod nearly orbicular, the long 
style projecting from the notch at the 
top.
Common as a weed of cultivation in 
western, central, and southern Europe.
Appears occasionally in cornfields in 
England, especially in limestone dis- 
tricts.
Fl. with the corn.
Fig. 98.
XXI.
HUTCHINSIA.
HUTCHINSIA.
Dwarf annuals or perennials, with pinnate leaves and white flowers, 
separated from Cress as having two seeds in each cell of the pod instead 
of one.
A genus limited by some to one species, by others extended to a few 
allied ones from southern Europe and Russian Asia, or also to two or 
three perennials from the higk mountain-ranges of central and southern 
Europe.
1. Rock Hutchinsia.
Hutchinsia petrsea, Br.
(Eig. 99.) 
(Lepidium, Eng. Bot.
t. 111.) 
A glabrous, delicate, erect annual, seldom 3 inches high, branching 
at the base.
Radical leaves about half an inch long and pinnate ; stem- 
leaves few and smaller, with fewer and narrower segments.
Flowers 
very minute.
Pod oval, rather more than a line long.
Radicle of the 
seeds incumbent on the back of the cotyledons, but very near the 
edge.
CRUCIFERiE.
79 
On limestone rocks, old walls, and 
stony places, in central and southern 
Europe, from Sweden to the Crimea.
Confined, inBri tain, to the limestone tracts 
of the west and north of England and 
Wales, and of southern Ireland.
FL 
spring.
Fig. 99.
XXII.
CAPSEL.
CAPSELLA.
Annuals, with entire or pinnate leaves and small white flowers, dis- 
tinguished from Cress and Hutchinsia by having several seeds in each 
cell of the pod, from Fennycress by the pod not winged, and the radicle 
incumbent on the back of the cotyledons.
A genus of a single one, or of two or three, European and Asiatic 
species, according to the limits assigned to it by different botanists.
1. Shepherd's-purse Capsel.
Capsella Bursa-pastoris, DC.
(Eig. 100.) 
{Thlaspi, Eng. Bot.
t. 1485.
Shepherd* s-purse.) 
Hoot tapering, often to a great depth.
Radical leaves spread on the ground, 
pinnatifid, with a larger ovate or trian- 
gular terminal lobe, or sometimes entire.
Stem erect, from a few inches to above 
a foot high, rather rough and often hairy, 
with a few oblong or lanceolate, entire 
or toothed leaves, clasping the stem with 
projecting auricles.
Pods in a long 
loose raceme, usually triangular, truncate 
at the top, with the angles slightly 
rounded, and narrowed at the base, 
sometimes notched at the top and al- 
most obcordate.
Seeds 10 or 12 in each 
cell.
Probably of European or west Asiatic 
origin, but now one of the commonest weeds in cultivated and waste 
places, nearly all over the globe without the tropics.
Abundant in 
Britain.
FL nearly all the year round.
Fig. 100.
80 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
XXIII.
CRESS.
LEPIDIUM.
Annuals or perennials, glabrous or hairy, with numerous small white 
flowers.
Petals equal.
Stamens without appendages.
Pods ovate or 
shortly oblong, rarely orbicular, compressed laterally (at right angles 
to the narrow partition) ; the valves boat- shaped, either without wings 
or the keel expanded into a narrow wing at the top.
Seeds one in each 
cell, the radicle usually incumbent on the back of the cotyledons.
A numerous and rather natural genus, widely diffused over the whole 
range of the Order.
It is readily distinguished from Candytuft by 
the small petals all equal, and from all other British siliculose Crucifers, 
with laterally compressed pods, except Senebiera, by the single seeds 
in each cell.
Pod winged at the top.
Tall annual, with a single stem.
Style short .
. .
. 1.
Field C.
Perennial, branching at the base.
Style longer than the 
notch of the pod 2.
Smith 1 s C.
Pod not winged.
Stem stout and erect.
Leaves oblong or broadly lanceolate.
Upper leaves auricled and clasping the stem.
Pod 2 
lines broad 3.
Hoary C.
Upper leaves narrowed at the base.
Pod 1 line broad 4.
Broad-leaved C.
Stem much branched and wiry.
Leaves linear or 
pinnate 5.
N arrow-leaved C.
The common Cress of our gardens is the L.
sativum, a native of west 
central Asia.
1. 
Field Cress.
Lepidium campestre, Br.
(Fig. 101.) 
{Tlilaspi, Eng. Bot.
t. 1385.
Mithridate Fepperwort.) 
An annual or biennial, near a foot high, 
more or less hoary with minute scaly 
hairs, or rarely quite glabrous ; the stem 
solitary, erect or nearly so, usually 
branched in the upper part.
Radical 
leaves stalked, oblong, entire or pinna- 
tifid, with a large terminal lobe ; the 
upper ones oblong or lanceolate, entire 
or slightly toothed, clasping the stem 
with short, pointed auricles.
Flowers 
very small.
Pods numerous, on spread- 
ing pedicels, broadly ovate, thick when 
ripe, nearly surrounded by the wing, 
which is narrow at the base, but broad 
and slightly notched at the top, with a 
Fig. 101.
short, often very minute style.
CRUCIFEEiE.
81 
In hilly pastures, cultivated and waste places, over the greater part 
of Europe, from Sweden to the Caucasus.
Generally distributed over 
England, Ireland, and southern Scotland.
Fl. summer.
2. Smith's Cress.
Lepidium Smithii, Hook.
(Fig. 102.) 
[Thlaspi hirtum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1803.) 
Yery near the field C, but forms a 
more or less perennial stock.
The stems 
are several together, much shorter, and 
decumbent at the base ; the foliage more 
hairy, the flowers not quite so small, and 
the pod glabrous.
In hilly pastures, cultivated and waste 
places in western Europe, from Spain 
and Portugal, up western France to 
England, Ireland, and southern Scot- 
land.
Fl. spring and autumn.
It should, 
perhaps, be united as a mere variety 
with the L.
hirtum from south-western 
Europe, which is hairy all over, includ- 
ing the pods, and the L.
heterojphyllum 
from western Europe, which is glabrous 
all over.
3. Hoary Cress.
Lepidium Draba, Linn.
(Eig. 103.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2683.) 
A perennial about a foot high, more 
or less hoary with a minute down.
The 
stems stout and erect, branching in the 
upper part.
Leaves oblong or broadly 
lanceolate, usually slightly toothed, \\ 
to 2 inches long, the lower ones stalked, 
the upper ones clasping the stem with 
projecting auricles.
Hacemes not much 
lengthened, forming a broad flat corymb.
Pods about 2 lines broad and not quite 
so long, very thick, the valves sharply 
keeled but not winged, the style promi- 
nent.
In waste places, by roadsides, etc.
; 
common in central and southern Europe, 
VOL.
I. 
Fig. 103.
82 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
and temperate .Russian Asia.
Eare in Britain, and only as an intro- 
duced weed in a few English counties.
Fl. spring or early summer.
Broad-leaved Cress.
Lepidium latifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 104.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 182.) 
A stout, erect perennial, attaining 2 
feet or even more in height, of a pale 
green, but glabrous.
Stems much 
branched in the upper part, but forming 
a large loose panicle, not a flat corymb 
as in the hoary C.
Radical leaves large, 
ovate, toothed, on long stalks ; stem- 
leaves oblong or broadly lanceolate, 2 or 
3 inches long, the lower ones stalked 
and mostly toothed, the upper sessile, 
but tapering at the base, and often en- 
tire.
Pods about 1 line long and broad, 
the valves scarcely keeled and not 
winged, the style almost imperceptible.
In waste places, especially near the 
sea, widely distributed over central and 
southern Europe and temperate Russian 
Asia, extending northwards to Sweden.
In Britain, apparently indigenous near 
the coasts of some of the eastern coun- 
ties of England, appearing occasionally also in some other localities.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 104.
5. Narrow-leaved Cress.
Lepidium ruderale, Linn.
(Fig. 105.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1595.) 
A glabrous annual, 6 inches to a foot high, with very much branched 
wiry stems.
The radical and lower leaves pinnatifid, with narrow 
lobes ; the upper ones entire or nearly so, and linear.
Flowers very 
minute, generally without petals, and only 2 stamens.
Pods small, 
nearly orbicular ; the valves keeled or sometimes very slightly winged 
at the top ; the style very minute.
In dry gravelly soils, waste places, on rubbish and old walls, chiefly 
CUJJCIYEllJE.
83 
Dear the sea, nearly all over Europe 
and Eussian Asia, except the extreme 
north, abundant also in extratropical 
Australia.
In Britain, along the coast 
of England, from Bristol round to Nor- 
folk, but scarcely wild inland.
Fl. early 
summer, and often on till autumn.
Fig, 105.
XXIY.
SENEBIEEA.
SENEBIEEA.
Prostrate annuals, with pinnate leaves, and short racemes of small 
white flowers opposite the leaves.
Petals and stamens as in Cress.
Pod 
laterally compressed (at right angles to the narrow partition), orbicular 
or broader than long, either indehiscent or separating into two nuts, 
each with a single seed.
Eadicle incumbent on the back of the coty- 
ledons, but the bend is, as in Awlwort, a little above the base of the 
cotyledons themselves, not at their junction with the radicle.
A genus of very few species, but widely diffused over the whole range 
of the Order.
Pods 2 lines broad, deeply wrinkled, sessile or nearly so .
. .
1. Common S.
Pods 1 line broad, slightly wrinkled, on slender pedicels .
. 2.
Lesser S.
1. Common Senebiera.
Senebiera Coronopus, Poir.
(Eig. 106.) 
( Coronopus Ruellii, Eng. Bot.
t. 1660.
Swine s-cress.
Wartcress.) 
A pale green, glabrous or glaucous annual, the stems, when first 
flowering forming a short, close tuft, afterwards spreading along the 
ground to the length of 6 inches or more.
Leaves once or twice pin- 
nately divided, the segments not numerous, linear or wedge-shaped, 
entire or toothed.
Eacemes at first forming close sessile heads, but, 
as the fruit ripens, lengthening out to 1 or 2 inches.
Pedicels seldom 
a line long.
Pod about 2 lines broad and not quite so long, scarcely 
H 2 
84 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
notched at the top, marked with deep 
wrinkles, which form a kind of crest 
round the edge ; it usually remains entire 
when ripe.
In cultivated and waste places, in cen- 
tral and southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, extending northward into Sweden.
Rather plentiful in southern England 
and Ireland, decreasing northwards, and 
quite local in Scotland.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 106.
2. Lesser Senebiera.
Senebiera didyma, Pers.
(Fig. 107.) 
(Lepidium, Eng. Bot.
t. 248.) 
Much like the common S.
in habit and 
foliage, but generally more slender, often 
sprinkled with a few hairs ; the leaves 
rather smaller and more divided ; the 
flowers smaller, in looser racemes.
Pod 
scarcely more than a line broad, but 
slightly wrinkled, and readily separating 
into two ovoid nuts.
On the seacoasts of North and South 
America, South Africa, and western 
Europe.
In Britain, on the southern 
and western shores of England, from 
Sussex to Caernarvonshire, and in Ire- 
land.
In inland districts only as an occasional straggler.
Fl. all 
summer.
Fig. 107.
XXV.
WOAD.
ISATIS.
Erect annuals or biennials, with undivided leaves, the upper ones 
clasping the stem, and auricled.
The flowers small, yellow, and nurae- 
CRUCIFEM.
85 
rous.
Pod flat, pendulous, obovate or oblong, with a strong rib on each 
side, indehiscent, and containing a single seed.
Radicle incumbent on 
the back of the cotyledons.
A small genus, spread oyer southern Europe and western Asia.
1. Dyer's Woad, Isatis tinctoria, Linn.
(Fig. 108.) 
(Eng. Rot.
t. 97.) 
Stems 18 inches to 2 or 3 feet high, 
branched in the upper part, glabrous and 
glaucous, or with a few hairs in the lower 
part.
Radical leaves obovate or oblong, 
coarsely toothed and stalked, 2 to 4 
inches long ; the upper ones narrow and 
lanceolate, with prominent auricles.
Pods 
hanging from slender pedicels, generally 
about 7 or 8 lines long and 2 to 2| broad, 
and tapering to the base, but somewhat 
differing in size and shape according to 
the variety.
Of south-eastern origin, formerly much 
cultivated in many parts of Europe and 
Asia, and has thence become established 
in stony or waste places-, as far north as 
Sweden.
Repeatedly found in several 
localities in Britain, but scarcely fully 
naturalized.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 108.
XXYI.
CAKILE.
CAKILE.
Maritime branching annuals, with fleshy leaves and purplish or white 
flowers.
Pod oblong-linear, somewhat compressed, without any longi- 
tudinal partition or valves, but when ripe, separating transversely into 
2 articles, the upper one mitre- shaped, deciduous, containing one 
erect seed ; the lower one persistent, not unlike the head of a pike, di- 
vided into two points, and containing a pendulous ovule, which seldom 
enlarges into a seed.
Radicle obliquely incumbent on the back or 
towards the edge of the cotyledons.
A genus consisting of very few species, spread over the seacoasts of 
the northern hemisphere, both in the new and old world.
86 
THE CRUCIFER FAMILY.
1. Sea Cakile.
Cakile maritima, Scop.
(Fig. 109.) 
(Bunias Cakile, Eng. Bot.
t. 231.
Sea Rocket.) 
Stems hard at the base, with loose 
straggling branches a foot long or more, 
and glabrous.
Leaves few, thick and 
fleshy, with a few distant, oblong or linear 
lobes.
Flowers not unlike those of a 
Stock, but smaller.
Pods on short thick 
pedicels, distant from each other in long 
racemes ; when young, linear or lanceo- 
late and entire, but when ripe, forming 
the two peculiar articles above described.
[Radicle remarkably large.
In maritime sands and salt-marshes ; 
on all the seacoasts of Europe and western 
Asia, except the extreme north.
Com- 
mon all round Britain.
Ft. summer and 
autumn.
Fig. 109.
XXVII.
CEAMBE.
CRAMBE.
Erect, stout perennials, or in some foreign species, annuals, with 
toothed or divided leaves, and loose panicles of white flowers.
Pod 
apparently stalked in the calyx (that is, supported on a stalk -like 
abortive lower article), globular, indehiscent, with one seed.
Radicle 
incumbent on the back of the cotyledons, which are folded over as in 
Brassica.
A well-characterized and natural genus, containing several south 
European, west Asiatic, and Canary Island species.
1. Seakale Crambe.
Crambe maritima, Linn.
(Fig. 110.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 924.
Seakale.) 
A glabrous plant, of a glaucous green, forming a thick, hard, 
perennial stock.
Stems branched, about 2 feet high.
Lower leaves 
stalked, large, rather thick, broadly oblong or rounded, waved and 
coarsely toothed or pinnatifid ; the upper leaves few and smaller.
Panicle large and much branched.
Filaments of the longer stamens 
ORtJCIFEKJE.
87 
forked.
Pod 3 or 4 lines in diameter; the 
abortive article or stalk within the calyx 
about a line long or rather more.
In maritime sands and stony places, 
along the western coasts of Europe, and 
on the Baltic, reappearing on the Black 
Sea. In Britain, rather thinly scattered 
along the coasts of England, of Ireland, 
and of the Scotch lowlands, becoming 
more scarce northwards.
Introduced 
into our gardens last century, from De- 
vonshire.
Fl. early summer.
XXVIII.
RADISH.
KAPHANUS.
Coarse, often hairy annuals or biennials ; the lower leaves pinnatifid 
or pinnate, the flowers rather large.
Pod more or less elongated, thick, 
pointed, indehiscent, more or less contracted or even jointed between 
the seeds, without any longitudinal partition when ripe, but containing 
several seeds, separated by a pithy substance filling the pod.
Radicle 
incumbent on the back of the cotyledons, which are folded over it.
A genus well characterized by the pod, but consisting of very few 
species, or perhaps only of several more or less permanent races of 
one species.
The most distinct form, our garden Radish, is unknown 
in a wild state, but some varieties of the wild one, on the coasts of the 
Mediterranean, come so near to it as to suggest the possibility that it 
may be but a cultivated race of the same species, although placed by 
some botanists in a distinct genus.
1. Wild Radish.
Raphanus Raphanistrum, Linn.
(Fig. 111.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 856.
Jointed Charlock.) 
An erect or spreading annual or biennial, 1 to 2 feet high, much 
88 
THE MIGNIONETTE FAMILY.
branched, with a few stiff hairs on the 
base of the stem.
Leaves pinnately di- 
vided or lobed, the terminal segment 
large, obovate or oblong, and rough with 
short hairs ; the upper leaves often nar- 
row and entire.
Flowers of the size of 
those of the Charlock, the calyx very 
erect, the petals either white, with co- 
loured veins, or pale yellow, or lilac.
Pod usually 1 to 1| inches long, nearly 
cylindrical when fresh, and terminating 
in a long, pointed or conical style, when 
dry more or less furrowed longitudi- 
nally, and often separating in joints be- 
tween the seeds.
A common weed of cultivation, 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
except the extreme north, and equally 
abundant in Britain.
Fl. summer and autumn.
A seacoast variety, 
particularly abundant round the Mediterranean, but extending up the 
shores of western Europe to those of England, Ireland, and southern 
Scotland, has been distinguished as a species, under the name of R.
maritimus (Eng. Bot.
t. 1643).
It has the leaves usually more divided, 
the pods often longer, and is more apt to last a second year, but all the 
other characters derived from the colour of the flower, the comparative 
length of the style and pod, the depth of the furrows, etc., occur also 
on inland specimens, at least on the Continent.
Fig. 111.
VII.
THE MIGNIONETTE FAMILY.
RESEDACE^.
A small family, limited in Britain to the single genus Mi- 
gnionette.
The exotic genera, of very few species each, asso- 
ciated with it, originally formed part of it, but have been separated 
on account chiefly of the slight differences in the structure of the 
fruit.
I. MIGNIONETTE.
EESEDA.
Herbs, either annual or with a short perennial stock, alternate leaves, 
no stipules, and small greenish-yellow or white flowers, in long terminal 
racemes or spikes.
Sepals 4 to 6, united at the base.
Petals as many, 
small, narrow, and some or all of them deeply divided.
Stamens in- 
RESEDACE/E.
89 
definite, but not numerous (about 8 to 24), inserted under the ovary 
on a glandular disk.
Ovary single, with short teeth, each terminating 
in a very short style or sessile stigma.
Capsule green, open at the top 
long before maturity, containing several seeds, arranged along as many 
parietal placentas as there were styles.
Seeds without albumen.
The species are not numerous, and chiefly confined to Europe, north- 
ern Africa, and western Asia.
The narrow, insignificant, divided 
petals, and open capsule, are sufficient to distinguish them from all 
other British plants.
Leaves entire 1.
Dyer's M.
Leaves cut or divided.
Petals white, all divided.
Leaves pinnate, with many 
entire segments 3.
White M.
Petals greenish-yellow, one or two of them undivided.
Leaves trifid or pinnate, with few segments, often 
again divided 2.
Cut-leaved M.
The sweet Mignionette of our gardens (It. odorata) is a native of 
Egypt, nearly allied to the cut-leaved M.
1. Dyer's Mignionette.
Reseda Luteola, Linn.
(Fig. 112.) 
(Eng. Bot.
320.
Weld, Yellow Weed, or Dyers Rocket.) 
An erect glabrous annual or biennial, 
with a hard, stiff, scarcely branched 
stem, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves linear or 
lanceolate, 2 to 3 inches long, entire, 
but slightly waved on the edges.
Elowers 
of a yellowish green, in long, stiff spikes.
Sepals 4.
Petals 4 or 5, very unequal, 
the 1 or 2 lower ones entire, the upper 
ones divided into 2 to 5 lobes.
Capsules 
nearly globular, with 3 or sometimes 4 
teeth, and twice as many external 
furrows.
In waste places, throughout temperate 
and southern Europe, from Sweden to 
the Caucasus.
Extends over the greater 
part of Britain, but decreases northward, 
although found occasionally as far as 
Aberdeen.
Long cultivated for the use 
of dyers, it may not improbably be an 
introduced plant with us, as in northern 
Europe generally.
Fl. summer.
Pig. 112.
90 
THE MIGNIONETTE FAMILY.
2. Cut- 
leaved Mignionette.
Reseda lutea, Linn.
(Fig. 113.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 321.) 
Not so tall as the dyers JM~.,much more 
branched, and less erect.
Leaves very 
variable, but always deeply divided, 
most of them once or twice trifid, but 
occasionally pinnatifid, with few oblong 
or linear segments, much waved on the 
margins.
Flowers on slender pedicels, 
in long racemes.
Sepals usually 6, but 
sometimes only 5.
Petals as many, of a 
greenish yellow, the lowest entire or 2- 
cleft, the others irregularly divided into 
2, 3, or 4.
Capsule oblong, with 3, rarely 
4, very short teeth.
In waste places, especially in limestone 
districts, in central and southern Europe, 
to the Caucasus.
In Britain, chiefly 
prevalent in south-eastern England, but 
extends also to the limestones of the 
western and northern counties of Eng- 
°" * land, into Ireland, and up the east 
coast of Scotland to Aberdeen.
Fl. summer.
3. White Mignionette.
Reseda alba, Linn.
(Fig. 114.) 
(B.fruticulosa, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2628.) 
A tall perennial, the lower leaves 
crowded on the stock or base of the stem, 
and all deeply pinnate, with numerous 
(9 to 21) linear or lanceolate segments, 
entire, but waved on the margins.
Flowers on short pedicels, much whiter 
than in the last two species.
Sepals 5 or 
6. Petals as many, all equal, and 3-cleft.
Capsule ovoid, with 4, or sometimes 3, 5, 
or 6 teeth.
A Mediterranean species, long since 
introduced into our cottage gardens, and, 
as an outcast from them, appears to have 
become naturalized in some parts of the 
south coasts of England and Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 114.
CISTINE7E.
91 
VIII.
THE CISTUS FAMILY.
CISTINE^].
Shrubs or herbs, with opposite, or in a few exotic species, al- 
ternate leaves, with or without stipules ; the flowers in terminal 
racemes.
Sepals 3, nearly equal, overlapping each other in the 
bud, with or without 2 smaller outer ones.
Petals 5, or rarely- 
fewer, broadly spreading.
Stamens numerous, hypogynous, and 
free.
Ovary and style single.
Capsule 1-celled, or incompletely 
divided into several cells, opening in 3, 5, or 10 valves, which bear 
along their centre as many placentas or imperfect partitions.
Seeds several, the embryo curved, imbedded in albumen.
A small Order spread chiefly over southern and western Europe and 
northern Africa, with a few American species.
It corresponds with 
the old Linnean genus Cistus, which is now limited to the large-flowered 
species with 5 valves to the capsule.
They are none of them British, 
but include the well-known Gum-Cistuses of our gardens.
I. ROCKCIST.
HELIANTHEMUM.
Low or diffuse undershrubs or herbs, with the flowers smaller than 
in the true Cistuses, and the capsule opening in 3 valves only.
The 
leaves in the British species are all opposite, and the two outer sepals 
very seldom wanting.
The geographical range is the same as that of the family.
Erect annual 1.
Spotted R.
Diffuse, much branched undershrubs.
No stipules to the leaves (flowers small) 2.
Hoary R.
A pair of stipules at the base of each leaf.
Leaves green above, nearly flat.
Elowers usually yellow 3.
Common R.
Leaves whitish on both sides, the edges rolled back.
Flowers always white 4.
White R.
1. Spotted Rockcist.
Helianthemum guttatum, Mill.
(Fig. 115.) 
(Cistus, Eng. Bot.
t. 544.) 
An erect, hairy annual, often branched at the base, from a few inches 
to near a foot high.
Leaves narrow-oblong or lanceolate, or the lower 
ones obovate and very obtuse ; the upper ones more pointed, and often 
accompanied by stipules, which are wanting to the lower ones.
Ha- 
92 
THE CISTUS FAMILY.
Fig. 115.
cemes loose, with small flowers on slender 
pedicels.
Petals very fugacious, yellow, 
either with or without a dark spot at their 
base, varying also in size, and in their 
edges entire or jagged.
In pastures, fields, and waste places, 
ver} 7- common in western and southern 
Europe, extending northward through 
France to the Channel Islands, and 
southern Ireland, and reappearing on 
the Holyhead mountain in Anglesea.
Fl. summer.
The Anglesea specimens 
are rather stunted, with the leaves 
broader than usual, and have been pub- 
lished as a species under the name of H.
JBreweri, 
2. Hoary Rockcist.
Helianthemum canum, Dun.
(Fig. 116.) 
(Cistus marifolius, Eng. Bot.
t. 396.) 
A much smaller and more compact 
undershrub than the common It. The 
leaves much smaller, seldom 6 lines long, 
white underneath, or sometimes on both 
sides, and all without stipules.
Hacemes 
numerous and short, with small bracts 
at the base of the pedicels.
Flowers 
yellow, very much smaller than in the 
common It.
In rocky, hilly districts, in central, 
western, and south-western Europe, 
from southern Sweden to Spain.
Bather 
rare in Britain, on limestone rocks in 
western and north-western England, and 
in the isle of Arran on the coast of Ire- 
land.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 116.
3. Common Rockcist.
Helianthemum vulgare, Gsertn.
(Fig. 117.) 
{Cistus Helianthemum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1321.
C. tomentosus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2208.
RocJc-rose ) 
A low, diffuse undershrub, with a short, much branched, woody 
CISTINE^.
93 
stem, and annual procumbent or ascend- 
ing flowering branches, from a few inches 
to near a foot long.
Leaves shortly 
stalked, mostly oblong, but varying from 
ovate to lanceolate, scarcely curved 
down on the edges, glabrous or slightly 
hairy, green above, and more or less 
hoary or white underneath.
Stipules 
linear-lanceolate, 1 to 2, or even 3 lines 
long.
Racemes loose, the pedicels de- 
flected before and after flowering.
The 
3 larger sepals marked with 3 very pro- 
minent ribs, and often scarious between 
them ; the 2 outer very small.
Petals 
broadly spreading, bright yellow, near 6 lines long and broad.
In dry meadows and pastures, throughout Europe and western Asia, 
except the extreme north.
Not uncommon in England, Ireland, and 
southern Scotland.
Fl. all summer.
A curious variety, or rather an 
accidental deformity, occasionally seen in gardens, and supposed to 
have been originally found near Croydon in Surrey, with small, nar- 
row, deeply- cut petals/ has been figured under the name of H.
surre- 
janum (Eng. Bot.
t. 2207).
The Hock-roses of our gardens are chiefly 
varieties of this species, which, under cultivation, varies much in the 
colour of its flowers.
Fig. 117.
4. White Rockcist.
Helianthemum polifolium, Pers.
(Pig. 118.) 
(Cistus, Eng. Bot.
t. 1322.) 
Very near the common It., and by 
some considered as one of its numerous 
varieties.
It is less straggling, the leaves 
are narrow, much rolled back on the 
edges, and hoary on both sides, and the 
flowers are always white.
On limestone, rocky wastes, common 
in south-western and some parts of cen- 
tral Europe.
In Britain only on Brent 
Downs in Somersetshire, and at Torquay 
and Babbicombe in Devonshire.
Fl.
summer.
Fig. 118.
94 THE VIOLET FAMILY.
IX.
THE VIOLET FAMILY.
VIOLARIE^.
A family limited in Europe to the single genus Violet, The ex- 
otic genera associated with it agree with it in their 5 sepals and 
petals, their 5 anthers placed on the inner surface of the short, 
broad filaments, and their 1-celled ovary with three parietal pla- 
centas.
They are chiefly tropical, and many are trees or shrubs, 
with small, almost regular flowers.
I. VIOLET.
YIOLA.
Low annuals or perennials, with stipulate, radical, or alternate leaves, 
and (in the British species) axillary or radical 1-flowered peduncles.
Sepals 5, produced at the base beyond their insertion.
Corolla irre- 
gular, of 5 spreading petals, the lowest produced into a spur at the 
base.
Stamens 5, the filaments very short and broad, bearing the 
anthers on their inner surface, and more or less cohering in a ring 
round the ovary, the two lower ones lengthened into a short spur 
at the base.
Style single, with a dilated or thickened or hooked stigma.
Ovary 1-celled, with several ovules inserted on 3 parietal placentas.
Fruit a capsule, opening in 3 valves, which become folded lengthwise 
so as to clasp tightly the shining seeds.
A considerable genus, widely spread over the greater part of the 
globe, and readily distinguished by the stamens and spurred flowers 
from all British Polypetals except Balsam, which is at once known by 
the number and shape of the sepals and petals.
In all the British 
species, except the Tansy, the showy, perfect flowers seldom set their 
fruits.
The capsules and seeds are generally produced by minute 
flowers, almost without petals or stamens, which appear later in the 
year 
Sepals obtuse.
Flowers and leaves apparently radical.
Stem 
very short.
Leaves glabrous, reniform.
Flowers small, scentless ...
1. Marsh V.
Leaves more or less downy or hairy.
Flowers sweet-scented.
Lateral scions creeping ....
2. Sweet V.
Flowers scentless.
No creeping scions.
Leaves very hairy 3.
Hairy V.
Sepals acute.
Annual flowering branches more or less elongated.
Stipules narrow, entire, ciliate or toothed.
Stigma hooked 
and pointed 4.
Dog V.
Stipules deeply divided.
Stigma thickened, with a tuft of 
hairs below it 5.
Pansy V, 
The V.
calcarata from the Alps, the V.
cornuta from the Pyrenees, 
VJOLARIEiU.
95 
and occasionally a few other exotic species, may be met with in our 
gardens.
1. Marsh Violet.
Viola palustris, Linn.
(Fig. 119.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 444.) 
The stock occasionally emits runners 
or scions, like the sweet T 7 "., but it is a 
smaller plant, and perfectly glabrous, 
except yery rarely a few hairs on the 
peduncles.
Leaves reniform or orbicular, 
and cordate at the base, very slightly 
crenate.
Flowers smaller than in the 
sweet Y., of a pale blue, with purple 
streaks, and quite scentless ; the sepals -^S* H9.
obtuse, the spur very short.
Stigma broad, oblique.
In marshy ground and bogs, widely distributed over northern and 
central Europe, Eussian Asia, and North America.
Abundant in 
Scotland, but decreasing southwards, and quite local in southern Eng- 
land.
Common in some parts of Ireland.
Fl. spring and early sum- 
mer ; the jpetalless flowers in summer.
2. Sweet Violet.
Viola odorata, Linn.
(Fig. 120.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 619.) 
Perennial stock short, but sometimes 
branched, knotted with the remains of 
the old leaf-stalks and stipules, and 
usually emitting creeping runners or 
scions.
Leaves in radical (or rather, 
terminal) tufts, broadly cordate, rounded 
at the top, and crenate, downy or shortly 
hairy, with rather long stalks.
Stipules 
narrow-lanceolate or linear, and entire.
Peduncles about as long as the leaf- 
stalks, with a pair of small bracts about 
halfway up.
Flowers nodding, of the 
bluish-purple colour named after them, 
or white, more or less sweet-scented.
Sepals obtuse.
Spur of the lower petal short, 
zontal or turned downwards.
On banks, under hedges, in woods, and on the borders of meadows, 
widely spread over Europe and Russian Asia, extending northward to 
Fig. 120.
Stigma pointed, hori- 
96 
THE VIOLET FAMILY.
southern Sweden.
Common in many parts of Britain, although here 
and there large districts are without it.
Fl. early spring, or some gar- 
den varieties in autumn ; the small petalless flowers that produce the 
seeds may be seen nearly all summer.
Some Continental botanists dis- 
tinguish several species from minute differences in the shape and hairs 
of the petals.
3. Hairy Violet.
Viola hirta, Linn.
(Fig. 121.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 894.) 
Very near the sweet V., and most pro- 
bably a mere variety, seldom producing 
runners, more hairy in all its parts, with 
narrower and less obtuse leaves, and 
scentless flowers.
Chiefly in limestone districts, in rocky 
places, open woods, and pastures, with a 
more extended area than the sweet V., 
penetrating further north in Scandinavia, 
and yet more common in southern Eu- 
rope to the Caucasus.
Appears more 
frequent in eastern Britain, and less so 
in the west, than the sweet V.
; both are 
recorded from Ireland.
Fl, rather later 
than the sweet V, 
Fig. 121.
4. Dog Violet.
Viola canina, Linn.
(Eig. 122.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 620.
V. sylvatica and V.
stagnina, Bab. Man.) 
Stock short, with the radical leaves 
tufted, and the flowering branches at first 
so short as to give the plant much re- 
semblance to the sweet V.
; but as the 
season advances, the lateral flowering 
branches are always more or less elon- 
gated, ascending or erect, from a few 
inches to near a foot long.
Leaves ovate, 
cordate, varying from nearly orbicular 
to broadly lanceolate, usually glabrous 
as well as the whole plant.
Stipules 
narrow-lanceolate and pointed.
Flowers 
much like those of the sweet V.
9 but 
usually paler, always scentless, and the 
The complete flowers set their fruit more frequently 
Fig. 122.
sepals pointed.
VIOLACEiE.
97 
than in the sweet V., but yet the greater number of capsules are pro- 
duced by the later petalless flowers.
Yery common in a variety of situations, throughout Europe and 
Eussian Asia.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. spring and early summer ; 
the petalless flowers all summer.
It varies much in size, in the shape of 
the leaves, and in the mode of development of the flowering branches, 
and has been divided into a number of species, which may be reduced 
to three principal varieties, viz.
: — 
a. Dwarf Dog Violet (V.
flavicornis, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2736).
Usually only 2 or 3 inches high, the flowering branches frequently 
perennial at the base, and the capsules almost always obtuse, being 
produced by the petalless flowers.
Grows in open, dry, or sandy si- 
tuations.
b. Common Dog Violet.
Six inches high or more, the flowering 
branches all lateral.
Leaves ovate, cordate.
Capsules often pointed, 
and produced by the complete flowers.
On hedge-banks and in thickets.
c. Narrow-leaved Dog Violet (V lactea, Eng. Bot.
t. 445).
Flower- 
ing branches more erect than in the common variety, often much longer, 
although sometimes short.
Leaves ovate-lanceolate, from one and a 
half to three times as long as broad, and cordate at the base.
Flowers 
very pale or white.
Yery luxuriant on boggy heaths, dwarf near the 
seaside.
5. Pansy Violet.
Viola tricolor, Linn.
(Eig. 123.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1287.
Heartsease or Tansy.) 
A most variable plant, but easily re- 
cognized by the branching stem, the 
large leaf-like stipules deeply divided 
into several linear or oblong lobes, the 
central or terminal one the largest, 
broadest, and most obtuse, and by the 
style thickened at the top into an al- 
most globular oblique stigma.
The plant 
is glabrous, or slightly downy.
Leaves 
stalked, from narrow-oblong to ovate or 
cordate, always obtuse and slightly cre- 
nate.
Flowers purple, whitish, or yel- 
low, or with a mixture of these colours ; 
the two upper pairs of petals slightly 
overlapping each other, and usually more 
coloured, the lower petal always broadest, and generally yellow at 
the base.
On hilly pastures and banks, in cultivated and waste places through - 
VOL.
I. 1 
Fig. 123.
98 THE VIOLET FAMILY.
out Europe and Russian Asia, and abundant in Britain, especially as a 
weed of cultivation.
Fl. from spring till autumn.
It is the most variable 
of all our Violets, and has been divided into more than a dozen specie3.
The following are the most prominent forms, which, however constantly 
different they may sometimes appear, at others pass gradually into 
each other.
a. Field Tansy (V.
arvensis, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2712).
A slender 
annual, from 2 or 3 inches to 6 inches or a foot long.
The lobes of the 
stipules and leaves narrow ; the petals small, sometimes shorter than the 
calyx, pale yellow, nearly white, or the upper ones pale purple.
A very 
common weed of cultivation.
b. Garden Pansy (V.
tricolor, Eng. Bot.
t. 1287).
Larger than the 
field P.
in all its parts, often biennial or perennial, with broader leaves.
The terminal lobe of the stipules larger ; the petals much larger than 
the calyx, very variable in colour.
It sows itself readily, but is apt to 
degenerate into the field P.
c. Yelloio Pansy (V.
lutea, Eng. Bot.
t. 721), Usually perennial.
Foliage of the compact forms of the garden P.
Flowers large and richly 
coloured, often yellow.
In mountain pastures in Wales, northern 
England, and western Scotland.
V. Curtisii (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2693) 
is an intermediate form between this and the garden P.
X. THE MILKWORT FAMILY.
POLYGALACE.E.
A family represented in Europe only by Milkwort itself.
The 
other genera associated with it are chiefly tropical or natives of 
the southern hemisphere, differing from Milkwort in the form and 
consistence of their fruit, or in minor details in the structure of 
their flowers.
I. MILKWORT.
POLYGALA.
Herbs or shrubs, with entire leaves, usually alternate, no stipules, 
and very irregular flowers in terminal racemes.
Sepals 5, of which 
the two inner are larger, usually petal-like, and commonly called 
wings.
Petals 3, 4, or 5, the lowest very small and subulate, and all 
more or less united with the stamens.
Stamens united in two parcels, 
each with 4 anthers opening by pores at the summit.
Style 1, with a 
single stigma.
Ovary and capsule flat, 2-celled, with a single pendulous 
seed in each cell.
. A very numerous genus, widely diffused over most parts of the globe.
POLYGALACEJE.
99 
Several of the showy south African species are often cultivated in our 
greenhouses.
1. Common Milkwort.
Polygala vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 12 L) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 76, and Suppl.
t. 2827, and P.
amara, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2764.
MilJcicort.) 
A glabrous or nearly glabrous peren- 
nial, with a short-tufted or almost woody 
stock, and numerous diffuse or ascending 
branches, from an inch or two to near a 
foot long.
It will also occasionally 
flower the first year, so as to appear 
annual.
Leaves crowded at the base, 
the lowest obovate or even orbicular, 
especially in young plants, the upper 
ones oblong-lanceolate, or even linear, 
2 or 3 lines to near an inch long.
Elowers 
usually bright blue or pink, hanging on 
short pedicels in elegant terminal ra- 
cemes, with a small bract at the base of 
each pedicel.
Three outer sepals small, 
linear, and greenish, the 2 wings twice 
as large, obovate or oblong, coloured 
and elegantly veined ; after flowering 
they lie flat on the capsule, but become 
greener.
Petals much smaller, the 2 
lateral oblong-linear, the lowest keel- shaped, and tipped with a little 
crest.
Style dilated at the top.
Capsule green, orbicular, surrounded 
by a narrow wing, notched at the top.
Seeds oblong, downy.
In meadows and pastures, on banks, under hedges, etc., throughout 
Europe and Russian Asia, except the extreme north.
Abundant in 
Britain.
Fl. all summer.
It varies much in the relative size of the 
lower and upper leaves, in the size and colour of the flowers, in the 
veins and the breadth of the wings, etc., and many forms which have 
appeared constant in particular localities, have at various times been 
characterized as species.
Fig. 124.
XL THE FRANKENIA FAMILY.
FRANKENIACE.E.
An Order limited to the genus Frankenia, which differs from 
the Fink family in the parietal placentas of the ovary and capsule, 
i 2 
100 
THE TINK FAMILY.
and from the Hypericum family in its valvate calyx, definite sta- 
mens, and in habit.
I. FRANKENIA.
FKANKENIA.
Prostrate or spreading seacoast herbs or undershrubs, with opposite, 
often clustered, small leaves, and no stipules, the flowers sessile in the 
upper axils.
Sepals combined into a tubular calyx, with 4 or 5 teeth.
Petals 4 or 5, with long claws and spreading laminas.
Stamens 4 or 5, 
alternating with the petals, and usually 2 or 3 additional ones opposite 
the petals.
Ovary single, with one style, shortly 2-, 3-, or 4-cleft.
Capsule opening in 2, 3, or 4 valves.
Seeds attached to the centre of 
the valves, very small, with a straight embryo imbedded in albumen.
A genus of few species, but widely spread over the seacoasts of nearly 
all the temperate and warmer regions of the globe.
1. Common Frankenia.
Frankenia lsevis, Linn.
(Fig. 125.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 205.
Sea-Heath.) 
A diffuse, much-branched perennial, 
spreading to the extent of 6 or 8 inches ; 
glabrous or nearly so in the British spe- 
cimens.
Leaves crowded in little op- 
posite clusters along the branches, small, 
rather thick, and appearing linear from 
their edges being closely rolled down.
Flowers few r sessile among the upper 
leaves, forming little terminal leafy 
heads or short spikes.
Calyx furrowed, 
about the length of the leaves.
Petals small, pink.
In maritime sands and salt-marshes, common round the Mediter- 
ranean and in central Asia, and extends up the western coasts of Spain 
and France.
Varieties of what is now considered as the same species 
are abundant in similar localities in the southern hemisphere.
In 
Britain only on the south-eastern coasts of England.
Fl. summer.
The 
hairy variety, often distinguished as a species, common in the south, 
does not appear to extend to Britain.
XII.
THE PINK FAMILY.
CARYOPHYLLACE^l.
Annual or perennial herbs, with opposite entire leaves and no 
stipules, or, in a very few genera, small scarious stipules; the 
CARYOPHYLLACE^].
10 1 
branches usually knotted at each pair of leaves ; the flowers not 
yellow, usually in diehotornous cymes or panicles.
Sepals 4 or 5, 
free or united into a tubular calyx.
Petals as many, twisted in 
the bud, sometimes minute or wanting.
Stamens free, twice as 
many as the petals, or fewer, inserted under the ovary.
Styles 2 
to 5, linear, stigmatic along their whole length.
Capsule 1-celled, 
or divided into cells at the base only, opening at the top into as 
many, or twice as many teeth or valves as there are styles, and con- 
taining several seeds, attached to a shorter or longer central 
column.
A considerable family, widely spread over the globe, most numerous 
in temperate regions, especially in the northern hemisphere, extending 
into the Arctic Circle, and to the summits of the Alps, but rare within 
the tropics.
The species are readily distinguished by their foliage and 
habit from all British polypetalous plants, except Franhenia, Flaline, 
and the cathartic Flax, which have their ovary and capsule completely 
divided into cells, and the Paronychia family, which have but one seed 
in the ovary and capsule.
The genera into which the species are distributed are often very 
artificial, depending on the number of sepals, petals, stamens, or styles.
These numbers are not indeed strictly constant, even in different flowers 
of the same individual ; but in general by far the greater number of 
flowers in each individual will be found to agree in this respect with 
the characters assigned to the genus to which it belongs.
Care must 
therefore be taken, especially in the smaller-flowered Alsinece, to count 
the number of parts in several flowers wherever any hesitation is felt 
as to the genus it should be referred to.
Suborder 1.
Silene^:.
Sepals united in a tubular or campanulate calyx.
Two or four scales or bracts closely embracing the base or 
the whole of the calyx 1.
Pink.
No scales at the base of the calyx.
Styles 2 2.
Saponakia.
Styles 3 3.
Silene.
Styles 5 (rarely 4) 4.
Lychnis.
Suborder 2.
Alsineje.
Sepals free, or only very slightly connected at the base.
Small, white, scaly stipules at the base of the leaves.
Styles 3.
Leaves linear, cylindrical, opposite, not clus- 
tered 12.
Sandspubhy.
102 THE PINK FAMILY.
Styles 3.
Leaves flat, the upper ones apparently 4 in a 
whorl 14 Polycarp.
Styles 5.
Leaves linear, eylindrical, clustered so as to 
appear many in a whorl 13.
Spurry.
Leaves without any scales or stipules at the base.
Petals entire or sligldly jagged or none.
Sepals 4 or 5, with the same number of styles.
Capsule opening in 4 or 5 valves.
Small, matted, 
fine-leaved plants 5.
Pearlwort.
Capsule opening at the top, in 8 or 10 teeth.
Plant glabrous, stiff, and erect.
Petals quite 
entire 8.
Mcenchia, 
Plant downy, much branched.
Petals slightly 
notched 10.
Cerast.
Sepals 5.
Styles 3 (rarely 4).
Petals none.
Alpine, moss-like plant ....
6. Cherleria.
Petals obovate or oblong (sometimes very small).
Petals quite entire 7.
Sandwort.
Petals slightly jagged 9.
Holosteum.
Petals 2-cleft.
Styles 3.
Capsule opening to below the middle, in 6 valves 11.
Starwort.
Capsule opening at the top, in 6 short teeth.
Alpine 
plant, with narrow leaves Starwort Cerast.
Styles 5, rarely 4.
Stem-leaves sessile.
Capsule opening in 10 or 8 
short teeth 10.
Cerast.
Stem-leaves cordate, stalked.
Capsule opening in 
5 entire or shortly split valves • .
. .
. Water Starwort.
Among exotic genera, several GypsopJiylls, from south-eastern Europe, 
are occasionally cultivated in our flower-gardens, and Cucubalus bac- 
cifer (Eng. Bot.
t. 1577), from central and southern Europe, is said to 
have been formerly found in the Isle of Dogs, introduced with ballast.
I. FINK.
DIANTHUS.
Stiff perennials, or more rarely annuals, with narrow leaves.
Calyx 
tubular, 5 -toothed, clasped at the base or covered by 2, 4, or 6 broad 
scales or bracts.
Petals usually crenate, or jagged.
Stamens 10.
Styles 
2. Capsule stalked within the calyx, opening at the top in 4 teeth or 
short valves.
A considerable genus, spread over Europe and Asia, with a few 
South African species.
It is also one of the most natural in the family* 
readily known by the scales under the calyx.
CARYOPHYLLACE^I.
103 
Annuals.
Flowers small, clustered together, the scales as 
long as the calyx.
Plant glabrous.
Scales broad, dry, and scarious ...
1. Proliferous P.
. Plant slightly downy.
Scales narrow, herbaceous, with 
long points 2.
Deptford P.
Perennials.
Flowers few on each stem, distinct, the scales 
much shorter than the calyx.
Lower leaves not half an inch long, green, and loosely 
tufted.
Calyx-teeth and scales pointed.
Flowers 
scentless 3.
Maiden P.
Lower leaves near an inch, stiff, and glaucous.
Calyx- 
teeth and scales broad, obtuse, or with minute 
points.
Flowers scented 4.
Cheddar P.
Among the exotic species cultivated in gardens, are the Siveet- William 
(D.
barbatus), the Carnation and Clove JPinlc (varieties of D.
Caryo- 
phyllus), the Pheasant' s-eye Pink (D.
plumarius), all from central or 
southern Europe, and the two last said to establish themselves occa- 
sionally half wild on old walls, the Indian Pink (D.
sinensis), etc.
1. Proliferous Pink.
Dianthus prolifer, Linn.
(Fig. 126.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 956.) 
A stiff, erect, wiry, glabrous annual, 
simple, or with, a few erect branches, 6 
inches to a foot high or rather more.
Leaves few, narrow, erect, and mostly 
pointed.
Elow r ers small, in compact, 
oblong or ovoid, terminal heads, the 
calyx quite concealed by broad, dry, 
shining, almost scarious, imbricated 
scales, from the top of which appear the 
small, spreading, pink petals.
On dry, hilly pastures, roadsides, etc., 
in central and southern Europe, from 
southern Sweden to the Caucasus.
In 
Britain, confined to a few spots in south- 
ern and eastern England.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 126.
2. Deptford Pink.
Dianthus Armeria, Linn.
(Fig. 127.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 317.) 
An erect annual, rather more than a foot high, slightly branched, 
and more or less downy with very short hairs.
Leaves more herbaceous 
104 
THE PINK FAMILY.
than in most Pinks, 1 to 2 or even 3 
inches long, obtuse, or the upper ones 
pointed.
Flowers small and scentless, 
in terminal clusters.
Calyx 8 or 9 lines 
long, the teeth fine and pointed, the 
outer scales broad at the base, but 
tapering into fine green points, often 
projecting beyond the calyx.
Petals 
narrow, pink, with white dots, crenate 
on the edge.
On pastures, in waste places, under 
hedges, etc., in central and southern 
Europe to the Caucasus, and northward 
to southern Sweden.
Not common in 
Britain, although it has been found in 
several English and in a few of the 
southern Scotch counties.
Fl. summer.
3. Maiden Pink.
Dianthus deltoides, Linn.
(Fig. 128.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 61.) 
A low perennial, forming a loose, dif- 
fuse, leafy tuft, not of many years' du- 
ration ; the flowering stems ascending, 
glabrous, or slightly hoary, 6 inches 
to near a foot long, usually forked above 
the middle.
Leaves seldom half an 
inch long, green and glabrous, obtuse, 
or the upper ones scarcely pointed.
Flowers not large, scentless, pink or 
spotted with white, solitary or two to- 
gether, on sliort peduncles.
Calyx 6 or 
7 lines long, with pointed teeth, the 
outer scales broad, with a narrow point 
reaching to a third or near half of the 
length of the calyx.
On banks, open pastures, etc., in Europe and western Asia, pene- 
trating further north into Scandinavia than the two last.
More gene- 
rally distributed over Britain, and abundant in some localities, .but 
wanting in many counties, and only recorded in a very few stations in 
Ireland.
Fl. all summer.
It varies with 2 or 4 scales to the calyx, and 
has sometimes white flowers.
CARYOPHYLLACE/E.
105 
4. Cheddar Pink.
Dianthus esesius, Linn.
(Fig. 120.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 62.) 
A perennial, of a very glaucous hue, 
forming a short, densely tufted, often 
almost woody stock.
Lower leaves 
crowded, stiff, seldom above an inch 
long, narrow-linear, but obtuse.
Flower- 
stems erect, 5 or 6 inches or rarely near 
a foot high, simple and 1-flowered, or 
rarely forked, bearing a few leaves more 
pointed than the lower ones.
Flowers 
rather large, fragrant.
Calyx rather 
thick, with short teeth, the outer scales 
4, broad, very shortly pointed, not half 
so long as the calyx.
Petals broad, ir- 
regularly crenate, usually with a few 
hairs on the inside.
On limestone or volcanic rocks, in va- 
rious parts of western, central, and south- 
ern Europe, but usually very local.
In Britain, confined to the Ched- 
dar rocks in Somersetshire.
Fl. June and July.
129.
II.
SAFONARIA.
SAPONARIA.
Calyx, corolla, and stamens of Lychnis.
Styles 2.
Capsule opening 
at the top in 4 teeth or short valves.
This genus, artificially distinguished by the number of styles, com- 
prises several European and west Asiatic species, among which the S.
ocymoides and S.
calabrica are frequently cultivated in our flower-gar- 
dens, and S.
Vaccaria, a common cornfield weed in Continental Europe 
and central Asia, remarkable for its angular calyx and small pink 
flowers, is said to have appeared occasionally in our own cornfields.
1. Common Saponaria.
Saponaria officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 130.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1060.
Soapwort.) 
A glabrous perennial, with several stout, leafy, erect stems, from 1 to 
2 feet high.
Leaves ovate or elliptical, 2 to 3 inches long, strongly 
marked with 3 or 5 ribs, and narrowed at the base into a very short, 
broad stalk.
Flowers large and handsome, of a pale pink, or nearly 
106 
THE PINK FAMILY.
white, in dense corymbs or heads at the 
summit of the stems, surrounded by small 
lanceolate floral leaves or bracts.
Calyx 
tubular, about 9 or 10 lines long.
Petals 
obcordate.
On banks, roadsides, and waste places, 
throughout central and southern Europe 
and western Asia.
Abundant in some 
parts of England, Ireland, and southern 
Scotland, about villages and habitations, 
probably introduced from cultivation, 
but perhaps really native on the coasts 
of Cornwall and Devon.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 130.
III.
SILENE.
SILENE.
Calyx, corolla, and stamens of LycJinis.
Styles 3.
Capsules opening 
at the top in 6 teeth or short valves.
A very numerous genus, widely spread over Europe, Russian and 
central Asia, and North America, with a few south African species.
It is very artificially distinguished from Saponaria and LycJinis by the 
number of styles, and the popular names of Catclifly and Campion each 
include species of both Silene and LycJinis.
It has been proposed to 
abandon the character derived from the styles, and to distinguish these 
two genera by the number of the teeth or valves of the capsule, the 
same as that of the styles in LycJinis, twice as many in Silene, thus 
transferring the red and white Lychnises to Silene, but this would 
scarcely render the genera less artificial.
Calyx glabrous.
Leaves glabrous or slightly downy.
Moss-like alpine plant, with very short tufted stems .
. 1.
Dwarf S.
Stem elongated.
Calyx much inflated after flowering, ovoid or globular .
2. Madder S.
, 
Calyx short, not inflated.
Flowers numerous, small .
. 3.
Spanish S.
Calyx and foliage downy or hairy.
Perennials.
Calyx short.
Flowers small, numerous, in opposite 
bunches or whorls .
3. Spanish S.
Calyx tubular.
Flowers rather large, nodding, on op- 
posite peduncles, forming loose panicles ....
4. Nodding S.
CARYOPHYLLACEiE.
107 
Annuals.
Calyx contracted at the top, with narrow 
teeth.
Flowers axillary, forming unilateral spikes.
Calyx 
10-ribbed 5.
Small-flowered S.
Flowers in terminal dichotomous panicles, or solitary.
Calyx conical, 25- to 30-ribbed 6.
Striated S, 
Calyx long and tubular, 10-ribbed .....
7. Night S.
Two south European species, S.
italica (S.
patens, Eng. Bot.
Sappl.
t. 2748) and the LobeVs Catchfly (S.
Armeria, Eng. Bot.
t. 1398), ap- 
pear to have occasionally escaped from gardens, and sown themselves 
in some localities.
Several other exotic species, especially S.
compacta, 
S. vesper Una, S.
rubella, S.
Shafta, etc., are frequent ornaments of our 
flower-beds.
1. Dwarf Silene.
Silene acaulis, Linn.
(Fig. 131.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1081.
Moss Campion.) 
This beautiful little mountain plant 
forms dense moss-like tufts, often many 
inches diameter, consisting of a much 
branched perennial stock, the very short 
branches covered with the remains of 
old leaves, and crowned by dense spread- 
ing clusters of short, green, linear, and 
glabrous leaves.
From the centre of 
these arise the numerous flowers, either 
sessile or on 1-flowered peduncles, which 
seldom attain an inch in length.
Calyx broadly tubular or campanu- 
late, quite glabrous, with rather obtuse teeth.
Petals reddish-purple, 
obovate, slightly notched, with a small scale at the base of the lamina.
In the mountains of northern and Arctic Europe, Asia, and America, 
and, at considerable elevations, on the great mountain-ranges of central 
and southern Europe.
Abundant in the mountains of Scotland and 
northern Ireland, extending more sparingly into the Lake district of 
England and into North Wales.
FL summer.
Fig. 131.
2. Bladder Sileiie.
Silene inflata, Sm.
(Fig. 132.) 
(Cucubalus Behen, Eng. Bot.
t. 164.
Bladder Campion.) 
A perennial, loosely branched at the base, with ascending or seldom 
erect stems, from 6 inches to above a foot long, of a glaucous green, 
and usually glabrous.
Leaves ovate, oblong, or rarely nearly linear, 
and usually pointed.
Flowers few, white, erect or slightly drooping, 
108 
THE PINK FAMILY.
in loose terminal panicles.
Calyx rather 
more than half an inch long, becoming at 
length almost globular, inflated and much 
veined.
Petals more or less deeply 2- 
clefb, with a small scale at the base of 
the lamina, which sometimes disappears 
altogether.
In fields, on banks, roadsides, and 
waste places, throughout Europe and 
Eussian and central Asia, extending -into 
the Arctic regions and to high alpine 
summits.
Generally spread over Britain, 
but not every common.
FL all sum- 
mer.
A seacoast variety, with short dif- 
fuse stems, thicker, more obtuse leaves, 
and almost solitary flowers, has been dis- 
tinguished as a species, under the name 
of S.
mariiima (Eng. Eot.
t. 957).
Fig. 132.
3. Spanish Silene.
Silene Otites, Sm.
(Fig. 133.) 
(Cucubalus, Eng. Bot.
t. 85.) 
Perennial stock short and tufted, with 
narrow leaves, as in the nodding S.
; the 
stems simple, erect and stiff, with few 
leaves, about a foot high.
Elowers dioe- 
cious, small and numerous, of a pale yel- 
lowish green, arranged in lo^se, opposite 
clusters, having the appearance of whorls, 
and forming a long, narrow panicle.
Calyx scarcely 1| lines long.
Petals 
narrow and entire.
Style and stamens 
projecting beyond the flower.
In sandy fields and pastures, in cen- 
tral, southern, and especially eastern 
Europe, and all across Eussian Asia, not 
so common in western Europe, although 
extending to the sandy shores of the 
Atlantic.
In Britain only in Norfolk, 
Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire.
Fl. sum- 
133.
CARYOPHYLLACEiE.
109 
4. Nodding Silene.
Silene nutans, Linn.
(Fig. 134.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 465, not good.
Nottingham Catclifly.) 
Stock tufted and perennial, with a ra- 
ther thick taproot, short, procumbent 
barren shoots, and erect flowering stems, 
1 to 2 feet high, more or less hoary with 
short hairs, and usually viscid in the up- 
per part.
Lower leaves oblong-obovate, 
pointed, narrowed into a long stalk, the 
stem-leaves few, narrow, and sessile.
Flowers nodding, in a loose rather narrow 
panicle, 3 or 5 together on short opposite 
peduncles.
Calyx tubular, 4 or 5 lines 
long.
Petals white, or greenish under- 
neath, deeply 2-cleft, with long claws, 
the style and stamens projecting beyond 
the flower.
On hilly or stony pastures, and in 
rocky districts, over nearly the whole 
of Europe and Russian Asia to the Arctic 
Circle.
Distributed over several parts 
of England and southern Scotland, but 
in some places introduced only, and not recorded from Ireland.
summer.
Fig. 134.
Fl.
5. Small-flowered Silene.
Silene gallica, Linn.
(Fig. 135.) 
{&.
anglica, Eng. Bot.
t. 1178.) 
A hairy, slightly viscid, much branched ££> 
annual, 6 inches to near a foot high, Is 
erect or decumbent at the base.
Lower 
leaves small and obovate, upper ones 
narrow and pointed.
Flowers small, 
nearly sessile, generally all turned to 
one side, forming a simple or forked ter- 
minal spike, with a linear bract at the 
base of each flower.
Calyx very hairy, 
with 10 longitudinal ribs and 5 slender 
teeth, at first tubular, afterwards ovoid, 
and much contracted at the top.
Pe- 
tals very small, entire or notched, pale 
red or white.
Probably of south European origin, 
but now a common weed in sandy or 
gravelly fields and waste places, espe- 
Fig. 135.
110 
THE PINK FAMILY.
cially near the sea, in most parts of the cultivated world ; pretty fre- 
quent in southern England, and appearing occasionally in other parts 
of Britain.
FL summer.
A variety with a dark spot on the petals, 
S. quinquevulnera (Eng. Bot.
t. 86), used to be cultivated in flower- 
gardens.
G. Striated Silene.
Silene eonica, Linn.
(Fig. 136.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 922.) 
f$2S 
Fig. 136.
An erect, simple, or slightly branched 
annual, about 6 inches high, slightly 
hoary with minute, soft hairs.
Badical 
leaves obovate, spreading, those of the 
stem narrow and erect.
Flowers few, 
in a small, compact, terminal panicle.
Calyx conical, about 6 lines long, marked 
with 25 to 30 longitudinal veins, the 
mouth always contracted, with 5 slender 
teeth.
Petals small, pale pink, notched 
or 2- cleft.
In sandy fields and waste places, es- 
pecially near the sea, common in central 
and southern Europe and central Asia, 
but not reaching into northern Germany.
In Britain, confined to south-eastern 
England and southern Ireland, or ap- 
pearing occasionally on ballast-hills fur- 
ther north.
Fl. summer.
7. Night Silene.
Silene noetiflora, Linn.
(Fig. 137.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 291.) 
A coarse, erect, hairy, and viscid annual, 1 to 2 feet high, simple or 
branched.
Lower leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, and shortly stalked, 
the upper ones narrow-lanceolate and sessile.
Flowers two or three, 
or sometimes several together, in a loose, terminal, dichotomous panicle.
Calyx above an inch long, tubular, with 10 ribs and 5 slender teeth, 
CAEYOPHYLLACE^].
Ill 
swelling, as the fruit ripens, rather be- 
low the middle.
Petals rather large, 2- 
cleft, pale pink or nearly white, opening 
at night.
Probably of south European origin, 
now a common cornfield weed in cen- 
tral Europe, and found occasionally as 
such in various parts of England, Ire- 
land, and southern Scotland.
Fl. with 
the corn.
Fig. 137.
IV.
LYCHNIS.
LYCHNIS.
Calyx tubular or inflated, with 5 teeth.
Petals 5, with erect claws 
and a spreading lamina, entire or 2-cleffc, usually with a small, double 
or notched scale at its base.
Stamens 10.
Styles 5, or very rarely 4.
Capsule 1-celled, or divided at the base into 5 cells, and opening in 5 
or 10 teeth or short valves at the top.
Far less numerous than Silene, the species of this genus are however 
widely spread over the northern hemisphere without the tropics.
Some 
botanists break up the genus into several small ones, referring the 
British species to Melandrium, Agrosiemma, Lychnis, and Viscaria.
Calyx with long, narrow, green lobes projecting beyond the 
petals 3.
Corn L.
Calyx- teeth shorter than the petals.
Calyx after flowering much swollen, ovoid and globular.
Plant glabrous and glaucous.
Calyx veined ....
Bladder Silene.
Plant coarse, green, and hairy.
Calyx 10-ribbed.
Flowers white.
Capsule ovoid 1.
White L.
Flowers red.
Capsule nearly globular 2.
Med L.
Calyx tubular or short, not swollen.
Flowers in loose panicles.
Petals cut into narrow strips 4.
Meadow L.
Flowers in heads, or dense oblong panicles.
Stems very viscid.
Calyx narrow, tubular.
Petals 
notched 5.
Viscid L.
Stem not viscid.
Calyx short.
Petals 2-cleft .
. 6.
Alpine L.
Among the exotic species most frequently cultivated for ornament, 
112 
THE PINK FAMILY.
may be mentioned the L.
chalcedonica, L.
coronaria or Rose Campion, 
L. Coeli-JRosa, and L.
ocellata, from the Mediterranean region or the 
Levant, and L.fulgens from Mexico.
1. White Lychnis.
Lychnis vespertina, Sibth.
(Fig. 138.) 
(L.
dloica alba, Eng. Bot.
t. 1580.) 
A rather coarse, hairy biennial, more 
or less viscid, 1 to 2 feet high, and loosely 
branched.
Leaves oval-oblong, usually 
pointed, tapering at the base, the lower 
ones stalked.
Flowers few, in loose 
panicles, rather large, white, or rarely 
pale pink, opening in the evening (when 
they are slightly scented), and usually 
dioecious.
Calyx 7 to 9 lines long, softly 
hairy, with 10 ribs and 5 lanceolate- 
linear teeth, swelling as the capsule 
ripens, so as to assume an ovoid shape.
Petals 2- cleft.
Capsule ovoid, opening 
at the top in 10 teeth, which remain 
erect, or curve slightly outwards.
Under hedges, in fields and waste 
places, throughout Europe and [Russian 
FL all summer.
Asia.
Fig. 138.
Abundant in Britain.
Bed Lychnis.
Lychnis diurna, Sibth.
(Fig. 139.) 
{L.
dioica rubra, Eng. Bot.
t. 1579.) 
Yery near the white L., and perhaps 
a mere variety, but the plant is less 
viscid, the leaves and calyxes usually 
shorter, the flowers red, scentless, open- 
ing in the morning, and the capsule more 
globular, the 10 teeth very spreading, 
or rolled back.
In moist, shady places, woods and 
hedge-banks, with the same geographical 
range as the white L.
Equally common 
in Britain.
Fl. all summer, commencing 
in spring.
Fig. 139.
CARYOPHYLLACE^i.
113 
3. Corn Lychnis.
Lychnis G-ithago, Linn.
(Fig. 140.) 
(Agrostemma, Eng. Bot.
t. 741.
Corn Cockle.) 
A tall, erect annual, simple or slightly 
branched, clothed with long, soft, whitish 
appressed hairs.
Leaves long and nar- 
row.
Flowers on long leafless peduncles, 
rather large, red, and inodorous, re- 
markable for the long, green, linear 
lobes of the calyx, projecting much be- 
yond the petals ; the latter are broad, 
undivided, and without any scales on 
the lamina.
Capsule opening in 5 teeth.
Probably of south-eastern origin, but 
now a common cornfield weed, all over 
Europe and Russian Asia, except the 
extreme north.
Abundant in British 
cornfields.
Fl. ivith the corn.
Fig. 140.
4. Meadow Lychnis.
Lychnis Flos-cuculi, Linn.
(Fig. 141.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 573.
Bagged Eobin.) 
Stock short and perennial, but not of 
long duration, stems erect, not much 
branched, 1 to 2 feet high, slightly downy 
below and viscid above.
Leaves few, nar- 
row-lanceolate, the lower ones stalked.
Flowers in loose terminalpanicles,redand 
scentless, but remarkable for their petals 
cut into 4 linear lobes, the two middle 
ones the longest.
Calyx short, glabrous, 
with 10 ribs and 5 short teeth.
Capsule 
nearly globular, opening in 5 teeth.
In moist or marshy meadows and pas- 
tures, ditches, etc., throughout Europe 
and Russian Asia, except the extreme 
north.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. spring 
and summer.
Fig. 141.
VOL.
I. 
114 
THE PINK FAMILY.
5. Viscid Lychnis.
Lychnis Viscaria, Linn.
(Fig. 142.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 788.) 
Stock perennial, usually tufted, the 
flowering stems erect, 6 inches to a foot 
high, glabrous, hut very viscid in the 
upper part.
Leaves long and narrow, 
the lower ones contracted into long stalks, 
which are often fringed with a few woolly 
hairs.
Flowers red, in close, sessile or 
shortly-stalked opposite clusters, form- 
ing an oblong panicle, or sometimes a 
terminal head.
Calyx tubular, about 6 
lines long, with 10 veins and 5 short 
teeth, rather swollen above the middle 
as the fruit ripens.
Petals slightly 
notched.
On rocks and rather dry hilly pastures, 
in northern and central Europe and a 
great part of Russian Asia, but not an 
Arctic plant, and yet rare in southern 
Europe.
In Britain confined to a few 
localities in North Wales and Scotland, 
especially about Edinburgh and in Perthshire.
Fl. June.
Fig. 142.
6. Alpine Lychnis.
Lychnis alpina, Linn.
(Fig. 143.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2254.) 
Like the viscid L.
in habit and foliage, 
but smaller and not viscid.
Stems sel- 
dom 6 inches high.
Flowers pink, smaller 
than in the viscid L., in compact heads, 
the calyx much shorter, and the petals 
narrow and deeply 2-cleft.
In rocky situations, at high latitudes 
or great elevations, in Arctic and north- 
ern Europe and Asia, and in the higher 
mountain, ranges of central Europe.
In 
Britain, only known on the summit of 
Little Kilrannoch, a mountain in For- 
farshire, and on Hobcartin Fell, in Cum- 
berland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 143.
CARY0PHYLLACEJ3.
115 
Y. PEARLWORT.
SAGJNA.
Small, matted or tufted herbs, with subulate leaves and small flowers.
Sepals 4 or 5.
Petals 4 or 5, small, entire or slightly notched, some- 
times entirely deficient.
Stamens 4 or 5, or twice those numbers.
Styles 4 or 5.
Capsule opening in as many valves.
A small genus, with nearly the geographical range of Sandwort, from 
which it only differs in the number of styles.
The 5-styled species were 
formerly included in Spurry, which is now reduced to one or two species 
easily distinguished by their apparently whorled foliage.
Is, stamens, and styles usually 4.
Petals as many, 
or none 1.
Procumbent P.
Sepals, petals, and styles 5.
Stamens usually 10.
Sepals obtuse.
Petals not longer than the calyx.
Leaves not clustered 2.
Alpine P.
Petals longer than the calyx.
Upper leaves with 
clusters of very small ones in their axils ...
3. Knotted P.
Sepals pointed ; Vernal Sandwort.
1. Procumbent Pearlwort.
Sagina procumbens, Linn.
(Fig. 144.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 880.
S. apetala, Eng. Bot.
t. 881, and S.
ciliata, 
Brit.
Fl.) 
A minute annual, or perhaps perennial, 
1 to 2 inches or seldom 3 inches high, 
sometimes erect from the base, especially 
at first, but usually branching and de- 
cumbent at the base, forming little 
spreading tufts, usually glabrous, but 
having often an exceedingly minute 
glandular down.
Leaves small and su- 
bulate, jointed at the base in a short, 
broad, scarious sheath, the radical ones 
longer and often tufted.
Flowers very 
small, on capillary pedicels much longer 
than the leaves.
Sepals about a line 
long, and obtuse.
Petals much shorter, 
often wanting.
Valves of the capsule 
as long as, or rather longer than the se- 
pals.
All these parts are usually in fours, but they may often be met 
with in fives.
Fig. 144.
116 
THE PINK FAMILY.
In a great variety of situations, but especially in waste or stony 
places, wet or dry heaths, sandy marshes, etc., throughout Europe, in 
Russian and central Asia, North America, Australia, etc.
Abundant 
in Britain.
Fl.from spring till autumn.
It varies considerably, and 
has been divided into many supposed species.
Small, slender, but lit- 
tle-branched specimens, with the petals very minute or wanting, con- 
stitute the S.
apetala ; in the S.
ciliata the branches are more diffuse.
A seacoast variety, called S.
maritima (Eng. Bot.
t. 2195), presents the 
usual maritime differences of somewhat firmer and thicker stems and 
leaves.
2. Alpine Pearlwort.
Sagina Linnsei, Presl.
(Fig. 145.) 
(Spergula saginoides, Eng. Bot.
t. 2105.
Sagina saxatilis and 
S. subulata, Brit.
Fl.) 
Very near the procumbent P., but it 
forms an undoubtedly perennial stock 
(although often flowering the first year, 
so as to appear annual), the radical leaves 
are rather longer, the petals are more 
conspicuous, usually considerably longer 
than the sepals, and there are almost 
always 5 sepals, 5 petals, 10 stamens, 
and 5 styles and valves of the capsule.
In mountain pastures, and stony places, 
in Arctic and northern Europe, Asia, and 
America, and in most mountain districts 
of central and southern Europe to the 
Caucasus, descending occasionally to 
the seacoast in western Europe, when 
it is very difficult to distinguish it from 
the procumbent P.
In Britain, in the 
Scotch Highlands, in the west and south 
Fig. 145.
of England, and inlreland.
FL summer.
3. Knotted Pearlwort.
Sagina nodosa, Fenzl.
(Fig. 14G.) 
{Spergula, Eng. Bot.
t. 694.) 
Like the last, this forms little perennial tufts, but as it often flowers 
the first year, it then appears annual.
Stems numerous, decumbent, 
or nearly erect, 2 to 3 or rarely 4 inches high, and not much branched.
Lower leaves like those of the alpine P., or rather longer, but the 
stem-leaves are much shorter, with little clusters of minute ones in their 
CARYOPHYLLACEJI.
117 
axils.
Flowers few on each stem, on 
pedicels from 3 to 6 lines long, and 
more conspicuous than in the other 
species, the wide obovate petals being 
twice as long as the calyx.
Sepals ob- 
tuse, a line long, the parts of the flower 
usually in fives, with 10 stamens.
In wet, sandy places, marshes, and 
bogs, in northern and central Europe, 
Russian Asia, and northern America.
Generally distributed over Britain.
Fl.
summer.
Fig. 146.
VI.
CHSRLERIA.
CHERLERIA.
Densely tufted, moss-like perennials, with closely packed leaves.
Sepals 5.
Petals none, or rarely linear and very minute.
Stamens 10.
Styles and valves of the capsule 3.
Flowers usually wholly or partially 
unisexual.
A genus of one or perhaps two species, scarcely distinct from Scrnd- 
icort.
1. Mossy Cherleria.
Cherleria sedoides, Linn.
(Fig. 147.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1212.
Cyphel.) 
Stock very densely matted, often se- 
veral inches in diameter, with long roots, 
the very short branches completely co- 
vered with closely packed linear leaves, 
rather stiff, and 2 or 3 lines long.
Pedicels 
slender, from the summit of the tufts, 
with a single erect flower.
Sepals about 
a line long, with 3 prominent veins.
Stamens shorter than the calyx.
Capsule 
slightly protruding, opening to the base 
in 3 valves, and containing but few seeds.
An alpine plant, not uncommon at 
considerable elevations in the Pyrenees 
and Alps of Europe, extending east- 
147.
118 THE PINK FAMILY.
ward to Greece and Transylvania, and reappearing in the Scotch 
Highlands, especially in the Breadalbane range, and in Sutherland, 
although neither an Arctic nor a Scandinavian plant.
Fl. summer.
VII.
SANDWORT.
AKENAMA.
Small, branched annuals, or tufted or prostrate perennials, glabrous, 
or rarely shortly hairy, with white flowers.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, entire.
Stamens 10 or rarely fewer.
Styles 3, very rarely 4.
Capsule opening 
in as many or twice as many valves.
A very numerous genus in the northern hemisphere without the 
tropics, with a few species also in the southern hemisphere ; distinguished 
from Pearlwort by the number of styles, from Cerast and Starwort by 
the entire petals.
The British species are usually distributed into four 
sections, often considered as independent genera, viz.
Alsine, with the 
valves of the capsule as many as the styles, and many seeds, including 
the vernal S.
9 the hog S., and the fine-leaved S.
; HoncTceneya, with the 
valves of the capsule as many as the styles, and few large seeds, for 
the ovate S.
; Arenaria, with the capsular valves twice as many and 
no appendage to the seeds, including the fringed S.
and the thyme- 
leaved S.
; and Mcehringia, with the capsule of Arenaria, but with 
shining seeds, having a little appendage to their hilum.
Leaves linear or subulate.
Tufted perennials.
Petals about as long as or longer 
than the sepals.
Pedicels 2 to 4 lines long 1.
Vernal S.
Pedicels 6 lines to an inch long or more ....
2. Bog S.
Annual.
Petals about half as long as the sepals .
. 3.
Fine-leaved S.
Leaves ovate.
Leaves thick and fleshy.
Capsules large, globular, 5- 
valved 4.
Ovate S.
Leaves small or thin.
Capsule 10-valved, small.
Leaves scarcely 2 lines long.
Sepals with 3 nerves.
Annual, much branched, and downy.
Petals 
shorter or scarcely longer than the calyx .
. 5.
Thyme-leaved S.
Alpine, procumbent perennial.
Petals much 
longer than the calyx 6.
Fringed S, 
Leaves mostly half an inch, thin, and 3 -nerved.
Sepals 1 -nerved 7.
Three-nerved S.
1. Vernal Sandwort.
Arenaria verna, Linn.
(Fig. 148).
(EDg. Bot.
t. 512.) 
Stock perennial, short, becoming densely tufted and thickly covered 
G'ARYOPHYLLACE^E.
119 
with old leaves ; the flowering stems 
erect or decumbent, 2 to 4 inches high, 
and branched.
Leaves subulate, rather 
stiff, the upper ones short and broader.
Flowers in rather loose forked cymes, the 
pedicels usually slightly downy, and 
seldom above 3 or 4 lines long.
Sepals 
1J to near 2 lines long, pointed, with 3 
very prominent nerves.
Petals obovate, 
spreading beyond the points of the sepals.
Capsule 3-valved.
In stony mountain pastures, almost 
all over the continent of Europe and 
[Russian Asia and in North America.
Much less frequent in Britain, and 
chiefly in Scotland, northern England, 
Wales, Cornwall, and Ireland.
Fl. spring 
and summer.
A high northern and 
Arctic varety, extending to the higher 
mountains of Scotland, has been distin- 
guished under the name of A.
rubella 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2638).
It is more stunted, with shorter and rather 
broader leaves, few flowers, smaller and narrower petals, and some- 
times 4 or even 5 styles and capsular valves.
Fig. 148.
2. Bog Sandwort.
Arenaria uliginosa, Schleich.
(Fig. 149.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2890.) 
Perennial tufts like those of the vernal 
S., but the subulate leaves are rather 
thicker, almost succulent, the stems 
longer, with very few distant pairs of 
leaves, the pedicels much longer, often 
an inch or even more, and always gla- 
brous, the sepals broader.
Petals about 
the length of the calyx.
Capsule 3- 
valved.
In bogs or mountain marshes, in Arctic 
and northern Europe and Asia, and in 
some mountainous parts of central Eu- 
rope, but never common.
In Britain, 
only known on Widdybank Fell, in 
Durham.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 149.
120 
THE PINK FAMILY.
Fine-leaved Sandwort.
Arenaria tenuifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 150.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 219.) 
A very slender, erect, much branched 
annual, glabrous or very minutely downy, 
3 or 4 inches high.
Leaves finely subu- 
late.
Pedicels very slender, usually 
about half an inch long.
Sepals narrow- 
lanceolate, finely pointed.
Petals ob- 
ovate or oblong, usually scarcely half 
the length of the sepals.
Capsule open- 
ing in 3 valves.
On old walls, stony wastes, or sandy 
fields, in central and southern Europe, 
from southern Sweden to the Caucasus.
In Britain, apparently confined to some 
of the eastern counties of England.
Fl.
Fig. 150.
4. Ovate Sandwort.
Arenaria peploides, Linn.
(Fig. 151.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 189; Honclceneya, Brit.
Fl. Sea Purslane.) 
Pootstock creeping, with short, pro- 
cumbent, usually forked flower-stems.
Leaves numerous, thick and somewhat 
fleshy, ovate or elliptical, half an inch 
long or more, the upper ones smaller 
and broader.
Flowers few, on short 
pedicels, in small, leafy terminal cymes, 
usually more or less unisexual.
Sepals 
thickish, about 2\ lines long.
Petals 
scarcely longer.
Capsule large, nearly 
globular, opening in 3 (or sometimes 4 
or 5) broad valves, with fewer and larger 
seeds than in the other Sandworts, 
In maritime sands, in northern and Arctic Europe, Asia, and Ame- 
rica, extending down western Europe to Portugal.
Rather common 
all round Britain.
Fl. summer, rather early.
Fig. 151.
CARYOPHYLLACE^.
121 
5. Thyme-leaved Sandwort.
Arenaria serpyllifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 152.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 923.) 
A very much branched, slender, and 
slightly downy annual, seldom attaining 
6 inches.
Leaves very small, ovate and 
pointed.
Pedicels from the upper axils 
or forks of the stem, 2 or 3 lines long, 
and slender.
Sepals pointed, about 1^ 
lines long.
Petals usually much shorter, 
but variable in size, obovate.
Capsule 
opening in 6 short narrow valves.
On walls and dry sands, or stony, 
waste places, throughout Europe and 
central and Russian Asia, except the 
extreme north.
Common in Britain, 
but more so in the south than in the 
north.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 152.
6. Fringed Sandwort.
Arenaria ciliata, Linn.
(Fig. 153.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1745.) 
Stems perennial at the base, short, dif- 
fuse, generally much branched and mat- 
ted, the flowering branches 2 or 3 inches 
high, and more or less downy.
Leaves 
small and ovate, more distinctly stalked 
than in the thyme-leaved S., veined un- 
derneath, and usually fringed with a few 
stiff hairs on each edge near the base.
Flowers much larger than in the last 
species, on slender pedicels, 3 to 6 lines 
long, the obovate petals considerably 
longer than the sepals.
Capsule opening 
in 6 valves.
In mountain pastures, in northern and 
Arctic Europe, and at considerable ele- 
vations, in the higher ranges of central 
and southern Europe.
In Britain, only 
VOL.
I. 
153.
122 
THE PINK FAMILY.
on limestone cliffs near Ben Bulben, in Sligo, Ireland, and on a serpen- 
tine hill in Unst, Shetland.
Fl. summer.
The Shetland specimens 
belong to an Arctic (maritime ?) variety, with more succulent leaves, 
seldom fringed, and rather broader sepals, distinguished as a species 
under the name of A, norvegica (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2852).
7. Three-nerved Sandwort.
Arenaria trinervis, Linn.
(Fig. 154.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1483.) 
A tender, much branched, decumbent 
or spreading annual, from 4 or 5 inches 
to a foot long, resembling in some re- 
spects the Ckicktveed Starwort, but very 
different in flower.
Leaves stalked, 
ovate, pointed, half an inch long or more, 
thin, of a light green, with 3 distinct 
nerves.
Pedicels from the upper forks 
of the stem, rather longer than the 
leaves.
Sepals very pointed.
Petals 
not quite so long, ob ovate and entire.
Capsule opening in 6 valves, the seeds 
few, shining, with a little white appen- 
dage at their hilum.
In shady woods, along ditches and 
moist places, throughout Europe and 
the greater part of Russian Asia, except 
the extreme north.
Frequent in Eng- 
land and Ireland, less so in Scotland.
Fl. spring and summer.
Fig. 154.
VIII.
MCEKCHIA.
MCENCHIA.
Small, but rather stiff, erect annuals.
Sepals 4.
Petals 4, entire.
Stamens 4 or 8.
Styles 4.
Capsule opening at the top, with 8 short 
teeth.
A genus of two or three European species, with the numbers of parts 
of the flower and entire petals of Pearlwort, the habit and calyx rather 
of Starwort, and the capsule of a Cerast.
CAKYOPHYLLACEiE.
123 
1. Upright Moenchia.
Mcenchia erecta, Sm.
(Fig. 155.) 
(Sagina, Eng. Bot.
t. 609.) 
A glabrous and glaucous annual, 2 to 
4 or rarely 6 inches high.
Leaves linear, 
the radical ones slightly spathulate and 
stalked, the upper ones few and sessile.
Flowers few, white, rather large for the 
size of the plant, on long, erect pedicels.
Sepals nearly 3 lines long, broadly lan- 
ceolate, pointed, with white scarious 
margins.
Petals rather shorter.
Capsule 
ovate.
In stony or sandy wastes and pastures, 
over the greater part of central and 
southern Europe, but not extending to 
its eastern limits, nor into the north of 
Germany.
Spread over England as far 
north as Cheshire and Durham, not re- 
corded from Ireland.
FL spring or early summer.
Fig. 155.
IX.
HOLOSTEUM.
HOLOSTEUM.
Small annuals.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, more or less toothed or jagged, 
but not cleft.
Stamens usually 5.
Styles 3.
Capsule opening in 6 
short valves or teeth.
Besides our species, there are but one or two from the Levant, all 
differing from Cerast in the less divided petals, and generally fewer 
stamens and styles.
1. Umbellate Holosteum.
Holosteum umbellatum, Linn.
(Fig. 156.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 27.) 
A slightly downy, more or less viscid annual, seldom above 6 inches 
high, divided at the base into several erect or ascending stems.
Radical 
leaves spreading, oblong or elliptical ; those of the stem sessile, varying 
from ovate to linear, often half an inch long, or more.
The upper part 
of the stem forms an almost leafless peduncle, bearing an umbel of 3 
to 8 flowers, on long pedicels, erect at the time of flowering, then turned 
l2 
124 
THE PINK FAMILY.
Tig. 156.
down, and erect again when the capsule 
is ripe.
Sepals near 2 lines long, white 
and scarious at the edges.
Petals white, 
rather longer.
On sandy and stony wastes, fields, and 
roadsides, very common in southern Eu- 
rope and western Asia, extending more 
sparingly over central Europe to south- 
ern Sweden.
In Britain, only in Nor- 
folk and Suffolk.
X. CEItAST.
CEKASTIUM.
Annual or perennial herbs, usually downy or hairy, and branching at 
the base, with white flowers in terminal forked cymes, or rarely soli- 
tary ; the upper bracts often, like the sepals, scarious on the edges.
Sepals 5, rarely 4.
Petals 5, rarely 4, usually 2-cleft, sometimes mi- 
nute or wanting.
Stamens 10, or occasionally reduced to 5 or fewer.
Styles 5, rarely 4 or 3.
Capsule opening at the top in twice as many 
short teeth as there are styles.
A considerable genus, widely diffused over the whole range of the 
family, and rather a natural one, differing generally from Stanvort in 
its capsule, from the other British Alsinece by the cleft petals.
Annual or biennial.
Petals shorter, or scarcely longer than 
the calyx 1.
Common C.
Perennials.
Petals considerably longer than the calyx.
Styles always 5.
Leaves narrow, pointed 2.
Field C.
Leaves oblong or ovate, and obtuse 3.
Alpine C.
Styles mostly 3.
Leaves narrow 4.
Starwort C.
An eastern species, with cottony leaves, C.
tomentosum, is not un- 
frequently cultivated in our cottage gardens.
CAEYOPH YLLACE^G .
125 
Fig. 157.
1. Common Cerast.
Cerastium vulgatum, Linn.
(Fig. 157.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 789.
Mouse-ear Chickweed.) 
A coarsely downy, usually more or 
less viscid annual, branching at the base, 
sometimes dwarf, erect, and much 
branched ; at others, loosely ascending 
to a foot or even two, occasionally form- 
ing, at the end of the season, dense, mat- 
ted tufts, which may live through the 
winter, and give it the appearance of a 
perennial.
Radical leaves small and 
stalked; stem-leaves sessile, from broadly 
ovate to narrow-oblong.
Sepals 2 to 2\ 
lines long, green, and downy, but with 
more or less conspicuous scarious mar- 
gins.
Petals seldom exceeding the calyx, 
and often much shorter, sometimes very 
minute, or even none.
Stamens often 
reduced to 5 or fewer.
Capsule, when 
ripe, cylindrical, often curved, and 
projecting beyond the calyx.
In cultivated and waste places, pastures, and woods, wet or dry, over 
nearly the whole of the civilized world.
Most abundant in Britain.
Fl. the tohole season.
Its protean forms have much puzzled the bota- 
nists of many countries to distinguish them into from 2 or 3 to 20 or 
30 supposed species.
The most conspicuous observable in Britain 
are — 
a. Clustered C.
(C.
glomeratum).
Tall and luxuriant, the leaves 
broad, almost orbicular, the flowers in a compact head, the pedicels 
shorter than the calyx, the stamens usually 10.
In rich soils, in moist, 
shady situations, but often, later in the season, assuming the inflores- 
cence of the narrower -leaved varieties.
b. Narroiv -leaved C.
(C.
viscosum, Eng. Bot.
t. 790).
Much branched 
at the base, but usually rather tall.
Leaves oblong or narrow.
Sta- 
mens usually 10.
The commonest form in rather moist and rich mea- 
dows and pastures.
Pedicels often elongated in this and the 2 fol- 
lowing varieties.
c. Lesser C.
(C.
semidecandrum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1630.
C. pumilum, 
Bab. Man.).
Stems short and often slender, more branched and more 
erect as the situation is drier.
Leaves rather small, thicker near the 
sea, more viscid in hot situations.
Stamens usually about 5, but often 
more.
Capsules usually long.
Very common in dry, poor, open 
situations .
126 
THE PINK FAMILY.
d. Four-stamened C.
(C.
tetrandrum).
Like the last, but more 
branched, and the parts of the flower usually reduced to fours.
Pedicels 
often long.
Less common than the last two, and generally near the 
sea.
2. Field Cerast.
Cerastium arvense, Linn.
(Fig. 158.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 93.) 
Stem perennial, and much branched 
at the base, often very intricate and 
prostrate ; the flowering branches as- 
cending to about 6 inches, or more when 
very luxuriant.
Leaves crowded in the 
lower parts, narrow, lanceolate-linear, 
more glabrous and less viscid than in the 
common C.
Flowers large and white, in 
loose cymes, on rather long pedicels.
Sepals near 3 lines long.
Petals twice 
that length, cleft to near the middle.
Capsule oblique, usually longer than the 
calyx.
In dry, hilly fields, pastures, and 
banks, throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, except the extreme north, in North America, and down the Andes 
of South America.
In numerous localities in Britain, but not at all 
common.
FL spring and early summer.
Fig. 158.
3. Alpine Cerast.
Cerastium alpiimm, Linn.
(Fig. 159.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 472 ; and C.
latifolium, Eng. Bot.
t. 473.) 
Stems shortly perennial, much branched, prostrate, and rooting at 
the base ; the flowering branches ascending to a few inches, with one or 
two large flowers on long peduncles : the w T hole plant nearly glabrous, 
or more frequently covered with long woolly hairs, and occasionally 
viscid.
Leaves ovate, elliptical, or oblong, always broader for their 
length than in the field C.
Petals rather longer than in that species.
Capsule not much longer than the calyx, straight or nearly so.
In alpine, moist pastures, and wet, rocky situations, in all the great 
mountain-ranges of Europe and Eussian Asia, and all round the Arctic 
Circle.
Pretty abundant in the Highlands of Scotland, less so in 
northern England, and rare in Wales ; not recorded from Ireland.
Fl. summer.
The nearly glabrous form, figured Eng. Bot.
t. 472, which 
CARYOPH YLLACE* .
127 
is the C.
alpinum of most Continental 
botanists, is not so common in Britain 
as the woolly one figured as C.
latifolium, 
Eng. Bot.
t. 473, which is the C.
lanatum 
of some foreign botanists.
The C.
lati- 
folium of the Alps of central Europe is 
not a British plant.
Fig. 159.
4. Starwort Cerast.
Cerastium trigynum, Vill.
(Fig. 160.) 
(Stellaria cerastoides, Eng. Bot.
t. 911.) 
Stems shortly perennial, prostrate and 
intricately branched, but much more 
slender than in the alpine C.
; the whole 
plant glabrous, with the exception of 
minute hairs down one side of the 
branches, or rarely generally hairy.
Leaves narrow, and usually curved to 
one side.
Flowering branches shortly 
ascending, with one or two large flowers, 
on rather long peduncles, like those of 
the alpine C.
; but the styles are al- 
most always reduced to 3, or very rarely 
flowers may be found with 4 or even 5, 
the teeth of the capsule always double 
the number of the styles.
In moist, alpine situations, in all the great mountain-ranges of 
Europe and Russian Asia to the Arctic Circle.
Not unfrequent in the 
Breadalbane range in Scotland, and other mountains to the northward ; 
recorded also from near Bantry, in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 160.
XI.
STARWORT.
STELLARIA.
Annuals or perennials, generally more glabrous than the Cerasts, the 
128 THE PINK FAMILY.
leaves usuall} r pointed, and often cordate, the sepals more pointed and 
less distinctly scarious at tke edge.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, deeply bifid.
Stamens 10, occasionally reduced to 5 or fewer.
Styles 3, or rarely 5.
Capsule opening to the middle or lower down, in as many or twice as 
many valves.
A large genus, extending, like the Cerasts, over nearly the whole geo- 
graphical range of the family, and generally a natural one, although 
some species, especially the Chit hweed and Bog Stamvorts, have all the 
appearance of the three-nerved Sandwort, and can only be distinguished 
by a close inspection of the minute petals and capsules.
Most species 
of Stariuort may be met with occasionally, though rarely, without any 
petals at all.
Lower leaves stalked, ovate or heart -shaped.
Petals much longer than the calyx.
Five styles in most of the flowers 1.
Water S.
Three styles 2.
Wood S.
Petals shorter, or scarcely longer than the calyx.
Lower leaves ovate-cordate, on long stalks ....
3. ChicJcweed S.
All the leaves narrowed at the base, sessile or shortly 
stalked .
. 4.
Bog S.
All the leaves narrow-lanceolate or linear, and sessile or 
nearly so.
Petals shorter, or scarcely longer than the calyx.
Plant annual.
Leaves oblong or lanceolate, short .
. 4.
Bog S.
Stock perennial.
Leaves narrow-lanceolate or linear .
5. Lesser S.
Petals considerably longer than the calyx.
Leaves very narrow.
Sepals distinctly three-nerved .
6. Glaucous S.
Leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate.
Nerves of the 
Is scarcely perceptible 7.
Greater S.
1. Water Starwort.
Stellaria aquatica, Scop.
(Fig. 161.) 
(Cerastium, Eng. Bot.
t. 538.
Malachium, Brit.
Fl.) 
A perennial with much of the habit and the heart-shaped leaves of 
the wood S.
9 but on a rather larger scale, usually more pubescent, and 
slightly viscid, the flowers smaller, and always known by all or most of 
the flowers having 5 styles, and the capsule opening in 5 valves, which 
are entire or shortly bifid, seldom deeply cleft as in the other Startvorts.
Stems weak, often a foot or more in length.
Lower leaves small, on 
long stalks, upper ones more sessile or stem-clasping, often 1 to 2 inches 
long, thin and flaccid, with a prominent midrib, and very pointed.
Flowers in the forks of leafy cymes, the pedicels turned down after 
flowering.
Sepals about 2 lines long at the time of flowering, enlarged 
CARYOPHYLLACE^:.
129 
when in fruit.
Petals narrow, deeply 
cleft, about one-half longer than the 
calyx.
In wet places, along ditches and 
streams, etc., very widely diffused over 
Europe and Russian and central Asia, 
except the extreme north, and migrating 
with man to several other parts of the 
world.
Not common in Britain, although 
found in most English counties, as far 
north as Yorkshire and Cheshire, and 
believed to have been found in Ireland.
Fl. sicmmer.
The flowers have occa- 
sionally, but seldom, only 3 styles.
Fig. 161.
2. Wood Starwort.
Stellaria nemorum, Linn.
(Fig. 162.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 92.) 
Rootstock creeping, of some years' 
duration.
Stems weak, emitting creep- 
ing branches from the base, the flowering 
branches ascending to 6 inches or a foot, 
with a few short, spreading hairs.
Leaves 
heart-shaped, pointed, of a thin texture, 
usually glabrous or slightly ciliated on 
the edges, the lower ones small, on long 
stalks, the upper 1 to 2 inches long, with 
much shorter stalks or nearly sessile.
Flowers in elegant, loose, spreading 
cymes, on long, slender pedicels, with 
small bracts at their base.
Sepals about 
3 lines, the petals nearly twice as long, 
narrow, and deeply cleft.
Styles 3.
Capsule straight, opening to near the 
base into 3 bifid or 6 entire valves.
In moist woods, throughout northern 
Europe and the hilly districts of central, 
and some parts of southern Europe, and across Russian Asia to western 
North America.
In Britain, chiefly in northern and western England 
and southern Scotland.
Not recorded from Ireland.
FL summer.
Fig. 162.
130 
THE PINK FAMILY.
3. Chickweed Starwort.
Stellaria media, Liim.
(Fig. 1G3.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 537.
Chickweed.) 
A weak, much branched annual, gla- 
brous, with the exception of a line of 
hairs down one side of the stem, and a 
few long ones on the leafstalks.
Leaves 
small, ovate and pointed, the lower ones 
stalked and often heart-shaped, the 
upper sessile and narrower.
Flowers 
small, on rather long, slender pedicels, 
in irregularly forked, leafy cymes.
Petals 
shorter than the calyx, deeply cleft, with 
narrow, slightly diverging lobes.
Sta- 
mens often reduced to 5.
Styles 3.
In cultivated and waste places, road- 
sides, and edges of streams, throughout 
Europe, and Russian and central Asia, 
and carried out as a weed to the whole 
of the temperate and colder regions of the globe.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. the whole season.
4. Bog Starwort.
Stellaria uliginosa, Murr.
(Fig. 164.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1074.) 
A weak, slender, glabrous annual, in 
some measure intermediate between the 
Chickweed S.
and the lesser S.
Stems 
usually about 6 inches, rarely nearly a 
foot long, much shorter and tufted when 
on dry ground.
Leaves much narrower 
than in the Chickweed S., but much 
shorter and broader than in the lesser S., 
oblong or lanceolate.
Flowers small, in 
loose, slender, forked panicles, which, as 
in the lesser S., soon become lateral.
Sepals about 1\ lines long.
Petals 
shorter, with very narrow spreading 
lobes.
Styles 3.
In marshes and wet ditches, widely 
spread over Europe, Russian Asia, and 
northern America, but not an Arctic 
plant, although in southern Europe ge- 
nerally confined to mountains.
Almost 
Fl. spring and summer.
Fig. 164.
universal in Britain.
CAKYOPHYLLACEJ].
131 
5. Lesser Starwort.
Stellaria graminea, Linn.
(Fig. 165.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 803.
Lesser Stitchwort.) 
A glabrous perennial, with a creeping 
rootstock and slender quadrangular 
stems, diffuse or nearly erect, often 
above a foot long.
Leaves sessile, 
linear-lanceolate and pointed.
Flowers 
small, in long, loose panicles, which often 
become lateral as the flowering advances, 
the bracts small and scarious.
Sepals 
3-ribbed.
Petals narrow, deeply cleft, 
seldom exceeding the calyx.
In meadows and pastures, along 
hedges, throughout Europe and Eussian 
Asia.
Yery common in the low grounds 
of Britain, and up the mountain valleys 
as far as cultivation extends.
Fl. all 
Fig. 165.
6. Glaucous Starwort.
Stellaria glauea 5 With.
(Fie 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 825.) 
Intermediate between the lesser and 
the great Starworts, having the 3-ribbed 
sepals and deeply cleft petals of the for- 
mer, whilst the flowers are nearly as 
large as in the latter.
It differs also in 
some measure from both, in being gene- 
rally of a more glaucous colour, and the 
leaves are more regularly linear, not so 
lanceolate nor so pointed, The flowers 
are also fewer than in the lesser S.
with 
the bracts more leafy.
In marshy and wet places, generally 
diffused over temperate Europe and 
Eussian Asia, but not always well dis- 
tinguished from the lesser S.
; it occurs 
also in Australia.
Not very common in 
Britain, but recorded from several parts 
of England, Ireland, and southern Scot- 
land.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 166.
160.) 
132 
THE PINK FAMILY.
7. Great Starwort.
Stellaria Holostea, Linn.
(Fig. 167.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 511.
Stitchwort.) 
A perennial, usually glabrous, with a 
creeping rootstock, and nearly erect 
though weak stems, 1 to 2 feet high, 
quadrangular, rather brittle, and some- 
times slightly downy.
Leaves sessile, 
lanceolate, tapering to a fine point, often 
2 inches long or more, "^lowers large, 
in loose, terminal, forked panicles, with 
leafy, green bracts.
Sepals about 3 lines 
long, scarious at the edge, scarcely rib- 
bed.
Petals near twice as long, rather 
broad, and cleft to about the middle.
In hedges, open woods, and bushy 
places, throughout Europe and Eussian 
Asia, except the extreme north.
Abun- 
dant in Britain.
Fl. spring and early 
summer.
Fig. 167.
XII.
SANDSFURRY.
SPERaULAKIA.
Low, generally prostrate herbs, with opposite, linear or subulate 
leaves, with smaller ones often clustered in their axils, and scaly, 
scarious stipules.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, undivided.
Stamens 10 or oc- 
casionally fewer.
Styles 3, rarely 4 or 5.
Capsule opening in as many 
entire valves.
A genus of very few, chiefly Mediterranean species, differing from 
Sandwort only in the stipules, which give them a strong resemblance to 
the Paronychia family.
1. Common Sandspurry.
Spergularia rubra, Pers.
(Fig. 168.) 
(Are?iaria, Eng. Bot.
t. 852, and A.
marina, Eng. Bot.
t. 958.
Lepigonum, Bab. Man.) 
An annual or biennial, glabrous or with a short viscid down in the 
upper parts, with numerous stems branching from the base, and form- 
ing spreading or prostrate tufts, 3 or 4 inches, or, when very luxuriant, 
6 inches long.
Leaves narrow-linear ; the scarious stipules at the base 
CARYOPHYLLACE.E.
133 
short, but very conspicuous.
Flowers 
very variable in size, usually pink, or 
rarely nearly white, on short pedicels, in 
forked cymes, usually leafy at the base.
Petals shorter, or rarely rather longer 
than the sepals.
Seeds more or lesr 
flattened, often surrounded by a nar- 
row, scarious wing or border.
In sandy or gravelly heaths and waste 
places, chiefly in maritime countries, 
widely spread over Europe, Russian 
Asia, North America, and many parts of the southern hemisphere.
Com- 
mon in Britain.
Fl. all summer.
There are two marked varieties, one 
chiefly occurring inland, has slender leaves, small flowers (the sepals 1 to 
2 lines long), short capsules, and the seeds rarely bordered ; the other 
generally growing near the sea, often distinguished as a species, under 
the name of S.
marina, has thicker, some what fleshy leaves, larger 
flowers (the sepals 2 to 3 lines long), larger capsules, and the seeds usually 
bordered, but both varieties occur with bordered and with unbordered 
seeds.
Fig. 168.
XIII.
SFURRY.
SPERGULA.
Slender herbs, with narrow-linear leaves in opposite clusters, so as 
to appear whorled, and minute, scarious stipules.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, 
undivided.
Stamens 10, or occasionally 5 or fewer.
Styles 5.
Cap- 
sule opening in 5 entire valves.
A very small European and Asiatic genus, differing from Pearlwort, 
as Sandspurry does from Sandwort, by the presence of scarious sti- 
pules.
1. Corn Spurry.
Spergula arvensis, Linn.
(Fig. 169.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1535 ; and S.
pentandria, Eng. Bot.
t. 1536.) 
A slender annual, branching at the base into several erect or ascend- 
ing stems, 6 inches to a foot high, glabrous or slightly downy.
Leaves 
almost subulate, 1 to 2 inches long, growing 6 or 8 together, in two 
opposite clusters, and spreading, so as to appear whorled.
The scarious 
stipules much smaller than in Sandspurry, and sometimes rather 
difficult to see.
Flowers small, white, on long slender pedicels, turned 
down after flowering, in terminal, forked cymes.
Sepals 1^ to 2 lines 
long.
Petals generally shorter.
Stamens frequently 10 or 5 in dif- 
134 
THE PINK FAMILY.
Fig. 169.
ferent flowers of the same plant.
Seeds 
slightly flattened, with or without a nar- 
row, scarious border.
In cultivated and waste places, widely 
spread over Europe, and Russian and 
central Asia; but in the northern dis- 
tricts, as in many other parts of the 
world, only as a cornfield weed.
Com- 
mon in British cornfields.
Fl. all sum- 
XIV.
POLYCARP.
POLYCAKPON.
Low annuals, with opposite, or apparently whorled, flat leaves, and 
scarious stipules.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, very minute.
Stamens 3 to 5.
Style very short, with 3 short linear branches.
A genus of two or three Mediterranean species, very near to Sand- 
spurry, but in their minute petals and very short styles, combined at 
the base, showing a further approach to the Far onychia family.
1. Pour-leaved Polycarp, Polycarpon tetraphyllum, Linn.
(Fig. 170.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1031.) 
A glabrous, much branched, spreading or prostrate annual, seldom 
more than 3 or 4 inches long.
Leaves obovate or oblong, really op- 
posite, but placed, as they usually are, under the forks, two pairs are 
so close together as to assume the appearance of a whorl of 4.
Flowers 
very small and numerous, in loose, terminal cymes ; the sepals barely 
a line long, and rather concave.
Petals much shorter, and very thin.
Stamens usually 3.
CARTOPHYLLACE^) .
135 
In sandy situations, generally not far 
from the sea, in west Africa, south-wes- 
tern Europe, round the Mediterranean 
and along the Atlantic, and spread as an 
introduced weed over other parts of the 
world, perhaps indigenous in Australia.
In Britain only in the Channel Islands 
and southern England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 170.
XIII.
THE PURSLANE FAMILY.
PORTULACE.E.
More or less succulent herbs, with entire leaves, usually op- 
posite.
Sepals 2 or rarely 3.
Petals 5 or rarely more, some- 
times slightly united.
Stamens either equal in number and op- 
posite to the petals, or indefinite.
Styles 2 to 8, united at the 
base.
Capsule I-celled, with a free central placenta, and several 
seeds, as in the Pink family.
The family has a very wide geographical range, especially in North 
and South America, with a few species dispersed over the other quarters 
of the globe.
It is nearly allied to the smaller plants of the PinJc fa- 
mily, and to the Paronychia family, but easily known by the calyx.
Several species belonging to the exotic genera Purslane and Celan- 
drinia, as well as to Claytonia, are cultivated in our gardens.
Petals 5, distinct.
Stamens 5, opposite the petals 1.
Claytonia* 
Petals united in a corolla split open at one side.
Stamens 3 .
2. Montia, 
I. CLAYTONIA.
CLAYTOMA.
Petals 5, free.
Stamens 5, opposite to the petals and adhering to 
them at the base.
Stigmas 3.
Capsule opening in 3 valves and con- 
taining 3 seeds.
The genus comprises several species, natives of north 
America or northern Asia, and is only admissible into the British 
Flora amongst naturalized aliens.
136 
THE PINK FAMILY.
1. Perfoliate Claytonia.
Claytonia perfoliata, Don.
(Fig. 171.) 
(Bot. Mag.
t. 1336.) 
A glabrous, green, somewhat succu- 
lent annual, with numerous spreading 
prostrate or ascending stems, from a few 
inches to nearly a foot long.
.Radical 
leaves on long petioles, small, broadly 
ovate or almost reniform.
Flowering 
stems with a single leaf below the 
flowers, nearly orbicular, concave an 1 
quite perfoliate, the stem passing through 
the centre, evidently formed by the 
union of two opposite leaves.
Flowers 
very small, in one, two, or more clusters 
or short racemes along one common pe- 
duncle above the leaf.
Petals white, 
notched, scarcely longer than the calyx.
A native of north-western America, 
now so common a weed in some parts 
of Lancashire, Oxfordshire, Surrey, and some other English counties 
that it can be no longer omitted from our Floras.
Fl. spring and 
summer.
Fig. 171.
II.
MONTI A.
MONTIA.
Flowers minute, with the 5 petals united into one corolla, split open 
in front.
Stamens 3.
Stigmas 3.
Capsule opening in 3 valves, and 
containing 3 seeds.
The genus consists but of one species.
1. Water Montia.
Montia fontana, Linn.
(Fig. 172.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1206.
Blinks or Water Chickiveed.) 
A little, glabrous, green, somewhat succulent annual, forming dense 
tufts, from 1 to 4 or 5 inches in height, the stems becoming longer and 
weaker in more watery situations.
Leaves opposite or nearly so, ob- 
ovate or spathulate, from 3 to 5 or 6 lines long.
Flowers solitary or 
in little drooping racemes of 2 or 3, in the axils of the upper leaves ; the 
petals of a pure white, but very little longer than the calyx.
Capsules 
small and globular.
TAMAEISCINEiE.
On the edges of rills, and springy 
wet places, where the water is not stag- 
nant, throughout Europe, in north Rus- 
sian Asia, in North America, and down 
the Andes to the southern extremity.
In Australia and New Zealand, but not 
in central Asia.
Extends over the whole 
of Britain.
Fl. spring and summer.
137 
Fig. 172.
XIV.
THE TAMAEISC FAMILY.
TAMARISCINE^].
A very small European, North African, and central Asiatic 
family, with one Mexican genus, all differing from the Pink family 
in their frequently shrubby habit, alternate leaves, and the ovules 
and seeds inserted on 3 distinct placentas, arising from the base 
of the cavity of the ovary, and adhering sometimes to the sides, 
forming incomplete dissepiments, almost as in the Frankenia fa- 
mily, A single species only has any claims for admission into a 
British Flora, and that only as an introduced plant, and no others 
are likely to be met with in our gardens.
I. TAMARISC.
TAMARIX.
Maritime shrubs, with slender, twiggy branches, covered with small, 
green, alternate, scale -likejleaves ; the flowers small, in terminal spikes 
or racemes.
Sepals 4 or 5.
Petals as many.
Stamens as many, or 
twice as many, hypogynous.
Ovary free, with 3, rarely 2 or 4 styles.
Capsule 1-celled, opening in as many valves as styles.
Seeds several, 
erect, crowned each with a tuft of cottony hairs.
No albumen.
1. Common Tamarisc.
Tamarix gallica, Linn.
(Fig. 173.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1318.
T. anglica, Brit.
Fl.) 
An elegant shrub of 3 to 5 or 6 feet ; the slender branches erect, or 
slightly pendulous at the extremities ; the numerous scale-like, pointed 
leaves scarcely above a line long ; flowers pink or white, very small, 
crowded in spikes of from \ to 1J inches long, forming frequently 
branching terminal panicles, the petals persisting till the fruit ripens.
VOL.
i. M 
138 
THE ELATINE FAMILY.
Very common on the sandy or marshy 
seacoasts of the Mediterranean, and ex- 
tending up the Atlantic shores of Spain 
and France.
Now found on several 
parts of the southern coast of England, 
and apparently established there, but 
believed to be only where it has been 
planted.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 173.
XV.
THE ELATINE FAMILY.
ELATINACEjE.
A very small family, confined in Europe to the single genus 
JElatine, but comprising two or three others from hotter or tro- 
pical climates.
They differ from the tribe Alsinece, of the Pink 
family, in their capitate stigmas, and their ovaries and capsules 
completely divided into 3 or more cells.
I. ELATINE.
ELATINE.
Minute, glabrous, aquatic or marsh annuals, with opposite, entire 
leaves, minute, almost microscopical stipules, and very small, axillary, 
solitary flowers.
Sepals 3 to 5, sometimes united at the base.
Petals 
as many, hypogynous, entire.
Stamens as many, or twice as many.
Styles 3 to 5, with capitate stigmas.
Ovary and capsule divided into 
as many cells as styles, opening, when ripe, in as many valves, leaving 
the dissepiments adhering to the axis.
Seeds several.
A small genus, spread over the northern hemisphere, in the new as 
well as the old world.
Flowers stalked.
Petals 3.
Stamens 6.
Styles 3 .
Flowers sessile.
Petals 4.
Stamens 8.
Styles 4 .
1. Six-stamened Tl.
2. Hight-stamened JS.
ELATINACEiE.
189 
1. Six-Stamened Elatine.
Elatine hexandra, DC.
(Fig. 174.) 
(F.
Hydropiper, Eng. Bot.
t. 955.
Waterpepper.) 
This little plant forms small, matted, 
creeping tufts, often under water ; the 
stems seldom above 2 inches long, and 
often not half an inch.
Leaves small, 
obovate or oblong, tapering at the base.
Pedicels 1 to 2 lines long.
Flowers 
globular, with 3 rose-coloured petals 
scarcely longer than the calyx.
Seeds 
numerous, beautifully ribbed and trans- 
versely striated under the microscope.
Spread over a wide range, in Europe 
and Russian Asia, but its known stations 
always few and scattered.
In Britain, 
recorded from several parts of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland, and probably frequently overlooked from its 
minuteness.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 174.
2. Eight-stamened Elatine.
Elatine Hydropiper, Linn.
(Fig. 175.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2670.) 
Included by the older authors with the 
last, under the name of F.
Hydropiper, 
but differs in having sessile flowers, with 
4 sepals, petals, and styles, and 8 sta- 
mens, a more deeply divided calyx, and 
fewer and larger seeds.
Scattered over the range of the six- 
stamened F., and sometimes mixed 
with it, but more rare.
In Britain it 
has only been observed near Farnham 
in Surrey, and in Anglesea.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 175.
XVI.
THE HYPERICUM FAMILY.
HYPERICINE.E.
A family confined in Britain to the single genus Hypericum.
The tropical genera associated with it differ slightly in the num- 
ber of parts, or in the arrangement of the stamens or of the seeds, 
m 2 
140 THE HYPERICUM FAMILY.
and some are tall shrubs or even trees.
The chief distinction of 
the Order from those nearest allied to it, lies in the stamens, 
either very numerous or arranged in 3 or 5 clusters or bundles.
I. HYPERICUM.
HYPERICUM.
Herbs, usually perennial (in some exotic species shrubs), often 
marked with glandular dots ; the leaves opposite^ and entire, and no 
stipules; the flowers regular, usually yellow.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5, 
hypogynous, usually oblique.
Stamens indefinite, clustered or shortly 
united at the base into 3 or 5 bundles.
Capsule more or less com- 
pletely divided into 3 or 5 cells by as many placentas projecting from 
the sides to the axis, and usually opening in 3 or 5 valves.
Seeds nu- 
merous, small, without albumen.
An extensive genus, particularly abundant in southern Europe, 
western Asia, and North America, but represented also within the 
tropics, as well as in the southern hemisphere, both in the new and the 
old world.
The glandular dots are of two kinds, the pellucid ones, 
which can be easily seen by holding up the leaves against the light, and 
the black ones, which are usually on the under side of the leaves round 
the edge, or on the flowers themselves.
Undershrubs, with large ovate leaves, few flowers, 
broad, round sepals, and stamens in 5 bundles.
Styles 5.
Flowers very large 1.
Large-flowered H.
Styles 3.
Petals not much longer than the calyx .
2. Tutsan H.
Herbs with numerous flowers, small or narrow sepals, 
and stamens in 3 bundles or clusters.
Sepals quite entire, or with very few teeth, without 
Hack dots.
Stems erect, above a foot high, bearing a corymb 
of bright yellow flowers.
Stems cylindrical or slightly angled.
Sepals pointed.
Leaves with numerous 
pellucid dots 3.
Common H.
Sepals blunt.
Leaves with few or no pellucid 
dots 4.
Imperforate H.
Stems distinctly four-sided.
Sepals broad and blunt, or scarcely pointed .
4. Imperforate H.
Sepals narrow and very pointed.
Petals 
pale yellow 5.
Square- stalled H.
Stems diffuse, not 6 inches long, and much 
branched.
Flowers small, in leafy cymes .
. 6.
Trailing R.
Sepals fringed with black or red glandular teeth or 
dots.
HYPERICINS^).
141 
Whole plant perfectly glabrous.
Stems diffuse, or, if erect, growing in tufts, sel- 
dom above 6 inches high.
Leaves oblong or ovate.
Stems low or diffuse 6.
Trailing H.
Leaves linear 7.
Flax-leaved H, 
Stems erect and stiff, usually a foot or more high.
Stem-leaves broad-cordate, rarely above ^-in.
long.
Panicle oblong, loose 8.
Slender IT.
Stem-leaves ovate or oblong 1 to 2 in.
long.
Panicle compact 10.
Mountain H.
Stems or leaves hairy.
Stem tall and erect, slightly hairy.
Leaves ob- 
long or elliptical 9.
Hairy H '.
Stems diffuse, very woolly.
Leaves orbicular .
11.
Marsh H.
Several half-shrubby or shrubby species, from southern Europe or 
the Canary or Azore Islands, are occasionally cultivated in our flower- 
gardens or shrubberies.
A supposed British species described by 
Bertoloni under the name of _5".
anglicum, appears to have been founded 
on some mistake.
1. Large-flowered Hypericum.
Hypericum calycinum, 
Linn.
(Fig. 176.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2017.) 
Eootstock extensively creeping and 
woody.
Stems scarcely a foot high, 
simple or branching at the base only, 
with large, almost sessile, ovate or ob- 
long leaves, very obtuse, green and gla- 
brous, with very small pellucid dots.
Flowers bright yellow, 3 or 4 inches 
diameter, one or two at the top of each 
stem, or, in our gardens, in a corymb of 
5 or 6.
Sepals nearly 6 lines long, or- 
bicular, with longitudinal glandular lines.
Stamens very numerous, long and slen- 
der, united at the base into 5 bundles.
Styles 5.
A south-east European species, long 
cultivated in our gardens, and now 
naturalized in bushy places in several 
part3 of England and Ireland.
FL sum- 
mer.
142 
THE HYPERICUM FAMILY.
2. Tutsan Hypericum.
Hypericum Androssemum, Liun.
(Fig. 177.) 
land, 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1225, sepals too pointed.
Tutsan.) 
Stock short, somewhat woody ; the 
flowering-stems usually numerous, erect, 
1| to 2 feet high, simple or slightly 
branched.
Leaves sessile, ovate, obtuse, 
cordate at the base, 2 to 3 inches long, 
glabrous, with very minute pellucid dots.
Flowers few, in small corymbs, shorter 
than the last pair of leaves.
Sepals 
broad, 3 or 4 lines long.
Petals scarcely 
longer.
Stamens numerous, slightly 
connected at the very base into 5 clusters.
Styles 3.
Capsule globular, slightly 
succulent before it is ripe, not usually 
opening in valves.
In shrubby places and open woods, in 
western and southern Europe, extend- 
ing also far into central Asia.
In Bri- 
tain, all along the west side of Great 
Britain, in Ireland, and southern Eng- 
but rare on the eastern side.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 177.
3. Common Hypericum.
Hypericum perforatum, Linn.
(Fig. 178.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 295.
St. Johns wort.) 
Stock perennial, with short runners or decumbent barren shoots 
and erect stems, 1 to 1^ feet high, branching in the upper part, cylin- 
drical or with two slightly prominent opposite angles, and quite gla- 
brous.
Leaves sessile, oblong, seldom above 6 lines long, marked with 
pellucid dots, and occasionally a few black ones on the under side.
Flowers bright yellow, in a handsome terminal corymb.
Sepals 
lanceolate, pointed, quite entire, but with a few glandular lines or 
dots.
Petals twice as long, marked, as well as the anthers, with black 
dots.
Stamens numerous, shortly united into 3 bundles.
Styles 3.
HYPERICIN EH.
143 
In woods, hedges and thickets, road- 
sides, etc., throughout Europe and cen- 
tral and Russian Asia, except the ex- 
treme north, and now introduced into 
other countries.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 178.
4. Imperforate Hypericum.
Hypericum dubium, Leers.
(Fig. 179.) 
.(Eng. Bot.
t. 296.) 
Very much like the common H., but 
the stem is slightly quadrangular, the.
leaves rather larger and broader, and 
nearly destitute of pellucid dots, but 
with a few black ones along the mar- 
gin on the under side ; the sepals much 
broader, obtuse or scarcely pointed, and 
the petals and stamens much less dotted.
In similar situations as the common 
IT., almost over all Europe, especially in 
hilly districts, extending far into Scan- 
dinavia, but not an Arctic plant.
Gene- 
rally spread over England, southern 
Scotland and Ireland, but not near so 
frequent as the common IT.
Fl. sum- 
mer.
Fig. 179.
144 
THE HYPERICUM FAMILY.
5. Square-stalked Hypericum.
Hypericum quadrangulum, 
Linn.
(Fig. 180.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 370.) 
With the general habit of the last 
two species, this one is readily known by 
the fonr prominent angles of the stem, 
and the rather smaller and paler flowers.
Leaves ovate, often an inch long, clasp- 
ing the stem at the base, with numerous 
pellucid dots, and a few black ones round 
the margin on the under side.
Sepals 
lanceolate and pointed.
Petals and an- 
thers with very few black dots, or en- 
tirely without them.
In moist pastures, by hedges and 
ditches, in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, extending northward to 
southern Sweden.
Common in England, 
Ireland, and southern Scotland, but de- 
creasing in frequency towards the north.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 180.
6. Trailing Hypericum.
Hypericum humifusum, Linn.
{Fig. 181.) 
(Eng, Bot. t.
1226.) 
A low, decumbent, much branched, 
almost trailing plant, from 2 or 3 to near 
6 inches long, sometimes forming dense, 
spreading tufts, with a perennial root- 
stock, but often flowering the first year, 
so as to appear annual.
Leaves of the 
common H., but smaller.
Flowers few, 
small, of a pale yellow, in short, loose, 
leafy cymes.
Sepals oblong, often un- 
equal, entire or with a few glandular 
teeth, and generally bordered by black 
dots.
Petals scarcely so long, with very 
few black dots.
Stamens few.
In stony heaths, pastures and bogs, 
fields and waste places, in central and 
Fig. 181.
southern Europe to the Caucasus, ex- 
HYPERICINEiB.
145 
tending northward to southern Sweden, and carried out to some other 
countries with European weeds.
Frequent in England and Ireland, 
less so in Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
7. Flax-leaved Hypericum.
Hypericum linariifolium, 
Vahl.
(Fig. 182.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2851.) 
Intermediate in some measure be- 
tween the trailing H.
and the common 
II.
; taller and more erect .than the for- 
mer, much smaller and more slender than 
the latter, seldom above 8 or 10 inches 
high.
Leaves linear or narrow- oblong, 
6 to 8 lines long, rarely marked with 
pellucid dots, but with a few black ones 
underneath.
Flowers in a loose corymb, 
larger and brighter than in the trailing 
H. ; the sepals oblong or broadly lan- 
ceolate, with numerous black dots, and 
a few glandular teeth on the edge.
Petals 
tw^ice or thrice as long as the sepals.
Stamens not numerous.
On dry, hilly wastes and rocky places, 
in western Spain, Portugal, and France, 
extending to the Channel Islands and to 
south-western England, where it has 
been found at Cape Cornwall,and on the banks of the Teign, in Devon- 
shire.
Fl. summer.
8. Slender Hypericum.
Hypericum pulchrum, Linn.
(Fig. 183.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1227.) 
Perennial stock shortly decumbent, the stems erect and stiff though 
slender, 1 to near 2 feet high, with short lateral branches, all perfectly 
glabrous.
Leaves of the main stem broadly cordate and clasping the 
stem at the base, seldom above 6 lines long, those of the lateral 
branches smaller and much narrower, all marked with pellucid dots, 
but usually without black ones.
Flowers rather smaller than in the 
common H., forming an oblong or pyramidal panicle, not a flat corymb 
146 
THE HYPERICUM FAMILY.
Sepals broad and obtuse, united to near 
the middle, without black dots outside, 
but fringed at the top with black glan- 
dular teeth.
In dry woods, on open heaths and 
wastes, almost all over Europe, but 
scarcety extending to the Asiatic fron- 
tier.
Frequent in Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 183.
9. Hairy Hypericum.
Hypericum hirsutum, Linn.
(Fig. 184.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1156.) 
A stiff, erect perennial, with an ob- 
long or pyramidal panicle like the slender 
H., but rather taller, and the stems al- 
ways more or less downy or hairy.
Leaves often above an inch long, oblong 
or elliptical, narrowed at the base into a 
very short stalk, more or less hairy un- 
derneath on the veins, and marked with 
numerous pellucid dots.
Flowers of the 
slender H., but of a paler yellow ; the 
sepals narrow, fringed with rather long, 
glandular teeth ; the petals full twice as 
long.
In woods and thickets, generally 
spread over Europe and Russian Asia, 
except the extreme north.
Frequent in 
Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 184.
HYPERICINS^.
147 
10.
Mountain Hypericum.
Hypericum montanum, Linn.
(Fig. 185.) (Eng. Bot.
t. 371.) 
Stock perennial, the stiff, erect stems 
about 2 feet high, usually simple, with 
the upper leaves small and distant, the 
lower leaves rather large, ovate, and 
stem- clasping, quite glabrous, with or 
without pellucid dots, but with a row of 
black ones round the margin underneath.
Flowers in a close, compact cyme, often 
reduced to a head ; the sepals lanceolate, 
fringed with black, glandular teeth ; the 
petals twice as long, narrow, and paler 
than in the common H.
In woods, in central and southern Eu- 
rope to the Caucasus, and northwards 
into southern Sweden.
Not so frequent 
in England as the other species, and 
probably not extending into Scotland or 
Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 185.
11.
Marsh Hypericum.
Hypericum Elodes, Linn.
(Fig. 186.) (Eng. Bot.
t. 109.) 
Stems diffuse, often rooting at thebase, 
and attaining 6 to 8 inches, or, when very 
luxuriant, a foot in length, covered with 
loose, woolly whitish hairs.
Leaves or- 
bicular, stem-clasping, woolly on both 
sides.
Flowers pale yellow, few together 
in a leafless cyme, at first terminal, but 
afterwards becoming lateral.
Sepals 
small, ovate, copiously fringed with 
glandular teeth.
Petals three times as 
long, with a small fringed appendage at 
their base.
Stamens united to above 
the middle in 3 bundles.
In spongy and watery bogs, in western 
Europe, from Spain and Portugal to 
north-western Germany.
Extends over 
the whole of the west of England, Wales, 
and Ireland, but rare in Scotland.
Fl.
summer % Fig. 186 
148 THE FLAX FAMILY.
XVII.
THE FLAX FAMILY, LINACE^.
Herbs or undershrubs, with entire leaves, no stipules, and re- 
gular flowers.
Sepals 5, rarely fewer, overlapping each other in 
the bud, rarely partially united.
Petals as many, twisted in the 
bud.
Stamens as many, free, or the filaments very shortly united 
at the base, with small teeth between each (or, in exotic genera, 
10 stamens).
Styles 5, rarely fewer, often slightly connected at 
the base, with capitate stigmas.
Ovary with as many cells as 
styles, or incompletely divided into twice as many.
Capsule 
separating into as many carpels as cells, without any central 
column ; each carpel opening inwards by longitudinal slits, and 
containing 2 seeds, often separated by an incomplete partition.
No albumen.
A small Order, widely spread over the globe, differing from the 
Geranium family chiefly in the foliage and the absence of any persis- 
tent axis to the fruit, from the Pink family by the capitate stigmas 
and the structure of the fruit.
Parts of the flower in fives 1.
Flax.
Parts of the flower in fours 2.
Allseed.
I. FLAX.
LINUM.
Sepals, petals, and stamens 5.
Cells of the capsule apparently 10 
but really 5, each divided into two by a nearly complete partition.
A rather numerous genus, spread over nearly the whole of the tem- 
perate and warmer regions of the globe, but chiefly abundant in the 
Mediterranean region and western Asia.
Flowers small, white.
Lower leaves opposite 4.
Cathartic F.
Flpwers blue.
Leaves all alternate.
Root annual.
Sepals pointed.
Stem erect.
Leaves lanceolate.
Petals 7 or 8 lines long 1.
Common F.
Stem decumbent.
Leaves short and linear.
Petals not 
6 lines long 3.
Pale F.
Rootstock perennial.
Sepals obtuse.
Petals deep blue, 7 or 8 lines long .
. 2.
Perennial F.
Sepals pointed.
Petals pale blue, not 6 lines long .
. 3.
Pale F.
The L.jlavum, a south European perennial, with yellow flowers, and 
some other exotic species, are to be met with in our gardens.
LINACE^].
149 
1. Common Flax.
Linum usitatissimum, Linn.
(Fig. 187.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1357.
Flax.
A tall, erect annual, perfectly glabrous, 
and usually branched only at the top.
Leaves alternate, erect, narrow-lanceo- 
late, pointed and entire, ^ to 1\ inches 
long.
Flowers of a rich blue, in a loose 
terminal corymb.
Sepals ovate or lanceo- 
late, all pointed.
Petals obovate, entire 
or slightly crenate, 7 or 8 lines long.
Capsule globular or slightly depressed.
An extensively cultivated plant, whose 
origin is unknown, but it readily sows 
itself as a weed of cultivation in Europe, 
Asia, and other parts of the world, and 
as such may be occasionally met with in 
some parts of England.
Fl. summer.
Linseed.) 
Fig. 187.
2. Perennial Flax.
Linum perenne, Linn.
(Fig. 188.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 40.) 
A very variable plant, sometimes re- 
sembling much the common F., but it 
forms a perennial stock, either tufted or 
root-like ; the stems are usually more 
slender and not so erect, and sometimes 
quite procumbent, the leaves smaller and 
narrower, and the sepals, or at least the 
inner ones, are always obtuse.
In dry chiefly limestone pastures and 
waste lands, or sometimes in rich moun- 
tain pastures, varying much according to 
soil or situation, and widely diffused over 
central and southern Europe, and south- 
ern Russian Asia, but not extending into 
northern Germany.
Occurs in some of 
the eastern counties of England, and pos- 
sibly in southern Ireland, but the pale 
F. is often mistaken for it.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 188.
150 
THE FLAX FAMILY.
3. Pale Flax.
Linum angustifolium, Huds.
(Eig. 189.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 381.) 
Usually a perennial, with the decum- 
bent stems and narrow leaves of some 
varieties of the perennial F., but with 
the pointed sepals of the common F.
It 
is also occasionally annual only, but al- 
ways differs from both the preceding 
species in its much smaller pale-blue 
flowers, the petals seldom exceeding 5 
lines in length.
In waste places, chiefly in limestone 
districts, very common in southern Eu- 
rope, and extending up western Erance 
to southern and western England, and to 
Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 189.
4. Cathartic Flax.
Linum catharticum, Linn.
(Fig. 190.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 382.) 
A very slender, erect, or slightly de- 
cumbent glabrous annual, from 3 or 4 
to 6 or 8 inches high, with small, op- 
posite, obovate or oblong leaves, and 
very small flowers, of a pure white, on 
long, slender pedicels.
Sepals all pointed.
Petals obovate, scarcely 2 lines long.
In meadows and pastures, very com- 
mon throughout Europe, except the ex- 
treme north, and in west central Asia.
Abundant in Britain.
FL all summer.
Fig. 190.
LINACEJ].
151 
II.
ALLSEED.
KADIOLA.
A single species, separated from Flax on account of the parts of the 
flower and fruit being in fours instead of in fives, and the sepals united 
to near the middle in a several-toothed calyx.
1. Common Allseed.
Radiola Millegrana, Sm.
(Fig. 191.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 893.) 
A minute, erect annual, with very nu- 
merous, repeatedly forked branches, 
forming dense corymbose tufts, 1 to 2 
inches high, with minute, globular 
flowers on short pedicels.
Leaves small, 
opposite.
Calyx-teeth 8 or 12.
Petals 
4, about the length of the calyx.
On sandy heaths and waste places, in 
central and southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, extending northward into southern Scandinavia, 
spread over Britain, and very abundant in some localities, though 
scarce in other districts.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 191.
Generally 
XVIII.
THE MALLOW FAMILY.
MALVACEAE.
Herbs or soft-wooded shrubs, with alternate, stipulate, pal- 
mately-veined leaves, and regular flowers.
Calyx of 5 divisions, 
valvate in the bud, and (in the British genera) 3 or more bracts 
at the base, forming an involucre or so-called outer calyx.
Petals 
5, twisted in the bud, and adhering, by their short claws, to the 
staminal tube.
Stamens numerous, their filaments united in a 
tube round the pistil, the anthers 1-celled.
Ovaries (in the 
British genera) several, arranged in a ring round a common axis.
Styles or style-branches as many as ovaries.
Eruit (in the British 
genera) separating into as many carpels as ovaries.
Seeds one or 
several in each carpel, attached to the inner angle, kidney-shaped, 
with a curved embryo and little albumen.
A very extensive, and generally natural family, widely distributed, 
chiefly over the warmer climates of the globe.
The three British 
genera, all closely allied to each other, only represent one of the two 
forms of ovary and fruit prevailing in the Order.
In Hibiscus, Abu- 
tilon, and several other exotic genera, the carpels are all united into a 
152 THE MALLOW FAMILY.
single several-celled ovary and fruit, in Pavonia and some others there 
are twice as many style-branches as ovaries.
Exterior bracts united at the base into an involucre or outer calyx.
Involucre 3-lobed 1.
Lavateea.
Involucre of 5 or more divisions 3.
Alth\ea.
Exterior bracts 3, distinct from each other, inserted on the 
calyx 2.
Mallow.
Among the plants of the Mallow family, grown in our gardens and 
belonging to exotic genera, the most frequently to be met with are 
species of Malope, Hibiscus, or Abutilon.
I. LAVATERA.
LAYATEEA.
Involucre 3-lobed, often larger than the 5-lobed calyx.
Ovary and 
fruit of Mallow.
A genus of very few species, from the Mediterranean region, western 
Asia, southern Africa, and Australia.
1. Sea Lavatera.
Lavatera arborea, Linn.
(Fig. 192.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1841.) 
Stem woody at the base, with thick, 
hard, annual flowering branches, form- 
ing an undershrub 1 to 4 or 5 feet high.
Leaves on long stalks, the lower ones 
broadly orbicular, palmately divided 
into 5 to 9 broad, short, crenate lobes, 
and softly downy on both sides, rarely 
nearly glabrous.
Flowers numerous, of 
the size of those of the common Mallow, 
of a pale purple-red, on short pedicels, 
collected into clusters, forming a long 
terminal raceme or narrow panicle.
In- 
volucre divided to below the middle into 
3 broad leaf- like lobes.
On maritime rocks, in south-western 
Europe, from the Gulf of G-enoa, round 
Spain and France, to the British Isles, 
where it is very local, chiefly on the south 
and west coasts of England and Ireland, 
and on the Bass rock in the Frith of Forth.
Fl. summer.
The tree Lavatera (L.
Olbia), a south European species, often cul- 
tivated in our gardens, is said to have appeared along the sides of a 
new embankment in Epping Forest, and may occasionally sow itself in 
other parts of England.
Fig. 192.
MALVACEAE.
153 
II.
MALLOW.
MALTA.
Involucre of 3 small distinct bracts, inserted on the lower part of the 
calyx.
Calyx divided to near the middle into 5 broad lobes.
Style- 
branches 10 or more, subulate.
Carpels as many, arranged in a ring 
round a thickish axis, and separating from it when ripe, each one con- 
taining a single seed.
The genus, as now limited, is dispersed over Europe and northern 
and central Asia.
Stems decumbent or prostrate.
Petals not above twice as long 
as the calyx 1.
Dwarf M.
Stem erect or ascending.
Petals 8 or 4 times the length of 
the calyx.
Leaves with short, broad lobes, not reaching to the middle.
Flowers in axillary clusters 2.
Common M.
Leaves deeply cut into narrow lobes.
Flowers crowded at 
the summit of the branches 3.
Music M.
The tall tree Mallow (31.
mauritiana), from the Mediterranean, and 
the curled Mallow (M.
crispa), from central Asia, are often to be met 
with in cottage gardens.
Several Cape species are also in cultivation.
1. Dwarf Mallow.
Malva rotundifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 193.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1092.) 
A procumbent annual, with a hard, 
sometimes woody-looking base, the stems 
6 inches to a foot long, tough, and 
slightly downy.
Leaves on long stalks, 
orbicular, cordate at the base, with 5 to 
7 very short and broad crenate lobes.
Flowers clustered in the axils of the 
leaves, small, and of a pale-bluish colour, 
on pedicels \ to 1 inch long.
Petals 4 
to 5 lines long.
Carpels usually about 
15, downy, and rounded on the back, so 
as to form together a disk-shaped fruit, 
slightly furrowed on the margin between 
each two carpels.
On roadsides in waste places, through- 
out Europe and western Asia, except the 
extreme north.
Common in England, 
Ireland, and southern Scotland, less so 
further north.
Fl. spring to autumn.
VOL.
I. 
Fig. 193.
154 
THE MALLOW FAMILY.
The small-flowered M.
(M.
parvijlora, Linn., or M.
pusilla, Eng.
Bot. t.
241), from southern Europe and other warm climates, and ex- 
tending northward into Scandinavia, is said to have been formerly 
found in Kent.
It has the small flowers of the dwarf 3f., but is chiefly 
distinguished by the carpels not rounded, but flat on the back, with 
angular edges, as in the common M.
The whorlcd M.
(M.
verticillata, 
Eng. Bot.
Suppl.t. 295B), from southern Europe and central Asia, with 
the flowers and fruit of the small-flowered 3f., but erect stems, and the 
flowers in close clusters, has appeared in cornfields near Llanelly, in 
South Wales.
2. Common Mallow.
Malva sylvestris, Linn.
(Fig. 194.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 671.) 
A biennial, with several erect or as- 
cending stems, 1 to 2 or even 3 feet high, 
more or less clothed with spreading 
hairs, especially in the upper part.
Leaves 
on long stalks, orbicular, slightly cor- 
date at the base, with 5 or 7 lobes, 
broad and short, but always deeper than 
in the dwarf M., and the middle one 
often longer than the others.
Elowers 
in axillary clusters, usually of a reddish 
^21^k purple ; the petals about 9 or 10 lines 
long.
Carpels usually 10, flat on the 
back, with angular edges, so that the 
fruit has rather projecting ribs than 
furrows between the carpels.
In waste places, on roadsides, etc.
Common in Europe, except at high 
northern latitudes, and extending all 
across Russian Asia.
Abundant in Eng- 
land and Ireland, decreasing to the 
northward, and probably not indigenous 
north of the Grampians.
Fl. summer.
Fi£.
194.
3. Musk Mallow.
Malva moschata, Linn.
(Eig. 195.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 754.) 
A perennial, with several erect, simple or slightly-branched stems, 
about 18 inches high, covered with long, spreading hairs.
Badical 
leaves orbicular, with short, broad lobes, but those of the stem deeply 
MALVAC&M.
155 
divided into linear or wedge-shaped seg- 
ments, which are again pinnatifid or 3- 
lobed.
Flowers large, rose-coloured or 
rarely white, crowded at the summits of 
the stem and branches.
Carpels rounded 
on the back, and very hairy.
On hedge-banks, roadsides, and in 
gravelly pastures, in western, central, 
and southern Europe, extending north- 
wards to south Sweden, and eastward to 
Dalmatia.
Not uncommon in England, 
Ireland, and southern Scotland.
Fl.
Fig. 195.
III.
AlaTHJBA.
ALTEUEA.
Involucre of more than 5 bracts, more or less united together at the 
base.
Calyx 5-lobed.
Ovary and fruit of Mallow.
A small genus, chiefly from the Mediterranean region and western 
Asia, with one or two South African species.
Tall perennial, covered with a short, velvety down .
. .
. 1 .
Annual, with long, spreading, stiff hairs 2.
Hispid A .
The Hollyhock of our gardens is an Althcea from the Mediterranean 
region.
The Althaea frutex of our gardeners is improperly so called, 
for it is a species of Hibiscus (H.
syriacus, Linn.).
1. Marsh Althaea.
Althsea officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 196.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 147.
Marsh Mallow.) 
Stock perennial, the flowering stems erect, branched, 2 to 3 feet 
high, covered, as well as the foliage and inflorescence, with a soft, 
dense, velvety down.
Leaves stalked, broadly ovate, undivided or 3- 
lobed, the lower ones often cordate at the base, the upper ones narrow.
Elowers not large, of a pale rose-colour, on short pedicels in the upper 
axils, or the greater number forming almost leafless terminal spikes, 
nvolucre divided into several linear segments, much shorter than the 
o-lobed calyx.
Carpels 15 to 20, rounded on the back.
156 
THE MALLOW FAMILY.
In marshes, especially in maritime 
districts, in central and southern Europe, 
and all across Russian Asia, extending to 
northern Germany, but not into Scandi- 
navia.
Not uncommon in southern 
England and some parts of Ireland, but 
not extending to the north of Lincoln- 
shire or Arran.
Fl. rather late in sum- 
Fig. 196.
2. Hispid Althaea.
Althaea hirsuta, Linn.
(Eig. 197.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2674, flowers too red.) 
An erect, stiff, but rather slender an- 
nual, seldom above a foot high, hispid 
with long spreading hairs.
Leaves few, 
the upper ones divided into 3, 5, or 7 
narrow segments.
Flowers of a pale 
purplish-blue, on long axillary peduncles.
Involucre of 8 to 20 lanceolate lobes, 
nearly as long as the calyx, the petals 
about one-half longer.
Carpels nume- 
rous, somewhat angular on their edges.
In waste and cultivated places, com- 
mon in southern Europe, up to the Pa- 
latinate of the Rhine, and occasionally 
carried to the northward as a weed of 
cultivation.
Probably introduced as 
such into Kent, where it is said to have 
fully established itself near Cobham.
Fl.
Fig. 197.
summer.
TILIACEiE.
157 
XIX.
THE LIME FAMILY.
TILIACE.E.
A rather large tropical Order, but limited in Britain to a single 
species.
It differs from the Hallow family by the petals imbri- 
cated but not twisted in the bud ; the stamens free, or shortly 
united into several bundles : the anthers 2-celled, and the carpels 
more completely consolidated into a several-celled ovary.
I. LIMB.
TILIA.
Trees with alternate leaves, deciduous stipules, and small cymes of 
flowers on an axillary peduncle, to which is attached a long, leaf-like 
bract.
Sepals 5, valvate in the bud.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous, 
very shortly cohering in several clusters.
Ovary globular, 5-celled, 
with 2 ovules in each cell, attached to the inner angle.
Style single, 
with a 5-toothed stigma.
Fruit, a small globular nut, containing 1 or 
2 seeds.
A genus of very few species, widely distributed over the temperate 
zone of the northern hemisphere, where it is the only representative 
of the family.
1. Common Lime.
Tilia europsea, Linn.
(Fig. 198.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 610.
T. parvifolia, Eng. Bot.
t. 170.
Lime-tree.) 
A handsome, long-lived tree, attain- 
ing sometimes as much as 120 feet 
in height, but generally not above half 
that size.
Leaves stalked, broadly 
heart-shaped or nearly orbicular, often 
oblique, and always pointed, serrate 
on the edge, glabrous above and more 
or less downy underneath, especially 
in the angles of the principal veins.
Peduncles hanging amongst the leaves, 
bordered or winged halfway up by the 
long, narrow, leaf-like bract.
Flowers 
sweet scented, of a pale whitish-green.
Nut downy when young, but often gla- 
brous when ripe.
In woods, over nearly the whole of 
Europe, except the extreme north, and 
extending eastward across Russian Asia 
Fig. 198.
158 THE LTME FAMILY.
to the Altai.
Much planted in Britain, and probably truly wild in 
southern and western England, and perhaps in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
It varies much in the size of the leaves, in the degree of down on their 
under surface and on the fruits, in the greater or less prominence of the 
5 filiform ribs of the fruit, etc.
The truly indigenous form in northern 
Europe is always a smalHeaved one.
The large-leaved variety which 
we commonly plant (T.
grandifolia, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2720) is of 
south European origin, with the leaves still further enlarged by cul- 
tivation.
Some North American species are also frequently planted.
XX.
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
GERANIACEiB.
Annual or perennial herbs, or, in exotic species, low shrubs, 
with opposite or rarely alternate leaves, usually more or less 
toothed, divided, or compound, and furnished with stipules.
Flowers regular in the principal British genera, irregular in Bal- 
sam and some exotic ones.
Sepals (in the regular flowers) 5, over- 
lapping in the bud.
Petals 5, twisted in the bud.
Stamens 5 to 
10, often united at the base.
Ovary 5-lobed and 5-celled, with 
one or several seeds in each, all attached to the central axis.
Styles 5.
Eruit 5-lobed, the carpels opening or partially falling 
off when ripe, leaving a central, persistent axis.
In the genera 
w T ith irregular flowers these characters are much modified (see 
Balsam).
The Geranium family resembles the Pink and Mallow families in 
the twisted arrangement of their petals, but differs from the former in 
foliage as well as in fruit, and from the latter in the definite stamens.
The species are distributed nearly all over the globe, but most nume- 
rous in the temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, and more 
especially in south-western Africa.
The limits of the Order are as yet 
very unsettled, some botanists including Flaxes, and many other 
exotic genera, whilst others exclude \Balsam, Oxalis, and Tropceolum, 
confining it to the old Linnaean genus Geranium.
Flowers regular.
Leaves opposite, cut or toothed.
Carpels 1-seeded, round 
base of a long-beaked receptacle or axis.
Ten stamens 1.
Geranium.
Five stamens 2.
Erobiuh.
GERANIACEJ].
159 
Leaves radical, with three entire leaflets.
Receptacle or axis 
not beaked.
Carpels with several seeds 3.
Oxaijs.
Flowers very irregular, spurred.
Leaves alternate.
Capsule 
with several seeds 4.
Balsam.
The Cape Pelargoniums, so frequent in our greenhouses, belong to 
the Geranium family.
The South American Tropceolums, including 
the common Nasturtium of our gardeners, are very nearly allied to 
Pelargonium, although some botanists now propose to remove them 
far away from the family.
I. GERANIUM.
GERANIUM.
Herbs, with forked stems often swollen at the nodes, opposite, pal- 
mately-divided leaves, and purplish flowers, solitary or two together, on 
axillary peduncles.
Stamens 10, of which 5 shorter, but generally with 
anthers.
Ovary 5-lobed, terminating in a long beak with 5 short 
stigmas on the top, the lobes being all whorled round the long-beaked 
receptacle.
Capsule separating into 5 one-seeded carpels, which curl 
upwards, with a long elastic awn, detached from the beak, and glabrous 
inside.
A genus spread over the northern hemisphere, with a few species in 
the southern, but always without the tropics.
It is easily distinguished 
from all but Mrodium by the long beak of the fruit, which has given to 
the two genera Geranium and Er odium the popular name of Crane s- 
bill.
Rootstock perennial.
Flowers usually large.
Peduncles 1 -flowered 1.
Blood G.
Peduncles with 2 (rarely 3) flowers.
Petals deeply notched.
(Flowers not so large) .
. 5.
Mountain G.
Petals entire or slightly notched.
Petals dark-purple, very spreading or almost re- 
flexed.
Points of the sepals very short .
. 2.
DusJcy G.
Petals bluish-purple.
Sepals with long fine points.
Pedicels of the fruit erect.
Flowers numerous, 
corymbose 3.
Wood 67.
Pedicels of the fruit spreading or reflexed.
Flowers in a loose panicle 4.
Meadoiv G.
Annuals, with small flowers.
Leaves of 3 distinct segments, which are pinnately cut 
or divided 6.
Herb- Robert G.
Leaves palmately cut or divided into 5 or more lobes 
or segments.
Calyx pyramidal, w T ith projecting angles.
Petals 
entire, much longer than the sepals 7.
Shining G.
Calyx scarcely angular.
Petals about as long, unless 
deeply notched.
160 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
Leaves divided to the base into 5 or more narrow 
cut segments.
Peduncles much shorter than the leafstalks.
Leaves much divided.
Seeds dotted .
. .11.
Cut-leaved G.
Leaves small, the lower ones divided to the 
middle only.
Seeds smooth .
. .
.9.
Small-flowered G.
Peduncles and pedicels long and slender.
Leaves 
much divided 12.
Long-stalked G.
Leaves orbicular, seldom divided below the middle.
Petals deeply notched.
Petals twice as long as the calyx .
. .
. 5.
Mountain G.
Petals not longer than the calyx ....
8. Dove's-foot G.
Petals entire or slightly notched.
Leaves shortly divided into broad lobes.
Seeds 
dotted 10.
Round-leaved G.
Leaves divided to the middle.
Seeds smooth 9.
Small-flowered G.
Two other Continental perennial species are included in some of ,our 
Floras as having occasionally strayed from gardens ; the striate G.
(G.
striatum), with long hairs on the stems, and rather large flowers, the 
petals very pale, elegantly veined, and rather deeply notched ; and the 
knotty G.
(G.
nodosum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1091), a glabrous plant, the lobes 
of the leaves very pointed, and the petals of a purplish red, much less 
notched.
G. macrorhizon and several other exotic perennials are also 
cultivated in our flower-gardens.
1. Blood Geranium 
Pig. isa 
Geranium sanguineum, Linn.
(Kg. 199.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 272.) 
Hootstock thick and woody, sometimes 
creeping.
Stems numerous, about a foot 
long, decumbent or rarely erect, with 
spreading hairs.
Leaves nearly orbi- 
cular, but divided to the base in 5 or 7 
segments, w r hich are again cut into 3 or 
5 narrow lobes.
Flowers large, of a 
dark purple, growing singly on long, 
slender peduncles.
Sepals hairy, with 
a fine point.
Petals twice as long, ob- 
ovate, slightly notched, and very spread- 
ing.
In dry w T oods and pastures, in tem- 
perate and southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, penetrating far into Scandinavia.
In Britain, it occurs in many localities 
and yet is not very general.
FL sum- 
GERANIACE^E.
161 
mer.
A variety with more flesh-coloured flowers, and of shorter growth, 
originally found in the Isle of Walney, Lancashire, has been published 
as a species, under the name of G.
lancastriense.
2. Dusky Geranium.
Geranium phseum, Linn.
(Fig. 200.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 322.) 
Hootstock and general mode of growth 
of the wood G., but the stems are weaker, 
with fewer flowers, the leaves less deeply 
cut, with broader lobes, and the petals, 
of a dark, dingy purple colour, are 
broadly obovate, quite entire, and spread 
very open from the base, or are almost 
renexed.
In woods and meadows, in hilly dis- 
tricts, in central and western Europe, 
not extending to its eastern limits, and 
in northern Europe only as an intro- 
duced plant.
In Britain, also believed 
to be an introduced plant, although said 
to be apparently wild in some parts of 
Westmoreland and Yorkshire.
Fl. all 
summer.
V » 
Fig. 200 
3. Wood Geranium.
Geranium sylvaticum, Linn.
(Fig. 201.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 121.) 
Hootstock very short, covered with the brow T n scarious stipules of the 
old leaves.
Stems erect or ascending, 1 to 2 feet high or rather more.
Radical leaves on long stalks, palmately divided almost to the base 
with 5 or 7 pointed lobes more or less cut and serrated.
Stem-leaves 
few, on much shorter stalks.
The upper part of the stem is repeatedly 
forked, forming a rather dense, corymbose panicle of handsome pur- 
plish flowers.
Peduncles short, each with two flowers, on short pedicels, 
which remain erect when the fruit ripens.
Sepals ending in a fine point 
above a line long.
Petals obovate, slightly notched, scarcely twice 
VOL.
I. o 
162 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
as long as the calyx.
Filaments of the 
stamens hairy, scarcely flattened.
In moist woods and thickets, and 
mountain meadows, throughout Europe 
and Russian Asia, extending to the 
Arctic regions.
In Britain, chiefly in 
western, central, and northern England, 
Scotland, and northern Ireland.
FL 
summer.
Fig. 201.
4. Meadow Geranium.
Geranium pratense, Linn.
(Eig. 202.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 404.) 
Distinguished from the wood G., 
chiefly by its more cut leaves, and larger 
bluish-purple flowers loosely panicled on 
longer peduncles ; the pedicels always 
more or less spreading or reflexed after 
flowering.
The filaments are also much 
flattened in their lower part, and the 
claws of the petals ciliated on the edge, 
not bearded inside.
In meadows, woods, and thickets, 
roadsides, etc., widely spread over Eu- 
rope and Russian Asia, but not an Arctic 
species, although, like the last, chiefly a 
mountain plant in southern Europe.
In 
Britain, rather less frequent than the 
wood G., not extending so far north in 
Scotland, but more widely spread in 
southern England ; not recorded in the 
Irish Elora.
FL summer.
Fig. 202.
GERANIACE7E.
163 
5. Mountain Geranium.
Geranium pyrenaicum, Linn.
(Fig. 203.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 405.) 
A perennial, like the last four species, 
but with smaller flowers, and much of 
the habit of the annual ones.
Stems 
often 2 feet long or more, and branched, 
more or less covered with short, soft 
hairs.
Leaves orbicular, deeply cut into 
5 or 7 coarsely toothed, usually obtuse 
lobes.
Flowers numerous, on slender 
pedicels, two together on each peduncle.
Sepals scarcely 2 lines long.
Petals 
about twice their length, pale-purple and 
veined, deeply notched.
A native of the hilly districts of cen- 
tral and southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, but frequently naturalized on 
roadsides and waste places further to the 
north.
In Britain it appears to be fully 
established in several parts of England, 
southern Scotland, and Ireland.
Fl.
spring and summer.
Fig. 203.
6. Herb-Robert Geranium.
Geranium Robertianum, L.
(Fig. 204.) 
(Eng. Bot.
f. 1486.
Herb- Robert.) 
An erect or spreading, much branched annual, 6 inches to near a 
foot high, generally bearing a few soft hairs, often turning bright-red 
in all its parts, and smelling disagreeably when rubbed.
Leaves 
divided into 3 pinnate or twice pinnate segments, never orbicular or 
palmate (except the 3 primary divisions).
Flowers rather small.
Se- 
pals hairy, with long points.
Petals reddish-purple or rarely white, 
sometimes nearly twice the length of the calyx, obovate and entire, 
with glabrous, erect claws.
Carpels glabrous, with a few transverse 
wrinkles.
In stony and waste places, open woods, etc., very common through- 
o2 
164 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
out Europe, Eussian and central Asia, 
northern America, short of the Arctic 
Circle.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. the 
tvhole season.
A maritime variety, with 
thicker leaves and smaller flowers, has 
been described under the name of 
G. purpureum (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2648.) 
Fig. 204.
7. Shining Geranium.
Geranium lucidum, Linn.
(Fig. 205.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 75, the leaves not correct.) 
An annual, often turning red like the 
Herb-Robert G., but always glabrous 
and shining, and the leaves are orbicular 
and palmately lobed, with broad seg- 
ments usually obtuse, or rarely slightly 
pointed.
It is easily distinguished also 
from all our Geraniums by the pyra- 
midal calyx, the edges of the erect 
sepals forming very projecting angles.
Petals like those of the Serb-Robert 
6r., but smaller.
In stony and waste places, on old walls, 
etc., in temperate and southern Europe 
and central Asia, extending northwards 
into Scandinavia.
Generally distributed 
over Britain, excepting northern Scot- 
Fig. 205.
land.
Fl. spring and summer.
GEEANIACE^E.
165 
8. Dove's-foot Geranium.
Geranium molle, Linn.
(Kg. 206.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 778.) 
An annual, often tufted at the base, 
more or less covered with rather long, 
soft, spreading hairs ; the stems weak 
and spreading, very short when first 
flowering, and seldom attaining a foot.
Radical leaves numerous, on very long 
stalks, orbicular, rather above an inch 
diameter, divided to below the middle 
into 7 to 11 obovate or wedge-shaped 
lobes, which are again 3- or 5-lobed ; the 
upper leaves few, small, with fewer but 
deeper and narrower divisions.
Pe- 
duncles shorter than the leaves, each 
with 2 small purplish flowers ; the sepals 
obtuse or scarcely pointed ; the petals 
deeply notched, scarcely longer than the 
calyx.
Carpels distinctly marked with 
transverse wrinkles.
Seeds quite smooth, 
without dots.
In waste and cultivated places, throughout Europe, except 
the extreme north, and spread over many other countries as 
of cultivation.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. the whole season.
Fig. 206.
perhaps 
a weed 
9. Small-flowered Geranium.
Geranium pusillum, Linn.
(Eig. 207.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 385.) 
Yery near the doves-foot G., but less hairy, and the leaves usually 
smaller and more deeply divided.
Sepals with a short but distinct 
point.
Petals but slightly notched.
Carpels not wrinkled, but hairy 
as in the round-leaved G., whilst the seeds are as smooth as in the 
doves-foot G.
Five of the stamens have usually, and perhaps con- 
stantly, no anthers, as in Er odium.
The upper leaves are sometimes 
divided to the base ; the species is then distinguished from the cut- 
leaved G.
by the smaller leaves and smooth seeds.
166 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
1b m% 
In waste and cultivated places, through- 
out Europe, except the extreme north, 
but not generally so common as the 
doves-foot G.
In Britain certainly not 
so abundant as that species, but per- 
haps sometimes mistaken for it, and 
thus overlooked.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 207.
10.
Round-leaved Geranium.
Geranium rotundifolium, L.
(Fig. 208.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 157.) 
Usually rather a stouter plant than 
the dove s -foot G., but with the same 
orbicular leaves and soft hairs ; the 
lobes of the leaves rather broader, more 
obtuse, and not so deep ; the peduncles 
shorter ; the flowers still smaller, with 
entire obovate petals, scarcely exceeding 
the slightly pointed sepals.
Carpels 
hairy, without wrinkles, and the seeds 
dotted, as in the two following species.
In waste and cultivated places, re- 
corded as common in Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia, and certainly so in the south, 
much less frequent in the north, the 
doves-foot G.
being, probably, frequently 
mistaken for it.
In Britain rather scarce, 
chiefly occurring in southern and cen- 
tral England, and some parts of Ireland.
Fig. 208.
FL summer.
GEEANIACE^.
167 
11.
Cut-leaved Geranium.
Geranium dissectum, Linn.
(Fig. 209.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 753.) 
An annual, like the last three, but 
often more erect, and usually more 
branched, and the leaves much more 
deeply divided into 5, 7 or 9 narrow 
segments, which are again deeply trifid 
or lobed.
Peduncles very short, bearing 
two small purple flowers ; the sepals 
rather larger than in the last three 
species, with distinct subulate points ; 
the petals about their length, slightly 
notched.
Carpels hairy, without wrinkles, 
Seeds beautifully and minutely reticu- 
lated or dotted.
The hairiness of the 
plant is yariable ; usually the stems are 
clothed with long, reflexed hairs, the 
leaves with a short, soft down.
In dry pastures, waste and cultivated 
places, common in Europe and Russian 
Asia, except the extreme north, a slight 
variety or closely allied species, equally common in North America, 
and another larger-flowered perennial form extends over western North 
America, the greater part of South America, southern Australia, and 
New Zealand.
Abundant in Britain.
FL spring and summer.
Fig. 209.
12.
Long-stalked Geranium.
Geranium Columbinum, L.
(Eig. 210.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 259.) 
An annual, with slender, decumbent, slightly hairy stems ; the leaves 
deeply divided as in the cut-leaved G., but the segments still nar- 
rower, mostly linear ; the peduncles and pedicels longer and more 
slender; the calyx considerably longer, with long, slender points.
Pe- 
tals entire or notched, seldom exceeding the calyx.
Carpels but 
slightly hairy, or quite glabrous, not wrinkled.
Seeds dotted as in 
the cut-leaved G.
168 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
In dry pastures, on banks and waste 
places, widely spread over Europe and 
Russian Asia, except the extreme north.
Not so common as the cut-leaved G.
in 
Britain, and very local in Scotland.
FL 
spring and summer.
II.
ERODIUM.
EBODIUM.
Prostrate or decumbent herbs, differing from Geranium in the di- 
visions or nerves of the leaves being pinnate, not palmate ; in the 
stamens always reduced to 5, the 5 alternate ones being rudimentary 
only ; in the awns of the carpels bearded with a few long hairs on the 
inside, and spirally twisted after they are detached from the axis.
The 
flowers are also frequently more than two together, in an umbel on 
the summit of the peduncle.
The geographical range is nearly that of Geranium, in which genus 
it was included by Linnaeus.
But the greater number of the species 
are maritime plants from the Mediterranean regions, or roadside weeds, 
with flowers so insignificant, that but few have ever been cultivated.
Leaves pinnate, with, distinct segments.
Segments deeply pinnatifid, with toothed lobes.
Flowers of a reddish purple.
.....
1. Common JS.
Segments ovate, coarsely toothed or shortly lobed.
Flowers of a bluish purple 2.
Musk E.
Leaves toothed or lobed, but not divided into dis- 
tinct segments.
Leaves ovate 3.
Sea B.
Leaves palmately lobed Small-flowered Geranium.
gekaniace;e.
169 
1. Common Erodium.
Erodium cicutarium, L'Her.
(Fig. 211.) 
(Eng. Bpt.
t. 1768.) 
Usually an annual, but often forming 
a dense tuft, with a thick taproot, and in 
some situations lasting at least a second 
year, always more or less covered with 
spreading hairs, which are sometimes 
viscid.
Stems sometimes exceedingly 
short, sometimes lengthening out to 6 
inches or near a foot.
Leaves mostly 
radical, pinnate, on long stalks, the seg- 
ments distinct and deeply pinnatifid, 
with narrow, more or less cut lobes.
Peduncles erect, bearing an umbel of 
from 2 or 3 to 10 or 12 small purple or 
pink flowers.
Sepals pointed, about the 
length of the obovate, entire petals.
Carpels slightly hairy, the beak varying 
from 6 to 18 lines in length.
In waste and cultivated lands and 
dry pastures, especially near the sea, 
and on roadsides ; very common in Eu- 
rope, Russian and central Asia, and northern America, short of the 
Arctic Circle.
Generally distributed over Britain.
Fl. spring and 
summer.
A maritime, more viscid, and hairy variety, known in southern 
Europe as E.
hirtum, is also found on our own coasts.
Fig. 211.
2. Musk Erodium.
Erodium moschatum, L'Her.
(Fig. 212.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 902.) 
A much larger and coarser plant than the common _£*., often emitting 
a strong smell of musk.
Stems often a foot long.
Leaves on long foot- 
stalks, with from 9 to 11 distinct, ovate, segments or leaflets, often cor- 
date at the base, and deeply toothed or shortly pinnatifid.
Flowers 
generally numerous in the umbel, of a bluish purple, rather larger than 
in the common E., although the petals are scarcely longer than the 
calyx.
Peduncles often 6 or 8 inches long.
170 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
In sandy, waste places and heaths, 
especially near the sea, in western and 
southern Europe.
Abundant in the 
Channel Islands, in some parts of the 
south of Ireland, and occurring occa- 
sionally on the southern and western 
coasts of England.
Fl. summer.
Tig. 212.
3. Sea Erodium.
Erodium maritimum, L'Her.
(Fig. 213.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 64,6.) 
A small, softly hairy, often viscid an- 
nual, with the same varying habit as the 
common F., but easily distinguished by 
the simple, not pinnate leaves, often not 
above half an inch long, ovate-cordate, 
more or less toothed or even lobed, but 
seldom beyond halfway to the midrib.
Peduncles seldom longer than the leaves, 
with 1, 2, or rarely more, small, reddish- 
purple flowers.
Beak of the fruit seldom 
above 6 lines long ; the hairs of the in- 
side of the awn very few, perhaps some- 
times entirely wanting.
In maritime sands, in western Europe, 
and on the Mediterranean, where it varies 
much more than with us, and should 
probably include several species of mo- 
dern botanists.
Not uncommon on the 
south and west coasts of England, up to 
the south of Scotland, less frequent in Ireland.
Has been found also 
in some inland situations in England.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 213.
GERANIACE^l.
171 
III.
OXALIS.
OXALIS.
Herbs, either annual, or with a tuberous or creeping, perennial root- 
stock, and, in European species, palmately trifoliate, long-stalked 
leaves.
Elowers solitary, or several in an umbel, on radical or axillary 
peduncles.
Sepals 5.
Petals 5.
Stamens 10.
Ovary angular, not 
beaked, 5-celled, with several ovules in each cell.
Styles 5, short, 
scarcely united at the base.
Capsule with 5 angles, opening in as 
many valves.
A very numerous genus, widely diffused over the temperate and 
hotter regions of the globe.
A few tropical species have entire or pin- 
nate leaves, and are occasionally undershrubs ; but the great mass of 
the genus, like the few European species, are remarkable for their 
leaves, with 3 obovate leaflets like those of a Clover.
Flowers white.
Peduncles radical, 1-flowered 1.
Sorrel O.
Flowers small, yellow.
Stem elongated.
Peduncles axillary 2.
Procumbent O.
Many exotic species, with yellow or reddish flowers, have at various 
times been cultivated, either in our flower-gardens, or, for their tu- 
berous rootstocks, as esculents.
1. Sorrel Oxalis.
Oxalis Acetosella, Linn.
(Fig. 214.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 762.
Wood-sorrel.) 
Hootstock shortly creeping, slender, 
but often knotted with thickened scales.
Leaves radical, with long stalks, and 3 
obovate, delicately green leaflets, with a 
slightly acid flavour.
Peduncles radical, 
long and slender, bearing a single/rather 
large white flower, and 2 small bracts, 
about halfway up.
Sepals small, ovate, 
obtuse, thin.
Petals obovate, about 6 
lines long.
Capsule ovoid, with 2 shin- 
ing black seeds in each cell.
In woods, throughout Europe, Rus- 
sian and central Asia, and northern 
America.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. early 
spring.
This is the original of the Irish 
Shamrock, although that emblem is now 
represented by the white Clover.
Fig. 214.
172 
THE GERANIUM FAMILY.
2. Procumbent Oxalis.
Oxalis corniculata, Linn.
(Fig. 215.) 
(Eng. Bot, t.
1726.) 
A more or less downy annual, or, in 
warmer climates, a perennial, with 
slender, spreading branches, seldom 
above 6 incbes long.
Leaves of 3 deeply 
obcordate leaflets, with small stipules at 
the base of the leafstalks.
Peduncles 
slender, axillary, bearing an umbel of 
from 2 to 4, or rarely 5, pale yellow 
flowers, much smaller than in the Sor- 
rel O.
Believed to be of American origin, 
but now a common weed in all the hotter, 
and most of the temperate regions of the 
globe.
In Britain, only in a few locali- 
ties in southern England, except where 
accidentally introduced into gardens.
Fl. the whole season.
A closely allied 
Fig. 215.
American species, the O.
stricta, with a 
more erect stem and no perceptible sti- 
pules, has also occasionally appeared among garden weeds.
IV.
BALSAM.
IMPATIENS.
Herbs, mostly glabrous or almost succulent, with alternate, un- 
divided leaves, no stipules, and very irregular flowers.
Sepals and 
petals all coloured, and consisting usually of 6 pieces, viz.
: 2 outer, 
opposite (sepals), flat and oblique ; the next (upper sepal, although by 
the twisting of the pedicel it hangs lowest), large, hood-shaped, ending 
below in a conical spur ; the fourth (lower petal, but uppermost from 
the twisting of the pedicel), much smaller, but yet very broad, and 
somewhat concave ; the 2 innermost (petals) very oblique and irre- 
gularly shaped, more or less divided into two unequal lobes.
Stamens 
5, with very short, thick filaments, the anthers cohering in a mass 
round the pistil.
Ovary 5-celled, with several ovules in each cell.
Stigmas 5, minute, sessile or nearly so.
Capsule bursting elastically in 
5 valves, which roll inwards, scattering the seeds.
GERANIACE.ft.
173 
A numerous genus, chiefly East Indian, with a few North American 
species.
Flowers yellow.
Spur of the calyx loosely bent back, and entire 1.
Yellow B.
Flowers orange-brown.
Spurs closely bent back upon the calyx, 
and notched at the extremity 2.
Orange B.
Several East Indian species are cultivated for their flowers, and 
amongst them the well-known garden Balsam (I.
Balsamina), whose 
flowers become double with great readiness.
1. Yellow Balsam.
Impatiens BToli-me-tangere, Linn.
(Fig. 216.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 937.
Touch-me-not.) 
An erect, glabrous, branching annual, 
1 to 2 feet high ; the stem rather suc- 
culent, and swollen at the nodes.
Leaves 
stalked, ovate, pointed, toothed, of a 
pale green, and very flaccid.
Peduncles 
axillary, slender, bearing one or two per- 
fect flowers, which are large and showy, 
yellow, spotted with orange ; the hooded 
sepal ending a long spur, curved upwards, 
and bent back upon the flower.
These 
flowers seldom set their seed in this 
country ; the pods are chiefly produced 
by minute, imperfect flowers, of which i 
there are several on the same peduncles 
as the perfect ones.
In moist woods and shady places, in 
the hilly districts of Europe and Russian 
Asia, extending northwards into Scan- 
dinavia.
In Britain, chiefly in northern 
England and North Wales, extending neither into Scotland nor Ire- 
land.
Fl. summer, till rather late.
Fig. 216.
2. Orange Balsam.
Impatiens fulva, Nutt.
(Fig. 217.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2794.) 
An annual, closely resembling the yellow B., except that the flowers 
174 
THE MAPLE TRIBE.
Fig. 217.
are of a deeper orange-colour, spotted 
with reddish-brown, and the spur is 
very closely bent back upon the calyx, 
and slightly notched at the extremity.
A North American plant, which ap- 
pears to have fully established itself 
along the Wey, and some other streams 
in Surre} r .
FL summer.
The Rue of our gardens (Ruta graveolens), and the Fraxinella of 
flower-gardens (Dictamnus Fraxinella), both from southern Europe, 
belong to the very large Rue family, chiefly numerous within the tro- 
pics, and in the southern hemisphere, but unrepresented in Britain.
The Diosmas, Correas, and many other South African and Australian 
plants in our plant-houses, are members of the same family.
XXI.
THE MAPLE TRIBE.
ACERACEiE.
(A Tribe of the Sapindus family, or Sapindacece.) 
The Maple tribe corresponds to the Linnsean genus Acer, which 
modern botanists have broken up into two or three, by the sepa- 
ration of a few North American or East Indian species.
The 
whole group consists, however, but of very few species, ranging 
over the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere.
The true Sapindacece are mostly tropical trees or lofty climbers, 
and are seldom to be met with even in our hothouses ; but the Horse- 
chestnuts {JEsculus, Linn.), so much planted in our parks and grounds, 
form another group in the same family, or, according to some bota- 
ACERACEJS.
] 75 
nists, the small adjoining family of Hippocastanece, which, like the 
Maple tribe, contains a small number of trees or shrubs from the 
northern hemisphere.
The Bladder-nut of our shrubberies (Staphylea 
pinnata, Eng. Bot, t.
1560), from central and eastern Europe, is the 
type of a third tribe of Sajoindacece, in which, as in the Maples and 
Horse-chestnuts, the leaves are always opposite, whilst in the true Sa- 
pindacea?
they are generally alternate.
I. MAPLE.
ACER.
Trees, with opposite, palmately -veined and lobed leaves, no stipules, 
and small, greenish flowers, in axillary corymbs or racemes.
Sepals 
usually 5, overlapping each other in the bud, and more or less united 
at the base.
Petals 5, or sometimes 4, or entirely wanting.
Stamens 
about 8, inserted on a thick disk below the ovary.
Ovary 2-lobed or 
rarely 3-lobed, each lobe enclosing one cell with 2 ovules suspended 
from the inner angle.
Styles 2, rarely 3, often united at the base.
Emit separating when ripe into 2, rarely 3, indehiscent carpels or nuts, 
produced into a wing at the top, and called keys or samaras.
Seeds 1 
or 2 in each carpel, without albumen.
A genus not numerous in species, but extending over Europe, Rus- 
sian and central Asia, and North America.
It differs from all British 
trees, except the Ash, by its opposite leaves, and from that genus by 
the flowers, and by the palmate not pinnate leaves.
Flowers on short, loose, erect corymbs.
Wings of the carpels 
diverging horizontally 1.
Common M.
Flowers in pendulous racemes.
Wings of the carpels erect, 
parallel or slightly diverging 2.
Sycamore M.
The A.
platanoides and A.
monspessulanum from eastern or southern 
Europe, the sugar Maple (A.
saccharatum), from North America, and 
some other exotic true Maples, besides the ash-leaved Maple, forming 
the genus Negundo, from North America, may be met with in our 
parks and plantations.
1. Common Maple.
Acer eampestre, Linn.
(Eig. 218.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 304.) 
When full-grown, a rather handsome, round-headed, though not 
very tall tree, with a dense, dark-green foliage, but, as it is of slow 
growth and flowers when young, it is often seen as a small scraggy 
tree, or mere bush, in our hedges.
Leaves on slender stalks, 2 to 3 
176 
THE MAPLE TRIBE.
inches broad, divided to about the mid- 
dle into 5 broad, usually obtuse lobes, 
entire or sinuate, glabrous above, often 
downy underneath.
Flowers few, on 
slender pedicels, in loose, erect corymbs, 
shorter than the leaves.
Carpels downy 
or rarely glabrous, the wings spreading 
horizontally, so as to form together one 
straight line.
In European woods, extending east- 
ward to the Caucasus, and northward to 
southern Sweden.
In Britain, abundant 
in southern England, and apparently 
truly indigenous as far north as Cheshire 
and the Tyne.
Scarcely indigenous in 
Ireland.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 218.
Sycamore Maple.
Acer Pseudo-platanus, Linn.
(Eg. 219.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 303.
Sycamore.) 
A much handsomer and freer-growing 
tree than the common M., the leaves 
larger, with more pointed and toothed 
lobes, not unlike those of a Plane-tree.
Flowers in loose, oblong, hanging ra- 
cemes.
Wings of the carpels nearly 
parallel, or diverging so as to form a 
right angle, not spreading into one 
straight line.
A native of the mountains of central 
Europe and western Asia, extensively 
planted in Britain, and in many places 
sows itself so readily that it may al- 
most be considered as naturalized.
Fl.
spring.
Fig. 219.
CELASTEACEJE.
177 
XXII.
THE CELASTRUS FAMILY.
CELASTRACE^l.
A rather numerous family, in warm climates of both the new 
and the old world, and in the southern hemisphere, but confined 
in Britain to the single genus Spindle -tree.
The exotic genera 
associated with it differ chiefly in the shape of the parts of the 
flowers, or in the various forms the frnit assumes as it ripens.
I. SPINDLE-TREE.
EVONYMUS.
Shrubs, with opposite, undivided leaves, and small, green or purplish, 
regular flowers, in loose, axillary cymes.
Calyx small and flat, with 4 
or 5 broad, short lobes, overlapping each other in the bud.
Petals as 
many, also overlapping each other.
Stamens as many, alternating 
with the petals, and united with them on a slightly thickened disk, 
which covers the base of the calyx.
Ovary immersed in the disk, with 
a very short, protruding style.
Capsule with 4 (rarely 3 or 5) angles 
or lobes, enclosing as many cells, and opening, when ripe, in as many 
valves along the middle of each cell.
Seeds solitary in each cell, en- 
closed in a coloured, fleshy arillus.
Embryo in a fleshy albumen.
A genus widely diffused over Europe, Asia, and JNTorth America, and 
easily recognized by its fruit.
1. Common Spindle-tree.
Evonymus europseus, Linn.
(Fig. 220.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 362.
Spindle-tree.) 
A glabrous shrub, about 3 to 5 feet 
high.
Leaves shortly stalked, ovate- 
obloug or lanceolate, pointed, and mi- < 
nutely toothed.
Peduncles shorter than 
the leaves, with seldom more than 3 or 
5 flowers, of a yellowish-green colour.
Petals 4, obovate, about 2 lines long, the 
stamens half that length.
Pod red when 
ripe, opening at the angles so as to show 
the seeds enclosed in a brilliant orange- 
coioured arillus.
In hedges and thickets, in tempe- 
rate and southern Europe, and western [ 
Asia, extending into southern Scandina- 
via.
Frequent in many parts of England 
and Ireland, but does not reach far 
into Scotland.
Fl. spring or early sum- 
mer.
Fig. 220.
VOL.
I. 
178 THE BUCKTHORN FAMILY.
The JE.
latifolius, from the continent of Europe, the E.
atropur- 
pureus, from North America, and some other exotic species, are occa- 
sionally planted in our shrubberies.
XXIII.
THE BUCKTHORN FAMILY.
UHAMNACEiE.
An extensive family, widely dispersed over the globe, but con- 
fined in Britain to the single genus Buckthorn.
The exotic genera 
all agree with that one, and differ from the adjoining families in 
the position of the stamens, alternating with fche sepals, the petals 
either small and opposite to (or underneath) the stamens, or 
wanting.
The CeanotJiuses of our gardens belong to this family.
The Grape 
Vine, the Virginian creeper, and other species of Vitis have the same 
relative position of the stamens and sepals ; but the stamens being more 
decidedly hypogynous, and the habit different, they form the indepen- 
dent Vine family.
I. BUCKTHORN.
RHAMNUS.
Shrubs, with alternate undivided leaves, and small green flowers on 
short pedicels, usually clustered in the axils of the leaves.
Calyx with 
4 or 5 short, deciduous teeth or sepals.
Petals none or very small.
Stamens 4 or 5, alternating with the teeth of the calyx and opposite 
the petals, inserted on a disk which lines the base of the calyx.
Ovary 
free, 3- or 4-celled, with one erect ovule in each cell.
Style very short.
Fruit a small berry (or drupe) enclosing 3 or 4 small one-seeded nuts.
Embryo in a fleshy albumen.
A considerable genus widely spread over the northern hemisphere, 
both in the new and the old world, penetrating into the tropics, with a 
few southern species.
Leaves minutely toothed.
Branches often thorny.
Flowers 
dioecious ; stamens 4 , .
. .
1. Common B.
Leaves entire.
No thorns.
Flowers hermaphrodite ; stamens 5 2.
Alder B.
The evergreen Alaternus of our shrubberies is a species of Buck- 
thorn (JR.
Alaternus) from southern Europe.
RHAMNACEJE.
179 
1. Common Buckthorn.
Rhamnus eatharticns, Linn.
(Fig. 221.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1629.) 
A glabrous shrub with spreading 
branches, the smaller ones often ending 
in a stout thorn.
Leaves stalked, ovate, 
acuminate or pointed, rarely obtuse, 1^ 
to 2 inches long, bordered by very small 
regular teeth, marked with a few promi- 
nent veins, obliquely diverging from the 
midrib, and mostly proceeding from be- 
low the middle.
Flowers dioecious, very 
small, usually thickly clustered in the 
axils of the leaves.
Petals 4, very nar- 
row, and not longer than the teeth of 
the calyx.
Fruit black, about the size 
of a pea.
In hedges and bushy places, extend- 
ing over Europe, Eussian Asia, and 
northern America, but not an Arctic species.
Not abundant in England 
or Ireland, and very rare in Scotland.
Fl. spring or early summer.
Fig. 221.
2. Alder Buckthorn.
Rhamnus Frangula, Linn.
(Fig. 222.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 250, not good.) 
A more erect shrub than the common 
R., not thorny, the leaves broader and 
more obtuse, entire or slightly sinuate, 
having sometimes a minute down on the 
under side, and the lateral veins more 
numerous, diverging equally from the 
midrib almost the whole of its length.
Flowers 2 or 3 together in each axil, all 
hermaphrodite ; the minute petals, the 
teeth of the calyx, and the stamens, in 
fives.
Fruit dark-purple, the size of a 
pea.
In hedges and bushy places, through- 
out Europe and Eussian Asia, except the 
extreme north.
In Britain rather more 
frequent than the common R., but still 
rare in Scotland.
FL spring or early 
summer.
Fjg ^ 
p 2 
180 THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
The Sumachs of our shrubberies (species of Rhus) belong to the large 
family of Terebinthacece, widely spread over the temperate and hotter 
regions of the globe, but unrepresented in Britain.
They are usually 
shrubs or trees, with mostly compound leaves, small regular flowers, 
definite stamens, inserted under a perigynous disk, quite free from the 
ovary, and no albumen in the seed.
XXIV.
THE PEAFLOWEE, TRIBE.
PAPILIONACE2E.
(A Tribe of the Leguminous family, or Leguminosce.) 
Herbs, shrubs, or trees ; the leaves alternate (or, in a few exotic 
genera, opposite), usually furnished with stipules, simple or more 
frequently compound ; the leaflets either pinnately or digitately 
arranged on their common stalk.
Flowers in axillary or terminal 
racemes or spikes, rarely solitary.
Sepals combined into a single 
calyx, more or less divided into 5 or fewer teeth or lobes.
Corolla 
very irregular, consisting of 5 petals ; the upper one, called the 
standard, is outside of all in the bud, and usually the broadest ; 
the two lateral ones, called icings, are between the standard and 
the two lower ones, which are inside of all, and united more or 
less by their outer edge into a single one called the Tee el ; the 
claws of all five petals remaining free.
Stamens 10, the filaments 
in the British species either nionadelphous, all united in a sheath 
round the ovary, or diadelpJious, when the upper one is free and 
the other 9 united in a sheath.
Ovary single, 1-celled, with 1, 2, 
or more ovules arrranged along the inner or upper angle (the one 
next the standard) of the cavity.
Style simple.
Fruit a pod, 
usually opening in 2 valves.
Seeds with 2 large cotyledons and 
no albumen.
A very numerous tribe, widely distributed over the whole surface of 
the globe, and easily known by the peculiar form and arrangement of 
the petals, constituting the well-known peafloiver called by botanists 
papilionaceous, comparing it, by a not very intelligible stretch of imagi- 
nation, to a butterfly.
The whole family comprises two other tribes or 
suborders, chiefly tropical or southern: the Ccesalpinia tribe, repre- 
sented in our plantations by the Judas-tree (Cercis) and the Gleditschia 
or, in our plant-houses, by Cassias, JBauhinias, and occasionally some 
PAPILIONACE^].
181 
others ; and the Mimosa tribe, to which belong the Sensitive-plant 
(Mimosa pudica), the Calliandras, and the numerous Australian Acacias 
of our plant-houses.
The Leguminosce thus form, after the Composites, 
the most extensive of all the Natural Orders of flowering plants.
, f Leaves simple, or with 3 leaflets 2 
I Leaves pinnate, with 2, 4, or more leaflets 12 
r Calyx distinctly divided into two lips, either entire, or the upper one 2- 
2 < toothed and the lower one 3-toothed 3 
L Calyx with 5 distinct teeth, not arranged in two lips 5 
o J Calyx yellow, nearly as long as the petals, deeply divided into two 1.
Furze.
I Calyx short, not divided below the middle 4 
. J Lips of the calyx deeply toothed 2.
Genista.
I Teeth of the lips Yerj short 3.
Broom.
- f Keel of the corolla very pointed 6 
I Keel of the corolla obtuse .
. .
7 
f Leaves simple, or with 3 leaflets.
Flowers solitary or in racemes.
Sta- 
fi j mens monadelphous 4.
Ononis.
I Leaves with a pair of leaflets at the base of the stalk besides the three 
^ at the top.
Flowers in umbels.
Stamens diadelphous .
9. Lotus.
,_ f Shrubs or undershrubs.
Stamens monadelphous ...
2. Genista.
I Herbs.
Stamens diadelphous 8 
R f Leaves simple, or reduced to a tendril 19.
Pea.
I Leaves with 3 leaflets 9 
q f Pod much curved or spirally twisted.
Flowers in short racemes 5.
Medice.
I Pod straight or nearly so 10 
,J" Flowers in long racemes 6.
Melilot.
1 Flowers hi heads or short racemes 11 
,, f Pod several-seeded, much longer than the calyx ....
7. Trigone!.
I Pod 1- to 4-seeded, seldom exceeding the calyx ....
8. Clover.
, 2 [ Flowers in umbels or globular heads 13 
I Flowers in spikes or racemes, or solitary 17 
r Umbels with a leaf at the top of the peduncle immediately under the 
13 1 flowers 14 
I Umbels leafless .16 
, .
J Calyx inflated, enclosing the pod .......
10.
Anthyllis.
I Calyx not inflated, shorter than the pod 15 
Leaflets 5.
Keel pointed or beaked.
Pod not jointed ...
9. Lotus.
Leaflets many.
Keel obtuse.
Pod jointed .
. .
.14.
Bird's-foot.
lfi i Keel very pointed 15.
Hippocrepis.
C Keel small, obtuse.
Flowers minute 13.
Arthrolobe.
r Common stalk of all the leaves ending in a terminal leaflet.
Stipides 
27 I not sagittate 18 
i Common stalk of the leaves, at least of some of them, ending in a 
^ tendril or fine point.
Stipules sagittate, or half-sagittate 20 
18 f Pod short, flat with one seed 16.
Sainfoin.
1 Pod turgid, or elongated, with several seeds 19 
.{ 
182 THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
, q f Keel with a -short, distinct point .
12.
Oxyteope.
I Keel obtuse, without any point 11.
Astragal.
("Style filiform or angular, hairy on the outer side or all round.
Leaflets 
9n j small and numerous (except in the Bithynian V.) .
. .
17.
Vetch.
J Style flattened, hairy on the inner side only.
Leaflets usually few, and 
L rather large 18.
Pea.
Among the very numerous Pea/lowers cultivated in our gardens, and 
belonging to genera entirely exotic, the most common are, amongst 
trees, — the Laburnum (Cytisus Laburnum), the Bobinias (commonly 
called Acacias, but not the Acacias of botanists) ; among shrubs, — the 
bladder Senna (Colutea arborescens), the Spanish Broom (Spartium 
iunceum), several species of Cytisus, Caragana, Coronilla, etc.
; in 
flower-gardens, — several Lupines, the French Honeysuckle (LLedysarum 
coronarium), etc.
; and in kitchen-gardens, — the French Bean (Phaseo- 
lus vulgaris), the Scarlet runner (Phaseolus coccineus), etc.
; whilst 
the Australian Chorozemas, JTennedyas and others, the New Zealand 
Fdioardsias and Clianthus, the East Indian Piptanthus, Indigos, etc., 
the Chinese Millettia (Wistaria or Glycine of gardeners), and many 
others, from various parts of the world, are conspicuous in our plant- 
houses or on garden-walls.
I. FURZE.
ULEX.
Much branched, very thorny, green shrubs, with simple, prickle- 
shaped leaves, and yellow flowers.
Calyx coloured like the petals, 
divided nearly to the base into two concave segments or lips, which are 
entire or minutely toothed at the top.
Stamens all united into a com- 
plete sheath.
Pod few-seeded, scarcely longer than the calyx.
A genus of very few species, confined to western and central Europe 
and north-western Africa.
Calyx very hairy, with the bracts of the base about a line long 1.
Common F.
Calyx nearly glabrous, the bracts scarcely perceptible.
...
2. Dwarf F.
1. Common Furze.
Ulex europseus, Linn.
(Fig. 223.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 742.
Furze, Gorse, or Whin.) 
A shrub of 2 to 3 feet, or even twice that height when old and luxu- 
riant, and more or less hairy, especially on the main branches ; the 
numerous short, intricate, small branches all ending in a stout thorn.
Lower leaves occasionally lanceolate, but the greater number reduced 
to thorns, 2 to 6 lines long.
Flowers about 6 lines long, solitary in 
the axils of the leaves on the preceding year's shoots, forming showy 
PAPILIONACE.E.
183 
racemes, intermixed with thorns at the 
end of the branches.
Calyx yellow like 
the petals and but little shorter, clothed 
with brownish hairs, with a small, broad 
bract about a line long on each side at 
the base, besides a similar bract under 
the short pedicel.
Petals narrow.
On heaths and sandy and stony wastes 
in western Europe, extending eastward 
to northern and central Germany, but 
not a Mediterranean species.
Abundant 
in England, Ireland, and southern Scot- 
land, more scarce in the north.
Fl.
spring and early summer, commencing 
occasionally in winter, or even late in 
autumn.
A double-flowering variety, 
and another with compact erect branches, 
commonly called Irish Furze (or U.
stricta), are frequent in gardens.
Fig. 223.
2. Dwarf Furze.
Ulex nanus, Eorst.
(Fig. 224.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 743.) 
Yery near the common F., and per- 
haps a mere variety.
It is of smaller 
stature, less hairy, and of a deeper green ; 
the flowers of a deeper golden-yellow, 
and smaller ; the calyx glabrous, or with 
only a few short, scattered hairs, and 
the bracts at its base very much smaller, 
sometimes quite microscopic.
On heaths and sandy or stony wastes, 
more strictly western than the common 
F., as it does not cross the Rhine, but 
often intermixed with that species.
Yery 
abundant in Britain.
FL summer and 
autumn, whilst the common F.
is in fruit.
There are two forms, sometimes very 
distinct, at others running much one into 
the other ; one, the original Z7.
nanus, 
found chiefly in the plains of eastern 
England, is very dwarf or procumbent, 
h^ 
Fig. 224.
184 THE PEAFLOWEK TRIBE.
with the calyx about 4 lines long ; the other, under the name of Z7.
gallica, is more erect, with the catyx about 5 lines long, and is more 
frequent in western England, often covering large tracts in the Welsh 
mountains.
II.
GENISTA.
GENISTA.
Low branching green shrubs or undershrubs, with single (or in 
some exotic species trifoliolate) leaves and yellow flowers.
Calyx with 
5 teeth, the 2 upper ones much longer than the 3 lower.
Standard 
oblong, keel reflexed after flowering.
Stamens all united in a com- 
plete sheath.
Stigma oblique.
Pod longer than the calyx, with se- 
veral seeds.
A numerous genus chiefly in the Mediterranean region and western 
Asia, the few British species easily distinguished by their foliage and 
the shape of the petals.
Many exotic species, however, present so 
much variety, that the general circumscription of the genus, and its 
distinction from Cytisus and other allied genera, are as yet far from 
being settled.
No thorns.
Pod narrow, much flattened.
Corolla and pods without hairs.
Branches erect or ascending 1.
Dyer's G.
Corolla and pods hairy.
Branches mostly prostrate ...
2. Hairy G.
Lower branches very thorny.
Pod short and inflated ...
3. Needle G.
I. Dyer's Genista.
Genista tinctoria, Linn.
(Fig. 225.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 44.
Greenweed.) 
Stems woody, branching and decumbent at the base, the flowering 
branches erect or ascending, 1 to 1^ feet high, hard and stiff, but green.
Leaves sessile, from narrow-lanceolate to broadly elliptical or nearly 
ovate, glabrous or nearly so, and often shining.
Flowers in short ra- 
cemes at the ends of the branches, each one shortly stalked in the axil 
of a lanceolate bract, with very small bracteoles below the flowers.
Calyx short, all the teeth ending in a short, fine point, the upper 2 
broadly lanceolate, the 3 lower very narrow.
Petals about 6 lines long.
Pod nearly an inch long, flattened, and quite glabrous .
In pastures, thickets, and waste places throughout central and 
southern Europe, across Russian Asia to the Baikal, and northward to 
southern Sweden.
Frequent in the greater part of England, rare 
PAPILICNACE2E.
185 
in Scotland and Ireland.
Fl. summer, 
rather early.
The common form is erect, 
with lanceolate leaves ; in rich meadows 
it becomes very luxuriant, with ovate 
leaves ; in dry rocky soils the stem is 
more branched, and almost prostrate, 
like the hairy G.
t from which it is al- 
ways known by its more pointed leaves, 
and glabrous flowers and pods.
Fie. 225.
2. Hairy Genista.
Genista pilosa, Linn.
(Fig. 226.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 208.) 
Stems woody and prostrate, with nu- 
merous short, hard branches.
Leaves 
shortly obovate or lanceolate^ obtuse, 
glabrous above, but covered underneath 
with short, silky hairs.
Flowers smaller 
than in the Dyers G., of a bright yellow, 
on short pedicels in the axils of the last 
year's leaves.
Calyx silky.
Petals also 
covered outside with silky hairs.
Pod 
rather shorter and broader than in the 
Dyers G., thickly covered with longish 
hairs, which are appressed and silky when 
young, more spreading as the pod ripens.
In pastures, heaths, and dry, gravelly 
or stony places, common in central and 
southern Europe to the Caucasus, ex- 
tending northward to southern Sweden.
B,are in Britain, and only recorded from 
Pembrokeshire, Cornwall, and Devon- 
hire, in the west, and Sussex and Suffolk, in the east of England.
spring or early summer.
Fig. 226.
Fl.
186 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
3. Needle Genista.
Genista anglica, Linn.
(Fig. 227.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 132.
Petty Whin.) 
A small, loosely branched, spreading 
shrub, seldom a foot high, perfectly gla- 
brous, the lower branches converted into 
short, but slender, simple or branched 
thorns.
Leaves small, lanceolate or 
ovate.
Flowers few, in short, leafy ra- 
cemes, paler and smaller than in the 
Dyers G.
; the teeth of the calyx less 
unequal ; the petals narrow, and often 
turning green in drying.
Pods about 6 
lines long, broad, and much inflated.
On heaths, moors, and bushy pastures, 
in western Europe, extending eastward 
to Denmark and north-w r estern Ger- 
many.
Frequent in England and the 
greater part of Scotland, but not recorded 
from Ireland.
Fl. spring and early 
summer, and sometimes again later in the 
year.
Tig. 227.
III.
BROOM.
SABOTHAMNUS.
Shrubs, with stiff, green branches, the leaves mostly with 3 digi- 
tate leaflets.
Calyx campanulate, with 2 short, broad lips, minutely 
toothed at the top.
Petals broad, the keel obtuse and slightly in- 
curved.
Stamens all united into a complete sheath.
Style very long 
and spirally incurved.
Pod flat, much longer than the calyx, with 
many seeds.
A genus of very few species, chiefly from western Europe, separated 
by rather slight characters from the exotic genus Cytisus, but now 
generally adopted.
1. Common Broom.
Sarothamnus scoparius, Wimm.
(Fig. 228.) 
(Spartium, Eng. Bot.
t. 1339.) 
A shrub, of 3 to 5 feet, glabrous or nearly so, with numerous long, 
straight and erect, green, wiry branches prominently angled.
Lower leaves 
shortly stalked, with 3 small, obovate leaflets ; the upper leaves sessile ; 
PAPILIONACE^].
187 
the leaflets often reduced to a single 
one.
Flowers large, bright yellow soli- 
tary or in pairs, on slender pedicels, 
in the axils of the old leaves, forming 
handsome leafy racemes along the upper 
branches.
Petals all broad, the standard 
broadly orbicular, the keel often deflected 
as in Genista.
Pod 1J to 2 inches long, 
flat, hairy on the edges, but glabrous on 
the sides, the seeds attached to a line 
considerably within the edge of the pod.
On dry, hilly wastes and bushy places, 
chiefly in western Europe, but extend- 
ing more sparingly to its eastern limits, 
and northward into southern Sweden.
Common in England, Ireland, and the 
greater part of Scotland.
Fl. spring 
and early summer.
The Irish Broom, of our gardens is the 8.
patens from Portugal, 
not a native of Ireland.
The Spanish Broom belongs to the genus Spar- 
tium.
Other shrubs called Brooms in our gardens are species of 
Gytisus.
Fig. 228.
IV.
ONONIS.
ONONIS.
Herbs or low undershrubs, with pinnately trifoliolate, or rarely simple 
leaves ; the leaflets generally toothed ; the stipules leafy, adhering to 
the leafstalk ; the flowers solitary, on axillary peduncles, often forming 
terminal leafy racemes.
Calyx with 5 narrow segments.
Standard 
large and striate.
Keel terminating in a pointed beak.
Stamens all 
united in a sheath.
Pod inflated, with few seeds.
A rather numerous genus, chiefly from the Mediterranean region, 
and not extending far into Asia.
The denticulate leaves are like those 
of the Clover group, whilst the stamens are monadelphous, as in Genista 
and its allies.
Much branched perennial or undershrub, often thorny .
1. Restharrow O.
Small, erect annual 2.
Small O.
1. Restharrow Ononis.
Ononis arvensis, Linn.
(Eig. 229.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 682, and Suppl.
t. 2659.
O. campestris, Bab. Man.) 
Very variable in aspect, generally a low, spreading, much branched 
undershrub, often rooting at the base or creeping undergound, some- 
188 
THE PBAPLOWEE TRIBE.
times nearly erect, a foot high or more, 
rarely glabrous, usually thinly clothed 
with soft spreading hairs, and more or 
less glutinous ; the hairs either covering 
the branches all round or entirely in two 
opposite lines ; in dry situations many of 
the small branches end in a thorn.
Leaf- 
lets obovate or oblong, the lateral ones 
smaller or sometimes wanting.
Flowers 
sessile or shortly stalked, solitary, on 
short branches, or forming short, leafy 
racemes.
Flowers pink, the standard 
streaked with a deeper shade.
Pod 
shorter or rather longer than the calyx, 
with 2 or 3 seeds.
In barren pastures and poor ill- culti- 
vated fields, throughout Europe and 
central and Russian Asia, except the ex- 
treme north.
Common in Britain.
Fl.
summer and autumn.
A glabrous, more erect, and thorny variety is 
often admitted as a species, under the name of O.
antiquorum or O.
campestris.
It is more common in the south of Europe than in Britain.
Fig. 229.
2. Small Ononis.
Ononis reclinata, Linn.
(Fig. 230.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2838.) 
$y%f\ ^ n erec ^ annual, 3 or 4 inches high, 
^0ftfj&& slightly hairy, and often viscid, the 
lateral branches decumbent at the base.
Leaflets small, varying from broadly ob- 
ovate to very narrow.
Flowers small, 
pale pink, hanging from short erect pe- 
dicels, forming short, terminal, leafy 
racemes.
Petals scarcely exceeding the 
calyx, or shorter.
Pod rather smaller, 
containing 10 or 12 seeds.
On sands and dry banks near the sea, 
very common round the Mediterranean, 
and here and there on the shores of the 
Atlantic, up to the Channel Islands, and 
again near the Mull of Galloway, on the 
south-west coast of Scotland.
FL early 
summer.
Fig. 230.
PAPILIONACE^.
189 
V. MEDICK.
MEDICAGO.
Herbs (with, one exotic shrubby species), with leaves pinnately tri- 
foliolate ; the leaflets usually toothed ; the leafy stipules adhering to the 
leafstalks ; the flowers small, in short spikes or loose heads, on axillary 
peduncles.
Calyx 5 -toothed.
Keel obtuse.
Stamens diadelphous, 
the upper one entirely free.
Pod small, with few seeds, very much 
curved or spirally twisted, and indehiscent.
A rather numerous genus in the Mediterranean region and a portion 
of central Asia, with a few species extending as weeds over a great 
portion of the globe.
To determine the annual species it is absolutely 
necessary to have the fruit, as some cannot be distinguished by any 
other character.
Perennials, with conspicuous purple or pale yellow flowers.
Stems mostly erect.
Flower purple.
Pod forming 2 or 
3 spires 2.
Lucem M.
Stems decumbent.
Flower pale yellow.
Pod not form- 
ing a complete spire • 1.
Sickle M.
Annuals, with very small, bright yellow flowers.
Pod small, 1-seeded, not forming a complete spire .
. 3.
Black M.
Pod several-seeded, spirally twisted, edged with prickles.
Plant downy.
Stipules nearly entire 6.
Bur M.
Plant nearly glabrous.
Stipules finely toothed.
Pod nearly globular, of 3 or 4 spires, furrowed at 
the edge between the prickles ......
5. Spotted M.
Pod of 2 or 3 flat loose, strongly-veined spires, not 
furrowed at the edge 4.
Denticulate M.
The shrubby M.
arbor ea, and one or two annual species from southern 
Europe, have been occasionally cultivated in gardens as curiosities, es- 
pecially the so-called Snail-plant (M.
scutellata).
1. Sickle Medick.
Medicago faleata, Linn.
(Fig. 231.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1016.
M. sylvestris, Bab. Man.) 
Stock perennial, with decumbent or rarely erect stems 1 to 2 feet 
long.
Stipules narrow and entire.
Leaflets obovate-oblong or nearly 
linear.
Peduncles axillary, bearing at their extremity a short, close 
raceme of flowers, rather large for the genus, usually yellow, but some- 
times passing into blue or violet.
Pod much longer than the calyx, 
flat, more or less curved, but never forming more than one complete 
ring.
Seeds 2 or 3.
190 
THE PEAFLOWER TEIBE.
On dry banks and open places in cen- 
tral and southern Europe, and central 
Asia, extending eastward to the Baikal 
and northward to Sweden.
In Britain 
confined to southern and eastern Eng- 
land, and rare even there ; quoted also 
from Ireland, but as scarcely indigenous.
FL summer.
Fig. 231.
2. Lucern Medick.
Medicago sativa, Linn.
(Fig. 232.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1749.
Lucern.) 
Much like the sickle M., and perhaps 
only a variety produced by cultivation.
It is usually more erect, the flowers are 
almost always violet or blue, and the 
pod is spirally twisted so as to form 
two, or sometimes three, complete rings 
or coils.
Apparently of south-eastern origin, 
but so generally cultivated, that no sta- 
tion is known for it where it may not 
have escaped from cultivation.
In Bri- 
tain, certainly introduced only, on the 
borders of fields, and in pastures.
FL 
Fig. 232.
PAPLIONACE^E.
191 
3. Black Medick.
Medicago lupulina, Linn.
(Fig. 233.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 971.
Nonsuch.) 
An annual, branching at the base into 
spreading stems 1 to 2 feet long, and 
more or less clothed with short, soft hairs.
Stipules broad and shortly toothed.
Leaf- 
lets obovate.
Peduncles longer than the 
leaves, bearing a compact raceme or ob- 
long head of very small bright-yellow 
flowers.
Pods small, black when ripe, 
glabrous or slightly hairy, kidney-shaped, 
but marked with veins curved almost 
into a complete spire, containing a single 
seed.
In pastures and waste places, through- 
out Europe and central and Russian 
Asia, except the extreme north, and of- 
ten cultivated among "artificial grasses." 
ing northern Scotland.
FL the whole season.
Frequent in Britain, except- 
4. Denticulate Medick.
Medicago denticulata, Willd.
(Fig. 234.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2634.) 
An annual, branching at the base into 
spreading stems from a few inches to 
above a foot long, glabrous, or with a 
very few appressed hairs.
Stipules bor- 
dered with fine teeth.
Leaflets obovate 
or obcordate.
Flowers very small, in 
little heads, on peduncles rather longer 
than the leaflets.
Pod spirally twisted, 
formed of 2 or 3 loose, flat coils, ele- 
gantly veined on the surface, and usually 
edged with two rows of more or less 
hooked or curved prickles, but not fur- 
rowed between them.
In cultivated and waste places, espe- 
cially near the sea, very abundant in 
the Mediterranean region and west cen- 
tral Asia, and carried out with cultiva- 
Fig. 234.
192 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
tion to many parts of the world.
In Britain it appears to have esta- 
blished itself in some of the southern and eastern counties of Eng- 
land.
Fl. spring and summer.
A variety with smaller pods, with the 
prickles exceedingly short and not hooked, has been sometimes con- 
sidered as a species under the name of M.
apiculata.
5. Spotted Medick.
Medicago maculata, Willd.
(Fig. 235.) 
(M.
polymorpha, Eng. Bot.
t. 1616.) 
An almost glabrous annual, so like the 
last in foliage, stipules, and flowers, that, 
without the fruit, it can be scarcely dis- 
tinguished but by a few spreading hairs 
on the leaf-stalks, visible when held up 
against the light.
It is often also more 
luxuriant, the leaflets have usually a 
dark spot in the centre, and the flowers 
fewer in the raceme.
The pod has 3 or 4 
spires, much more compact than in the 
denticulate M., giving the whole pod a 
more globular form, the surface is less 
veined, and the edge thicker, more or 
less furrowed between the prickles, which 
are finer and more curved.
In cultivated and waste places, in 
western and southern Europe to the 
Caucasus, rarely extending into Ger- 
many.
Not uncommon in central and 
southern England, also in southern Ireland.
Fl. spring and summer.
6. Bur Medick.
Medicago minima, Linn.
(Fig. 236.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2635.) 
An annual, like the last two, but usually smaller and more compact, 
and clothed with short, soft hairs or down.
Stipules entire or very 
shortly toothed.
Flowers few, minute, on short peduncles.
Pod 
smaller than in the last two species, nearly globular, of 2, 3, or 4 com- 
pact spires edged each with a double row of hooked prickles.
PAPILI0NACE7E.
193 
In open pastures and waste places, 
widely spread over Europe and western 
Asia, extending northwards to southern 
Sweden.
Eare in Britain, and only in 
some of the southern and eastern coun- 
ties of England.
Fl. spring and summer .
Like other species, it varies much in the 
size of the pods and the length of the 
prickles : in Britain they are usually 
small.
Fig. 236.
VI.
MEMLOY.
MELILOTITS.
Herbs with leaves pinnately trifoliolate, the leaflets usually toothed, 
the stipules slightly adhering to the leafstalks, and small yellow or 
white flowers, in long, loose racemes on axillary peduncles.
Calyx 
five -toothed.
Petals falling off after fading, the keel obtuse.
Sta- 
mens diadelphous, the upper one entirely free.
Pod of one or very 
few seeds, straight, thick, small, but longer than the calyx, and inde- 
hiscent.
A genus of few species, all south European or west Asiatic, but some 
spreading over most parts of the world.
They were formerly united 
with Clover, but their inflorescence gives them a very different aspect.
From Trigonel they differ chiefly in the short, thick pod, usually with 
only 1 or 2 seeds.
Flowers white 3.
White M.
Flowers yellow.
Pod irregularly net-veined and wrinkled.
Stem usually 2 
or 3 feet high 1.
Common M.
Pod transversely wrinkled.
Stem usually under 2 feet 
high 2.
Field M.
1. Common Melilot.
Melilotus officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 237.) 
{Trifolium, Eng. Bot.
t. 1340.) 
An annual or biennial, usually erect, 2, 3, or even 4 feet high, branched 
and glabrous ; the leaves usually distant, on long leafstalks.
Stipules 
VOL.
I. Q 
194 
THE PEAFLOWEE TRIBE.
Fig. 237.
narrow.
Leaflets of the lower leaves ob- 
ovate, nearly orbicular, tbose of the up- 
per ones narrower, often linear.
Mowers 
numerous, 2 or 3 lines long, of a bright 
yellow, in long, axillary racemes.
Pod 
oval, about 2 lines long, obtuse or pointed, 
marked with irregularly netted veins.
On roadsides, banks and bushy places 
throughout Europe and central and Rus- 
sian Asia, except the extreme north.
Not 
frequent in Britain, and only as an in- 
troduced plant, excepting in southern 
England, and perhaps Ireland.
FL 
summer.
2. Field Melilot.
Melilotus arvensis, Willd.
(Fig. 238.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2960.) 
Very near the common M., and per- 
haps a mere variety.
It is usually 
smaller, seldom attaining two feet, the 
leaflets rather broader, and the ra- 
cemes looser, with fewer flowers, but the 
only positive distinction is in the fruit, 
which is smaller, more like that of the 
white M., and marked with transverse 
wrinkles.
In flower only it is often im- 
possible to distinguish it from the com- 
mon M.
In cultivated and waste places, in cen- 
tral and southern Europe.
In Britain, 
only observed in some of the eastern 
counties of England.
FL summer.
The 
species requires further investigation.
Tig. 238.
PAPILIONACEiE.
195 
3. White Melilot.
Melilotus alba, Lam.
(Fig. 239.) 
(M.
leucantha, Eng. Bot.
Suppl, t.
2689.
Very like the common M., but usually 
of taller growth and longer duration, 
with a harder, more wiry stem, and nar- 
rower leaflets, and the flowers always 
white.
Pod variable, but usually smaller 
and more obtuse than in the common 
M., with the transverse wrinkles of the 
field M.
As widely spread as the common M.
over Continental Europe and Asia, and 
more abundant in the south, where it be- 
comes a troublesome weed in fields and 
vineyards.
Occasionally found in many 
parts of England, Ireland, and Scotland, 
but probably introduced with corn or 
ballast.
Fl. rather late in summer.
M. vulgaris, Brit.
Fl.
Fig. 239.
VII.
TRIGONE!*.
TKIGONELLA.
Herbs, with the habit and most of the characters of Medich, but 
differing from that genus by the straight or but slightly curved pod, 
and from Clover by the pod much longer than the calyx, opening, in 
two valves.
The true Trigonels or Fenugreeks are all exotic, and widely spread 
over southern Europe, Asia, and Australia.
The only British species 
is sometimes anomalous, approaching in many respects to Clover, with 
which it was associated by the older botanists, and recently proposed 
as a distinct genus under the name of Aporanthes.
It requires further 
comparison with some exotic species, as yet but little known, before 
the question can be decided.
1. Bird's-foot Trigonel.
Trigonella ornithopodioid.es, DC.
(Fig. 240.) 
{Trifolium, Eng. Bot.
t. 1047.) 
A little annual, with thickly matted spreading stems, rarely more 
than 2 or 3 inches long, and usually glabrous.
Leaflets inserted close 
196 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
together at the summit of the stalk, ob- 
ovate orobcordate, and toothed.
Flowers 
small, nearly white, solitary or 2 or 3 
together in each axil, the lower ones 
nearly sessile, the upper ones on stalks 
of 2 to 4 or even 5 lines long.
Calyx- 
teeth slender.
Petals remaining round the 
pod, as in Clover.
Pod slightly curved, 
glabrous, containing 6 to 8 seeds.
In dry sandy pastures, chiefly near the 
sea, in western and southern Europe, 
extending northward to Denmark.
In several maritime counties of 
England, Ireland, and southern Scotland.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 240.
VIII.
CLOVER.
TEIFOLIUM.
Herbs, with stipules adhering to the leafstalks.
Leaves pinnately or 
almost digitately trifoliolate ; the leaflets often toothed.
Flowers red, 
white, or yellow, in close heads.
Calyx 5-toothed.
Petals narrow, 
often connected together by the claws, and usually remaining round 
the pod after fading.
Stamens diadelphous, the upper one entirely 
free.
Pod scarcely protruding beyond the calyx, containing from 1 to 
4 seeds, and usually indehiscent.
A very widely spread and numerous genus in the northern hemi- 
sphere, both in the new and the old world, deficient in several tropical 
regions, but reappearing in southern America and Africa.
It is readily 
distinguished from the MedicJcs and Trigonels by the pod, from the 
Melilots by the compact heads of flowers.
{Heads of flowers pedunculate in the axils of the leaves, or above the 
last leaves of the stem 2 
Heads of flowers closely sessile in the axils, or within the last leaves of 
the stem 14 
„ ( Flowers yellow, reflexed and brown when faded 3 
i Flowers red, white, or cream-coloured 5 
r Flowers 30 to 40, in a compact head.
Standard distinctly furrowed 
3 { when faded 18.
Hop C.
L Flowers not more than 20 in the head.
Standard scarry striate .
. 4 
r Flowers usually 10 to 20 in the head, sessile or on very short pedicels.
j 19.
Lesser C.
j Flowers 2 or 3, rarely 5 or 6 in the head.
Pedicels as long as the 
I calyx-tube 20.
Slender C.
PAPILIONACEiE.
197 
_ f Stem creeping, and rooting at the nodes, or closely prostrate ...
6 
1 Stein ascending or erect 8 
fi / Flowers pedicellate in the head, reflexed after fading .
. 17.
White C.
1 Flowers sessile, erect 7 
( Heads globular.
Flowers small.
Calyx much inflated after flowering.
I 16.
Strawberry C.
1 Heads of few rather large flowers.
Peduncles turned down into the 
L ground after flowering 15.
Subterranean C.
s f Heads oblong or cylindrical when fully out 9 
I Heads ovoid or globular 10 
« f Corolla small, shorter than the long, fine calyx-teeth 2.
Hare's-foot C.
" 1 Corolla showy.
Standard longer than the calyx- teeth .
.1.
Crimson C.
10 f Corolla small, 1 to 3 lines long 11 
I Corolla showy, 5 to 6 lines long or more 12 
/-Calyx-teeth short, lanceolate, slightly ciliate 7.
Sea C.
I Calyx-teeth short, subulate, glabrous 11.
Upright C.
11 «{ Calyx softly hairy, the teeth longer than the corolla, spreading after 
flowering 3.
Starry C.
L Calyx inflated after flowering.
Standard turned outwards 14.
Reversed C.
1 2 J Annual.
Teeth of the calyx nearly equal 1.
Crimson C.
\ Perennials.
Lower tooth of the calyx longer than the others ...
13 
.. o f Flowers red 6.
Zigzag C.
I Flowers cream-coloured 4.
Sulphur C.
1 ^ f Corolla showy, 6 lines long or more 15 
I Corolla small, 1 to 3 lines > 16 
.. g f Flowers red 5.
Purple C.
I Flowers cream-coloured 4.
Sulphur C.
rHeads globular.
Calyx glabrous, with short recurved teeth .
. .17 
16<{ Heads ovoid or oblong when fully out.
Calyx more or less hairy, with 
L rigid, erect or spreading teeth 18 
rHeads crowded at the base of the very short prostrate stems 
17 -j 13.
Suffocated C.
LHeads distinct or distant along the branches .
. .
.12.
Clustered C.
,£ f Calyx-teeth rigid and spreading after flowering, almost lanceolate .
.19 
I Calyx-teeth shortly subulate, erect or slightly spreading ....
20 
, q f Stems ascending or erect, a foot high or more 7.
Sea C.
\ Stems spreading, seldom above 6 inches 10.
Bough C.
f Leaflets obovate.
Upper stipules very broad ....
8. Knotted C.
20 <j Leaflets narrow-oblong or linear.
Stipules narrow.
Stem erect.
L 9.
Boccone's C.
The Alsilce clover (T.
hybridum), a species allied to the white C, but 
with ascending not creeping stems, and more pink in the flowers, is now 
frequently cultivated for forage, but does not appear to have as yet 
become naturalized, although common in northern and central conti- 
nental Europe.
198 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
1. Crimson Clover.
Trifolium incarnatum, Linu.
(Fig. 241.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2950.) 
A softly hairy annual, erect or nearly 
so, often slender and starved-looking 
when wild, with ovoid or shortly oblong 
terminal flower-heads ; but in rich soils, 
or when cultivated, attaining 1\ to 2 
feet in height, with oblong or cylindrical 
flower-heads sometimes 2 inches long.
Stipules broad and membranous.
Leaf- 
lets very broadly obovate or obcordate.
Calyx softly hairy, with narrow pointed 
teeth nearly equal in length.
Corolla of 
a rich crimson, or of a pale cream- colour, 
4 to 6 lines long.
In open places, especially near the sea, 
in southern Europe, and, having been long 
cultivated for fodder, has become natu- 
ralized in various parts of central and 
even northern Europe.
In Britain, the 
pale yellow variety, the most common in 
a truly wild state on the Continent, ap- 
pears to be indigenous on the coast of Cornwall, near the Lizard Point; 
the cultivated crimson variety has only established itself in a few places 
in southern England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 241.
2. Hare's-foot Clover.
Trifolium arvense, Linn.
(Fig. 242.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 944.) 
A slender, branching, erect annual, seldom reaching a foot in height, 
and clothed with short soft hairs.
Stipules and leaflets narrow.
Flowers 
small, in pedunculate heads, which are at first nearly globular but soon 
become oblong or cylindrical, 6 to 9 lines long, appearing very soft and 
feathery owing to the fine hairy teeth of the calyx projecting beyond 
the very small corolla.
PAPILIONACE^E.
199 
In cornfields, dry pastures, on sandy 
banks, etc., throughout Europe and 
western Asia, except the extreme north.
Abundant in Britain, but more in the 
south than in the north.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 242.
3. Starry Clover.
Trifolium stellatum, Linn.
(Fig. 243.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1545.) 
A low but rather coarse annual, co- 
vered with soft hairs, and seldom above 
6 inches high.
Leaves broadly obovate 
or obcordate.
Elower-heads globular, 
softly hairy, on rather long peduncles 
above the last leaves.
Calyx remarkable 
for the long subulate-lanceolate teeth, 
spreading like a star after flowering, 
whilst the mouth is closed over the pod 
by a tuft of hairs.
Corolla shorter than 
the calyx-teeth, of a pale cream-colour.
In dry pastures and waste places, in 
southern Europe, common round the 
Mediterranean, reappearing in south- 
western France, and in Britain, on the 
coast of Sussex near Shoreham, and per- 
haps in a few other localities, introduced 
with ballast.
Fl. early summer, and 
sometimes again in autumn.
Fig. 243.
200 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
4. Sulphur Clover 
Trifolium ochroleucum, Linn.
(Tig. 244.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1224.) 
A perennial, with the habit and foli- 
age, as well as the inflorescence of the 
purple C, 9 and the same-sized flowers, 
bnt the leaflets are usually rather nar- 
rower, the flower-heads more ovoid, and 
the flowers cream-coloured, with rather 
shorter teeth to the calyx, the lowest 
tooth twice as long as the others.
In pastures, dry meadows, and open 
woods, in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, but not crossing the 
Baltic.
In Britain, confined to a few of 
the eastern counties of England.
Fl.
summer.
Fig. 244.
5. Purple Clover.
Trifolium pratense, Linn.
(Tig. 245.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1770.) 
Stock usually perennial, but of few 
years' duration.
Stems decumbent or 
nearly erect, 1 to 2 feet long, and hairy.
Stipules rather large, ovate, veined, with 
long green points.
Leaflets obovate or 
obcordate.
Flowers of a reddish-purple, 
about 6 lines long, in dense terminal, 
ovoid, or globular heads, with 2 sessile, 
trifoliolate leaves close at their base, or 
very rarely the heads are shortly stalked 
above them.
Calyx- teeth subulate and 
hairy, the lowest longer than the others.
After flowering, the petals turn brown, 
the calyx remains erect, enclosing the 
pod, which has usually a single seed.
In meadows and pastures, throughout 
Europe and central and northern Asia, 
from the Mediterranean to the Arctic 
Fig. 245.
Circle, ascending high up into mountain 
PAPILI0NACE2E.
201 
regions.
It has however been so long cultivated, that in some loca- 
lities it may not be truly indigenous.
Abundant in Britain.
FL the 
whole summer.
6. Zigzag Clover.
Trifolium medium, Linn.
(Fig. 246.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 190.) 
Yery much resembles the purple C, 
and may be a mere variety.
It is a 
handsomer plant, with narrower stipules 
and leaflets ; the heads of flowers are 
always more or less pedunculate above 
the last floral leaves, and the corolla 
rather larger, of a brighter and richer 
colour.
The zigzag stem is not a very 
constant differential character, and even 
the pedunculate flower-heads may be 
occasionally observed also in the pur- 
ple a 
In open woods, bushy pastures, on 
banks and roadsides, in northern and 
central Europe, and across Russian 
Asia, becoming a mountain plant in 
southern Europe.
Generally spread over 
Britain, but more common in southern 
Scotland and northern England than further north or south ; extends 
also into Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 216.
7. Sea Clover.
Trifolium maritimum, Huds.
(Eig. 247.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 220.) 
An annual, with spreading or decumbent stems, seldom above a 
foot high, and more slender than the last three, with much smaller 
flowers.
Stipules long and narrow.
Leaflets narrow-obovate or ob- 
long.
Elower-heads at first globular, then ovoid, shortly peduncu- 
late above the last leaves.
Calyx-teeth at first subulate, the lower 
one longer than the others, but all much shorter than in the purple C, 
and after flowering they are somewhat enlarged, stiff*, and slightly 
VOL.
I. K 
202 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
spreading.
Corolla pale-pink, ratlier 
longer than the calyx.
In salt-marshes and rich meadows near 
the sea, in southern and western Europe, 
rarely extending along great rivers.
In 
Britain, confined to southern England 
and Ireland.
Fl. summer, ratlier early.
Fig. 247.
8. Knotted Clover.
Trifolium striatum, Linn.
(Fig. 248.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1843.) 
A small, tufted, more or less spread- 
ing annual, covered with short, soft 
hairs.
Stipules ovate, ending in a fine 
point.
Leaflets obovate.
Flower-heads 
small, ovoid or globular, chiefly terminal; 
and closely sessile within the last leaves, 
of which the stipules are very broad 
and thin, with occasionally one or two 
heads sessile in the axils of the upper 
leaves.
Calyx softly hairy, with short 
but subulate teeth, which remain erect 
after flowering.
Corolla very small and 
pale -red.
In dry pastures, on banks and waste places, in central and southern 
Europe to the Caucasus, extending northward into southern Sweden.
Diffused over nearly the whole of England, Ireland, and southern 
Scotland.
Fl. all summer, 
Fig. 248.
9. Boccone's Clover.
Trifolium Bocconi, Savi.
(Fig. 249.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2868.) 
Yery near the knotted C, but the stems are erect or nearly so, 2 to 6 
PAPILIONACEiE.
203 
inches high ; the stipules narrower ; the 
leaflets narrow-oblong, spathulate, or 
nearly linear ; the flower-heads more ob- 
long, usually two together at the sum- 
mit of the stem, and sometimes one or 
two besides, on short, lateral branches.
Flowers much like those of the knotted 
C, of a very pale colour, the calyx 
rather less hairy.
In dry pastures and waste places, in 
southern Europe, and here and there up 
western France.
In Britain only on the 
Cornwall coast, near the Lizard Point.
Fl. summer.
Kg. 249.
10.
Rough Clover.
Trifolium scabrum, Linn.
(Fig. 250.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 903.) 
Very near the knotted C, and not 
always easy to distinguish from it.
Usually more procumbent and less 
hairy, the leaflets not so broad, the 
flower-heads more in the axils of the 
leaves, and the stipules of the floral 
leaves less prominent ; but the chief dis- 
tinction lies in the calyx, of which the 
teeth are broader, more rigid, and 
usually spreading or recurved after 
flowering, giving the plant a stiffer ap- 
pearance.
Flowers small and whitish.
In dry pastures and waste places, in 
central and southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, scarcely extending into northern Germany.
In Britain, chiefly 
near the sea, in England, Ireland, and southern Scotland, but less com- 
mon than the knotted C.
FL all summer.
Fig. 250.
11.
Upright Clover.
Trifolium striatum, Linn.
(Fig. 251.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2949.) 
An erect annual, seldom 6 inches high, and perfectly glabrous.
Sti- 
pules very broad and thin.
Leaflets narrow.
Flower-heads solitaiy, 
or two or three on each stem, pedunculate above the last leaves, small 
a 2 
204 
THE PEAPLOWER TRIBE.
and globular.
Flowers very small.
Calyx 
campanulate, the teeth subulate, quite 
glabrous, and about the length of the 
corolla.
Pod ovoid, generally 1-seeded, 
projecting from the calyx.
In dry pastures and waste places, 
scattered over central and southern 
Europe, from the Atlantic to Transyl- 
vania.
In Britain, confined to the Chan- 
nel Islands and the Cornwall coast about 
the Lizard Point.
Fl. early summer.
12.
Clustered Clover.
Trifolium glomeratum, Linn.
(Fig. 252.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1063.) 
A small, slender, spreading annual, 
glabrous or nearly so.
Stipules short, 
with a subulate point.
Leaflets broadly 
obovate.
Flower-heads small, globular, 
closely sessile in the axils of the leaves 
or at the ends of the branches.
Calyx- 
teeth short, broad, very pointed, and 
rigidly recurved as the pod ripens.
Co- 
rolla of a bright pink, very small, al- 
though longer than the calyx-teeth.
On dry heaths, pastures, and waste 
places, very abundant in southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, and extending more 
sparingly along western France to the 
southern and eastern counties of Eng- 
land.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 252.
13.
Suffocated Clover.
Trifolium suffocatum, Linn.
(Fig. 253.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1049.) 
A very small tufted annual, with procumbent stems often scarcely 
developed, and seldom more than 2, or at most 3, inches long.
Leaf- 
lets glabrous, obovate, on long slender footstalks.
Flowers small, 
PAP1LIONACE.33.
205 
closely sessile, in little dense heads, 
crowded along the short stems, close to 
the ground.
Calyx thin, with fine re- 
curved teeth ; the corolla very minute.
In dry pastures and sandy or gravelly 
places, especially near the sea, in south- 
ern Europe to the Caucasus, extending 
up western France to the shores of the 
Channel.
Bare in England, on the 
southern coasts, extending eastward up 
to Norfolk, and westward to Anglesea ; 
not recorded from Ireland, but perhaps 
overlooked from its small size.
Fl.
spring or early summer.
Fig. 253.
14.
Reversed Clover.
Trifolium resupinatum, Linn.
(Fig. 254.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
2789, not good,) 
A glabrous annual, with numerous 
stems, leafy and tufted at the base, 
lengthened out to a foot or more.
Sti- 
pules rather broad, with narrow points.
Flower-heads small, on short axillary 
peduncles.
Calyx glabrous or hairy on 
the upper side only, the teeth short, 
but after flowering the upper part be- 
comes very much inflated, arched, 
membranous and veined, with the 2 up- 
per teeth at the top, the 3 lower ones 
remaining at the base of the inflated 
part.
Corolla small, pink, the standard 
turned outwards instead of inwards as 
in other Clovers.
In meadows and pastures, especially 
near the sea, in southern Europe to the 
Caucasus, and up western France to the 
shores of the Channel.
JN T ot indigenous Fl S # 254 ' 
in Britain, but has occasionally appeared in some of the southern coun- 
ties of England.
Fl. spring and early summer.
206 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
15.
Subterranean Clover.
Trifolium subterraneum, Linn.
(Fig. 255.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1048.) 
A small, prostrate annual, more or less 
clothed with long spreading hairs ; the 
stems usually short and tufted, but oc- 
casionally lengthened out to 6 or 8 inches.
Stipules broad.
Leaflets obovate, on 
long leafstalks.
Flowers white or pale- 
pink, long in proportion to the plant, 2 
or 3 together on axillary peduncles, 
which lengthen considerably after flower- 
ing, and turn down almost into the 
the ground ; the fruiting calyx then 
turns back upon the peduncle, and is 
usually surrounded by short thick fibres, 
each with 5 spreading, subulate teeth, 
showing that they are, in fact, unde- 
veloped calyxes.
In dry, gravelly or sandy pastures, 
common in southern Europe to the 
Caucasus, and up western France to the Channel.
Abundant in many 
parts of southern and central England, but not in the north, nor in 
Scotland, nor as yet recorded from Ireland.
Fl. spring and early summer.
Fig. 255.
10.
Strawberry Clover.
Trifolium fragiferum, Linn.
(Fig. 256.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1050, not good.) 
The perennial stock, creeping stems, 
foliage, and peduncles are those of the 
white C, but the flowers are closely ses- 
sile in the head, surrrounded by an invo- 
lucre of lobed bracts as long as the calyx- 
tubes, and the calyx, after flowering, 
becomes much inflated, thin and reticu- 
late, with short fine teeth ; the flower- 
head is thin, very compact, half an inch 
or more in diameter, and often assumes 
a pink tint, so as to have been compared 
to a strawberry.
Corolla small and 
red.
Fig. 256.
In rather dry meadows and pastures, 
PAPILIONACE^S.
207 
common in Europe and central and Russian Asia, penetrating far into 
Scandinavia.
Frequent in England, Ireland, and southern Scotland.
Fl>.
summer and autumn.
17.
White Clover.
Trifolium repens, Linn.
(Fig. 257.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1769.
Dutch Clover.) 
A glabrous or slightly hairy perennial, 
the stems creeping and rooting at the 
nodes.
Stipules small.
Leaflets ob- 
ovate, distinctly toothed, and usually 
bearing a mark in the centre, which has 
been compared to a horseshoe, the leaf- 
stalks often very long.
Peduncles ax- 
illary, long and erect, bearing a globu- 
lar head, or rather umbel, of white 
flowers, often tinged with pink ; the pe- 
dicels, after flowering, more or less 
elongated and recurved.
Calyx-teeth 
scarcely so long as the tube, the lowest 
one usually the shortest.
Pod containing 
2 to 4 seeds, usually protruding from 
the calyx, but enclosed in the withered 
corolla.
In meadows and pastures, throughout 
Europe and Russian Asia, from the Me- 
diterranean to the Arctic Circle, and 
having been long cultivated, and spread- 
ing rapidly in genial soils, it is now common in most temperate regions 
of the globe.
Abundant in Britain.
In Ireland believed to be of com- 
paratively recent introduction, although it is now taken as the national 
emblem in substitution of the Wood-sorrel Oxalis, which was the 
original shamrock.
Fl. the whole season.
Fig. 257.
18.
Hop Clover.
Trifolium agrarium, Linn.
(Fig. 258.) 
(T.
procumhens, Eng. Bot.
t. 945.) 
A slender annual, much branched at the base, glabrous or slightly 
downy, procumbent or nearly erect, 6 inches to a foot long, or rather 
more.
Stipules broad and pointed.
Leaflets obovate or obcordate, 
the central one at some distance from the others.
Flower-heads loosely 
globular or ovoid, on rather long axillary peduncles, containing 30 to 
208 
THE PEAFLOWEK TBIBE.
Fig. 258.
50 small yellow flowers on very short 
pedicels ; in fading, the flowers become 
reflexed, and turn pale-brown, with a 
broadly obovate standard, distinctly 
marked with longitudinal furrows, and 
completely concealing the small, 1- 
seeded pod.
In rather dry pastures and meadows, 
on the borders of fields, etc., throughout 
Europe and western Asia, except the ex- 
treme north.
Abundant in Britain ge- 
nerally, but becoming rare in northern 
Scotland.
Fl. the toliole season.
19.
Lesser Clover.
Trifolium procumbens, Linn.
(Fig. 259.) 
(T.
minus, Eng. Bot.
t. 1256.) 
Very near the Hop C, but more slen- 
der and procumbent ; the flowers smaller, 
usually 12 to 20 in a head, and of a paler 
colour ; the standard not so broad, more 
folded, and only faintly striated.
The 
central leaflet of each leaf is usually at 
some distance from the others, as in the 
Hop C, excepting sometimes in the 
lower leaves.
Pedicels of the flowers 
much shorter than the tube of the calyx.
As common as the Hop C.
over the 
greater part of Europe, but does not 
appear to extend so far to the east or to 
the north.
In Britain, also as abundant 
as the Hop C, excepting, perhaps, in the 
north.
Fl. the whole season.
Starved specimens of this species are 
much like the more luxuriant ones of the slender C, and chiefly dis- 
tinguished by the shortness of the pedicels.
Fig. 259.
20.
Slender Clover.
Trifolium filiforme, Linn.
(Fig. 260.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1257.) 
Still more slender than the lesser C.
; the stems decumbent, ascend- 
ing, or erect, seldom G inches long.
Leaflets usually narrower than 
PAPILIONACEJE.
209 
in the last two species, the central one 
inserted immediately between the two 
others, excepting in the npper leaves of 
very luxuriant specimens.
Flowers 2 
or 3 in each head, or very seldom as 
many as 5 or 6, smaller than in the 
lesser C.
; the pedicels usually about as 
long as the calyx.
In sandy or stony pastures and waste 
places, chiefly near the sea, in southern 
Europe; very common round the Me- 
diterranean, and extending up western 
France to the Channel.
Hare in Britain, 
and probably confined to south-eastern 
England, starved states of the lesser C.
having been frequently mistaken for it.
true plant from Gravesend, in Kent.
Fl. early summer* 
Fig. 260.
I have seen specimens of the 
IX.
LOTUS.
LOTUS.
Herbs, with pinnate leaves of 5 (rarely 4) leaflets, of which 2 (or 1), 
close to the stem, take the place and appearance of stipules.
Peduncles 
axillary, bearing one or several yellow or reddish flowers in an umbel, 
with a leaf of 3 leaflets close under it.
Calyx 5-toothed.
Keel pointed.
Stamens diadelphous, the upper one free from the base, and 5 of the 
filaments flattened at the top.
Pod cylindrical, with several seeds.
A well-marked genus, not very numerous in species, chiefly abun- 
dant in southern Europe and northern Africa, but widely spread over 
the temperate regions of the old world and Australia.
Perennial.
Flowers usually 5 or more in the umbel ...
1. Common L.
Annual.
Flowers small, seldom above 2 in the umbel ...
2. Slender L.
1. Common Lotus.
Lotus corniculatus, Linn.
(Fig. 261.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2090.
BiroVs-foot Trefoil) 
Stock perennial, with a long taproot.
Stems decumbent or ascend- 
ing, from a few inches to near 2 feet long.
Leaflets usually ovate or 
obovate, and pointed, but sometimes narrow ; those which take the 
place of stipules broader than the others.
Peduncles much longer than 
the leaves.
Umbels of from 5 or 6 to twice that number of bright 
yellow flowers \ the standard often red on the outside.
Calyx- teeth 
210 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
about the length of the tube.
Pod usu- 
ally about an inch long.
Seeds globular, 
separated by a pithy substance, which 
nearly fills the pod.
In meadows and pastures, whether 
wet or dry, open or shaded, widely spread 
over Europe, Russian and central Asia, 
the East Indian Peninsula, and Australia, 
but not reaching the Arctic Circle.
Abun- 
dant all over Britain.
Fl. the whole sum- 
mer.
It is a very variable species, ac- 
commodating itself to very different sta- 
tions and climates ; and some of the races 
appear so permanent in certain locali- 
ties as to have been generally admitted 
as species, but in others they run so 
much into one another as to be abso- 
lutely undistinguishable.
The most dis- 
tinct British forms are — 
a. Greater Lotus (L.
major, Eng. Bot.
t. 2091).
Tall, ascending or 
nearly erect, glabrous or slightly hairy, and luxuriant in all its parts, 
with 6 to 12 flowers in the umbel.
Calyx-teeth usually, but nob always, 
finer and more spreading than in the smaller forms.
In moist meadows, 
along ditches, under hedges, and in rich, bushy places.
b. Common Lotus.
Low and spreading, often tufted at the base, 
glabrous or nearly so, usually with 5 or 6 rather large flowers to the 
umbel.
Leaflets broad, and often glaucous, especially near the sea, 
where they become much thicker.
In open pastures and on dry sunny 
banks.
c. Hairy Lotus.
Like the common variety, but covered with long 
spreading hairs.
In dry, sunny situations, common in southern Eu- 
rope, but rare in Britain.
d. Narrow Lotus (L.
tenuis, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2615).
Slender and 
more branched than the common form, with very narrow leaflets.
In 
poor pastures and grassy places, chiefly in south-eastern Europe.
Hare 
in Britain, and always running much into the common form.
Fig. 261.
2. Slender Lotus.
Lotus angustissimus, Linn.
(Fig. 262.) 
(L.
diffusus, Eng. Bot.
t. 925.) 
An annual, more slender and branched than the common L., always 
hairy, and with smaller leaflets.
Peduncles short, the flowers scarcely 
above half the size of those of the common L., often solitary or 2 
PAP 1 LION ACEiE.
211 
together, very seldom 3 or even 4 in the 
umbel.
Calyx-teeth longer than the tube.
Pod slender, 8 or 9 lines long.
In meadows, pastures, and fields, very 
common in southern Europe, extending 
eastward in southern Russia to the Altai, 
and northward along the coasts of west- 
ern Europe to the Channel.
In Britain, 
only on the south coasts of Ireland and 
England, extending eastward to Hast- 
ings.
Fl. early summer, and often again 
in autumn.
The hispid L.
(L.
hispidits, 
Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2823) is a larger, 
more hairy variety, having often 3 flowers 
to the umbel, with a thicker pod, often 
less than 6 lines long.
It has the same 
range as the more slender variety.
Tiff.
262.
X. ANTHYLLIS.
ANTHYLLIS.
Herbs, with pinnate leaves, and yellow, red, or purple flowers in 
crowded heads or umbels, with a deeply divided bract close underneath.
Calyx inflated, with 5 small teeth.
Stamens all united in an entire 
sheath.
Pod enclosed in the calyx, with few seeds.
A genus of few species, chiefly from the Mediterranean region, allied 
to Lotus in inflorescence, to Genista in the stamens, and easily distin- 
guished by the calyx.
1. Common Anthyllis.
Anthyllis vulneraria, Linn.
(Fig. 263.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 104.
Kidney Vetch, or Lady s- fingers.) 
Stock perennial, and often tufted, with spreading or ascending stems, 
from a few inches to a foot long ; the whole plant more or less clothed 
with short, appressed, silky hairs.
Leaflets narrow and entire, 6 lines 
long or more ; in the upper leaves often numerous and not very un- 
equal ; in the lower leaves the terminal leaflet is usually oblong, an 
inch long or more, with very few much smaller ones along the stalk ; 
212 
THE PEAFLOWEK TRIBE.
Fig. 263.
or in the first leaves the terminal one 
stands alone.
Flower-heads usually in 
pairs at the ends of the branches, each 
one surrounded by a digitate, leafy bract; 
the flowers numerous and closely sessile.
Calyx hairy, much inflated, and con- 
traeted at the mouth.
Corolla small, 
varying from a pale or bright yellow to 
a deep red.
In dry pastures and rocky stony places, 
chiefly in hilly districts, throughout Eu- 
rope and western Asia, from the Medi- 
terranean to the Arctic Circle.
Hanges 
generally over Britain, although here 
and there considerable districts may be 
without it.
Fl. summery commencing 
early.
XI.
ASTRAGAL.
ASTRAGALUS.
Herbs, with pinnate leaves, and pink, purple, bluish, pale-yellow, or 
white flowers, in axillary racemes or spikes, without leafy bracts.
Sti- 
pules entire at the base (not sagittate).
Calyx with 5 teeth.
Petals 
usually narrow.
Keel obtuse.
Stamens diadelphous, the upper one 
entirely free.
Pod cylindrical or inflated, usually more or less divided 
lengthwise by a complete or partial partition proceeding from the side 
next the keel.
Seeds several.
A very numerous genus, distributed all over Europe, central and 
northern Asia, North America, and down the Andes of South America ; 
penetrating far into the Arctic regions, ascending to high alpine sum- 
mits, and abundant in the hot rocky districts of the Mediterranean 
region.
Stems 2 or 3 feet long, with large leaflets, and dingy yellow 
flowers 3.
Sweet A.
Low plants, with small leaflets, and bluish-purple flowers.
Flowers 8 or 9 lines long.
Pods erect, not twice the length 
of the calyx 1.
Purple A.
Flowers not 6 lines long.
Pods pendulous, 3 or 4 times 
the length of the calyx 2.
Alpine A.
PAPIL10NACE7E.
213 
1. Purple Astragal.
Astragalus hypoglottis, Linn.
(Fig. 264.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 274.) 
A low, slightly hairy perennial, the 
stem prostrate, branching at the base, 
2 to 5 or 6 inches long.
Stipiiles free 
from the leafstalk, bnt more or less 
united together on the opposite side of 
the stem.
Leaflets usually in 10 to 12 
pairs with an odd one, 2 or 3 lines long.
Flowers of a bluish-purple, in short 
spikes, on long axillary peduncles.
Calyx 
sessile, erect, about 3 lines long, more 
or less downy with short black hairs.
Standard near 3 times as long as the 
calyx.
Pod shortly stalked within the 
calyx, ovoid, erect, hairy, seldom 6 lines 
long, and completely divided by a longi- 
tudinal partition into 2 cells, usually 
with only one seed in each cell.
On dry hilly pastures, in central and 
northern Europe, Russian Asia, and northern America, but not an 
Arctic plant.
In Britain, chiefly in eastern, central, and northern 
England, and southern Scotland; in Ireland, only indicated on the 
south islands of Arran on the west coast.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 264.
2. Alpine Astragal.
Astragalus alpinus, Linn.
(Fig. 265.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2717.) 
A small, prostrate, slightly hairy per- 
ennial, the stems branching at the base, 
a few inches or rarely nearly a foot long.
Stipules slightly connected with the 
leafstalk, but quite free from each other.
Leaflets 8 to 12 pairs, with an odd one, 
ovate or oblong.
Flowers drooping, of 
a bluish-purple, or white tipped with 
purple, in short close racemes, on rather 
long peduncles ; the calyx little more 
than 1 line ; the corolla about 5 lines 
long, with petals broader in proportion 
than in the purple A.
Pod pendulous, 
about 6 lines long, on a stalk about the 
length of the calyx, covered with short 
Fig. 265.
214 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
black hairs, and partially divided inside by a narrow projection from 
the side next the keel.
Seeds 3 to 6.
An alpine plant, common in the great mountain-ranges of central 
and northern Europe and Russian Asia, and extending far into the 
Arctic Regions.
In Britain, only in the mountains of Clova and Brae- 
mar in Scotland.
Fl. summer.
3. Sweet Astragal.
Astragalus glycyphyllos, Linn.
(Fig. 266.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 203.
Milkvetch.) 
A glabrous perennial, of a light green 
colour ; the zigzag stems spreading along 
the ground to the length of 2 feet or 
even more.
Stipules free.
Leaflets 11, 
13, or more, ovate, 1 to 1^ inches long, 
the common leafstalk full 6 inches.
Flowers about 6 or 7 lines long, of a dingy 
yellow, spreading or pendulous, in ra- 
cemes rather shorter than the leaves.
Pods erect, curved, glabrous, above an 
inch long, completely divided into 2 cells 
by a thin double partition, with 6 to 8 
seeds in each half.
In rather dry, open woods, and bushy 
places, over the greater part of Europe 
and Russian Asia, except the extreme 
north.
Not common in Britain, al- 
though it ranges over a great part of 
England, especially the eastern counties, 
and southern Scotland ; not recorded from Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 266.
XII.
OXYTROPE.
OXYTROPIS.
Low, tufted perennials, only differing from Astragal in the keel, which 
has a small point at its extremity, either erect or slightly recurved, and 
in the pod, which has an incomplete longitudinal partition projecting 
into the cavity from the angle next the vexillum (the one which bears 
the seeds), not from the angle next the keel.
A considerable genus, but not so numerous nor so widely spread as 
papilionacej:.
215 
Astragal, and chiefly confined to mountain stations or high latitudes in 
Europe, Asia, and JN"orth America.
Flowers yellowish 1.
Yellow O.
Flowers purple 2.
Purple O.
1. Yellow Oxytrope.
Oxytropis campestris, DC.
(Fig. 267.) 
(Astragalus, Eng. Bofc.
t. 2522.) 
Stock short and tufted, covered with 
the old stipules and leafstalks, sel- 
dom lengthening into shortly ascending 
branches ; the leaves and peduncles 
usually proceeding from the stock.
Leaf- 
lets 10 to 15 pairs with an odd one, ob- 
long or lanceolate, and hairy ; the com- 
mon leafstalk 2 or 3 inches long.
Pe- 
duncles rather longer, with a short, 
spike of pale-yellow flowers, tinged 
with purple.
Calyx hairy, 4 or 5 lines ; 
corolla twice that length ; the point of 
the keel short, straight, and erect.
Pod 
erect, ovoid, covered with short, usually 
black, hairs ; the partition projecting to 
about the centre of the cavity.
In mountain pastures, and on alpine 
rocks, common in the great mountain 
ranges and Arctic regions of Europe, 
Russian Asia, and Northern America.
In Britain only in one spot, among the Clova mountains of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 267.
2. Purple Oxytrope.
Oxytropis uralensis, DC.
(Eig. 268.) 
(Astragalus, Eng. Bot.
t. 466, not exact as to the point of the keel.
0. Halleri, Bab. Man.) 
Stock short and tufted, with the foliage, inflorescence, and pod of 
the yellow 0., but the whole plant is much more densely covered with 
soft, silky hairs ; the flowers are of a bright purple, and the pod is more 
completely divided into two cells.
The point of the keel is short and 
straight, as in the yellow O.
216 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
In mountain pastures, in central Eu- 
rope and llussian Asia, descending to a 
low level in the north, and penetrating 
far into the Arctic regions.
Not un- 
common in Scotland, in dry, hilly pas- 
tures, chiefly near the sea, but does not 
descend to England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 268.
XIII.
ARTHEOLOBE.
AKTHKOLOB1UM.
Slender, spreading, glabrous annuals, with pinnate leaves and axillary 
peduncles, bearing an umbel of minute flowers, without any bract.
Calyx tubular.
Pod cylindrical, curved, separating, when ripe, into 
several one-seeded articles.
A genus of very few species, chiefly south European, scarcely distinct 
from Coronilla, and differing from BircVs-foot chiefly in the want of the 
leaf to the umbel.
1. Sand Arthrolobe.
Arthrolobium ebracteatum, DC.
(Eig. 269.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2844.) 
Stems very slender, spreading on the ground to the length of 6 
inches.
Leaflets 9 to 15, small, obovate or oblong, the lowest pair 
at some distance from the stem.
Stipules very small.
Peduncles 
very slender, with an umbel of from 2 to 5 minute yellow flowers.
Pod about an inch long, slender, curved, ending in a short, hooked 
PAPILIONACEiE.
217 
beak, and separating into several linear 
articles.
In sandy situations, near the sea, 
chiefly in south-western Europe, extend- 
ing nearly all round the Mediterranean, 
and northward, up western France to 
the Channel Islands, and to the Scilly 
Isles off the coast of Cornwall.
Fl.
spring, and often again towards autumn.
Fig. 269.
XIY.
BIRDS-FOOT, ORNITHOPUS.
Slender, spreading, hairy annuals, with pinnate leaves and axillary 
peduncles, bearing a head, or umbel, of very few small, pink or white 
flowers, with a pinnate leaf at their base.
Stamens diadelphous, the 
upper one quite free.
Pod narrow, much longer than the calyx, slightly 
flattened, separating, when ripe, into several one-seeded articles.
A genus of very few, chiefly South European, species, only differing 
from Coronilla by the slightly flattened pod, and by the leaf on the 
peduncle, under the flowers.
1. Common Bird's-foot.
Ornithopus perpusillus, Linn.
(Fig. 270.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 369.) 
Stems spreading on the ground, or slightly ascending, to the length 
of 6 or 8 inches.
Leaflets 5 to 10 pairs, with an odd one, or some- 
times more, small, oval or oblong, and softly hairy, the lowest pair 
close to the stem.
Flowers usually 2 or 3 only on the peduncle, 
closely sessile over a small, pinnate leaf; the keel short and obtuse.
VOL.
I. S 
218 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
Fig. 270.
Pods slightly downy, about 6 lines long, 
ending in a curved beak ; the articles 
short and oval.
In dry pastures, in central and south- 
ern Europe, scarcely extending to its 
eastern limits, and northward only into 
southern Sweden.
Abundant in many 
parts of England and Ireland, less so in 
Scotland.
Fl. spring and summer.
XV.
HIPPOCREPIS.
HIPPOCREPIS.
Herbs or low shrubs, usually glabrous, with pinnate leaves and axil- 
lary peduncles, bearing an umbel of yellow flowers, without any leaf.
Stamens diadelphous, the upper one quite free.
Pod much flattened, of 
numerous articles, each of them curved like a horseshoe, so that the 
pod has as many deep notches on one side.
A genus of but few species, chiefly natives of south-western Europe.
In flower they cannot well be distinguished from Coronilla, but the 
pod is very different.
1. Common Hippocrepis.
Hippocrepis comosa, Linn.
(Fig. 271.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 31.) 
Stock perennial, with numerous stems branching at the base, and 
either short and tufted, or spreading along the ground to the length of 
6 inches to a foot.
Leaflets 9 to 15, small, obovate, oblong, or linear, 
and glabrous, the lowest pair at a distance from the stem.
Flowers 5 
to 8 in the umbel, resembling those of the common Lotus, and with 
nearly the same pointed keel, but rather smaller and paler.
Pod about 
PAPILIONACEffi.
219 
an inch long, ending in a fine point, the 
notches of the inner edge broad and 
deep.
In pastures, on banks, etc., chiefly in 
limestone districts, in central and south- 
ern, especially western Europe, not ex- 
tending to northern Germany.
Abun- 
dant in some parts of England, but not 
in Scotland or Ireland.
Fl. spring and 
summer.
Fig. 271.
XYL SAINFOIN.
ONOBRYCHIS.
Herbs, with pinnate leaves, without tendrils, and spikes of flowers 
usually pink, on long axillary peduncles.
Stamens diadelphous, the 
upper one quite free.
Pod sessile, flat, hard, one-seeded, and indehis- 
cent, strongly veined or pitted, and usually either prickly, crested, or 
winged.
A genus of several species, chiefly from the eastern Mediterranean 
region and west central Asia, very distinct from any other British Pea- 
floiuer, but only differing from Hedysarum (a large European and 
Asiatic genus, which includes the so-called French Honeysuckle of our 
gardens) in the pods being reduced to a single article.
1. Common Sainfoin.
Onobrychis sativa, Lam.
(Fig. 272.) 
{Hedysarum Onobrychis, Eng. Bot.
t. 96.) 
Stock perennial, but of a few years ' duration, with several ascending 
stems, 1 to \\ or rarely 2 feet long.
Stipules brown, thin, and finely 
pointed.
Leaflets numerous, oblong, slightly downy underneath, gla- 
brous above.
Peduncles longer than the leaves, bearing in their upper 
half a spike of pale-pink flowers, at first closely packed, but lengthening 
out as the flowering advances.
Calyx-teeth long and slender.
Wings 
s 2 
220 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
of the corolla shorter than the keel and 
standard.
Pod twice as long as the 
calyx, the upper edge nearly straight, the 
lower semicircular, bordered with short 
teeth, sometimes prickly, the flat sur- 
face marked with raised veins.
In limestone districts, in central and 
southern Europe, and temperate Asia; 
much cultivated for forage, and occa- 
sionally naturalized further northward.
In Britain, believed to be truly indige- 
nous in southern and eastern England, 
but not recorded from Ireland.
Fl.
early summer.
Fig. 272.
XVII.
VETCH.
VICIA.
Herbs, with weak stems, often slightly climbing, half-sagittate sti- 
pules, and pinnate leaves ; the leaflets usually numerous ; the common 
leafstalk ending in a simple or branched tendril, or at least in a small 
point.
Flowers in the axils of the leaves, solitary, clustered, or in pe- 
dunculate racemes, blue, purplish, white, or pale-yellow.
Petals usually 
rather narrow.
Upper stamen quite free, or connected with the others, 
at least in the middle.
Style cylindrical or slightly flattened, with a 
tuft of hairs below the stigma on the outer side, or shortly downy all 
round under the stigma, or rarely quite glabrous.
Pod more or less 
flattened, opening in two valves, with several, or rarely only two seeds, 
either globular or slightly flattened.
A numerous genus, widely spread over nearly the whole globe, but 
most abundant in temperate regions ; in the tropics almost confined to 
mountain districts, and unknown in Australia.
The tendrils distinguish 
it from all our Leguminous plants, except the following genus, Pea, 
from which it is absolutely separated chiefly by the style ; but also in 
all our species, except the Bithynian V., the more numerous and smaller 
leaflets, and the general shape of the flowers, give it a peculiar aspect 
easily recognized.
The staminal tube is usually much more oblique at 
the top than in Peas.
PAPILIONACEiK.
221 
Leaflets above an inch long, 1 or 2 pairs to each leaf .
. .10.
Bithynian V, 
Leaflets more than 2 pairs to each leaf, usually small.
Peduncles elongated fat least half as long as the leaf J.
Flowers few and small, on slender peduncles.
Pod 
scarcely 6 lines long.
Plant glabrous or nearly so.
Pod with 4 to 6 seeds .
2. Slender V.
Plant hairy.
Pod with 2 seeds 1.
Hairy V.
Flowers at least 6 lines long.
Pod an inch or more.
Leafstalks ending in a short point.
Racemes short and close.
Plant quite glabrous, drying black.
Stipules quite 
entire Black Pea.
Plant slightly hairy.
Stipules usually toothed .
. 5.
Upright V.
Leafstalks ending in a tendril.
Racemes long.
Flowers white, with purplish yeins.
Stipules deeply 
divided at the base 4.
Wood V.
Flowers of a rich purple-blue.
Stipules mostly en- 
tire 3.
Tufted V.
Peduncles not longer than the calyx, orfloivers quite sessile.
Flowers pale-yellow.
Pod hairy 7.
Yellow V.
Flowers purple blue or red.
Pod glabrous.
Flowers 3 or 4 together, shortly stalked 6.
Bush V.
Flowers sessile, solitary or rarely two together.
Flowers large.
Seeds smooth 8.
Common V.
Flowers small.
Seeds granulated 9.
Spring V.
1. Hairy Vetch.
Vicia hirsuta, Koch.
(E 
{JErvum, Eng. Bot.
t. 970.) 
A more or less hairy annual, with 
slender, weak stems, 1 to 3 feet long, 
often climbing by means of the branched 
tendrils.
Stipules small, narrow, often 
divided.
Leaflets small, oblong, 6 to 8 
pairs to each leaf.
Peduncles slender, 
with very few, usually 2 or 3, insigni- 
ficant, pale-blue flowers, the fine teeth 
of the calyx almost as long as the stand- 
ard.
Style glabrous.
Pod nearly 6 lines 
long, flat and hairy, containing two 
slightly compressed seeds, with a long, 
linear hilum.
In hedges, cornfields, and waste places, 
common in Europe and Russian Asia, 
from the Mediterranean to the Arctic 
Circle.
Extends all over Britain, but said 
to be rare in the Highlands of Scot- 
land.
Fl. the whole summer.
g. 273.) 
222 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
2, Slender Veteh.
Vicia tetrasperma, Moench.
(Fig. 274.) 
(Ervum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1223.) 
( /J/Q A slender annual, glabrous or nearly 
so, the weak stems often climbing, from 
6 inches to near 2 feet long.
Leaflets 
narrow, the lower ones obtuse, 3 to 6 
pairs in each leaf, the tendrils simple or 
branched.
Peduncles slender, with 1 to 
6 or 7 pale -bluish flowers, longer than in 
the hairy V., but much smaller than in 
any other British Vetch, seldom exceed- 
ing 3 lines.
Calyx-teeth much shorter 
than the standard.
Pod flat, not above 
6 lines long, usually containing about 4 
seeds, but sometimes 5 or 6.
In fields, hedges, and waste places, all 
over temperate Europe and Russian Asia.
Not uncommon in England, more rare 
in Scotland and Ireland.
Fl. the whole 
summer.
A variety with more pointed 
leaflets, and with the number of seeds 
more frequently 5 or 6, has been distinguished under the name of V.
gracilis (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2904).
Fig. 274.
tf\ 
3. Tufted Vetch.
Vicia Cracca, Linn.
(Fig. 275.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t 1168.) 
Rootstock perennial, the annual stems 
weak, and climbing by means of the 
branched tendrils, to the length of 2 or 
3 feet or rather more ; the whole plant 
hairy, or nearly glabrous.
Stipules nar- 
row and entire.
Leaflets numerous, ob- 
long or linear, the largest 8 or 9 lines 
long.
Flowers numerous, in one-sided 
racemes, on peduncles rather longer than 
the leaves, of a fine bluish-purple, each 
one about 5 lines long.
Style hairy all 
round below the stigma.
Pod flattened, 
glabrous, about an inch long, with 6 or 
8 seeds.
In hedges and bushy places, through- 
out Europe and Russian Asia, from the 
b ' ' Mediterranean to the Arctic Circle, and 
in northern America; Common in Britain.
Fl. summer.
PAPTLIONACEiE.
223 
4. Wood Vetch.
Vicia sylvatica, Linn.
(Fig. 276.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 79.) 
A handsome usually glabrous species, 
climbing over shrubs and small trees, 
sometimes to the length of 6 or 8 feet.
Stipules deeply divided at their base.
Leaflets fewer and broader than in the 
tufted V, usually 8 or 10 pairs to each 
leaf, oblong, or the lower ones ovate, 
obtuse or notched at the top.
Flowers 
considerably longer than in the tufted V, 
white with bluish streaks, loosely droop- 
ing in long racemes.
Pod glabrous, 
broad, an inch long, with 4 to 6 seeds.
In open woods and bushy places, in 
the hilly, and especially the northern dis- 
tricts of Europe and Russian Asia, to 
the Arctic Circle, and in the mountains 
of southern Europe and central Asia.
Not uncommon in Scotland, and occurs 
in most hilly, wooded districts of England and Ireland.
Fig. 276.
Fl.
5. Upright Vetch.
Vicia Orobus, 
{Orobus sylvaticus, Eng. Bot.
t, 
A slightly hairy, branching perennial, 
with a somewhat creeping rootstock ; the 
stems more erect than in the other 
Vetches, and the tendrils all reduced to 
a fine point terminating the leafstalk, or 
in the upper leaves replaced by a termi- 
nal leaflet, as in the black Pea, but the 
plant does not usually dry black, as in 
that species, and the style is that of the 
tufted Vetch.
Stipules broader than in 
the last two species, and slightly toothed.
Leaflets 8 to 10 pairs to each leaf, nar- 
row-oblong, with a fine point.
Pe- 
duncles about the length of the leaf, with 
a close raceme of 6 to 10 rather large 
flowers of a purplish-white.
Pods flat- 
tened, about an inch long, with 3 or 4 
seeds, or rarely more.
DC.
(Fig. 277.) 
518.) 
Fig. 2 
224 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
In mountain pastures and woods, in western Europe, from the 
Pyrenees to southern Norway, reappearing eastward in Bavaria and 
Transylvania.
In Britain, spread over Wales, northern England, and a 
great part of Scotland, more rare in Ireland.
FL early summer.
Arctic Circle.
6. Bush Vetch, Vicia sepium, Linn.
(Fig. 278.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1515.) 
A slightly hairy perennial ; the stems 
1 to 2 feet high, weak and straggling, 
but scarcely climbing.
Stipules small 
and entire, or larger and toothed.
Leaflets 
4 to 6 pairs in each leaf, ovate or oblong ; 
the leafstalk ending in a tendril, usually 
branched.
Flowers smaller than in the 
common V.
f of a light reddish-purple, 2 
to 4 together in the axils of the upper 
leaves, drooping from short pedicels, 
and forming a sessile cluster or a very 
short raceme.
Style with a dense tuft 
of hairs under the stigma on the outer 
side, with a few short hairs on the op- 
posite side.
Pod glabrous, about an inch 
long.
Seeds few, half encircled by the 
long, linear hilum.
In woods and shady places, and 
hedges, extending over Europe and Bus- 
si an Asia, from the Mediterranean to the 
Common in Britain.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 278.
7. Yellow Vetch.
Vicia lutea, Linn.
(Fig. 279.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 481.) 
A glabrous or slightly hairy annual, said however by some to form a 
perennial rootstock ; the steins spreading, branched, usually low, but 
sometimes ascending to a foot or more.
Stipules, foliage, and solitary 
flowers of the common V., but the corolla is of a pale-yellow, and the 
PAPILI0NACE7E.
225 
rather broad pods are reflexed, and co- 
vered with long hairs.
Seeds few, with 
a short hilum.
In dry, stony, waste or cultivated 
places, in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, not extending into 
northern Germany.
In Britain, chiefly 
near the sea in southern England, and 
again on the rocky coasts of eastern 
Scotland, probably introduced with bal- 
last.
Not recorded from Ireland.
Fl.
early summer.
Fig. 279.
8. Common Vetch.
Vicia sativa, Linn.
(Eig. 280.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 334.
V. laevigata, Eng. Bot.
t. 483.) 
An annual or biennial, glabrous or 
hairy ; the stems short and spreading, or 
nearly erect, or almost climbing, 1 to 2 
feet high.
Stipules toothed, and usually 
marked by a dark spot in the centre.
Leaflets usually 4 to 7 to each leaf, vary- 
ing from obcordate or obovate to narrow- 
linear, the tendrils usually branched.
Elowers sessile and solitary, or rarely 
two together in the axils of the leaves, 
usually large, of a reddish or bluish pur- 
ple.
Pod glabrous, 1 to 2 inches long, 
rather narrow, with 10 to 12 smooth, 
globular seeds.
In dry pastures, open woods, and 
waste places, throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia, and having been long cul- 
tivated for forage, is now widely spread Tig. 280.
226 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE., 
over the temperate regions of the globe.
Fl. spring and early sum- 
mer.
In the cultivated state the stems are 1 to 2 feet high, the leaflets 
usually broad, and the flowers large ; in the more common wild form, 
often distinguished as a species, under the name of V.
anguslifolia 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2614), the leaflets are narrower, and flowers rather 
smaller ; and the low spreading variety, published as V.
Bobartii 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2708), is only to be distinguished from the spring 
V. by the smooth seeds, and somewhat larger flowers and pods.
9. Spring Vetch.
Fig. 281.
Vicia lathyroides, I^inn.
(Fig. 281.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 30.) 
A low spreading annual or biennial, 
glabrous or nearly so ; the stems branch- 
ing at the base, seldom 6 inches long ; 
the foliage, solitary flower, and gene- 
ral appearance those of the smaller speci- 
mens of the common V.
; the flowers are 
however smaller, usually of a richer 
purple, the calyx less decidedly oblique 
at the base, and the pod seldom an inch 
long.
The seeds are also rough with 
raised dots, a distinction believed to be 
constant.
In dry pastures, open woods, banks, 
etc., over the whole of Europe, except 
the extreme north, extending eastward 
to the Caucasus.
Not uncommon in 
England, Ireland, and the greater part 
of Scotland.
Fl. spring.
10.
Bithynian Vetch.
Vicia bithynica, Linn.
(Eig. 282.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1842.) 
A glabrous or slightly downy annual, with weak angular stems, 1 to 
2 feet long.
Leaves more like those of a Pea than of a Vetch, having 
usually only two pairs of leaflets, obovate in the lowest leaves, oblong 
or lanceolate and above an inch long in the others, the tendrils branched.
Stipules rather broad and toothed.
Flowers solitary or two together, 
on peduncles sometimes very short, sometimes half as long as the leaves, 
rather large, of a bluish-purple with very pale wings, and shaped like 
PAPILIONACE^E.
227 
those of the common V.
Style with a 
tuft of hairs under the stigma on the 
outer side.
Pod 1 to 1\ inches long, 
about 4 lines broad, usually more or less 
hairy.
Seeds 4 to 6.
In bushy or stony waste places, chiefly 
near the sea, but spreading inland as a 
cornfield weed, in southern Europe to 
the Caucasus, extending up western 
France to Bordeaux, and reappearing in 
the south-western counties of England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 282.
XVIII.
PEA.
LATHYKUS.
Herbs, with weak stems, sometimes climbing, and half-sagittate or 
sagittate stipules ; the leaves usually pinnate, with few leaflets larger 
than in the Vetches, the common leafstalk ending in a simple or branched 
tendril or in a small point, the leaflets sometimes wanting.
Flowers 
solitary or in racemes, on axillary peduncles, purple, red, white, or 
bright yellow.
Petals usually broad, especially the standard.
Upper 
stamen free, or more frequently connected with the others, at least in 
the middle.
Style flattened below the stigma, quite glabrous on.
the 
outer side, but more or less downy on the inner face for some way below 
the stigma.
Pod cylindrical or flattened.
Seeds several, usually glo- 
bular or angular.
A considerable genus, with the wide geographical range of the Vetches, 
differing from them chiefly by the style, and, in most cases, by the fewer 
and longer leaflets and broader petals.
The calyx is usually more ob- 
lique, the upper teeth shorter than the lower ones.
Several species 
are very apt to dry black, which is seldom the case with the Vetches.
Leafstalks without real leaflets.
Stipules large and leaf-like.
Leafstalk a mere tendril.
Flowers yellow 2.
Yellow P.
Stipules none.
Leafstalk flattened, resembling a grass- 
leaf.
Flowers pale-red 1.
Grass P.
Leaves with one pair of leaflets.
Annual, with small red flowers.
Pods hairy .
. , .
3. Rough P.
228 
THE TEAFLOWEll TRIBE.
Perennials, with large red or purplish flowers.
Pods 
glabrous.
Rootstock tuberous.
Stems not winged 5.
Earthnut P.
Rootstalk without tubers.
Stems winged ....
6. 'Everlasting P.
Perennial, with yellow flowers.
Pods glabrous ...
4. Meadow P.
Leaves with two or more pairs of leaflets.
Stipules deeply divided Pithy nian Vetch.
Stipules entire.
Leafstalk ending in a simple or branched tendril.
Leaflets lanceolate.
Stipules narrow, half-sagittate 7.
Marsh P.
Leaflets ovate or elliptical.
Stipules large, broadly 
ovate, sagittate 8.
Sea P.
Leafstalk ending in a short fine point.
Leaflets 2 or 3 pairs, rarely 4 pairs, lanceolate or linear 
Leaflets 5 or 6 pairs, rarely 4 pairs, ovate 
. 10.
Tuberous P.
Black P.
The Sicilian sweet Pea, the Tangiers Pea, the South American 
Ansons Pea, and some other exotic species, are cultivated in our flower- 
gardens.
The Pea of our kitchen-gardens and fields is usually distin- 
guished as a genus, under the name of Pisum, but upon characters 
which are hardly sufficient for the separation of a solitary specie's.
1. Grass Pea. Lathyrus Nissolia, Linn.
(Fig. 283.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 112.
Vetchling.
Grass Vetch.) 
An erect, glabrous annual, branching 
from the base, about a foot high.
Leaves 
all reduced to a long, linear, grass-like, 
flattened leafstalk, ending in a fine point, 
without leaflets or stipules.
Peduncles 
long, bearing immediately below their 
summit 1 or rarely 2 small pale-red 
flow T ers.
Pod long, narrow, and straight.
In bushy places, grassy borders of 
fields, and stony pastures, in central and 
southern Europe to the Caucasus, but 
not extending into northern Germany.
In Britain, spread over central and 
southern England, but rare, and not 
known in Ireland or Scotland.
Fl. early 
summer.
Fig. 283.
PAPILIONACE.T].
229 
2. Yellow Pea. Lathyrus Aphaca, Linn.
(Fig. 284.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1167.
Yellow Vetcliling.) 
A weak, branching, glabrous annual, 
about a foot long, without real leaflets, 
but the two large, broadly heart-shaped, 
or sagittate stipules, assume the appear- 
ance of simple opposite leaves, with a 
slender branching tendril between them.
Peduncles long and slender, with 1 or 
rarely 2 small yellow flowers.
Pod 
rather more than an inch long, flattened, 
glabrous, containing 4 to 8 seeds.
In waste and cultivated places, in 
central and southern Europe and cen- 
tral Asia, spreading northwards as a 
cornfield weed, and, as such, appearing 
occasionally in the southern counties of 
England.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 284.
3. Rough Pea. Lathyrus hirsutus, Linn.
(Fig. 285.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1255.) 
A weak annual, much branched at the 
base, a foot long or more, with the young 
shoots slightly hairy.
Stipules narrow.
Tendrils branched, with a single pair 
of linear-lanceolate leaflets.
Peduncles 
long, with 1 or 2 rather small flowers.
The standard bright red, the keel and 
wings paler.
Pod hairy.
In cultivated and waste places, in 
southern Europe to the Caucasus, spread- 
ing northwards as a cornfield weed, and 
as such has been found in Essex and in 
iSomersetshire.
Fl. early summer.
230 
THE PEAFLOWER TRIBE.
4. Meadow Pea. Lathyrus pratensis, Linn.
(Fig. 286.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 670.) 
A weak, much branched, glabrous per- 
ennial, straggling or half climbing to 
the length of 1 to 2 feet or rather more.
Stipules large, broadly lanceolate, and 
sagittate.
Tendrils branched, with one 
pair of narrow-lanceolate or linear leaf- 
lets.
Peduncles elongated, with a short 
raceme of 6 to 10 or rarely more yellow 
flowers.
Pod glabrous.
In moist meadows and pastures, 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
from the Mediterranean to the Arctic 
Circle.
Abundant in Britain.
Ft. all 
Fig. 286.
5. Earthnut Pea. Lathyrus tuberosus, Linn.
(Fig. 287.) 
Fig. 287.
Hoot stalk perennial, slender, forming 
small tubers ; the annual stems weak, 
branching, ascending to the height of 
the corn in which it grows, glabrous, the 
angles not winged.
Leafstalks ending 
in a branched tendril, and bearing a 
single pair of obovate, oblong or broadly 
lanceolate leaflets.
Stipules lanceolate, 
half-sagittate.
Peduncles 3 to 6 inches 
long, bearing a loose raceme of red 
flowers, very handsome although not 
usually so numerous as in the everlasting 
P., and rather smaller.
Pod glabrous, 
rather more than an inch long.
In grassy wastes and hedge-banks, but 
more especially in cornfields, frequent 
in many parts of central Europe and 
PAPlLIONACEiE.
231 
Bussian Asia.
In Britain, only around Fyfield in Essex, where it is 
abundant, and protably an ancient denizen, although first noticed, at 
least in modern days, by Mr. O.
Corder, in 1859.
Ft. summer.
6. Everlasting Pea. Lathyrus sylvestris, Linn.
(Fig. 288.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 805.) 
A glabrous perennial, with a creeping 
rootstock, and straggling or climbing 
stems, attaining 3 to 5 or even 6 feet, 
the angles expanded into narrow green 
wings.
Leafstalks also flattened or 
winged, ending in a branched tendril, 
and bearing a single pair of long lan- 
ceolate leaflets.
Stipules narrow.
Pe- 
duncles 6 inches long or more, bearing 
a loose raceme of rather large flowers of 
a pale reddish-purple ; the standard very 
broad, with a green spot on the back, 
and the keel also partially green.
Pod 
2 or 3 inches long or even more.
Seeds 
numerous, slightly flattened.
In hedges, thickets, and bushy or 
rocky places, scattered over the greater 
part of Europe except the extreme north, 
but chiefly abundant in the south.
Occurs in many localities in Eng- 
land, but probably not indigenous in Scotland, and not recorded from 
Ireland.
FL summer, often lasting late.
The everlasting Fea of our 
gardens is a broad-leaved variety from southern Europe, with larger, 
more richly coloured flowers, and some slight difference in the seeds.
It has been distinguished as a species, under the name of L.
latifolius 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1108), and, escaping from cultivation, will often establish 
itself in the vicinity of gardens.
Fig. 288.
7. Marsh Pea. Lathyrus palustris, Linn.
(Fig. 289.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 169.) 
A glabrous, somewhat climbing perennial, not half the size of the 
everlasting P., and the wings of the stem much narrower.
Stipules 
half-sagittate.
Leaflets oblong-lanceolate, 2 to 4 pairs to each leaf, 
the tendrils usually branched.
Elowers smaller and not so broad as in 
232 
THE PEAFLOWER TRJBE.
the everlasting P., of a bluish-purple 
colour, from 2 to 8 in the raceme.
Pod 
glabrous, rather more than an inch 
long.
In moist meadows and boggy places, 
in northern and central Europe, Russian 
Asia, and northern America.
Dispersed 
over a few localities in England and 
Ireland, but only a very doubtful inha- 
bitant of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fiff.
289.
8. Sea Pea. Lathyrus maritimus, Bigel.
(Fig. 290.) 
(Pisum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1046.) 
A glabrous, rather stout, branching 
perennial, with a creeping rootstock, and 
sharply angular spreading stems about 
a foot long.
Stipules broad and leaf-like, 
sagittate at the base, both sides nearly 
alike.
Leaflets 5 or 6 pairs to each leaf, 
those next the stem often 2 inches 
long by 1 broad, the tendril simple or 
branched.
Peduncles about the length 
of the leaves, with a raceme of 6 to 8 
large flowers of a bluish-purple.
Pod 
hairy, at least when young, 1 to 2 inches 
long.
On gravelly seacoasts, in northern and 
Arctic Europe, Asia, and America, not 
extending southwards in Europe beyond 
the shores of Picardy.
Occurs in a few 
localities on the coasts of southern and 
eastern England, of Shetland, and of 
Fig. 290.
Kerry in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
PAPILIONACE^.
233 
9. Tuberous Pea. Lathyrus maerorrhizus, Wimm.
(Fig. 291.) 
{Orobus tuberosus, Eng. Bot.
t. 1153.) 
Root-stock perennial, forminf small 
tubers ; the annual stems glabrous, 
nearly erect, simple or nearly so, 6 inches 
to a foot high.
Leaves without tendrils ; 
the leafstalk ending in a fine point, or 
sometimes in a narrow leaflet ; the leaf- 
lets usually 2 pairs, sometimes 3 or even 
4 pairs, oblong-lanceolate or linear.
Peduncles slender, bearing a loose ra- 
ceme of 2 to 4 flowers of a bright reddish- 
purple.
Pod glabrous, about 1J inches 
long.
The whole plant dries black like 
the following species.
In thickets and open woods, under 
hedges, etc., throughout Europe, except 
the extreme north.
Abundant in Bri- 
tain.
Fl. spring and early summer, This and the blade _P.
form part 
of the old genus Orobus, still kept up by many botanists, but only 
differing from Pea by the want of tendrils to the leaves.
Fig. 291.
10.
Black Pea. Lathyrus niger, Wimm.
(Fig. 292.) 
{Orobus, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2788.) 
A glabrous perennial, always turning 
black in drying ; the rootstock short 
and not tuberous ; the stems erect or 
ascending, branched, 1 to 2 feet high or 
even more.
Stipules small and narrow.
Leaflets 4 to 6 pairs to each leaf, ovate 
or elliptical, 6 lines to an inch long, the 
common stalk ending in a short point.
Peduncles longer than the leaves, with a 
short raceme of 6 to 8 flowers.
Pod 
glabrous, near 2 inches long.
In mountainous and rocky districts, 
throughout temperate Europe to the 
Caucasus, extending far into Scandi- 
navia.
In Britain, only known from two 
localities, in Perth and Forfar.
FL sum- 
mer.
Fig. 292.
TOL.
I. 
234 THE ROSE FAMILY.
XXV.
THE ROSE FAMILY.
ROSACEzE.
Herbs, shrubs, or trees, with alternate leaves, mostly toothed 
or divided, the stipules seldom wanting and often leaf-like.
Flowers in cymes, or solitary at the ends of the year's shoots, or 
more rarely in lateral bnnches or racemes.
Sepals 4 or 5, united 
at the base into a lobed calyx, usually enclosing the ovary or ad- 
hering to it.
Petals 4 or 5 or rarely none.
Stamens usually in- 
definite in number, inserted with the petals on the calyx below 
its lobes.
Ovary of 1, 2, or more carpels, usually distinct at the 
time of flowering, but sometimes combined even into a single 5- 
celled ovary, which is then always inferior or combined with the 
calyx.
As the fruit enlarges, the carpels either remain free or 
are variously combined with each other or with the calyx.
Seeds 
1 or 2 (or in Spircea 3 or 4) in each carpel.
Embryo with large 
cotyledons and no albumen.
A numerous family, widely spread over the globe, but more in the 
temperate and cooler parts of the northern hemisphere than within the 
tropics.
The indefinite stamens inserted on the calyx are sufficient to 
distinguish the greater number of the genera from all other British 
plants.
In the few cases where the stamens are apparently definite, 
there are no petals, but they then differ widely from all other apetalous 
genera by their stipules and divided leaves, as well as by the structure 
of the ovary.
r Ovary or ovaries superior or free from the calyx, though sometimes en- 
, j closed in it 2 
i Ovary or ovaries inferior or adhering to the calyx-tube, which is closed 
S- over them 14 
9 J A single ovary 3 
I Several ovaries 4 
o I" Trees with a deciduous calyx and succulent fruit .
. .
.1.
Prunus.
I Herbs, with the calyx persisting round the dry seed-vessel ....
4 
. f No petals.
(Herbs) 5 
I Four, five, or more petals.
(Herbs or shrubs) 8 
k f Leaves palmately lobed or digitate.
Flowers in loose panicles or cymes 6 
I Leaves pinnate.
Flowers in heads 7 
• fi f Calyx single, 4-lobed 9.
Alchemil.
I Calyx double, 5 large and 5 small lobes 8.
Sibbaldia .
r Heads purplish.
Flowers hermaphrodite, with 4 stamens 10.
Sanguisorb.
7 s Heads green.
Flowers dioecious, the males with numerous stamens 
L 11.
POTERITTM.
R0SACE2E.
235 
« f Calyx-tube short and nearly flat, not enclosing the carpels ....
9 
I Calyx-tube closing over the carpels or seeds .
. 14 
r Calyx single 10 
9<j Calyx double, having as many external bracts as divisions, and alter- 
L nating with them 12 
..^ f Calyx-segments 5 11 
1 Calyx-segments about eight.
Carpels dry and distinct when ripe 3.
Deyas.
1 , f Carpels dry, opening when ripe 2.
Spie^a.
I Carpels succulent, forming a kind of granulated berry ...
5. Rttbtts.
, 9 J Carpels dry, ending in a long jointed awn .......
4. Avens.
1 Carpels without awns, small and seed-like 13 
f Carpels few, on a minute dry receptacle 8.
Sibbaldia.
13 -l Carpels numerous, on a small, flat, dry receptacle ...
7. Potentil.
L Carpels numerous, on a large, succulent receptacle .
6. Steawbeeeey.
r Trees or shrubs.
Calyx-tube fleshy.
Fruit succulent or fleshy .
. 15 
14<*{ Herbs.
Calyx-tube dry, small, with hooked bristles forming a burr 
I 12.
Ageimony.
{Fruit enclosing from 1 to 5 cells or hard nuts, arranged round the cen- 
tral axis, and each with 1 or 2 seeds 14.
Pyeus.
Fruit enclosing several hairy, seed-like carpels irregularly placed 
13.
Eose.
These Genera are usually distributed into three Tribes, considered 
by some botanists as distinct Orders, viz.
: — 
1. Amygdaleje.
Calyx deciduous.
Carpels 1, free.
Genus: — 1.
Petjnus.
2. Roseze.
Calyx persistent.
Carpels 1 or more, free (but sometimes in- 
cluded in the closed calyx).
Genera: — 2.
Spie^a • 3.
DeyaSj 4.
Avens ; 
5. Kubus; 6.
Steawbeeey ; 7.
Potentil ; 8.
Sibbaldia; 9.
Alchemil; 
10.
SaNGTTISOEB ; 11.
POTEEIUM ; 12.
AGEIMONY ; 13.
EOSE.
3. Pomaces.
Calyx persistent, adherent to the ovary, the carpels of which 
are united, at least in the ripe fruit.
Genera : — 14.
Pyeus ; 15.
Hawthoen ; 
16.
COTONEASTEE; 17.
MEDLAE.
The double-flowering Kerria japonica, so frequently to be met with trained 
upon cottage garden-walls, formerly supposed to be a species of Corchorus, is 
now known to belong to the Hose family.
I. PRUNUS.
PRUNITS.
Shrubs or trees, with undivided toothed leaves, and small, free 
stipules, often scarcely visible ; the flowers either in small bunches on 
a former year's wood, or in racemes in the axils of young leaves.
Calyx free, 5-lobed.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous.
Ovary of 1 car- 
pel, containing 2 pendulous ovules.
Fruit a fleshy or juicy drupe, with 
a hard stone, smooth or rugged, but not wrinkled on the surface, con- 
taining 1, or rarely 2 seeds.
236 
THE KOSE FAMILY.
A considerable genus, distributed over the whole of the northern 
hemisphere, and even abundant within the tropics, both in the new 
and the old world, but not extending into the south temperate zone.
It 
is the onty British genus with a stone fruit.
Flowers in axillary racemes 3.
BirdcJierry P.
Flowers solitary or clustered, from leafless buds.
Flowers single or two together, on short pedicels ...
1. Blackthorn P.
Flowers in clusters, on pedicels longer than the flower itself 2.
Cherry P.
The well-known common Laurel and Portugal Laurel of our gar- 
deners, are species of Prunus (P.
Lauro-cerasus and P.
lusiianicus), 
and have no affinity with the true Laurel of the ancients, which is our 
Bay -tree (Laurus nobilis).
The Mahaleb (P.
Mahaleb) and the P.
semperflorens, both from the continent of Europe, are also frequently 
to be met with in our shrubberies.
The Apricot is another Prunus 
(P.
armeniaca) ; the Almond, the Peach, and the Nectarine, belong 
to the genus Amy g dolus, only differing from Prunus in the wrinkled 
surface of the stone.
1. Blackthorn Prunus.
Prunus communis, Huds.
(Fig. 293.) 
(P.
spinosa, Eng. Bot.
t. 842, and P.
insititia, Eng. Bot.
t. 841.
Black- 
thorn or Sloe.) 
In the common, trul} r wild state, this 
is a much branched shrub, the smaller 
branches often ending in a stout thorn.
Leaves ovate or oblong, stalked, and 
finely toothed, usually glabrous, but oc- 
casionally, especially the under sides as 
well as the young shoots, more or less 
downy.
Flowers small, white, nearly 
sessile, solitary or in pairs, appearing 
before the leaves.
Fruit small, globular 
or shortly ovoid, nearly black, with a 
bluish bloom.
In hedges, thickets, and open woods, 
common in Europe and in Russian and 
central Asia.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. early spring, A variety of a some- 
what taller growth, and less thorny, 
with the leaves rather more downy, and the fruit rather more oblong and 
less acrid, has been distinguished under the name of P.
insititia.
It is 
ROSACEA.
237 
more abundant and more marked in south-eastern Europe and central 
Asia than with us.
The JBullace, the Damson, and the numerous va- 
rieties of Plum, of our gardens, although growing into thornless trees, 
are believed to be varieties of the Blackthorn, produced by long cul- 
tivation; they will occasionally sow themselves, and may be found 
apparently wild in the neighbourhood of gardens and orchards, retain- 
ing their arborescent character.
Some botanists distinguish these 
varieties as a species, under the name of P.
domestica (Eng. Bot.
t, 1783).
2. Cherry Primus.
Prunus Cerasus, Linn.
(Eig. 294.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 706, and Suppl.
t. 2863.) 
The Cherry, when wild, is often a 
mere shrub of 6 or 8 feet, throwing out 
suckers from its creeping roots, or more 
properly rhizomes ; but in cultivation, 
and often, also, in a really wild state, 
it will form a tree of considerable size.
Stipules narrow, often toothed and glan- 
dular, but very deciduous.
Leaves ovate 
or ovate-lanceolate, and toothed, 2 to 4 
inches long, usually with 1 or 2 glands 
at the top of the stalk or on the edge of 
the blade, near the base ; but they are 
sometimes wanting on the same speci- 
men.
Flowers white, on pedicels from 
1 to 2 inches long, in bunches of 2, 3, or 
more, issuing together from leafless buds, 
surrounded by brown scales, of which the inner ones often become 
green and leaf-like at the tips.
Eruit globular and smooth, red or 
black, usually without bloom.
In woods, thickets, and hedgerows, in central and southern Europe 
and temperate Asia, extending northwards into Scandinavia, but has 
been in so many places introduced by cultivation, that its precise limits 
can scarcely be fixed.
Generally dispersed over England, Ireland, and 
southern Scotland, but in many cases truly indigenous.
Fl. spring.
There are several more or less permanent varieties in cultivation, which 
are variously distributed by different botanists into several species, of 
which P.
avium, for the tree variety, without suckers, and P.
Cerasus 
for the shrubby form, are generally adopted ; but none of the charac- 
ters given appear to be constant in a wild state.
Fig. 294.
- 
238 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
3. Birdcherry Prunus.
Prunus Padus, Linn.
(Fig. 295.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1383.) 
A shrub of 6 or 8 feet, or sometimes 
a small tree, always glabrous.
Leaves 
oval or ovate-lanceolate, finely toothed, 
and slightly cordate at the base.
Flowers 
white, rather small, in loose, often droop- 
ing racemes of 2 or 3 to near 6 inches, on 
short, leafy, or rarely leafless branches, 
on the last year's wood.
Fruit small, 
nearly globular, black and bitter, with a 
rugged stone.
In woods, thickets, and hedges, in 
northern and central Europe and Asia, 
from the Arctic regions to the Caucasus 
and Himalaya, but disappearing in south- 
western Europe.
Scattered over various 
parts of Britain, but absent or rare in 
southern England, and a great part of 
Ireland.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 295.
II.
SPIR2EA, SPIE^A.
Herbs, with pinnate leaves, or in exotic species, shrubs, showing 
much diversity in foliage.
Flowers usually small and numerous, in 
elegant terminal cymes or panicles.
Calyx free, 5-lobed.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels 3 or more, usually 5, quite free from the 
calyx, forming as many dry capsules, opening when ripe along the 
inner edge, and containing 2 or more seeds.
A considerable genus, spread over the northern hemisphere both in 
the new and the old world, but scarcely penetrating into the tropics.
It is easily recognized by its dehiscent, capsular carpels, and among 
British Rosacea, by the numerous small flowers.
Leaves with few large segments, white underneath .
. .
. 1.
Meadow S.
Leaves with numerous small segments, deeply toothed ...
2. Common S.
Several North American and Asiatic shrubby species of Spircea are 
cultivated in our shrubberies and flower-gardens, and among them the 
ROSACEA.
239 
Willoio S.
(S.
salicifolia, Eng. Bot.
t. 1468), with simple oblong or 
lanceolate leaves, and small crowded panicles of pink flowers, has been 
admitted into onr Floras as occurring in several parts of northern 
England and southern Scotland, but apparently only where it has 
been planted.
It is a native of eastern Europe and Hussian Asia.
1. Meadow Spirsea.
Spiraea Ulmaria, Linn.
(Fig. 296.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 960.
Me udoiv- sweet.) 
Stock perennial, with erect, rather 
stout, annual stems, 2 or 3 feet high, 
usually glabrous and reddish.
Leaves 
large, pinnate, with 5 to 9 ovate or 
broadly lanceolate segments often 2 or 
3 inches long, irregularly toothed, green 
above, soft and whitish underneath, the 
terminal one deeply divided into three ; 
besides which are several smaller seg- 
ments along the common stalk.
Stipules 
broad and toothed.
Flowers small, of a 
yellowish- white, sweet-scented, and very 
numerous, in compound corymbose 
cymes at the summit of the stems.
Cap- 
sules 5 to about 8, very small, and more 
or less spirally twisted.
In meadows, on the banks of ponds 
and ditches, etc., throughout Europe and 
Hussian Asia, except the extreme north.
Common in Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 296.
2. Common Spirsea.
Spirsea Filipendula, Linn.
(Fig. 297.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 284.
Dropioort.) 
Stock perennial, the fibrous roots swollen here and there into oblong 
tubers.
Stems erect, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves chiefly radical or in 
the lower part of the stem, 3 to 5 inches long, with numerous (above 
20) small, oval, oblong or lanceolate segments, deeply toothed or pin- 
nately lobed, gradually smaller as they near the stem, green and 
glabrous, or slightly downy.
Stipules broad, adhering to the leaf- 
stalk nearly their whole length.
Flowers like those of the meadow 
240 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
S., but rather larger, and often tipped 
with red.
Carpels 6 to 12, not twisted.
In meadows, pastures, and open 
woods, generally dispersed over Europe 
and Russian Asia, except the extreme 
north.
Rather frequent in England, 
extending into southern Scotland, but 
not recorded in the Irish Flora.
Fl.
summer.
Fig. 297.
III.
DRYAS.
DRYAS.
Tufted or creeping perennials, with undivided leaves and rather 
large white flowers, growing singly on long peduncles.
Calyx free, 8- 
to 10-lobed.
Petals 8 to 10, or rarely fewer.
Carpels numerous, 
crowded on the receptacle, 1-seeded and indehiscent, ending when 
ripe in long feathery awns or tails, which are not jointed.
The genus consists of but two, or perhaps three species, confined to 
the high mountains or Arctic regions of Europe, Asia, and North 
America.
1. White Dryas.
Dryas Octopetala, Linn.
(Fig. 298.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 451.
D. depressa, Bab. Man.) 
Stems short, much branched, prostrate or creeping, forming with 
their crowded foliage dense spreading tufts.
Leaves little more than 
6 lines long, oblong, deeply and regularly crenate, green, glabrous, 
and almost shining above, white and downy underneath.
Peduncles 
ROSACEA.
241 
erect, 2 or 3 inches long.
Segments of 
the calyx usually 8, rather shorter than 
the petals.
Feathered awn of the carpels 
above an inch long.
General geographical range nearly the 
same as that of the genus.
In Britain, 
not uncommon in the limestone moun- 
tain-districts of northern England and 
Ireland, but particularly abundant in 
the north of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 298.
IY.
AVENS.
GEUM.
Herbs, with a short perennial, sometimes slightly creeping stock, 
and annual, erect stems.
Leaves pinnate, with a few and very unequal 
distinct segments, and yellow or red or white flowers growing singly 
on long peduncles at the ends of the stem or branches.
Calyx of 5 
equal divisions, with 5 very small outer ones alternating with them.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels numerous, 1-seeded, indehis- 
cent, ending in a hairy point or awn, which is hooked at the tip.
A genus of several species, widely diffused over the temperate and 
colder regions of Europe, Asia, and North America, and descending 
along the Andes to extratropical South America.
1. Common Avens.
Geum urbanum, Linn.
(Fig. 299.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1400.
Herb-Bennet.) 
Stems erect, slightly branched, 1 to 2 feet high, nearly glabrous.
Stipules large and leaf-like, the upper ones sometimes above an inch 
long and broad, and coarsely toothed or lobed.
Leaves thin, light 
green, the lower ones w r ith several large segments intermixed with 
small ones, the upper ones usually with only 3 large segments, or a 
single one divided into 3, and sometimes 2 or 3 small ones along the 
stalk, all coarsely toothed.
Flowers yellow, with small spreading petals.
Carpels in a close, sessile head, covered with silky hairs ; the awn 
VOL.
I. U 
242 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
about 3 lines long, curved downwards, 
with a minute hook at the tip.
Under hedges, on roadsides, banks, 
and margins of woods, common in the 
greater part of Europe and Russian and 
central Asia, but not a high northern 
plant, and only as an introduced plant 
in North America.
Abundant in Eng- 
land, Ireland, and southern Scotland, 
but apparently becoming scarce towards 
the north.
Fig. 299.
2. Water Avens.
Geum rivale, Linn.
(Eig. 300.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 106.) 
Rootstock often shortly creeping.
Stems erect or ascending, usually simple, 
shorter than in the common A.
Leaves 
mostly radical, with one large, orbicular, 
terminal segment, coarsely toothed or 
lobed, or sometimes divided into 3, and a 
few very small segments lower down 
the stalk, all more hairy than in the 
common A.
Elowers few, drooping, 
much larger than in the common A.
; the 
petals less spreading, of a dull-purplish 
colour, with a tint of orange.
Carpels 
very hairy, in a globular head, which is 
shortly stalked above the calyx.
In marshes and wet ditches, in Eu- 
rope, Russian Asia, and northern Ame- 
rica, extending into the Arctic regions, 
and almost confined to mountainous dis- 
tricts in southern Europe.
Common in northern England, Scotland, 
and Ireland, but rare in southern England.
FL summer.
Where this 
and the common A.
grow together, specimens are occasionally found 
Fig. 300.
ROSACEA.
243 
which partake of the characters of both, approaching sometimes more 
nearly to the one, sometimes to the other.
They have been described 
as a species under the name of G.
intermedium, but they are more gene- 
rally believed to be mere accidental hybrids between the two species.
Y. RUBUS.
KUBUS.
Herbs, with a perennial stock, or more frequently weak, scrambling, 
prickly shrubs ; the leaves pinnately or palmately divided into dis- 
tinct segments or leaflets, or rarely simply lobed.
Calyx free, 5-lobed.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous.
Fruit a kind of granulated berry, 
formed by the union of numerous 1-seeded succulent carpels round the 
conical or shortly oblong, dry receptacle.
A large genus, widely distributed over almost every part of the globe.
The fruit, analogous in some respects to that of a Mulberry, is suffi- 
cient to distinguish it at once from all other Rosacece.
In the Mulberry 
however each granule is formed by a separate flower, whilst in Rubus 
the whole fruit proceeds from a single one.
From the Strawberry it 
differs in that the carpels are succulent on a dry receptacle, whilst in 
the Strawberry the carpels are dry, and the receptacle succulent.
Flowering stems biennial or perennial, woody at least at the 
base, 2 or more feet long.
Stipules subulate.
Lower leaves pinnate, with 5 leaflets.
Rootstock creeping 1.
Raspberry R.
Leaves of 3 leaflets, or, if of 5, the 4 lower proceed from 
the same point.
Branches slender, glaucous.
Fruit covered with bluish 
bloom 3.
Dewberry R.
Branches not glaucous.
Fruit black, without bloom .
2. Blackberry R.
Flowering stems herbaceous, very short, or seldom a foot 
high.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate.
Leaves with 3 leaflets.
Flowers small, axillary ....
4. Stone R.
Leaves undivided.
Flowers large, terminal, solitary .
. 5.
Cloudberry R.
The Virginian Raspberry, often cultivated in shrubberies, is the 
R. odoratus from North America.
The Arctic R.
(R.
arcticus, Eng.
Bot. t.
1585), a low plant, with a creeping rootstock, and short herba- 
ceous stems, like the Cloudberry R.
f but with 3 leaflets and pink 
flowers, has been inserted in our Floras as having been found in the 
Scotch Islands, but this appears to be a mistake.
At any rate, all 
recent search for it there has been in vain.
u 2 
244 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
1. Raspberry Rubus.
Rubus idseus, Linn.
(Fig. 301.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2442.
Baspberry.) 
Eootstock perennial and creeping; 
the flowering stems biennial, nearly erect, 
3 or 4 feet high, more or less downy, 
and armed with weak prickles.
Stipules 
small, subulate, often inserted some way 
up the leafstalk.
Leaves pinnate ; leaf- 
lets 5 in the lower leaves, often 3 only 
in the upper ones, ovate or oblong, 
pointed, coarsely toothed, of a light green 
above and whitish underneath.
Flowers 
white, in long panicles at the ends of the 
short branches.
Petals narrow and 
short.
Fruit red, sometimes white in 
cultivation, usually separating from the 
receptacle when ripe.
In woods throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia.
Generally distributed 
over Britain, but perhaps in some locali- 
ties escaped from cultivation.
Fl. spring 
or early summer.
Fiir.
301.
2. Blackberry Rubus.
Rubus fruticosus, Linn.
(Fig. 302.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 715, 827, 2572, and Suppl.
t. 2604, 2605, 2625, 2631, 2664, 
and 2714.
Bramble.
Blackberry.) 
Hootstock perennial, without underground creeping shoots ; the 
flowering stems biennial, or of few years' duration, sometimes nearly 
erect, but more frequently arched, straggling or prostrate, often root- 
ing and forming fresh plants at the extremity, usually armed with 
prickles, either stout and hooked or thin and straight, with stiff hairs, 
or glandular bristles, or a short down, all variously intermingled or oc- 
casionally wanting.
Stipules subulate or linear, inserted a short way 
up the leafstalk.
Leaflets rather large, and coarse, either 3 or 5, the 2 or 
4 lower ones inserted together at some distance below the terminal one, 
ovate, toothed, more or less downy, the midribs as well as the stalks 
usually armed with small hooked prickles.
Flowers white or pink, 
in panicles at the ends of the branches.
Fruit black, or very rarely 
dull-red, not separating readily from the receptacle, the calyx usually 
turned down under it, seldom closing over it as in the Dewberry B.
ROSACEA.
245 
aSSfr 
In Ledges, thickets, woods, and waste 
places, over nearly the whole of Europe, 
Russian and central Asia, and northern 
Africa, but not a high alpine nor an Arc- 
tic species.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl.
summer, commencing early.
It varies 
considerably, especially in the prickles 
and hairs, and in the shape of the leaf- 
lets, and from its propagating so readily 
by its rooting stems, individual varia- 
tions are often extensively multiplied, 
and acquire an undue importance in the 
eyes of local observers.
The conse- 
quence has been an excessive multipli- 
cation of supposed species, both in Bri- 
tain and on the Continent, although 
scarcely any two writers will be found to 
agree in the characters and limits to 
be assigned to them.
Amongst those 
which have been observed in Britain, the following appear to be the 
most marked, although even these will very frequently be found to 
pass imperceptibly one into the other.
a. Common Blackberry (R.
fruticosus communis).
Leaflets covered 
underneath with a close, white down.
Flowers usually numerous.
Chiefly in hedges and thickets.
b. Hazel-leaved B.
{R.
f. corylifolius).
Leaflets green underneath, 
usually large and broad.
Flowers not so numerous as in the common 
B. In hedges and thickets with the common B., but usually flowering 
earlier.
c. Hornbeam-leaved B.
(R.
f. carpinifolius) .
Leaflets green under- 
neath, but not so broad, and more pointed than in the last, the stems 
more hairy.
Flowers not numerous.
Chiefly in w^oods.
d. Glandular B.
(R.
f. glandulosus).
Leaflets as in the last variety, 
or sometimes broader, the stems with numerous stiff, glandular hairs 
mixed in with the prickles.
More frequent in shady woods than in 
open thickets.
e. Suberect B.
(R.
f. suberectus).
Leaflets green, or slightly hoary 
underneath.
Stems shorter, and more erect than in the common forms.
Flowers usually few, and the fruit not so black.
Occasionally found 
in wet woods and thickets.^ 
* For further details see Hooker and Arnott's * British Flora/ 7th edit., 
pp.
121 to 130, where the Blackberry and Dewberry are described as either 
one, seven, or twenty-one species ; or Babington's c Manual,' 4th edit., p.
96, 
where thirty- six species are admitted.
246 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
3. Dewberry Rubus.
Rubus csesius, Linn.
(Fig. 303.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 826.
Dewberry.) 
Very near the Blackberry R., but dis- 
tinguished by the more slender branches, 
more or less glaucous when young, spread- 
ing, or creeping along the ground, and 
seldom arched ; the flowers few, in small, 
loose panicles ; the divisions of the 
calyx narrow, with much longer points, 
closing more or less over the fruit ; and 
especially by the glaucous bloom cover- 
ing the fruit when ripe.
Leaves pale- 
green on both sides.
Prickles usually 
small, with few or no hairs intermingled.
In open fields and stony wastes, sel- 
dom penetrating into woods, or climbing 
up into hedges, extending over Europe 
and Russian Asia, but not an Arctic 
plant.
Common in Britain.
Fl. summer.
It is believed by some botanists to be as 
much connected with the Blackberry by 
intermediate forms as some of the above-enumerated varieties of that 
species are with each other, but generally speaking it is not difficult to 
distinguish it.
Fig. 303.
4 Stone Rubus.
Rubus saxatilis, Linn.
(Fig. 304.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2233.) 
The rootstock emits a few creeping runners rooting at the nodes, and 
erect or ascending simple stems seldom above a foot high, slender and 
downy, with a few small prickles, or sometimes wholly unarmed.
Sti- 
pules ovate-oblong or lanceolate, scarcely adhering to the leafstalk.
Leaflets usually 3, much like those of the Dewberry It., thin, and of a 
pale-green.
Flowers on slender pedicels, 2 or 3 together in the axils 
of the upper leaves, forming very short racemes or corymbs, seldom 
growing out into short, leafy, flowering branches.
Petals of a dirty 
white or greenish-yellow, and very narrow.
Berries red, with very 
few rather large carpels.
ROSACEA.
247 
In open woods, diffused over the 
mountain regions of Europe and central 
and Russian Asia ; more abundant, and 
descending to lower elevations in more 
northern latitudes.
Frequent in Scot- 
land, in the north of England, and along 
the western counties to South Wales ; 
in Ireland, chiefly in the north.
Fl. sum- 
mer.
Fig. 304.
5. Cloudberry Rubus.
Rubus Chamsemorus, Linn.
(Fig. 305.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 716.
Cloudberry.) 
Rootstock creeping.
Stems simple, 
herbaceous, and unarmed, seldom above 
6 inches high.
Lower stipules entire, in 
a short sheath, without leaves ; upper 
ones distinct, small, and ovate.
Leaves 
few, rather large, simple, broadly or- 
bicular or reniform, toothed, and often 
more or less deeply cut into 5, 7, or 9 
broad lobes.
Flowers white, rather 
large, solitary on terminal peduncles.
Fruit rather large, of an orange-red.
In turfy bogs, in northern Europe, 
Asia, and America, generally at high 
latitudes, but descending southwards 
into northern Germany.
Abundant in 
Scotland, and extends also into north- 
ern England, Wales, and Ireland.
FL 
Fig. 305.
248 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
VI.
STRAWBERRY.
FRAGAEIA.
Habit, foliage, and flowers of Fotentil, but the fruit is succulent, 
formed of the enlarged succulent receptacle, studded on the outside 
with the numerous minute, 1-seeded carpels, looking like seeds.
A genus spread over nearly the whole of the northern hemisphere 
without the tropics, where it consists, perhaps, but of a single species, 
and represented again by a nearly allied but possibly distinct species 
in southern extratropical America.
1. Common Strawberry.
Fragaria vesca, Linn.
(Fig. 300.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1524, and Suppl.
t. 2742.
Strawberry.) 
A short, perennial, tufted stock often 
emits slender runners, rooting and form- 
ing new plants at every node.
Leaves 
mostly radical, more or less clothed with 
soft, silky hairs, consisting of 3 ovate, 
toothed leaflets at the end of a long 
leafstalk.
Flower-stems radical, erect, 
leafless, or with 1 or 2 usually undivided 
leaves, 3 to 6 inches high or rarely more, 
bearing a small number of pedicellate 
white flowers.
Fruit usually red.
In woods, bushy pastures, and under 
hedges, throughout Europe and Eussian 
and central Asia, and in northern Ame- 
rica, extending to the Arctic regions.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. nearly the 
whole season.
The Hautboy, a rather 
taller variety, with fewer runners and 
flowers, usually entirely or partially uni- 
sexual, has been distinguished as a 
species under the name of F.
elatior (Eng. Bot.
t. 2197) ; and several 
other wild or cultivated varieties have been proposed as species, but 
the great facility with which fertile cross-breeds are produced, gives 
reason to suspect that the whole genus, including even the Chilian 
Fine Strawberry, may prove to consist but of one species.
Fig. 306.
VII.
POTENTIL.
POTENTILLA.
Herbs, with a perennial, tufted stock, and occasionally a creeping 
rootstock or runners.
Flowering stems usually annual, often very 
KOSACE.E. 249 
short, rarely perennial or partially shrubby.
Leaves of 3 or more 
digitate or pinnate, distinct segments or leaflets.
Peduncles 1-flowered, 
solitary or forming a dichotomous cyme at the ends of the stem.
Calyx 
free, double, that is, of twice as many divisions as there are petals, the 
alternate ones outside the others and usually smaller.
Petals 5 or 
rarely 4.
Stamens numerous.
Carpels numerous, small, 1-seededand 
seed-like, crowded on a receptacle which enlarges but slightly, and 
rarely becomes spongy, never succulent.
The species are numerous, extending over the whole of the northern 
hemisphere without the tropics, especially in Europe and Asia, pene- 
trating into the Arctic regions, and descending along the mountain- 
ranges of America to its southern extremity.
The genus, already ex- 
tended by the admission of Tormentilla and Comarum, would, perhaps, 
be still better defined if the Strawberry and Sibhaldia were likewise 
included.
It would then comprise all Rosacea with a double calyx, 
numerous, distinct, 1-seeded carpels, not enclosed in its tube, and the 
styles not transformed into long, feathery beaks or awns.
Leaves digitately divided.
Flowers white 1.
Strawberry -leaved P.
Flowers yellow.
Petals 4 in all, or nearly all, the flowers .
.3.
Tormentil P.
Petals 5 in all, or nearly all, the flowers 
Leaves very white underneath .
. .4.
Hoary P.
Leaves green on both sides.
Stems creeping, and rooting at the nodes .
2. Creeping P.
Stems short and tufted or procumbent, 
but not rooting 5.
Spring P.
Leaves pinnately divided.
Flowers dingy-purple 9.
Marsh P.
Flowers white 8.
Rock P.
Flowers yellow.
Stem much branched, often shrubby.
Leaflets 
few, oblong 6.
Shrubby P.
Stem creeping.
Leaflets numerous, silky under- 
neath 7.
Goose P.
Two red-flowered, East Indian species, with digitate leaves, P.
nejia- 
lensis and P.
atropurjpurea, and several of their hybrids, are frequently 
to be met with in our gardens.
1. Strawberry-leaved Potentil.
Potentilla Fragariastrum, 
Ehrh.
(Eig. 307.) 
{Frag aria sterilis, Eng. Bot.
t. 1785.) 
Resembles the Slraicberry in its short, tufted stems, silky hairs, 3 
leaflets regularly toothed almost all round, and white flowers ; but the 
250 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
receptacle does not swell or become suc- 
culent as the fruit ripens.
The stem it- 
self is also often shortly creeping, either 
under or above ground, and the flower- 
ing branches are less erect than in the 
Straivberry ; the petals usually smaller, 
although variable, sometimes narrow 
and scarcely so long as the calyx, some- 
times nearly as large as in the common 
wild Strawberry.
On banks, dry pastures, and in open 
woods, in western and central Europe, 
extending northward to south Sweden, 
and eastward to the Crimea and the 
Caucasus.
Abundant in England, Ireland, and southern Scotland, but 
becoming rare in the Highlands.
FL early spring.
2. Creeping Potentil.
Potentilla reptans, Linn.
(Fig. 308.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 862.
Cinquefoil.) 
Stock seldom much tufted, with slen- 
der, prostrate stems, often rooting at the 
nodes, and sometimes extending to a 
considerable length.
Stipules ovate, 
mostly entire.
Leaves all stalked, with 
5 obovate or oblong, coarsely toothed 
leaflets.
Flowers single, on long pe- 
duncles, apparently axillary, or rarely 
forming a loose, terminal cyme, as in the 
Tormentil P.
Petals large and yellow, 
mostly 5, but occasionally only 4.
In rich pastures, borders of meadows, 
edges of woods, and hedges, throughout 
Europe and Russian Asia, except the 
extreme north.
Abundant in England 
and Ireland, but decreasing much in 
Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Much as the common form of 
this species differs from the following one, it is by some supposed to 
be a mere variety, and certainly the procumbent variety of the true 
Tormentil appears to be intermediate between the two.
Fig. 308.
ROSACEA.
251 
3. Tormentil Potentil.
Potentilla Tormentilla, Sibth.
(Fig. 309.) 
{Tormentilla officinalis, Eng. Bot.
t. 863.) 
Koot stock thick and woody.
Stems 
erect, or procumbent at the base, several 
times forked, more or less silky-hairy as 
well as the leaves.
Lower leaves often 
shortly stalked, and like those of the 
creeping P., but the upper ones always 
sessile, consisting of 3, or rarely 5, 
deeply -toothed leaflets.
Peduncles in 
the forks of the stem, or in the axils of 
the upper leaves, forming a loose, leafy, 
terminal cyme.
Flowers small, bright 
yellow, and mostly with 4 petals ; the 
first one, however, of each stem has oc- 
casionally 5.
On heaths, moors, and pastures, in 
open woods, etc., throughout Europe 
and Eussian Asia, to the Arctic regions.
One of the most abundant and most 
generally diffused British plants.
Fl.
summer.
The Tormentilla reptans (Eng. Bot.
t. 864) is a more pro- 
cumbent variety, occasionally creeping at the base, with rather larger 
flowers, more frequently breaking out into 5 petals, and forms some 
approach to the creeping P.
; but the really intermediate forms men- 
tioned above are of very rare occurrence.
Fig. 309.
4. Hoary Potentil.
Potentilla argentea, Linn.
(Fig. 310.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 89.) 
Stems decumbent at the base, ascending, and forked above.
Lower 
leaves on long stalks, the upper ones nearly sessile, composed of 5 
wedge-shaped or sometimes obovate leaflets, with a very few deep 
teeth or lobes, and remarkable for the close white down which covers 
their under side as well as the stems.
Flowers in a loosely forked, 
leafy corymb or panicle, rather small, with 5 yellow petals.
252 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
In gravelly pastures, and on roadsides, 
in northern and central Europe, ex- 
tending all across the Asiatic continent, 
but neither an Arctic nor generally a 
Mediterranean plant.
In Britain, spa- 
ringly distributed over England, Ire- 
land, and a portion of Scotland.
FL 
summer.
Fig. 310.
5. Spring Potentil.
Potentilla verna, Linn.
(Fig. 311.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 37.) 
Stems generally short and tufted, 
sometimes procumbent at the base, and 
ascending above to the height of 6 or 8 
inches, or shortly prostrate, but not 
rooting at the nodes as in the creeping 
P. Lower leaves on long stalks, with 
5 or 7 obovate or oblong, toothed leaf- 
lets ; the upper ones shortly stalked or 
nearly sessile, with 5 or rarely only 3 
leaflets, all green on both sides, although 
sometimes greyish by the abundance of 
silky hairs.
Elowers irregularly panicled 
at the ends of the short, weak stems ; 
the petals yellow, broad, and longer than 
the calyx.
In pastures and waste places, chiefly 
in hilly and mountain districts, in Europe, and central and Russian 
Asia, extending to the Arctic regions, but grows also in the dry, hot 
regions of southern Europe.
Thinly scattered over England and Scot- 
land, chiefly in hilly districts, and not recorded from Ireland.
Fl.
spring and summer.
It varies much in size and hairiness, and in the 
size of the flowers.
A luxuriant mountain-variety, with larger flowers, 
of a golden-yellow, has been distinguished as a species, under the name 
of P.
alpestris or P.
aurea (Eng. Bot.
t. 561).
Fig. 311.
ROSACEA.
253 
6. Shrubby Potentil.
Potentilla fruticosa, Linn.
(Fig. 312.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 88.) 
Differs from all other European species 
by the stem, the lower portion of which 
becomes woody, forming an erect or 
spreading shrub or under shrub, often 
very low, but sometimes attaining 2 feet 
in height ; the short flowering-branches 
die down as in other Potentils.
Stipules 
narrow and thin.
Leaflets usually 5, 
narrow and entire ; the three upper ones 
often shortly connected at the base ; the 
two lower inserted at some distance from 
them, so as to form a pinnate rather 
than a digitate leaf.
Peduncles terminal 
or opposed to the leaves, each with a 
single, rather large, yellow flower.
In bushy or stony places, chiefly in 
mountain districts, widely diffused over 
Europe, central and Russian Asia, and 
North America, but not generally com- 
mon.
In Britain, only in a few localities 
in the north of England, and in Clare and Gralwav in Ireland.
FL summer.
Fiff.
312.
7. Goose Potentil.
Potentilla anserina, Linn (Fig. 313.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 861.
Silver -weed.) 
Stock tufted, with long creeping run- 
ners rooting at the nodes, as in the creep- 
ing JP.
Leaves pinnate, with numerous 
oblong, deeply toothed leaflets, green or 
somewhat silky on the upper side, of a 
shining silver-white underneath from 
the silky down with which they are co- 
vered.
Peduncles long, solitary at the 
rooting nodes, bearing a single, rather 
large, yellow flower.
Common on roadsides, in stony pas- 
tures, and waste places throughout Eu- 
rope, Russian and central Asia, and a 
great part of North America, extending 
to the Arctic regions, and reappearing in 
the southern hemisphere.
Abundant in 
Britain.
FL summer.
254 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
8. Rock Potentil.
Potentilla rupestris, Linn.
(Fig. 314.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2058.) 
Stock perennial, sometimes forming a 
very short, woody stem, the annual 
flower-stems 6 to 10 inches high.
Leaves 
chiefly radical, pinnate ; the common 
stalk rather long ; the leaflets 5 or rarely 
7, ovate, toothed, green, and somewhat 
glutinous.
The stem-leaves few and 
smaller, usually with only 3 leaflets.
Flowers few, rather large, of a pure 
white, forming a loose, irregular corymb.
In clefts of rocks, in limestone districts, 
in the mountain-ranges of central and 
southern Europe, and across the whole 
continent of Asia, extending northwards 
into southern Sweden.
In Britain, only 
on the Breiddin hills in Montgomery- 
shire, except where it may have esta- 
blished itself for a time in the neigh- 
bourhood of gardens in which it has been cultivated.
Fl. May and 
June.
Fig. 314.
9. Marsh Potentil.
Potentilla Comarum, Nestl.
(Fig. 315.) 
(Comaram palustre, Eng. Bot.
t. 172.) 
A perennial, 1 to 1| feet high, often 
assuming a bluish-purple colour ; gla- 
brous or more or less hairy in the 
upper part; the stems decumbent and 
rooting at the base.
Stipules not dis- 
tinct from the enlarged base of the leaf- 
stalk.
Leaflets mostly 5, shortly pin- 
nate at the end of the stalk, oblong, 
toothed, nearly glabrous above and 
hoary underneath, or softly hairy on 
both sides, and often near 2 inches long.
Flowers in a loose, irregular corymb, 
of a dingy purple ; the inner segments of 
the calyx broad, with long points, the 
outer ones narrow and much smaller.
Petals shorter than the calyx.
Carpels 
Fig. 315.
numerous and small, on a somewhat en- 
ROSACEA.
255 
larged, rather spongy receptacle, on which account this plant is often 
considered as forming a distinct genus, under the name of Comarum.
In marshes, peat-bogs, and wet places, in northern and central Eu- 
rope, Asia, and a portion of North America, penetrating far into the 
Arctic regions.
Widely distributed over Britain, but rare in the 
south of England.
Fl. summer.
VIII.
SZBBAIiDIA.
SIBBALDIA.
Habit and characters of Potentil, except that the number of sta- 
mens and carpels is reduced below 10, generally from 5 to 7.
The 
genus consists but of very few species, small alpine plants, inhabiting 
the great mountain-ranges both of the new and the old world.
1. Procumbent Sibbaldia.
Sibbaldia procumbens, Linn.
(Eig. 316.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 897.) 
The perennial stock forms a short, 
dense, spreading tuft.
Leafstalks sel- 
dom above 6 lines long, with 3 obovate 
or wedge-shaped leaflets, 3-toothed at 
the end, green, and more or less hairy 
on both sides.
Elower-stems f to 1\ 
inches long, almost leafless, bearing a 
cyme of small flowers, of which the green 
calyxes are the most conspicuous, the 
petals being very small and of a pale- 
yellow, or occasionally wanting.
The 
lobes of the calyx often close over the 
carpels after flowering, but the latter are not enclosed within the 
tube as in AlcJiemil.
'In the mountains of northern and Arctic Europe, Asia, and America, 
or, at greater elevations, in the higher ranges of central Europe and 
Asia.
Erequent in the Scotch Highlands, constituting in some places a 
considerable portion of the greensward, but unknown in England or 
Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 316.
256 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
IX.
ALCHEMIL.
ALCIIEMILLA.
Tufted herbs, either annual or with a perennial, almost woody stock, 
and annual flowering- stems, palmately lobed or divided leaves, and 
small green flowers, in loose panicles or in small sessile heads.
Calyx 
free, double, that is, of 8 divisions, of which 4 alternate ones are out- 
side and smaller.
No petals.
Stamens 4 or fewer.
Carpels 1 or 2, 
1-seeded, and enclosed in the dry tube of the calyx.
The species are very few, but widely spread over the northern hemi- 
sphere, chiefly in mountainous districts.
The palmate, not pinnate 
leaves, and inflorescence, readily distinguish them from the two follow- 
ing apetalous genera.
Perennial.
Flowers in terminal panicles.
Leaves green on both sides, with short, broad, palmate lobes 1.
Common A.
Leaves silvery shining underneath, deeply palmate ...
2. Alpine A.
Small annual.
Flowers minute, in sessile axillary heads .
. 3.
Field A.
1. Common AlcTiemil.
Alehemilla vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 317.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 597.
Lady s -mantle.) 
A perennial, either glabrous or more 
or less hairy, but always green, not 
silvery.
Eadical leaves large, on long 
stalks, broadly orbicular or reniform, 
divided only to a fourth or a third of 
their depth into 7 or 9 broad, regularly- 
toothed lobes.
Flowering-stems decum- 
bent or ascending, seldom above 6 inches 
high, bearing a few small leaves on short 
stalks, with large, green, toothed sti- 
pules, and a loose panicle of small, green 
flowers, each borne on a little pedicel, 
generally at least as long as the tube of 
the calyx.
In meadows and pastures, in north- 
ern and Arctic Europe and Asia, be- 
coming more restricted to mountain- 
ranges in central and southern Europe 
and central Asia.
Generally distributed over Britain, but scarce in 
south-eastern England.
Fl. spring and summer.
Fig. 317.
K0SACE7E.
257 
2. Alpine Alchemil.
Alehemilla alpina, Linn.
(Fig. 318.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 244.
A. conjuncta, Bab. Man.) 
An elegant plant, with much of the 
general hah it of the common A., but 
known at once by the shining silvery 
hairs, which cover the stems and under 
side of the leaves.
The stock often emits 
short, creeping runners.
Leaves smaller 
than in the common A., and divided to 
the base, or nearly so, into 5 or 7 oblong, 
almost entire segments.
Flowers in 
little, dense corymbs, which form short, 
interrupted spikes or panicles at the 
ends of the branches.
In the principal mountain-ranges of 
Europe, but generally at greater ele- 
vations than the common A., and in Asia 
and America almost restricted to the 
Arctic regions.
Abundant in many parts 
of the Scotch Highlands and of north- 
ern England, and occurs also in the mountains of Kerry an 
in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 318.
d Sligo 
3. Field Alchemil.
Alehemilla arvensis, Scop.
(Fig. 319.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1011.
Parsley Piert.) 
A little annual, so different in ap- 
pearance from the last two that it has 
often been considered as forming a dis- 
tinct genus, but the essential characters 
are the same as in Alchemil.
It is sel- 
dom more than 2 or 3 inches high, and 
often in full flower at 1 inch, much 
branched, green, and softly hairy.
Leaves 
on short stalks, orbicular, more or less 
deeply divided and cut.
Flowers very 
minute, green, and sessile, forming little 
heads in the axils of the leaves, half en- 
closed in the leafy stipules.
In fields and waste gravelly places, 
on earthy wall-tops, etc., throughout 
VOL.
T. 
Fig. 319.
258 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
Europe and western Asia, and carried by cultivation into other 
countries.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. the whole season.
X. SANGUISORB.
SANaUISOKBA.
Herbs, with a perennial stock, annual, erect, or ascending stems, and 
pinnate leaves.
Flowers in dense oval or cylindrical heads, at the 
ends of long peduncles.
Calyx simple, of 4 coloured lobes, the tube 
enclosed in 2 or 4 bracts.
Petals none.
Stamens few.
Carpels 1 or 
rarely 2, 1-seeded, enclosed in the dry, oblong tube of the calyx.
The genus consists but of very few European, North Asiatic, and 
North American species.
They are closely allied to the following one, 
with which they are popularly included under the name of Burnet, the 
chief distinction being in the small number of stamens, and the flowers 
usually hermaphrodite.
Burnet Sanguisorb.
Sanguisorba officinalis, Linn.
(Eig. 320.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1312.
Great Burnet.) 
A glabrous and erect perennial, at- 
taining about 2 feet in height.
Leaves 
chiefly radical or from the lower part of 
the stem, with to 13 ovate or oblong, 
toothed segments ; the upper part of the 
stem almost leafless, and divided into 3 
or 4 long peduncles, each terminated by 
a single head of flowers, at first globular, 
then ovoid or oblong, rarely an inch long.
Flowers much crowded, and more or 
less tinged with dark purple.
Stamens 
usually 4.
In moist meadows, chiefly in moun- 
tainous districts, almost all over Europe 
and Russian Asia to the Arctic Circle.
In Britain, chiefly in southern Scotland, 
and in northern and western England ; 
not recorded from Ireland.
Fl. sum- 
Fig. 320.
wier.
E0SACE7E.
259 
XL POTEPJUM.
POTERIUM.
Herbs, with a perennial stock, ascending or erect annual stems, and 
pinnate leaves.
Flowers without petals, in dense, globular or ovate 
heads at the ends of long peduncles, as in Sanguisorb, but most frequently 
monoecious.
Calyx in the males 44obed, the stamens numerous, with 
long filaments.
Calyx in the females tubular, contracted at the mouth, 
with 4 small deciduous teeth.
After flowering it becomes quadrangular, 
closely enclosing 1 or rarely 2 one- seeded carpels.
A small genus, chiefly south European and western Asiatic, gene- 
rally preferring drier and more rocky situations than the Sanguisorbs.
1. Burnet Poterium.
Poterium Sanguisorba, Linn.
(Fig. 321.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 860.
Salad Burnet.
Garden Burnet.) 
A glabrous or very slightly downy 
perennial, much like the Sanguisorb but 
smaller, the stem seldom above a foot 
high.
Leaflets small, ovate, deeply 
toothed, often 15 to 19 to each leaf.
Heads of flowers smaller and more glo- 
bular than in the Sanguisorb, of a light 
green colour, very seldom acquiring a 
purplish tinge.
Lower flowers all males, 
with the numerous stamens projecting 
in hanging tufts ; upper flowers female, 
with a long style ending in a purple, 
tufted stigma.
Eipe calyx from 1 to 2 
lines long, more or less distinctly quad- 
rangular, and irregularly wrinkled and 
pitted.
In dry pastures and clefts of lime- 
stone rocks, in central and southern 
Europe, and temperate Russian Asia, 
extending northwards into southern Sweden.
In Britain, generally 
spread over the limestone districts of England and Ireland, but scarce 
in Scotland.
The ripe calyx or fruit varies in size and in the pro- 
minence of the wrinkles, constituting, in the eyes of southern botanists, 
several distinct species ; one of these, with the ripe calyx near 2 lines 
long, and very distinctly pitted and marked with little asperities, is 
usually inserted in our Floras under the name of P.
muricaticm.
x 2 
Fig. 321.
260 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
XII.
AGRIMONY.
AGR1MONIA.
Herbs, with a perennial stock, erect stems, pinnate leaves with dis- 
tinct segments or leaflets, and yellow flowers in long, terminal, simple, 
loose spikes.
Calyx 5-toothecl.
Petals 5.
Stamens few.
Carpels 
usually 2, enclosed within the dry, persistent calyx, which is covered, 
when ripe, with hooked bristles.
The genus comprises but very few European, north Asiatic, and 
North American species, easily known by their inflorescence, as well as 
by their fruit.
♦ 
1. Common Agrimony.
Agrimonia Eupatoria, Linn.
(Fig. 322.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1335.
A. odorata, Brit.
El.) 
Stems 2 or 3 feet high, more or less 
clothed, as well as the leaves, with soft 
hairs.
Lower leaves often 6 inches long, 
with from 5 to 9 distinct, ovate, coarsely 
toothed leaflets, about an inch long, in- 
termixed with a number of much smaller 
ones ; the upper leaves gradually smaller, 
with fewer leaflets.
Spike long and leaf- 
less, but each flower in the axil of a small 
3-cleft bract, with two smaller 3-toothed 
bracteoles on the very short pedicel.
Tube 
of the calyx hairy and erect when in 
flower, turned downwards after flowering, 
when it becomes thickly covered at the 
top with hooked, green or reddish bris- 
tles, forming a small burr.
Petals rather 
small, oblong.
Stamens short, often not 
more than 6 or 7, but sometimes twice 
that number.
On roadsides, waste places, borders of fields, etc., over nearly the 
whole of Europe, .Russian Asia, and North America, but not an Arctic 
plant.
Frequent in England and Ireland, but becoming scarce be- 
yond the Clyde and Forth in Scotland.
Fl. all summer.
It varies 
considerably in the hairiness of the foliage, in the size of the flowers, 
and in the form of the ripe calyx, which is more or less contracted at 
the base, from ob conical to campanulate ; and from this character two 
European species have been distinguished, but the differences do not 
appear constant enough to separate them even as marked varieties.
Fig. 322.
ROSACE M.
261 
XIII.
ROSE.
ROSA.
Erect, scrambling or climbing shrubs, more or less prickly with, pin- 
nate leaves, leafy stipules adhering to the leafstalk, and showy flowers, 
either solitary or in small corymbs at the ends of the branches.
Calyx- 
tube globular or ovoid, contracted towards the top ; the limb divided 
into 5 segments, often unequal, and sometimes lobed.
Petals 5.
Sta- 
mens numerous.
Carpels several, 1 -seeded, hairy, enclosed within the 
tube of the calyx, which becomes succulent when ripe, and sometimes 
slightly pulpy between the carpels, the whole forming a rather dry red 
or black berry.
A well-marked genus, widely diffused over the northern hemisphere, 
in the new world as well as the old.
It comprises a considerable num- 
ber of true species ; but several of them being of very ancient and uni- 
versal cultivation, and having been hybridized and multiplied with all 
the skill of modern horticulturists, their more or less marked races and 
varieties are now reckoned by thousands.
Even in the wild state en- 
deavours have been made to characterize so large a number of pro- 
posed species, that the confusion amongst them is almost as great as in 
the Brambles.
The forms indigenous to Britain appear to be reducible 
to five types, which are probably real species.
It must, however, be 
admitted, that the characters separating them are not so decided as 
could be wished, and that specimens will occasionally be found that 
the most experienced botanist will be at a loss to determine, and cer- 
tainly not the less so if the number of British species be extended, as 
proposed, to 15 or 20.
# 
Prickles mostly straight, or very slightly curved, scarcely 
dilated at the base.
Stem seldom above a foot high when wild.
Leaflets 7 or 
9, usually small, and simply toothed 1.
Burnet R.
Stem 2 feet or more.
Leaflets 5 or 7, usually doubly 
toothed, downy on both sides 2.
Doiony R.
Prickles, at least the larger ones, more or less curved, and 
dilated at the base.
Styles slightly protruding from the mouth of the calyx in 
a dense tuft, but not united.
Stem scarcely trailing.
Calyx-tube globular, more or less prickly or bristly .
2. Downy R.
* See Hooker and Arnott, ' British Flora,' 7th edit.
pp.
3 37 to 141 ; and 
Babington's 'Manual,' 4th edit.
pp.
110 to 113, where 19 species are described, 
in both cases from the careful observations of Mr. Borrer (Hook .
Brit.
Fl. cd.
1 and 2, pp.
223 to 242).
The above number includes, however, the R.
Dick- 
soni and R.
cinnamomea, since admitted not to be British.
262 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
Calyx-tube ovoid or oblong, without prickles or bristles.
Leaflets very glandular, doubly toothed .
. .
. .
3. Sweetbrlar R.
Leaflets without glands, or very few on the edges only, 
simply or rarely doubly toothed 4.
Dog R.
Styles united in a column, protruding from the calyx.
Stem very trailing 5.
Field R.
The most common exotic Roses in our cottage gardens are the Cab- 
bage and Moss Hoses, varieties of the R.
centifolia, of uncertain origin 
(perhaps not distinct from the R.
gallica, from central and southern 
Europe) ; the Ayrshire Rose, a cultivated variety of the south Euro- 
pean R.
sempervirens ; and the China Roses, varieties of the Asiatic 
R. indie a ; but several other species from Europe, Asia, and JNorth 
America, are also in general cultivation, and are among the parents of 
the numerous garden-hybrids.
1. Burnet Rose.
Rosa pimpinellifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 323.) 
(R.
spinosissima, Eng. Bot.
t. 187.
R. involuta, t.
2068 ?
and R.
ru- 
bella, t.
2521.) 
A small, erect, very much branched 
shrub, usually under a foot high when 
wild, and seldom above 2 feet in culti- 
vation, usually armed with numerous 
unequal, mostly straight, rather slender 
prickles, often more or less intermixed 
with glandular hairs.
Leaflets small, 7 
9 to each leaf, glabrous or with 
or 
a minute glandular down ; the teeth 
simple, or very rarely again toothed.
Flowers rather small, white or pink, 
solitary at the end of the short branches ; 
the floral stipules small.
Calyx globu- 
lar, or slightly ovoid, and smooth ; the 
segments lanceolate, and almost always 
entire.
Carpels all sessile, with free 
styles.
Fruit black, or rarely red, glo- 
bular or nearly so, crowned by the per- 
sistent segments of the calyx.
In dry, bushy wastes, either near the sea or on dry, heathy hills, 
widely spread over Europe and temperate Asia, ascending occasionally 
to considerable elevations, but not extending to the Arctic regions.
Com- 
mon in Scotland and in several parts of England and Ireland, gene- 
rally not far from the sea.
Fl. spring or early summer, and sometimes 
again later.
This is the origin of the Scotch Roses of our gardens.
ROSACEA.
263 
2. Downy Rose.
Rosa villosa, Linn.
(Fig. 324.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 583.
B. mollis, Eng. Bot.
t. 2459, and B.
tomentosa, Sm.) 
In its ordinary state, this is distin- 
guished from the downy varieties of the 
dog B.
chiefly by the globular fruit, more 
or less covered with small, fine pric- 
kles, which are seldom entirely wanting.
It is usually more erect and bushy, 
the prickles of the stem straight or 
but slightly curved ; the leaflets softly 
downy on both sides, and almost always 
doubly toothed.
Calyx-segments long, 
and often expanded near the top, some- 
times all entire, sometimes, as in the dog 
B., some of them more or less pinnately 
lobed.
Flowers white or pale-pink.
In hedges and thickets, in Europe and 
western Asia, and chiefly in the north, 
or in the mountain districts of the south.
Generally distributed over 
Britain, but chiefly in Scotland, northern and w r estern England, and 
Ireland.
Fl. early summer.
The B.
scabriuscula, Eng. Bot.
t. 1896, 
B. kibernica, t.
2196, B.
Sabini, Suppl.
t. 2594, and B.
Doniana, 
Suppl.
t. 2601, appear to be slight varieties of this species, to which 
belongs also the Apple Bose (B.
pomifera), from continental Europe.
Fig. 324.
3. Sweetbriar Rose, 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 991 
Rosa rubiginosa, Linn.
(Fig. 325.) 
B. micrantha, t.
2490, and B.
sepium, Suppl.
t. 2653.
Sweetbriar.) 
Very nearly allied to the dog B., but 
in its typical state, as cultivated in our 
gardens, easily recognized by the aroma- 
tic scent of the foliage when rubbed.
This proceeds from small glands, co- 
piously scattered on the leafstalks and 
under side and edges of the leaflets, often 
giving the foliage a rusty hue.
In the 
wild state the scent is often very faint, 
although the glands are still numerous.
The plant is usually more slender than 
the dog B., the prickles curved or hooked, 
often intermixed with glandular hairs ; 
the leaflets rather small, and almost al- 
Fig. 325.
264 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
ways doubly toothed ; the flowers pink, usually solitary, rather smaller 
than in the dog R.
Fruit ovoid or oblong, smooth or rarely bearing 
a very few small prickles.
In hedges and thickets, in central and southern Europe and central 
Asia, extending northwards into Scandinavia.
In Britain, chiefly in 
southern and eastern England, apparently rare in northern and western 
England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Fl. early summer.
4. Dog Rose.
Rosa eanina, Linn.
(Eig. 326.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 992.) 
Eootstock woody, frequently pro- 
ducing suckers.
Stems of several years* 
duration, often the first year erect and 
simple to the height of 3 or 4 feet ; the 
flowering stems of two or more years 
branched, rather weak and straggling, 
attaining 6 or 8 feet in length, usually 
glabrous, and without glands, armed 
with curved or hooked prickles.
Leaf- 
lets 5 or sometimes 7, ovate, usually 
simply toothed and glabrous, or downy 
on the under side, and then often doubly 
toothed.
Elowers pink or white, usually 
sweet-scented, solitary or 3 or 4 together 
at the ends of the branches ; the stipules 
of the undeveloped floral leaves forming 
elliptical bracts.
Fruit ovoid or rarely 
globular, without bristles, although 
there are often a few on the pedicels ; 
the 5 divisions of the calyx persistent, spreading or reflexed, either all 
dilated at the top and entire, or more frequently one pinnate on both 
sides, two on one side only, and the other two entire.
Styles free, but 
collected in a dense hairy mass scarcely protruding from the orifice of 
the calyx-tube.
Central carpels always distinctly stalked, according 
to Koch, a character which requires further verification.
In hedges and thickets, the commonest Rose throughout Europe 
and Russian Asia.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. summer, rather early.
It varies considerably in the foliage, either quite glabrous or more or 
less downy, especially underneath, and often glandular at the edges, 
but never so much so as in the Sweetbriar R., nor so downy as in 
the downy R., from which it is usually readily distinguished by the 
prickles and the fruit.
The plants figured in * English Botany ' as 
R. eollina, t.
1895, R.
ccesia, t.
23G7, R.
sarmentacea, Suppl.
t. 2595, 
Fig, 326.
ROSACEA.
26?
B. dumctorum, t.
2579 and Suppl.
t. 2610, B.
Forsteri, Suppl.
t. 2G11, 
and probably also B.
tomentosa, t.
990, appear to be all reducible to 
the dog B.
5. Field Rose.
Rosa arvensis, Linn.
(Fig. 827.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 188.) 
A mucb more trailing plant than the 
dog B., often extending to many feet, 
with slender branches.
Foliage and 
prickles nearly as in that species, but 
the leaflets are usually more glabrous 
and shining on the upper side, rarely 
slightly downy.
Prickles usually small, 
and much hooked.
Flowers white and 
scentless, usually 3 or 4 together at the 
ends of the branches, rarely solitary.
Fruit globular or nearly so, without 
bristles ; the calyx-divisions mostly en- 
tire, and falling off before the fruit is 
ripe.
Styles usually united in a column 
protruding from the orifice of the calyx- 
tube, and the carpels all quite sessile, 
but neither of these characters appear 
to be quite constant.
In hedges and thickets with the dog B., in western and central 
Europe, and often as common, but not extending so far to the north, 
nor apparently into eastern Europe.
Abundant in England and Ire- 
land, but becomes scarce in Scotland.
Fl. summer, lasting much later 
than the dog B.
Fig. 327.
XIY.
PYRUS.
PYRUS.
Trees or shrubs, with entire or pinnately divided leaves, and showy 
flowers, either proceeding, with a few leaves, from buds or spurs on a 
former year's wood, or in simple or branched corymbs at the ends of 
the year's shoots.
Calyx-tube adhering to the ovary, the limb with 5 
small divisions.
Petals 5.
Stamens numerous.
Styles 5 or fewer.
Fruit forming with the calyx a fleshy mass, divided in the centre- into 
5 or fewer cells of a leathery or cartilaginous consistence, each cell con- 
taining one or two seeds oy pips.
A genus of several species, widely spread over the northern hemi- 
266 THE KOSE PAMILY> 
sphere, but chiefly in central Asia and southern Europe.
This and the 
three following genera, although universally distinguished by modern 
botanists, are nevertheless separated only by characters of little im- 
portance and difficult to appreciate.
The structure of the flowers is 
the same in all ; the number of styles is variable, the distinction con- 
sists chiefly in the consistency of the lining of the cells of the ripe 
fruit.
In Pyrus it is cartilaginous or leathery, so that the fruit can be 
cut across with a knife ; in the three other genera the cells are hard 
and bony, and tend to separate from each other into distinct nuts.
The 
following analytical Table includes the British species of all four.
Flowers solitary or few together, in simple bunches.
Leaves undivided.
Calyx-segments long and leafy.
Flowers solitary, 
sessile XVII.
Mediae.
Calyx-segments small.
Flowers several together.
Flowers small, drooping.
Leaves entire, white 
underneath XYI.
Cotoneaster.
Flowers showy, erect.
Leaves toothed.
Styles combined at the base.
Fruit globular .
2. Apple P.
Styles distinct.
Fruit pear-shaped 1.
Pear P.
Flowers in branched corymbs.
Leaves often cut or 
divided.
Leaves simple, toothed, lobed, or pinnate at the base 
only.
Leaves very white underneath, with a dense cotton 3.
Beam P.
Leaves green or loosely hairy underneath.
Leaves large, broad or almost cordate at the base, 
more or less pinnately lobed 4.
Cut-leaved P.
Leaves narrowed or wedge-shaped at the base, 
3- or 5-lobed XV.
Hawthorn.
Leaves pinnately divided to the midrib into several 
pairs of distinct, nearly equal segments or leaflets 5.
Rowan P.
Several others are cultivated in our gardens for their fruit or for 
ornament, especially the Quince ( P.
Cydonia), the scarlet Pear (P.
Ja- 
ponica), the Siberian Crab (P.
prunifolia), etc.
1. Pear Pyrus.
Pyrus communis, Linn.
(Fig. 328.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1784.
Pear-tree.) 
In favourable circumstances the Pear will form a handsome tree of 
considerable elevation, of a somewhat pyramidal shape, with dense 
foliage, and showing all its flowers on the outside ; but it may often 
be seen as a low scrubby tree or mere bush.
Leaves stalked, ovate or 
ROSACEA.
257 
obovate, simple, bordered with, numerous 
small teeth, glabrous or loosely covered, 
when young, with a slight down.
Flowers 
rather large, of a pure white, on pedi- 
cels of about an inch long, in very short 
racemes or bunches of 6 to 10, on the 
wood of a former year.
Divisions of the 
calyx narrow and pointed.
Styles long, 
and distinct from the base.
The fruit 
is so well known as to have given its 
name to the peculiar shape it retains 
through nearly the whole of its nume- 
rous cultivated varieties.
In woods and hedgerows, in the tem- 
perate regions of Europe and Asia, ex- 
tending northwards into southern Swe- 
den.
Scattered over Britain, but in so 
many instances escaped from cultivation, 
that it cannot be affirmed to be really indigenous 
/*;> 
Fig. 328.
Fl. spring.
2. Apple Pyrus.
Pyrus Malus, Linn.
(Fig. 329.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 179.
Crab and Apple trees.) 
The Apple-tree never grows to the 
height of the Pear, and assumes a more 
spreading shape.
The leaves are very 
nearly the same, but generally downy 
underneath, with a shorter and stouter 
stalk.
The inflorescence is also the same, 
except that the peduncles issue from 
nearly the same point, instead of being 
arranged in a short raceme along a com- 
mon axis ; the divisions of the calyx are 
broader and downy, the flowers often 
assume a pinkish hue, the styles are 
shortly united at the base, and the fruit 
i3 nearly globular, and flat or hollowed 
at the base by the stalk.
As widely spread as the Pear-tree 
over Europe and western Asia, it ex- 
tends further northward into Scandi- 
navia.
Equally scattered over Britain, but with more probability of 
its being a true native.
FL spring.
In a wild state it produces the 
Fig. 329.
268 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
small acrid fruit known under the name of Crab- Apple, but the Apples, 
Pippins, Codllns, etc., of our orchards all belong to the same species.
3. Beam Pyrus.
Pyrus Aria, Ehrh.
(Fig. 330.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1858.
White Beam-tree.) 
Often a mere shrub, but growing into 
a tree of moderate size, with a rather 
broad head ; the inflorescence, the young 
shoots, and the under side of the leaves 
covered with a soft, white cotton.
Leaves ovate or obovate, green and gla- 
brous on the upper side, always sharply 
toothed, sometimes undivided, sometimes 
more or less pinnately lobed ; the lobes 
rounded at the top, and not acuminate 
as in the cut-leaved P.
Flowers white, 
in corymbs at the ends of short, leafy 
branches, but not near so numerous as 
in the Hoivan-tree, and rather larger, the 
lateral peduncles bearing seldom more 
than 3 or 4.
Styles usually 2 only.
Berries globular or ovoid, and red.
In woods, in central Europe, and in the mountain-ranges of southern 
Europe and central Asia, extending eastward to the Altai and Hima- 
laya, and northward into Scandinavia.
Generally distributed over 
Britain, but more frequent in England and Ireland than in Scotland.
Fl. spring or early summer.
The cut-leaved varieties are sometimes con- 
sidered as species, under the name of P.
intermedia or P.
scandica, 
when the lobes are not deep, and P.
pinnatifida (Eng. Bot.
t. 2331) or 
P.fennica, when the lower ones reach the midrib; the former is not 
uncommon in the north of Europe, and is occasionally found in Scot- 
land ; the other appears to be of garden origin.
Tig. 330.
4. Cut-leaved Pyrus.
Pyrus torminalis, Ehrh.
(Fig. 331.) 
(Cratcegus, Eng. Bot.
t. 298.
Wild Service-tree.) 
A tall shrub or moderately-sized tree, with the inflorescence and 
under side of the leaves, when young, clothed with a loose down, 
which disappears as they grow old.
Leafstalks slender ; leaves broad, 
and divided to near the middle into a few broad, pointed lobes, 
bordered with small teeth.
Flowers in corymbs at the ends of short 
leafy branches, white, fewer and larger than in the Roivan P.
; *more 
E0SACE7E.
269 
numerous and rather smaller than in the 
Beam P.
Styles usually 2, united to 
above the middle.
Berries ovoid or glo- 
bular, small and brownish.
In woods, in central and southern Eu- 
rope to the Caucasus, scarcely extend- 
ing into northern Germany.
In Britain, 
only in southern and central England.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 331.
5. Rowan Pyrus.
Pyrus Aucuparia, Gsertrj.
(Fig. 332.) 
(Sorhus, Eng. Bot.
t. 337.
Boivan-tree or Mountain Ash.) 
A moderate-sized tree, distinguished 
from all the foregoing by the regularly 
pinnate leaves.
Leaflets 11 to 19, in 
pairs along the common stalk, with a 
terminal one at some distance from the 
last pair ; all narrow-oblong, toothed, 
from 1 to near 2 inches long, glabrous 
or nearly so above, more or less downy 
underneath.
Flowers white, rather small, 
but very numerous, in showy corymbs 
at the ends of short leafy branches.
Peduncles and calyx more or less downy.
Styles rather short, usually 3, almost 
glabrous, and free from the base.
Berries 
numerous, small, globular, of a bright 
red.
In woods, throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia, especially in mountainous 
districts and at high latitudes, where it 
shrinks into a stunted shrub.
Generally distributed over Britain in a 
wild state, besides being much planted.
Fl. spring or early summer.
Fig. 332.
270 
THE ROSE FAMILY.
The cultivated Service-tree (Pyrus domcstica, Eng. Bot.
t. 350) has 
precisely the foliage of the Rowan P., of which it is believed by some 
to be a mere variety produced by cultivation.
The flowers are rather 
larger and the styles often woolly, but the only real distinction is in 
the fruit, which is very much larger, assuming the form of a little pear.
It has been inserted in British Floras on the strength of a single tree 
in the forest of Wyre, near Bewdley, which has, however, been shown 
to have been in all probability planted there.
XV.
HAWTHORN.
CKAT^EGUS.
Shrubs, seldom growing into trees, mostly armed with stout thorns 
formed of abortive branches, and differing from Pyrus only in the hard 
bony consistence of the cells of the fruit.
The genus is, like Pyrus, spread over the temperate regions of the 
northern hemisphere, but the species are more numerous in North 
America than in Europe and Asia.
Among those most frequently 
cultivated in our shrubberies and gardens are the C.
pyracantha from 
south-eastern Europe, and the C.
Crus-galli, and some other North 
American ones.
The evergreen C.
glabra, from China, now forms 
the genus PJiotinia.
1. Common Hawthorn.
Crataegus Oxyaeantha, Linn.
(Fig. 333.) 
{Mespilus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2504.
Hawthorn.
May. Whitethorn.) 
A thorny shrub or small tree, gla- 
brous or more or less downy on the 
calyxes and young foliage.
Leaves 
stalked, narrowed at the base, and more 
or less divided upwards into three or five 
lobes or segments, which are irregularly 
toothed or even lobed.
Elowers white 
or pink, sweet-scented, in sessile corymbs 
on short leafy branches.
Petals broad.
Styles 1, 2, or 3.
Emit red, globular or 
ovoid, crowned by the short divisions of 
the calyx, and containing a hard, bony, 
1- or 2-celled nut, each cell with a single 
seed.
In woods, thickets, and hedges, 
Fig 333.
throughout Europe and central and Eus- 
ROSACEA.
271 
sian Asia, except the extreme north.
Abundant in Britain, and uni- 
versally cultivated for artificial hedges.
Fl. spring or early summer.
It varies much in the form of its leaves, the down of its foliage and 
calyx, the number of styles, and the colour and size of the flower and 
fruit.
XYI.
COTONEASTER.
COTONEASTER.
Shrubs, with leaves usually small and entire, and rather small flowers, 
either solitary on short peduncles, or 4 or 5 together, in short droop- 
ing racemes ; the generic characters those of Hawthorn, except that 
the cells of the fruit form as many nuts, distinct from each other, but 
cohering to the inside of the fleshy calyx.
The species are few, chiefly from eastern Europe or central Asia, with 
a few North American ones.
1. Common Cotoneaster.
Cotoneaster vulgaris, Lindl.
(Fig. 334.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2713.) 
An irregularly- growing, tortuous shrub, 
with a dark ruddy bark ; the young 
shoots and under side of the leaves co- 
vered with a short, dense, white cot- 
tony down.
Leaves shortly stalked, 
small, ovate or orbicular, and entire, 
glabrous on the upper side.
Elowers 
greenish-white, small, solitary or few 
together, in short drooping racemes, on 
very short leafy branches or buds.
Calyx glabrous, with short broad teeth.
Styles usually 3.
Fruit small, reddish.
In rocky situations, chiefly in lime- 
stone regions, in central and southern, 
and especially eastern Europe, and in 
central and Russian Asia, extending in 
the east to the Arctic Circle, ascending high up into mountain ranges, 
even to the edges of glaciers.
In Britain, only known on the limestone 
cliffs of the Great Orme's Head.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 334.
272 
THE EOSE FAMILY.
XVII.
MEDLAR.
MESPILUS.
A single species, distinguished as a genus from Hawthorn on account 
of its large flowers with more foliaceous divisions to the calyx, and of 
its fruit, of which the bony cells are more exposed at the top of the 
fruit, and more readily separable from each other.
1. Common Medlar.
Mespilus germanica, Linn.
(Fig. 335.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1523.) 
A shrub or small tree, more or less 
thorny when wild, but losing its thorns 
in cultivation.
Leaves undivided, nearly 
sessile, lanceolate or oblong, with very 
small teeth, usually downy, especially 
on the under side.
Flowers large, white 
or slightly pink, solitary and sessile on 
short leafy branches.
Styles glabrous 
and distinct, usually 5.
Fruit nearly 
globular or pear-shaped, crowned by a 
broad hairy disk, from whence the 5 
bony cells very slightly protrude.
In hedges and thickets, common in 
southern Europe to the Caucasus, ex- 
tending more or less into central Eu- 
rope, but in many cases only as escaped 
from cultivation.
In Britain, apparently 
wild in several localities in southern 
England, but probably not truly indi- 
genous.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 335.
The CalycantJms, occasionally planted in shrubberies, and CJiimon- 
antJms, often trained against walls, belong to the small North American 
and Asiatic CalycantJms family, allied on the one hand to the Rose 
family, on the other to the Magnolia family.
The common Myrtle, a 
south European shrub, is one of the very large tropical Myrtle family, 
with the indefinite perigynous stamens of the Rosacece, but with oppo- 
site leaves, and a completely syncarpous inferior ovary.
onageace^:.
273 
XXVI.
THE (ENOTHERA FAMILY.
ONAGRACEiE.
Herbs, or, in some exotic genera, shrubs, with the leaves, es- 
pecially the lower ones, frequently opposite, almost always undi- 
vided (except when immersed in water), and toothed, without sti- 
pules.
Flowers in terminal spikes or racemes, or the lower ones 
solitary in the axils of the leaves.
Calyx-tube adhering to the 
ovary, sometimes prolonged considerably above it ; the limb of 4 
or sometimes 2 lobes, not overlapping each other in the bud.
Petals as many, inserted on the calyx below its lobes, or occa- 
sionally wanting.
Stamens 8, 4, 2, or 1, inserted with the petals.
Styles simple or divided at the top into 2 or 4 stigmas.
Ovary 
inferior, of 2 or 4 cells.
A considerable Order, ranging over the whole world, but in the 
greatest variety in North America.
It is readily known amongst 
European Calyciflores with an inferior syncarpous ovary, by the parts 
of the flowers being all in twos or in fours.
The small-flowered genera 
with sessile stigmas (of which Myriojohyll and Marestail are the only 
British ones) form a distinct Suborder, sometimes considered as an in- 
dependent Order, under the name of Haloragece.
Style distinctly present.
Stamens 8.
Petals 4.
Flowers purplish-red, pink, or white.
Capsule long.
Seeds with a tuft of hairs 1.
Epilobe.
Flowers large, yellow.
Capsule short.
Seeds without 
hairs 2.
CEnothera.
Stamens 4.
Petals small or none.
Capsule short.
Seeds 
without hairs 3.
Lttdwiqia.
Stamens 2.
Petals 2, cleft.
Capsule small, hispid.
Seeds 
1 or 2 4.
CiECiEA.
Stigma sessile on the ovary.
Aquatic plants with mmute 
flowers.
Stamens 4 or 8.
Stigmas and seeds 4 5.
Myriophyll.
Stamen, stigma, and seed 1 6.
Marestail.
The North American Clarkias, Zauschneria and Gaura, of our 
flower-gardens, and the South American Fuchsias of our plant-houses, 
all belong to the CEnothera family.
I. EPILOBE.
EPILOBIUM.
Herbs, mostly erect, with annual flowering stems, either with a 
creeping perennial rootstock, or, in the small-flowered species, becoming 
YOL.
I. T 
274 THE (ENOTHEKA FAMILY.
perennial by means of scions or offsets formed in autumn at the base 
of the decaying stem.
Leaves opposite, or irregularly scattered.
Flowers pink or red, rarely white.
Limb of the catyx 4-cleft.
Petals 
4. Stamens 8.
Ovary and capsule long and narrow, 4-celled.
Style 
distinct, with a club-shaped or 4-lobed stigma.
Seeds numerous, bear- 
ing a tuft of long hairs.
The genus is diffused over nearly the whole of the globe, from the 
extreme Arctic regions of both hemispheres to the tropics.
The nu- 
merous forms the species assume in every variety of climate, make 
it exceedingly difficult to define them upon any certain principle, and 
botanists seldom agree as to the number they should admit.
Those 
here adopted are the most marked among our British forms ; but it 
must be confessed that in some instances intermediates are to be met 
with which will be found very puzzling.
In all eases the style must 
be carefully observed, if possible when fresh, and a note made whether 
the stigma is entire or lobed.
Flowers somewhat irregular, in long, terminal, leafless racemes.
Petals spreading from the base, mostly entire ....
1. Willow E.
Flowers regular, axillary or in short racemes, leafy at the base.
Petals erect at the base, mostly notched.
Stigma deeply 4t-lohed.
Stem often 3 to 4 feet.
Flowers large.
Leaves clasping 
the stem 2.
Great E.
Stem seldom above 2 feet.
Leaves, at least the lower ones, 
shortly stalked.
Leaves lanceolate, the middle ones sessile.
Plant softly 
hairy 3.
Hoary E.
Leaves ovate-lanceolate or ovate, mostly stalked.
Plant 
glabrous or slightly hoary 4.
Broad E.
Stigma club-shaped, entire (or very shortly 4>-looed in the 
pale E.J.
Stem marked with two or four raised lines, decurrent from 
the lower or all the leaves.
Leaves shortly stalked.
Buds erect or slightly nodding 5.
Pale E.
Leaves lanceolate, sessile.
Buds erect 6.
Square E.
Stem cylindrical.
Decurrent lines none or faint.
Buds 
nodding.
Alpine plant, not 6 inches high.
Leaves ovate.
Leaves small, mostly entire.
Plant little-branched 9.
Alpine E.
Leaves broad, toothed, an inch or more long.
Plant 
much branched 8.
ChicJctveed E.
Lowland plant, often a foot high or more.
Leaves 
narrow, nearly entire 7.
Marsh E.
ONAGRACE^).
275 
1. Willow Epilobe.
Epilobium angustifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 336.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1947.
French Willow.
Rose-bay.) 
A handsome plant, simple or scarcely 
branched, 2 or 4 feet high, glabrous or 
slightly hoary, but never hairy.
Root- 
stock creeping.
Leaves shortly stalked, 
lanceolate, entire or with very minute 
distinct teeth.
Flowers large, purplish- 
red, in long terminal racemes ; the petals 
slightly unequal, entire, and spreading 
from the base ; the stamens and styles 
inclined downwards.
Stigma deeply 4- 
lobed.
Pod 1 to 2 inches long, more or 
less hoary.
On moist banks, and in moist open 
woods, chiefly in light soils, in Arctic 
and northern Europe, Asia, and Worth 
America, extending into the mountain- 
ous districts of central Europe and Asia.
Widely spread over Britain, but not 
common, and in many places introduced.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 336.
2. Great Epilobe.
Epilobium hirsutum, Linn.
(Fig. 337.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 838.
Great Willow-herb.
Codlins-and-cream.) 
Stems stout and branched, 3 or 4 or even 
5 feet high, the whole plant softly hairy.
Leaves lanceolate, clasping the stem at 
the base, and bordered with small teeth.
Flowers large and handsome ; the petals 
erect at the base, spreading upwards, 
and deeply notched.
Pod very long, 
quadrangular, and hairy.
On the sides of ditches and rivers, and 
in wet places, throughout Europe and 
central and Russian Asia, except the ex- 
treme north.
Abundant in England, 
but soon disappearing in Scotland.
FL 
Fig. 337, 
276 
THE (ENOTHERA FAMILY.
3. Hoary Epilobe.
Epilobium parviflorum, Schreb.
(Fig. 338.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 795.) 
Some specimens of this plant look like 
the great E.
on a small scale, others ap- 
proach the broad JE.
It is distinguished 
from the former by its smaller stature 
and much smaller flowers.
The lower 
leaves, also, and sometimes the upper 
ones, are shortly stalked ; the middle 
ones usually sessile, but scarcely clasp- 
ing the stem.
From the broad E.
there 
is little to separate it but the soft hairs 
with which it is clothed, the narrower 
leaves with shorter stalks, and the ra- 
ther larger flowers.
But none of these 
characters appear to be quite constant, 
and it may possibly prove to be a mere 
variety of the broad E.
In Europe and western Asia, but not 
so common as the broad E., and gene- 
rally found in wetter situations.
It has 
nearly the same range over Britain, excepting the north of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 338.
4. Broad Epilobe.
Epilobium montanum, Linn.
(Fig. 339.) 
(Eng. Bot, t.
1177.) 
Stems erect, simple or slightly branched, from 6 inches to a foot or 
more high, cylindrical, without any decurrent lines or angles, and 
usually glabrous or slightly hoary ; the autumnal offsets usually short, 
and sometimes sessile.
Leaves shortly stalked, or sometimes almost 
sessile, ovate or broadly lanceolate, and toothed.
Flower-buds erect 
or slightly nodding ; ovary downy, tapering into a stalk at the base, 
and crowned by a calyx 2 or 3 lines long, divided below the middle 
into 4 reddish lobes.
Petals pink, usually nearly twice as long, but 
sometimes scarcely exceeding the calyx, always deeply notched.
Style divided at the top into 4 oblong, spreading, stigmatic lobes.
Pod slender, 2 to 3 inches long.
ONAGBACEJS.
277 
In waste and cultivated places, road- 
sides, woods, etc., throughout Europe 
and Eussian and central Asia, and ap- 
parently in many other parts of the globe.
Yery abundant in Britain.
Fl. summer.
It varies much in the size of the flowers, 
which are in dry situations often nearly 
as small as in the pale _Z?., from which 
it is then chiefly distinguished by the 
deeply- cleft stigma.
n^ 
Fig. 339.
5. Pale Epilobe.
Epilobium roseum, Schreb.
(Fig. 340.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 693.) 
An erect plant, glabrous or hoary 
when young, much resembling at first 
sight a small-flowered broad J?., but the 
leaves are narrower, on longer stalks, 
the lower ones generally opposite, with 
a raised line descending more or less 
along the stem from the junction of the 
leafstalk on each side, almost as in the 
square E.
They vary from ovate-lanceo- 
late to narrow- oblong, and from 1 to 3 
inches in length.
Flowers in a short, 
terminal, leafy, branched raceme or 
panicle ; the limb of the calyx hardly 2 
lines long, and the notched petals not 
much longer.
Buds erect or slightly 
nodding, the style ending in a club- 
shaped stigma, either entire or very 
shortly 4-lobed.
Pods from 1 to 2 inches 
long.
Along ditches, and in moist situations, 
in Europe and Russian Asia, but not so common as either the preced- 
Fiff.
340.
278 
THE OENOTHERA FAMILY.
ing or the following species, nor extending so far to the north.
Scattered 
over several parts of Britain, but being often confounded with the broad 
E. or the hoary E., its real distribution is very uncertain.
El. sum- 
mer.
Specimens in which the stigma is slightly lobed have been dis- 
tinguished under the name of E.
lanceolatum (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2935, 
the style much more lobed than it should be).
Square Epilobe.
Epilobmni tetragonum, Linn.
(Fig. 341.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1948.
E. obscurum, Bab. Man.) 
Stems erect, often much branched, 1 
to 2 feet high, glabrous, or hoary with 
a very short down, and more or less 
angular from raised lines descending on 
each side from the margins of the leaves ; 
the autumnal offsets often long and 
threadlike, with a fleshy bud at the ex- 
tremity, more rarely short and scaly or 
leafy, as in the broad E.
Leaves ses- 
sile or nearly so, narrow, and toothed.
Flowers small, in terminal leafy racemes, 
the buds erect, the petals deeply notched.
Stigma entire and club-shaped.
Pod 
often very long.
In wet ditches and watery places, 
throughout Europe, Russian Asia, and 
a portion of North America, and ex- 
tending to the Arctic Circle.
Common 
in Britain, excepting in the north of 
Scotland.
El. summer.
Specimens with filiform scions have been dis- 
tinguished under the name of E.
virgatum.
Fig. 341.
7. Marsh Epilobe.
Epilolbium palustre, Linn.
(Fig. 342.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 346.) 
Yery near the aljpine E., and by some believed to be a lowland form 
of it.
It has the same slender scions, entire or not much toothed 
leaves, short terminal racemes, small flowers, nodding buds, and club- 
shaped, undivided stigma ; but its stature is taller, often a foot or even 
two in height, and the leaves are longer and much narrower, often 
ONAGEACEiE.
279 
linear.
It sometimes also comes very 
near the narrow-leaved forms of the pale 
E. and the square E., but has the buds 
much more nodding, and the decurrent 
lines on the stem are either very faint 
or entirely wanting.
In wet, boggy places, and watery 
ditches, throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, but more especially in the north, 
extending into the Arctic regions.
Ge- 
nerally distributed over Britain, but not 
a very common species.
El. summer.
Fig. 342.
8. Chick-weed Epilobe.
Epilobium alsinsefolium, Vill.
(Fig. 343.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2000.) 
Closely allied to, and perhaps a mere 
variety of, the alpine E., but much more 
luxuriant, and frequently branched, 
though seldom more than 6 inches high.
Leaves very shortly stalked, ovate, and 
toothed, and an inch long or more, like 
those of the broad E., but of a thicker 
consistence.
Elowers larger than those of 
the alpine E.
The autumnal scions 
are more frequently underground than 
green and leafy.
Along alpine rivulets and springs, in 
all the great mountain-ranges of Europe 
and western Asia.
Yery common in the 
Scotch Highlands, extending into the 
mountains of North Wales and north- 
western England, but not recorded from 
Ireland.
El. summer.
Fig. 343.
280 
THE OENOTHERA FAMILY.
9. Alpine Epilobe.
Epilobium alpinum, Linn.
(Fig. 344.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2001.
JE.
anagallidi folium, Bab. Man.) 
This little plant is seldom more than 
4 or 5 inches high, and often much 
shorter, decumbent and much branched 
at the base, glabrous or nearly so ; the 
autumnal scions usually above ground, 
slender and leafy, rarely short and tufted.
Leaves more or less stalked, small, ovate 
or lanceolate, usually obtuse, and en- 
tirely or obscurely toothed.
The stems 
have not the raised decurrent lines of 
t\ie pale E., but are only marked occa- 
sionally with faint downy lines.
The 
flowers, although as small as in the marsh 
E. f appear large in proportion to the 
size of the plant, they are few in the 
axils of the upper leaves, forming short, 
leafy racemes.
Buds nodding.
Petals 
notched.
Style ending in a club-shaped stigma, entire or nearly so.
Pod 1 to 2 inches long, narrowed at the base into a long stalk.
Along alpine rills, and wet places in the high mountain-ranges or 
Arctic regions of Europe, Russian Asia, and northern America.
Abun- 
dant in the Scotch Highlands, but very local in England, and does not 
extend into Wales or Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 344.
II.
OENOTHERA.
(ENOTHEBA.
Herbs or undershrubs, with alternate leaves, and yellow, red, or 
purple flowers, either axillary or in terminal spikes or racemes.
Calyx- 
tube prolonged above the ovary, 4-lobed at the top.
Petals 4.
Sta- 
mens 8.
Ovary and capsule 4-celled.
Style distinct, with a capitate 
or 4-lobed stigma.
Seeds numerous, without any tuft of cottony hairs.
A large American, and chiefly North American genus, from whence 
several species are cultivated in our flower-gardens.
1. Common CEnothera.
CEnothera biennis, Linn.
(Fig. 345.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1534.
Evening Primrose.) 
A biennial, 2 or 3 feet high ; the stems almost simple, and more or 
less hairy : leaves ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, slightly toothed, 
ONAGRACEiE.
281 
lioary or downy.
Flowers yellow, large, 
and fragrant, in a long, terminal spike, 
often leafy at the base.
Ovary sessile, 
about 6 to 8 lines long, the tube of the 
calyx at least an inch longer, the petals 
broad and spreading.
Capsule oblong.
A JN"orth American plant, long culti- 
vated in European flower-gardens, and 
now naturalized on river- banks and 
other sandy places in several parts of 
western Europe.
Appears to be fully 
established in Lancashire and some other 
counties of England.
Fl. summer and 
autumn, opening in the evening.
Fig. 345.
III.
LUDWI6IA.
LUDWIGIA.
Marshy or almost aquatic herbs, with opposite leaves, and small 
flowers solitary in the axils of the upper leaves.
Limb of the calyx of 
4 short divisions.
Petals very small, or, in the British species, none.
Stamens 4.
Ovary and capsule 4-celled.
Style distinct, with a capi- 
tate stigma.
Seeds numerous, without any tuft of hairs.
The genus consists of a considerable number of species, widely dif- 
fused over the hotter as well as the temperate regions of the globe, in 
the new world as in the old.
In their general habit and small flowers 
they resemble Peplis, and some other semiaquatic plants of the Lyth- 
rum family, but the inferior ovary and other characters are entirely 
those of the Oenothera family.
1. Marsh Ludwigia.
Ludwigia palustris, Ell.
(Fig. 346.) 
(Isnardia, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2593.) 
A small glabrous annual, 3 to 6 inches high or rarely more ; the 
lower part of the stem creeping in mud or floating in water, branching 
and rooting at almost every node.
Leaves ovate and entire, 6 lines to 
an inch long.
Flowers closely sessile, with a small green calyx, no 
petals, very small stamens, and an exceedingly short style, with acom- 
paratively large capitate stigma.
The capsule rapidly enlarges, being, 
VOL.
I. Z 
282 
THE OENOTHERA FAMILY.
when ripe, about 2 lines long, obovate, 
with 4 green angles, and containing 
numerous minute seeds.
In wet ditches, bogs, and pools, in 
central and southern Europe, central 
Asia, and North America, not crossing 
the Baltic to the northward.
In Britain 
only known hitherto in three localities 
in Hampshire and Sussex, and in the 
Channel Islands.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 346.
IV.
CIROffiA.
CIROEA.
Herbs, becoming perennial by creeping rootstocks from the base of 
the erect annual flowering stems, with opposite stalked leaves, and 
small flowers in terminal racemes.
Limb of the calyx of two divisions, 
turned back whilst flowering.
Petals 2.
Stamens 2.
Style distinct, 
with a thick stigma.
Ovary and capsule globular, pear-shaped, or ob- 
long, 2- or 1-celled, with 1 seed in each cell.
This pretty little genus consists but of three or four species, spread 
over Europe, temperate Asia, and North America, all so nearly re- 
sembling each other, that, in the opinion of some botanists, they are 
mere varieties of one.
Plant more or less hairy.
Capsule pear-shaped, with 2 seeds .
1 .
Common C.
Leaves perfectly glabrous.
Capsule oblong, with 1 seed .
. 2.
Alpine C.
1. Common Ciresea.
Circsea lutetiana, Linn.
(Eig. 347.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1056.
Enchanter s Nightshade.) 
Stems erect or shortly decumbent, and rooting at the base, 1 to 1\ 
feet high, and, as well as the leaves and racemes, more or less clothed 
with very short whitish hairs.
Leaves on rather long stalks, broadly 
ovate or heart-shaped, 2 to 3 inches long, rather coarsely toothed, of a 
thin texture.
Flowers white or pink, in elegant, slightly branched, 
ONAGEACEtE.
283 
leafless, terminal racemes.
Pedicels 
about 2 lines long, turned down after 
flowering.
Capsule small, pear-shaped, 
covered with stiff, hooked hairs, forming 
a small burr.
Seeds 2.
In woods and shady situations, 
throughout Europe and central and 
Kussian Asia, except the extreme north, 
and in North America.
Abundant in 
England and Ireland, but scarce in Scot- 
land.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 34/7.
2. Alpine Circsea.
Circsea alpina, Linn.
(Eig. 348.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1057, not good.) 
Closely resembles the common species, 
of which it may be a mountain variety, 
but is smaller in all its parts, and usually 
quite glabrous, except the fruit.
It is 
seldom above 6 inches high ; the leaves 
are thinner, and often glossy ; the cap- 
sules smaller, less hairy, much narrower, 
and usually contain only a single seed, 
owing to the almost constant abortion of 
one of the cells.
In woods, and stony places, chiefly 
in mountain districts, in Europe and all 
across Eussian Asia, often ascending to 
great altitudes, and penetrating further 
northward than the common C, but ap- 
parently not an Arctic plant.
Abun- 
dant in Scotland, extending into the 
north of England, but disappearing in 
the south ; in Ireland both in the north 
and in Cork county.
Fl. summer.
A 
larger variety has sometimes been described as a distinct species, under 
the name of C.
intermedia, a name also occasionally given to smaller 
states of the common C.
z 2 
Fig. 348.
284 
THE OENOTHERA FAMILY.
V. MYRIOPHYLL.
MYRIOPHYLLUM.
Aquatic plants, with finely pinnated, whorled leaves, and minute, 
sessile, monoecious flowers.
Calyx with 4 short divisions.
Petals 4 in 
the male flowers, very minute or none in the females.
Stamens in the 
males 8, 6, or 4.
Ovary and capsule of the females short, divided into 
4 cells, with 1 seed in each.
A small genus, widely diffused over almost every part of the globe.
In its finely-cut whorled leaves it bears at first sight much resemblance 
to Ceratophyll, but the lobes of the leaves are pinnate, not repeatedly 
forked as in the latter plant.
Floral leaves or bracts not longer than the flowers ....].
Spiked M.
Floral leaves longer than the flowers, usually pinnate, like 
the stem-leaves 2.
Whorled M.
1. Spiked Myriophyll.
Myriophyllum spicatum, Linn.
(Fig. 349.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 83.
Water Milfoil.) 
Hootstock perennial, creeping and 
rooting in the mud under water.
Stems 
ascending to the surface, but usually 
wholly immersed, varying in length ac- 
cording to the depth of the water, and 
more or less branched.
Leaves whorled, 
in fours or sometimes in threes or in 
fives, along the whole length of the stem ; 
the numerous capillary segments entire, 
3 to near 6 lines long.
From the sum- 
mit of the branches a slender spike, 2 to 
3 inches long, protrudes from the water, 
bearing minute flowers arranged in little 
whorls, and surrounded by small bracts 
seldom as long as the flowers themselves.
The upper flowers are usually males, 
their oblong anthers, on very short fila- 
ments, protruding from the minute calyx 
and petals.
The lower ones are female, 
very small, succeeded by small, nearly globular or slightly oblong 
capsules, each separating ultimately into 4 one-seeded carpels.
In watery ditches, and ponds, throughout Europe and Russian Asia.
Extending all over Britain.
Fl. all summer.
A starved slender va- 
riety, with the whorls of the spike often reduced to a single flower, and 
Fig. 349.
ONAGRACB.E.
285 
the lower ones having leaves at their base like the stem-leaves, has 
been considered by some as a distinct species, under the name of M.
alterniflorum (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2854).
2. Whorled Myriophyll.
Myriophyllum verticillatum, 
Linn.
(Fig. 350.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 218.
Water Milfoil) 
In deep, clear waters the foliage is 
precisely that of the spiked M., but the 
flowers are all immersed in the water, in 
the axils of the upper leaves.
In shallow, 
muddy ditches, the segments of the 
leaves are often shorter and fewer, and 
the flowers form a spike protruding above 
the water as in the spiked M., but the 
bracts or floral leaves are longer than 
the flowers, and pinnate like the stem- 
leaves : this form constitutes the M.
pectinatum of some authors, but cannot 
be distinguished with any precision, even 
as a variety.
In watery ditches and ponds, with the 
spiked M., over the greater part of its 
geographical range, and in many coun- 
tries as common.
In Britain it appears 
to be rather scarce, but perhaps fre- 
quently overlooked from its flowers not appearing above the 
all summer.
Fig. 350.
water.
Fl.
VI.
JYIARESTAIIi. HIPPUEIS.
A single aquatic species, distinguished as a genus from MyriopJiyll 
by its entire leaves, and by its flowers always without petals, with a 
scarcely perceptible border to the calyx, and reduced to 1 stamen, 1 
subulate style, and 1 ovule and seed.
1. Common Marestail.
Hippuris vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 351.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 763.) 
An aquatic plant with a perennial rootstock, and erect, annual, simple 
286 
THE LYTHRUM FAMILY.
stems, the upper part projecting out of 
the water sometimes to the height of 8 
or 10 inches, and crowded in their whole 
length by whorls of from 8 to 12 linear 
entire leaves ; the submerged ones, when 
in deep streams, often two or three inches 
long, gradually diminishing till the up- 
per ones are less than half an inch.
Flowers minute, sessile in the axils of 
the upper leaves, consisting of a small 
globular or oblong ovary, crowned by a 
minute, scarcely perceptible border, on 
which is inserted a very small stamen, 
and from the centre of which proceeds a 
short, thread-like style.
Fruit a little, 
oblong, 1-seeded nut, scarcely a line in 
length.
In shallow ponds, and watery ditches, 
over the greater part of Europe, Russian 
and central Asia, and North America, especially at high latitudes.
In 
Britain, not near so frequent as the Myriophyll and Ceratophyll.
Fl.
summer.
The whole plant has a general resemblance, although no 
affinity, to some of the more slender species of Equisetum, often called 
Horsetails or even Marestails.
Fig. 351.
XXVII.
THE LYTHRUM FAMILY.
LYTHRARIE^.
Herbs, or, in some exotic genera, shrubs or trees, with leaves 
mostly (at least the lower ones) opposite, entire, and without 
stipules ; the flowers either axillary or forming terminal racemes 
or spikes, more or less leafy at the base.
Calyx free, tubular or 
campanulate, with as many, or twice as many, teeth as there are 
petals.
Petals 4, 5, or sometimes more, rarely deficient, inserted 
at the top of the tube of the calyx, crumpled in the bud.
Stamens 
equal to or double the number of the petals (or, in some exotic 
genera, indefinite), inserted in the tube of the calyx, often lower 
down than the petals.
Style single.
Ovary free from the calyx, 
but generally enclosed within its tube, divided into 2 or more 
cells, each with several ovules.
Capsule of a thin texture, some- 
LYTHRARIEiE.
287 
times becoming 1-celled by the drying of the partition, containing 
several small seeds, without albumen.
A considerable family, some of the herbaceous semiaquatic species 
dispersed over almost every part of the globe, whilst the larger shrubby 
or arborescent ones spread over the tropics both in the new and the 
old world.
They come near to some Rosacea in the insertion of the 
stamens, the position of the ovary, the structure of the seeds, etc., but 
independently of the structure of the ovary, they are readily known by 
their entire leaves, the lower ones at least always opposite.
They are 
much more allied to the splendid and extensive tropical Order of 
Melastomacece, which however has no representative in Europe, and 
is even but little known in our stoves.
Calyx tubular.
Petals longer than its teeth ' 1.
Lytheum.
Calyx shortly cainpanulate.
Petals minute or none ....
2. Peplis.
Several species of Cupliea, an American genus of this family, are 
now generally cultivated in our flower-gardens.
I. LYTHRUM.
LYTHEUM.
Herbs, with sessile, axillary flowers, the upper ones forming long 
leafy spikes.
Calyx tubular, with 8, 10, or 12 teeth, 4, 5, or 6 of them 
being external, and much narrower than the alternate inner ones.
Petals 4, 5, or 6, longer than the calycine teeth.
Stamens as many, 
or nearly twice as many, inserted below the petals on the tube of the 
calyx.
Ovary and capsule 2-ceiled.
Stigma borne on a distinct style.
The genus consists of very few species, spread over the northern 
hemisphere of the new as well as the old world.
Stems 2 feet or more.
Leaves all opposite or whorled.
Flowers 
large, in a showy, terminal raceme 1.
Spiked L.
Stems 6 or 8 inches or less.
Upper leaves alternate, narrow.
Flowers small, with minute petals 2.
Hyssop L.
1. Spiked Lythrum.
Lythrum Salicaria, Linn.
(Fig. 352.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1061.
Purple Loosestrife.) 
Eootstock perennial, with short, annual, erect stems, 2 or 3 feet 
high, slightly branched, glabrous or softly downy.
Leaves opposite 
or sometimes in threes, sessile, and clasping the stem at the base, 
lanceolate and entire, from 2 to 3 inches long.
Flowers reddish- 
purple or pink, in rather dense whorls, forming handsome terminal 
288 
THE LYTHRUM FAMILY.
spikes, more or less leafy at the base ; 
the upper floral leaves reduced to bracts 
scarcely longer, or even shorter than the 
flowers.
Calyx about 3 lines long, with 
as many ribs as teeth; of these the 
outer ones are subulate, the inner ones 
short and broad.
Petals oblong, often 
near half an inch long.
In wet ditches and marshy places, 
throughout Europe and Russian and 
central Asia, in Australia and North 
America.
Abundant in England, Ire- 
land, and southern and western Scot- 
land, very local in the east and north.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 352.
2. Hyssop Lythrum.
Lythrum hyssopifolium, Linn.
(Pig. 353.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 292.) 
A glabrous annual, seldom more than 
6 or 8 inches high, the stems slight]y 
branched, and decumbent at the base, 
or, in starved specimens, erect and sim- 
ple.
Leaves sessile, narrow, and entire, 
barely half an inch long ; the lower ones 
opposite, the upper ones alternate.
Elowers small, solitary in the axils of the 
upper leaves ; the calyx scarcely more 
than a line long, with minute teeth ; the 
petals purple, about half that length.
In moist or muddy places, especially 
tho^e which are occasionally inundated.
Widely spread over central and southern 
Europe, all across central Asia, in North 
and South America, South Africa and 
Australia, but not so common in Europe 
as the spiked L.
In Britain but few lo- 
calities are recorded for it in some of the 
southern and eastern counties of Engancl and in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 353.
CUCTJRBITACE2B.
289 
II.
PEPLIS.
PEPLIS.
Small glabrous annuals, with opposite entire leaves, and minute 
axillary flowers.
Calyx shortly campanulate, with 6 external and 6 
internal smaller teeth.
Petals very minute or none.
Stamens 6.
Style very short, scarcely distinct.
Capsule globular.
A genus of very few species, widely spread over Europe, Asia, and 
Africa.
1. Common Peplis.
Peplis Portula, Linn.
(Fig. 354.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1211.
Water Purslane.) 
A slightly branched annual, creeping 
and rooting at the base, seldom above 2 
or 3 inches high, but sometimes many 
plants grow together in broad tufts or 
patches.
Leaves obovate or oblong, 
seldom half an inch long, tapering into 
a stalk at the base.
Flowers sessile in 
the axils of nearly all the leaves.
Cap- 
sules enclosed in the somewhat enlarged 
calyx, but seldom attaining a line in 
diameter.
In wet ditches, and moist, watery 
places, in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, extending northward into Scandinavia, but not re- 
corded from Siberia or central Asia.
Frequent in England and Ire- 
land, less so in Scotland.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 354.
XXVIII.
THE GOURD FAMILY.
CUCURBITACE^.
Herbs, with long stems, prostrate, or climbing by means of 
axillary tendrils ; alternate, palmately-veined leaves ; and unisexual 
flowers, either solitary or in bunches or racemes in the axils of the 
leaves.
Calyx 5-toothed.
Petals united in a single 5-lobed co- 
rolla or rarely distinct, inserted in the margin of the calyx.
Sta- 
mens in the male flowers inserted on the calyx or corolla ; anthers 
curved, forming a wavy line on the short, thick filaments, which 
are sometimes free, but often so combined as that the number of 
stamens has been differently described as 5, or 3 only, or some- 
290 
THE GOUED FAMILY.
times all the filaments form but one mass.
Ovary in the females 
inferior, divided into 3 or 5 cells.
Stigmas from 3 to 5, 2-cleft, 
either sessile or supported on a style.
Fruit succulent or juicy, 
either indehiscent or bursting open elastically when ripe.
A considerable Order, chiefly tropical, and more especially African, 
with but very few species, extending into Europe or northern Asia.
It 
is very easily recognized, as well by its foliage and tendrils as by the 
structure of the flowers.
The only Order at all allied to it is that of 
the Passion-flowers, almost all of them American, and chiefly tropical, 
but of which some species are well known among our greenhouse or 
stove plants.
To the Gourd family belong the Cucumbers, Melons, 
Watermelons, Gourds, Pumpkins, etc., of our gardens, most of them 
of very ancient cultivation, but unknown in a w T ild state.
I. BRYONY.
BRYONIA.
Calyx with 5 small teeth.
Corolla 5-lobed.
Anthers apparently 3, 
of which 2 are double and 1 single.
Style 3-lobed, with capitate or 2- 
lobed stigmas.
Fruit a globular berry.
1. Common Bryony, Bryonia dioica, Linn.
(Fig. 355.) 
J K- 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 439.) 
E-ootstock perennial, thick and tu- 
berous, sometimes branched ; the annual 
stems climbing to a great length, and, 
as well as the whole plant, rough with 
minute hairs, containing an acrid juice, 
and emitting a sickening smell in dry- 
ing.
Tendrils simple or branched, and 
spirally twisted.
Leaves more or less 
deeply divided into 5 or 7 broad, angu- 
lar, and coarsely toothed lobes, of which 
the middle one is the longest.
Flowers 
dioecious, the males several together in 
stalked racemes, of a pale yellow ; the 
corolla broadly campanulate, about half 
an inch diameter ; the females much 
smaller, generally 2 together, nearly 
rotate, with a globular ovary.
Berries red or orange, about 4 lines in 
diameter, containing several flat nearly orbicular seeds.
Common in hedges and thickets, in central and southern Europe to 
the Caucasus.
Occurs in most English counties, and common in some, 
Fig. 355.
CRASSULACE.E. 291 
but rare in the north and in Wales, and does not extend into Scotland 
or Ireland.
Fl. summer.
It must not be confounded with the so- 
called black Bryony \ which is the common Tamus, a very different plant, 
with entire, shining leaves.
(The Purslane family, inserted here in the first edition, is now placed 
above, p.
135, next to the Pink family ; and the Paronychia family 
will be found below, next to the Goosefoot family.) 
XXIX.
THE CBASSXJLA FAMILY.
CRASSULACE.E.
Herbs or shrubs, with succulent leaves, all or only the upper 
ones usually alternate, rarely all opposite, no stipules, and flowers 
iu terminal racemes or cymes.
Sepals 3 or more, usually 5, some- 
times 15 to 20, cohering at the base.
Petals as many, sometimes 
united in a single corolla.
Stamens as many, or twice as many, 
inserted with the petals at the base of the calyx.
Ovary superior ; 
the carpels as many as the petals, and free, usually with a small, 
flat scale at their base, and forming as many distinct capsules, 
each containing several seeds attached to the inner angle.
Embryo 
straight, with a thin, fleshy albumen.
A numerous family, extending over the greater part of the globe, but 
particularly abounding in south-western Africa and in the rocky dis- 
tricts of Europe and central Asia.
The exact concordance in number 
of the parts of the flower of the different whorls forms the most pro- 
minent character of the family, to which the succulent leaves give a 
peculiar habit.
Stamens 3 or 4.
Plants very small, with minute flowers .
. 1.
Till m A.
Stamens twice as many as the petals (half of them sometimes 
without anthers) .
Petals united in a tubular corolla, longer than the calyx .
2. Cotyledon.
Petals free or nearly so, and spreading.
Flowers mostly with 5 or 6 petals and sepals ....
3. Sedum.
All the flowers with more than 6, usually 10 or 12 petals 
and sepals 4.
Houseleek.
Among the succulent plants in our greenhouses, the Crassulas, 
Echeverias, Eocheas, and a few others, belong to this family, but by 
292 
THE CRASSULA FAMILY.
far the greater proportion form part of the Mesembryantliemnm and 
Cactus families, which are entirely exotic.
I. TILLfEA.
TILLvEA.
Very small annuals, with opposite leaves, and minute flowers in the 
upper axils.
Sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels 3 or 4.
-Besides the European species, the genus contains several from North 
America, central Asia, southern Africa, and Australia, most of them 
amongst the smallest of flowering plants.
1. Mossy Tillsea.
Tillsea muscosa, Linn.
(Fig. 356.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 116.) 
The whole plant is seldom more than 
2 inches high, and usually but an inch, 
or even much less, although much 
branched, and crowded with flowers ; it 
is usually of a reddish colour, and slen- 
der, though succulent.
Leaves narrow- 
lanceolate or linear.
Flowers solitary 
in each axil, or several together in little 
clusters.
Sepals lanceolate, pointed.
Petals minute and subulate.
Carpels with 2 minute seeds in each.
On moist, barren, sandy heaths and wastes, in western and southern 
Europe, extending eastward round the Mediterranean, and northward 
to the Netherlands.
Has been found in several of the southern coun- 
ties of England, but not in Ireland or Scotland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 356.
II.
COTYLEDON.
COTYLEDON.
Herbs, or succulent shrubs, with scattered leaves (rarely opposite in 
some exotic species), and flowers in terminal racemes or panicles.
Sepals 5, small.
Petals combined into a single tubular or campanulate 
corolla, with 5 teeth or divisions.
Stamens 10, inserted at the base of 
the corolla, but often adnate to the top of the tube.
Carpels 5, each 
with a scale at the base.
Taking this genus in the sense in which it was understood by Lin- 
naeus, it includes a considerable number of south-west African, besides 
several south European and central Asiatic ones, which, with our 
British species, are considered by some modern botanists as forming 
a distinct genus under the name of Umbilicus.
CRASSULACBJl.
293 
1. Wall Cotyledon.
Cotyledon umbilicus, Linn.
(Fig. 357.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 179.
Pennywort.
Navelwort.) 
Stock perennial, almost woody.
Ra- 
dical and lower leaves on long stalks, 
fleshy, orbicular, broadly crenate, and 
more or less peltate.
Flowering stems 
erect, from 6 inches to a foot high, sim- 
ple or slightly branched, leafy at the 
base only, and bearing a long raceme 
of pendulous, yellowish-green flowers.
Calyx very small.
Corolla cylindrical, 
about 3 lines long, becoming afterwards 
somewhat enlarged, with 5 short teeth, 
and enclosing the adnate stamens and 
the carpels.
On rocks, walls, and old buildings, in 
western Europe, extending eastward 
round the greater part of the Mediter- 
ranean, southwards to the Canary Is- 
lands, and northwards to Ireland, west- 
ern England, and the south-west corner 
of Scotland.
It occurs more sparingly along the south coast of Eng 
land, and occasionally in some of the eastern counties.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 357.
III.
SEDUM.
SEDUM.
Succulent herbs, sometimes woody at the base, with scattered leaves, 
occasionally opposite or whorled, especially at the base, or on barren 
stems ; and yellow, white, reddish, or blue flowers, in terminal cymes 
or corymbs.
Sepals 4 to 6 (usually 5).
Petals as many, distinct.
Stamens twice as many.
Carpels as many as the petals, each with an 
entire or emarginate scale at the base, and containing several seeds.
A widely diffused genus, numerous in species, especially in central 
and southern Europe and central Asia, but extending also into North 
America, and the mountains of South America.
A large number of 
the smaller, thick-leaved species are found on dry rocks or stony places, 
whence the popular name of Stonecrop applied to several of them.
Leaves flat, broad.
Flowers dioecious, with 4 sepals and petals 1.
Roseroot 
Flowers hermaphrodite, in large corymbs, with 5 sepals 
and petals 2.
Orpine S.
294 
THE CRASSULA FAMILY.
Leaves as thick, or nearly a3 thick, as broad.
Flowers lohite or reddish.
Leaves shortly ovoid or globular.
Whole plant quite glabrous 3.
English S.
Calyx and pedicels with a few" short, glandular hairs 4.
Thick-leaved S.
Leaves oblong or cylindrical.
Glabrous perennial, with numerous short barren 
branches, and erect flowering stems ....
5. White S.
Yiscidly downy, erect annual, without barren 
branches 6.
Hairy S.
Flowers yellow.
Flowering stems 1 to 3 inches high.
Cymes of two 
or three short branches.
Leaves ovoid or globular 7.
Biting S.
Leaves cylindrical or oblong 8.
Tasteless S.
Flowering stems at least 6 inches high.
Cymes two 
or three times divided 9.
Fock S.
The S.
Sieboldi, from Japan, and some other exotic species, are to 
be met with in our gardens.
1. Roseroot Sedum.
Sedum Rhodiola, DC.
(Fig. 358.) 
(Fhodiola rosea, Eng. Bot.
t. 508.
Roseroot.
Mid summer -men.) 
Stock short, thick, and almost woody ; 
the annual stems erect, stout, simple, 6 
inches to nearly a foot high, leafy to the 
top.
Leaves alternate, sessile, obovate 
or oblong, slightly toothed, from 6 lines 
to an inch long, the lower ones often 
reduced to brown scales.
Flowers dioe- 
cious, yellow or rarely purplish, forming 
rather dense cymes, surrounded by the 
upper leaves, which often assume a yel- 
low or purple tinge; the males with 8 
stamens, rather longer than the petals 
and sepals ; the females with 4 carpels, 
ending in short, spreading styles.
In clefts of rocks, in northern and 
Arctic Europe and Asia, and in the 
higher mountain-ranges of central Eu- 
rope and Asia.
Abundant in Scotland 
and in the higher mountains of northern 
England and Ireland, descending also to maritime cliffs in western 
Scotland.
Fl. summer.
The smell of the rootstock, when drying, 
has been compared to that of roses, whence its specific name.
Fig. 358.
CEASSULACEiE.
295 
2. Orpine Sedum.
Sedum Telephium, Linn.
(Fig. 359.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1319.
S. purpureum, Bab. Man.
Orpine.
Livelong.) 
Rootstock perennial, the annual stems 
hard, erect, simple, about a foot high or 
rather more.
Leaves scattered, obovate 
or oblong, and coarsely toothed ; the 
lower ones 2 inches long or even more, 
and much narrowed or even stalked at 
the base ; the upper ones often rounded 
at the base.
Flowers numerous, purple 
in the British variety, forming a hand- 
some corymb at the top of the stem.
Sepals 5, short and pointed.
Petals 
more than twice as long.
Stamens 10, 
rather shorter than the petals.
On the borders of fields, hedgebanks, 
and bushy places, in northern and central 
Europe and Knssian Asia, chiefly con- 
fined to hilly districts in the more south- 
ern portion of its area.
Occurs in most 
of the British counties, but has been so 
long cultivated in cottage gardens, and is so tenacious of life, that it is 
difficult to say how far it is really indigenous.
Fl. summer, rather late.
Fig. 359.
3. English Sedum.
Sedum anglicum, Huds.
(Fig. 380.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 171.) 
A small perennial, seldom more than 
3 inches high, and quite glabrous in all 
its parts ; the stems decumbent and 
much branched at the base, with short, 
thick, almost globular leaves, crowded 
on the short barren branches, more 
loosely scattered and occasionally oppo- 
site on the flowering ones.
Flowers 
white, occasionally tinged with pink, in 
a short, irregular cyme.
Sepals short 
and green.
Petals more than twice as 
long, lanceolate, and more or less 
pointed.
In rocky or stony places, usually not far from the sea, in western 
Europe, from Portugal to southern Norway, ascending also high into 
the mountains of the south-west.
Abundant along the western coast 
Fig. 360.
296 
THE CRASSULA FAMILY.
of Scotland, in Wales, and in Ireland, and appears also occasionally, 
but rarely, on the eastern coasts of England.
Fl. summer.
4. Thick-leaved Sedum.
Sedum dasyphyllum, Linn.
(Fig. 361.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 656.) 
Very nearly allied to the English S., 
but usually rather smaller, of a glaucous- 
green, and the flowering summits more 
or less viscid, with short, glandular hairs ; 
the leaves thicker, and more frequently 
opposite ; the cymes of flowers more 
compact, of a dead w T hite tinged with 
rose-colour ; and the petals broader and 
not so pointed.
Much more widely spread on rocks 
and walls, in western, central, and south- 
ern Europe, than the English S., but 
does not extend eastward to the Russian 
territory, nor northward into northern 
Germany.
In Britain, only indicated in 
a few localities in southern England, with some doubt as to its being 
indigenous, but probably truly so in Cork county, Ireland.
FL summer.
Fig. 361.
White Sedum.
Sedum album, Linn.
(Fig. 362.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1578.) 
Stock creeping and procumbent, bear- 
ing in winter short barren stems with 
crowded leaves, and in summer erect 
flowering branches, from 4 to 6 inches 
high, and perfectly glabrous.
Leaves 
scattered, oblong or cylindrical, 3 to 6 
lines long.
Flowers of a pure white or 
slightly pink, rather small and numerous, 
in elegant terminal cymes or corymbs.
Sepals short, oval, and obtuse.
Petals near 
three times as long, oblong and obtuse.
On old walls, rocks, cottage-roofs, etc., 
over the greater part of Europe and 
Russian Asia, except the extreme north.
In Britain, perhaps truly indigenous in 
the Malvern Hills, in Somersetshire, 
and in some parts of Ireland ; in other 
places where it has been observed, it 
Fig. 362.
had probably been introduced from gardens.
Fl. summer.
CRASSULACEiE.
297 
6. Hairy Sedum.
Sedum villosum, Linn.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 394.) 
An annual, with erect, nearly simple 
stems, 3 to 4 inches high ; the upper 
part of the plant always more or less 
covered with short, viscid hairs, like the 
thick-leaved S.
Leaves more than twice, 
often 4 or 5 times, as long as thick, al- 
ternate or scattered.
Mowers few, of a 
pale, rather dingy rose-colour, in a small, 
rather loose, terminal cyme.
Sepals 
ovate and green.
Petals ovate, about 
twice as long as the calyx.
In bogs and along stony rills, in the 
mountains of western, central, and north- 
ern Europe, frequent in northern Eng- 
land and the Scotch Highlands, but not 
recorded from Ireland.
Fl. summer.
(Fig. 363.) 
Fig. 363.
7. Biting Sedum.
Sedum acre, Linn.
(Fig. 364.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 839.
Wall-Pepper.) 
Tufts perennial and procumbent, con- 
sisting of numerous short barren stems, 
and erect or ascending flowering 
branches, from 1 to 2 or 3 inches high ; 
the whole plant quite glabrous, assu- 
ming a yellowish tinge, and biting to the 
taste when chewed.
Leaves small, thick, 
ovoid or sometimes nearly globular, 
those of the barren shoots usually closely 
imbricated in six rows.
Elowers of a 
bright yellow, in small terminal cymes.
Sepals very short.
Petals 
much longer, narrow-oblong and pointed.
On walls and rocks, in stony and sandy places, throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia, from the Mediterranean to the Arctic regions.
Abun- 
dant in Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 364.
8. Tasteless Sedum.
Sedum sexangulare, Linn.
(Eig. 365.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1946.) 
Very near the biting S., and by some considered as a mere variety, 
VOL.
I. 
2 A 
298 
THE CRASSULA FAMILY.
differing only by the more slender leaves, 
several times longer than thick, and by 
the flavour said to be less acrid.
A rather scarce plant, scattered over 
central and eastern Europe.
Indicated 
in some parts of England, especially on 
old walls, in some of the eastern counties, 
but with doubts as to its being indige- 
nous.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 365.
9. Bock Sedum.
Sedum rupestre, Linn.
(Fig. 366.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 170, and S.
glaucum, Eng. Bot.
t. 2477.) 
Stock perennial and creeping, with 
numerous short barren shoots, 1 to 3 
inches long ; the terminal flowering 
stems ascending or erect, 6 inches to a 
foot high.
Leaves narrow, cylindrical, 
with a short point, and more or less 
extended at the base below their point 
of insertion into a short spur.
Flowers 
yellow, considerably larger than in the 
other British species, forming a termi- 
nal cyme of 4 or 5 to 7 or 8 recurved 
branches, each bearing from 3 to 5 or 6 
sessile flowers.
Sepals short and ovate ,* 
the petals twice as long and linear.
On old walls and stony places, in tem- 
perate and southern Europe, extending 
northwards to southern Sweden.
In 
Britain, it is undoubtedly wild in several 
of the southern and western counties of 
England and in Ireland, but has besides established itself in many 
places where it has escaped from cultivation.
Fl. summer.
Slight 
varieties have been distinguished under the names of S.
reflexum (Eng.
Bot. t.
695) and 8.
Fosterianum (Eng. Bot.
t. 1802), but the charac- 
ters assigned, derived chiefly from the more or less crowded, closely 
Fie. 366.
CRASSULACE-SO.
299 
appressed or spreading leaves of the barren shoots, are very difficult to 
appreciate, and appear to depend more on station than on any real dif- 
ference in the plants.
IV.
HOUSSLEEK.
SEMPEEVIVUM.
Succulent herbs, with a perennial, often woody stock, usually larger 
and coarser than the Sedums ; the thick, succulent leaves densely im- 
bricated on tlfe short, often globular, barren shoots, and scattered 
along the erect flowering stems.
Inflorescence and flowers as in Sedum, 
except that the parts of the flower are much more numerous, the sepals, 
petals, and carpels varying from 6 to 20 (usually 10 to 12).
Stamens 
twice as many, but one half occasionally abortive and very small, or 
sometimes transformed into extra carpels.
The little scales placed 
under the carpels are toothed or jagged, or sometimes wanting.
Eesides the common one, there are a few allied species in central and 
southern Europe, some half-shrubby ones in the Canary Islands, and 
several in south-western Africa.
Some of these have long been in cul- 
tivation among our garden succulent plants.
1. Common Houseleek.
Sempervivum tectorum, Linn.
(Fig. 367.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1320.) 
The barren shoots form numerous, 
almost globular tufts, from whence, in 
subsequent years, arise the stout, suc- 
culent flowering stems to the height of 
about a foot.
Leaves very thick and 
fleshy ; the lower ones 1 to 1 J inches 
long, ending in a short point, and 
bordered by a line of short, stiff hairs ; 
the upper ones as well as the cymes 
more or less clothed with a short, viscid 
down.
Elowers pink, sessile along the 
spreading or recurved branches of the 
cyme.
Petals linear, pointed, two or 
three times as long as the sepals, downy 
on the outside, and ciliate on the edges, 
like the leaves.
In rocky situations, in the great moun- 
tain-ranges of central and southern Eu- Fig. 367.
2 a 2 
300 THE KIBES FAMILY.
rope to the Caucasus, and having been very long cultivated as a curio- 
sity, it is widely spread over northern Europe, as an introduced plant, 
on cottage-roofs and old walls.
It is only under such circumstances 
that it is to be met with in Britain.
Fl. summer.
XXX.
THE RIBES FAMILY.
BIBESIACEJK.
This family is identical with the Linnsean genus Bibes, and 
nearly allied to the exotic shrubby genera of the Saxifrage family, 
but maintained as distinct on account of the succulent fruit with 
parietal placentas, and the union of the styles at the base, indi- 
cating some approach to the Cactus family.
I. RIBES.
KIBES.
Shrubs, with alternate, palmately veined or lobed leaves, no stipules, 
and axillary flowers in racemes, or rarely solitary.
Calyx adherent to 
the ovary at the base, the limb divided into 4 or 5 segments.
Petals 
as many, very small and scale-like, inserted at the base of the segments 
of the calyx.
Stamens as many.
Ovary inferior, 1-celled, with many 
ovules inserted on 2 parietal placentas.
Style deeply divided into 2 or 
4 lobes.
Fruit a berry, filled with juicy pulp, in which the seeds are sus- 
pended by long stalks.
Albumen horny, with a small, straight embryo.
A genus spread over the whole of the temperate regions of the north- 
ern hemisphere.
The species are most numerous in north-western 
America, and a small number extend down the Andes to the southern 
extremity of that continent.
Stems prickly.
Peduncles 1 or 2-flowered 1.
Gooseberry R.
Stems unarmed.
Flowers in racemes.
Flowers all complete.
Leaves inodorous.
Pedicels all short.
Fruit red or 
white 2.
Currant R.
Leaves strongly scented.
Lowest pedicels of each ra- 
ceme longer than the upper ones.
Fruit black .
. 4.
Black R.
Flowers dioecious.
Fruit red 3.
Mountain R.
The scarlet Bibes and several others, now frequent in our shrubberies, 
are natives of north-western America.
1. Gooseberry Bibes.
Bibes Grossularia, Linn.
(Fig. 368.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1292, and B.
Uva-crispa, Eng. Bot.
t. 2057.) 
A much branched but rather weak shrub, 3 or 4 feet high, with 
numerous palmately spreading prickles, either single or two or three 
EIBESIACEiE.
301 
together.
Leaves small, orbicular, pal- 
mately divided into 3 or 5 crenated lobes, 
more or less hairy on both sides.
Flowers 
green, hanging singly or in pairs on short 
pedicels from little tufts of young leaves.
Calyx-tube shortly campanulate, the seg- 
ments oblong, about twice the length of 
the petals.
Berry of the wild plant ra- 
ther small and yellowish, sprinkled with 
stiff hairs, but in cultivation var}^ing 
much in size and colour, and often quite 
glabrous.
In thickets, open woods, and hedges, 
in the rocky parts of central and south- 
ern Europe, and western Asia.
In Bri- 
tain, well established in many places, in 
hedges and even wilder places, but 
scarcely indigenous, having been abun- 
dantly cultivated in cottage-gardens for 
several centuries.
Fl. early spring.
Fig. 368.
2. Currant Kibes.
Kibes rubrum, Linn.
(Fig. 369.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1289, and B.
jpetrceum, t.
705.
Bed and White Currants.) 
An erect, branching shrub, 3 or 4 
feet high, without prickles.
Leaves on 
rather long stalks, much larger and 
thinner than those of the Gooseberry B., 
with 3 or 5 rather short and broad- 
toothed lobes, glabrous, or more fre- 
quently sprinkled with a few minute 
hairs on the upper surface, and more or 
less downy underneath.
Flowers small, 
greenish- white, several together in axil- 
lary racemes at the base of the year's 
shoots.
These racemes are either erect 
or pendulous when in flower, but almost 
always pendulous when in fruit ; the 
pedicels all short, and do not commence 
at the very base of the raceme as in the 
black B., each pedicel being in the axil 
of a small bract.
Calyx-segments broadly 
spreading, obovate or rounded, twice 
the length of the small petals.
Berries red when wild, varying 
tivation from red to white.
Fig. 369.
in cul- 
302 
THE KIBES FAMILY.
In rocky woods, in northern and central Europe and Eussian Asia, 
extending to the Arctic Circle, but replaced in southern Europe and 
central Asia by the It. petrceum.
Frequent in Scotland, the north of 
England, and occurs also in some parts of southern England and Ire- 
land, but it has been so long and so generally cultivated, that it is 
difficult to say how far it is really indigenous.
Fl. spring.
A variety 
with more upright racemes has been falsely referred to the Continental 
It. petrceum, and another with the flowers almost sessile has been dis- 
tinguished as It. spicatum (Eng. Bot.
t. 1290).
3. Mountain Bifoes.
Ribes alpinum, Linn.
(Fig. 370.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 704.) 
Very near the Currant It., but the 
leaves are smaller, more deeply divided, 
smooth and shining, and glabrous under- 
neath ; the flowers much smaller and 
always dioecious; the males rather nu- 
merous, in little, erect racemes, of 1 to 
1\ inches ; the pedicels slender, but not 
quite so long as the bracts ; the females, 
on separate shrubs, much fewer together, 
in very short racemes, and often almost 
sessile ; the berries small and tasteless.
In rocky, hilly districts, in central and 
southern Europe and Russian Asia ; not 
an alpine plant, notwithstanding its 
name, but said to extend to rather high 
northern latitudes ; it may not, however, 
always have been properly distinguished 
from the Currant It. Rather scarce in 
Britain, and chiefly in central and northern England and southern 
Scotland ; it does not extend into the Highlands, nor is it recorded 
from Ireland.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 370.
4. Black Ribes.
Ribes nigrum, Linn.
(Fig. 371.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1291.
Black Currant.) 
Easily known by the peculiar smell of the leaves when rubbed, 
arising from the small, glandular dots copiously sprinkled on the under 
side.
Stem unarmed.
Leaves rather larger than in the Currant R., 
more cordate, and usually with only three broad, crenate lobes, coarse 
and rough, but scarcely hairy.
Racemes pendulous, looser than in the 
SAXIFRAGACEiE.
303 
Currant JR.; the flowers larger, cam- 
panulate, on longer pedicels, of which 
the lowest, arising from the very base of 
the raceme, are much longer than the 
others.
Calyx rather hoary outside.
Berries black.
In woods, in northern, central, and 
eastern Europe, and Russian and central 
Asia, but less common in western Eu- 
rope than the last two species.
In Bri- 
tain, although found in cool, shady 
places, and boggy thickets, in various 
parts of England, yet it is very doubtful 
whether it be truly indigenous, as, like 
the Gooseberry and the Currant, its cul- 
tivation dates from a very early period.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 371.
XXXI.
SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
SAXIFRAGACE^J.
Herbs, or in exotic genera, trees or shrubs, with alternate or 
opposite leaves, and no stipules.
Calyx free, or more or less ad- 
herent to the ovary, with 4 or 5 (rarely more) lobes or segments.
Petals as many, perigynons, or none.
Stamens as many, or twice 
as many (rarely more), perigynous.
Ovary either adherent or in- 
serted on a broad base, either 2- or 4-celled, or 1-celled, with 2 or 
more parietal placentas, often lobed at the top, with as many 
(rarely twice as many) styles or stigmas as cells or placentas.
Eruit a capsule.
Seeds several, usually many, to each cell or pla- 
centa ; the albumen usually copious, rarely none.
An extensive family, ranging over nearly the whole world, and in- 
cluding many shrubs and trees, such as the Hydrangeas, JEscallonias, 
PhiladeljpJtuses (Syringas), Deutzias, etc., of our gardens, of which the 
British herbaceous genera can give very little idea.
The characters of 
the Order are moreover somewhat complicated, there being several ex- 
ceptions among exotic genera, besides those alluded to in the above 
general character, and the limits to be assigned to it are by no means 
satisfactorily settled.
The four British genera differ from each other 
304 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
in many essential points, but are all distinguished from the Rose family 
by the definite stamens and want of stipules, from that and the Crassula 
family by the carpels united into a single ovary, and from the Lythrum 
family by the distinct styles and the more adherent ovary.
Petals none 2.
Cheysosplene.
Petals 5.
Stamens 10, all bearing anthers.
Styles 2 ....
1. Saxifrage.
Stamens 5, bearing anthers ; 5 barren, with a tuft of 
globular-headed filaments.
Stigmas 4 3.
Paenassia.
Stamens 5 only.
Styles 6 or 8 (3 or 4, each deeply 2- 
cleft) 4.
Sundew.
I. SAXIFRAGE.
SAXIFKAGA.
Herbs, either annual or more commonly with a perennial tufted stock, 
with radical or alternate or rarely opposite leaves, no stipules, and 
terminal flowers either solitary or in cymes or panicles.
Calyx free, or 
more or less adherent to the ovary at the base, with 5 teeth or seg- 
ments.
Petals 5.
Stamens 10, inserted with the petals at the base of 
the segments of the calyx.
Ovary 2- celled, superior or more or less 
inferior, with 2 distinct styles.
Seeds several in each cell, with a small 
embryo in a fleshy albumen.
A numerous genus, consisting chiefly of mountain or rock plants, 
abundant in all the great mountain- chains of the northern hemisphere, 
some species ascending to the highest alpine or furthermost Arctic 
stations, others extend along the great chain of the Andes to the Ant- 
arctic Circle, whilst a few descend to the hot limestone rocks of the 
Mediterranean region.
Leaves all opposite and small.
Low, spreading plant.
Flowers purple 1.
Purple 8.
Leaves alternate or radical.
Flowers yellow.
Calyx spreading, adherent at the base.
Stem bear- 
ing several flowers 2.
Yellow 8.
Calyx reflexed, free.
Stems 1 -flowered ....
3. Marsh S.
Flowers white or pink.
Calyx adherent at the base, the lobes erect or spreading.
Stem much branched at the base, with procum- 
bent or densely tufted barren shoots.
Leaves 
narrow, simple or 3-lobed.
Leaves or their lobes acute.
Tufts loose ...
4. Cut-leaved S.
Leaves or their lobes obtuse.
Tufts dense .
. 5.
Tufted S.
Stems simple or branched, without barren shoots at 
the base.
SAXIFRAGACEJG.
305 
Perennials, with the radical leaves larger, and 
longer stalked.
Lower leaves rounded or palmate.
Flowers 
solitary or panicled.
Lowland plant.
Stem erect.
Lower leaves 
crenate 6.
Meadow S.
High alpine plants.
Stems weak.
Lower 
leaves angular or deeply lobed.
Petals at least twice as long as the calyx .
7. Drooping S.
Petals scarcely exceeding the calyx ...
8. Brook S.
Radical leaves ovate, toothed.
Stem almost 
leafless, with a terminal head of small 
flowers 10.
Alpine S.
Annual, with narrow leaves, entire or three-lobed 9.
Rue-leaved S.
Calyx free, icith reflexed divisions.
Flowers white.
Leaves thin, angular or acutely 
toothed 11.
Star S.
Flowers pink.
Leaves thick and leathery, crenate.
Leaves obovate, narrowed at the base .
. .
12.
London-pride S.
Leaves orbicular, cordate or rounded at the 
base 13.
Kidney S.
The large, somewhat coarse Siberian thick-leaved Saxifrage (S.
crassi- 
folia) is common among herbaceous plants in our gardens.
The Chinese 
S. sarmentosa, with long, hanging runners, is often grown in pots in 
cottage windows ; and several species from the great European moun- 
tain-ranges, form a great proportion of all cultivated collections of 
alpine plants.
1. Purple Saxifrage.
Saxifraga oppositifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 372.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 9.) 
Stems perennial, creeping, very much 
branched, forming low, straggling tufts, 
of several inches in diameter, seldom 
rising above an inch from the ground.
Leaves crowded, small, opposite, obovate, 
and ciliate.
Flowers rather large, hand- 
some, and purple, often so crowded as 
almost to conceal the foliage, although 
growing singly on very short erect 
branches.
Calyx- tube adhering to the 
ovary and capsule up to more than half its length ; the se 
ovate, green, erect or spreading, not half so long as the petals 
Fig. 372.
gments 
306 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
In moist alpine situations, in the higher mountain-ranges of Europe, 
and Russian and central Asia, extending far into the Arctic regions.
Common in the Scotch Highlands, and also found, but sparingly, on 
some of the higher Irish, Welsh, and northern English mountains.
Fl. spring and early summer.
2. Yellow Saxifrage.
Saxifraga aizoides, Linn.
(Fig. 373.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 39.) 
Stock short, sometimes tufted, the 
flowering stems ascending to about 6 
inches high.
Leaves alternate, narrow, 
rather thick, smooth and shining, about 
half an inch long, entire or rarely notched 
with 1 or 2 teeth.
Elowers yellow, in a 
loose panicle of from 3 or 4 to a dozen 
or more.
Calyx-segments not much 
shorter than the petals, and often nar- 
row, like them and almost as yellow, 
giving the flower the appearance of hav- 
ing ten petals with a broad circular disk 
in the centre.
Capsule adhering, to 
about half its length, to the short tube of 
the calyx.
On wet rocks or gravel, along rills 
and springs, in almost all mountainous 
districts of Europe, Eussian Asia, and northern America, to the Arctic 
Circle, descending also much lower than the last.
Abundant in Scot- 
land, the north of England, and some parts of Ireland, but apparently 
wanting in Wales.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 373.
3. Marsh Saxifrage.
Saxifraga Hirculus, Linn.
(Fig. 374.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1009.) 
Perennial stock still shorter than in the last, and often reduced to a 
small tuft.
Leaves alternate, narrow-oblong or linear, and entire.
Flowering stems ascending, as in the yellow S., to about 6 inches, but 
terminated by a single, rather large flower ; the calyx almost entirely 
free, with oblong, reflexed divisions, not half so long as the erect, nar- 
row-obovate or oblong, yellow petals.
Capsule rather large, ending in 
2 spreading beaks.
SAXIFEAGACEiE.
307 
In wet moors, at high elevations, 
chiefly in the mountain-ranges of eastern 
Europe and central and Russian Asia, 
and generally round the Arctic Circle ; 
rare in western Europe.
In Britain, only 
in a few localities in northern England, 
southern Scotland, and Ireland.
FL 
August.
Fig. 374 
4. Cut-leaved Saxifrage.
(Fij 
Saxifraga hypnoides, Linn.
. 375.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 454, 8.
platypetala, t.
2276, 8.
elongella, t.
2277, 8.
hirta, 
t. 2291, and S.
affinis, Suppl.
t. 2903.) 
Perennial stock usually shortly creep- 
ing and rather slender, much branched, 
with numerous decumbent barren shoots, 
attaining, in moist situations, 2 or 3 
inches, but sometimes contracted into a 
short, dense tuft.
Leaves mostly entire, 
2 or 3 lines long, narrow-linear and 
pointed, but some of the larger ones are 
often 3-lobed, or even 5-lobed, and at- 
tain half an inch ; they are glabrous, or 
more or less ciliated with slender, often 
glandular, hairs.
At the ends of the 
shoots, and in the axils of the leaves, the 
leaf-tufts are often somewhat enlarged 
and crowded into an oblong head or 
bulb.
Flowering stems 3 to 6 inches 
high, with very few leaves, and from 1 to 
6 or 8 rather large, white flowers.
Calyx 
adherent to about two-thirds the length 
of the capsule ; the segments not one- 
third so long as the petals, and usually Fig. 375.
more or less pointed.
308 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
In rather moist, rocky situations, in the mountains of western Eu- 
rope, descending occasionally to low, hilly districts.
Abundant in 
Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and northern England, but very local in 
the southern counties.
Fl. summer.
It is very variable in the degree 
of development of its stems, leaves, and flowers, in the more or less 
viscid hairs, and in the leaves and calyx-segments more or less pointed 
or almost obtuse.
This has given rise to its subdivision into numerous 
supposed species ; besides that some of its extreme varieties have been 
mistaken for S.
geranioides, S.
muscoides, and other Continental species 
not found in Britain.
5. Tufted Saxifrage.
Saxifraga csespitosa, Linn.
(Fig. 376.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 794, and S.
palmata, Eng. Bot.
t. 455.) 
Very near to the last, but never emit- 
ting the weak, procumbent barren shoots 
of that species ; the leaves broader, more 
obtuse, and more frequently lobed, and 
the calyx- divisions also obtuse.
The 
short, leafy stems are crowded into dense 
tufts ; the flowering stems from 2 to 3 
inches high, generally covered with a 
short, glandular down, and bearing 1 or 
2 white flowers, smaller than in the cut- 
leaved S.
A high northern and Arctic plant.
In Britain, only on some of the higher 
Scotch mountains, such as Ben Avers 
and Ben Nevis.
Fl. summer.
High al- 
pine forms of the cut-leaved S.
have been frequently mistaken for this 
plant, and are not indeed always easy to distinguish from it.
The Irish 
variety figured (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2909) seems referable rather to the 
cut-leaved than to the tufted S.
Fig. 376.
6. Meadow Saxifrage.
Saxifraga granulata, Linn.
(Fig. 377.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 500.) 
Perennial stock reduced to a cluster of small bulbs, covered with 
whitish or brown hairy scales.
Stems erect, 6 inches to a foot high, 
simple or slightly branched, more or less covered with short spreading 
hairs, which become glandular in the upper part of the plant.
Radical 
and lower leaves on long stalks, reniform, obtusely crenate or lobed, 
the upper ones few and small, more acutely lobed or entire.
Flowers 
SAXIFRAGACE^].
309 
white, rather large, 3 to 6 together, in 
rather close terminal cymes.
Calyx ad- 
herent to about the middle of the ovary, 
with rather obtuse divisions, about half 
the length of the petals.
In meadows, pastures, and on banks, 
throughout temperate Europe, extending 
northward into Scandinavia, and east- 
ward into central, but perhaps not into 
[Russian Asia.
Abundant in several 
parts of England, Ireland, and southern 
Scotland, but scarcely penetrates into the 
Highlands.
Fl. spring and early summer.
Fig. 377.
7. Drooping Saxifrage.
Saxifraga cernua, Linn.
(Fig. 378.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 664.) 
In many respects allied to the meadow 
S., of which it may be a starved alpine 
variety.
It is weaker, more glabrous, 
and slender ; the stock does not always 
form distinct bulbs ; the leaves are 
smaller, angular or broadly lobed, and 
the upper ones have often little bulbs in 
their axils.
Flowering stems more or 
less drooping at the summit, with 1 to 
3 flowers, rather smaller than in the 
meadow S.
At great elevations, in a few of the 
larger mountain-ranges of Europe and 
Asia, and all round the Arctic Circle.
In Britain, only known on the summit 
of Ben Lawers, where, however, it very Fig. 378.
seldom flowers, and is now almost extinct.
8. Brook Saxifrage.
Saxifraga rivularis, Linn.
(Fig. 379.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2275.) 
A glabrous plant, still smaller than the drooping S., which it much 
resembles in foliage.
Perennial stock small, and seldom forming bulbs ; 
310 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
radical leaves on long stalks, deeply 3- 
or 5-lobed.
Flowering stems weak, only 
2 or 3 inches long, with very few small 
leaves, and 1 to 3 flowers, like those of 
the drooping S.
9 but much smaller, the 
petals scarcely exceeding the calyx.
A high alpine or Arctic species, with 
nearly the same geographical range as 
the drooping S.
9 but usually not so 
scarce.
In Britain, it occurs sparingly 
near the summit of Ben Lawers and Ben 
Nevis, and more abundantly on Loch- 
ia.
August.
Fig. 379.
9. Rue-leaved Saxifrage.
Saxifraga tridaetylites, Linn.
(Fig. 380.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 501.) 
A little erect annual, 2 to 5 inches 
high, simple or branched, and more or 
less clothed with a glandular down.
Ea- 
dical leaves very small, entire, and 
stalked.
Stem-leaves either entire and 
linear-oblong or more frequently 3-lobed.
Flowers small, white, growing singly on 
rather long pedicels.
Calyx adherent, 
with ovate segments not half so long as 
the petals.
On walls and rocks, throughout Eu- 
rope and Russian Asia, from the Medi- 
terranean to the Arctic Circle.
Fre- 
quent in England, Ireland, and southern 
Scotland, less so further north, especially 
on the western side.
Fl. spring and 
early summer.
Fig. 380.
10.
Alpine Saxifrage.
Saxifraga nivalis, Linn.
(Fig. 381.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 440.) 
Perennial stock short and simple, but thick and hard, crowned with 
a tuft of spreading, obovate, toothed leaves, rather thick and leathery, 
SAXIFRAGACEjE.
311 
and narrowed into a stalk at the base.
Stems simple, erect, 2 to 5 inches high, 
slightly hairy in the upper part, leafless 
or with 1 or 2 small leaves close under 
the flowers.
These are small, collected 
together in little terminal heads.
Calyx 
adherent to about halfway up the ovary, 
with shortly oblong spreading segments, 
about the length of the obovate, white 
petals.
In the mountains of northern and 
Arctic Europe and Asia, and on the 
highest of the Sudetan mountains in 
Bohemia.
Not uncommon in the Scotch 
mountains, and found also, but much 
more sparingly, in the Lake districts of northern England, in North 
Wales, and on Benbulben in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 381.
11.
Star Saxifrage.
Saxifraga stellaris, Linn.
(Eig. 382.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 167.) 
A perennial, but the stock is small, 
and has often an annual appearance; 
it is crowned by one or more tufts of 
spreading leaves, rather thin, varying 
from oblong to obovate, with a few 
coarse teeth, and tapering at the base.
When luxuriant, these tufts are elon- 
gated into leafy branches of 1 or 2 
inches.
Stems erect, 3 to 6 inches, leaf- 
less, except a small, leafy bract under 
each pedicel.
Flowers from 2 or 3 to 
8 or 10, rather small, white and starlike, 
on slender, spreading pedicels, forming 
a loose terminal panicle.
Calyx free al- 
most to the base, the segments closely 
reflexed on the pedicel.
Petals narrow and spreading, 
ther large, with 2 diverging beaks.
On wet rocks and along rivulets and springs, in all the mountain- 
ranges of Europe and Russian Asia, from the Mediterranean to the 
Arctic regions, and also in northern America.
Frequent in the Scotch 
Highlands, and found also in the mountains of northern England, 
North Wales, and Ireland.
Fig. 382.
Capsule ra- 
312 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
12.
London-pride Saxifrage.
Saxifraga umbrosa, Linn.
(Fig. 383.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 663, and Suppl.
2891.
London Pride.
Cabbage.
None-so-pretty.) 
St. Patrick's 
Perennial stock shortly branched, 
crowned by the spreading leaves, form- 
ing dense tufts, which in our gardens 
will attain near a foot in diameter.
Leaves 
rather thick and leathery, usually gla- 
brous, obovate, an inch or more in length, 
bordered with cartilaginous crenatures 
or coarse teeth, and narrowed at the 
base into a short, more or less flattened 
stalk, ciliate at the edges.
Stems erect, 
leafless, 6 inches to a foot high.
Mowers 
small, pink, elegantly spotted with a 
darker colour, in a loose, slender panicle.
Calyx free, with short segments closely 
reflected on the pedicel.
Petals much 
longer, ovate or oblong, and spreading.
In shady places, in Portugal, western 
Spain, and the higher Pyrenees, and re- 
appearing in south-western Ireland.
Cultivated from an early period in our gardens, it appears to have 
established itself in some localities in northern England and south- 
western Scotland.
PL early summer.
Fig. 383.
13.
Kidney Saxifrage.
Saxifraga Geum, Linn.
(Fig. 384.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1561, and Suppl.
t. 2893.) 
Closely allied to the London-pride S.
in its habit and flowers, this 
species only differs in its leaves, which are orbicular, usually notched 
or cordate at the base, with long stalks, less flattened than in the last 
species, and usually very hairy ; the leaves themselves also have often 
a few scattered hairs on both surfaces.
The geographical range is the same as that of the London-pride S., 
but it appears generally to prefer lower altitudes.
PL early summer.
Specimens in some measure intermediate between this and the last 
species, with the leaves orbicular or nearly so, but not cordate, and the 
SAXIFRAGACEJS.
313 
stalk somewhat flattened, have been 
gathered near Killarney.
They have 
been published as species, under the 
names of S.
hirsuta (Eng. Bot.
t. 2322) 
and 8.
elegans (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2892), 
whilst others consider them as hybrids.
In favour of the latter supposition there 
appears to be but little evidence, and 
they are probably mere varieties of the 
Kidney S.
Fig. 384.
II.
CHRYSOSPLENE.
CHEYSOSPLENIUM.
Delicate herbs, perennial and creeping at the base ; the short flower- 
ing stems ascending, and often of a golden yellow at the top ; with 
orbicular leaves, no stipules, and small yellow flowers, in short, leafy 
terminal cymes.
Calyx adherent, with 4, or rarely 5, short, free seg- 
ments.
Petals none.
Stamens 8, rarely 10, inserted at the base of the 
calyx-segments.
Ovary adherent to near the top, where it is divided into 
2 short, conical lobes, each with a short style, and surrounded by a 
crenated disk within the stamens.
Capsule 1-celled, opening at the 
top in 2 short valves.
Seeds several, attached to 2 parietal placentas.
Albumen copious, with a small embryo.
A small genus, spread over the temperate and colder regions of both 
the northern and southern hemispheres.
Leaves opposite 1.
Opposite C, 
Leaves alternate 2.
Alternate C.
1. Opposite Chrysosplene.
Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, 
Linn.
(Fig. 385.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 490.
Golden Saxifrage.) 
The loose, leafy tufts often spread to a considerable extent ; the 
stems scarcely rising above 4 or 5 inches from the ground, simple or 
VOL.
I. 2 B 
314 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
forked near the top.
Leaves all opposite, 
3 or 4 to 6 or 8 lines in diameter, slightly 
crenated or sinuate, and notched at the 
base, with a few stiff hairs on the upper 
surface.
Flowers small and sessile, in 
little, compact cymes, surrounded by 
leaves like those of the stem, but smaller, 
more sessile, and of a golden yellow.
Calyx-segments obtuse and spreading.
In moist, shady places, along the sides 
of rivulets, dispersed over the greater 
part of Europe and Russian Asia.
Abun- 
dant in Eritain.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 385.
Alternate Chrysosplene.
Chrysosplenium alternifolium, 
Linn.
(Fig. 386.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 54.) 
Closely resembles the opposite C, but 
is usually of a paler colour ; the leaves 
are always alternate, and the lower ones 
on longer stalks, and rather more of a 
kidney-shape.
In similar situations as the opposite C, 
and much more common in Continental 
Europe, Hussian and central Asia, and 
northern America, extending into the 
Arctic regions.
In Britain, on the con- 
trary, much less common than the oppo- 
site C.j although pretty generally dis- 
tributed.
Fl. spring.
The two species 
are frequently found growing together, 
but appear always to retain their cha- 
racters.
Fig. 386.
III.
FARNASSIA.
PARNASSIA.
Herbs, with a perennial stock ; entire leaves, mostly radical ; and 
erect, annual flowering stems, usually bearing a single leaf, and a single 
SAXIFRAGACEiE.
315 
terminal flower.
Calyx in the British species almost free, with 5 seg- 
ments.
Petals 5, perigynous.
Stamens perigynous, 5 perfect, and 5 
imperfect, bearing, instead of anthers, a tuft of globular-headed fila- 
ments.
Stigmas 4, rarely 3, sessile.
Capsule 1-celled, opening in 4, 
or rarely 3, valves.
Seeds very numerous, without albumen, inserted 
on 4, rarely 3, parietal placentas, opposite the styles, and in the centre 
of the valves.
A few species are inhabitants of bogs and wet places in Europe, Asia, 
and ]N"orth America.
The above characters are so well marked, that 
the genus is not easily confounded with any other, but its place in the 
Natural System has been much disputed.
It has been most generally 
placed amongst Thai 'ami/lores, with the Sundews, next to the Violet 
and Milkwort families ; but its close affinity with Saxifrage and Chry- 
sosplene has now been fully proved, especially by the recent publica- 
tion of several curious Himalayan species.
1. Marsh Parnassia.
Parnassia palustris, Linn.
(Fig. 387.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 82.
Grass-of- Parnassus.) 
Stock very short.
Radical leaves ra- 
ther long-stalked, broadly heart-shaped, 
glabrous as the rest of the plant.
Stems 
6 inches to a foot high, with a single 
sessile leaf below the middle.
Flower 
white, rather large.
Segments of the 
calyx ovate, spreading, 3 to 3J lines long.
Petals obovate, spreading, nearly twice 
that length.
Imperfect stamens at the 
base of each petal, short and thick, with 
a tuft of 10 to 12 short, white filaments, 
each bearing a little, yellow, globular 
gland.
Capsule globular.
In bogs and moist heaths, throughout 
northern Europe and Russian Asia, be- 
coming a mountain plant in southern 
Europe and west-central Asia.
Fre- 
quent in Britain.
Fl. end of summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 387.
IV.
SUNDEW, DROSERA.
Herbs, with long-stalked, radical leaves, covered with long, glan- 
dular hairs or bristles ; the leafless flower-stems terminating in a simple 
or forked unilateral spike or raceme.
Sepals 5, free from the ovary.
316 
THE SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.
Petals and stamens 5 ; in the British species almost hypogynous, but 
in many exotic ones decidedly perigynous.
Styles 3 or 4, each divided 
into 2.
Capsule 1 -celled, opening into 3 or 4 valves, sometimes split 
into twice that number.
Seeds several, with albumen, inserted on 3 
or 4 parietal placentas in the centre of the valves.
The Sundews are rather numerous in species, and found in nearly all 
parts of the globe where there are bogs.
The curious glandular hairs 
of the leaves distinguish them from all other British genera, inde- 
pendently of their floral characters.
Associated with a few exotic 
genera, all remarkable for the same glandular hairs, but differing 
chiefly in number of stamens, or of the valves of the capsule, or in the 
insertion of the ovules, they form a distinct group, usually considered 
as an independent family among Tlialamiflores ; but a considerable 
number of species have their flowers rather perigynous than hypogy- 
nous, and they appear much more naturally associated with Saxifrages 
as a somewhat anomalous tribe of that family.
Leaves obovate or orbicular, as broad as long ......
1. Common S.
Leaves obovate-oblong, three or four times as long as broad .
2. Oblong S.
Leaves linear-spathulate, five or more times as long as broad .
3. 'English S.
1. Common Sundew.
Drosera rotundifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 388.) 
(Eng. Bot.
n. 867 in the text, 868 on the plate.) 
Rootstock short and slender, the leaves 
on long stalks, nearly orbicular, 3 to near 
6 lines in diameter, covered on the upper 
surface with long, red, viscid hairs, each 
bearing a small gland at the top.
Flower- 
stems slender, erect, and glabrous, 2 or 
3 to 5 or 6 inches high, the upper por- 
tion, consisting of a simple or once- 
forked unilateral raceme, rolled back 
when young, but straightening as the 
flowers expand.
Pedicels nearly a line 
long, without bracts.
Calyx near 2 lines.
Petals white, rather longer, expanding 
in sunshine.
Seeds spindle-shaped, 
pointed at both ends, the loose testa 
several times longer than the small, 
ovoid albumen.
In bogs, and wet, heathy ground, 
throughout central and northern Europe, and Russian Asia; from 
northern Spain to the Arctic regions.
Abundant in all parts of Britain 
where there are considerable bogs.
Fl. summer and early autumn.
SAXIFRAGACEiE.
317 
2. Oblong Sundew.
Drosera longifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 389.) 
(Eng. Bot.
n. 868 in the text, 867 on the plate.) 
Distinguished from the common S.
by 
the leaves much more erect, not half so 
broad as long and gradually tapering 
into the footstalk ; the flowering stem is 
also usually shorter, and not so slender ; 
the styles less deeply divided, and the 
seeds are ovoid or oblong ; the testa 
either close to the albumen, and taking 
its form, or very slightly prolonged at 
each end.
In bogs, with the common S., but 
much less generally distributed both on 
the continent of Europe and in Britain.
Fl, summer and early autumn.
Fig. 389.
3. English Sundew.
Drosera anglica, Huds.
(Fig. 390.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 869.) 
Very like the oblong S., but the leaves 
are still longer and narrower, often an 
iuch long without the stalk, the flowers 
and capsule larger, and the testa of the 
seed is loose and elongated, as in the 
common S., but more obtuse at the ends.
In bogs, apparently spread over the 
same geographical range as the two other 
species, but being often confounded with 
the oblong S., of which it may be a mere 
variety, its precise stations are not very 
clearly defined.
In Britain, more fre- 
quent in Scotland and Ireland than in 
England.
Fl. summer and early autumn.
Fig. 390.
318 THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
XXXII.
UMBELLATE FAMILY.
UMBELLIFEILE.
Herbs, or, in a few exotic species, shrubs, with alternate leaves, 
often much cut or divided ; the footstalk usually dilated at the 
base, but no real stipules.
Flowers usually small, in terminal or 
lateral umbels, which are either compound, each ray of the general 
umbel bearing a partial umbel, or more rarely simple or reduced 
to a globular head.
At the base of the umbel are often one or 
more bracts, constituting the involucre, those at the base of the 
partial umbel being termed the involucel.
Calyx combined with 
the ovary, either entirely so or appearing only in the form of 
5 small teeth round its summit.
Petals 5, inserted round a little 
fleshy disk which crowns the ovary, usually turned in at the point, 
and often appearing notched.
Stamens 5, alternating with the 
petals.
Ovary 2-celled, with one ovule in each cell.
Styles 2, 
arising from the centre of the disk.
Fruit, when ripe, separating 
into 2 one-seeded, in dehiscent carpels, usually leaving a filiform 
central axis, either entire or splitting into two.
This axis, often 
called the carpophore, is however sometimes scarcely separable 
from the carpels.
Each carpel (often called a niericarp, and hav- 
ing the appearance of a seed) is marked outside with 10, 5, or 
fewer, prominent nerves or ribs, occasionally expanded into wings, 
and underneath or within the pericarps are often longitudinal 
channels, called vittas, filled with an oily or resinous substance.
Embryo minute, in a horny albumen, which either fills the seeds 
or is deeply furrowed or excavated on the.
inner face.
A numerous family, more or less represented nearly all over the 
globe ; but the species are comparatively few in high northern latitudes, 
as well as within the tropics, their great centre being western Asia and 
the Mediterranean region.
Their inflorescence, and the structure of 
their flowers, distinguish them at once from all other families, except 
that of the Aralias, and these have either more than two styles, or the 
fruit is a berry.
But the subdivision of Umbellifers into genera is 
much more difficult.
Linnseus marked out several which were natural, 
but without definite characters to distinguish them ; and the modern 
genera, founded upon a nice appreciation of minute differences in the 
fruit and seed, are often very artificial, or still more frequently re- 
duced to single species, and require as complete a revision as the Crucifers 
and Composites.
These minute characters are moreover in many cases 
UMBELLIFERJE.
319 
very difficult to ascertain.
I have, therefore, in the following Analy- 
tical Key, endeavoured to lead to the determination of the species, as 
far as possible, by more salient though less absolute characters, which 
may suffice in a great measure for the few British species, although, 
even for them, the minute variations of the fruit cannot be wholly 
dispensed with.
For this purpose it is essential to have the fruit quite 
ripe.
It must then be cut across, and if a horizontal slice is placed 
under a magnify ing-glass, the general form, the ribs and furrows of the 
pericarp, and the vittas, will clearly appear.
Where the fruit is de- 
scribed as laterally compressed, this slice will assume an oval form, the 
division between the carpels being across the narrow diameter ; 
where it is flattened from front to back, the division will be across the 
broadest diameter.
In Seseli and other genera, where the fruit is not 
compressed, the horizontal slice will be orbicular.
Where the albumen 
is furrowed, its trausverse section will assume more or less of a half- 
moon or a kidney shape.
1 f Leaves undivided 2 
1 Leaves palmate or pinnate, or variously dissected 3 
r Leaves quite entire, grass-like or ovate.
Flowers yellow 15.
Bupleveb.
2 <j Leaves rounded, crenate or peltate.
Aquatic or marsh plant, with small 
L heads or whorls of flowers 1.
Hydrocotyle.
r Leaves and globular heads of flowers very prickly ...
4. Eryngo.
3 <| Leaves and stems very thick and succulent ....
23.
Samphire.
L Leaves neither prickly nor fleshy 4 
r Fruit covered with prickles or bristles or hairs, or with dentate or sinuate 
4*1 ribs 5 
L Fruit glabrous and smooth, or with entire ribs or wings 12 
- f Leaves orbicular or palmate.
Umbels simple or irregularly compound 6 
1 Leaves pinnate or much dissected.
Umbels usually compound ...
7 
r Flowers in small heads, without involucre.
Fruit prickly .
2. Sanicle.
6-^ Flowers in simple or irregularly compound umbels.
Involucre of many 
L bracts.
Fruit rough, with sinuate or dentate ribs .
3. Astrantia.
i- J Fruit covered with bristles or prickles or hairs 8 
I Fruit glabrous, with sinuate ribs 35.
Hemlock.
R f Fruit flat, with a thick border 28.
Hart wort.
I Fruit ovoid, not bordered .
9 
q f Bracts of the involucre mostly pinnatifid 34.
Carrot.
I Bracts of the involucre entire or none 10 
{Umbels of more than 20 rays, with involucres of many bracts, and shortly 
downy fruits 19.
Seseli.
Umbels of few rays (seldom 10).
Bracts few or none.
Fruits burr-like 
or very hispid 11 
f Fruit contracted at the top into a very short, smooth beak.
11 -| 32.
Burr Chervil.
l_Fruit covered to the top with hooked bristles .
. .
.33.
Caucalis.
320 THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
f Fruit very much flattened 13 
-, 2 J Fruit globular, ovoid, or shortly oblong 18 
i Fruit long and narrow, at least four times as long as broad.
(Leaves 
L much cut, and often hairy) 46 
,„[ Fruit rough, surrounded by a thick edge 28.
Hartwort.
I Fruit smooth, with a thin or a double edge 14 
rFruit bordered by two thin edges or wings, which are distinct before the 
-. a j fruit ripens.
(Tall plant, with numerous ovate segments to the leaves.
I 24.
Angelica.
"-Edge of the fruit single until the carpels separate 15 
,J Leaves much dissected, with narrow or small segments .
25.
Peucedan.
I Leaves consisting of a few large, broad segments 16 
f Lower leaves of three large, 3-lobed segments, equal to each other, and 
,~j with stalks of equal length 25.
Broad Peucedan.
i Lower leaves pinnate ; or, if ternate, the middle segment longer, with a 
^ longer stalk 17 
, » f Flowers yellow, all small 26.
Parsnip.
I Flowers white, the outer petals of the umbel much larger 27.
Heraclettm.
.. s f Flowers yellow 19 
1 Flowers white 22 
r Leaves two or three times ternate, with large, broad segments.
Fruit of 
19 i 2 globular carpels 37.
Smyrnium.
i Leaves pinnate or much divided.
Fruit ovoid or oblong ....
20 
2 f Leaves very finely divided into filiform segments ....
18.
Fennel.
I Segments of the leaves flat, linear-lanceolate or oblong 21 
o-i f Ribs of the fruit very prominent, almost winged ....
21.
Silatts.
I Ribs of the fruit scarcely prominent 9.
Common Parsley.
{Fertile flowers and fruits, at least the central ones, nearly sessile, sur- 
rounded by small, barren, pedicellate flowers.
Fruit corky, with pro- 
minent calyx-teeth 16.
(Enanth.
Fertile flowers pedicellate 23 
Leaves twice or thrice ternate, with large, broad segments (of 2 or 3 inches) 
24 
Leaves once pinnate, with several pairs of sessile, ovate, lanceolate, or dis- 
sected segments 26 
Leaves much dissected, with small or narrow segments, the lower ones 
[_ stalked 30 
o .
f Umbels all terminal and peduncled 25 
I Umbels mostly lateral and sessile 6.
Apittm.
9 k J No involucres 11.
GtOUTweed.
"*  \ Partial involucres of several bracts, general one of very few 20.
Lovage.
9 „ J No involucres 14.
Pimpinel.
23 
'III.
volucres at least to the partial umbels 27 
9h .
J Umbels terminal 28 
1 Umbels mostly lateral, almost sessile 29 
rFruit ovoid, about 2 lines long or more 46 
28 i Fruit ovoid, under 2 lines long .
13.
Sium.
L Fruit nearly globular, not 1 line long 8.
Sison.
UMBELLIFER2E.
321 
pq J General involucre of several bracts 13.
Sium.
I No general involucre, or only a single bract ....
7. Helosclad.
„~ f Umbels mostly lateral, almost sessile 31 
I Umbels all terminal or pedunculate 32 
f Leaves with few ovate segments 6.
Apium, 
31 *j Leaves twice or thrice pinnate, with numerous small segments.
*- 16.
Fine-leaved CEnanth.
oo f Erect branched annuals (not above 2 feet high) 33 
I Perennials or tall biennials 36 
oo J Partial involucres longer than the flowers, and reflexed .
17.
^Ethusa.
I Partial involucres shorter than the flowers, or none 34 
04 f Fruit globular or broader than long 35 
'{; 
. Fruit ovoid or longer than broad 41 
or f Fruit globular, not separating into two 38.
Coriander.
1 Fruit separating into 2 small globular carpels 8.
Sis ON.
rFruit of 2 little, globular, bladder-like lobes or carpels 36.
Physosperm.
36 <j Fruit nearly globular or broader than long .........
37 
L Fruit ovoid or longer than broad 41 
^h J Partial involucre of several bracts ' 38 
I No involucres •.
40 
r Flowers of a yellowish-green.
Ribs of the fruit acute, almost winged.
38 <J 21.
SlLAFS.
L Flowers white.
Ribs of the carpels obtuse, or crisped, or not prominent 39 
r Calyx-teeth appearing above the fruit.
Leaf-segments narrow.
oq!
5. COWBANE.
1 Calyx-teeth not conspicuous.
Leaf-segments numerous, small.
L 35.
Hemlock.
pStem erect, not much branched.
Leaves pinnately divided with ovate, 
1 lanceolate, or linear segments 14.
Pimpinel.
j Stem short, with spreading stiff branches.
Leaves ternately divided with 
L subulate segments ' 10.
Trpnia.
r Leaf-segments divided into numerous subulate lobes, not above 2 lines 
41 <J long, in opposite clusters, appearing whorled along the common stalk 42 
L Leaf- segments oblong-lanceolate or linear, and flat ......
43 
r Common stalk of the leaf simple.
Fruit not above 2 lines long.
42 «{ 12.
Whorled Carum.
L Common stalk branched.
Fruit 3 or 4 lines long ...
22.
Spignel.
. f Rootstock a globular tuber 44 
I Rootstock or root not tuberous .
45 
r Styles closely reflected on the fruit.
Ribs of the fruit prominent.
Yittas 
AA I single 12.
Tu herons Carum.
44 < ° 
1 Styles erect.
Ribs of the fruit scarcely visible.
Yittas several to each 
L interstice 31.
Bunium.
rUmbels of 3 to 5 very unequal rays 9.
Field Parsley.
.^ !
Umbels of 7 to 10 rather unequal rays.
Calyx-teeth not conspicuous.
12.
Caraway Carum.
^ Umbels of 10 to 20 rays.
Calyx-teeth prominent .
. .16.
GEnanth.
TOL.
I. 2 C 
322 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
,z r f Fruit 10 lines to above an inch long .
: 47 
I Fruit not above half an inch long 48 
a h f Fruit thick, with prominent angles or ribs the whole length 30.
Cicely.
I Fruit slightly ribbed at the base, with a long smooth beak 29.
Scandix.
Aft J Fruits mostly sessile or nearly so 16.
CEnanth.
I Fruits all pedicellate 32.
Chervil.
I. HYDROCOTYLE.
HYDROCOTYLE.
Herbs, mostly, aquatic, with leaves often peltate.
Flowers in a 
small simple head or umbel, or in 2 or more whorls one above the other.
Petals ovate.
Fruit laterally compressed, the carpels flat, nearly or- 
bicular, placed edge to edge, w T ith one prominent rib on each side, and 
without any prominent calycine teeth.
A rather large genus, spread over the greater part of the globe, and, 
notwithstanding some rather anomalous South African species, readily 
known as well by its foliage and inflorescence as by its fruit.
1. Common Hydrocotyle.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 391.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 751.
Marsh Pennywort.
White-rot.) 
The perennial slender stem creeps 
along the wet mud, or even floats in 
w r ater, rooting at every node, and emit- 
ting from the same point small tufts of 
leaves and flowers.
Leaves orbicular, 
\ to 1 inch diameter, crenate or slightly 
lobed, and attached by the centre to a 
rather long stalk.
Peduncles shorter 
than the leafstalks, with a single termi- 
nal head, or 2 or even 3 whorls of mi- 
nute white flowers on very short pedicels.
Fin- 391.
Fruits small, flat, and glabrous, about a 
line in diameter.
In bogs, marshes, edges of ponds and lakes, in temperate Europe, 
from southern Scandinavia to the Caucasus.
Frequent in Britain.
Fl.
summer.
II.
SANICLE.
SANICULA.
Herbs, with a perennial rootstock ; palmately divided leaves mostly 
radical ; and erect, almost leafless stems, irregularly branched at the 
top, each branch ending in a very small head of flowers.
Fruit ovoid, 
covered with short, hooked prickles, and crowned by the 5 prickly 
teeth at the calyx.
Petals minute, obovate, with an inflected point.
umbelliferj:.
'323 
A genus of very few species, but widely spread over a great part of 
the globe without the tropics.
They are all readily distinguished 
among irregular Umbellates by their burr-like fruit.
1. Wood Sanicle.
Sanicula europsea, Linn.
(Fig. 392.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 
Rootstock short, almost woody.
Radical 
leaves on long stalks, 1 to 2 inches dia- 
meter, deeply divided into about 5 pal- 
mate segments or lobes, each one obovate 
or wedge-shaped, dentate or lobed, the 
teeth ending in a fine point, and often 
ciliate at the edge ; the whole plant other- 
wise glabrous.
Stems 1 to 1| feet high, 
leafless or with small trifid leaves or 
bracts under the branches of the panicle.
This usually consists of 3 short branches, 
each with a single small head of flowers, 
with a longer branch lower down the 
stem bearing 3 small heads, but some- 
times there are more 3-headed branches 
forming an irregular umbel.
At the time 
of flowering, the calyx-teeth almost con- 
ceal the petals ; as the fruit ripens into 
little burrs of about 2 lines, the prickles 
almost conceal the calyx-teeth.
In woods, throughout Europe except the extreme north, extending 
eastward into central Asia.
Frequent in Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 392.
III.
ASTRANTIA.
ASTRANTIA.
Herbs, with a perennial rootstock, and palmately divided leaves, 
mostly radical.
Umbels compact, irregularly compound, with general 
and partial involucres of several coloured bracts.
Flowers often uni- 
sexual.
Fruit ovoid or oblong, somewhat compressed laterally, 
crowned by the long pointed teeth of the calyx.
Carpels with 5 plaited 
or crimped ribs, and without vittas.
A small genus, extending over central and southern Europe to the 
Caucasus.
The foliage and involucels, as well as the fruit, mark it 
out as a very distinct group in the family.
1. Larger Astrantia.
Astrantia major, Linn.
(Fig. 393.) 
Radical leaves like those of the Sanicle, but larger, with more pointed 
2 c 2 
324 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
lobes.
Stems 2 feet high or more, erect, 
with 1 or 2 leaves, smaller, and on shorter 
stalks than the radical ones.
General 
umbel very irregular, of 3 to 5 unequal 
rays, the involucre of as many coloured 
and lobed or toothed bracts, with occa- 
sionally a bract or two below the middle 
of each ray.
Partial umbels with an 
involucel of 15 to 20 lanceolate pointed 
bracts, quite entire, as long or longer 
than the flowers, either white or tinged 
with pink.
Flowers small, mostly uni- 
sexual, the calyx-border campanulate, 
with 5 teeth about the length of the 
petals.
In woods and pastures, in central and 
southern Europe, not nearer to Britain 
than central France.
Occurs apparently 
wild in Stokesay Wood, near Ludlow, 
and between Whitbourne and Malvern, 
in Herefordshire ; probably °riginally escaped from some old cottage- 
garden.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 393.
IV.
ERYNGO.
ERYJSTGIUM.
Stiff, hard herbs, usually perennial, and with very prickly leaves 
and involucres.
Flowers in a compact spike or head, with a scale or 
bract on the common receptacle under each flower.
Petals erect, with 
a long inflected point.
Fruit ovoid, without vittas, crowned by the 
pointed or prickly teeth of the calyx.
A rather numerous and very natural genus, spread over the greater 
part of the temperate and warm regions of the globe.
In many species 
the whole of the upper part of the plant as well as the flowers acquire 
a bluish or white tint, on which account several exotic species have 
been frequently cultivated in our gardens.
Radical leaves rounded, the lobes plaited and toothed.
Scales of 
the receptacle 3-lobed .
1. Sea ~E.
Leaves pimiately divided, the lobes pinnatifid and toothed.
Scales 
of the receptacle entire 2.
Field IS.
1. Sea Eryngo.
Eryngium maritimum, Linn.
(Fig. 394.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 718.
Sea Holly.) 
A stiff, erect, much branched plant, nearly a foot high, quite gla- 
UMBELLIEERiE.
325 
brous, and glaucous or bluish.
Leaves 
very stiff, broad, and sinuate, more 
or less divided into 3 broad, short 
lobes, elegantly veined and bordered by 
coarse, prickly teeth ; the radical ones 
stalked ; the others clasping the stem 
by their broad bases.
Heads of flowers 
nearly globular, of a pale blue, with an 
involucre of 5 to 8 leaves, like those of 
the stem, but much smaller and nar- 
rower, the bracts within the head di- 
vided into 3 prickles.
On the seacoasts of the whole of Eu- 
rope and western Asia, except the ex- 
treme north.
Abundant on the maritime 
sands of England, Ireland, and southern 
and western Scotland, and has been 
found as far north as Shetland.
Fl, 
summer, rather late.
Fig. 394.
2. Field Eryngo.
Eryngium campestre, Linn.
(Fig. 395.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 57.) 
Stems not so thick, and more branched 
than in the sea F.
; the leaves much 
more divided ; the segments pinnate, 
with lanceolate lobes, waved and coarsely 
toothed, bordered and terminated by 
strong prickles.
Heads of flowers more 
numerous and smaller ; the involucral 
leaves more or less pinnately toothed; 
the scales or bracts within the heads 
narrow, and mostly entire.
In fields, waste places, and roadsides, 
in central and southern Europe, extend- 
ing eastward to the Caucasus and Ural, 
and northward to Denmark.
Rare in 
Britain, and believed by some to be an 
introduced plant ; among several sta- 
tions formerly given, it is now only 
known near Plymouth, on the ballast- 
hills of the Tyne, and near Waterford, in 
Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 395.
326 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
V. COWBANE.
CICUTA.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, without any general involucre, 
or only one or two small bracts ; the partial involucre of many bracts.
Calyx-teeth prominent above the ovary.
Petals white, obcordate.
Fruit short, laterally compressed ; each carpel nearly globular, with 5 
scarcely prominent, broad, flat ribs, and single vittas under the furrows.
A genus of very few species, spread over the northern hemisphere ; 
distinguished among the short-fruited Umbellates with single vittas 
chiefly by the prominent teeth of the calyx.
1. Water Cowbane.
Cicuta virosa, Linn.
(Fig. 396.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 479.
Cowbane.
Water Hemlock.) 
Stem hollow, somewhat branched, at- 
taining 3 or 4 feet.
Leaves twice or thrice 
pinnate or ternate, with narrow-lanceo- 
|y late, acute segments, 1 to 1^ inches long, 
bordered with a few unequal, acute teeth.
General umbels of from 10 to 15 or even 
more rays.
Bracts of the partial invo- 
lucres subulate, not quite so long as the 
pedicels.
In wet ditches and on the edges of 
lakes, in northern and central Europe, 
[Russian Asia, and northern America, 
disappearing in southern Europe.
Very 
local in Britain, and never abundant, al- 
though occurring in several counties of 
England, Ireland, and southern Scot- 
land.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 396.
VI.
APIUM.
APIUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound.
JNo involucres.
Petals en- 
tire, white, with a small, inflected point ; fruit short, slightly com- 
pressed laterally, without visible calycine teeth.
Carpels ovoid, with 5 
slender ribs, and single vittas under the furrows, and 2 on the face, 
next the axis ; the axis or carpophore free and entire, or shortly split 
at the top.
A genus which has been differently understood and characterized by 
UMBELLIITEJRjE.
327 
almost every botanist who has studied Umbellates, and which has now 
no claims to be considered either natural or definite.
It might be 
made more so if extended so as to comprise Helosciad, and several 
small exotic ones.
......
1. Celery Apium.
Apium graveolens, Linn.
(Fig. 397.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1210.
Celery.) 
In its wild state not a stout plant ; 
quite glabrous, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves 
pinnate, with 3 or 5 distinct, broad seg- 
ments, crenate or 3-lobed, from 6 to 9 
lines long, the upper leaves very small.
Umbels small, nearly sessile on the 
upper branches opposite the leaves, or 
on very short terminal peduncles sel- 
dom 2 lines above the last leaves ; di- 
vided into from 3 to 6 rays, and bearing 
numerous small flowers on short pedicels.
Fruits very small, the vittas often very 
indistinct.
In marshy places near the sea, on the 
coasts of Europe, Africa, western Asia, 
and America, but not in high northern 
latitudes.
In Britain it extends as far 
north as the southern counties of Scot- 
land, and is occasionally found inland, 
but then mostly escaped from cultiva- 
tion.
Fl. summer.
The Celery of our gardens is a cultivated va- 
riety, in which the leafstalk and base of the stem acquire a consider- 
able size.
Fig. 397.
VII.
HELOSCIAD.
HELOSCIADIUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres, and 
sometimes a general one also.
Flowers and fruit of Apium, except 
that there are no vittas on the face of the carpels next the axis.
A small genus, including some American, besides the European and 
Asiatic species, but which in a general revision would probably all be 
united with Apium.
328 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
Leaves of several pairs of ovate or lanceolate toothed seg- 
ments.
Rays of the nmbel about 5 or 6 .
. .
. 1 .
Procumbent II, 
Leaf-segments few, usually lobed or divided.
Kays of the 
umbel about 3 or 4 2.
Lesser H.
1. Procumbent Helosciad.
Helosciadium nodinorum, 
Koch.
(Fig. 398.) 
(Slum, Eng. Bot.
t. 639.) 
r ~*i\ Stems perennial, creeping, and rooting 
at the base, the annual flowering branches 
ascending or nearly erect ; attaining se- 
veral feet in some situations, but usually 
very much shorter, the whole plant gla- 
brous.
Leaves with 3 to 10 or more 
pairs of ovate or lanceolate toothed seg- 
ments.
Umbels nearly sessile or on 
short peduncles, either opposite to the 
leaves or between the upper branches, 
each with 5 or 6, or rarely as many as 8 
or as few as 4 rays.
General involucre 
usually w r anting, but sometimes consist- 
ing of 3 or 4 narrow-lanceolate bracts ; 
partial involucre of several small, lanceo- 
late bracts.
In marshy meadow r s, and wet ditches, 
in western and southern Europe; scarcely 
eastward of the Rhine in central Europe, 
but extends nearly all round the Mediterranean.
Abundant in Eng- 
land, Ireland, and southern Scotland.
Fl. summer.
It varies much 
in size and foliage ; when very luxuriant the leaf-segments are nume- 
rous, narrow, from 1 to 1J inches long ; in half dried-up, open ditches 
the plant is small, much branched, with 3 to 5 small, broad segments ; 
it will then also creep much more, has the peduncles rather longer, 
and has been considered as a distinct species (S.
repens, Eng. Bot.
t. 1431), but both forms may be occasionally found proceeding from 
the same stock.
Fig. 398.
2. Lesser Helosciad.
Helosciadium inundatum, Koch.
(Fig. 399.) 
(Sison, Eng. Bot.
t. 227.) 
A glabrous plant, creeping and rooting at the base like the last, but 
much smaller, and more slender, and often half immersed in water, 
UMBELLIEERiE.
329 
when the submerged leaves are divided 
into capillary segments.
Flowering 
stems 6 to 8 inches high, with small ter- 
nate or pinnate leaves ; the segments 3- 
toothed or 3-lobed, each lobe often again 
3-toothed.
Umbels on short peduncles 
opposite the leaves, as in the procumbent 
H., but generally of 2 or 3 rays only, 
without involucre ; the partial umbels of 
5 or 6 small flowers, with 2 or 3 minute 
bracts.
In swamps, shallow ponds and pools, 
or half-dried mud, chiefly in western and 
central Europe, extending northwards 
into southern Sweden, eastwards almost 
to the Asiatic frontier, but rare in the 
south.
Generally dispersed over Bri- 
tain, but easily overlooked, and conse- 
quently supposed to be more rare than 
is the fact.
Fl. summer.
Tig. 399.
VIII.
SISON.
SISON.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and partial in- 
volucres.
Petals broad, deeply notched, with an inflected point.
Fruit of Apium, except that the axis or carpophore is deeply cleft as 
in Parsley, and the vittas are slightly thickened at the lower end.
A single species, formerly considered as a congener of the Corn 
Parsley.
1. Hedge Sison.
Sison Amomum, Linn.
(Fig. 400.) 
(Eng. Bat.
t. 945.
Bastard Stone Parsley.) 
An erect, glabrous annual or biennial, 2 feet high or rather more, 
with numerous stiff, slender branches in the upper part.
Leaves pin- 
nate ; the segments of the lower ones ovate or oblong, often an inch 
long, toothed or lobed, or the lower pair again pinnate ; the upper 
leaves much smaller, with small, narrow segments, deeply 3-lobed, 
toothed or entire.
Umbels on slender peduncles of 3 to 5 rays, with 
but few white flowers on short pedicels.
Involucres of very few, linear 
330 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
bracts, those of the partial umbels 
smaller, and often turned to one side.
Fruit scarcely above a line long, rather 
broader than long.
In hedges and thickets, chiefly in west- 
ern Europe, not reaching the Rhine in 
central Europe, but spreads here and 
there much further eastward in the Me- 
diterranean region.
In Britain, fre- 
quent in southern England ; more rare 
in the north, scarcely penetrating into 
Scotland, and not recorded from Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 400.
IX.
PARSLEY.
PETROSELINUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and partial in- 
volucres of very few bracts.
Petals entire.
Fruit of Apium, except 
that the axis of the carpophore splits to the base when ripe.
Two European species, not much like each other, nor yet like the 
few exotic ones artificially associated with them.
Tall biennial.
Flowers yellow 1.
Common P.
Slender annual.
Flowers white 2.
Corn P.
1. Common Parsley.
Petroselinum sativum, Hoffm.
(Fig. 401.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2793.) 
An erect, glabrous biennial, or sometimes lasting 3 or 4 years, 1 to " 
2 feet high, with a thick root and stiff branches.
Leaves triangular 
in their general outline, twice pinnate ; the segments stalked, ovate, 
lobed and toothed ; the upper leaves less divided, with narrow, often 
linear, entire segments.
Umbels all stalked, not very large, but with 
15 to 20 or even more rays ; the general involucre consisting of 2 to 
4 or 5 short linear bracts, the partial ones of several smaller bracts.
Flowers rather small, of a greenish-yellow.
UMBBELIFBEjB.
331 
A native apparently of the eastern 
Mediterranean region, much cultivated 
throughout Europe, and often establishes 
itself in waste places.
In Britain it ap- 
pears quite naturalized in maritime rocks 
in several parts of northern and western 
England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 401.
2. Corn Parsley.
Petroselinum segetum, Koch.
(Fig. 402.) 
(Bison* Eng. Bot.
t. 228.) 
A glabrous, much branched, slender 
annual, 9 to 18 inches high or sometimes 
more.
Leaves chiefly radical, not un- 
like those of the common Pimpinel, but 
smaller, simply pinnate, with 5 to 10 
pairs of sessile, ovate, toothed or lobed 
segments 3 to 6 lines long; the upper 
leaves few and small, merging into linear 
bracts.
Umbels very irregular, the rays 
few and very unequal ; the partial um- 
bels containing but few flowers, some 
quite sessile, others on pedicels varying 
from 1 to 6 lines in length.
Flowers 
small, white.
Fruit 1\ to 2 lines long, 
often curved by the abortion of one of 
the carpels.
In fields and waste places, dispersed 
over central Europe and western Asia, 
but apparently wanting both in the north 
and in the south.
In Britain only in 
southern and central England.
Fl. summer and autumn.
nearer allied in habit to the Caraway and to the hedge Sison than to 
Parsley.
Much 
332 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
X. TRINIA.
TKINIA.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, without involucres, or with 
a single bract.
Flowers dioecious.
Petals entire, with an inflected 
point.
Fruit short, somewhat laterally compressed, without visible 
calycine teeth.
Carpels ovoid, with 5 prominent ribs, and single vittas, 
under or within the ribs themselves, not under the interstices, as in 
most Umbellates.
A very small genus, chiefly south European and west Asiatic, with 
a peculiar habit, and differing from Apium chiefly in the dioecious 
flowers, and the position of the vittas of the fruit.
1. Common Trinia.
Trinia vulgaris, DC.
(Fig. 103.) 
{Pimpinella dioica, Eng. Bot.
t. 1209.) 
Stock perennial, short and thick, al- 
most woody, forming a tap-root at its 
base.
Stems annual, erect, stiff and 
angular, with numerous spreading 
branches, 6 inches to near a foot high, 
the whole plant glabrous, with a glau- 
cous hue.
Leaves finely cut into stiff, 
narrow-linear or subulate segments ; the 
radical ones twice pinnate, with ternate, 
entire segments, 3 to 6 lines long, the 
upper ones twice or only once ternate.
Umbels small and numerous, on slender 
peduncles, forming a loose panicle, each 
with 4 to 6 rays.
Flowers white, the 
males with much narrower petals than 
^' ' ' the females.
In dry, arid, and stony wastes, chiefly in limestone districts, in west- 
ern and southern Europe to the Caucasus, scarcely extending into 
central Germany.
Rare in Britain, and confined to the south-western 
counties of England and to southern Ireland.
Fl. spring or early 
XI.
GOUTWEED.
iEGOPODIUM.
Leaves dissected 1 .
Umbels compound, without any involucres.
Petals broad, notched, with an inflected point.
Fruit ovoid-oblong, 
umbellifem:.
333 
Carpels 
somewhat laterally compressed, without visible calycine teeth, 
with 5 slender ribs and no vittas.
A single species, differing from Carum in habit and in the absence 
of vittas.
1. Common Goutweed.
-Slgopodmm Podagraria, Linn.
(Eig. 404.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 940.
Goulioeed.
jBishopweed.) 
A coarse, erect, glabrous perennial, 1^ 
to 2 feet high, with a creeping root stock.
Radical leaves on long stalks, twice 
ternate ; the segments ovate or ovate- 
lanceolate, sharply toothed, 2 to 3 inches 
long, the terminal ones rounded at the 
base, the lateral ones obliquely cordate 
or sometimes lobed.
Stem-leaves few, 
less divided, with smaller segments.
Umbels rather large, with 12 to 20 or 
even more rays, with numerous white 
flowers.
Eruit about 2 lines long, the 
styles closely deflected upon it.
In moist woods and thickets, widely 
spread over Europe and Russian Asia, 
except the extreme north.
Having been 
much cultivated for medicinal purposes, 
and spreading readily by its creeping 
rootstocks, it is not always truly indige- 
nous, although a troublesome weed in gardens.
In Britain it is com- 
mon, but chiefly about houses and gardens, and therefore probably 
introduced.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 404.
XII.
CARUM.
CARUM.
Leaves dissected, with narrow segments.
Umbels compound, with 
involucres of several small bracts or none.
Petals broad, notched, 
with an inflected point.
Eruit oval-oblong, somewhat laterally com- 
pressed, without visible calycine teeth.
Carpels with 5 not very pro- 
minent ribs, and 1, 2, or 3 vittas under each furrow.
A considerable genus, chiefly spread over southern Europe and 
334 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
central Asia, differing from Apium in the notched petals and the 
shape of the frnit.
Stock short, covered with the remains of old leafstalks.
Lower 
leaves pinnate, with many distinct segments.
Segments of the leaves very numerous, short, fine, and 
nearly equal, apparently clustered or whorled along the 
main leafstalk 1.
Whorled C.
Segments gradually diminishing in length from the base to 
the top of the leaf 2.
Caraway C.
Rootstock a globular tuber.
Lower leaves twice Or thrice 
ternate 3.
Tuberous C.
1. Whorled Carum.
Carum verticillatum, Koch.
(Fig. 405.) 
(Sison, Eng. Bot.
t. 395.) 
Perennial stock short and thick, co- 
vered with the decayed bases of old 
leafstalks, the fibrous roots slightly 
thickened, the erect annual stems 1 to 1\ 
feet high.
Leaves mostly radical, con- 
sisting of from 12 to 20 pairs of opposite 
segments, about 2 or 3 lines long, divi- 
ded to the base into a number of fine 
subulate lobes, so as to appear like 
whorls or clusters of segments placed 
at regular distances along the common 
stalk, the whole leaf being 4 to 6 inches 
long.
Stem-leaves similar, but few and 
small.
Umbels terminal, not large, of 8 
to 10 rays.
Involucres, both general and 
partial, of several very small, linear 
bracts.
In heaths and bogs, in western Eu- 
rope, from the Spanish Peninsula to 
Belgium.
In Britain, common in some 
parts of Wales and Ireland, and in western Scotland.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 405.
2. Caraway Carum.
Carum Carvi, Linn.
(Eig. 40G.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1503.
Caraivay.) 
A biennial, forming a tap-root, and perhaps occasionally a perennial 
stock.
Stem erect, branched, \\ to 2 feet high.
Leaves with a rather 
UMBELLIFEE/E.
835 
long sheathing footstalk, pinnate, with 
several pairs of segments, which are 
sessile, but once or twice pinnate, with 
short linear lobes ; in a leaf of 3 or 4 
inches, the lowest or next to the lowest 
segments are ' about f of an inch long, 
the others diminishing gradually to the 
top.
Upper leaves smaller and less di- 
vided.
Umbels of about 8 or 10 rays, 
either without involucres or with 1 or 
2 small linear bracts.
Carpels (com- 
monly called Car aw ay -seeds) about 2 
lines long, linear-oblong, and usually 
curved, with the ribs prominent.
In meadows, and moist pastures, in 
the greater part of Europe and Rus- 
sian and central Asia, from the Arctic 
regions to the Mediterranean and Hi- 
malaya, more rare in western Europe.
Occurs in many parts of Britain ; if not 
truly indigenous, at any rate well naturalized, having been long cul- 
tivated for its aromatic carpels.
Fl. spring and early summer.
Fig. 406.
3. Tuberous Carum.
Carum Bulbocastanum, Koch.
(Fig. 407.) 
(Bunium, Eng. Bot.
t. 1524, Suppl.
t. 2862.) 
Resembles the tuberous JBunium, and, 
like that species, the stock forms globu- 
lar, underground tubers, known by the 
name of JSarthnuts or Pignuts.
Radical 
leaves (which usually disappear at the 
time of flowering) twice or three times 
ternate ; the segments all stalked and 
pinnately divided into a small number of 
linear lobes, less unequal than in the 
tuberous JBunium.
Involucres always 
present, consisting of a few very fine 
bracts.
Carpels like those of the Cara- 
way, but more slender, with the ribs 
rather less prominent, although more so 
than in the tuberous Bunium, and the 
face of the seed is flat or slightly con- 
cave, not furrowed as in the Bunium.
Vittas single under each interstice.
Fig. 407.
336 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
In dry pastures, on banks, roadsides, etc., especially in limestone 
districts, in central and southern Europe, and central Asia, scarcely 
extending into central Germany.
In Britain, not generally diffused, 
but said to be abundant in some parts of Hertfordshire, Cambridge- 
shire, and adjoining counties.
Not recorded from Ireland.
FL sum* 
mer% 
XIII.
SIUM.
SIUM.
Leaves pinnate.
Umbels compound, with general and partial invo- 
lucres.
Calyx-teeth often prominent.
Petals white, notched with an 
inflected point.
Fruit broadly ovoid, somewhat compressed laterally.
Carpels with 5 slender ribs, and several vittas under each interstice.
A small genus, spread over almost all temperate regions of the globe ; 
resembling Apium in the shape of the fruit, but with the calyx-teeth 
usually prominent as in Coivhane, and differing from both in the more 
numerous vittas.
Stem usually 3 or 4 feet.
Umbels all terminal ; rays usually 
15 to 20 1.
Broad S.
Stem much branched, seldom above 2 feet.
Umbels mostly 
lateral ; rays usually 10 to 15 2.
Lesser S.
1. Broad Sium.
Sium latifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 408.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t, 204.
Water Parsnip.) 
A glabrous perennial, with a creeping 
rootstock, and stout erect stems 2 to 4 
feet high.
Lower leaves very long, with 6 
to 10 pairs of ovate-lanceolate segments, 
sessile on the common stalk, toothed or 
rarely slightly lobed, often 2 to 4 inches 
long ; the upper leaves shorter, with 
fewer and smaller segments.
Umbels 
rather large, of 15 to 20 rays, and all 
terminal.
Involucres, both general and 
partial, of several lanceolate bracts, often 
toothed.
Fruits about 1 J lines long and 
broad, the small pointed teeth of the 
calyx usually very distinct.
In wet ditches and on the edges of 
streams, throughout Europe, except the 
extreme north; replaced in Asia by a 
Fig. 408.
UMBELLlFERiE.
337 
closely allied species or variety.
In Britain, not unfrequent in 
southern and central England and in Ireland, more rare in the north, 
and very local in southern Scotland.
Fl. summer.
2. Lesser Sium.
Sium angustifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 409.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 139.) 
Hesembles the broad S., but is not so 
tall, more branched and leafy, seldom 
2 feet high, and in dried-up ditches often 
less than a foot, and decumbent.
Seg- 
ments of the leaves smaller, 8 to 10 pairs 
in the lower leaves, fewer in the upper 
ones, from ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 
more deeply and sharply toothed or 
lobed than in the broad S.
Umbels 
more numerous, smaller, on shorter pe- 
duncles, mostly lateral, with 8 to 12 or 
15, rarely more, rays.
Involucral bracts 
varying from broad-lanceolate to linear, 
often toothed.
Fruit smaller than in 
the broad S., the ribs less prominent, the 
vittas less superficial, the calyx-teeth 
very minute.
In wet ditches, and shallow streams, 
throughout temperate and southern Europe and western Asia, from 
south Sweden to Persia.
In Britain, rather more common than the 
broad S., in the greater part of England and Ireland, but becoming 
scarce in northern England and southern Scotland.
FL summer.
Fig. 409.
XIY.
PXMPINEI..
PIMPINELLA.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, without involucres.
Petals 
broad, notched with an inflected point.
Fruit short, somewhat laterally 
compressed, without visible calycine teeth.
Carpels with 5 scarcely 
prominent ribs, 2 or 3 vittas under each interstice, and several vittas 
on the inner face.
The genus, as now usually limited, contains a considerable number 
of species, chiefly from the Mediterranean region and west-central 
Asia.
The shape of the fruit is nearly that of Apium, but the ribs are 
much less prominent, and the vittas more numerous.
VOL.
I. 2d 
338 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
Segments of the lower leaves either nearly orbicular or very 
much divided 1.
Common P.
Segments of most of the leaves ovate or lanceolate; the teeth 
or lobes very pointed 2.
Greater P.
The Aniseed is the fruit of a species of this genus (P.
Anisum).
1. Common Pimpinel.
Pimpinella Saxifraga, Linn.
(Fig. 410.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 407.
Burnet Saxifrage.) 
Stock short and thick, but not tube- 
rous.
Stems erect, 1 to 2 feet high, not 
much branched, glabrous or downy at 
the top.
Leaves very variable, the ra- 
dical ones usually pinnate, with 7 to 9 
pairs of broadly ovate or orbicular seg- 
ments, 6 to 9 lines long, toothed or lobed ; 
the upper leaves small, their segments 
divided into a few narrow, or even linear 
lobes : sometimes all, even the radical 
leaves, have their segments once or twice 
pinnate, with narrow lobes ; sometimes, 
again, the few stem- leaves are, like the 
radical ones, simply pinnate, but much 
smaller, or reduced to simple bracts.
Umbels terminal, with from 10 to 15 
rather slender rays ; the flowers white.
In pastures, on banks, roadsides, etc., 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
Fig. 410.
except the extreme north.
Abundant 
in Britain.
Fl. all summer.
2. Greater Pimpinel.
Pimpinella magna, Linn.
(Fig. 411.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 408.) 
Very near the common P., and perhaps a mere variety.
It is much 
larger in all its parts ; the stems often more than 2 feet high, and 
stouter ; the segments of the leaves usually undivided, ovate or lan- 
ceolate, often 1 to 1^ inches long, with more pointed teeth, or, if divided, 
the lobes much longer and more pointed than in the common P., 
the flowers frequently pink, in larger umbels, and the fruit also larger.
UMBELLIFER.E.
339 
The general range is nearly the same 
as that of the common P., but it is more 
frequent in mountainous districts and 
shady situations, or rich soils.
In Bri- 
tain, chiefly in southern and eastern 
England and southern Ireland.
Fl. sum- 
mer, rather late.
It is probable that a 
further study of intermediate forms, 
which are frequent in the south of Eu- 
rope, will induce its reunion with the 
common P.
as a marked variety.
Fig. 411.
XY.
BUPLEVER.
BUPLEYRUM.
Leaves quite entire.
Umbels compound, or sometimes small and 
irregular, with partial and usually also general involucres.
Petals 
broad, entire, yellow, Eruit ovoid or oblong, somewhat laterally com- 
pressed, without visible calycine teeth.
Carpels with 5 more or less 
prominent ribs, with or without vittas.
A considerable genus, widely diffused over the temperate regions of 
the old world, and one of the few natural ones among Umbellates, but 
distinguished more by its entire leaves, with parallel veins and yellow 
flowers, than by the carpological characters, which in different species 
correspond to different short-fruited genera.
Leaves broad and perfoliate.
Bracts of the partial involucres 
broadly ovate 1.
Karens-ear B.
Leaves narrow and grasslike.
Annuals.
Rays of the umbel few, very short, or incon- 
spicuous.
Umbels of 3 or 4 short rays.
Bracts lanceolate, longer 
than the flowers 2.
Narrow B.
Flowers 2 or 3 together, in little heads along the 
slender wiry stems.
Bracts very small 3.
Slender B.
Perennials.
Umbels of 4 to 8 rays.
Bracts shorter than 
the rays 4.
Falcate B.
2 D 2 
340 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
The B.fruticosum, a shrubby south European species, used formerly 
to be much planted in our shrubberies, but is now more seldom met 
with, being rather tender.
1. Hare's-ear Buplever, 
Buplevrum rotundifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 412.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 99.
Hares-ear or Thoroiv-wax.) 
An erect, stiff, glabrous annual, a foot 
or rather more high, and remarkable for 
its broadly ovate leaves, the upper ones 
embracing the stem, and joined round 
the back of it, so that they appear per- 
foliate or pierced through by the stem, 
the lowest leaves tapering to a stalk.
Umbels terminal, of 3 to 5, or rarely 6, 
short rays, without any general invo- 
lucre ; the partial involucres very much 
longer than the flowers, consisting of 4 
to 6 broadly ovate, yellowish bracts very 
unequal in size, the largest about 6 lines 
long.
A cornfield weed, apparently indige- 
nous to the Mediterranean region, but 
now widely spread over Europe and 
western Asia, and introduced into Worth 
America.
Occurs not unfrequently in 
cornfields in chalky soils in England, but neither in Ireland nor 
Scotland.
Fl. with the com.
Fig. 412.
2. Narrow Buplever.
Buplevrum aristatum, Bartl.
(Fig. 413.) 
(B.
Odontites, Eng. Bot.
t. 2468.) 
An erect annual, slender but stiff, not much branched, from 2 or 3 
inches to near a foot high.
Leaves narrow-linear and grasslike, but 
rather stiff, 1 to 2 inches long.
Umbels small, terminal, of 2 to 6 
very short rays.
Involucres of about 5 lanceolate, green bracts ending 
in a fine point ; the general one usually longer than the rays ; the par- 
tial ones rather shorter, but still far exceeding the flowers.
UMBELLIFERiE.
341 
In stony wastes, very abundant in 
southern Europe and eastward to the 
Caucasus, more scarce in central Europe.
In Britain, only in the neighbourhood 
of Torquay, and in the Channel Islands.
FL summer.
Fig. 413.
3. Slender Buplever.
Euplevrum tenuissimum.
(Eig. 414.) 
Linn.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 478.) 
A slender, wiry annual, either simple 
and nearly erect, or more frequently 
divided from the base into several de- 
cumbent or ascending branches, 6 inches 
to a foot high.
Leaves few, narrow- 
linear and grasslike, the upper ones very 
short.
Flowers in little heads of 3 or 
4, nearly sessile along the upper part of 
the stem and branches, sometimes form- 
ing little, irregularly compound umbels 
at the top.
Involucres of a few small, 
linear, pointed bracts.
Emits more con- 
spicuous than in the other species, and 
covered with little raised dots or granules 
between the ribs.
On heaths, barren wastes, and stubbles, 
common in central and southern Europe, 
especially near the sea, extending east- 
ward to the Caucasus, and northwards 
to southern Sweden.
Occurs in most of the maritime counties of Eng- 
land, and occasionally also found inland, but neither in Ireland nor 
Scotland.
Fl. late in summer.
Fig. 414.
342 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
4. Falcate Buplever.
Buplevrum falcatum, Linn.
(Fig. 415.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2763.) 
Stems stiff and erect, sligktly branched, 
1 to 1| feet high, forming at the base a 
short perennial stock.
Leaves linear 
and grasslike, the radical ones often 
stalked and rather broader.
Umbels 
terminal and compound, of 4 to 8 rays ; 
the general involucre of 3 or 4 oblong or 
lanceolate bracts, very much shorter 
than the rays ; those of the partial invo- 
lucres also lanceolate, of a yellowish 
green, scarcely as long as the flowers.
In open woods, bushy wastes, and 
heaths, abundant in the hilly districts of 
central and southern Europe, and in cen- 
tral and temperate Russian Asia, but 
scarcely further to the north than south- 
ern Belgium.
In Britain, only on Norton 
Heath, near Ongar, in Essex.
FL 
August.
Fig. 415.
XVI.
CEWANTH.
(ENANTHE.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial and sometimes 
also general involucres, of several small, narrow bracts.
Flowers of 
the circumference usually barren and with larger petals ; the fertile 
ones in the centre sessile, or on very short, often thickened pedicels.
Petals notched, with an inflected point.
Fruits from ovate to narrow- 
oblong, crowned with the 5 small calycine teeth.
Carpels somewhat 
corky, with 5 obtusely convex ribs, and single vittas under the furrows.
A rather natural genus, spread over Europe, Asia, and North 
America, most of the species frequenting wet meadows, and marshes, 
or even growing in water.
Segments of the upper leaves few, long and linear.
Stems very hollow.
Central umbel fertile, of 3 rays ; those 
of the branches barren, of several rays 1.
Common 
(E.
UMBELLIFEE2E.
343 
Stems nearly solid.
All the umbels of several rays, with 
fertile and barren flowers 2.
Parsley (E.
Segments of the stem-leaves numerous, broadly cuneate, or 
short and oblong.
Umbels terminal and large.
Segments of the leaves at 
least half an inch long 3.
Hemlock (E.
Umbels mostly opposite to the leaves.
Leaf-segments 
small ' 4.
Fine-leaved (E.
1. Common CEnanth.
CEnanthe fistulosa, Linn.
(Fig. 416.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 363.
Water Drojowort.) 
Stock (probably the offset of the pre- 
vious autumn) emitting creeping run- 
ners, with a cluster of fibrous roots, 
usually more or less thickened into ob- 
long tubers.
Stems thick and very hol- 
low, erect, 2 to 3 feet high, and slightly 
branched.
Radical leaves twice pinnate, 
with small cuneate segments divided 
into 3 or 5 lobes ; those of the stem have 
long stalks, hollow like the stems, and 
bear only in their upper extremity a few 
pinnate segments with linear lobes.
Um- 
bels terminal, the central one on the 
main stem has only 3 rays, each with 
numerous sessile fertile flowers, and few 
or no pedicellate barren ones ; those 
which terminate the branches have 
usually 5 rays, their flowers all pedicel- 
late and barren.
Partial involucres of 
a few small narrow bracts, the general 
one either entirely wanting or reduced to a single bract.
Fruits in 
compact globular heads, each one full 2 lines long, narrowed at the 
base, and crowned by the stiff, narrow teeth of the calyx, and the still 
longer, rigid styles.
In wet meadows and marshes, dispersed over temperate Europe, 
extending eastward to the Caucasus, and northward into southern 
Sweden.
Common in England and Ireland, but only in the southern 
counties of Scotland.
FL summer and autumn.
Fiff.
416.
344 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
2. Parsley CEnanth.
CEnanthe pimpinelloides, Linn..
(Fig. 417.) 
Fig. 417.
(Eng. Bot.
t. 347 and 348.
CE.
Lachenalii and CE.
silaifolia, Brit.
Fl.) 
A perennial, with clustered fibrous 
roots, swelling into round, ovoid, or ob- 
long tubers, at a greater or less distance 
from the stock, or, in very wet places, 
remaining sometimes slender through- 
out.
Stems erect, firmer and more solid 
than in the common CE., 1 to 2 feet high 
or sometimes more, with a few long 
branches.
Leaves much more divi- 
ded than in the last species, but very 
variable ; the upper ones usually with 
long, narrow segments, those of the ra- 
dical leaves much shorter and broader, 
and sometimes very numerous.
Umbels 
of 8 to 15 rather short rays ; the gene- 
ral involucre of a few small, linear bracts, 
or sometimes wanting ; the partial ones 
of several small, linear bracts.
The fer- 
tile sessile or shortly pedicellate flowers, 
and the distinctly pedicellate barren ones, are mixed in the same 
umbels ; the persistent styles on the ripe fruits much shorter than in 
the common CE.
In meadows, pastures, and marshes, throughout central and southern 
Europe, extending northwards to the Baltic, and eastward to the Cau- 
casus.
Abundant in many parts of England and Ireland, but does not 
penetrate far into Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
The great va- 
riations in the tubers of the roots and in the form of the radical leaves 
has induced its division into two, three, or four species.
These diffe- 
rences have, however, been shown to depend often on soil and situa- 
tion; at the same time rather more constant differences have been 
pointed out in the fruiting umbels, although even here intermediate 
states show that the two following should be considered rather as 
marked varieties than as true species.
a. Meadow Parsley CE.
(CE.
pimpinelloides, Brit.
Fl.) Flowers as- 
suming occasionally a faint tinge of yellowish-green.
Fruiting pedicels 
(although very short) enlarged at the top so as to form a callosity 
round the base of the fruit, which is itself fully as broad at the base as 
at the top.
In dry or moist, but not marshy meadows and pastures, 
and the commonest form in inland situations.
UHBELLIFERZE.
345 
b. Marsh Parsley CE.
(CE.
Lachenalii, Brit.
Fl.) Flowers of a purer 
white ; the fruiting pedicels less conspicuous, but little enlarged at the 
top ; the fruits either cylindrical or narrowed at the base.
In wet 
marshes, and especially in maritime salt-marshes.
3. Hemlock (Enanth.
CEnanthe crocata, Linn.
(Fig. 418.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2313.) 
A stout, branched species, attaining 3 
to 5 feet ; the root-fibres forming thick, 
elongated tubers close to the stock ; the 
juice both of the stem and roots be- 
coming yellow when exposed to the air.
Leaves twice or thrice pinnate ; the seg- 
ments much larger than in the other 
species, always above half an inch long, 
broadly cuneate or rounded, and deeply 
cut into 3 or 5 lobes.
Umbels onlong, ter- 
minal peduncles, with 15 to 20 rays, 2 
inches long or more ; the bracts of the 
involucres small and linear, several in the 
partial ones, few or none under the ge- 
neral umbel.
The pedicellate flowers at 
the circumference of the partial umbels 
are mostly but not always barren, the 
central fertile ones almost sessile.
Fruit 
somewhat corky, the ribs broad and 
scarcely prominent.
In wet ditches, and along rivers and streams in western Europe, ex- 
tending eastward into Italy, but not into central France.
Common in 
England, Ireland, and southern Scotland.
FL summer.
Fig. 418.
4. Fine-leaved CEnanth.
CEnanthe Phellandrium, Lam.
(Fig. 419.) 
(Phellandrium aquaticum, Eng. Bot.
t. 684.) 
Stem rooting at the base, and either thickened and erect, or elon- 
gated and creeping, or floating, according to the situation it grows 
in, the flowering branches erect or ascending.
Stem-leaves twice or 
thrice pinnate, with small oblong and entire, or cuneate and lobed 
segments ; or, when under water, all the lobes are narrow and long, 
sometimes capillary.
Umbels much smaller than in the Hemlock CE., 
346 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
and almost all on very short peduncles, 
either opposite to the leaves or in the 
forks of the branches.
Kays seldom 
above 12.
No general involucre, and 
but very small, narrow bracts to the 
partial ones.
Fruits rather different 
from those of the other species, being 
shortly pedicellate, cylindrical, with 
scarcely prominent, broad ribs, and the 
calycine teeth very minute.
In wet ditches, ponds, and along rivers 
and streams, throughout the temperate 
parts of Europe and Russian Asia.
Not 
uncommon in England and Ireland, but 
very rare in Scotland.
Fl. summer.
A 
variety growing usually in deeper or 
running water, with the lower part of 
the stem much elongated and slender, 
has been distinguished as a species, 
under the name of OE.
flwviatilis (Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2944).
Fig. 419.
XVII.
i&THUSA.
JETHUSA.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres.
Petals white, notched, with an inflected point.
Fruit ovoid, not la- 
terally compressed, without visible calycine teeth.
Carpels with 5 
thick, prominent ribs, and narrow furrows, with a vitta under each.
A single species, differing from Seseli more in habit than in cha- 
racter.
1. Common JEthusa.
JEthusa Cynapium, Linn.
(Eig. 420.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1192.
Fool's Parsley.) 
An erect, glabrous, leafy annual, 1 to 2 feet high, with forked 
branches, emitting a nauseous smell when rubbed.
Leaves of a bright 
green, twice or thrice pinnate, the segments ovate-lanceolate, more or 
less deeply cut into narrow lobes.
Umbels on long peduncles, either 
terminal or opposite to the leaves, of 8 to 12 rays, usually without 
general involucres.
Partial involucres of 2 or 3 long, linear bracts, 
turned downwards towards the outside of the umbels, a character 
UMBJBLLIFERffi.
peculiar to this species among British 
Umbellates.
Fruit about 1^ lines long, 
with very small reflected styles.
A common weed in fields and gar- 
dens, throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, except the extreme north.
Abun- 
dant in England, but does not appear 
to extend far north into Scotland.
Fl.
summer and autumn.
347 
Fig. 420.
XVIII.
FENNEL.
FGEMCULUM.
Leaves finely dissected.
Umbels compound, without involucres.
Petals yellow, entire, inflected at the top, but not pointed.
Fruit oval, 
slightly compressed laterally, without visible calycine teeth.
Carpels with 
5 prominent ribs, and single vittas under the furrows.
A single, or perhaps two species, with the yellow flowers and habit 
of Anethum (or Dill-seed), from which it has been separated, as having 
the fruit somewhat laterally compressed, not flattened from front to 
back.
1. Common Fennel.
Fceniculum vulgare, Gsertn.
(Fig. 421.) 
{Anethum Foeniculum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1208.) 
Stock perennial, but usually of short duration.
Stems erect, 
branched, 2 or 3 feet high, or when cultivated, still taller.
Leaves 3 
or 4 times pinnate, with very narrow, linear or subulate segments, 
rather stiff in dry situations, very slender when cultivated.
Umbels 
rather large, of 15 to 20, or more rays, more or less glaucous.
Fruit 
about 3 lines long, the vittas very conspicuous.
On dry, rocky banks, apparently of south European origin, but has 
348 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
Fig. 421.
long been much cultivated, and establishes 
itself readily in stony or arid hilly situa- 
tions, especially near the sea, so that it 
is now generally diffused over temperate 
Europe and western Asia.
Occurs in 
many parts of Britain, and may be even 
indigenous on some points of the coasts 
of England and Ireland.
FL late in 
summer, and autumn.
XIX.
SESELI.
SESELI.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial and sometimes 
general involucres of several bracts.
Petals white, usually notched, 
with an inflected point.
Fruit ovoid or oblong, not compressed, the 
calycine teeth usually prominent.
Carpels with 5 prominent, often 
thick ribs, and single, or rarely 2 or more vittas under each furrow.
A considerable genus, widely spread over the northern hemisphere 
in the old world.
The British species belongs to a section differing 
from the more common ones in habit, and in the hairy fruit, and is 
united by some with the southern genus Athamanta, by others con- 
sidered as an independent genus under the name of Libanotis.
1. Mountain Seseli.
Seseli Libanotis, Koch.
(Fig. 422.) 
{Athamanta, Eng. Bot.
t. 138.) 
Stock perennial, short, covered with the decayed remains of old leaf- 
stalks.
Stems stout, erect, 1 to 2 feet high, slightly branched.
Leaves 
chiefly radical, thrice pinnate, with small ovate or lanceolate, pinnately 
lobed segments ; the stem-leaves few, and much smaller.
Umbels of 
20 to 30 or more rays, with numerous narrow bracts, both to the gene- 
UMBELLIFEM].
ral and the partial involucres.
Flowers 
white, crowded.
Fruits always hairy, 
and there is often a minute whitish 
down on the stems, petioles, and umbels.
In hilly pastures, in central and east- 
ern Europe and Russian Asia, less fre- 
quent in the west, and wanting in the 
south.
In Britain, limited to the coun- 
ties of Hertford, Cambridge, and Sussex.
Fl. summer.
349 
Fig. 422.
XX.
LOVAGE.
LIGUSTICUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
many bracts.
Petals white, notched, with an inflected point.
Fruit 
ovoid or oblong, not compressed, the calycine teeth scarcely distinct.
Carpels with 5 very prominent acute ribs, almost expanded into wings, 
and several vittas under each furrow.
A genus of several European, Asiatic, and North American species, 
chiefly mountain plants, differing from Seseli in the acute ribs of the 
fruit, and indistinct calycine teeth.
1. Scotch Lovage.
Ligusticum scoticum, Linn.
(Fig. 423.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1207.) 
Stock perennial, descending into a tap-root.
Stem erect, glabrous, 
thick and hollow, 1 to 2 feet high, slightly branched.
Lower leaves 
on long stalks, deeply divided into 3, each branch bearing 3 broadly 
ovate or obovate toothed segments, or 1 segment deeply divided into 3 
350 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
Fig. 423.
lobes, each segment above an inch long.
Upper leaves less divided, with short 
stalks.
Umbels of 12 to 20 rays, with 
a general involucre of 2 or 3 very narrow 
bracts, and more numerous ones to the 
partial umbels.
Fruits near 4 lines 
long.
A high northern plant, extending all 
round the Arctic Circle.
Common on 
the rocky seacoasts of Scotland and 
northern Ireland, descending also to the 
north of England.
Fl. summer.
XXL SILAUS.
SILAUS.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
several bracts.
Flowers yellowish.
Petals scarcely notched.
Fruit 
nearly of Lovage, ovoid, but slightly compressed, and with the ribs 
scarcely acute.
A genus of two or three European and Asiatic species, but slightly 
differing from Lovage chiefly in the colour of the flowers.
1. Meadow Silaus.
Silaus pratensis, Bess.
(Fig. 424.) 
( Peucedanum Silaus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2142.
Pepper Saxifrage.) 
A glabrous ; erect perennial, 1 to 2, or sometimes near 3 feet high, 
slightly branched.
Leaves once, twice, or three times pinnate ; the 
segments not numerous, narrow- oblong, \ to 1 inch long, entire or 
3-lobed.
Umbels all terminal, not large, of about 6 to 8 rays.
Ge- 
neral involucres usually of 1 or 2 small bracts, with several small nar- 
row-linear ones to the partial umbels.
Flowers of a pale greenish- 
yellow.
Carpels about 2 lines long.
UMBELLIFERJ5.
351 
In meadows, and moist, bushy pas- 
tures, throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, except the extreme north.
In 
Britain, spread over England and south- 
ern Scotland, but scarce in the western 
counties and in Ireland.
Fl. summer, 
rather late.
Fig. 424.
XXII.
SPIGNEL.
MEUM.
Leaves finely dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres 
of several bracts.
Petals white or pink, entire, with an incurved point.
Fruit oblong, without distinct calycine teeth.
Carpels with 5 prominent, 
acute ribs, and 2 or 3 vittas under each furrow.
A genus of two or three European species, differing by characters 
of very little importance from Lovage, with which some botanists 
unite it.
1. Common Spignel.
Meum Athamanticum, J acq.
(Eig. 425.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2249.
Spignel, Meu, or Baldmoney.) 
Stock short, perennial, covered with the fibrous remains of old 
leaves, and emitting a tuft of radical leaves ; their segments deeply 
cut into numerous very fine, but short lobes, so as to have the appear- 
ance of being whorled or clustered along the common stalk, as in the 
whorled Carum, but the stalk itself is once or twice pinnately divided, 
not simple as in that plant.
Stems 1 or rarely near 2 feet high, with 
a very few smaller and less divided leaves.
Umbels terminal, not 
352 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
^C\^2 
large, of 10 to 15 rays, with one or two 
narrow bracts to the general one, and 
partial involucres of a small number of 
short, slender bracts.
Fruits about 4 
|^#' lines long.
In mountain pastures, in western and 
central Europe, not extending eastward 
beyond the Russian frontier, nor north- 
ward into Scandinavia.
Not unfrequent 
in the Scotch Highlands, in northern 
England and North Wales, but not re- 
corded from Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 425.
XXIII.
SAMPHIRE.
CKITHMUM.
Leaves succulent, dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and 
partial involucres.
Petals entire.
Fruit ovoid, not compressed, with- 
out distinct calycine teeth.
Carpels of a thick, succulent or somewhat 
corky consistence, with 5 acute ribs, becoming prominent when dry, 
but not winged ; the vittas numerous, slender, and irregular.
Seeds 
loose in the cavity, with numerous fine vittas on the outside.
A single species, very different from any other British Umbellate, 
but closely allied to the large Mediterranean and Asiatic genus Cachrys, 
with which some botanists unite it.
1. Sea Samphire.
Crithmum maritimum, Linn.
(Fig. 426.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 819.) 
A perfectly glabrous perennial, seldom above a foot high, almost 
woody at the base ; the young branches, foliage, and umbels, thick 
and fleshy.
Leaves twice or thrice ternate, with thick linear segments 
about an inch long.
Umbels of 15 to 20 or even more rays.
Involucres 
of several small linear or lanceolate bracts.
Petals very minute, and 
soon disappearing.
Fruits about 3 lines long.
UMBELLIFER.E.
353 
In clefts of rocks, close to the sea, on 
the western coasts of Europe and north- 
ern Africa, and extending along the 
Mediterranean to the Black Sea. Abun- 
dant in southern and western England 
and southern Ireland, but becomes rare 
in northern England and Scotland.
Fl.
summer.
Fig. 426.
XXIY.
ANGELICA.
ANGELICA.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
several bracts.
Petals white, entire.
Eruit flattened from front to 
back ; the carpels broad, with 3 ribs on the back, the edges expanded 
into wings, those of the two carpels distinct before they separate, so 
that the fruit is surrounded by a double wing.
A genus of few species, dispersed over Europe, Asia, and North 
America, distinguished from all other British Umbellates by the double 
wing round the fruit.
1. Wild Angelica.
Angelica sylyestris, Linn.
(Fig. 427.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1128.) 
A tall, stout, branching perennial, attaining 3 or 4 feet in height, 
with thick stems, slightly downy in the upper part.
Lower leaves 
large, twice pinnate, with ovate-lanceolate segments, often above 2 
inches long, sharply toothed, and sometimes 3-lobed ; the upper leaves 
shorter-stalked, with fewer segments, those under the peduncles often 
reduced to a broad sheath, with a few small segments at the top.
Um- 
bels large, terminal, those of the main stems often with 30 or 40 rays.
General involucre of 2 or 3 linear bracts ; partial ones of several fine, 
short bracts.
vol.
I. 2 E 
354 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
V\Nv\\a 
In moist woods, and marshy places, 
especially near streams, throughout 
Europe and Russian Asia to the Arctic 
regions.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl.
late in summer.
The garden Angelica (A.
Archan- 
gelica, Eng. Bot.
t. 2561), a native of 
northern and eastern Europe, long 
cultivated for confectionery, is not 
wild in Britain.
Fig. 427.
XXV, FEUCEDAN.
PEUCEDANUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
many bracts.
Petals w 7 hite or yellowish, entire or notched, with an 
inflected point.
Fruit flattened from front to back ; the calycine teeth 
very small or indistinct.
Carpels broad, with 3 prominent ribs on the 
back, the edges expanded into a wing, those of the two carpels so close 
as to form a single edge to the fruit before the carpels separate.
Vittas 
single under the furrows.
A large genus, widely spread over Europe, Asia, and North America, 
scarcely differing from Heracleum except in the more evident ribs of 
the carpels, the more slender vittas, and generally in habit.
Segments of the leaves narrow oblong or linear.
Leaves several times ternate.
Flowers yellowish .
. .
. 1.
Sea P.
Leaves twice or three times pinnate.
Flowers white ...
2. Marsh P.
Leaves of 3 broad segments, each 3 inches long, and often 
3-lobed 3.
Broad P.
The Dillseed (Anethum graveolens), often cultivated as a condiment, 
has the fruit of a Feucedan with the fine leaves of a Fennel.
1. Sea Peucedan.
Peucedanum officinale, Linn.
(Eig. 428.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1767.
Hogs Fennel or Sulphur -weed.) 
A glabrous perennial, w r ith erect, branching stems, 2 or even 3 feet 
UMBELLIFER2E.
355 
high.
Leaves 3, 4, or 5 times tern ate, 
with, narrow-linear entire segments, 
often above 2 inches long.
Umbels large, 
of 20 or more rays, with pale-yellow 
flowers.
Bracts of the general invo- 
lucre very few or wanting ; those of the 
partial involucre very narrow and shorter 
than the pedicels.
Fruit broadly oval, 
near 3 lines long.
In meadows and moist pastures, in 
central and eastern Europe and Russian 
Asia, or near the sea in western Europe.
Scarce in Britain : forms of the parsley 
(Enanth or of the meadow Silaus have 
been frequently mistaken for it : and 
the only certain stations for the true 
Peucedan are the salt-marshes of Kent 
and Essex.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 428.
2. Marsh Peucedan.
Peucedanum palustre, Moench.
(Fig. 429.) 
(Selinum, Eng. Bot.
t. 229.
Hog's Fennel or Milk Parsley) 
Tall and erect like the last, but often 
hairy at the base, and the juice is milky.
Leaves twice or thrice pinnate rather 
than ternate, with much shorter seg- 
ments, varying from oblong to linear, 
and seldom exceeding half an inch.
Umbels not so large as in the sea P., 
although consisting of as many rays.
Flowers white.
Involucres, both gene- 
ral and partial, of several lanceolate or 
linear bracts, with fine points.
Fruit 
broadly oval, about 2 lines long.
In wet meadows and marshes, in cen- 
tral, eastern, and northern Europe and 
Bussian Asia, to the Arctic Circle.
Ap- 
parently wanting in western France, 
although it extends into Spain.
Like 
the sea P.
very local in Britain and only 
known for certain in the marshes of east- 
ern England from Suffolk to Yorkshire.
Fig. 429.
Fl. late in summer.
356 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
3. Broad Peucedan.
Peucedanum Ostruthium, Koch.
(Fig. 430.) 
(Imperatoria, Eng. Bot.
t. 1380.
Masterwort) 
k^ 
in the 
Stock perennial, with stout, erect stems, 
2 to 3 feet high.
Leaves divided into 3 
large, broad segments, which are again 
deeply 3-lobed and coarsely toothed, 3 
to 4 inches long, and often rather rough 
with a few short hairs, but much less so 
than in Heracleum ; the lateral segments 
descend much lower along the leafstalk 
on the outer than on the inner side.
Um- 
bels large, terminal, of 40 to 50 rays, 
without any general involucre, and only 
a few very slender small bracts to the par- 
tial ones.
Flowers white.
Fruit nearly 
orbicular, about 2 lines diameter.
A native of mountain pastures in cen- 
tral Europe ; formerly much cultivated 
as a pot-herb, and now naturalized in se- 
veral parts of northern Europe as well as 
north of England and in Scotland.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 430.
XXYI.
PARSNIP.
PASTINACA.
Habit and fruit of Heracleum, but the flowers are yellow and all 
small.
The vittas are also usually more slender, and descend lower 
down on the fruit, but this character is not constant.
A genus of very few species, chiefly from the Mediterranean region 
and west central Asia.
1. Common Parsnip.
Pastinaca sativa, Linn.
(Fig. 431.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 556.) 
An annual or biennial, forming a taproot, with an erect stem seldom 
more than 2 feet high when wild, 3 or 4 when cultivated.
Lower leaves 
pinnate, coarse, and more or less downy, especially on the under side, 
with 5 7, or 9 segments, each 1 to 3 inches long, sharply toothed, and 
more or less lobed, especially the terminal one ; upper leaves small 
UMBELLIFERiE.
357 
and less divided.
Umbels not very large, 
of 8 to 12 rays, usually without invo- 
lucres.
Fruit about 3 lines long, flat 
and oval, with scarcely prominent ribs, 
the vittas very conspicuous, descending 
nearly to the base of the fruit.
In pastures and thickets, on banks 
and edges of fields, throughout central 
and southern Europe, and temperate 
Russian Asia.
Frequent in England 
and Ireland, extending at least as far 
north as Durham.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 431.
XXVII.
HERACLEUM.
HERACLEUM.
Coarse, rough herbs, the leaves dissected with large segments.
Umbels compound ; the bracts few and deciduous or none.
Flowers 
white ; the outer petals of each umbel larger.
Fruit flattened from 
front to back, with a single thin border (splitting only by the separa- 
tion of the carpels).
Carpels broad, with 3 very fine, scarcely promi- 
nent ribs ; or if 5, the 2 outside ones close to the border.
Vittas single 
to each interstice, not descending to the base of the fruit, and often 
thickened at the lower end.
A rather natural genus, comprising a considerable number of species, 
from the mountains of central and southern Europe, and especially 
central Asia, with a single North American one.
Some Asiatic species, 
remarkable for their size (the annual stems 12 to 15 feet, with umbels 
more than a foot in diameter), are occasionally grown in our gardens.
1. Common Heracleum.
Heraeleum Sphondylium, Linn.
(Fig. 432.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 939.
Cow Parsnip or Hogweed.) 
A tall, coarse plant, although not quite so large nor so much 
branched as the wild Angelica, and the stock of much shorter duration, 
358 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
but not strictly biennial as commonly 
supposed ; the whole plant more or less 
rough with short, stiff hairs.
Leaves 
pinnate, with 3, 5, or 7 large, broad 
segments, usually 3-lobed and toothed, 
from 3 to 5 inches long and at least as 
broad, sometimes more numerous and 
much narrower.
Umbels large, of about 
20 rays, the outer petals much larger 
than the others.
Carpels nearly orbi- 
cular, 3 or 4 lines long ; the vittas very 
conspicuous, often only reaching half- 
way down the fruit.
In meadows, pastures, hedges, and 
thickets, throughout Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia.
In Britain, one of the com- 
monest of our Umbellates .
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 432.
XXVIII.
HARTWORT.
TORDYLIUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and partial in- 
volucres.
Flowers white or pink, the outer petals often larger.
Fruits 
flattened from front to back, with a single thick border (splitting only 
by the separation of the carpels), and covered with stiff hairs or tuber- 
cles.
Carpels broad, with the ribs scarcely visible, and 1 or 3 vittas 
under the interstices.
A small genus, chiefly from the Mediterranean region, with the 
appearance of Caucalis, but readily known by the flat fruit.
1. Great Hartwort.
Tordylium maximum, Linn.
(Fig. 433.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1173.) 
An erect annual, 2 feet or rather more in height, rough with short, 
stiff hairs.
Leaves pinnate, with 5, 7, or segments, lanceolate or al- 
most ovate, and coarsely toothed ; the lateral ones 1 to 2 inches, the 
terminal ones usually longer.
Umbels terminal, of 8 to 10 short rays, 
with a few rather long, narrow bracts to the involucres.
Petals all 
UMBELLIFEM].
small and pink.
Fruits about 3 lines 
long, the thickened border very pro- 
minent.
In waste and cultivated lands, in 
southern Europe, and eastward to the 
Caucasus ; more rare as a weed of cul- 
tivation in central Europe.
In Britain, 
only in Middlesex and some adjoining 
counties.
FL summer.
359 
Fig. 433.
XXIX.
SCANDIX.
SCANDIX.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
several bracts, and white flowers.
Eruit linear, with a very long, 
smooth beak.
Carpels (below the beak) with 5 obtuse ribs, without 
vittas.
Albumen of the seed with a longitudinal furrow on the inner 
face.
A small but distinct genus, ranging chiefly over the Mediterranean 
region and west central Asia.
1. Needle Scandix.
Scandix Pecten, Linn.
(Eig. 434.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1397.
Shepherd?
s-needle or Venus' s-comb.) 
A branching annual, erect or spreading, 6 inches to a foot high, and 
more or les3 hairy.
Leaves twice or thrice pinnate, with short seg- 
ments cut into narrow lobes.
Umbels terminal, of 2 or 3 rays, with- 
out general involucres ; partial involucres of several lanceolate bracts, 
often 2- or 3-lobed at the top.
Elowers almost sessile, small and 
white, with a few large outer petals.
Fruits attaining near 2 inches ; 
the carpels at the base cylindrical and ribbed, 4 or 5 lines long, the 
360 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
Fig. 43 i.
remainder occupied by a stiff, flattened 
beak, often compared to the tooth of a 
comb.
In fields and waste places, throughout 
Europe and west central Asia.
Fre- 
quent as a cornfield weed in England, 
Ireland, and the south of Scotland, but 
decreasing further northward.
FL with 
the corn.
XXX.
CICELY.
MYRRHIS.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
several bracts, and white flowers.
Fruit narrow-oblong, not beaked.
Carpels with 5 very prominent, acute ribs, which are hollow inside, 
and no vittas.
Albumen of the seed with a deep longitudinal furrow 
on the inner face.
A single species, scarcely distinct as a genus from Chervil.
1. Sweet Cicely.
Myrrhis odorata, Scop.
(Fig. 435.) 
(Scandix, Eng. Bot.
t. 697.) 
An erect, branching, hairy perennial, 2 to 3 feet high, with the 
foliage and habit of a Chervil, and highly aromatic.
Leaves large, 
thin, twice or three times pinnate, with numerous lanceolate segments, 
deeply pinnatifid and toothed.
Umbels terminal, not large, with sel- 
dom more than 8 or 10 rays, and of these but few ripen their fruits.
JSTo general involucre ; bracts of the partial ones lanceolate, thin, whitish, 
with fine points.
Fruits when ripe 6 or 7 lines to near an inch long ; 
the very prominent ribs occasionally rough with minute hairs.
A native of mountain pastures, in central and southern Europe, 
from the Pyrenees to the Caucasus.
Of ancient cultivation in more 
UMBELLIFER2E.
361 
northern Europe, it lias frequently esta- 
blished itself in the neighbourhood of 
cottages.
In Britain, believed by some 
to be truly indigenous in the hilly dis- 
tricts of northern England, where, at 
any rate, it is perfectly naturalized.
Fl.
spring and early summer.
Fig. 435.
XXXI.
BUNIUM.
BUNIUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, either without involucres or 
with very few small bracts, and white flowers.
Fruit oval-oblong, 
somewhat laterally compressed, shortly contracted at the top, with 
erect or slightly spreading styles.
Carpels with 5 scarcely perceptible 
ribs, and several very slender vittas under the interstices.
Albumen 
of the seed with a longitudinal furrow on the inner face.
A genus of few species, chiefly from the Mediterranean region, with 
the habit of the tuberous Carums, but with a fruit more nearly allied 
to that of some Chervils, although shorter.
1. Tuberous Bunium.
Bunium nexuosum, With.
(Eig. 436.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 988.) 
The perennial stock consists of a globular tuber, known by the name 
of JEartJinut or Pignut ; the annual stems erect, slender, glabrous, 1 
to near 2 feet high, with a few forked branches.
Radical leaves few 
and decaying early, with 3 long-stalked segments, each once or twice 
pinnate ; the ultimate divisions short, narrow, pointed, entire or 3- 
lobed.
Stem-leaves few, with narrow linear divisions ; the central 
VOL.
T. 2 F 
362 
TTTE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
lobe of each segment much longer than 
the lateral ones.
Umbels terminal, or 
one opposite the last leaf, of 6 to 10 rays.
The ribs and vittas of the fruit scarcely 
perceptible.
In woods and pastures, chiefly known 
as a west European plant, possibly ex- 
tending eastward to the Caucasus, but 
there is some uncertainty as to the iden- 
tity of the eastern species referred to it.
Much more common in Britain than the 
tuberous Carum, which is also known 
under the name of Pignut, FL summer.
Fig. 436.
XXXII.
CHERVIL,.
CHiEKOPHYLLTJM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with partial involucres of 
several bracts, and white flowers.
Fruit narrow-oblong or linear, 
contracted at the top, and sometimes forming a beak always much 
shorter than the seed.
Carpels with 5 ribs, sometimes only apparent 
at the top, either without vittas or with one vitta under each interstice.
Seed marked with a longitudinal furrow on the inner face.
A considerable and rather natural genus, widely diffused over the 
northern hemisphere without the tropics.
It is usually divided into 
two, Cheer ojphyllum, with a vitta between each rib ; and Anthriscus, 
without vittas, and the ribs themselves scarcely visible, except at the 
top, when the fruit is beaked ; but the distinction is purely artificial.
Umbels on short, lateral peduncles.
Fruit short, hispid ...
3. Burr C.
Umbels terminal.
Fruit long, glabrous.
Lobes of the leaves rather obtuse.
Ribs and vittas of the fruit 
conspicuous when dry 1.
Rough C, 
Lobes of the leaves pointed.
Fruit very smooth, without ribs 
or vittas 2.
Wild C.
The garden Chervil (C.
sativum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1268; Anthriscus 
Cerefolium, Brit.
FL), a native of south-eastern Europe, may occa- 
UMBELLIFER^.
363 
sionally be found in waste places near where it has been cultivated.
It is a more slender plant than the wild C.
9 the leaves more dissected, 
with shorter segments, the umbels mostly lateral and sessile, and the 
fruit evidently beaked.
1. Bough Chervil.
Chserophyllum temulum, Linn.
(Fig. 437.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1521.) 
An erect biennial, 2 to 3 feet high, and 
rough with short reflexed hairs.
Leaves 
twice pinnate or ternate, with ovate or 
wedge-shaped, pinnatifid or toothed seg- 
ments, more or less hairy, especially on 
the upper side ; the lobes short and ra- 
ther obtuse, never elongated and pointed 
as in the wild C.
and the stveet Cicely.
Umbels of few rays, without a general 
involucre ; the partial involucres of 5 or 
6 broadly-lanceolate bracts, shorter than 
the pedicels.
Outer petals of the umbel 
rather large.
Fruit the size of that of 
the wild C, but with 5 obtuse ribs and 
vittas between them.
In hedges and thickets, in central and 
southern Europe, and all across Russian 
Asia, extending northwards into south- 
ern Scandinavia.
Frequent in England and Ireland, less so in the 
Scotch Highlands.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 437.
2. Wild Chervil.
Chserophyllum sylvestre, Linn.
(Fig. 438.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 752.
Anthriscus, Brit.
Fl.) 
The perennial, or perhaps only biennial, stock descends into a tap- 
root.
Stems hairy, erect, and branched, 2 to 3 feet high.
Lower leaves 
on long stalks, twice pinnate, with ovate-lanceolate pointed segments, 
deeply pinnatifid and toothed ; upper leaves smaller, on shorter stalks, 
all more or less hairy, or rarely nearly glabrous.
Umbels rather nu- 
merous, not large, of 8 to 10 rays, with small white flowers.
No gene- 
2 F 2 
364 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
ral involucre, but the partial ones of se- 
veral bracts.
Fruits about 3 lines long, 
very smooth and shining, without ribs or 
vittas, narrowed at the top, but without 
any distinct beak.
Under hedges, on the borders of fields, 
etc., throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia.
In Britain, one of the commonest 
Umbellates.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 438.
3. Burr Chervil.
Chserophyllum Anthriscus, Lam.
(Fig. 439.) 
(Scandix, Eng. Bot.
t. 818.
Anthriscus vulgaris, Brit.
Fl.) 
An erect, branched, hairy annual, at- 
taining near 2 feet in height, with nearly 
as much the habit of a Caucalis as of a 
Chervil.
Leaves not large, twice, or the 
lower ones thrice pinnate, with ovate or 
ovate-lanceolate segments, pinnately 
lobed and toothed.
Umbels small, on 
short peduncles, opposite to the leaves, 
of 3 to 7 rays, without general involucres, 
and but few bracts to the partial ones.
Fruits ovoid-oblong, not 2 lines long, 
covered with short, hooked bristles, and 
narrowed at the top into a very short, 
smooth beak.
A weed of cultivation, probably of 
south European origin, but readily 
spreading with our crops, and now esta- 
blished in scattered localities over Europe and Eussian Asia.
Eather 
Fig. 439.
UMBELLIFER.E. 365 
frequent in England and Ireland, more scarce in Scotland.
Fl. spring 
and early summer.
XXXIII.
CATJCALIS.
CAUCALIS.
Hairy annuals, with dissected leaves.
Umbels usually compound, 
with partial involucres of several simple bracts, or rarely wanting.
Outer petals usually larger, and deeply bifid.
Fruit ovoid, covered 
with prickles or bristles.
Carpels with 3 or 7 dorsal ribs, and 2 on the 
inner face ; vittas single under each furrow.
Albumen more or less 
furrowed on the inner face.
A small European, Asiatic, and African genus, one of the few natural 
ones in the family, if retained entire.
It is well distinguished from 
Carrot by the involucre, the shape of the fruit, and of the albumen ; 
from the bristle-fruited Chervils by the want of the smooth tip to the 
fruit ; from all other British compound Umbellates by the bristled 
fruits.
Umbels opposite to the leaves, sessile, or on peduncles shorter 
than the rays.
Umbels contracted into little sessile heads.
Fruit short .
1. Knotted C.
Umbels of 3 or 4 slender rays.
Fruit oblong, with a 
short beak Burr Chervil.
Umbels terminal, or on peduncles longer than the rays.
Fruit not 2 lines long, with short bristles, mostly hooked.
General involucre of several bracts (often very small), 
one under each of the outer rays 2.
Upright C.
General involucre of a single bract or entirely wanting 3.
Spreading C.
Fruit 3 or 4 lines long or more, with long prickles.
Leaves twice or thrice pinnate, with much cut, short 
segments 4.
Small C.
Leaves once pinnate, with long pinnatifid segments .
5. Broad C.
1. Knotted Caucalis.
Cauealis nodosa, Sm.
(Fig. 440.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 199.
Torilis, Brit.
Fl.) 
Stems procumbent or spreading, scarcely a foot long.
Leaves twice 
pinnate, with small, narrow, pointed segments.
Umbels forming little 
heads, closely sessile, and opposite to the leaves ; they are sometimes 
composed of 2 or 3 exceedingly short, scarcely distinct rays, sometimes 
of a simple cluster.
Fruits smaller than in the other species ; the 
outer ones covered with short, straight or hooked bristles, which on the 
inner ones are reduced to mere tubercles.
366 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
On roadsides and in waste places, in 
the limestone districts of central and 
southern Europe, and eastward to the 
Caucasus, extending northward chiefly 
as a weed of cultivation.
Common in 
sunny places in southern England and 
Ireland, more rare in the north and in 
southern Scotland.
FL spring and 
summer.
Fig. 440.
2. Upright Caucalis.
Caucalis Anthriscus, Huds.
(Fig. 441.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 987.
Torilis, Brit.
Fl. Sedge Parsley.) 
Stem erect, attaining 2 or even 3 feet, 
with slender, wiry branches, sprinkled, 
as well as the leaves, with appressed, 
stiff hairs.
Leaves once, or the lower 
ones twice pinnate ; the segments lanceo- 
late, pinnatifid, or coarsely toothed ; the 
lower ones of each leaf stalked, and re- 
mote from the others.
Umbels on long, 
slender peduncles, rather small, of from 
3 to 7 or 8 rays.
Involucres, both gene- 
ral and partial, of small, subulate bracts, 
one close under each ray and often not 
readily distinguished at first sight.
Petals pink or white, not very unequal 
in size.
Eruit a small burr, being co- 
vered with short, rough bristles, more 
or less curved inwards, or hooked at the 
top.
In hedges, on roadsides, and waste 
places, common throughout Europe and central and Russian Asia, ex- 
cept the extreme north.
Abundant all over Britain.
FL summer and 
autumn.
Fig. 441.
UMBELLIFERJE.
367 
3. Spreading Caucalis.
Caucalis infesta, Curt.
(Fig. 442.) 
(Eng. Bot.
1314.
Torilis, Brit.
FL) 
Very near the upright C, but usually 
a rather smaller and more spreading 
plant ; the general involucre is either 
entirely wanting or reduced to a single 
bract, often lanceolate, and the bristles 
of the fruit are usually less curved, but 
with a minute hook at the top ; this 
character is not however so constant as 
that of the involucre.
In cultivated and waste places, on 
banks and roadsides, in central and 
southern Europe to the Caucasus, not- 
extending into Scandinavia.
In Britain, 
chiefly amongst corn, in the southern 
and eastern counties of England.
It is 
said to be abundant in several local 
Floras, but the upright C.
is often mis- 
taken for it.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 442.
4. Small Caucalis.
Caucalis daucoides, Linn.
(Fig. 443.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 197.) 
Erect or spreading, and much branched, 
seldom above a foot high.
Leaves twice 
or three times pinnate, with rather nar- 
row, but short, pinnatifid segments, the 
general outline of the leaf being broadly 
triangular.
Umbels terminal or opposed 
to the leaf, on rather long peduncles, 
usually of 3 or 4 rays only.
General 
involucre of one bract, partial ones of 
a few linear bracts.
Flowers white or 
pink, the outer petals occasionally larger.
Fruits nearly sessile, attaining, when 
ripe, nearly half an inch, covered with 
long, stout prickles.
There are usually 
in each partial umbel a few barren 
flowers on longer pedicels.
A cornfield weed of southern origin, 
now widely spread over Europe and 
Russian Asia.
Apparently well esta- 
Fig. 443.
blished in some of the southern counties of England.
Fl. with the corn.
368 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
5. Broad Caucalis.
Caucalis latifolia, Linn.
(Fig. 444.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 198.) 
Stem seldom a foot high, erect or 
spreading, and branched at the base.
Leaves much less divided than in the 
other species, being simply pinnate, with 
oblong-lanceolate segments, the lowest 
above an inch long, and pinnatifid, the 
others gradually diminishing to the top, 
and less deeply cut.
Umbels terminal 
or opposite the leaves, on stout peduncles, 
consisting of 2 or more rays.
Involu- 
cres, both general and partial, of broad, 
thin bracts.
Flowers white or purple, 
the outer petals large.
Fruit 4 or 5 lines 
long, the primary and secondary ribs 
equally prominent, with long, straight 
or hooked prickles.
In fields and waste places, in south- 
Fig. 444.
ern Europe and west-central Asia, often 
establishing itself for a time in more 
northern localities.
Occasionally found as a cornfield weed in several 
counties of England.
Fl. with the corn.
XXXIV.
CARROT.
DAUCUS.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and partial in- 
volucres of several linear, pinnatifid or divided bracts.
Fruit ovoid, 
prickly on the ribs, the 4 secondary ribs more prominent than the 3 
primary dorsal ones.
Albumen not furrowed.
A genus of very few real species, although the published forms are 
now numerous ; they are widely spread over most cultivated or mari- 
time parts of the globe.
1. Common Carrot.
Daucus Carota, Linn.
(Fig. 445.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1174.) 
An erect annual or biennial, 1 to 3 feet high, with a taproot.
Lower 
leaves twice or thrice pinnate, with deeply 3-lobed or pinnatifid seg- 
UMBELLIFEEZE.
369 
ments, usually lanceolate or linear, some- 
times short and crenate ; upper leaves 
with fewer and narrower divisions.
Um- 
bels terminal, rather large, with nume- 
rous crowded rays ; the inner ones very 
short, the outer much longer, and usually 
closing over after flowering, so as to give 
a concave or globular form to the umbel, 
with the fruit inside.
Bracts of both 
involucres usually divided into 3 or 5 long 
linear lobes.
Fruit covered with prickles, 
of which the larger ones are often much 
flattened at the base.
Probably an original native of the 
seacoasts of southern Europe, but of 
very ancient cultivation, and sows itself 
most readily, soon degenerating to the 
wild form with a slender root, and now 
most abundant in fields, pastures, waste 
places, etc., throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia.
Common in Britain, especially near the sea.
FL the 
tvhole summer and autumn.
A decidedly maritime variety, with the 
leaves somewhat fleshy, with shorter segments, more or less thickened 
peduncles, more spreading umbels, and more flattened prickles to the 
fruits, is often considered as a distinct species (D.
maritimus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2560.) 
Fig. 445.
XXXY.
HEMLOCK.
CONIUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and partial in- 
volucres and small white flowers.
Fruit broadly ovate, somewhat 
laterally compressed, without distinct calycine teeth.
Carpels with 5 
prominent ribs, which when ripe are often slightly waved or crenated.
JNTo vittas.
Albumen with a deep longitudinal furrow on the inner 
face.
A single species, with the short fruit of an Apium or Cowhane, but 
differing essentially in the deeply furrowed albumen.
1. Common Hemlock.
Conium maculatum, Linn.
(Fig. 446.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1191.) 
An erect, branching annual or biennial, 3 to 5 feet high or some- 
times more, usually glabrous, and emitting a nauseous smell when 
370 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
Fig. 446.
bruised.
Leaves large and much divided 
into numerous small ovate or lanceolate 
deeply-cut segments ; the upper leaves 
gradually smaller and less divided.
Um- 
bels terminal, not large for the size of 
the plant, of 10, 12, or even 15 rays.
Bracts short and lanceolate ; those of 
the general involucre variable in num- 
ber ; those of the partial ones almost 
always 3, turned to the outside of the 
umbel.
Fruit about 2 lines long.
On the banks of streams, along hedges, 
and the borders of fields, etc., widely 
spread over Europe and temperate Asia, 
though not always common.
Generally 
distributed over Britain.
Fl. summer.
XXXVI.
PHYSOSPERM.
PHYSOSPERMUM.
Leaves dissected.
Umbels compound, with general and partial in- 
volucres.
Flowers white.
Fruit 2-lobed, the carpels nearly globular, 
and attached by a narrow edge, each with 5 scarcely visible rays, and 
single vittas to the interstices.
Albumen with a longitudinal furrow 
on the inner face.
A genus of very few species, from Europe and temperate Asia.
1. Cornish Physosperm.
Physospermum cornubiense, 
DC.
(Fig. 447.) 
(Ligusticum.
Eng. Bot.
t. 683.) 
Stock perennial.
Stem erect, almost leafless, 1\ to 2 feet high, 
slightly branched.
Radical leaves on long stalks, twice or thrice ter- 
nate ; the segments ovate or cuneate, and deeply cut.
Umbels ter- 
minal, of 10 to 12 rays, with rather large, white flowers.
Involucres, 
both general and partial, of very few linear bracts.
The fruits have 
the appearance of two little smooth' bladders, placed face to face, with 
a loose seed in each.
UMBELLIFEftE.
371 
A mountain plant, occurring here and 
there along the great European chain 
from the Asturias to the Caucasus, and 
reappearing in a few very limited locali- 
ties in Cornwall and Devonshire.
Fl.
late in summer.
The Continental plant 
is by some botanists considered as a dis- 
tinct species from the British one, but 
the characters appear to have been de- 
rived from the examination of single 
specimens.
^/>.
Fig. 447.
XXXVII.
SMYRNZUM.
SMYRNIUM.
Leaves entire or dissected.
Umbels compound, either without invo- 
lucres or only a very few small bracts.
Flowers yellow.
Fruit 2-lobed ; 
the carpels ovoid, attached by the very narrow face, each with 3 pro- 
minent, angular ribs, and several vittas under the interstices.
Albu- 
men with a longitudinal furrow on the inner face.
A genus of very few species, from the Mediterranean region and 
western Asia.
1. Common Smyrnium.
Smyrnium Olusatrum, Linn.
(Fig. 448.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 230.
Alexanders.) 
A coarse, erect annual or biennial, 2 to 4 feet high, and nearly gla- 
brous.
Lower leaves twice or thrice, upper ones but once ternate ; the 
segments broadly ovate, coarsely toothed or 3-lobed, 2 or more inches 
long and broad, and often of a yellowish-green.
Umbels terminal, of 
8 to 12 rays.
Flowers of a greenish yellow, much crowded in the 
partial umbels.
As the fruit ripens, the peduncles are often much 
thickened under the umbels.
Carpels above 3 lines long, very an- 
gular.
372 
THE UMBELLATE FAMILY.
In meadows and waste places, espe- 
cially near the sea, all round the Medi- 
terranean and up western Europe to the 
English Channel.
Probably really in- 
digenous in several of the maritime 
counties of southern England and Ire- 
land, and, having been formerly much 
cultivated, has spread into many inland 
parts of England and southern Scotland, 
/ in the vicinity of old castles and gardens.
FL spring and early summer.
Fig. 448.
XXXVIII.
CORIANDER.
CORIANDKUM.
Fruit globular, not readily separating into the two carpels, crowned 
by the conspicuous teeth of the calyx, the ribs scarcely prominent, and 
no vittas.
A single species, very distinct in the form of the fruit.
1. Common Coriander.
Coriandrum sativum, Linn.
(Eig. 449.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 67.) 
An erect, branching, glabrous annual, 1 to 1\ feet high, emitting a 
very disagreeable smell when rubbed.
Lowest leaves once or twice 
pinnate, with broadly-ovate or cuneate, deeply-cut segments ; the others 
more divided, with linear segments, few and slender in the uppermost 
leaves.
Umbels' terminal, rather small, of 5 to 8 rays, without general 
involucre, and only a few small slender bracts to the partial ones.
ARALIACEiE.
Flowers white, the outer petals larger.
Fruits about 2 Hues long.
A native of the Levant, long since 
cultivated in Europe, and occasionally 
spreading as a weed of cultivation.
Said 
to be established as such in some of 
the eastern counties of England.
FL 
summer.
373 
Fig. 449.
XXXIII.
THE ARALIA FAMILY.
ARALIACE^.
Shrubs, trees, or climbers, rarely herbs, differing from most 
TJmhellates in their simple (solitary or paniculate) umbels, and 
more generally in their fruit more or less succulent, consisting 
often of more than 2 (from 2 to 10) carpels, which do not separate 
so readily as in Umhellates, usually forming a single berry.
The 
styles also are sometimes united.
A considerable Order, widely spread over the warmer regions of the 
globe, represented in Europe by a single species.
Some species of 
Aralia are also occasionally cultivated in gardens.
I. IVY.
HEDEEA.
Petals not cohering at the top.
Cells of the ovary 5 or 10.
Styles 
short, usually cohering in a single mass.
A genus extending nearly over the whole range of the Order, but 
whose precise distinctive characters, and consequently the number of 
species it should contain, are as yet very imperfectly settled.
374 
THE MISTLETOE FAMILY.
Common Ivy. Hedera Helix, Linn.
(Fig. 450.) 
(Eng. Bat.
1. 1267.
A woody, evergreen climber; when 
wild the lower, slender branches spread 
along the ground, with small leaves, 
whilst the main stems climb up trees, 
rocks, or buildings to a great height, 
adhering by means of small, rootlike 
excrescences.
Leaves thick and shining, 
ovate, angular, or 3- or 5-lobed ; those 
of the barren stems usually much more 
divided than the upper ones.
Flowering 
branches bushy, projecting a foot or two 
from the climbing stems, each bearing a 
short raceme or panicle of nearly glo- 
bular umbels.
Flowers of a yellowish 
green.
Border of the calyx entire, 
scarcely prominent, about halfway up 
the ovary.
Petals 5, broad and short.
Stamens 5.
Styles united into a single, 
very short one.
Berry smooth and 
black, with from 2 to 5 seeds.
In woods, on rocks and old buildings, common in western and south- 
ern Europe, northern Africa, and west- central Asia, scarcely penetra- 
ting into central Europe, except where the winters are very mild.
Extends over the whole of Britain.
Fl. late in autumn.
Several 
varieties are in cultivation, differing chiefly in the more or less di- 
vided leaves, and one, with yellow berries, introduced from the Conti- 
nent, has become almost wild in some parts of southern and western 
England.
Fig. 450.
XXXIV.
MISTLETOE FAMILY.
LORANTHACE^.
Shrubby or half-succulent evergreens, parasitic on the branches 
of trees, with jointed branches, opposite thickish leaves, and no 
stipules.
Calyx combined with the ovary, either entirely so or 
appearing only in the shape of an entire or toothed border round 
its summit.
Petals 4.
Stamens 4, opposite the petals, and 
usually inserted on them (or, in a few exotic species, the petals 
LORANTHACEiE.
375 
are wanting, and the stamens reduced to 3, 2, or 1), Ovary 1- 
eelled, with a simple style or stigma.
Fruit a 1-seeded berry.
A considerable tropical family, with but very few representatives in the 
more temperate regions, and no exotic species are at present in culti- 
vation.
The affinities of the Order are perhaps greater with the Sandal- 
wood family among Monochlamyds than with the Calyciflores, with 
vrhich they are here associated ; but they could not well be removed 
thither without doing violence to the general principles of the Can- 
dollean arrangement.
I. MISTLETOE.
YISCUM.
Flowers dioecious.
Calyx without any prominent border.
Anthers 
in the males sessile in the centre of the petals, opening in several pores.
Stigma in the females sessile on the ovary.
The genus, taken in its most extended sense, included a con- 
siderable number of species, ranging over nearly the whole area of the 
family, but is now limited to a much smaller number, chiefly Asiatic, 
besides the common European one.
1. Common Mistletoe.
Viscum album, Linn.
(Fig. 451.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1470.) 
Stems becoming woody when old, with 
repeatedly forked, succulent branches, 
forming dense tufts of a yellowish green, 
attaining 1 to 2 feet in diameter, and 
attached by a thickened base to the 
branches of trees.
Leaves entire, vary- 
ing from narrow-oblong to nearly ob- 
ovate, thick and fleshy, and always ob- 
tuse.
Flowers almost sessile in the 
forks of the branches ; the males 3 to 5 
together, in a somewhat cup-shaped, 
fleshy bract, with 4 short, thick, trian- 
gular petals ; the females solitary, or 
rarely 2 or 3 together in a cup-shaped 
bract.
The petals very minute.
Berry 
white, semi-transparent, enclosing a sin- 
gle seed, surrounded by a very glutinous 
pulp.
Fig. 451.
376 THE COENEL FAMILY.
On a great variety of trees, but especially on the Apple, extending 
over the whole of temperate Europe, from Sweden to the Mediter- 
ranean, and far into Asia, but not everywhere abundant.
Common in 
southern and especially western England ; rare in the north, and not 
known in Scotland or Ireland.
Fl. spring.
XXXV.
THE CORNEL FAMILY.
CORNACEiE.
Limited in Europe to the single genus Cornel, with which are 
associated two or three allied tropical genera, scarcely differing 
from the Aralia family, except in their erect, not climbing habit, 
the more generally opposite leaves, and the more complete union 
of the carpels and styles.
Among the exotic genera cultivated in our gardens may be mentioned 
the Japanese Aucuha (of which however we only possess the female) 
and the JBenthamiafragifera from the Himalaya.
I. CORNEL.
CORNUS.
Tree, shrubs, or very rarely herbs, with opposite (or in one exotic 
species alternate), undivided leaves, and rather small flowers in termi- 
nal corymbs without bracts, or in umbels or heads surrounded by 
bracts, which are sometimes coloured and petal-like.
Calyx, 4 small 
teeth round the summit of the ovary.
Petals 4, valvate in the bud.
Stamens 4, alternating with the petals.
Style simple.
Ovary 2-celled, 
with a single pendulous ovule in each cell.
Fruit a berry-like drupe ; 
the stone 1- or 2-celled, with 1 seed in each cell.
Seeds with a fleshy 
albumen and a rather long embryo.
A genus not numerous in species, but extending over the temperate 
and colder regions of the northern hemisphere, both in the new and 
the old world.
It was formerly included in the Honeysuckle family, 
from which it differs chiefly in the distinct petals, valvular in the bud.
Low herb.
Umbel surrounded by 4 petal-like bracts ...
1. Dwarf C.
Shrub.
Flowers in a corymb, with bracts 2.
Common C.
Some other shrubby species of Cornel are often planted in our shrub- 
beries, especially C.
alba, alternifolia, and florida, from North Ame- 
rica, and C.
mas from southern Europe.
1. Dwarf Cornel.
Cornus sueeica, Linn.
(Fig. 452.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 310.) 
Unlike as this little herb is to the common C, its generic affinity may be 
CORNACEiE.
377 
traced through the exotic C.florida.
It 
has a slender, creeping perennial root- 
stock, with annual stems, barely 6 inches 
high, and usually simple.
Leaves ses- 
sile, ovate, entire, seldom above an inch 
long, with 5 or sometimes 7 longitu- 
dinal nerves, and sprinkled with a few 
very minute, closely appressed hairs.
Flowers very small, in a little terminal 
umbel, surrounded by 4 large, broad, 
petal-like, white bracts, so as to give the 
whole umbel the appearance of a single 
flower with 4 petals.
The real petals are 
very minute, of a dark purple.
Drupes 
small and red, resembling berries.
In mountain pastures, in northern 
Europe, extending into the Arctic 
Circle nearly all round the globe.
Abundant in Scandinavia, and de- 
scending southward to northern Germany.
Not uncommon in the 
Scotch Highlands, reappearing in north-eastern England, but not in 
Ireland.
FL summer, rather late.
Fig. 452.
2. Common Cornel.
Cornus sanguinea, Linn.
(Fig. 453.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 249.
Dogivood.) 
An erect shrub, of 5 or 6 feet.
Leaves 
opposite, broadly ovate, and stalked ; 
when young, hoary or silky, with closely 
appressed hairs ; but when full-grown, 
green and nearly glabrous.
Flowers 
numerous, forming terminal cymes of 1^ 
to 2 inches in diameter, without bracts ; 
the calyx and peduncles covered with 
mealy down.
Petals of a dull white, 
lanceolate, nearly 3 lines long.
Drupes 
globular, almost black, and very bitter.
In hedges and thickets, in temperate 
Europe and Russian Asia, extending 
northwards into southern Scandinavia.
Abundant in southern England, be- 
coming scarce in the north, and does not 
appear to be wild anywhere in Scotland, 
and only in a very few localities in Ire- 
land.
FL early summer.
TOL.
I. 
Fig. 453.
2 G 
378 THE HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY.
XXXVI.
THE HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY.
CAPRIFOLIACE^E.
Trees, shrubs, or herbs, with opposite leaves, and no stipules.
Flowers usually in terminal heads, corymbs, or panicles, more 
rarely axillary.
Calyx combined with the ovary, with an entire 
or toothed border, sometimes scarcely prominent.
Corolla mono- 
petalous, 5- or rarely 4-lobed, regular or somewhat irregular, with 
the lobes overlapping each other in the bud.
Stamens inserted 
in the tube of the corolla, and alternating with its lobes, either of 
the same number or one less, or rarely double the number.
Ovary 
inferior, with 3 to 5 cells, and as many stigmas, either sessile or 
borne on short styles, or united on the summit of a single style.
Fruit usually succulent, with 1 to 5 cells.
Seeds solitary or few 
in each cell, with a fleshy albumen.
The Honeysuckle family is not a very natural one, but tolerably well 
defined, differing from the exotic opposite-leaved genera of the Madder 
family chiefly in the want of real stipules ; from the Valerian and 
Teasel families in the compound ovary.
Stigmas several.
Corolla spreading, with a very short tube.
Low herb.
Leaves once, twice, or thrice ternate .
. .
1. Moscatel.
Tall herb, or tree.
Leaves pinnate 2.
Eldee.
Shrubs.
Leaves entire or palmately lobed 3.
Viburnum.
Style single.
Corolla narrowed into a tube at the base.
Shrubs or climbers.
Stamens 5 4.
Honeysuckle.
Trailing perennial.
Stamens 4 5.
Llnkea.
The Snowberry (Symphoricarpos), Leycesteria, and Weigela, of our 
gardens, belong also to this family.
I. MOSCATEL.
ADOXA.
Leaves ternately divided.
Calyx with 2 or 3 spreading teeth or 
lobes.
Corolla with a very short tube, and 4 or 5 spreading divisions.
Stamens 8 or 10, in pairs, alternating with the divisions of the corolla, 
and inserted on a little ring at its base.
Styles 3 to 5, very short, 
united at the base.
Ovary 3- to 5-celled, with one ovule in each cell.
Fruit a berry.
A genus consisting of a single species, with very different foliage and 
stamens from those of other Caprifoliacece, but in other respects much 
more nearly allied to them than to the Aralia family, among which it 
has until recently been classed.
CAPRIFOLIACE.E.
379 
1. Tuberous Moscatel.
Adoxa Moschatellina, Linn.
(Fig. 454.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 453.) 
A low, glabrous herb, of a light-green 
colour in all its parts ; the rootstock 
covered with a few thick scales the re- 
mains of old leafstalks, and emitting 
creeping, half- underground runners.
Radical leaves stalked, once, twice, or 
even three times ternate, with broad, 
deeply 3-lobed segments.
Flower-stems 
radical, from 4 to 6 inches high, with a 
single pair of leaves on short stalks, and 
but once ternate.
Flowers pale-green, 
in a little globular head at the top of the 
stem, containing usually 5 ; the ter- 
minal one with 2 divisions to the calyx, 
and 4 to the corolla, and 8 stamens ; 
whilst the 4 lateral flowers have 3 divi- 
sions to the calyx, and 5 to the corolla, 
with 10 stamens ; but these numbers 
are not quite constant.
Berry green 
and fleshy, most frequently containing 
but a single seed.
On moist, shady banks, in woods and other shady places, especially 
in hilly districts, in northern and central Europe, Russian Asia, and a 
part of North America, extending far into the Arctic regions, and 
ascending to the highest alpine summits.
In southern Europe, chiefly 
confined to mountains.
Common in Britain.
Fl. spring.
Fig. 454.
II.
ELDER.
SAMBUCUS.
Trees, shrubs, or tall herbs, with opposite pinnate leaves, and large 
cymes or corymbs of numerous, rather small, white flowers.
Calyx 
with a border of 5 small teeth.
Corolla with a very short tube, and 
5 spreading divisions, so as to appear rotate.
Stamens 5, inserted at 
the base of the corolla.
Stigma sessile, 3- to 5-lobed.
Fruit a berry, 
or, strictly speaking, a berry-like drupe, with 3, rarely 4, seed-like 
stones, each containing a single seed.
2 g2 
380 
THE HONEYS QCKLE FAMILY.
The genus consists of but !
few species, spread over Europe, tempe- 
rate Asia, and North America, and is the only one in the family with 
pinnate leaves.
Tree.
Leaflets ovate, without stipular lobes 1.
Common 22.
Herb.
Leaflets lanceolate, the lowest short, broad, and close 
to the stem, representing stipules .........
2. Dwarf E.
The red-berried E.
(S.
racemosus) common in our shrubberies, is a 
native of the mountains of continental Europe.
1. Common Elder.
Sambucus nigra, Linn.
(Fig. 455.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 476.) 
A small tree, or shrub, with the stem 
and branches full of pith.
Leaf-seg- 
ments 5 to 7, ovate, pointed, 2 to 3 
inches long, regularly and sharply 
toothed, and nearly glabrous.
Corymbs 
5 or 6 inches broad, several times 
branched, the first time into 4 or 5, but 
the branches less numerous at each sub- 
sequent division, the bracts very mi- 
nute.
Flowers white or cream-coloured.
Fruits black.
In woods, coppices, and waste places, 
common in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, and extending itself 
readily from cultivation further north- 
ward.
Appears to be truly indigenous 
in England and Ireland, but only intro- 
duced into Scotland.
Fl. summer, rather 
Fig. 455.
early.
leaves.
A garden variety has deeply and finely- cut segments to the 
2. Dwarf Elder.
Sambucus Ebulus, Linn.
(Fig. 456.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 475.
Danewort.) 
Stock short and perennial, with annual, erect stems, thick and pithy, 
slightly branched, 2 to 3 feet high.
Leaf-segments 7 to 11, lanceolate, 
2 to 4 inches long, with a small one on each side of the leafstalk, on the 
stem itself, looking like stipules.
Corymbs less regular, and rather 
smaller than in the common E., with only 3 primary branches.
Flowers 
sweet-scented, of a pure white, or tinted with purple on the outside.
Fruits black.
CAPBIF0LIACEJ5.
581 
On roadsides, in rubbishy wastes, and 
stony places, in central and southern 
Europe, and west central Asia, extend- 
ing northward to southern Sweden.
Occurs in several parts of Britain, and 
may be really indigenous in some of the 
southern counties of England and Ire- 
land, although it is believed by many 
to be even there an introduced plant.
Fl. summer, later than the common JS.
Fig. 456.
III.
VIBURNUM.
VIBUENUM.
Shrubs or small trees, with undivided or palmately-lobed leaves and 
whitish flowers in terminal cymes.
Calyx with a border of 5 small 
teeth.
Corolla with a short campanulate tube (in some exotic species 
much longer) and 5 spreading divisions.
Stamens 5, inserted near the 
base of the corolla.
Stigmas 3 or 2, sessile or on very short styles.
Ovary 3- or 2-celled in a very young stage, but at the time of flowering 
1-celled, with a single ovule.
Fruit a 1-seeded berry.
A rather large and widely-spread genus, extending further into the 
tropical regions of both the new and the old world than any other of the 
family.
The flowers, at first sight very much like those of the Elder, 
have yet a more distinct tube, and the foliage is very different.
Leaves toothed, undivided, downy underneath.
Flowers 
all small and perfect .
1. Mealy V.
Leaves 3 to 5-lobed, glabrous.
Outer flowers of the cyme 
large, without stamens or pistils 2.
Guelder-Rose V.
The Laurustinus of our gardens is a species of Viburnum from 
southern Europe.
1. Mealy Viburnum, Viburnum Lantana, Linn.
(Fig. 457.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 331.
Way faring -tree.) 
A large, much branched shrub, the young shoots and leaves thickly 
covered with a soft mealy down.
Leaves ovate, 3 to 5 inches long, 
382 
THE HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY.
Fig. 457.
cordate at the base, bordered by small 
pointed teeth, very soft and velvety on 
the upper side, with a more mealy whi- 
tish down underneath, without any glands 
to the leafstalks.
* Flowers small and 
white, in dense cymes of 2 to 3 inches 
diameter.
Berries somewhat oblong, of 
a purplish-black.
In woods and hedges, all over tempe- 
rate and southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, penetrating far into Scandinavia.
Not unfrequent in southern England, 
but very doubtfully indigenous in the 
northern counties or in Scotland, and 
not recorded from Ireland.
FL early 
summer.
2. Guelder-Rose Viburnum.
Viburnum Opulus, Linn.
(Jig. 458.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 332.
Guelder-Rose.) 
Not generally a tall shrub when wild, 
but it will grow into a small tree, and is 
always glabrous in all its parts.
Leaves 
2 to 3 inches broad, divided to near the 
middle into 3 or sometimes 5 broad 
angular pointed lobes, which are usually 
coarsely toothed or again lobed; the 
slender leafstalks have 2 or more sessile 
glands at the top, and 2 or more linear 
fringe-like appendages at the base.
Elower-cymes like those of the mealy V., 
except that the outer flowers become 
much enlarged, attaining often near an 
inch in diameter, but, having neither 
stamens nor styles, they are perfectly 
barren.
Berries globular, of a blackish- 
red.
In hedges and coppices, in Europe 
and Hussian Asia, extending into the 
Arctic regions.
In Britain, however, much less frequent in Scotland 
than in England and Ireland.
Fl. summer, rather early.
The Guelder- 
Rose of our gardens is a variety, or, more properly speaking, a mon- 
strosity, in which all the flowers are enlarged and barren, giving the 
cyme a globular shape.
Fig. 458.
CAPRIFOLIACE^].
383 
IV.
HONEYSUCKLE.
LONICERA.
Shrubs, or tall climbers, with opposite entire leaves, and white, 
yellowish, pink, or red flowers, two or more together in terminal or 
axillary heads.
Calyx with a border of 5 small teeth.
Corolla with a 
more or less elongated tube, and an oblique limb either 5-lobed or in 
two lips, the upper one 4-lobed, the lower entire.
Stamens 5.
Style 
filiform, with a capitate stigma.
Ovary 2- or 3-celled, with several 
ovules in each cell.
Berry small, with one or very few seeds.
A considerable genus, spread over the temperate regions of Europe, 
Asia, and North America.
It is really a natural one, and very readily 
distinguished from the adjoining genera by the flowers, although the 
two principal groups into which it is separable, the climbing true 
Honeysuckles and the erect shrubby fly Honeysuckles, are at first sight 
rather dissimilar in aspect.
Climbers.
Flowers long, in terminal heads.
All the leaves distinct at the base 1.
Common H.
Leaves of the one or two uppermost pairs joined to- 
gether at the base 2.
Perfoliate H.
Erect shrub.
Flowers short, two together on short 
axillary peduncles 3.
Fly H.
Several exotic species of both sections are much cultivated in our 
gardens and shrubberies.
1. Common Honeysuckle.
Lonicera Periclymenum, Linn.
(Fig. 459.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 800.
Woodbine.) 
A woody climber, scrambling over 
bushes and trees to a considerable 
height.
Leaves ovate or oblong, gla- 
brous above, usually slightly downy or 
hairy underneath ; the lower ones con- 
tracted at the base or stalked, the upper 
ones rounded and closely sessile, but not 
united.
Flowers several together, closely 
sessilein terminal heads, which are always 
stalked above the lastleaves.
Corollaabout 
1^ inches long.
Berries small and red.
In woods, thickets, and hedges, in 
western and central Europe, from south- 
ern Scandinavia to the Mediterranean, 
but not extending eastward to the Rus- 
sian frontier.
Common in Britain, ex- 
tending to its northern extremity.
Fl.
summer and autumn.
Fig. 459.
384 
THE HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY.
2. Perfoliate Honeysuckle.
Lonicera Caprifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 460.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 799.) 
Very much like the common H., but 
quite glabrous ; the leaves broader, 
the uppermost pair in the flowering 
branches united at the base, and the 
heads of flowers closely sessile within a 
pair of leaves united into a singlebroadly- 
rounded perfoliate leaf ; or the flowers 
are sometimes separated into two tiers, 
with a perfoliate leaf under each.
In hedges and woods, in central and 
south-eastern Europe, and perhaps 
western Asia, but often confounded with 
the two common southern species, L.
im/plexa and L.
etrusca.
Not truly w T ild 
in Britain, but long since cultivated for 
ornament, it has established itself in 
some counties of England, and the south 
of Scotland so as to become almost naturalized.
Fl. spring and early 
summer.
Fig. 460.
Fly Honeysuckle.
Lonicera Xylosteum, Linn.
(Fig. 461.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 916.) 
An erect, much branched shrub, 3 or 
4 feet high, of a pale-green, and downy 
in all its parts.
Leaves ovate, entire, 
and stalked, about \\ inches long.
Flowers of a pale yellowish-white, 
downy and scentless, only 4 or 5 lines 
long, hanging two together from short 
axillary peduncles, with two small nar- 
row bracts close under them.
Berries 
bright scarlet, with 2 or 3 seeds in each.
In thickets and hedges, almost all 
over Europe and Russian Asia, ex- 
tending northward to the Arctic Circle.
Dispersed over various parts of Bri- 
tain, generally introduced from cultiva- 
tion, but believed to be really indige- 
Fig. 461.
STELLATE.
385 
nous in some parts of south-eastern England, 
our shrubberies.
Fl. early summer.
It is very common in 
V. LINNiEA.
LINM]A.
Calyx with a border of 5 teeth.
Corolla campanulate, 5-lobed, nar- 
rowed at the base into a short tube.
Stamens 4.
A genus of a single species, dedicated to the great master of natural 
science, with whom it was an especial favourite.
1. Northern Linneea.
Linnsea borealis, Gronov.
(Fig. 462.) 
(Eng. Eot.
t 433.) 
A slender evergreen, creeping and 
trailing along the ground to the length 
of a foot or more.
Leaves opposite, small, 
broadly ovate or obovate, and slightly 
toothed at the top.
Flowering branches 
short and erect, with 2 or very few pairs 
of leaves, and terminated by a long 
slender peduncle, branched near the top 
into 2 pedicels, each bearing an elegant, 
gracefully drooping and fragrant flower 
of a pale pink or white colour, about 5 
lines long.
Ovary globular and very 
hairy, the rest of the plant more or less 
covered with a very minute glandular 
down, or sometimes quite glabrous.
In woods, or rarely in more open 
rocky situations, in northern Europe and 
Asia and some parts of North America, 
re-appearing in the mountain districts of central Europe even on the 
southern side of the Alps.
In Britain confined to the fir-woods of 
some of the eastern counties in Scotland, and to a single locality in 
Northumberland.
FL summer.
Fig. 462.
XXXVII.
THE STELLATE TRIBE.
STELLATE.
(A Tribe of the Madder family, or Rubiacece.) 
Herbs, with angular stems, and entire leaves in whorls of 4, 6, 
or 8 (that is, apparently so, for two opposite ones only of each 
886 THE STELLATE TRIBE.
whorl are real leaves with buds in their axils, the others, although 
precisely similar, are in fact stipules), rarely 2 only, the buds and 
branches always opposite.
Flowers small, in terminal or rarely 
axillary panicles or heads.
Calyx combined with the ovary, 
either entirely so or rarely with a border of 4 or 5 teeth.
Co- 
rolla monopetalous, with 4 or 5 spreading lobes.
Stamens as 
many, inserted in the tube.
Ovary inferior.
Style 2-cleft at the 
top, with a capitate stigma to each branch.
Fruit in dehiscent, 
small, dry or rarely succulent, usually separating into 2 seed-like 
carpels with one seed in each.
Albumen horny, with a small 
embryo.
The Stellates are widely diffused over the globe, especially in tem- 
perate regions : in the tropics they are more rare, except in moun- 
tainous regions.
They form a considerable and very natural tribe 
in the great Natural Order of Rubiacece, otherwise unrepresented in 
Britain or even in Europe.
It is one of the most extensive ones 
within the tropics, distinguished by opposite leaves, interpetiolar sti- 
pules, an adherent calyx, and a monopetalous corolla, and includes 
trees and shrubs as well as herbs.
Many are cultivated in our stoves, 
greenhouses, or flower-beds, including the genera Cqffea, Gardenia, 
Luculia, JPentas, Manettia, Bouvardia, etc.
Corolla rotate, the tube very short or indistinct.
Fruit fleshy.
Corolla usually 5-lobed 1.
Madder.
Fruit dry.
Corolla usually 4-lobed 2.
Galium.
Corolla with a distinct tube, as long as or longer than the 
lobes.
Fruit crowned by the 4 teeth of the calyx.
Flowers in 
heads, surrounded by an involucre 4.
Sherardia.
Calyx not distinct.
Flowers in panicles ......
3. Asperule.
I. MADDER.
KUBIA.
A genus only distinguished from Galium by the rather larger suc- 
culent fruit.
The European species have also larger leaves, of a firmer, 
more shining texture, and the flowers have often four instead of five 
parts, but these differences scarcely hold good in the South American 
species.
The species are not numerous, and might rather be considered as 
forming one or two sections of Galium, the South American species 
being intermediate between the two genera as now established.
STELLATE.
887 
1. Wild Madder.
Rubia peregrina, Linn.
(Fig. 463.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 851.) 
A straggling herb, of a shining green, 
sometimes very dwarf, sometimes trail- 
ing over bushes and hedges to the length 
of several feet, clinging by means of 
short recurved prickles on the edges and 
midribs of the leaves, and sometimes on 
the angles of the stem .
Rootstock and 
sometimes also the base of the stem peren- 
nial and creeping.
Leaves 4 or 6 in the 
whorl, ovate-oblong or lanceolate, 1 to 1 \ 
inches long, on very short stalks or nearly 
sessile.
Flowers small, greenish, in loose 
axillary or terminal panicles rather 
longer than the leaves.
Corolla usually 
3-lobed.
Fruit a small black 2-lobed 
berry.
In dry woods, and stony places, in 
western and southern Europe, and east- 
ward to the Caucasus, less frequent in 
northern France and G-ermany.
In 
Britain scarcely found beyond the south-western counties of England, 
the coast of South Wales, and the east coast of Ireland.
FL all summer.
The dyers Madder (R.
tinctoria), extensively cultivated in southern 
Europe for the scarlet dye furnished by its roots, differs but very 
slightly from the zvild M., and may be a mere variety.
Fig. 463.
II.
GALIUM.
GALIUM.
Herbs, with weak, quadrangular stems, sessile leaves, in whorls of 
4, 6, or 8, and small white, yellow, or (in exotic species) red flowers, in 
axillary or terminal trichotomous cymes or panicles, sometimes re- 
duced to small clusters.
Calyx completely combined with the ovary, 
without any visible border.
Corolla rotate, the tube scarcely percep- 
tible, with 4 spreading lobes.
Fruit small, dry, 2-lobed, with 1 seed 
in each lobe.
An extensive and natural genus, spread over the whole of the tempe- 
rate regions of the new as well as of the old world, especially abundant 
in Europe and northern Asia, penetrating also into the tropics, but 
there chiefly confined to mountain districts.
388 THE STELLATE TRIBE.
Flowers yellow.
Leaves 4 in each whorl, ovate.
Cymes axillary, shorter 
than the leaves 1.
Crossivort G.
Leaves 6 or 8 in each whorl, linear.
Panicles terminal 2.
Yellow G.
Flowers white.
Leaves in fours.
Fruit hairy 8.
Northern G.
Fruit glabrous.
Leaves ovate or lanceolate, very shining, and prickly 
at the edge Wild Madder.
Leaves linear, smooth or rough, but not prickly.
Flowers on slender pedicels.
Corolla small and 
rotate 3.
Marsh G.
Flowers nearly sessile, in little clusters.
Corolla 
funnel-shaped Common Asjperule.
Leaves 6 or 8 in each whorl.
Perennials.
Stem smooth or rough on the angles.
Fruits covered with long hairs Woodruff Asperide.
Fruit small, smooth, or slightly granulated.
Lobes of the corolla ending in a fine point.
Stems 
usually 1 to 2 feet, and rather firm at the 
base 6.
Hedge G.
Lobes of the corolla scarcely pointed.
Stems 
short, or very slender.
Leaves 4 or 6, very obtuse 3.
Marsh G.
Leaves 6 or 8, mostly pointed.
Leaves nearly smooth 5.
Heath G.
Leaves very rough 4.
Swamp G.
Annuals.
Stem very rough at the edges, with adhesive 
hairs or minute prickles.
Small, very slender plant.
Fruit very small, granu- 
lated or hairy 7.
Wall G.
Coarse plants, very adhesive.
Fruit rather large, 
usually covered with stiff hairs or tubercles.
Flowers 3 or more, in axillary panicles longer 
than the leaves.
Fruiting pedicels straight .
9. Cleavers G.
Flowers 1 or 3, on axillary peduncles, shorter than 
the leaves.
Fruiting pedicels rolled inwards .
10.
Corn G.
1. Crosswort Galium.
Galium Cruciata, Scop.
(Fig. 464.) 
(Eng. Eot.
t. 143.
Crosswort or Maywort.) 
Stock perennial and slender, with a few short, prostrate or creeping 
barren shoots ; the flowering stems erect or ascending, 6 to 18 inches 
long, and hairy.
Leaves in whorls of 4, ovate, 6 to 9 lines long, hairy on 
STELLATiE.
389 
both sides.
Flowers small and yellow, 
in little leafy cymes or clusters, shorter 
than, or scarcely so long as the leaves.
Many of these flowers are males only, 
and soon fall off, their reflexed pedicels 
remaining till the stem withers.
Fertile 
flowers few, and often 5-lobed.
Fruits 
small, smooth, almost succulent.
On hedge-banks, and in bushy places, 
in central and southern Europe, and 
eastward to the Caucasus.
Not unfre- 
quent in England, and extending a con- 
siderable way into Scotland, but not 
mentioned in the Irish Flora.
Fl. spring 
and early summer.
,Mh.
?!2 
• j -M> / 
\ 
Fig. 464.
2. Yellow Galium.
Galium verum, Linn.
(Fig. 465.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 660.
Ladies Bedstraw.) 
Hootstock woody, often shortly creep- 
ing, the whole plant glabrous and smooth, 
or with only a slight asperity on the 
edges of the leaves.
Stems much 
branched at the base, decumbent or as- 
cending, 6 inches to above a foot long, 
ending in an oblong panicle of very nu- 
merous, small, yellow flowers.
Leaves 
small, linear, numerous, in whorls of 6 
or 8.
Fruits small, and smooth.
On banks and pastures, throughout 
Europe and central and Russian Asia, 
except the extreme north.
Abundant in 
Britain.
Fl. the ivhole summer.
Fig. 465.
3. Marsh Galium.
Galium palustre, Linn.
(Fig. 4iG6.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1857.) 
A weak and slender, glabrous perennial, more generally blackening 
in drying than any of the following.
Stems a foot or more long, with 
390 
THE STELLATE TRIBE.
Fig. 466.
few spreading branches, almost always 
rough on the angles.
Leaves mostly 4 
in a whorl, occasionally 5, very rarely 6, 
linear or oblong, obtuse, without the 
small point of the three following species ; 
mostly, but not always, rough on the 
edges.
Flowers small, and white, not 
very numerous, in spreading panicles ; 
the lobes of the corolla without the fine 
point of the hedge G.
Fruit rather 
small, slightly granulated.
In marshes and wet places, often quite 
in the water, but sometimes also in drier 
situations, and even hanging from the 
clefts of rocks, extending all over Eu- 
rope and Russian Asia, from the Medi- 
terranean to the Arctic Circle.
Common 
in Britain.
Fl. summer.
4. Swamp Galium.
Galium uliginosum, Linn.
(Fig. 467.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1972, and G.
Witheringii, Eng. Bot.
t. 2206.) 
Differs from the marsh G.
in its leaves, 
either 6 or 8 in a whorl, usually nar- 
rower, terminated by a fine point, and 
less disposed to turn black in drying ; 
from the slender varieties of the heath 
G., in its stem very rough on the angles, 
and often 1 to 2 feet long.
Dispersed over Europe and Russian 
Asia, and occurs in various parts of Bri- 
tain, but not a very common plant, for 
although indicated in almost all Floras 
within the geographical range of the 
marsh G.
and the heath G., it is pro- 
bable that varieties of the one or the other 
are often mistaken for it.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 467.
STELLATE.
391 
5. Heath Galium.
Galium saxatile, Linn.
(Fig. 468.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 815, and G.
jpusillum, Eng. Bot.
t. 74.) 
A small perennial, much branched, 
leafy, and often tufted at the base ; the 
flowering stems numerous, weak, 5 or 6 
inches high, rarely attaining nearly a 
foot, and smooth, or nearly so, on the 
angles.
Leases usually 6 in a whorl, 
sometimes 7 or 8, and occasionally 
on the barren shoots only 4 or 5 ; 
the lower ones small and obovate, the 
upper narrow, and, when the stem 
lengthens much, mostly linear ; all have 
a little point at the tip, the edges are 
smooth or rough, the length seldom ex- 
ceeds 3 lines.
Flowers numerous, and 
white, in short terminal panicles, the 
lobes of the corolla scarcely pointed.
Fruits small, more or less granulated.
In open heaths, and pastures, very 
common in western and central Europe, but seldom mentioned in the 
more eastern Floras.
In Britain, one of the most universally distributed 
species.
Fl. summer.
Varieties with narrower leaves, more often 8 in 
a whorl, have been distinguished under the names of G.
pusillum, 
sylvestre, montanum, commutatum, etc.
Fig. 468.
6. Hedge Galium.
Galium Mollugo, Linn.
(Fig. 469.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1673.) 
Very near the heath G., but on a much larger scale.
Stems, from a 
perennial stock, 1 to 2 or 3 feet long, smooth and shining, and more or 
less branched.
Leaves usually 8 in a whorl, varying from obovate to 
oblong or linear, more or less rough on the edges, and always termi- 
nated by a little point.
Flowers white and numerous, in large terminal 
panicles.
Corolla varying from 1 to 2 lines in diameter, each lobe 
bearing a little point, sometimes rather long, sometimes scarcely pro- 
minent.
Fruit small and smooth, or slightly granulated.
In hedges, thickets, and rich pastures, widely spread over Europe 
and western Asia, but neither an Arctic nor perhaps a Siberian species.
Very common in England, and in some parts of Ireland, but extends 
only into the south-eastern counties of Scotland.
Fl. summer.
In 
shady situations and rich soils the stems are very straggling, swollen 
above each node, with broader leaves, and spreading panicles.
This is 
392 
THE STELLATE TRIBE.
considered by many botanists as the 
only true G.
Mollugo.
In drier, more 
open situations, the stem is more erect, 
the leaves narrower, the panicles closer 
and more oblong, and the points of the 
corolla more prominent.
This form is 
often described as one or more distinct 
species, under the names of G.
erectum 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2067), G.
cinereum, and 
G. aristatum (the figures Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2783 and 2784 from specimens 
probably not British).
7. Wall Galium.
Galium parisiense, Linn.
(Fig. 470.) 
(G.
angllcum, Eng. Bot.
t. 384.) 
Somewhat resembles a very slender 
heath G., but the root is only annual, and 
the flowers and fruits are very much 
smaller.
Stems about 6 inches high, the 
branches almost filiform, spreading, and 
rough on the edges.
Panicles spreading, 
with filiform pedicels.
Corolla white, 
very minute ; the lobes less spreading 
than in most species, and not pointed.
Emits small, granulated in the only va- 
riety hitherto found in Britain ; in south- 
ern Europe more commonly covered with 
little bristles or stiff hairs.
In stony wastes, on old walls, etc., 
very common in the Mediterranean re- 
gion, and eastward to the Caucasus ; 
less abundant in central Europe, and barely extending to some of the 
southern counties of England.
Fl. summer.
The variety above al- 
luded to as the only one we possess, has been distinguished as a species 
under the name of G.
anglicum or G, dlvaricatum.
Fig. 470.
STELLATE.
393 
8. Northern Galium.
Galium boreale, Linn.
(Fig. 471.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 105.) 
Eootstock creeping; the stems more 
firm and erect, and less branched than 
in the other species, from \ to 1^ feet 
high, glabrous or slightly hoary.
Leaves 
4 in a whorl, lanceolate or linear, rather 
firm, with 3 longitudinal ribs, smooth or 
scarcely rough at the edges, and often 
an inch long.
Mowers numerous, in 
oblong terminal panicles, white, and ra- 
ther larger than in the hedge G., with 
very short, inflected points to the lobes.
Fruit covered with hooked hairs or 
bristles.
On moist rocks, and in mountain 
pastures, all over northern Europe and 
Russian Asia to the Arctic regions, con- 
fined to mountains in southern Europe 
and central Asia.
Frequent in Scot- 
land, northern England, Worth Wales, and Ireland 
Fig. 471.
Fl. summer.
9. Cleavers Galium.
Galium Aparine, Linn.
(Fig. 472.) 
(Eng. Bot, t.
816.
Cleavers.
Although an annual, this plant often 
extends to several feet, scrambling over 
bushes, to which it clings by the recurved 
asperities or small prickles on the angles 
of the stem and on the edges and mid- 
ribs of the leaves.
Leaves 6 or 8 in a 
whorl, linear or linear-lanceolate, often 
above an inch long.
Peduncles oppo- 
site and axillary, rather longer than the 
leaves, bearing a loose cyme of from 3 
to 8 or 10 small, greenish-white flowers, 
with 3 or 4 leaves at the base of the 
cyme.
Pedicels 2 to 4 lines long, straight 
and slender, or but slightly recurved 
and thickened.
Fruits usually covered 
with hooked bristles, forming small, 
very adhesive burrs, but sometimes al- 
most or entirely without them.
VOL.
I. 
Goosegrass.) 
2 h 
394 
THE STELLATE TRIBE.
In hedges and thickets, throughout Europe and northern Asia, from 
the Arctic Circle almost to the tropics, and now spread over North 
America.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. the whole summer, and often in 
autumn.
Slender or short varieties, less hispid, and with smaller 
fruits, have been distinguished under the names of G.
Vaillantii (Eng.
Bot. Suppl.
t. 2943) and G.
spurium (Eng. Bot.
t. 1871), but the latter 
name is also given to luxuriant forms of the corn G.
10.
Corn Galium.
Galium tricorne, "With.
(Fig. 473.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1641.) 
Yery near the cleavers G., but a 
smaller plant, seldom above a foot long, 
the leaves shorter, the peduncles shorter 
than the leaves, with only 1, 2, or 3 
flowers, the pedicels of which are rolled 
back and thickened after flowering, and 
the fruit is granulated only, without 
hooks or bristles.
A much more southern plant than the 
cleavers G., very common in waste and 
cultivated places in the Mediterranean 
region, and eastward to central Asia ; 
becomes a cornfield weed in central Eu- 
rope, and as such extends over most 
counties of England, but disappears in 
the north.
Fl. with the corn, or some- 
-p.
^n times later, on the stubble, 
£^ 
III.
ASPEEULE.
ASPERULA.
Differs from Galium only in the shape of the corolla, which tapers at 
the base into a tube at least as long as the lobes, and often several 
times longer.
The species are less numerous than those of Galium, and the geo- 
graphical range is not so extensive, being limited to Europe, northern 
Africa, northern and central Asia, and Australia.
Leaves lanceolate, about 8 in a whorl.
Fruit hispid ...
1. Woodruff A.
Leaves linear, opposite or 4 in a whorl.
Fruit small, glabrous 2.
Small A.
STELLATE.
395 
1. Woodruff Asperule.
Asperula odorata, Linn.
(Fig. 474.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 755.
Sioeet Woodruff.) 
Rootstock slender and creeping.
Stems 
erect, 6 inches to near a foot high, 
smooth on the angles.
Leaves nsually 
8 in a whorl (rarely 6, 7, or 9), the lowest 
small and obovate, the remainder oblong- 
lanceolate, above an inch long, slightly 
rough at the edges.
Peduncles termi- 
nal, bearing a few small, white flowers, 
in a loose, trichotomous cyme.
Corollas 
very fugacious.
Fruits globular and 
very hispid.
The whole plant has a 
sweet hay smell in drying.
In woods and shady places, through- 
out Europe and Russian Asia, except the 
extreme north.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. spring and early summer.
Fig. 474.
2. Small Asperule.
Asperula cyanchica, Linn.
(Fig. 475.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 33.
Squinancy-wort.) 
A smooth and glabrous perennial, the 
stems sometimes erect and wiry, with 
few leaves, 6 to 8 inches high, some- 
times decumbent or spreading on the 
ground, in broad, leafy tufts or patches.
Leaves narrow-linear, the lower ones 4 
in a whorl, the upper ones often 2 only, 
the 2 others wanting or reduced to 
small stipules.
Flowers white, often 
with a lilac tinge, forming little clusters 
at the summits of the branches ; the 
corollas little more than a line long, 
funnel-shaped, tapering into a tube at the 
base.
Fruits small, slightly granulated.
In dry pastures, on warm banks, and 
waste, stony, and sandy places.
Abun- 
dant in central and southern Europe to 
the Caucasus, extending northward more 
Fig. 475.
396 
THE VALEEIAN FAMILY.
sparingly to the Baltic.
Common in many parts of southern England 
and Ireland, but does not extend into Scotland.
Fl. summer.
IV.
SHERARDIA.
SHERAEDIA.
A single species, with the corolla and fruit of an Asperule, and the 
habit of some southern species of that genus, but distinguished both 
from Asperule and Galium by the calyx, which has a distinct border 
of 4 or 6 teeth crowning the fruit.
1. Blue Sherardia.
Sherardia arvensis, Linn.
(Fig. 476.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 891.
Field Madder.) 
A small annual, seldom above 6 inches 
high.
Leaves about 6 in a whorl, the 
lower ones small and obovate, the upper 
linear or lanceolate, all rough on the 
edges and ending in a fine point.
Flowers 
small, blue or pink, in little terminal 
heads, surrounded by a broad, leafy invo- 
lucre, deeply divided into about 8 lobes, 
longer than the flowers themselves.
Co- 
rolla with a slender tube, little more than 
a line long, and 4 small, spreading lobes.
Calyx-teeth enlarged after flowering, 
forming a little leafy crown at the top 
of the fruit.
In cultivated and waste places, in 
temperate Europe and western Asia, extending far to the north as a 
weed of cultivation.
Common in the greater part of Britain, but be- 
coming scarce Jn the north of Scotland.
Fl. the ivliole summer.
Fig. 476.
XXXVIII.
VALERIAN FAMILY.
VALERIANA.
Herbs, either annual or with a perennial, sometimes almost 
bushy stock, opposite leaves, and no stipules.
Flowers in ter- 
minal corymbs or panicles, usually small and numerous.
Calyx 
adherent to the ovary, the small border sometimes toothed, some- 
times scarcely perceptible at the time of flowering, but unrolling 
afterwards into a feathery pappus.
Corolla in the British genera 
VALERIANEiE.
397 
monopetalous, tubular at the base, with 5 spreading lobes.
Sta- 
mens always fewer than the lobes of the corolla.
Fruit small, 
dry, and seed-like, with a single seed suspended from the top of 
the cell, with the addition frequently of 1 or 2 imperfect or abor- 
tive empty cells.
A natural family, not large, but widely diffused over a great part of 
the globe.
Well characterized among inferior- fruited Monopetals by 
the seed-like fruit and reduced number of stamens.
Stamen 1.
Tube of the corolla spurred at the base ...
1. Centranth.
Stamens 3.
Tube of the corolla slightly swollen at the base 
but not spurred.
Perennials.
Fruit crowned by a feathery pappus .
. 2.
Valerian.
Annuals.
Fruit crowned by a small, cup-shaped, or 
toothed border 3.
Cornsalad.
I. CENTRANTH.
CENTRANTHUS.
Habit, calyx, and fruit of Valerian.
Corolla with a more slender 
tube projected at the base into a little spur, and only 1 stamen.
A small genus from the Mediterranean and Caucasian regions.
1. Red Centranth.
Centranthus ruber, DC.
(Fig. 477.) 
(Valeriana, Eng. Bot.
t. 1531.
Hed Valerian.) 
Perennial stock much branched, form- 
ing when old an almost bushy, coarse 
tuft ; the whole plant quite glabrous and 
often somewhat glaucous.
Stems stout, 
1 to near 2 feet high.
Leaves ovate- 
lanceolate, entire or scarcely toothed.
Flowers numerous, red or rarely white, 
in dense cymes, forming a handsome, 
oblong terminal panicle.
Tube of the 
corolla 3 or 4 lines long, with a spur of 
at least a line.
Border of the calyx un- 
rolling in the ripe fruit into a little 
elegant, bell-shaped, feathery pappus.
A native of rocky places in the Medi- 
terranean region, but, long cultivated 
for ornament, it has become naturalized 
on old walls in most parts of central Eu- 
rope, as in many localities in England 
and Ireland.
Fl. all summer.
398 
THE VALERIAN FAMILY.
II.
VALERIAN.
VALERIANA.
Herbs with a perennial stock and usually erect flowering stems.
Leaves opposite, those of the stem usually pinnately divided or toothed, 
the lowest often entire.
Flowers white or red, small, usually nume- 
rous, in terminal corymbs or panicles, sometimes contracted into 
heads.
Calyx with a prominent border, at the time of flowering rolled 
inwards and entire, as the fruit ripens opening out into a little, bell- 
shaped feathery pappus.
Corolla with a short tube, not spurred at the 
base, and 5 short lobes.
Stamens 3.
Fruit small, Lseeded, crowned 
with the pappus.
A large genus, with the geographical range of the family, but most 
abundant in mountain regions, where some species ascend to great ele- 
vations.
Lower leaves undivided.
Stem 6 to 8 inches high.
Radical leaves and segments of the 
upper ones entire 1.
Marsh V.
Stem 2 to 4 feet.
Leaves large, broadly cordate, and 
toothed 3.
Fyrenean V, 
All the leaves pinnately divided, with several pairs of seg- 
ments 2.
Common V.
1. Marsh Valerian.
Valeriana dioica, Linn.
(Fig. 478.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 628.) 
Rootstock emitting creeping runners 
and erect flowering stems, 6 to 8 inches 
high.
Radical leaves and those of the 
runners on long stalks, ovate, entire, \ 
to 1 inch long ; stem-leaves few, mostly 
pinnate, with one oval or oblong termi- 
nal segment and several pairs of smaller 
and narrow ones, all entire.
Flowers 
small, of a pale rose-colour, in terminal 
corymbs, mostly unisexual ; the tube of 
the corolla short.
A marsh plant, spread over a great 
part of Europe and eastward to the 
Caucasus, but apparently more common 
in the west than in the east ; extending 
northward into southern Scandinavia.
In most English counties and in a few of 
the southern Scotch ones, but not re- 
corded from Ireland.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 478.
VALEKIANE7E.
399 
2. Common Valerian.
Valeriana officinalis, Linn.
(Fig. 479.) 
(Eng. Eot.
t. 698.
All-7ieal.) 
Rootstock short and thick, with creep- 
ing runners, and one or rarely more erect 
stems, 2 to 3 or even 4 feet high, nearly- 
simple, and more or less hairy at the 
base.
Leaves pinnate, with from 9 to 
21, or even more, lanceolate segments, 
1 to 2 or even 3 inches long, and much 
varying in breadth, marked with a few 
coarse teeth, and more or less sprinkled 
with hairs underneath; the upper leaves 
few and distant.
Flowers small, white 
or tinged with pink, in broad terminal 
corymbs.
In moist situations, sides of ditches 
and streams, and damp woods, extending 
over the whole of Europe and .Russian 
Asia to the Arctic Circle, becoming a 
mountain plant in the south.
Common 
in Britain.
Fl. summer.
A variety with 
fewer and broader segments to the leaves * *£• 479.
has been distinguished under the name of V.
sambucifolia.
3. Pyrenean Valerian.
Valeriana pyrenaica, Linn.
(Fig.
(Eng. Bot.
1. 1591.) 
A taller plant even than the common 
V., and much coarser ; the leaves broadly 
heart-shaped, coarsely toothed, often 5 
or 6 inches long and broad, with more 
prominent veins than in most Valerians, 
the lower ones undivided, the upper 
ones, in addition to the large terminal 
segment, have 1 or sometimes 2 pairs of 
smaller ones on the short footstalk.
Flowers like those of the common V., in 
large, flat terminal corymbs.
A Pyrenean species, which, having es- 
caped from cultivation, is now well-esta- 
blished in woods and plantations in some 
part3 of central and southern Scotland 
and western England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 480.
480.) 
400 THE VALERIAN FAMILY.
III.
CORNSALAD.
VALERIANELLA.
Low annuals, with forked branches, narrow, entire or scarcely 
toothed leaves, and very small white or pale-blue flowers, in little com- 
pact cymes at the ends of the branches or solitary in the forks.
Calyx- 
border small, entire or toothed, sometimes enlarging as the fruit ripens, 
but not feathery.
Corolla with a short tube, not spurred at the base, 
and 5 equal, spreading lobes.
Fruit small, convex on the back, but 
often marked in front with 2 longitudinal ribs or variously shaped 
projections, which are in fact the imperfect or abortive empty cells.
The species are rather numerous, all much alike in general appear- 
ance, and distinguished chiefly by modifications in the form of the 
little fruits which appear to be constant.
They are chiefly natives of 
the Mediterranean and Caucasian regions, but some are spread as 
weeds of cultivation over the greater part of the temperate regions of 
the northern hemisphere.
Fruit without any perceptible projecting border on the 
top.
Fruit as broad as long, somewhat laterally com- 
pressed, with a slight furrow on each side ...
1. Common C.
Fruit ovoid, convex on the back, with an oval, con- 
cave or cup-shaped appendage on the face ...
2. Keeled C.
Fruit crowned by the small, oblique, toothlike border 
of the calyx.
Fruit narrow, rather flattened, convex on the back, 
with 2 longitudinal ribs on the face .....
4. Narrow-fruited C.
Fruit broadly ovoid, showing, when cut across, 3 
cells, one with a seed in it, and two conspicuous 
empty ones 3.
Sharp -fruited C.
1. Common Cornsalad.
Valerianella olitoria, Poll.
(Fig. 481.) 
(Valeriana locusta, Eng. Bot.
t. 811.
Cornsalad or Lamb's -lettuce.) 
A glabrous or slightly downy annual, seldom above 6 inches high, 
erect or ascending, branching from the base, and repeatedly forked.
.Radical leaves in a spreading tuft, oblong, 1\ to 2 inches long, rounded 
at the top, entire or with a very few coarse teeth, narrowed at the 
base ; stem-leaves narrower, but with a broad base, often clasping the 
stem, and more frequently toothed.
Flowers very small, mostly in little, 
dense, terminal cymes, J to \ inch in diameter, surrounded by small 
lanceolate or linear bracts.
Fruit about a line long and at least as 
broad, somewhat compressed, without any perceptible calycine border, 
VALERIANE^].
401 
and marked on each side with a longi- 
tudinal furrow.
When cut across, the 
seed will be seen to occupy the centre, 
with a somewhat corky mass on one side, 
and an empty cell on the other.
A native of southern Europe, often 
cultivated for salad, and now a common 
weed in waste places and cornfields in 
central Europe.
Not unfrequent in 
various parts of the British Isles.
Fl.
spring and summer.
Fig. 481.
2. Keeled Cornsalad.
Valerianella carinata, Lois.
(Fig. 482.) 
(Fedia, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
2810.) 
Closely resembles the common C.
in 
everything but the fruit, which is ovoid, 
not compressed laterally, but rather from 
front to back, without any corky mass 
at the back of the seed, and the empty 
cell in the front is not closed in, but open, 
in the shape of a little cup-shaped ap- 
pendage.
More abundant than the common C.
in most parts of continental Europe, 
but much less frequent in England.
I 
have not met with it in cultivation, al- 
though so similar in foliage.
Fl. spring 
and summer.
Fig. 482.
3. Sharp-fruited Cornsalad.
Valerianella auricula, DO.
(Fig. 483.) 
(Fedia, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2809.) 
Stems generally more erect than the last two species, the branches not 
proceeding from so near the base, more slender and wiry ; the leaves 
small and narrow, the cymes small and not so compact, often with single 
VOL.
I. 2 I 
402 
THE VALERIAN FAMILY.
flowers in the forks of the stem, and the 
bracts small and narrow.
Fruit broadly 
ovoid, scarcely compressed, crowned by 
the little green oblique border of the 
calyx.
On being cut across, it shows 
one small cell occupied by the seed, and 
two somewhat larger empty ones.
In cornfields and waste places, widely 
spread over central and southern Europe 
and western Asia.
Not unfrequent in 
Britain, and perhaps truly indigenous.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 483 
4. Narrow-fruited Cornsalad.
Valerianella dentata, Koch.
(Fig. 484.) 
( Valeriana.
Eng. Bot.
t. 1370.) 
Habit and foliage precisely those of 
the sharp -fruited C, and the fruit is in 
the same manner crowned by the ob- 
lique border of the calyx, but the fruit 
is narrower, slightly compressed from 
front to back, and the seed occupies the 
entire cavity without any empty cells ; 
these are represented by two longitu- 
dinal ribs on the inner face of the fruit, 
which, when examined under the mi- 
croscope, will be found to be hollow.
The geographical range appears to be 
the same as that of the sharp-fruited 
C, with which it is often confounded.
FL summer.
It varies in its fruits more 
or less hairy, and the calyx-border 
sometimes cup-shaped, nearly as long as 
the fruit, and scarcely oblique, some- 
times smaller and very oblique, and some of these forms have been 
distinguished as species, under the names of V.
eriocarpa, V.
trun- 
cat a, etc.
Fig. 484.
dipsace^:.
403 
XXXIX.
THE TEASEL FAMILY.
DIPSACE^E.
Herbs or undershrubs, with opposite leaves, and no stipules.
Flowers collected into compact heads or spikes, surrounded by 
a common involucre, with scales or hairs on the receptacle be- 
tween the florets, as in Composites, but each floret is moreover 
inserted in a small involucel having the appearance of an outer 
calyx, sometimes tubular, and completely enclosing the ovary ; 
sometimes cup-shaped at its base.
Calyx combined with the 
ovary, with an entire or toothed border ; the teeth often termi- 
nating in stiff points or bristles.
Corolla monopetalous, 4- or 
5-lobed, and often oblique.
Stamens 4, inserted in the tube; 
the anthers free, not united as in Composites.
Fruit small, dry, 
and indehiscent, crowned by the border of the calyx, often en- 
closed in the involucel, which assumes the form of an outer coat- 
ing.
Seed solitary, pendulous.
A small family, spread over the temperate regions of the old world, 
both in the northern hemisphere and in southern Africa ; at once dis- 
tinguished from Composites by the anthers, from capitate Umbellates 
by the opposite leaves and the monopetalous corollas.
Scales of the receptacle between the florets prickly .
. .
. 1.
Teasel.
Scales of the receptacle not prickly, or replaced by hairs .
. 2.
Scabious.
I. TEASEL.
DIPSACUS.
Tall, erect biennials, either prickly or bearing very stiff hairs.
Heads 
of flowers oblong or globular ; the scales between the florets long and 
prickly.
Involucels small and angular, with a very small, thickened 
border.
Calyx with a small, cup-shaped border appearing above the 
involucel.
Corolla oblique, 4-lobed.
A very small European and north Asiatic genus.
Heads of flowers ovoid or cylindrical, very prickly ....
1. Common T.
Heads of flowers globular, very hairy, and slightly prickly .
2. Small T.
1. Common Teasel.
Dipsacus sylvestris, Linn.
(Fig. 485.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1032.) 
A stout biennial, 4 or 5 feet high, with numerous prickles on the 
stems, the midribs of the leaves, the peduncles, and involucres.
Leaves 
2i 2 
404 
THE TEASEL FAMILY.
sessile, long and lanceolate, entire or 
coarsely toothed, the upper ones broadly- 
connate at the base.
Heads of flowers 
at first ovoid, but gradually becoming 
cylindrical, near 3 inches long and above 
1^ inches in diameter.
Involucre of 8 
to 12 long but very unequal stiff, linear, 
prickly bracts, usually curved upwards.
Scales of the receptacle broad and hairy 
at the base, ending in a fine prickly 
point, rather longer than the florets.
Flowers pale-lilac.
On roadsides and waste places, in cen- 
tral and southern Europe, and all across 
Russian Asia, not extending northward 
beyond Germany.
Common in the 
southern counties of England and in Ire- 
land, more rare in the north, and in 
Scotland probably only as an introduced 
plant.
Fl. late in summer or autumn.
The fullers' Teasel (D.
fullonum, Eng.
Bot. t.
2080) is believed to be a cultivated variety of this plant, only 
differing in the scales of the receptacle being hooked at the extremity.
Fig. 485.
2. Small Teasel.
Fig. 486.
Dipsacus pilosus, Linn.
(Fig. 486.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 877.) 
A branching biennial, 2 to 4 feet high, 
covered with stiff spreading hairs or 
bristles, which rarely amount to weak 
prickles.
Leaves with 1 large, ovate, 
pointed, and coarsely toothed terminal 
segment, and 1 or 2 pairs of smaller 
ones on the short leafstalk.
Flowers 
white, forming globular, hispid heads, 
barely an inch in diameter, on long pe- 
duncles.
Bracts of the involucre sel- 
dom longer than the florets, and passing 
gradually into the scales of the receptacle, 
which are ovate, ending in a fine stiff 
point, almost prickly, about as long as 
the florets.
In rather moist hedges, thickets, and 
banks, in central and southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, extending northwards 
DIPSACE^E.
405 
to southern Sweden.
Occurs in most of the southern and central 
counties of England, but not in Ireland or Scotland.
Fl. summer and 
autumn.
II.
SCABIOUS.
SCABIOSA.
Herbs, either annual or with a perennial stock, becoming shrubby in 
some exotic species, without prickles.
Heads of flowers hemispherical 
or globular, with an involucre of small, green, not prickly bracts.
[Re- 
ceptacle bearing small not prickly scales, or hairs only, between the 
florets.
Involucels various.
Corolla 4- or 5-lobed, often oblique.
Ovary and fruit crowned by the little, cup-shaped calycine border, 
with 4, 5, or more teeth or bristles.
This, the principal genus of the family, belongs chiefly to the Me- 
diterranean region, a few species extending over the rest of Europe and 
temperate Asia.
Although not very numerous in species, it has been 
broken up into 4, 5, or 6 genera, the three British species being re- 
ferred severally to Succisa, Scabiosa, and Trichera or Knautia.
Leaves entire or nearly so.
Florets 4-lobed, the outer ones 
scarcely larger than the others 1.
Blue S.
Leaves toothed or divided.
Outer florets of each head usually 
much larger and more oblique.
Florets 5-lobed.
Involucel with a spreading, scarious border.
Fruit crowned by 5 bristles 2.
Small S.
Floret3 4-lobed.
Involucel very short.
Fruit crowned by 
minute teeth 3.
Field S.
The annual siveet Scabious (S.
atropurpurea) and some other exotic 
species are occasionally cultivated in our flower-gardens.
1. Blue Scabious.
Scabiosa succisa, Linn.
(Fig. 487.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 878.
DeviVs-bit.) 
Eootstock short and thick, ending abruptly below as if it had been 
bit off.
Leaves mostly radical, stalked, ovate or oblong and entire, 
glabrous or with a few long hairs on the upper surface ; those of the 
stem few and oblong, occasionally marked with 1 or 2 teeth.
Stems 1 
to 2 feet high, w ith 1 to 5 heads of deep-blue flowers on long peduncles.
Bracts of the involucre lanceolate, in 2 or 3 rows, the outer ones about 
as long as the flowers, the inner ones passing gradually into the pointed 
scales of the receptacle.
Florets all nearly alike, 4-lobed, and but 
406 
THE TEASEL FAMILY.
little oblique.
Tnvolucels tubular, an- 
gular, completely enclosing the ovary 
and fruit, bordered by very small, green 
teeth.
Fruit crowned by the 4 bristles 
of the calyx, which scarcely project be- 
yond the involucel.
In meadows, pastures, heaths, etc., 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
except the extreme north.
Abundant in 
Britain.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 487.
2. Small Scabious.
Scabiosa Columbaria, Linn.
(Fig. 488.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1311.) 
Stock perennial, tufted when old, and 
sometimes almost woody.
Stems 1 to 2 
feet high, including the long terminal 
peduncles, glabrous or slightly hoary.
Leaves pinnate, the lower ones crowded, 
spreading, with an ovate or oblong ter- 
minal segment, and several smaller ones ; 
the stem-leaves few, with linear seg- 
ments entire or pinnatifid.
Flowers of 
a pale purplish-blue.
Involucres short.
Scales of the receptacle small and linear.
Florets 5-lobed, the outer ones of each 
head much larger and more oblique.
In- 
volucel enclosing the fruit to near the 
top, w T here it is contracted, and then ex- 
pands into a scarious, sinuate, cup-shaped 
border, in the centre of which appears 
the summit of the fruit, crowned by the 
5 bristles of the calyx.
In pastures and waste places, very abundant all over central and 
southern Europe, extending eastward to the Caucasus, and northward 
to southern Scandinavia.
Dispersed over a great part of England, 
especially near the east coast, along which it extends into Scotland, 
but does not occur in Ireland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 488.
COMPOSITE.
407 
3. Field Scabious.
Scabiosa arvensis, Linn.
(Fig. 489.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 659.) 
A perennial, bnt of short duration, 
and often flowering the first year, more 
or less hairy, especially near the base, 
from 1 to 2 or even 3 feet high.
Leaves 
very variable ; the radical ones usually 
lanceolate and stalked ; the upper ones 
broader at the base, and sessile ; all 
coarsely toothed or slightly lobed, but 
sometimes some or all are deeply cut 
or pinnate.
Heads of flowers large, of 
a pale lilac-purple, on long peduncles ; 
the outer florets much larger and more 
oblique than the central ones, as in the 
small $., but all are 4-lobed.
Involucre 
short.
Receptacle with hairs only be- 
tween the florets.
Involucel very mi- 
nute.
Ovary and fruit angular, crowned 
by the 8 or 10 radiating teeth or short 
bristles of the calyx.
In pastures, open woods, waste and cultivated places, throughout 
Europe and Hussian Asia to the Arctic Circle.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 489.
XL.
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
COMPOSITE.
Herbs, or in some exotic genera or species, shrubs, with alter- 
nate or opposite leaves, without stipules.
Elowers or florets col- 
lected several together into a head surrounded by an involucre, 
the whole having the appearance of a single flower, and called by 
older authors a compound flower with a common calyx.
The re- 
ceptacle, or enlarged summit of the peduncle on which the florets 
are inserted within the involucre, either bears chaffy scales and 
hairs between the florets or is naked.
In each floret the calyx is 
combined with the ovary, either completely so or only appears at 
408 THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
its summit as a short border, or more frequently as a pappus : 
that is, a ring of long, simple or feathery (plumose) hairs, or of 
small chaffy scales.
Corollas either all tubular, with a 5-toothed 
(or rarely 4-toothed) border, or all ligulate : that is to say, flat, 
linear or oblong, forming only a short tube at the base ; or else 
both kinds are in the same head, the central ones tubular, form- 
ing the disk ; the outer ones ligulate, constituting the ray.
In 
the latter case the head of flowers is said to be radiate, and in 
contradistinction a head of flowers that has no ray is said to be 
discoid, and one which has no disk is said to be ligulate.
Stamens 
5 or rarely 4, inserted in the tube of the corolla ; the anthers 
linear and united (or in Burweed closely connivent) in a sheath 
round the style.
Ovary inferior, with a single erect ovule, and 
a filiform style divided at the top into 2 short branches bearing 
the stigmas.
Fruit a small, dry, seed-like nut, usually called an 
achene, crowned by the pappus or sometimes naked.
The most extensive family among flowering plants, and represented 
in every quarter of the globe and in every description of station.
It is 
also most easily recognized.
The ligular florets are unknown in any 
other family, and when the florets are all tubular, the Composites are 
distinguished from the Teasel family, and the few others which have 
similar heads or florets, by the union of the anthers.
In Jasione in- 
deed the anthers are slightly united, but there, besides other characters, 
the ovary and capsule have 2 cells with several seeds.
The genera are 
very numerous, and the characters are often taken from differences in 
the achenes and in the pappus which crowns them, which cannot well 
be observed until the fruit is ripe.
It is therefore particularly neces- 
sary, in Composites, in collecting specimens for determination, to select 
such as have the most advanced flower-heads, and these will always 
be found in the centre of the corymb.
•-Florets all ligulate (Ligulates) 37 
i Florets all tubular 2 
| Florets tubular in the disk or centre of each head, the outer ones either 
L ligulate and forming a ray, or slender and filiform (Corymbifers) .
5 
r Involucre or leaves prickly.
Style slightly bulbous under the branches 
2<j (Thistleheads) 29 
I Involucre and leaves not prickly 3 
o f Florets purple, blue, or white 4 
I Florets yellow or greenish, usually small (Corymbifers) ....
5 
. J" Leaves opposite 1.
Eupatory.
I Leaves alternate or radical (Thistleheads) 29 
COMPOSITE.
409 
CoRYMBIFERS.
k f Leaves opposite 6 
I Leaves alternate or radical *.
. .
. 7 
rFlower-heads small, numerous, purple.
Pappus of many hairs.
g !
1. EUPATOBY.
I Flower-heads few, rather large, yellow.
Pappus of a few bristles.
L 19.
BlDENS.
f Flower discoid, that is, all the florets of the head tubular or filiform, 
t- J the outer not longer than the central ones 8 
i Flowers radiate, the outer florets ligulate and spreading, or, if erect, 
^ longer than the central ones 18 
o f Achenes without a pappus, or crowned by a small cup or short scales .
9 
I Achenes bearing a pappus of hairs 12 
rFlower-heads monoecious, the males with many tubular florets, the fe- 
q J males forming a thick burr, ending in 2 conical beaks, and enclosing 2 
flowers 20.
Burweed.
^-Flower-heads all alike 10 
/-Receptacle bearing scales between the florets.
Plant covered with a dense 
J white cotton.
Leaves entire or toothed 13.
Diotis.
1 No scales between the florets.
Leaves, at least the lower ones, much di- 
L vided 11 
{Flower-heads hemispherical, 3 or 4 lines in diameter, in a large terminal 
corymb.
Achenes angular, with a flat top 14.
Tansy.
Flower-heads small, often nodding, in a leafy raceme or panicle.
Achenes 
obovate, contracted at the top 15.
Artemisia.
r Bracts of the involucre linear, equal in length, with a few very small outer 
\2< ones 13 
I Bracts of the involucre imbricated in two or more rows 14 
r Radical leaves large, broadly heart-shaped or orbicular.
Stem-leaves 
13 < small and narrow 2.
Coltsfoot.
L Leaves pinnate and toothed 17.
Sekecto.
^ Plants more or less covered with a white cotton or down.
Involucral 
bracts also cottony, or shining and scarious, or coloured at the edge, 
j 16.
Cudweed.
L Plants not woolly.
Involucral bracts narrow and green 15 
r All the florets tubular and 5 -toothed 16 
15<j Outer florets of the head linear or filiform, although not longer than the 
I central ones 17 
{Involucral bracts few, oblong-linear.
Plant growing in salt-marshes.
3. Aster.
Involucral bracts numerous, narrow -linear.
Plant growing on limestone 
rocks 5.
Linosyris.
^Tall stiff plant.
Flower-heads ovoid, in a terminal corymb.
7. Rigid Inule.
{ Flower-heads numerous and small, in a long leafy panicle.
L 4.
Canadian Erigeron.
r 
410 THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
r Achenes without any pappus, or crowned by a small cup or minute scales.
18 <{ 19 
LAchenes bearing a pappus of hairs 23 
r Receptacle bearing scales between the florets, at least among the central 
19<^ ones 20 
L Receptacle naked (without scales between the florets) 21 
r Flower-heads rather large, with convex or conical receptacle.
20 < 11.
Camomile.
L Flower-heads small, with a small flat receptacle .
. .
12.
Achillea.
Q-.
f Involucral bracts all green and of equal length 8.
Daisy.
I Involucral bracts imbricated and scarious at the edges 22 
22 J Receptacle flat or convex 9.
Chrysanthemum.
I Receptacle conical, much elongated as the fruit ripens 10.
Matricary.
oo f R a y purple or blue 24 
I Ray yellow 25 
/-Involucral bracts and florets of the ray not numerous, oblong-linear.
i 3.
Aster.
O 4 J 
j Involucral bracts and florets of the ray very numerous and narrow.
L 4.
Erigkeron.
r Involucral bracts linear, equal in length, or with a few very small outer 
25 <{ ones 26 
L Involucral bracts imbricated in two or more rows 28 
f Radical leaves large, broadly heart-shaped or orbicular, distinct from the 
j flowering stem.
Florets of the ray narrow and very numerous.
26 <J 2.
Coltseoot.
I Radical leaves none, or at the base of the flowering stem.
Florets of the 
L ray linear or oblong 27 
2^ f Achenes of the ray without any pappus 18.
Doronio.
I Achenes of the ray with a pappus like those of the disk .
17.
Senecto.
r Florets of the ray not more than 10 or 12.
Anthers without tails.
j 6.
GOLDENROD.
J Florets of the ray very numerous, or at any rate above 20.
Anthers with 
L minute fine points or tails at their base 7.
Inule.
Thistleheads.
f Bracts of the involucre entire, obtuse or pointed, but not prickly .
. 30 
| Bracts of the involucre ending in a long, stiff point, hooked at the 
29 <j extremity 21.
Burdock.
' Bracts of the involucre prickly, or ending in a fringed or toothed ap- 
pandage 33 
oq f Hairs of the pappus simple 31 
1 Hairs of the pappus feathery .32 
31 f Receptacle chaffy 22.
Sawwort.
I Receptacle naked 2.
Coltsfoot.
3 2 J Leaves entire or coarsely toothed, not prickly ...
23.
Saussurea.
I Leaves either prickly or bordered with minute stiff bristles 24.
Thistle.
COMPOSITE.
411 
r Bracts of the involucre ending in a simple point or prickle .
. .
.34 
33 <{ Bracts of the involucre ending in a fringed or toothed appendage, or in 
L several points or prickles, or in a prickle branched at the base .
. 35 
r Receptacle bearing long chaffy bristles between the florets 24.
Thistle.
34 <j Receptacle honeycombed with jagged edges to the cavities, but not bristly.
L 25.
Onopord.
pinner bracts of the involucre long, linear, shining and spreading, outer 
J ones very prickly.
Achenes silky 26.
Carline.
j Bracts of the involucre toothed or jagged, not prickly .
27.
Centattrea.
L Bracts of the involucre prickly.
Achenes glabrous 36 
o fi f Pappus of long simple or feathery hairs 24.
Thistle.
1 Pappus of short simple bristles or none .
. .
' .
. 27.
Centaurea.
LlGULATES.
o* f Achenes, bearing a pappus of numerous long hairs 38 
I Achenes, without a pappus, or crowned by a few short scales ...
49 
oo f Pappus with some or most of the hairs feathery 39 
I Pappus with all the hairs simple 43 
r Involucre (very long) with all the bracts of equal length .
28.
Salsiey.
39-={ Involucre with outer bracts much smaller, or different from the inner 
L ones 40 
r External bracts of the involucre 4 or 5, broadly ovate or heart-shaped.
40 ^ 29.
Helminth.
L External bracts of the involucre small and unequal 41 
("Receptacle bearing some long chaffy scales between the florets.
41 <j 32.
Hypoch,ere.
iReceptacle naked 42 
r Stem leafy, branched, several-flowered, with clinging, hooked hairs.
Achenes without a beak 30.
Picris.
42 <j Stem almost leafless, simple or slightly branched, with one or very few 
flower-heads.
Achenes usually tapering into a short beak.
31.
Hawe:bit.
f^ Achenes more or less flattened.
Leaves glabrous, often bearing prickles 
43 <j on the edges or midrib 44 
L Achenes cylindrical or angular.
Leaves glabrous, hairy, or downy .
46 
r Achenes tapering into a slender beak bearing the pappus 45 
44 <j Pappus sessile or not supported on a distinct, slender beak.
L 34.
Sowtiiistle.
4- J Peduncles radical, with a single flower-head ....
35.
Dandelion.
I Elowering stems, erect, leafy, bearing several flower-heads 33.
Lettuce.
4P J Achenes tapering into a slender beak, bearing the pappus ....
47 
I Pappus sessile or not supported on a distinct, slender beak ....
48 
4 Y f Peduncles radical, simple, with a single flower-head .
35.
Dandelion.
I Flowering stems branched, bearing several heads .
. .
.36.
Crepis.
412 THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
f Achenes strongly striate, and slightly narrowed at the top.
Pappus of 
numerous white hairs.
Lower leaves frequently pinnatifid 36.
Crepis.
48 <{ Achenes but slightly striate, not narrowed at the top.
Pappus of rather 
I stiff bristles, of a dirty white.
Leaves toothed or entire.
L 37.
Hawkweed.
. q f Flowers blue.
Pappus a small cup formed of short scales.
38.
Chicory.
1 Flowers small and yellow.
No pappus 50 
f Stem 1 to 2 feet, leafy, with several flower-heads .
. .
40.
Lapsane.
50 -{ Stem leafless, not 6 inches high, hollow under the flower-heads.
Leaves 
L radical 39.
Arnoseris.
The very numerous genera of Composites are.
distributed into four 
great Tribes or Suborders, of which the three following only are re- 
presented in Britain : — 
I. Corymbieers {Corymbiferai) .
Herbs (or, in some exotic species, trees or 
shrubs), with alternate or opposite leaves, not prickly (except in a few exotic 
species).
Involucres seldom prickly.
Outer florets of each head usually ligu- 
late or filiform, or more slender than the central ones, and female or neuter.
Central florets usually tubular, small, hermaphrodite, with 4 or 5 short lobes or 
teeth.
Rarely all the florets are tubular, as in Thistleheads ; but then the 
style is not swollen under the branches.
This vast Suborder is again divided 
into Tribes, of which the British ones are : — 
1. Eupatorie^e.
Branches of the style usually club-shaped or obtuse.
Genera : — 1.
Eupatory ; 2.
Coltsfoot.
2. Astere^;.
Branches of the style usually flattened and pointed.
Genera : 
—3.
Aster ; 4.
Erigeron; 5.
Linos yris; 6.
Goldenrod ; 7.
Inule; 8.
Daisy.
3. Senecione^:.
Branches of the style usually truncate at the top, with a 
tuft of minute hairs, or conical and pointed.
Genera : — 9.
Chrysanthemum ; 
10.
Matricary; 11.
Camomile; 12.
Achillea; 13.
Diotis ; 14.
Tansy; 
15.
Artemisia ; 16.
Cudweed ; 17.
Senecio ; 18.
Doronic ; 19.
Bidens.
4. AMEROSiEiE.
Anthers closed round the style, but not united.
Genus, 
20.
Burweed.
II.
Thistleheads (Cynarocephalce).
Herbs, with alternate or radical 
leaves, often prickly.
Involucres usually globular or ovoid, with numerous im- 
bricated, usually prickly or jagged bracts.
Receptacle often thick, and hard.
Florets all tubular and regular, with 4 or 5 often narrow lobes.
Style slightly 
swollen below the lobes.
Genera : — 21.
Burdock ; 22.
Sawwort ; 23.
Saus- 
surea ; 34.
Thistle ; 25.
Onopord ; 26.
Carline ; 27.
Centaurea.
III.
Ligulates (Liguliflorce or Chicoracece) .
Herbs, with alternate or ra- 
dical leaves, seldom prickly.
All the florets ligulate, usually of several rows, 
the inner ones gradually shorter than the outer ones.
Genera : — 28.
Salsify ; 
29.
Helminth ; 30.
Picris ; 31.
Hawkp.it ; 32.
Hypochjere ; 33.
Let- 
tuce ; 34.
SOWTHISTLE ; 35.
DANDELION ; 36.
CREPIS ; 37.
HAWKWEED ; 
38.
Chicory ; 39.
Arnoseris ; 40.
Lapsane.
Among the numerous exotic genera familiar to us by long or general 
COMPOSITE.
413 
cultivation, may be mentioned the Marigold {Calendula), the Sunflower 
and Jerusalem Artichoke {Helianthus) the French and African Mari- 
golds (Peruvian species of Tagetes), several Everlastings (Helichrysum, 
and other Cape and Australian genera), several species of Coreopsis, 
Rudbeckia, Zinnia, Dahlia, Ageratum, etc., all belonging to Corym- 
bifers ; the Artichoke and Cardoon (Cynara), and the Globe-Thistle 
(Fchinops), belonging to Thistleheads ; and Scorzonera and Catananche 
among Ligulates.
I. EUPATORY.
EUPATOEIUM.
Herbs (or, in exotic species, shrubs), with leaves mostly opposite, 
and purplish or white flowers in terminal corymbs.
Receptacle with- 
out scales.
Florets all tubular and equal.
Styles much exserted, 
with long, thickened or club-shaped branches.
Achenes angular or 
striated, with a pappus of simple hairs.
A vast genus, chiefly American, with a few Asiatic species, one of 
which is also our European one, the only British Composite with oppo- 
site leaves, and florets not yellow.
1. Common Eupatory.
Eupatorium cannabinum, Linn.
(Fig. 490.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 428.
Hemp Agrimony.) 
Rootstock perennial, the stems erect, 
3 or 4 feet high.
Leaves 3 to 5 inches 
long, slightly downy, divided into 3 
broadly lanceolate, coarsely toothed 
lobes, sometimes again slightly lobed, 
a few upper leaves occasionally simple 
and alternate.
Flower-heads nume- 
rous, in compact terminal corymbs, 
of a pale reddish-purple.
Involucres 
cylindrical, of very few unequal bracts, 
and usually containing 5 florets.
On banks and bushy places near water, 
throughout Europe and central and Rus- 
sian Asia, except the extreme north.
Ex- 
tends all over Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 490.
414 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
II.
COLTSFOOT.
TUSSILAGO.
Herbs, with perennial, creeping rootstocks, and large, broad, deeply 
cordate radical leaves ; the flowering stems issuing from separate buds, 
with small, narrow, alternate leaves or scales, and terminal flower-heads, 
either solitary or in a raceme.
Involucre of several linear bracts, with 
a few small outer ones.
Outer florets female, either filiform or narrow- 
ligulate, the inner ones tubular, or sometimes all tubular.
Receptacle 
without scales.
Branches of the style cylindrical or club-shaped.
Achenes cylindrical, with a copious pappus of simple hairs.
A genus of very few European or north Asiatic species, easily known 
among British Composites by the peculiar foliage.
Flower-heads solitary, the external florets yellow and nar- 
row ligulate 1.
Common C.
Flower-heads in a compound raceme, purple or pink, nearly 
all tubular, or nearly all small and filiform, not ligulate 2.
Butterbur C.
1. Common Coltsfoot.
Tussilago Farfara, Linn.
(Fig. 491.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 429.
Coltsfoot.) 
Flowering stems simple, but often 
growing in tufts, erect, about 6 inches 
high, more or less covered with a loose, 
white cotton ; the small leaves or scales 
numerous, oblong or linear, entire and 
erect.
Flower-head solitary, terminal ; 
the florets of the ray numerous, ligulate, 
very narrow, but not long, of a bright 
yellow.
Radical leaves appearing much 
later than the flower-stems, 4 or 5 inches 
broad, angular and toothed, covered 
underneath with a loose, white, cottony 
wool, of which there is a little also on 
the upper side.
In waste and cultivated ground 
throughout Europe and central and 
Russian Asia to the Arctic Circle, and 
a very troublesome weed in poor, stiff 
soils.
Abundant in Britain.
FL early 
spring.
Fig. 491.
COMPOSITE.
415 
2. Butterbur Coltsfoot.
Tussilago Petasites, Linn.
(Fig. 492.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 431, and T.
hybrida, Eng. Bot.
t. 430.
Butterbur.) 
Leaves of the common C, but usually- 
larger.
Flowering stems not in tufts, 
often a foot high when full-grown, with 
many flower-heads, of a dull pinkish- 
purple, in a narrow-oblong terminal 
panicle, and almost dioecious.
The male 
plant .
has a looser panicle of smaller 
heads, the florets either all tubular and 
male (the pistil, although apparently 
perfect, having no ovule and forming no 
seed), or with a few filiform female ones 
on the outside ; the female panicle more 
compact, the heads larger, the florets all 
filiform, or with a few tubular male ones 
in the centre.
In sandy meadows, on the banks of 
streams, or roadsides, in Europe and 
Russian Asia, but not an Arctic plant.
Frequent in England, extending into 
southern Scotland.
FL spring.
It is often distinguished from Colts- 
foot as a genus, under the name of Petasites.
The winter Heliotrope of our gardens, or sweet Coltsfoot (Tussilago 
fragrans), will sometimes establish itself near where it has been planted; 
it is very near the Butterbur, but easily known by its fragrant flowers.
Fig. 492.
III.
ASTER.
ASTER.
Herbs usually erect, with alternate, entire or toothed leaves, and 
radiate flower-heads in terminal corymbs.
Involucral bracts imbri- 
cated in few rows.
Florets of the ray ligulate, purple or white, those 
of the disk tubular and yellow.
Branches of the style somewhat 
flattened, and pointed.
Anthers without tails.
Achenes flattened, 
with a pappus of many hairs.
A very numerous North American genus, with a few species spread 
over northern Asia, Europe, and some other parts of the world.
Se- 
veral of the North American ones are known among the autumnal 
416 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
plants in onr flower-gardens, under the name of Michaelmas Daisies.
Our China Asters belong to a nearly allied genus (perhaps a mere 
section) from eastern Asia.
1. Sea Aster.
Aster Tripolium, Linn.
(Fig. 493.) 
. (Eng. Bot.
t. 87.) 
A glabrous perennial, seldom above a 
foot high, erect, or decumbent at the 
base, and slightly branched ; the leaves 
linear, entire, and somewhat succu- 
lent.
Flower-heads in a rather compact 
corymb, the involucral bracts few and 
oblong.
Florets of the ray purplish, 
not numerous, and occasionally wanting ; 
those of the disk longer than the invo- 
lucre ; the pappus also longer than the 
involucre.
In salt-marshes, common in Europe 
and Russian Asia, except the extreme 
north.
Extends along the British coasts 
to the north of Scotland.
Fl. late in sum- 
mer, or autumn.
Fig. 493.
IV.
ERIGERON.
EKIGERON.
Differs from Aster in the involucral bracts very narrow and nu- 
merous, and in the outer florets very numerous, either filiform and not 
projecting beyond the involucre and pappus, or very narrow-ligulate, 
forming a short, coloured ray.
The regular, tubular, yellowish florets 
in the centre often reduced to very few.
Its geographical range is even more extended than that of Aster, for 
several species are natives of the tropics ; some are found in the ex- 
treme Arctic regions, or on the summits of the Alps, whilst others 
spread as weeds nearly all over the globe.
Outer florets all filiform, not projecting beyond the involucre.
Heads very numerous, and small 3.
Canadian E.
Outer florets (some or all) forming a shortly projecting 
coloured ray.
COMPOSITE.
417 
Annual or biennial.
Flower-heads several, on rather long 
peduncles.
Kay erect, very little longer than the 
disk .
. • 1.
Common F.
Perennial.
Flower-heads solitary or very few.
Bay spread- 
ing, considerably longer than the disk 2.
Alpine F.
Several large-flowered American species are occasionally cultivated 
in our flower-gardens.
1. Common Erigeron.
Erigeron aeris, Linn.
(Fig. 494.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1158.
Fleabane.) 
An erect annual or biennial, 6 inches 
to a foot high, slightly branched, and 
rather rough with short hairs.
Leaves 
linear or lanceolate and entire, the ra- 
dical ones stalked, but usually withered 
away at the time of flowering.
Flower- 
heads rather small, solitary on the pe- 
duncles or upper branches, forming a 
short, loose panicle.
Florets very nu- 
merous, mostly filiform and short, the 
outer rows of a pale purple, projecting 
slightly beyond the involucre and pap- 
pus, the tubular ones of the centre very 
few, of a pale yellow.
In pastures, on banks, roadsides, and 
waste places, common in the greater 
part of Europe, from the Mediterranean 
to the Arctic regions, and in central 
and Russian Asia.
Less frequent in 
England and Ireland, and rare in Scot- 
land.
Fl. summer and autumn.
It varies much in stature, in the number 
and size of the flower-heads, and of the florets of the ray, but these are 
always smaller and more numerous than in the alpine F., much larger 
and fewer than in the Canadian F.
Fig. 494.
2. Alpine Erigeron.
Erigeron alpinus, Linn.
(Fig. 495.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 464, and F.
unijlorus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2416.) 
Stock perennial, with erect or ascending hairy stems, 2 to 6 or rarely 
8 inches high.
Radical leaves oblong-lanceolate, tapering at the base ; 
stem-leaves smaller, few, and lanceolate.
Flower-heads solitary on each 
stem, or rarely 2 or 3 in a loose corymb, each one at least half an 
vol.
i. 2 k 
418 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
inch in diameter ; the florets like those 
of the common JE., except that the outer 
pink or purplish ones are longer, more 
decidedly ligulate, forming a distinct 
spreading ray.
In mountain pastures, in northern 
Europe, Asia, and America, to the Arctic 
regions, and in the higher mountain- 
ranges further south.
In Britain, con- 
fined to some of the eastern Highlands 
of Scotland.
Fl. summer, rather late.
Fig. 495.
3. Canadian Erigeron.
Erigeron canadensis, Linn.
(Fig. 496.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2019.) 
A stiff, erect annual, 1 to 2 feet high, 
glabrous, except a few long, spreading 
hairs.
Leaves narrow, and entire or 
slightly toothed.
Flower-heads very 
small, green or whitish ; very numerous, 
forming a long, narrow, leafy panicle.
Florets minute, the outer ones filiform, 
scarcely longer than the involucre, and 
slightly tinged with red ; central ones 
tubular, yellowish- white.
A native of North America, now esta- 
blished in the greatest abundance as a 
roadside weed in almost all temperate 
and hot countries, and appears occa- 
sionally as such in England.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 496.
COMPOSITE.
419 
Y. LINOSYRIS.
LINOSYKIS.
Habit, involucres, achenes, and pappus of LZrigeron, but the florets 
are all tubular, yellow, and deeply 5-cleft.
A small genus, chiefly North American, with two or three Asiatic 
species, and a single European one.
1. Common Linosyris.
Linosyris vulgaris, Cass.
(Fig. 497.) 
(Chrysocoma Linosyris, Eng. Bot.
A glabrous, erect perennial, 6 inches 
to a foot high, with numerous narrow- 
linear, entire leaves, more or less dot- 
ted.
Flower-heads in a rather compact, 
terminal corymb, of a bright yellow.
Involucres imbricated, with numerous 
narrow bracts shorter than the florets 
and pappus.
Achenes somewhat com- 
pressed, and silky.
In clefts of rocks, and on stony hills, 
and especially along the gravelly banks 
of great rivers in south-central and 
southern Europe to the Caucasus, not 
extending to northern Germany, al- 
though reappearing on the Isle of Oe- 
land, in the Baltic.
In Britain, con- 
fined to a few limestone cliffs on the 
southern and western coasts of England.
Fl. end of summer or autumn.
t. 2505.
Goldilocks.' 
Fig. 497.
VI.
GOLDENROD.
SOLIDAGO.
Herbs, usually tall, perennial, and leafy, with numerous rather 
small, yellow, radiate flower-heads.
Involucres imbricate, in few rows.
Receptacle without scales.
Outer florets ligulate and few, inner ones 
tubular, all yellow.
Style and anthers of Aster.
Achenes cylindrical, 
with a pappus of many simple hairs.
A considerable North American genus, with a single species spread- 
ing over central and northern Asia and Europe.
It differs from Aster 
in the yellow rays and cylindrical achenes, from Inula in the fewer 
2 k2 
420 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
ligulate florets, besides the microscopical but constant character de- 
rived from the tailless anthers.
1. Common Goldenrod.
Solidago Virga-aurea, Linn.
(Fig. 498.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 301.) 
Stock more or less tufted.
Stems 
erect, stiff, nearly simple, 6 inches to 2 
feet high, glabrous or minutely downy.
Radical leaves obovate and stalked, 
stem-leaves oblong or lanceolate, slightly 
toothed, shortly tapering at the base.
Mower-heads crowded in a narrow-ob- 
long terminal panicle often leafy at the 
base, not large, of a bright yellow, each 
with a spreading ray of about 10 or 12 
florets, and about twice that number of 
tubular ones in the disk.
In woods, very common throughout 
Europe, and central and Russian Asia, 
and northern America, to the Arctic re- 
gions.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. sum- 
mer and autumn.
Several North American species have 
been long cultivated in our flower-gar- 
dens, and among them the S.
lanceolata 
to have occasionally established itself in their vicinity.
Fig. 498.
is said 
VII.
INULE.
INULA.
Herbs, usually erect, with alternate, entire or toothed leaves.
Flower- 
heads in terminal corymbs or panicles, or rarely solitary.
Involucral 
bracts imbricated in several rows.
Florets all yellow, the outer rows 
ligulate and radiating, or rarely short and concealed by the involucre ; 
those of the disk tubular.
Receptacle without scales.
Achenes cylin- 
drical or angular, with a pappus of many hairs.
Anthers tipped at the 
lower end by two minute hair-like points called tails.
A numerous European and north Asiatic genus, technically distin- 
guished from Goldenrod by the tails of the anthers ; but these, though 
COMPOSITE.
421 
constant, are so minute as not to be seen without a careful dissection 
and good magnifier.
The florets of the ray are also very numerous 
and narrow in Inule, much fewer and broader in Goldenrod.
Flower-heads very large, with broadly ovate mvolucral bracts 1.
Elecampane I.
Flower- heads less than an inch in diameter.
Involucral 
bracts narrow.
Bays considerably longer than the involucre.
Grlabrous plants, with narrow thick, succulent leaves .
2. Samphire I.
Downy plant, wdth flat, ovate or oblong, stem- clasping 
leaves '.
4. Common I.
Rays very minute, concealed by the involucre, or scarcely 
longer.
Tall perennial.
Flower-heads ovoid, in dense corymbs 3.
Rigid I.
Annual, scarcely a foot high.
Flower-heads broad, softly 
downy, in a loose, leafy corymb 5.
Small 1.
1. Elecampane Inule.
Inula Helenium, Linn.
(Fig. 499.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1546.
Elecampane.) 
A coarse perennial, with stout, erect, 
scarcely branched stems, about2 feethigh.
Eadical leaves often a foot long, oblong, 
and narrowed into a stalk ; the upper 
ones ovate or oblong, clasping the stem, 
nearly glabrous above, more or less 
softly hairy underneath.
Flower-heads 
very large, solitary at the ends of the 
branches.
Involucral bracts broadly 
ovate and softly hairy.
Florets of the 
ray numerous, long, and linear.
In rich hilly pastures, in central and 
southern Europe, and eastward to the 
Caucasus and Himalaya, and, having 
been much cultivated in former days in 
herb-gardens, it has established itself 
in many places further north.
It may 
therefore be only an introduced plant in 
Britain, when growing, as it generally does, in the neighbourhood of 
old castles and gardens ; but it is also believed to be truly indigenous 
in some parts of southern England, South Wales, and Ireland.
Fl.
summer and autumn.
422 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
2. Samphire Inule.
Inula crithmoid.es, Linn.
(Fig. 500.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 68.
Golden Samphire.) 
A glabrous, erect perennial, about a 
foot high or rather more.
Leaves nume- 
rous, linear, thick and succulent, entire 
or with one or two small teeth at the 
base.
Flower-heads not large, solitary 
on the short branches of a short, leafy 
panicle.
Involucral bracts numerous 
and narrow.
Florets of the ray bright- 
yellow and spreading, not so narrow or 
so numerous as in the other species, yet 
twice as many as in the common Golden- 
rod.
In salt-marshes, in western Europe, 
and all round the Mediterranean ; fre- 
quent on the southern and western coasts 
of Britain up to Kirkcudbright and Wig- 
ton, both in salt-marshes and on dry 
maritime limestone rocks.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
Fig. 500.
3. Rigid Inule.
Inula Conyza, DC.
(Fig. 501.) 
{Conyza squarrosa, Eng. Bot.
t. 1195.
Ploughman s Spikenard.) 
A hard, erect biennial, 2 to 3 feet 
high, covered with a short down, rough 
on the stem, soft and cottony on the 
under side of the leaves.
Leaves ovate- 
lanceolate, the lower ones stalked, the 
upper sessile.
Flower-heads numerous, 
in a terminal corymb.
Involucres ovoid ; 
the bracts numerous, the outer ones tip- 
ped with green, the inner linear, reddish, 
and erect.
Outer florets numerous but 
very small, their purple styles alone pro- 
truding beyond the involucre, so that the 
plant appears at first sight to have no 
ray.
In hedges and open woods, on banks 
and roadsides, in central and southern 
Europe to the Caucasus, extending north- 
wards into Denmark, but not into north- 
Fig. 501.
COMPOSITE.
423 
eastern Germany.
In Britain, 
neither in Ireland nor Scotland.
as far north as Westmoreland, but 
Fl. summer and autumn.
4. Common Inule.
Inula dysenterica, Linn.
(Fig. 502.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1115.
Fleabane.) 
Rootstock perennial, with ascending 
or erect stems 1 to 2 feet high, loosely 
branched, and, as well as the foliage, 
more or less downy or woolly.
Leaves 
oblong, much waved, clasping the stem 
with rounded auricles.
Flower-heads 
pedunculate in the upper axils or at the 
ends of the branches, hemispherical, 
rather more than half an inch in diame- 
ter, with a ray of very numerous, linear, 
spreading florets of a bright-yellow.
In- 
volucral bracts also numerous and nar- 
row.
Pappus-hairs few and shorter than 
in the three preceding species, and 
enclosed at the base in a minute mem- 
branous cup.
In wet pastures, ditches, and road- 
sides, in central and southern Europe 
and western and central Asia, extending 
northwards to the Baltic.
Abundant in 
southern England and Ireland, becoming rare in the north, and scarcely 
found in Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
This and the following 
species are sometimes separated as a genus, under the name of 
Fulicaria.
Fig. 502.
5. Small Inule.
Inula Pulicaria, Linn.
(Eig. 503.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1196.
Fleabane) 
An erect, branching annual, seldom a foot high, with narrower and 
less woolly leaves than the common J., which it resembles in manj^ re- 
spects.
Elower-heads much smaller, and the florets of the ray, although 
very numerous, yellow, and spreading, are so short as at first sight 
to escape observation.
The minute outer scales of the pappus are dis- 
tinct, not forming a little cup as in the common I.
424 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
Fig. 503.
In moist waste places, roadsides, 
and sandy heaths, ranging over Eu- 
rope, extending eastward across Rus- 
sian Asia, and northward to southern 
Sweden.
In Britain, chiefly in south- 
eastern England, and not known either 
in Ireland or Scotland.
FL summer 
and autumn.
VIII.
DAISY.
BELLIS.
Low herbs, with alternate or radical, entire or toothed leaves.
Elower-heads solitary, on radical or axillary peduncles, with a yellow 
disk and white or pink ray.
Involucre hemispherical, with many 
bracts of equal length, in about two rows, and green, not scarious, at 
the tips.
Receptacle conical, without scales.
Achenes compressed, 
without any pappus.
Style nearly that of Aster.
A small genus, extending over the temperate regions of the northern 
hemisphere.
1. Common Daisy.
Bellis perennis, Linn.
(Eig. 504.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 424.) 
Stock perennial, tufted.
Leaves radical, obovate or oblong, slightly 
toothed.
Peduncles also radical, leafless, bearing single flower-heads.
Involucres green, nearly glabrous.
Elorets of the ray ligulate, white or 
tinged with pink ; those of the disk numerous, small, and tubular.
COMPOSITE.
421 
In pastures, common throughout Eu- 
rope, except the extreme north, but ap- 
parently not extending eastward beyond 
the Caucasus, nor ascending high into 
mountain regions.
Abundant all over 
Britain.
FL nearly the whole year 
round.
Fig. 504 
IX.
CHRYSANTHEMUM.
CHRYSANTHEMUM.
Annual or perennial herbs (or in some exotic species, shrubs), with 
alternate toothed or variously dissected leaves, and radiating flower- 
heads, solitary on terminal peduncles, or in corymbs.
Involucres he- 
mispherical, with a few rows of imbricate bracts, more or less scarious 
on the edges.
Receptacle flat or convex, without scales.
Achenes 
angular or striate, without any pappus, but sometimes crowned with a 
minute raised border.
Style nearly that of Senecio.
A considerable genus, extending over Europe, northern and central 
Asia, and northern Africa.
It has been divided by modern botanists 
into a number of small genera, founded upon minute, almost micro- 
scopical, characters, having little relation to general habit.
Among 
them Pyrethrwm has been the most generally adopted, although bo- 
tanists are but little agreed as to the characters or species which should 
be assigned to it.
Ray yellow 2.
Corn C.
Ray white.
Leaves toothed only 1.
Oxeye C.
Leaves pinnate.
Flower-heads in corymbs.
Segments of the leaves pin- 
natifid and toothed 3.
Feverfew C.
Flower-heads on terminal peduncles.
Leaves 2 or 3 times 
pinnate, with narrow-linear or filiform lobes ....
4. Scentless C.
The old yellow and white Chrysanthemums of our cottage gardens 
426 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
belong to a north African species (C.
coronarium).
The late autumnal 
flowers now so generally cultivated, under the name of Chrysanthe- 
mums, are varieties of the C.
indicum from China.
1. Oxeye Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum Leucan- 
themum, Linn.
(Fig. 505.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 601.
Oxeye Daisy.) 
A perennial, with erect, simple or 
slightly branched stems, 1 to 2 feet high, 
glabrous or slightly downy.
Radical 
leaves obovate and coarsely toothed, on 
long stalks ; stem-leaves narrow, sessile, 
with a few coarse teeth.
Flower-heads 
solitary on long terminal peduncles, and 
rather large .
Involucral bracts bordered 
by a brown, scarious edge.
Florets of 
the ray white, more than half an inch 
long ; those of the disk numerous, small, 
and yellow.
In pastures, on banks, etc., through- 
out Europe and Russian Asia, from the 
Mediterranean to the Arctic Circle.
Extends all over Britain.
Fl. summer, 
commencing in spring.
Fig. 505.
2. Corn Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum segetum, 
Linn.
(Fig. 506.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 540.
Corn Marigold.) 
A glabrous, erect annual, about a foot high or rather more, with 
spreading branches.
Lower leaves obovate and stalked ; upper ones 
narrow and stem-clasping, generally with a few deeply-cut teeth at the 
top.
Flower-heads rather large, on terminal peduncles ; the invo- 
lucral bracts broadly scarious ; the florets of the ray as well as the disk 
of a deep golden-yellow.
COMPOSITE.
427 
A cornfield weed, probably of Medi- 
terranean origin, bnt now common all 
over Europe, except the extreme north.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. summer and 
autumn.
Fig. 506.
3. Feverfew Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum Par- 
thenium, Pers.
(Fig. 507.) 
(Pyrethrum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1231.
Matricaria, Bab. Man.) 
Stock perennial, shortly branched ; 
the flowering stems erect, branching, a 
foot high or rather more.
Leaves pin- 
nate ; the segments ovate or oblong, 
pinnatifid and toothed.
Flower-heads 
numerous, about half an inch in dia- 
meter, in a terminal corymb ; the florets 
of the ray white, ovate or oblong, those 
of the disk numerous and yellow.
Achenes crowned by a minute toothed 
border.
On roadsides, and in waste places, 
in central and southern Europe to the 
Caucasus, and spread from cultivation 
much further north, as well as to many 
other parts of the globe.
Dispersed over 
a great part of Britain, but perhaps not 
truly indigenous.
Fl. summer.
A very 
double variety is now frequent in our 
flower-gardens.
Fig. 507.
428 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
4. Scentless Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum inodorum, 
Linn.
(Fig. 508.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 676.
Matricaria, Bab. Man.) 
An erect or spreading, branched an- 
nual, 1 to 1^ feet high, with the leaves of 
a Camomile, twice or thrice pinnate, 
with numerous narrow-linear, almost 
capillary lobes.
Flower-heads rather 
large, on terminal peduncles.
Involucral 
bracts with a brown, scarious edge, as in 
the Oxeye C.
Florets of the ray white, 
about 7 or 8 lines long ; those of the 
disk numerous and yellow.
Receptacle 
convex, hemispherical, or ovoid, but not 
so conical nor hollow as in Matricary.
Achenes prominently ribbed, crowned 
with a minute, entire or 4-toothed 
border, and marked outside near the top 
with two glandular spots.
In fields and waste places, common in 
Europe and Russian Asia, from the Me- 
diterranean to the Arctic regions.
Ex- 
tends all over Britain.
FL the tohole season.
A maritime variety, 
with the leaves rather succulent, and the flowers not so large, has 
been, considered as a distinct species (Pyrethrum maritimum, Eng.
Bot. t.
979).
Fig. 508.
X. MATRICARY.
MATRICARIA.
Habit, foliage, and conical receptacle of Camomile, but the receptacle 
without scales, as in Chrysanthemum.
Achenes, as in both genera, 
angular or striate, without any pappus, but sometimes crowned with a 
minute border.
A very small European, northern Asiatic, and North American 
genus.
1. Common Matricary.
Matricaria Camomilla, Linn.
(Fig. 509.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1232.
Wild Camomile) 
Eesembles so closely the fetid Camomile that it can scarcely be dis- 
tinguished but by the absence of the scales between the florets.
It is, like 
COMPOSITE.
429 
tliat plant, an erect, branching annual ; 
the leaves twice or thrice pinnate, with 
short bnt very narrow linear segments, 
and the ilower-heads rather large, on 
terminal peduncles.
Involucral bracts 
all nearly of the same length, with sca- 
rious edges.
Kay florets white.
Re- 
ceptacle much elongated as the flowering 
advances, and hollow.
Achenes without 
any border at the top.
In fields and waste places, in Europe 
and Russian Asia.
Probably diffused 
all over Britain, but often confounded 
with the com or the fetid Camomile.
Fl.
the whole season.
Fig. 509, 
XL CAMOMILE.
ANTHEMES 
Herbs, with alternate, much cut leaves, and radiating flower-heads, 
solitary on terminal peduncles, or in a loose corymb.
Involucres 
hemispherical, with a few rows of bracts more or less scarious on 
the edges.
Receptacle convex or conical, with scales between all 
or at least the central florets.
Achenes angular or striate, without 
any pappus, or crowned by a minute border.
Style nearly that of 
Senecio.
A rather large genus, spread over Europe, temperate Asia, and 
northern Africa ; differing from most Chrysanthemums in habit, and 
from all in the scales of the receptacle.
It has recently been divided 
into several groups, too technical to be adopted as genera.
Rays yellow ....'.
4. Yellow C.
Rays white.
Florets of the ray without any style.
Erect, glabrous annual 1.
Fetid C.
Florets of the ray with a style.
Plant downy.
Procumbent or creeping perennial.
Receptacle-scales 
oblong and obtuse 3.
Common C.
Erect or decumbent branching annual.
Receptacle- scales 
narrow and pointed 2.
Corn C.
430 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
1. Fetid Camomile.
Anthemis Cotula, Linn.
(Fig. 510.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1772.
Stink Mayweed.) 
An erect, branching annual, a foot 
high, or rather more, glabrous, but 
sprinkled with glandular dots, and emit- 
ting a disagreeable smell when rubbed.
Lower leaves twice or thrice, upper ones 
once pinnate, with very narrow-linear, 
short, pointed lobes, entire or divided.
Flower-heads in a loose terminal corymb.
Involucre slightly cottony, the inner 
bracts s carious at the top.
Receptacle 
convex from the beginning, lengthening 
out as the flowering advances into a nar- 
row oblong shape, with a few linear, 
pointed scales among the central florets.
Hay-florets white, without any trace of 
the style.
Achenes rough with glandu- 
lar dots, without any border.
In cultivated ground, and waste places ; 
a common weed all over Europe and 
Russian Asia, except the extreme north.
Abundant in southern Eng- 
land and Ireland, much less so in the north, and rare in Scotland.
FL 
all summer and autumn.
Fig. 510.
2. Corn Camomile.
Anthemis arvensis, Linn.
(Pig. 511.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 602.) 
A coarser plant than the fetid C, sometimes biennial, often decum- 
bent, more or less downy with minute silky hairs, the leafy branches 
terminating in single flower-heads.
Segments of the leaves shorter, 
and not so narrow as in the last, the flower-heads rather larger, the 
bracts of the receptacle usually broader, and the florets of the ray have 
always a style although they do not always perfect their fruit.
Less widely diffused than the fetid C, and chiefly south European, 
but extends also over a great part of the Continent.
Certainly not 
very common in England or Ireland, and local or rare in Scotland, 
but so frequently confounded with allied species that its precise 
distribution is difficult to ascertain.
Fl. spring and summer.
A 
maritime variety, with a more spreading stem and thicker leaves, 
COMPOSITE.
431 
found on the north-east coast of Eng- 
land, has been figured as A.
maritima 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2370), but the true plant 
of that name is limited to the shores of 
the Mediterranean.
The British plant 
has been since described as a species, 
under the name of A.
anglica.
Fig. 511.
3. Common Camomile.
Anthemis nobilis, Linn.
(Fig. 512.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 980.) 
A procumbent or creeping, branched 
perennial; the flowering branches shortly 
ascending, and leafy.
Segments of the 
leaves fine, and pointed as in the fetid C, 
but fewer and more compact.
Flower- 
heads on terminal peduncles, with white 
rays.
Inner involucral bracts more 
scarious at the top than in the last two 
species.
Scales of the receptacle rather 
broad, obtuse, and nearly as long as the 
central florets.
A native, apparently, of western Eu- 
rope, and chiefly of sandy pastures near 
the sea, but having been long cultivated, 
it has established itself in so many places 
that its precise area cannot well be 
made out.
Evidently indigenous in southern England and Ireland, 
but decreases rapidly northward, and not a true native of Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 512.
432 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
4. Yellow Camomile.
Anthemis tinctoria, Linn.
(Fig. 513.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1472.) 
This lias much the habit and aspect of 
the corn C, but is usually a taller plant 
and more downy, the leaves less divided, 
with pinnatifid or toothed segments, the 
flower-heads rather larger, and the rays 
of a bright-yellow.
In cultivated and waste places, in cen- 
tral and eastern Europe and Russian 
Asia, abundant in Denmark and eastern 
France, but scarcely further west.
In 
Britain, said to be indigenous in some of 
the eastern counties of England.
Fl. end 
of summer* 
Fig. 513.
XII.
ACHILLEA.
ACHILLEA.
Herbs, mostly perennial, with alternate, much divided, or rarely 
simple leaves ; the flower-heads rather small, in a terminal corymb, 
with white or pink rays, and a yellow disk.
Involucres ovoid or hemi- 
spherical, the bracts imbricated, only slightly scarious on the edges.
Receptacle small, not convex, with scales between the florets.
Achenes 
without any pappus.
Style nearly that of Senecio.
A considerable European and west Asiatic genus, divided by modern 
botanists into two sections or genera, represented by the two British 
species, but separated by very trifling characters.
Leaves linear, serrated.
Flower-heads few, hemispherical .
1. Sneezewort A , 
Leaves much divided.
Flower-heads numerous, small, and 
ovoid 2.
Milfoil H.
1. Sneezewort Achillea.
Achillea Ptarmica, Linn.
(Fig. 514.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 757.
Sneezewort.) 
Rootstock perennial and creeping.
Stems erect and glabrous, 1 to 2 
feet high, nearly simple.
Leaves rather broadly linear, and regularly 
COMPOSITE.
433 
serrate.
Flower-heads few, in a loose ter- 
minal corymb.
Involucres hemispherical, 
slightly cottony, smaller than in the 
Camomiles, but much larger than in the 
Milfoil A.
Florets of the ray generally 
from 10 to 15, short, broad, and white ; 
those of the disk numerous, interspersed 
with small linear scales.
In moist, chiefly hilly pastures, in 
northern and central Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia, becoming a mountain plant in 
southern Europe, yet not extending to 
the Arctic regions.
Common in Britain.
Fl. summer, rather late.
Fig. 514.
2. Milfoil Achillea.
Achillea Millefolium, Linn.
(Fig. 515.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 758.
Milfoil or Yarrow.) 
Stock perennial, creeping under- 
ground, with numerous short, leafy bar- 
ren branches, and erect, almost simple 
flowering stems, about a foot high.
Leaves oblong or linear in their outline, 
but finely cut into numerous short, but 
very narrow and deeply pinnatifid seg- 
ments.
Flower-heads numerous, small, 
and ovoid, in a dense terminal corymb.
Florets of the ray seldom above 5 or 6 
in each head, white or pink.
In pastures, meadows, waste places, 
etc., very abundant in Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia from the Mediterranean to the 
Arctic Circle, and extends over a great 
part of North America.
It is also one 
of the commonest of British plants.
Fl.
the whole summer.
It varies with the 
foliage nearly glabrous or densely co- 
vered with white woolly hairs.
VOL.
I. 2 L 
Fig. 515.
434 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
XIII.
DIOTIS.
DIOTIS.
A single, very cottony species, distinguished generally from Achillea 
by the florets, all tubular, with two projecting ears at the base, which 
enclose the achene and remain upon it after the upper part falls off.
1. Sea Diotis.
Diotis maritima, Cass.
(Fig. 516.) 
(Santolina.
Eng. Bot.
t. 141.) 
Hootstock perennial and creeping ; the 
stems branching at the base, hard and 
almost woody, seldom a foot high, co- 
vered, as well as the leaves and involu- 
cres, with a dense, white, cottony wool.
Leaves alternate, oblong, entire or 
slightly toothed, about half an inch long.
Flower-heads nearly globular, about 4 
lines diameter, in dense terminal co- 
rymbs.
Florets yellow and small.
Ee- 
ceptacle convex, with scales between the 
florets.
Achenes without pappus or 
border except the persistent base of the 
floret.
In maritime sands on the Mediter- 
ranean and Atlantic.
Extends on the 
English coasts up to Anglesea on one 
side and Suffolk on the other, found also 
Fig. 516.
on the coast of Waterford in Ireland.
Fl. end of summer or autumn.
XIV.
TANSY.
TANACETUM.
Herbs, with much divided, alternate leaves.
Flower-heads hemi- 
spherical, in terminal corymbs.
Involucral bracts imbricated, scarious 
at the edges.
Receptacle without scales.
Florets yellow, all tubular, 
or the outer ones ligulate but not longer than the others.
Achenes 
angular, with a flat top, without any pappus.
A small genus, from the Mediterranean and Caucasian regions, dif- 
fering from Artemisia technically in the shape of the achene, but more 
evidently in the larger, more yellow, corymbose, not paniculate, flower- 
heads.
COMPOSITE.
435 
1. Common Tansy.
Tanacetum vulgare, Linn.
(Fig. 517.) 
(Eng. Bot.
1. 1229.) 
A stout, erect perennial, 2 to 3 feet 
high, glabrous or slightly downy, with 
a strong scent and bitter savour.
Root- 
stock creeping.
Leaves rather large, 
pinnate, with oblong-linear, pinnatifid or 
toothed segments.
Flower-heads nu- 
merous, hemispherical, about 4 lines dia- 
meter, of a golden yellow, in a large 
terminal corymb.
On the edges of fields, roadsides, and 
waste places, in Europe and Russian 
Asia, from the Mediterranean to the 
Arctic Circle.
Extends all over Britain, 
either indigenous or in some places in- 
troduced.
Fl. end of summer.
Fig. 517.
XV.
ARTEMISIA.
ARTEMISIA.
Herbs or shrubs, usually highly aromatic, with narrow, alternate 
leaves, usually much divided, and often white or grey, at least on the 
under side.
Flower-heads small, in terminal leafy racemes or panicles.
Involucral bracts imbricated, usually loosely cottony, with slightly 
scarious edges.
Florets the length of the involucres, yellow or greenish, 
either all tubular and 5-toothed, or the central ones tubular, 5-toothed, 
and male or barren, and the outer ones filiform, or 3-toothed, female, 
and fertile.
Receptacle without scales.
Achenes obovate, rounded or 
narrow at the top, without any pappus.
A numerous genus, often covering vast tracts of land in eastern 
Europe and central Asia, and extending over nearly the whole of 
the northern hemisphere from the Arctic regions to the borders of 
the tropics.
Stem spreading, much branched.
Segments of the leaves 
narrow-linear or subulate.
Stem and leaves cottony-white.
Involucres narrow-ovoid 
or cylindrical, cottony 2.
Sea A.
436 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
Stem and leaves green or reddish.
Involucres ovoid, 
glabrous 1.
Field A.
Flowering stems or branches tall and erect.
Segments of the 
leaves flat, broadly linear, or lanceolate.
Leaves green above, white underneath, with pointed seg- 
ments .
3. Common A.
Leaves silky, whitish on both sides, with obtuse segments 4.
Wormwood A .
The shrubby Southernwood and the Tar agon of our gardens are 
species of Artemisia; the latter (A, Dracunculus) is one of the very 
few species in which the leaves are not dissected.
1. Field Artemisia.
Artemisia campestris, Linn.
(Fig. 518.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t, 338.) 
Stock herbaceous and hard, or shrubby, 
low, and branched ; the annual branches 
twiggy, very spreading or procumbent, 
a foot long or more, nearly glabrous, 
often turning red.
Leaves small, once 
or twice pinnate, with few very narrow- 
linear segments, green, at least on the 
upper side.
Flower-heads small, ovoid, 
in numerous loose spikes or racemes, 
forming a long leafy panicle.
Involucre 
not cottony, containing 5 or 6 outer fe- 
male florets, and about as many central, 
male or barren ones.
In heaths, and dry, sandy, or stony 
wastes, widely spread over Europe and 
temperate Asia, extending far into Scan- 
dinavia.
In Britain, almost peculiar to 
a small tract of country in the north- 
west of Suffolk and adjacent portion of 
Norfolk.
Fl. autumn.
Fig. 518.
2. Sea Artemisia.
Artemisia maritima, Linn.
(Fig. 519.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1706, and A.
gallica, Eng. Bot.
t. 1001.) 
A much branched, decumbent or nearly erect undershrub, more or less 
covered with a close white cotton.
Leaves twice pinnate, with narrow- 
linear segments, shorter and more compact than in the field A.
COMPOSITE.
437 
Flower-heads small, narrow-ovoid or 
nearly cylindrical, erect or drooping, 
each containing from 3 to 5 or 6 florets, 
all tubular and fertile.
In sandy wastes, generally near the 
sea, occupying large tracts of country 
near the Caspian and Black Seas, and 
extending ronnd the Mediterranean, and 
along the Atlantic, up to the coasts of 
Britain, where however it is not very 
frequent.
Fl. autumn.
Fig. 519.
3. Common Artemisia.
Artemisia vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 520.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 978.
Mugwort.) 
Stock thick and woody, but short, 
with erect flowering stems, 2 to 3 feet 
high.
Leaves once or twice deeply 
pinnatifid, with lanceolate, pointed lobes 
or segments, coarsely-toothed or lobed, 
green and glabrous above, very white 
underneath.
Flower-heads ovoid, with 
cottony involucres, forming a long ter- 
minal panicle, each head containing 12 
to 20 complete florets and a few female 
ones, all fertile.
On roadsides and waste places, either 
indigenous or introduced, over nearly 
the whole area of the genus.
Common 
in Britain.
Fl. end of summer, and 
autumn.
The A.
ccerulescens (Eng. Bot.
t. 2426) is a garden variety of this 
plant.
Fig. 520.
438 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
4. Wormwood Artemisia.
Artemisia Absinthium, Linn.
(Fig. 521.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1230.
Wormwood or Absinth.) 
Stock short, but branched and leafy, 
sometimes almost woody ; the flower- 
ing stems erect and hard but annual, 
1 to 2 feet high ; the whole plant of a 
greyish-white, with a very close al- 
most silky down.
Leaves almost orbi- 
cular in their general outline, but 
much cut into oblong-linear, obtuse 
lobes.
Flower-heads numerous, droop- 
ing, nearly hemispherical, and larger 
than in the other British species ; the 
outer bracts narrow-linear, the inner 
ones very broad.
Central florets nume- 
rous and mostly fertile; the outer fe- 
male ones small and often barren.
On roadsides and waste places, over 
the greater part of Europe and Russian 
Asia, but in many cases introduced only, 
having been formerly much cultivated 
for its bitter qualities.
In Britain it ap- 
pears truly indigenous near the sea in many parts of England and 
southern Scotland ; in the interior it is confined to the neighbour- 
hood of villages and habitations.
Fl. autumn.
Fig. 521.
XVI.
CUDWEED.
GNAPHALIUM.
Herbs, more or less covered with a grey or white, cottony wool ; the 
leaves narrow and entire.
Flower-heads small, sessile, often clustered, 
rarely forming terminal corymbs.
Involucral bracts imbricated, cot- 
tony outside, and more or less dry, scarious, and often coloured at the 
tips.
Receptacle small, without scales.
Florets of the centre tubular, 
but often barren; those of the circumference filiform and female, or 
the two kinds separated in different heads.
Anthers with minute 
bristles or hair-like points at their base.
Style of Senecio.
Achenes 
with a pappus of simple hairs.
If taken in its integrity, this genus is one of the most extensive 
among Composites, and the widest-diffused over the globe.
It has been, 
composite.
439 
however, subdivided into a very large number of small genera upon 
minute characters, the natural value of which is scarcely yet satisfac- 
torily established.
The most marked of them applicable to the British 
species, and which may be considered at any rate as sections, are the 
following : — 1.
Antennaeia ; flower-heads dioecious, comprising the 
dioecious C.
and the pearl C.
2. Meeope ; hairs of the pappus com- 
bined in a ring at the base ; the wood C.
and the dwarf C.
3. Filago ; 
receptacle bearing a row of scales between the outer and the next row 
of florets ; the common C, narroiv C, and least C.
Leaving in 4, 
Gnaphalium, the somewhat dissimilar Jersey C.
and marsh C.
Most of the Composite Everlastings of our gardens belong to the 
allied genus Ueliclirysum, of which no species are British.
Inner bracts of the involucre pure-white at the tips.
Flower- 
heads almost dioecious, in terminal corymbs.
Low plant, with 3 to 6 heads in the corymb 1.
Mountain C.
Tall plant, with a large corymb of numerous heads ...
2. Pearl C.
Inner bracts of the involucre brown or pale at the tips.
Flower-heads in clusters or rarely solitary, including both 
kinds of florets.
Perennials.
Flower-heads in leafy spikes, or terminal and 
few.
Flower-heads in oblong or elongated leafy spikes.
Outer 
filiform florets numerous.
Achenes not flattened .
. 4.
Wood C.
Flower-heads solitary or very few, on a dwarf stem.
Outer filiform florets few.
Achenes flattened ...
5. Dwarf C.
Flower-heads densely clustered, terminal, almost corym- 
bose.
Outer filiform florets numerous.
Achenes not 
flattened 3.
Jersey C.
Annuals.
Flower-heads small, numerous, in lateral or ter- 
minal clusters.
Clusters terminal, surrounded by leaves much longer than 
the heads.
Florets very numerous, all within the involucre without 
intervening scales 6.
Marsh C.
Outer filiform florets separated by scales of the recep- 
tacle, outermost of all embraced by the inner in- 
volucral bracts .
.9.
Narroiv C.
Clusters terminal or lateral ; the surrounding leaves 
shorter or scarcely longer.
Involucres very small, in very dense clusters, with a row 
of scales on the receptacle within the outer row of 
florets.
Clusters few, globular, and terminal, with numerous 
heads 7.
Common C.
Clusters numerous, lateral and terminal, with less 
than 10 heads.
440 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
Leaves linear-lanceolate 8.
Field C.
Leaves linear-subulate 9.
Narrow C.
Involucres loosely clustered, 2 or 3 lines diameter.
Florets all within the inner bracts of the involucre 3.
Jersey C.
1. Mountain Cudweed.
Gnaphalium dioicum, Linn.
(Fig. 522.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 267.
Antennaria, Brit.
Fl. A.
hyperborea, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2640.
Mountain Everlasting, or Cafs-ear.) 
A small perennial, with a tufted or 
creeping leafy stalk, and almost simple 
flowering stems, 2 to 4 or 5 inches high.
Lower leaves ob ovate or oblong ; upper 
ones linear, white underneath or on both 
sides.
Flower-heads 3 or 4 together, in 
compact, terminal corymbs, and dioe- 
cious.
In the males the inner bracts 
of the involucre have broad, white, petal- 
like tips, spreading like the ligulate 
florets of a radiating flower-head ; the 
florets all tubular and short.
In the 
females the inner bracts are narrow, 
Fig. 522.
white at the tips, but not spreading, and 
the florets all filiform, with a long pro- 
truding pappus to the achenes.
In mountain pastures, common in northern Europe, Asia, and 
America, to the Arctic regions, and in the great mountain-ranges of 
central and southern Europe and Russian Asia.
Abundant in Scot- 
land, Wales, Ireland and many parts of England, descending occa- 
sionally nearly to the coast level.
Fl. summer, rather early.
2. Pearl Cudweed.
Gnaphalium margaritaceum, Linn.
(Fig. 523.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2018.
Antennaria, Brit.
Fl.) 
An erect perennial, 2 to 3 feet high.
Leaves linear-lanceolate, white 
and cottony underneath or on both sides.
Flower-heads numerous, in 
flat terminal corymbs, usually dioecious, but less absolutely so than 
in the mountain C.
; the involucres of both kinds with several rows of 
very white, broad, loose or spreading bracts.
COMPOSITE.
441 
A North American and central Asiatic 
plant, long cultivated among our garden 
Everlastings, and now apparently na- 
turalized in a few localities in Mon- 
mouthshire and in South Wales.
FL 
end of summer.
Fig. 523.
3. Jersey Cudweed.
Gnaphalium luteo-album, Linn.
(Fig. 524.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1002.) 
An annual or biennial, scarcely a foot 
high ; the stems erect or ascending, and 
all covered with soft, white cotton.
Leaves narrow.
Flower-heads 2 or 3 
lines in diameter, irregularly clustered 
in a dense corymb.
Involucral scales 
scarious at the top, of a pale-brown, yel- 
low, or dirty- white colour, but not 
spreading.
Florets very numerous, 
mostly female and filiform, with a few 
tubular male or complete ones in the 
centre.
In sandy fields, pastures, and waste 
places, dispersed nearly all over the 
temperate and warmer regions of the 
globe, extending in Europe to the Baltic, 
but not beyond.
In the British Isles, 
hitherto confined to Jersey.
FL sum- 
mer and autumn.
VOL.
I. 
Fig. 524.
2 M 
442 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
4. Wood Cudweed.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum, Linn.
(Fig. 525.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 913.
G. rectum, Eng. Bot.
t. 124.) 
Stock perennial, tnfted or shortly 
creeping, with long-stalked, lanceolate 
leaves.
Flowering stems nearly simple, 
erect, from 2 to 6 or 8 inches high, with 
linear leaves, usually cottony on the 
under side only, but sometimes on both 
sides.
Flower-heads small, cylindrical 
or ovoid, either solitary or in little clus- 
ters in the axils of the upper leaves, 
forming a long, leafy spike.
Involucres 
scarcely cottony, with brown, shining 
bracts ; the outer filiform florets more 
numerous than the inner tubular ones.
Achenes slender, nearly cylindrical.
In open woods, heaths, and pastures, 
in northern and central Europe and 
Russian Asia, and all round the Arctic 
Circle ; becoming a mountain plant in 
the south, and scarcely reaching the 
Mediterranean.
Extends over the whole of Britain, but rare in south- 
western England.
Fl. summer and autumn.
A high alpine or Arctic 
variety, with the leaves cottony on both sides, and the flower-heads 
darker coloured, in a short terminal spike, has been distinguished 
under the name of G.
norvegicum or fuscatum, and has been found on 
some of the Scotch mountains.
Fig. 525.
5. Dwarf Cudweed.
Gnaphalium supinum, Linn.
(Fig. 526.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1193, unusually luxuriant.) 
A small, tufted perennial, with narrow leaves, sometimes resembling 
dwarf specimens of the wood C, but the stem seldom 2 inches high, 
bearing only very few flower-heads in a terminal cluster, or only a 
single one ; and sometimes the flower-heads are almost sessile in the 
centre of the radical leaves.
Involucres brown, like those of the wood 
COMPOSITE.
443 
C, but the filiform florets are much 
fewer, and the achenes broader and evi- 
dently flattened.
An Arctic and high alpine plant, ex- 
tending over the principal mountain- 
ranges of Europe and western Asia to the 
Arctic Circle.
Not uncommon in the 
Scotch Highlands.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 526.
6. Marsh Cudweed.
Gnaphalium uliginosum, Linn.
(Fig. 527.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1194.
Cudtueed.) 
A much branched, cottony annual, 
seldom above 6 inches high ; the leaves 
linear or narrow-oblong, the upper ones 
waved on the edges.
Flower-heads small 
and clustered, many together, within a 
tuft of rather long leaves at the extre- 
mity of the branches.
Involucral bracts 
brown and s carious.
Florets about the 
length of the involucre, the 3 or 4 outer 
rows filiform, with a very few tubular ones 
in the centre.
Achenes very minute, 
scarcely compressed, with a very decidu- 
ous pappus of distinct hairs.
In fields and waste places, especially 
in wet, sandy situations, throughout 
Europe and Russian Asia, from the Me- 
diterranean to the Arctic regions.
Com- 
mon in Britain.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 527.
7. Common Cudweed.
Gnaphalium germanieum, WillcL 
(Fig. 528.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 946.
Filago, Brit.
Fl. F.
apiculata, and F.
sjpatJiulata, 
Bab. Man.
Cudweed.) 
An erect, cottony annual, about 6 or 8 inches high, simple or 
branched at the base ; each stem terminated either by a single globu- 
lar cluster of flower-heads, or throwing out immediately under it 2 
2m 2 
444 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
or 3 branches, each ending in a similar 
cluster.
Leaves erect, lanceolate or 
linear, pointed or obtuse, sometimes, 
slightly spathulate ; those under the 
clusters shorter or rather longer than 
the clusters themselves.
Flower-heads 
very small, about 12 to 20 or 30 in each 
cluster; the involucres ovoid-conical, 
more or less angular, of a pale-yellow or 
brown ; the bracts usually acute.
Florets 
shorter than the involucres ; the outer 
filiform ones mostly concealed among 
the scales of the receptacle (or inner 
bracts of the involucre), with a few, chief- 
ly tubular, in the centre, without scales.
. In dry pastures, and stony or sandy 
wastes, over the whole of Europe and 
western Asia except the extreme north.
Abundant in England, rather less so in 
Scotland.
Fl. the whole summer.
It 
has been subdivided into several sup- 
posed species, upon characters derived from the shorter or longer, 
and more or less obtuse or acute floral leaves, from the quantity of 
cotton on the involucres, and from their obtuse or acute bracts.
Fig. 528.
8. Field Cudweed.
G-naphalium arvense, "Willd.
(Fig. 529.) 
(G.
minimum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1157.
Filago minima, Brit.
Fl.) 
A much more slender and smaller an- 
nual than the common C, which it other- 
wise resembles in foliage and mode of 
growth.
It is more irregularly branched 
at the top, the leaves smaller, the clus- 
ters of flower-heads smaller and more 
numerous, each consisting of from 3 to 
10 minute conical heads.
Involucres cot- 
tony at the base, shining at the tips, and 
only one or jtw r o outer rows of filiform 
florets are amongst the scales of the 
receptacle.
In fields, and stony or sandy wastes, 
with a wider range than that of the 
common C, extending all across Russian 
Asia, and more common in the north, al- 
though not an Arctic plant.
In Britain, 
I , - ,_, > it has been observed in a few localities 
COMPOSITE.
445 
in England, Ireland, and southern Scotland, but perhaps frequently 
overlooked owing to its small size.
Fl. the whole summer.
9. Narrow Cudweed.
G-naphalium gallicum, Huds.
(Fig. 530.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2369.
Fllago, Brit.
Fl.) 
Very near the ji eld C, but much more 
branched, the leaves almost subulate and 
much longer, the clusters of flower-heads 
very numerous and small, the leaves 
which surround them longer than the 
involucres, whilst in the last two they 
are mostly shorter.
Involucres very 
small and conical, containing but very 
few florets.
Some of the outermost row 
are embraced as it were each by one of 
the inner bracts of the involucre, with a 
row of receptacular scales between them 
and the next row, thus distinguishing 
this species from small specimens of the .
marsh C, which it sometimes resem- 
bles.
In fields and sandy wastes, in western 
and southern Europe, becoming rare in 
Germany.
Yery local in Britain, having 
been chiefly recorded from some of the eastern counties of England.
FL summer.
Fig. 530.
XVII.
SENECIO.
SEKECIO.
Herbs (or, in some exotic species, shrubs), with alternate, toothed or 
divided, rarely entire leaves.
Flower-heads in terminal corymbs ; the 
florets of the disk yellow and tubular, those of the ray also yellow (or, 
in some exotic species, blue, purple, or white), spreading, or rarely 
wanting.
Involucre cylindrical or nearly hemispherical, with 1 or 2 
rows of linear bracts of equal length, often tipped with brown, usually, 
but not always, accompanied by a few small outer bracts at their base.
Receptacle without scales.
Achenes cylindrical, with a pappus of 
simple hairs, usually soft and white.
Branches of the style truncate at 
the top, usually with a tuft of minute hairs.
446 THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
This, the largest of all Composite genera, is spread over every quarter 
of the globe, although the majority of species occupy each a small area.
Several species which have not the small outer bracts to the involucre, 
were distinguished by Linnseus under the name of Cineraria, but the 
character has proved so uncertain that modern botanists have given 
it up.
Leaves cut or divided.
Florets of the ray very small and rolled back, or en- 
tirely ivanting.
Moot annual.
Kay none.
Flower-heads almost sessile, in dense 
corymbs or clusters .
. ' 1.
Groundsel S.
- Ray small and rolled back or rarely wanting.
Flower- 
heads stalked, in loose corymbs.
Whole plant very viscid.
Involucres broadly cy- 
lindrical, of about.
20 bracts, with 2 or 3 short 
outer ones.
Achenes glabrous 2.
Viscous S.
Plant rarely viscid.
Involucres narrow, of about 12 
to 14 bracts ; the outer ones scarcely perceptible.
Achenes silky 3.
Wood S.
Florets of the ray conspicuous and spreading.
Boot annual.
Achenes with short silky hairs 4.
Squalid S.
Achenes quite glabrous 5.
Water S.
Bootstock perennial.
Branches spreading.
Corymb loose and irregular.
Achenes all glabrous 5.
Water S.
Stem tall and erect.
Corymb rather dense, and 
terminal.
Achenes of the disk hairy.
Leaves irregularly pinnate, with a broad terminal 
lobe.
Achenes of the ray glabrous.
Boot- 
stock not creeping 6.
Ragwort S.
Leaves pinnate ; the lobe3 all narrow.
Achenes 
all hairy.
Bootstock shortly creeping ...
7. Narroiv-leavedS.
Leaves undivided, entire or toothed.
Involucres with small, fine outer bracts at the base.
Leaves acutely toothed.
Leaves cottony underneath.
Bay of 12 to 20 florets 8.
Fen S.
Leaves glabrous.
Ray of 5 to 8 florets 9.
Broad-leaved S.
Involucres of a single row of bracts, without small 
outer ones.
Leaves entire or obtusely toothed.
Annual or biennial.
Leaves downy.
Achenes gla- 
brous, strongly ribbed 10.
Marsh S.
Bootstock perennial.
Leaves loosely cottony under- 
neath.
Achenes cottony ; the ribs scarcely pro- 
minent 11.
Field S.
Several exotic species are much cultivated for ornament, especially 
COMPOSITE.
447 
the double-flowering S.
elegans from the Cape, the S.
Cineraria from the 
shores of the Mediterranean, and the numerous varieties of one or two 
Canary Island species, known to our gardeners as greenhouse Cinerarias.
The S.
saracenicus, a tall perennial, from central and eastern Europe, 
with narrow undivided leaves, is said to be perfectly naturalized near 
Stradbally, Queen's County > Ireland.
1. Groundsel Senecio.
Senecio vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 531.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 747.
Groundsel.) 
An erect, branching annual, from 6 
inches to near a foot high, glabrous or 
bearing a little loose, cottony wool.
Leaves pinnatifid, with ovate, toothed or 
jagged lobes.
Flower- heads in close ter- 
minal corymbs or clusters.
Involucres 
cylindrical, of about 20 equal bracts, 
with several outer smaller ones.
Florets 
almost always all tubular, without any 
ray whatever.
Achenes slightly hairy.
A very common weed of cultivation 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
but not extending into the tropics, and 
less disposed than many others to mi- 
grate with man.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. all the year round.
^. KO _, 
,7 Fig. 531.
2. Viscous Senecio.
Senecio viscosus, Linn.
(Fig. 532.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 32, the ray rather too large, and 8.
lividus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2515 ?) 
A coarser, harder, and taller annual than the Groundsel S., and co- 
vered all over with a short, viscous, strong-smelling down, the leaves 
more deeply divided, with narrower, more jagged lobes, the flower- 
heads rather thicker, with more florets, and on longer peduncles, form- 
ing a loose, terminal corymb.
Outer scales of the involucre usually 
but 2 or 3, and nearly half as long as the inner ones, of which there are 
about 20.
Outer florets ligulate, but small, and rolled back so as at 
first sight to escape observation.
Achenes glabrous.
448 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
In waste places, over a great part ot 
Europe, but not common, and does not 
extend so far eastward or northward as 
the Groundsel S.
Scattered over vari- 
ous parts of England, southern Scotland, 
and Ireland, but very local, and seldom 
abundant.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 532.
3. Wood Senecio.
Senecio sylvaticus, Linn.
(Fig. 533.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 748.) 
An annual, with the foliage much like 
that of the Groundsel S., but a taller and 
weaker plant, sometimes 2 feet high or 
more, slightly downy, or nearly glabrous, 
not so viscid nor so strong-smelling as 
the viscous S.
Flower-heads rather nu- 
merous, in a loose corymb, the invo- 
lucres cylindrical, of from 12 to 15 equal 
bracts, with the outer ones very minute 
or wanting.
Outer florets usually ligu- 
late, but small and rolled back as in the 
viscous S., and sometimes altogether 
wanting, as in the Groundsel S.
Achenes 
covered with minute, appressed hairs.
On banks, waste places, and borders 
of woods, in temperate and southern 
Europe, from Scandinavia to the Medi- 
terranean.
Found occasionally in most 
parts of Britain, but not generally com- 
summer and autumn.
Fig. 533.
mon.
Fl.
COMPOSITE.
449 
4. Squalid Senecio.
Senecio squalidus, Linn.
(Fig. 534.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 600.) 
An annual or biennial, or even some- 
times forming a stock of two or three 
years' duration, with the stature of the 
Groundsel S., but quite glabrous.
Leaves 
rather thick, pinnatind, with narrow, 
deeply- cut, or jagged lobes.
Flower- 
heads rather large, in a loose corymb, 
with a bright-yellow, spreading ray, 
as conspicuous as in the Ragioort 8.
Achenes silky-hairy.
A south European species, said to be 
quite established on walls at Oxford, 
Bideford, Cork, and a few other localities 
in southern England and Ireland, but 
evidently not indigenous.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
5. Water Senecio.
Senecio aquations, Huds.
(Fig. 535.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1131.) 
Not always easy to distinguish from 
the Ragwort S.
9 especially from occa- 
sional autumnal offsets of the latter, 
when the main stem has been acciden- 
tally destroyed.
The foliage is nearly 
the same, but the plant appears to be of 
shorter duration, the stem not so tall, 
seldom attaining 2 feet, more branched 
and spreading, the flower-heads larger, 
fewer, on longer peduncles, forming a 
loose, irregular, spreading corymb, and 
especially the achenes appear to be al- 
ways quite glabrous.
In wet places, along ditches, etc., 
spread almost all over Europe, extend- 
ing northward to southern Scandinavia.
Common in Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 535 
450 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
6. Ragwort Senecio.
Senecio Jacobsea, Linn.
(Fig. 53G.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1130, not good.) 
Hootstock short and thick, without 
creeping shoots.
Stems 2 to 4 feet high, 
erect, scarcely branched except at the 
top.
Leaves pinnate, with ovate, ob- 
ovate, or narrow segments, coarsely- 
toothed or pinnatifid, the terminal ones 
large and confluent, the lower ones 
smaller and distinct, all glabrous, or with 
a loose, woolly down, especially on the 
under side.
Flower-heads rather large, 
of a bright-yellow, in a handsome, com- 
pact terminal corymb.
Involucral bracts 
tipped with black, the outer ones few, 
and very small.
Florets of the ray from 
12 to 15, linear-oblong and spreading.
Achenes of the disk covered with short 
hairs, those of the ray glabrous.
On roadsides, in waste places, and 
bushy pastures, all over Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia, except the extreme north.
Very 
common in Britain.
Fl. summer, lasting 
till late.
When eaten down, or checked in its growth, it will often assume 
the spreading inflorescence of the water S., when it can only be dis- 
tinguished by inspection of the achenes.
Fig. 536.
7. Narrow-leaved Senecio.
Senecio erucaefolius, Linn.
(Fig. 537.) 
(S.
tenuifolius, Eng. Bot.
574.) 
Very near theltdgwort S., but appears everywhere distinct.
It is fully 
as tall, and has the same inflorescence and flower-heads, but the root- 
stock is shortly creeping, the leaves are much more regularly divided 
into narrower segments, the terminal ones not very different from the 
others, and the achenes of the ray as hairy as those of the disk.
The 
whole plant is generally more or less covered with a loose cottony 
down.
COMPOSITE.
451 
The geographical area and stations 
are about the same as those of the Mag- 
wort S.
It is rather more common in 
central and southern Europe, but rather 
less so in Britain, and in the north ge- 
nerally.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 537.
8. Ten Senecio.
Senecio paludosus, Linn.
(Fig. 538.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 650.) 
Stem erect, 2 to 5 or 6 feet high, 
scarcely branched.
Leaves numerous, 
narrow-lanceolate, sharply toothed, more 
or less cottony on the under side.
Flower- 
heads rather large, not very numerous, 
in a loose terminal corymb.
Involucres 
almost hemispherical, the outer bracts 
few, short, and subulate.
Florets of the 
ray from 12 to 16, yellow, linear and 
spreading.
In swamps and fens, in temperate 
Europe, extending northward to south- 
ern Sweden, but usually very local.
In 
Britain, restricted to the fenland tracts 
in the eastern counties of England.
FL 
Fig. 538.
452 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
9. 
Broad-leaved Senecio.
Senecio saracenicus, Linn.
(Fig. 539.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2211.) 
An erect perennial, nearly allied to the 
fen S., but glabrous or nearly so, and 
not usually so tall.
Leaves broadly or 
narrowly lanceolate, and more regularly 
toothed.
Flower-heads much more nu- 
merous, and smaller than in the fen S., 
in a compact corymb.
Involucres cy- 
lindrical or ovoid, with seldom more than 
6 or 7 florets to the ray.
In woods and shady places, almost all 
over the continent of Europe, extending 
in Russian Asia to the Arctic regions, al- 
though not found in Scandinavia.
Yery 
local in Britain, and chiefly in moist 
meadows and pastures in various parts 
of England, possibly escaped from gar- 
dens where it has been sometimes culti- 
vated.
In Ireland, in woods near Ban- 
try.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 539.
10.
Marsh.
Senecio.
Senecio palustris, DC.
(Fig. 540.) 
{Cineraria.
Eng. Bot.
t. 151.) 
wQ^PIiSfeo^ An erect and nearly simple annual or 
biennial, often covered with a loose, grey 
down, not cottony as in the field S, 
Stem hollow, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves 
lanceolate, sinuate and coarsely toothed 
Or nearly entire.
Flower-heads in a 
dense terminal corymb, approaching to 
an umbel.
Involucral bracts all equal, 
without any small outer ones.
Florets 
of the ray about 20, yellow.
Achenes 
glabrous, strongly ribbed, with a copious, 
silky pappus more than twice as long as 
the involucre.
In wet, muddy places, in northern 
Europe and Asia, from the Arctic re- 
gions to Picardy, the Netherlands, and 
central Germany.
Rare in Britain, and 
Fie 540 apparently confined to the eastern coun- 
ties of England.
Fl. summer.
COMPOSITE.
453 
11.
Field Senecio.
Senecio campestris, DC.
(Fig. 541.) 
{Cineraria integrifolia, Eng. Bot.
t. 152.) 
Rootstock short and thick, or slightly 
creeping.
Stem erect, simple, from a 
few inches to 1 or 2 feet high.
Radical 
leaves stalked, oblong or ovate, those of 
the stem longer and narrower, upper 
ones few and distant, all entire or toothed, 
with a loose, cottony wool on the under 
side, as also on the stems, especially in 
open dry situations.
Flower-heads like 
those of the marsh S., but only few to- 
gether, in a small terminal corymb or 
rather umbel, the peduncles starting from 
nearly the same point.
Achenes downy, 
with scarcely prominent ribs, and a 
shorter pappus than in the marsh S, 
In meadows and pastures, in most of 
the mountain-ranges of Europe and Rus- 
sian Asia to the Arctic regions.
In Bri- 
tain, limited to a few stations on the 
chalky downs of the central and south- 
ern counties of England, and to the maritime rocks near Holyhead.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 541.
XVIII.
DORONIC.
DORONICUM.
Herbs, with perennial, often creeping stocks, long-stalked, broad 
radical leaves, and erect flower-stems, bearing a few undivided, alter- 
nate leaves, and one, or but few, rather large, yellow, radiating flower- 
heads.
Involucres hemispherical, with linear bracts of equal length.
Achenes and florets of Senecio, except that the achenes of the ray have 
no pappus.
A small genus, extending over central and southern Europe and 
western Asia, but chiefly restricted to mountain districts.
Radical leaves deeply cordate.
Stems usually with 3 to 
5 flower-heads 1.
Great D.
Radical leaves narrowed or rounded at the base.
Stems 
usually with 1 flower- head .2.
Plantain D, 
454 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
1. Great Doronic.
Fig. 542, 
Doronicum Pardalianches, Linn.
(Fig. 542.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2654.
Leopard's -bane.) 
Rootstock more or less creeping, often 
woolly at the crown.
Radical leaves 
broadly ovate and deeply cordate at the 
base.
Stems about 2 feet high, with but 
few leaves, mostly ovate ; the lower ones 
stalked, but embracing the stem by a 
broader dilated base ; the upper ones 
small, sessile or embracing the stem.
Flower-heads generally 3 to 5, on long, 
leafless peduncles ; the yellow rays nu- 
merous, and narrow.
In woods and mountain pastures, in 
central Europe, frequently cultivated in 
cottage gardens, and readily spreads in 
their vicinity.
In Britain, only as an out- 
cast from gardens, but apparently well 
established in several parts of England 
and southern Scotland.
Fl. spring and 
early summer.
2. Plantain Doronic.
Fig. 543.
Doronicum plantagineum, Linn.
(Fig. 543.) 
Differs from the great D.
chiefly in 
the radical leaves, which are never cor- 
date, usually narrowed or wedge-shaped 
at the base, and rather strongly marked 
with 3 or 5 ribs ; the stem-leaves nar- 
rower than in the great D.
; and the 
flower-head solitary on a long terminal 
peduncle, or very rarely, when very 
luxuriant, the stem bears 2 or 3 heads.
In open, sandy woods, in central and 
southern Europe, from the Atlantic to 
the eastern frontier, extending in France 
considerably to the northward of Paris.
In Britain, like the last species, only as 
an escape from cultivation.
Fl. spring 
and early summer.
Both the species vary, 
either glabrous or hairy, and with their 
leaves entire or irregularly toothed.
COMPOSITE.
455 
XIX.
BIDENS.
BIDETSTS.
Glabrous herbs, with opposite leaves, and hemispherical heads of 
yellow flowers.
Involucres of 2 or 3 rows of bracts, the outer ones 
often longer and leafy.
Florets either all tubular, or the outer ones 
ligulate and radiating.
Receptacle with chaffy scales between the 
florets.
Achenes flattened, crowned by 2 or 3 (very rarely 4 or 5) short, 
stiff bristles or awns, which are rough with minute deflexed prickles.
A genus not very numerous in species, but diffused over the whole 
surface of the globe, some species being among the commonest tropical 
weeds, whilst others extend into the Arctic Circle.
Leaves undivided 1.
Nodding JB.
Leaves deeply cut into 3 or 5 segments 2.
Three-cleft B.
1. Nodding Bidens.
Bidens eernua, Linn.
(Fig. 544.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1114.
Bur-Marigold) 
A rather stout, erect annual^ 1.
to 2 
feet high, with spreading branches.
Leaves lanceolate and serrate, but not 
divided.
Flower-heads drooping, on ter- 
minal peduncles from \ an inch to an 
inch diameter ; the florets usually all 
tubular, but occasionally a few of the 
outer ones become ligulate.
Inner bracts 
of the involucre broad, and often shining, 
and yellow on their edges ; outer ones 
more leafy, and often much longer, and 
spreading.
Awns of the achenes usually 
2 or 3, very rarely 4.
In wet ditches and marshes, through- 
out the temperate and northern regions 
of Europe, Asia, and America.
Com- 
mon in England and southern Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 544.
2. Three-cleft Bidens.
Bidens tripartita, Linn.
(Fig. 545.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1113.) 
Only differs from the Nodding B.
in the leaves, which are deeply 
456 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
cut into 3 or 5 lanceolate segments, and 
in the flower-heads rather less droop- 
ing.
Its geographical range and stations 
are the same as those of the drooping 
2?., but it appears to be rather less 
common in Britain.
Fl. summer and 
autumn.
Fig. 545.
XX.
BURWEED.
XANTHIUM, 
Coarse annuals, with alternate leaves, and unisexual, axillary or ter- 
minal heads of green flowers.
Involucre of the males of several bracts 
in a single row, enclosing many tubular florets, separated by the scales 
of the receptacle.
Anthers free.
Female florets 2 together, combined 
with the involucre into an ovoid or oblong, prickly burr, terminating 
in 2 beaks, from which the stigmas shortly protrude.
A genus of two or perhaps three species, from the Mediterranean 
region to the Levant, but spread as weeds of cultivation over a great 
part of the globe.
Its immediate connection with the remainder of 
Composites can only be traced through several exotic genera forming 
the small tribe of Ambrosiece, the general habit and unisexual flowers 
showing at first sight some analogy to the Nettle family, and some 
other Monochlamyds.
1. Broad Burweed.
Xanthium Strumarium, Linn.
(Fig. 546.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2544.) 
A coarse, erect annual, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves on long stalks, 
rather large, broadly heart-shaped, coarsely toothed or angular, rough 
COMPOSITE.
457 
on both sides.
Flower-heads in axillary 
clusters, or short terminal racemes ; 
the upper ones male ; the lower female 
heads forming, when in fruit, ovoid 
burrs, about 6 to 8 lines long, covered 
with hooked prickles ; the stout, short, 
conical beaks, erect or turned inwards.
In cultivated and waste places, through- 
out central and southern Europe and 
central Asia, extending, as a weed of 
cultivation, northwards to the Baltic, as 
well as into many other parts of the 
globe.
Has been occasionally found in 
some of the southern counties of Eng- 
land and Ireland, but is not a truly 
British plant.
FL summer.
Fig. 543.
XXI.
BURDOCK.
ARCTIUM.
A single species, distinguished as a genus from Thistles by the 
foliage, by the bracts of the involucre ending in a long, stiff point 
hooked at the extremity, and by the short, stiff pappus.
1. Common Burdock.
Arctium Lappa, Linn.
(Fig. 547.) 
(Eng.'Bot. t.
1228.
A. Bardana, Eng. Bot.
t. 2478.) 
A stout, branching, erect biennial, 3 to 5 feet high, the lower heart- 
shaped leaves very large, sometimes attaining 1^ feet in length by a 
foot in breadth ; the upper ones much smaller, and broadly ovate ; all 
green, and nearly glabrous above, often covered with a short, white, 
cottony down underneath, bordered by minute teeth, but not prickly.
Flower-heads in terminal panicles.
Involucres nearly globular, gla- 
brous or covered with a loose, white, cottony wool, catching at anything 
they come in contact with by the hooked points of their numerous 
bracts.
Florets purple, all equal.
Anthers with hair-like appendages 
at their base.
Achenes large, with a short pappus of stiff hairs.
In waste places, on roadsides, etc., over all Europe and Russian Asia, 
except the extreme north, and naturalized in other parts of the globe.
Common in Britain.
Fl. summer.
It varies much in the size of the 
VOL.
I. 2k 
458 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
flower-heads (from f to 1J inches dia- 
meter), in the breadth of the involucral 
bracts, in the abundance or deficiency of 
the cottony wool, in the length of the 
peduncles ; and botanists have attempt- 
ed to establish as many as five spe- 
cies, # but no certain limits can be as- 
cribed even to the three more generally 
recognized varieties, the large-headed, 
the small-headed, and the cottony Bur- 
docks.
Em. 547.
XXII.
SAWWORT.
SERKATTTLA.
Herbs, not prickty, but with the general habit and style of the 
Thistleheads.
Involucres ovoid or oblong, the bracts imbricated and 
pointed, but not prickly.
Receptacle with chaffy bristles between the 
florets.
Pappus of numerous simple and unequal hairs, longer than 
the achenes.
Anthers without appendages.
Although much reduced by the modern splitting of genera, Sawwort 
still includes several south European and Asiatic species.
1. Common Sawwort.
Serratula tinetoria, Linn.
(Fig. 548.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 38.) 
A stiff, erect, scarcely branched, and nearly glabrous perennial, 1 to 
3 feet high ; the lower leaves more or less pinnate, with lanceolate, 
pointed, and finely toothed segments, the terminal one the largest ; 
the upper leaves toothed only, or with a few lobes at their base.
Flower-heads in a terminal corymb, partially dioecious, the male heads 
rather stouter than the females.
Involucres 7 or 8 lines long, with 
numerous ap pressed bracts, the inner ones often coloured at the tips.
Florets purple.
* See Babington's ' Manual,' ed.
4, pp.
184 and 185.
COMPOSITE.
In open woods, thickets and bushy- 
pastures, common throughout temperate 
Europe, and extending far into Scandina- 
via, but not indicated in Asiatic Floras.
Spread over nearly the whole of Eng- 
land, but scarcely penetrates into Scot- 
land, and not recorded from Ireland.
Fl, late in summer.
459 
Fig. 548.
XXIII.
SAUSSUREA.
SAUSSUREA.
Herbs, with the habit and characters of Sawwort, except that the 
hairs of the pappus, or at least the inner ones, are very feathery, and 
the anthers have at their lower end hair-like appendages or tails.
The species are chiefly numerous in central and Russian Asia.
There 
are but few in Europe, confined to mountain regions or high northern 
latitudes.
1. Alpine Saussurea.
Saussurea alpina, DC.
(Fig. 549.) 
(Sei*ratula, Eng. Bot.
t. 599.) 
Stem erect and simple, seldom a foot high, covered, as well as the 
involucres and under side of the leaves, with a loose cotton, which wears 
off with age.
Leaves from ovate to lanceolate, entire or toothed, 2 to 
3 inches long.
Flower-heads ovoid or oblong, nearly sessile, in a small, 
dense terminal corymb, with purple florets.
The soft, feathery pap- 
pus projects beyond the involucres, the inner bracts of which are softly 
hairy.
2 K 2 
460 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
In high northern latitudes, or at con- 
siderable elevations in the mountain- 
ranges of Europe, Russian Asia, and 
Arctic America.
Frequent in the High- 
lands of Scotland, and found also in 
North Wales, in the Lake district of 
northernEngland, and in Kerry county, 
Ireland.
Fig. 549.
XXIY.
THISTLE.
CAKDUUS.
Herbs, with hard stems.
Leaves often cut, and usually very prickly.
Involucres globular or ovoid, the bracts numerous, closely imbricated, 
and usually prickly.
Receptacle thick, bearing bristles between the 
florets.
Florets all equal and tubular.
Achenes glabrous, with a pap- 
pus of numerous simple or feathery hairs longer than the achene 
itself.
The largest and widest-spread genus among Thistle-heads, for al- 
though the species are chiefly European and Asiatic, yet there are also 
several from North America, and the common ones accommodate 
themselves readily even to a tropical climate.
They are usually di- 
vided into two genera, the plume Thistles {Cirsium or Cnicus) with a 
feathery pappus, and the true Thistles with a simple-haired pappus, 
but the distinction is so purely artificial that several botanists now re- 
vert to the old natural limits indicated by Linnaeus.
Pappus consisting of simple hairs (True Thistles).
Bracts of the large involucre very broad at the base, 
with lateral as well as terminal prickles .
. .
. 1.
Milk T.
Bracts of the involucre lanceolate or linear, without 
lateral prickles.
Involucres globular, large.
Involucral bracts broadly anceolate 2.
Musk T.
COMPOSITE.
461 
Involucral bracts linear 3.
Welted T.
Involucres ovoid or cylindrical 4.
Slender T.
Pappus consisting of feathery hairs (Plume Thistles) .
Leaves decurrent along the stem , forming prickly wings.
Flower-heads all peduncled.
Mower-heads few, near \\ inches long.
Stem winged 
and prickly.
Root biennial 5.
Spear T.
Flower-heads not an inch long, in terminal corymbs.
Leaves but little decurrrent.
Rootstalk creep- 
ing 7.
Creeping T.
Flower-heads small, in dense clusters.
Stem winged 
and prickly 6.
Marsh T.
Leaves not decurrent^ or only very shortly so.
Flower-heads sessile or on very short peduncles.
Stems stout and branched (about 2 feet).
Invo- 
lucres large and cottony 8.
Woolly T.
Stems dwarf, or scarcely any.
Involucres not 
cottony 12.
Dwarf T.
Flower-heads all peduncled.
Eootstock perennial, 
often creeping.
Flower-heads in terminal corymbs 7.
Creeping T.
Flower-heads growing singly on long peduncles.
Leaves ciliate, not prickly, very white underneath 9.
Melancholy T.
Leaves prickly, green, or with a -loose white cotton 
underneath.
Leaves deeply pinnatifid and lobed.
Flower-heads 
usually 2 to 4 .10.
Tuberous T* 
Leaves toothed, sinuate, or shortly lobed.
Flower-heads usually solitary or 2 only .
.11.
Meadow T.
Very anomalous specimens occur occasionally, especially among the 
Plume T/iistles, which are generally believed to be natural hybrids.
1. Milk Thistle.
Carduus Marianus, Linn.
(Fig. 550.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 976.
Silyhum, Bab. Man.) 
An annual or biennial, 2 to 3 feet high, not much branched, and 
glabrous or with but very little cottony wool.
Leaves smooth and 
shining above, and variegated by white veins ; the lower ones deeply 
pinnatifid with broad very prickly lobes ; the upper ones clasping the 
stem by prickly auricles but scarcely decurrent.
Flower-heads large, 
drooping, solitary at the ends of the branches, with purple florets.
Bracts of the involucre very broad at the base, with a stiff, spreading, 
462 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
leafy appendage, ending in a long 
prickle, and bordered with prickles at 
its base.
Hairs of the pappus simple.
In waste places, in southern Europe 
to the Caucasus ; not indigenous in 
central Europe, although it occurs here 
and there as a weed of cultivation.
Rare and probably only introduced into 
Britain.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 550.
2. Musk Thistle.
Carduus nutans, Linn.
(Pig. 551.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1112.) 
A stout species, 2 to 3 feet high, 
usually slightly covered with loose cot- 
tony hairs.
Leaves deeply pinnatifid, 
very prickly, their edges decurrent 
along the stem, forming narrrow, very 
prickly wings.
Flower-heads large 
and drooping, as in the milk T., but 
often 3 or 4 in a loose corymb.
Invo- 
lucral bracts numerous, with a stiff, nar- 
row-lanceolate appendage, ending in a 
spreading or reflexed prickle, but with- 
out lateral prickles.
Hairs of the pap- 
pus simple.
In waste places, common in the greater 
part of Europe and temperate Asia, but 
not spreading to the extreme north.
Pretty frequent in southern England, 
especially on limestone soils, less so in 
the north, and rare in Scotland.
Occurs 
also in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 551.
COMPOSITE.
463 
3. Welted Thistle.
Carduus acanthoides, Linn.
(Fig. 552.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 973.) 
Much resembles the mush T., but is* 
usually taller and rather more branched ; 
the leaves narrower and more prickly ; 
and the stem more thickly covered with 
prickly appendages, decurrent from the 
base of the leaves.
Flower-heads not so 
large, though yet globular and slightly 
drooping ; the involucral bracts very 
numerous and narrow, ending in a 
linear, spreading or recurved prickle, 
the innermost often of a thinner texture, 
slightly coloured and scarcely prickly.
Hairs of the pappus simple.
A very common Continental Thistle, 
extending eastward entirely across Asia, 
and northward to the Arctic Circle, 
although in Britain, like many others, 
it becomes scarce in Scotland.
FL sum- 
mer.
Two forms are often distinguished 
as species, the C.
acanthoides, with the flower-heads single, on long 
peduncles, and the leaves often nearly glabrous, and C.
crisjpus, with 
the heads clustered several together on short stalks, and the leaves 
usually rather broader and more cottony underneath ; but they run 
too much one into the other to be separable even as permanent varie- 
ties.
Fig. 552.
4. Slender Thistle.
Carduus pycnocephalus, Jacq.
(Fig. 553.) 
(C.
tenuiflorus, Eng. Bot.
t. 412.) 
A stiff annual or biennial, from 1 to 3 or 4 feet high, but not so stout 
as the last three, and much more covered, especially the stems and the 
under side of the leaves, with a white loose cotton.
Leaves pinnatifid, 
with short, wavy, very prickly lobes, and decurrent along the stem, 
forming waved prickly wings as in the welted T.
Flower-heads rather 
numerous, but small and ovoid or oblong, generally in clusters at the 
top of the stem and branches.
Involucral bracts rather broad at the 
base, ending in a narrow, straight or slightly spreading prickle.
Florets 
464 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
pink or whitish.
Hairs of the pappus 
simple.
In waste places and cultivated ground, 
in western and southern Europe and 
central Asia, extending northward to 
Denmark, but scarcely eastward of the 
Hhine in central Europe.
Not unfre- 
quent in England and Ireland, especially 
near the sea, and occurs also in the low- 
lands of Scotland.
FL all summer.
Fig. 553.
5. Spear Thistle.
Carduus lanceolatus, Linn.
(Fig. 554.) 
Bot. t.
107.
Cnicus, Brit.
Fl.) 
A rather stout biennial, 3 or 4 feet 
high; the stem winged and prickly.
Leaves waved and pinnatifid, with short 
but narrow lobes, the terminal longer 
and lanceolate, all ending in a stiff 
prickle, rough on the upper side with 
short almost prickly hairs, white and 
cottony underneath.
Flower-heads few, 
ovoid, near an inch and a half long when 
in flower.
Involucral bracts lanceolate, 
cottony, ending in a stiff, spreading 
prickle.
Florets purple.
Hairs of the 
pappus feathery.
In fields, pastures, and waste places, 
very common throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia, except the extreme north, 
and spread with cultivation into other 
parts of the world.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. all summer* 
Fig. 554.
COMPOSITE.
465 
G. Marsh Thistle.
Carduus palustris, Linn.
(Fig. 555.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 974.
Cnicus, Brit.
Fl.) 
A stiff annual or biennial, 4 or 5 feet 
high, and scarcely branched ; the stems 
quite covered with the prickly de current 
margins of the leaves as in the welted T.
Leaves narrow, the lower ones 6 to 8 
inches long, pinnatifid with numerous 
ovate, wavy, prickly lobes, with a few 
rough hairs scattered on both surfaces ; 
the upper leaves small and very narrow.
Flower-heads rather numerous, small 
and ovoid, usually collected in clusters, 
forming an irregular terminal corymb.
Involucral bracts numerous, with very 
small somewhat prickly points, the inner 
ones often coloured.
Florets purple.
Hairs of the pappus feathery.
In wet fields, and meadows, through- 
out Europe and Russian Asia, pene- 
trating into the Arctic regions.
Frequent in Britain 
Fig. 555.
FL summer.
7. Creeping Thistle.
Carduus arvensis, Curt.
(Fig. 556.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 975, male individual.
Cnicus, Brit.
Fl.) 
Hootstock perennial and creeping, 
with erect annual stems 3 or 4 feet high.
Leaves narrow, pinnatifid, and very 
prickly, either embracing the stem with 
prickly auricles or shortly decurrent.
Flower-heads not large, forming rather 
loose terminal corymbs, and always 
dioecious ; the males nearly globular, 
with very projecting purple florets ; the 
females with much longer involucres 
but shorter florets, the copious feathery 
pappus of the achenes projecting con- 
siderably as the fruit ripens : in both, 
the involucral bracts are numerous, ap- 
pressed, with very small prickly points.
In cultivated and waste places, the 
commonest of European and Asiatic 
Thistles, accompanying cultivation to all 
466 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
parts of the world ; extending far to the north, though perhaps not 
quite to the Arctic Circle.
Abundant in Britain.
Fl. summer.
A 
curious variety, with the leaves almost entire, not decurrent, and 
scarcely prickly (C.
setosus), not uncommon in south-eastern Europe 
and western Asia, has been found in the county of Fife, in Scotland.
8. Woolly Thistle.
Carduus eriophorus, Linn.
(Fig. 557.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 386.
Cnicus, Brit.
Fl.) 
The stoutest of all our indigenous 
Thistles, and much branched, but not so 
tall as some others.
Leaves not decur- 
rent, green and hairy above, white and 
cottony underneath, deeply pinnate, with 
narrow lobes ending in very sharp stout 
prickles.
Mower-heads large and glo- 
bular, clustered 2 or 3 together at the 
summits of the branches.
Involucres 
covered with a cottony wool, the nume- 
rous bracts ending in a narrow prickly 
point.
Hair of the pappus feathery.
In waste places, in central and south- 
era Europe to the Caucasus, but not ex- 
tending into northern Germany.
In 
Britain, probably confined to the lime- 
stone districts of southern England.
FL 
summer.
Fig. 557.
9. Melancholy Thistle.
Carduus heterophyllus, Linn.
(Eig. 558.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 675.
Cnicus, Brit.
Fl.) 
This species is not prickly like other Thistles, but resembles them 
in other respects.
Rootstock perennial and creeping, the stems tall, 
stout, deeply furrowed, with a little loose cottony wool.
Leaves clasp- 
ing the stem, with scarcely decurrent auricles, lanceolate, glabrous and 
green above, very white and cottony underneath, bordered with very 
small, bristly but scarcely prickly teeth, and sometimes slightly lobed.
Flower-heads about the size of those of the spear T s growing singly 
COMPOSITE.
467 
on long peduncles.
Involucral bracts 
glabrous, lanceolate, obtuse, or with a 
very minute not prickly point.
Hairs of 
the pappus feathery.
In mountain pastures, in northern 
Europe and Asia, and in the great cen- 
tral ranges of both continents.
Fre- 
quent in Scotland, extending into north- 
ern England, and North Wales.
Fl.
Fig. 558.
10.
Tuberous Thistle.
Carduus tuberosus, Linn.
(Fig. 559.) 
{Cnicus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2562.) 
Rootstock woody, usually shortly 
creeping, emitting occasionally a few 
thick, almost woody, tuberous roots, and 
erect or ascending stems, but little di- 
vided, or sometimes simple, about 2 feet 
high.
Radical leaves pinnatifid, the 
lobes waved and prickly, slightly hairy 
<above, with more or less of a loose cot- 
tony wool underneath ; the stem-leaves 
few, less divided, sessile or sometimes 
very shortly decurrent.
Flower-heads 
not very large, ovoid, growing singly on 
long terminal peduncles.
Involucral 
bracts lanceolate, not prickly, with more 
or less of cottony wool.
Hairs of the 
pappus feathery.
In moist, rich meadows, and marshy, 
open woods, in western and south-cen- 
tral Europe, extending eastwards to 
Transylvania.
In Britain, only in Wilt- 
shire, near Heytesbury.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 559.
468 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
11.
Meadow Thistle.
Carduus pratensis, Huds.
(Pig. 560.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 177.
Cnicus, Brit.
EL) 
Probably a mere variety of the tube- 
rous T.
The roots are less tuberous.
Stems 1 to 2 feet high, usually simple, 
with a single ovoid flower-head, or occa- 
sionally divided into 2 or 3 long one- 
headed branches.
Leaves more cottony 
than in the tuberous T.
and much less 
divided, the radical ones usually sinuate 
or shortly pinnatifid, the stem-leaves 
lanceolate, bordered only with short, 
slightly prickly teeth.
In low, wet pastures, boggy meadows, 
and marshy thickets, chiefly in western 
Europe.
Abundant in some of the 
southern counties of England and Ire- 
land, more rare in the north.
FL sum- 
mer.
Luxuriant specimens, with more 
divided leaves, sometimes slightly de- 
current, havebeen considered as a species 
under the name of C.
Forsteri, or as hy- 
brids between this and the marsh T.
Another luxuriant variety oc- 
curs occasionally, approaching the tuberous T.
in foliage, but with 2 or 
3 flower-heads rather close together, not on long separate peduncles.
Fig, 560.
12.
Dwarf Thistle.
Carduus aeaulis, Linn.
(Eig. 561.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 161.
Cnicus, Brit.
Fl.) 
W4lw/ 
In the common state this is at once 
distinguished by the almost total want 
of stem.
A thick, woody, perennial 
stock bears a spreading tuft of very 
prickly pinnatifid and glabrous leaves, 
in the midst of which are a few rather 
large sessile flower-heads.
Involucres 
ovoid, not cottony, with numerous lan- 
ceolate, obtuse or scarcely pointed bracts.
Florets purple.
Hairs of the pappus 
feathery.
Occasionally, but rarely, the stem will grow up to the height 
of 2 or 3 inches.
Fig. 561.
COMPOSITE.
469 
In dry pastures, in temperate Europe and Russian Asia, extending 
northward to southern Scandinavia.
In Britain, only in the southern 
and some central counties of England.
FL summer, rather late.
In 
some situations, on the Continent, the stem will grow out to 6 or 8 
inches, but this variety is very rare in England.
XXV.
ONOPORD.
ONOPOKDON.
Large-headed, stout, prickly herbs, only differing from Thistle in the 
receptacle, which, instead of bearing long chaffy bristles between the 
florets, is honeycombed into a number of little cavities, the jagged 
edges of which are shorter than the achenes.
There are but few species, natives of the Mediterranean and Cauca- 
sian regions, one only of which extends into central Europe.
1. Common Onopord.
Onopordon Acanthium, Linn.
(Fig. 502.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 977.
Scotch or Cotton Thistle.) 
A stout, branched biennial, attaining 
sometimes 6 feet or even more, covered 
with a loose cottony wool.
Leaves 
coarsely toothed or pinnatifid, waved 
and very prickly, their broadly-decurrent 
margins forming prickly wings all down 
the stem.
Flower-heads large, globular, 
erect, and solitary on the branches of a 
large irregular panicle.
Involucral bracts 
numerous, ending in a long, lanceolate, 
spreading prickle.
Hairs of the pap- 
pus rather longer than the achenes, not 
feathery, but strongly toothed when seen 
under a magnifying glass.
A native of the Mediterranean region 
and west-central Asia, not uncommon 
also in central Europe and all across 
Russian Asia, but spreads readily with 
cultivation, and it is difficult to say how 
far north it is indigenous.
Now found 
in several parts of England, but certainly not wild in Scotland, although 
generally selected to represent the Scotch heraldic Thistle.
Fl. end 
of summer.
Fig. 562.
470 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
XXVI.
CARLINE.
CARLINA.
Low, very prickly herbs.
Outer bracts of the involucre very prickly, 
inner ones coloured or shining, long, and spreading like the rays of a 
star.
Receptacle bearing irregularly cut, chaffy scales between the 
florets.
Achenes silky-hairy, with a feathery pappus.
A small European and Asiatic genus, easily distinguished by the in- 
volucral bracts.
1. Common Carline.
Carlina vulgaris, Linn.
(Fig. 563.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1144.) 
An erect biennial, seldom above 6 or 
8 inches high.
Leaves not decurrent, 
toothed or pinnatifid, and very prickly ; 
the lower ones narrow, slightly covered 
with loose cottony wool ; the upper ones 
broader and nearly glabrous.
Flower- 
heads hemispherical, about an inch in 
diameter, usually 3 or 4 in a small ter- 
minal corymb.
Outer involucral bracts 
broadly lanceolate, bordered with very 
prickly teeth, or lobes ; inner ones linear, 
entire, with very smooth and shining, 
horizontally-spreading tips.
In dry, hilly pastures and fields, 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
Fig. 563.
except the extreme north.
Hather com- 
mon in England and Ireland, extending 
into a few Scottish counties.
Fl. summer and autumn.
XXYII.
CENTAUREA.
CENTAUREA.
Herbs, with entire or pinnatifid leaves, seldom prickly, and purple, 
blue, or sometimes yellow flowers.
Involucres globular or ovoid, the 
bracts numerous, ending either in a prickle or in a fringed or toothed 
appendage.
Outer row of florets usually longer than the others, and 
neuter.
Eeceptacle bearing bristles between the florets.
Achenes 
glabrous, with a short pappus of simple hairs or scales, sometimes very 
short, or rarely quite wanting.
One of the most numerous genera of ThistleJieads in the Mediter- 
ranean and Caucasian regions, with a very few American species.
The 
COMPOSITE.
471 
2. Greater C.
3. Corn C.
4. Jersey C.
enlarged outer florets, the most prominent character of the genus, are 
seldom deficient, and that chiefly in a common variety of our own black 
Centaurea.
In that case the fringed involucral bracts as readily indi- 
cate the genus.
Involucres not prickly, or with very small prickly points 
to the bracts.
Involucral bracts with a broad, black, or brown fringed 
border or appendage.
Leaves mostly entire or toothed.
Appendages almost 
concealing the bracts themselves 1.
Blade C.
Leaves deeply pinnatifid.
Involucral bracts showing 
their green centres with a black fringed border 
Involucral bracts ending in, or bordered by, minute 
teeth or prickles.
Outer florets bright blue.
An erect cornfield annual 
Florets purple.
A spreading Jersey perennial .
. 
Involucral bracts ending in a long, stout prickle.
Florets purple 5.
Starthistle C.
Florets yellow 6.
Yellow C.
The C.
montana, from central and southern Europe, and a few others, 
are occasionally cultivated in our gardens.
1. Black Centaurea.
Centaurea nigra, Linn.
(Fig. 564.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 278 ; C.
nigrescens, Brit.
Fl. Knajptveed or Hardheads.) 
A perennial, with erect stems, hard 
and branched, 1 to 2 feet high.
Leaves 
from linear to lanceolate or oblong ; the 
upper ones entire or nearly so, clasping 
the stem at their base ; the lower with 
a few coarse teeth or short lobes ; all 
green, and rather rough with a few mi- 
nute hairs, or slightly cottony under- 
neath when young.
Involucres globular, 
on terminal peduncles ; the bracts closely 
imbricate, so as only to show their ap- 
pendages, which are brown or black, 
and deeply fringed, except on the inner- 
most bracts, where they are shining and 
usually jagged.
Florets purple, either 
all equal or the outer row much larger 
and neuter as in the rest of the genus.
Achenes slightly hairy, often apparently 
without any pappus, but really crowned 
by a ring of very minute scaly bristles, occasionally intermixed with 
a few longer, very deciduous ones.
Fig. 564.
472 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
In meadows and pastures, throughout Europe and western Asia, 
except the extreme north, extending probably all across .Russian Asia.
Very abundant in Britain.
Fl. all summer.
The two forms, with or 
without the outer row of large florets, are so different in appearance 
that it has often been attempted to distinguish them as species, but it has 
been now proved that they are mere varieties, and it is even believed 
by some that the same plant will appear in some years with and in 
others without the ray.
The C.
Jacea (Eng. Bot.
t. 1678) is a variety, 
occurring occasionally in England, more frequently in some parts of 
the Continent, with the appendages of the involucral scales of a much 
paler colour, with a much shorter fringe, or only jagged.
This form 
passes, however, gradually into the common one.
2. Greater Centaurea.
Centaurea scabiosa, Linn.
(Fig. 565.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 56.) 
A stouter plant than the black C, 
more branched at the base ; the leaves 
"^y deeply pinnatifid, with linear or lanceo- 
late lobes, often coarsely toothed or 
lobed.
Flower-heads large, with purple 
florets, the outer ones always enlarged 
and neuter.
Involucral bracts broad, 
bordered only with a black appressed 
fringe, leaving the green centre exposed.
Pappus of stiff hairs or bristles nearly as 
long as the achene.
In pastures, waste places, roadsides, 
etc., throughout Europe and Bussian 
Asia, except the extreme north.
Bather 
frequent in England, less so in Scotland, 
and scarcely indigenous beyond south- 
eastern Perth and Forfar.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
~E\%.
565.
3. Corn Centaurea.
Centaurea Cyanus, Linn.
(Fig. 566.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 277.
Bluebottle or Cornflower) 
An erect, branching annual, about 2 feet high, covered with a loose 
cottony down.
Lower leaves usually toothed or pinnatifid; upper 
COMPOSITE.
473 
ones, or sometimes nearly all, linear and 
entire.
Involucres solitary, on long ter- 
minal peduncles, ovoid ; the bracts ap- 
pressed, often ending in a minute prickle, 
and bordered by a fringe of very small 
teeth.
Central florets of a bluish pur- 
ple ; outer ones much larger, of a bright 
blue.
Pappus about the- length of the 
achene.
Apparently of south European or west 
Asiatic origin, but now spread as a corn- 
field weed over a great part of Europe 
and Asia.
Not uncommon in British 
cornfields, and formerly much cultivated 
in flower-gardens, where it will sport 
much as to colour.
Fl. all summer.
Fig. 566.
4. Jersey Centaurea.
Centaurea aspera, Linn.
(Fig. 567.) 
(C.
Isnarcli, Eng. Bot.
t. 2256.) 
A biennial or perennial, much branch- 
ed, very spreading or prostrate, with 
hard but not thick branches, glabrous, 
or rough with minute hairs.
Leaves 
narrrow ; the lower ones pinnatifid, the 
upper ones entire.
Flower-heads soli- 
tary at the ends of the branches, with 
one or two leaves close under them.
Involucres about the size of those of the 
corn C, with appressed glabrous bracts, 
not fringed, but most or all of them 
ending in a palmate appendage of 5 
minute prickles or points.
In waste lands, not far from the sea ; 
very common on the Mediterranean, and 
extending up the west coast of Europe 
to the Channel Islands.
Fl. summer 
and autumn.
vol.
J. 
Fig. 567.
2 o 
474 THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
5 Star-thistle Centaur ea.
Centaurea Calcitrapa, Linn.
(Fig. 5G8.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 125.) 
A coarse, green annual, sometimes 
slightly covered with cottony down, sel- 
dom rising to a foot in height, but with 
very spreading or prostrate branches.
Leaves pinnatifid, with a few long linear 
or lanceolate lobes.
Flower-heads ses- 
sile among the upper leaves or in the 
forks of the branches, not large in them- 
selves, but the involucral bracts end in 
stiff spreading spines, \ to 1 inch long, 
with 1 or 2 smaller prickles at their 
base.
Florets purple.
Achenes without 
any pappus.
In waste places, and on roadsides, in 
central and especially southern Europe 
to the Caucasus, and most abundant 
near the sea.
Found occasionally in 
some of the southern counties of Eng- 
land, but scarcely further northward.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 568.
6. Yellow Centaurea.
Centaurea solstitialis, Linn.
(Fig. 569.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 243.) 
A stiff, erect annual, 1 to 2 feet high, 
with few branches, and covered with a 
white cottony w 7 ool.
Radical leaves pin- 
natifid, upper ones small and linear, de- 
current in long, narrow wings along the 
stem.
Flower-heads solitary at the ends 
of the branches, nearly globular ; the 
innermost bracts ending in a small shi- 
ning appendage ; the intermediate ones 
in a long spreading prickle, with one or 
two small ones at its base ; the outer- 
most usually with only a few small, pal- 
mate prickles, as in the Jersey C.
Florets 
of a bright yellow.
In waste and cultivated places, in 
southern Europe and western Asia, es- 
pecially near the sea, and, as a weed of 
cultivation, widely spread over Europe, 
Asia, and other parts of the world.
In 
COMPOSITE.
475 
Britain, it appears occasionally in cornfields, and sometimes in waste 
places near the sea.
Fl. summer and autumn.
XXVIII.
SALSIFY.
TRAGOPOGON.
Biennials or perennials, with tap-roots, and long, narrow, grass-like, 
entire leaves, broader and sheathing at the base.
Involucre of 8 to 
12 bracts, nearly equal, and slightly united at the base.
Achenes nar- 
rowed at the top into a long beak, bearing a pappus of feathery hairs.
A genus not very numerous in species, spread over Europe and 
temperate Asia, easily known among the British Ligulates by the 
foliage.
In this respect it resembles Scorzonera, a numerous exotic 
genus, of which one species, the S.
hispanica, is often cultivated in our 
gardens for the same purposes as the Salsify.
Flowers yellow 1.
Meadow S.
Flowers purple 2.
Purple S.
1. Meadow Salsify.
Tragopogon pratense, Linn.
(Fig. 570.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 434.
T. minor, Bab. Man.
Yellow Goafs-beard.) 
Stem erect, slightly branched, 1 to 2 
feet high.
Radical and lower leaves 5 
to 8 inches long or even more, shortly 
dilated at the base, glabrous and slightly 
glaucous ; upper leaves shorter, w T ith 
the dilated base longer in proportion.
Peduncles long, thickened at the summit, 
each with a single head of yellow flowers.
Involucral bracts narrow-lanceolate, 1 
to 1^ inches long.
Florets sometimes 
not half so long, but varying from that 
to the full length of the involucre.
Achenes long and striate, the slender 
beak as long as the achene itself, the 
hairs of the pappus long and very fea- 
thery.
In meadows and rich pastures, through- 
out Europe and western Asia, except the 
extreme north.
Abundant in Britain, 
extending far north into Scoland.
Fl.
early summer.
It is often divided into two or more species, according 
to the relative length of the florets and involucres.
Fig. 570.
476 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
2. Purple Salsify.
Tragopogon porrifolium, Linn.
(Fig. 571.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 638.
Salsify or Salsafy.) 
It is difficult to assign any positive 
character to distinguish this from the 
meadow S.
beyond the colour of the 
florets, which is of a very deep violet- 
blue or purple.
It is generally of more 
luxuriant growth, the peduncles more 
thickened at the top, the involucres 
longer in proportion to the florets, and 
the beak of the achenes and pappus 
longer.
In meadows and pastures, in the Me- 
diterranean region, but only as an intro- 
duced plant in central and northern Eu- 
rope, having been long cultivated for 
culinary purposes.
In Britain, confined 
to southern England, where it appears 
to be well established in some localities.
Fl. early summer.
Fig. 571.
XXIX.
HELMINTH.
IIELMfflTHIA.
Habit and pappus of Picris, from which it only differs in the invo- 
lucre, of which the outer bracts are broadly cordate and leafy, and in 
the achenes narrowed at the top into a short beak.
1. Oxtongue Helminth.
Helminthia echioides, Gbertn.
(Fig. 572.) 
(Picris, Eng. Bot.
t. 972.) 
A coarse, erect annual or biennial, 1 to 2 or 3 feet high, rough with 
numerous short, stiff, almost prickly hairs, often hooked as in Picris.
Leaves lanceolate, sinuate or coarsely toothed, very rough ; the lower 
ones narrowed at the base ; the upper ones clasping the stem or shortly 
decurrent.
Flower-heads rather small, rather crowded, on short pe- 
duncles, forming- an irregular terminal corymb.
Outer broad bracts 
COMPOSITE.
477 
of the involucre 4 or 5, rough like the 
leaves ; inner ones about 8, lanceolate, 
and much thinner.
Achenes ending in 
a beak, with a dense, white, feathery 
pappus.
On hedge-banks, edges of fields, and 
waste places ; common in central and 
especially southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, scarcely extending into northern 
Germany.
Dispersed over England and 
Ireland, but does not reach Scotland.
FL summer and autumn.
Fig. 572.
XXX.
FICBIS.
PICRIS.
Coarse, hispid herbs, with toothed leaves, and rather small heads of 
yellow flowers, in a loose, irregular corymb.
Involucre of several nearly 
equal, erect, inner bracts, with 2 or 3 outer rows of smaller ones, usu- 
ally spreading.
Achenes transversely striated, not beaked, with a 
whitish pappus, of which the inner hairs at least are feathery.
A genus containing but few species, natives of Europe and temperate 
Asia, having much the appearance of HawJcweed and Crepis, but readily 
distinguished by the feathery pappus.
1. Hawkweed Picris.
Pieris hieracioid.es, Linn.
(Fig. 573.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 196.) 
A biennial, 1 to 2 or 3 feet high, covered with short, rough hairs, 
most of which are minutely hooked at the top, so as to cling to what- 
ever they come in contact with.
Leaves lanceolate, the lower ones 
tapering into a stalk, and often 6 inches or more long, the upper ones 
clasping the stem.
Peduncles rather long and stiff.
Involucres 
scarcely 6 lines long.
Pappus of a dirty white, the hairs usually very 
feathery, except a few of the outer ones of each achene.
478 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
Fig. 573.
On roadsides, borders of fields, and 
waste places, in southern and central 
Europe, as far as southern Scandinavia, 
in temperate Russia and central Asia, 
and now spread as a weed of cultivation 
to many other parts of the world.
Abundant in the greater part of Eng- 
land, but does not perhaps extend into 
Scotland, and has only been found in 
one place, at Portmarnock, in Ireland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
XXXI.
HAWKBXT.
LEONTODON.
Herbs, with a perennial stock, radical, spreading leaves, simple or 
slightly branched, usually leafless flower-stems, and yellow flowers.
Involucres of several nearly equal, erect, inner bracts, and two or 
three rows of smaller outer ones.
Receptacle without bracts between 
the florets.
Achenes more or less tapering at the top into a short 
beak, sometimes scarcely perceptible.
Pappus of all, or at least the 
central florets, composed of feathery hairs.
A genus not numerous in species, but abundantly spread over Eu- 
rope and Russian Asia.
It was formerly united with Dandelion, from 
which it has been separated on account of the feathery pappus.
All the achenes with a pappus of feathery hairs.
Hairy plant, with simple flower-stems.
Pappus with an 
outer row of minute, simple hairs 1.
Common H.
Plant nearly glabrous.
Flower-stems often divided, en- 
larged under the flower-heads.
All the hairs of the 
pappus of equal length .2.
Autumnal H.
Achenes of the outer row of florets with a pappus of very 
short, simple hairs.
Flower-stems simple .
. .
. 3.
Lesser H.
COMPOSITE.
479 
1. Common Hawkbit.
Leontodon hispidus, Linn.
(Fig. 574.) 
(Hedypnois, Eng. Bot.
t. 554.
Apargia, Bab. Man.) 
The whole plant more or less hispid 
with erect, stiff, short hairs, often forked 
or stellate at the top.
Leaves long 
and narrow, coarsely toothed or pinna- 
tifid.
Peduncles 6 inches to a foot or 
more long, slightly swollen at the top, 
with a single rather large flower-head.
Bracts of the involucre narrow, and 
always hispid, the inner row much 
longer than the outer ones.
Achenes 
long, striate, and transversely rugose, 
slightly tapering at the top, but seldom 
distinctly beaked.
Pappus of about a 
dozen brown, feathery hairs, about as 
long as the achene, surrounded by 5 or 
6 others not a quarter that length.
In meadows and pastures, very com- 
mon in Europe, and eastward to the 
Caucasus and the Ural, except the ex- 
treme north.
Abundant in Britain, as 
far north as Glasgow and Forfar.
Fl. the whole summer and autumn.
A nearly glabrous variety (L.
hastilis), frequent on the Continent, does 
not appear to have been found in Britain.
Fig. 574.
2. Autumnal Hawkbit.
Leontodon autumnalis, Linn.
(Fig. 575.) 
(Hedypnois, Eng. Bot.
t. 830.
Apargia, Bab. Man.) 
Habit nearly of the long-rooted Hypochoere, but with smaller flower- 
heads, and no scales between the florets.
Leaves long, narrow, and 
pinnatifid, with a few narrow lobes, glabrous, or with a few long, stiff 
hairs.
Flower-stems erect, usually with 1 or 2 single- headed branches, 
having sometimes 1 or 2 narrow, nearly entire leaves near the base ; 
the branches or peduncles nearly glabrous, bearing a few small scales.
Involucres oblong, tapering at the base into the enlarged summit of 
the peduncle, glabrous in the common variety, with closely appressed, 
imbricated bracts.
Achenes long, striate, and transversely wrinkled, 
tapering into a short beak, scarcely perceptible in the outer ones.
Pappus brown and feathery, without the short, outer hairs of the 
common II.
480 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
In meadows, pastures, and waste places, 
throughout Europe and Russian Asia, 
from the Mediterranean to the Arctic 
regions.
Abundant all over Britain.
FL 
summer and autumn.
The mountain H.
(Iledypnois Taraxaci, Eng. Bot.
1. 1109) 
is a northern or alpine variety of dwarf 
stature, with the flower- stems often sim- 
ple, and rather large flower-heads, the 
much enlarged summit of the peduncle, 
and the involucre more or less covered 
with black hairs.
Not unfrequent in the 
Scotch Highlands.
The true L.
Tarax- 
aci, from the alps of central Europe, is 
quite a distinct plant.
Fig. 575.
3. Lesser Hawkbit.
Leontodon hirtus, Linn.
(Fig. 576.) 
(Hedypnois, Eng. Bot.
t. 555.
Thrincia, Brit.
Fl.) 
Usually a smaller plant than the two 
last, and glabrous, or with a few stiff, 
mostly forked hairs on the leaves and 
lower part of the peduncles.
Leaves 
oblong or linear, coarsely toothed, sinu- 
ate or shortly pinnatifid.
Peduncles 
seldom above 6 inches high, with a sin- 
gle rather small head of bright yellow 
flowers.
Involucres green, glabrous, 
thickening at the base after flowering, 
consisting of 10 or 12 nearly equal bracts, 
with several small imbricated ones at the 
base.
Achenes of the outer row curved, 
slightly tapering at tjie top, with a very 
short, scaly pappus ; the others like 
those of the common If.
In rather dry open pastures, moors, 
and waste places, in central and south- 
ern Europe, scarcely extending to its 
eastern limits, or northward to the Baltic.
Yery common in England and Ireland, and found in Scotland as far 
as Glasgow and Fife.
Fl. summer.
COMPOSITE.
481 
XXXII.
HYFOCHCERE.
HYPOCHCERIS.
Annuals or perennials, with the habit and pappus of Hawhbit, but 
more frequently branched ; the involucres rather more imbricated, and 
there are a few chaffy scales on the receptacle between the florets, at 
least amongst the inner ones.
More numerous in species than Hawlcbit, it has also a wider geo- 
graphical range, extending over Europe, Russian Asia, North America, 
and western and southern South America.
Involucres oblong, nearly glabrous.
Florets scarcely longer than the involucres.
Outer 
achenes without a beak 1.
Glabrous H.
Florets longer than the involucres.
Ail the achenes 
ending in a slender beak 2.
Long-rooted H.
Involucres large, hemispherical, and hairy 3.
Spotted H.
1. Glabrous Hypoehcere.
Hypochoeris glabra, Linn.
(Fig. 577.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t, 575.) 
Much resembles the long-rooted H., 
but is a smaller plant, with an annual 
root, and quite glabrous ; the stems sel- 
dom attain a foot in height, with much 
smaller flower-heads, although the in- 
volucres become much elongated after 
flowering.
The achenes are similarly 
wrinkled, and have the same feathery 
pappus, which however is sessile on the 
achenes of the outer florets, whilst on 
the central ones it is supported on a 
slender beak, as in the long-rooted IT.
Although generally spread over cen- 
tral and southern Europe, and natu- 
ralized even in distant temperate cli- 
mates, it is much less common than the 
long-rooted H., growing chiefly in sandy 
situations.
Thinly scattered over Eng- 
land, the Scottish stations are still 
fewer, and not recorded from Ireland.
VOL.
T. 
Fig. 5*/ 
Fl. summer.
2 p 
482 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
Long-rooted Hypochoere.
Hypochceris radicata, Linn.
(Fig. 578.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 831.
Oafs-ear.) 
Rootstock perennial.
Leaves all ra- 
dical, spreading, narrow, more or less 
toothed or pinnately lobed, hispid on 
both sides with stiff hairs.
Stems erect 
and leafless, 1 to 2 feet high, usually di- 
vided like the autumnal HawJcbit into 
two or three long branches or peduncles, 
slightly thickened upwards, each bear- 
ing a few small scales, and terminated 
by a rather large head of flowers.
In- 
volucres near an inch long, narrow but 
somewhat thickened at the base ; the 
bracts imbricated in several rows, the 
outer ones smaller, all glabrous or with 
a few short hairs on the back.
Scales of 
the receptacle long, narrow, and finely 
pointed.
Achenes transversely wrinkled, 
all narrowed into a long slender beak 
with a feathery pappus.
In meadows, pastures, and waste 
places throughout Europe, except the extreme north, but scarcely ex- 
tends into Asia.
Abundant in Britain, extending far into the north 
of Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
3. Spotted Hypochoere.
Hypochceris maculata, Linn.
(Fig. 579.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 225.) 
Rootstock perennial.
Leaves all or mostly radical, spreading, 
broadly obovate, or rarely oblong, coarsely toothed or nearly entire, 
hairy onboth sides, and often spotted.
Flower-stem erect, 1 to 2 feet high, 
usually simple, but occasionally bearing a small leaf near the base, and 
terminated by a single large flower-head ; the involucre broad and 
hairy.
The stem is rarely forked, with two flower-heads.
COMPOSITE.
483 
In open pastures, andmeadows, widely- 
spread over Europe and Russian Asia, 
chiefly in mountain districts, although 
not an Arctic plant.
Bare in Britain, 
the only reliable localities being in Suf- 
folk, Cambridgeshire, and North Wales.
FL summer.
Fig. 579.
XXXIII.
LETTUCE.
LACTUCA.
Annual or perennial herbs, glabrous or with a few stiff bristles ; the 
stems leafy, erect, and branched, with (in the British species) nume- 
rous small heads of yellow flowers.
Involucre narrow, of a few im- 
bricated bracts, containing very few florets.
Achenes flattened, taper- 
ing into a slender beak, with a pappus of numerous white and silky, 
simple hairs.
A genus widely spread over southern Europe and central Asia, and 
among the exotic species includes several species differing from the 
British ones in their large blue flowers.
It has the flattened achenes 
of Sowtliistle, from which the only positive distinctive character is the 
beak of the achenes, but the narrow involucres and few florets generally 
give it a different habit.
Leaves thin, on long stalks, with a broad terminal lobe.
Panicle 
slender.
Beak shorter than the achene itself .
. .
. 1.
Wall L.
Leaves mostly sessile, rather stiff, often prickly.
Panicle rigid.
Beak as long as or longer than the achene.
Panicle rather loose, oblong or spreading.
Beak about the 
length of the achene 2.
PricTcly L.
Panicle almost reduced to a long, clustered spike.
Beak about 
twice the length of the achene .
3. Willow L.
2p2 
484 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
Our garden Lettuces are luxuriant forms, produced by long culti- 
vation of one or perhaps two southern species, which have not been 
as yet satisfactorily identified, some botanists believing them to be cul- 
tivated varieties of the prickly L.
1. Wall Lettuce.
Laetuca muralis, Eresen.
(Fig. 580.) 
(Prenanthes, Eng. Bot.
t. 457.) 
[ft A glabrous, erect annual or biennial, 
about 2 feet high, with slender branches, 
forming a loose, terminal panicle.
Leaves 
few and thin, rather large, with a broadly 
triangular, toothed or lobed, terminal 
segment, and a few irregular smaller 
ones along the stalk ; the upper leaves 
, small, narrow, and entire or toothed.
—\u/ Flower-heads small, on slender pedicels.
<^P^ Involucres about 5 lines long, of 5 equal, 
^ linear bracts, with 1, 2, or 3 very small 
outer ones, containing 4 or 5 florets.
Beak of the achenes much shorter than 
the achene itself.
In woods and shrubby places, in Eu- 
rope and Russian Asia, extending far 
into the north, although not an Arctic 
plant.
Not uncommon in England, more 
rare in southern Scotland, and only known 
in Louth County in Ireland.
Fl. summer.
2. Prickly Lettuce.
Laetuca Scariola, Linn.
(Fig. 581.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 268.) 
An erect, stiff annual or biennial, 2, 3, or even 4 feet high, of a more 
or less glaucous green, with short but spreading branches, and quite 
glabrous, except a few stiff bristles or small prickles on the edges or 
on the midrib of the leaves.
Leaves more or less spreading, varying 
from lanceolate to broadly oblong, either bordered only with small 
teeth, or with a few short lobes or coarse teeth usually curved down- 
wards, or deeply pinnatifid with few narrow lobes ; the upper ones 
narrow, more entire, and clasping the stem with pointed auricles.
Elower-heads in a more or less leafy panicle, sometimes long and 
narrow, sometimes more branched and spreading.
Involucres 4 or 5 
lines long, of a few imbricate bracts, the short, broad, outer ones 
COMPOSITE.
485 
passing gradually iuto the inner, long, 
narrow ones.
Florets 6 to 10 or 12, of 
a pale yellow.
Achenes much flattened, 
obovate-oblong, striated, varying in co- 
lour from nearly white to nearly black, 
with a slender beak about the length of 
the achene.
In dry or stony wastes, on banks and 
roadsides, in central and southern Eu- 
rope, extending over a great part of 
central Asia.
Thinly scattered in Bri- 
tain, from southern England to the low 
tracts in the south-east Highlands of 
Scotland.
Fl. summer.
The name of 
L. Scar tola is often limited to the va- 
rieties with more erect leaves, with 
deeper and narrower lobes ; and those 
with broader leaves, toothed only, and 
not so glaucous, have been considered 
as a distinct species, under the name of 
L. virosa (Eng. Bot.
t. 1957).
Fig. 581.
3. Willow Lettuce.
Lactuca saligna, 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 707.) 
Very near the prickly L., but more 
slender and twiggy ; the leaves upright 
against the stem, and narrower ; the 
stiff panicles with branches so short that 
the flower-heads appear clustered in a 
simple spike ; and the beak of the 
achene from twice to three times its own 
length.
These characters are however 
so variable as to occasion some doubt 
whether the two species are really dis- 
tinct.
The commonest form in the Medi- 
terranean and Caucasian regions, ex- 
tending to some parts of central Europe.
Bare in Britain ; most certainly recorded 
from the banks of the Thames in Kent.
Fl. summer.
ie.
58S 
Fig. 582.
486 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
XXXIY.
SOWTHISTLE.
SONCHUS.
Erect, leafy herbs, either glabrous or with more or less glandular 
hairs on the panicles ; the leaves usually pinnately lobed or coarsely 
toothed, and clasping the stem at the base; the flower-heads in ter- 
minal panicles, with numerous yellow or blue florets.
Involucre ovoid, 
with imbricated bracts, and usually becoming conical after flowering.
Achenes flattened and striate, not beaked ; the pappus sessile, of nu- 
merous simple hairs.
A considerable genus, spread over the temperate regions of the 
northern hemisphere, distinguished from Lettuce by the sessile pappus, 
from Crejpis and Ilawkweed by the flattened achenes.
Flowers yellow.
Pappus white and silky.
Perennials.
Flower-heads large.
Involucres hairy at the 
base.
Marsh plant, the auricles of the leaves narrow and acute 2.
Marsh S.
Field weed, the auricles of the leaves short and broad .
1. Com S 
Annuals.
Flower-heads rather small and pale.
Involucres 
glabrous 3.
Common S.
Flowers blue.
Pappus of stiff, bristly hairs, of a dirty white 4.
Alpine S.
1. Corn Sowthistle.
Sonchus arvensis, Linn.
(Fig. 583.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 674.) 
Hootstock creeping.
Stems 2 to 3 feet 
high.
Leaves long, pinnatifid or sinuate, 
the lobes lanceolate or triangular, more 
or less curved downwards, and bordered 
by small prickly teeth ; the lower ones 
stalked, the upper ones clasping the 
stem with short, broad auricles.
Flower- 
heads large, of a bright yellow, in loose 
terminal panicles ; the branches, pe- 
duncles, and involucres more or less 
hispid with brown or black glandular 
hairs.
Achenes striated and transversely 
wrinkled, with a pappus of copious, 
white, silky hairs.
A cornfield weed, extending over the 
whole of Europe and liussian Asia, ex- 
cept the extreme north.
Common in 
Britain.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 583.
COMPOSITE.
487 
2. Marsh Sowthistle.
Sonchus palustris, Linn.
(Fig. 584.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 935.) 
This has the large flowers, glandular 
hairs, and general habit of the corn S., 
but is a much taller plant ; the root- 
stock scarcely creeps, and the leaves are 
narrow, often 8 or 10 inches long, clasp- 
ing the stem with long pointed auricles, 
and either undivided or with one or two 
pairs of long lanceolate lobes.
In marshes, and the edges of ponds 
and wet ditches.
Said to have nearly 
the geographical range of the corn $., 
but appears to be more confined to east- 
ern Europe, and nowhere common.
In 
Britain, very rare, the only certain lo- 
calities being in the marshes of some of 
the eastern counties of England.
Fl.
late summer, or autumn.
Fig. 584.
3. Common Sowthistle.
Sonchus oleraceus, Linn.
(Fig. 585.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 843.) 
An annual, with a rather thick hollow stem, 1 to 3 or even 4 feet 
high, perfectly glabrous, except occasionally a very few stiff glandular 
hairs on the peduncles.
Leaves thin, pinnatifid, with a broad, heart- 
shaped or triangular terminal lobe, bordered with irregular, pointed or 
prickly teeth, and a few smaller lobes or coarse teeth along the broad 
leafstalk ; the upper leaves narrow and clasping the stem with short 
auricles.
Flower-heads rather small, in a short corymbose panicle, 
sometimes almost umbellate ; the involucres remarkably conical after 
flowering.
Florets of a pale yellow.
Achenes flattened, with longi- 
tudinal ribs often marked with transverse wrinkles or asperities, the 
pappus of copious snow-white hairs.
A weed of cultivation, so universally distributed over the globe, ex- 
cept perhaps some tropical districts, that the limits of its native country 
cannot now be fixed ; probably truly indigenous in Europe and cen- 
488 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
tral Asia.
Very abundant in Britain.
Fl. the whole season.
The prickly S.
(S.
aspera, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2765 and 
2766) appears to be a marked variety, 
rather than a species, in which the longi- 
gitudinal ribs of the achenes have not 
the transverse wrinkles.
The leaves are 
usually darker in colour and less di- 
vided, but much more closely bordered 
with prickly teeth ; and the auricles 
which clasp the stem are broader, 
rounded, and more prickly toothed : 
none of these characters are, however, 
constant.
It is almost always mixed 
with the common S., and in many places 
as abundant.
Fig. 585.
4. Alpine Sowthistle.
Sonchus alpinus, Linn.
(Fig. 586.) 
(S.
cceruleus, Eng. Bot.
t. 2425.
Mulgedium, Brit.
Fl.) 
im Stock perennial, with erect stems 2 to 
3 feet high.
Leaves much like those of 
the common 8., but with a much larger, 
broadly triangular, and pointed terminal 
segment.
Panicle oblong, almost nar- 
rowed into a raceme, more or less hispid 
with glandular hairs.
Involucres nar- 
row, of but few bracts, containing 12 to 
20 deep-blue florets.
Achenes oblong, 
but slightly flattened ; the hairs of the 
pappus of a dirty white, and rather 
stiffer than in the other species.
In moist, rocky situations, in northern 
and Arctic Europe and Asia, limited in 
central and southern Europe to moun- 
tain-ranges.
In Britain, only in the 
Lochnagar and Clova mountains and 
their vicinity, where it is now becoming 
very rare.
Fl. summer, rather late.
The 
differences in the pappus which have induced its separation as a genus, 
COMPOSITE.
under the name of Midgedium, will scarcely hold 
exotic species of blue Sowthisttes.
489 
in some other 
XXXV.
DANDELION.
TAKAXACUM.
Herbs, with a perennial rootstock, radical leaves, and radical pe- 
duncles, with single heads of yellow flowers.
Involucres of several 
nearly equal, erect inner bracts, and several imbricated outer ones.
Receptacle without scales.
Achenes tapering into a long slender beak, 
with a pappus of numerous simple hairs.
A widely diffused genus, of which all the described species may per- 
haps be considered as varieties of a single one, differing from Sawkbit 
in the simple hairs of the pappus, from Crejois chiefly in the leafless 
simple peduncles.
1. Common Dandelion.
Taraxacum Dens-leonis, Desf.
(Fig. 587.) 
(Leontodon Taraxacum, Eng. Bot.
t. 510.) 
The rootstock descends into a thick 
tap-root, black on the outside, and very 
bitter.
Leaves varying from linear- 
lanceolate and almost entire to deeply 
pinnatifid, with broad triangular lobes 
usually pointing downwards, the ter- 
minal one larger, obovate or acute.
Pe- 
duncles 2 to 6 or 8 inches high.
Involu- 
cral bracts linear, often thickened to- 
wards the top, or with a tooth on the 
back below the point.
Achenes slightly 
or not at all compressed, striated, 
marked upwards with short pointed as- 
perities, the beak two or three times as 
long as the achene itself.
lg ' ° l ' 
In meadows and pastures, cultivated and waste places, throughout 
Europe, Eussian and central Asia, and northern America to the Arctic 
regions, and now a troublesome weed in almost all cultivated parts of 
the world.
Among the numerous forms which have given rise to the 
distinction of a considerable number of supposed species, the most re- 
markable British ones are the common _D., with pinnatifid leaves and 
the outer involucral bracts much recurved, and the marsh D.
(T.
palustre, Eng. Bot.
t. 553), with narrow leaves nearly entire or sinuate, 
and the outer involucral bracts scarcely spreading at the tips.
490 THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
XXXYI.
CREPIS.
CREPIS.
Annuals or biennials, rarely forming a stock of longer duration, 
usually glabrous or slightly hairy, with branched, more or less leafy 
stems, and rather small heads of flowers in loose panicles, yellow in the 
British species.
Involucre of several, nearly equal, linear inner bracts, 
with smaller outer ones.
Receptacle without scales.
Achenes not 
compressed, angular or striated, more or less narrowed at the top or 
beaked, with a pappus of copious simple hairs, usually very white.
One of the largest genera of Ligidates in Europe and Asia, with a 
very few American species, all nearly allied to Haiokiveed, but mostly 
distinguished by habit as well as by the achenes contracted at the top 
and the white pappus.
There are some species, however, so nearly 
intermediate between the two genera that they are referred to the one 
or to the other according to peculiar views of individual botanists.
Achenes narrowed into a distinct, slender beak {Barlchausid) .
All the achenes with a long, slender beak.
Outer invoiu- 
cral bracts lanceolate, whitish at the the edges .
. 1.
Beaked C.
Achenes of the outer florets scarcely beaked, the others 
with a long beak.
Outer involucral bracts small, and 
very narrow 2.
Fetid C.
Achenes contracted at the top, but without a distinct beak.
Lower leaves pinnatifid, or very narrow.
Flower-heads 
numerous.
Pappus very white, and silky.
Outer bracts of the involucre narrow-linear ....
3. Smooth C.
Outer bracts of the involucre oblong-linear, with a 
whitish edge 4.
'Rough C.
Leaves mostly oblong, coarsely toothed or entire.
Flower- 
heads few.
Pappus not very white, and rather stiff.
Leaves mostly entire.
Achenes with about 20 ribs or 
striae 5.
Haivkweed C.
Leaves mostly toothed.
Achenes with 10 ribs or strias 6.
Marsh C.
The pink Hawkweed, formerly much cultivated in flower-gardens, is 
a species of Crepis from south-eastern Europe ; the bristly Crepis (C.
setosa, Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2945), which has the long-beaked achenes of 
the beaked C, but is covered with stiff, spreading hairs, is a south-east 
European plant, which has occasionally appeared in Britain as a weed 
of cultivation.
1. Beaked Crepis.
Crepis taraxacifolia, Thuil.
(Eig. 588.) 
(Eng. Bot.
Suppl.
t. 2929.
JBorckhausia, Brit.
Fl.) 
Much resembles some forms of the rough C, but easily known by the 
pappus.
Leaves chiefly radical and pinnatifid, with a large, terminal, 
COMPOSITE.
491 
coarsely toothedlobe,andsmall ones along 
the stalk.
Stems erect, 1 to 2 feet high, 
bearing a few small, narrow leaves.
Flower-heads smaller than in the fetid 
C, forming a loose, terminal, flat corymb.
Involucres scarcely hairy, the outer 
bracts much shorter than the inner ones, 
lanceolate, and more or less membranous 
and whitish on the edges.
Achenes all 
terminated by a slender beak about the 
length of the achene itself.
In rather dry pastures, and waste 
places, in central and especially southern 
Europe, and eastward to the Caucasus, 
not extending into northern Germany.
In Britain, chiefly in limestone districts 
of southern England and Ireland ; ra- 
ther more frequent than the fetid C, 
but appears to have been frequently con- 
founded with that plant or with the 
rough C.
Fl. summer.
2. Fetid Crepis.
Crepis foetida, Linn, 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 406.
BorcJchausia, Brit 
A slightly hairy annual or biennial, 
seldom a foot high, with a few spreading 
branches.
Badical leaves irregularly 
pinnatifid, with short lobes, the termi- 
nal one varying from broadly triangu- 
lar to narrow- oblong ; the stem-leaves 
narrow, the lower slightly pinnatifid, the 
upper entire or toothed.
Flower-heads 
few, on long peduncles, usually recurved 
after flowering.
Involucres hairy, the 
outer bracts small, and very narrow.
The beak of the outer achenes is very 
short, often scarcely distinct, whilst that 
of the inner ones is long and slender, 
carrying up the whole pappus above the 
tips of the involucral bracts.
In rather dry pastures, and waste 
places, in southern Europe to the Cau- 
casus, becomes rare further north.
In 
Britain only in some of the southern and 
eastern counties of England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 588.
(Fig 
Fl.) 
589.) 
Fig. 5S9.
492 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
3. Smooth Crepis.
Crepis virens, Linn.
(Fig. 590.) 
(C.
tectorum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1111.) 
An erect or ascending, branched an- 
nual or biennial, from 1 to 3 feet high, 
usually glabrous or nearly so.
Leaves 
linear or lanceolate, toothed or pinna- 
tifid, with triangular or narrow, but 
short lobes ; the radical ones stalked, 
the upper ones clasping the stem by 
pointed, spreading auricles.
Flower- 
heads small, in loose, often leafy panicles.
Involucres often slightly hispid, and be- 
come conical after flowering ; the outer 
bracts narrow-linear, and rather close.
Achenes narrow-oblong, very slightly 
contracted at the top, but not beaked, 
and generally shorter than the pappus, 
although there are frequently in the 
same head a few much longer than the 
rest, and longer than their own pappus.
In pastures, on dry banks, roadsides, 
and waste places, throughout western and central Europe, from Scan- 
dinavia to the Mediterranean ; further east apparently replaced by the 
true C.
tectorum.
One of the commonest of the British Ligulates.
Fl.
the whole summer and autumn.
It varies much in stature and in the 
size and number of the flower-heads, but they are always smaller than 
in any other British species.
Fig. 590.
4. Hough Crepis.
Crepis biennis, Linn.
(Fig. 591.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 149, not good.) 
A taller and stouter plant than the smooth C, more frequently 
biennial, less branched from the base, but forming a broad, terminal 
corymb of rather larger flower-heads ; the leaves more or less rough 
with short, stiff hairs ; and the outer bracts of the involucre broader, 
with a whitish, membranous edge.
In this respect it resembles the 
larger forms of the beaked C, but the achenes have the ribs much 
smoother, and although narrowed at the top, they do not bear the 
long, slender beak of that species.
In similar situations with the last three, dispersed over temperate 
Europe, from Sweden to the Mediterranean.
Rare in Britain; its pre- 
COMPOSITE.
493 
cise geographical limits are indeed not 
well ascertained, as it is often confounded 
with the common smooth C.
or with the 
beaked C, but I have seen true speci- 
mens from the central and eastern coun- 
ties of England.
Fl. summer.
Fig. 591.
5. Hawkweed Crepis.
Crepis hieracioid.es, Jacq.
(Fig. 592.) 
(C.
succiscefolia, Brit.
Fl. Hieracium molle, Eog. Bot.
t. 2210.) 
Like the marsh C, this has much the 
habit of a HaioTciveed, but the pappus is 
white and soft, as in Crepis.
It is an 
erect, scarcely branched perennial, a 
foot high or rather more, glabrous or 
slightly hairy.
Leaves entire or with a 
few minute teeth ; the radical and lower 
ones obovate- oblong, on long stalks ; the 
upper ones few, narrow, and clasping 
the stem.
Flower-heads few, in a loose 
corymb, like those of the marsh C, but 
the achenes are finely striate, with about 
20 ribs.
In meadows and pastures, chiefly in 
mountain districts, all across central 
Europe, from the Pyrenees to the Rus- 
sian frontier, not extending into Scandi- 
navia.
In Britain, in a few localities in 
southern Scotland, in northern England 
and in Ireland.
FL summer and autumn.
Fig. 592.
494 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
6. Marsh Crepis.
Crepis paludosa, Moench.
(Fig. 593.) 
{Hieraciiun, Eng. Bot.
t. 1094.) 
This species has almost as much the 
habit and characters of Hawlcweed, with 
which Linnsous associated it, as of Crepis, 
to which it is referred by modern bo- 
tanists.
It is an erect, scarcely branched 
perennial, but of short duration, and 
nearly glabrous, 1 to 2 feet high.
Ra- 
dical leaves ovate, coarsely toothed, with 
a few small lobes along the stalk; the 
stem-leaves from broadly oblong to 
lanceolate, pointed, toothed, especially 
in the lower part, and clasping the stem 
by rather large, pointed auricles.
Flower- 
heads yellow, rather large, in corymbs 
of 8 or 10 ; the involucres more or less 
hairy, with black, spreading hairs.
The 
pappus is of a dirty white, almost like 
that of a Hawlcweed, but the achenes are 
distinctly contracted at the top as in 
^' ' Crepis, and marked with 10 ribs or striae.
In moist, shady situations, in northern Europe, and all across Rus- 
sian Asia, becoming a mountain plant in southern Europe.
Extends 
all over Scotland, and southward into the central counties of England, 
and into South Wales, and is not rare in Ireland.
Fl. summer and 
autumn.
XXXVII.
HAWKWEED.
HIERACIUM.
Herbs, with a perennial stock, entire or toothed leaves, and yellow 
or rarely orange-red flower-heads, either on leafless radical peduncles, 
or in terminal corymbs or panicles on leafy stems.
Involucre more 
or less imbricated.
Receptacle without scales.
Achenes angular or 
striated, not narrowed at the top ; with a pappus of simple, generally 
stiff hairs, of a tawny- white or brownish colour.
A rather numerous European and north Asiatic genus, with a few 
American species, very nearly allied to Crepis, but the achenes are not 
perceptibly contracted at the top, and the hairs of the pappus are 
composite.
495 
usually stiffer, and never so white.
The habit is also different, with 
the exception of a few species, which are also intermediate in more 
essential characters.
The species are some of them very variable, and 
specimens are frequently found apparently intermediate between some 
of the commonest ones.
In the attempt to classify these forms, and to 
give greater exactness to their definitions, modern botanists have dis- 
tributed them into a large number of supposed species, amounting to 
between 30 and 40 for Britain alone.
But the difficulty of distinguish- 
ing them appears only to increase with their subdivision, and the 
seven here enumerated will probably be found to be the only truly 
botanical species indigenous to Britain.* 
Peduncles radical, bearing a single flower-head.
Peduncles leafless.
Stems creeping.
Leaves white under- 
neath.
Flower-heads pale-yellow 1.
Mouse-ear R.
Peduncles or flower-stems with one or more narrow leaves.
ISTo creeping stems.
Leaves not white.
Flower-heads 
large, bright yellow.
Radical leaves ovate.
Involucres with short hairs .
. 3.
Wall R.
Radical leaves narrow.
Involucres with long hairs .
2. Alpine R.
Flowering-stems with more than one flower-head.
Radical leaves mostly persistent at the time of flowering.
Stem-leaves one or few.
Outer involucral bracts few 
and short.
Stem-leaves ovate and toothed, or small and narrow, 
stalked or sessile, scarcely stem-clasping .
. .
. 3.
Wall R.
Stem-leaves one or two, entire, glaucous, clasping the 
stem with broad, rounded auricles 4.
Honeyivort H.
No radical leaves at the time of flowering.
Stems leafy.
Outer involucral bracts imbricated.
Upper stem-leaves sessile or shortly stalked, not clasping 
the stem.
Upper stem-leaves all tapering at the base, usually 
narrow 5.
Umbellate R.
Upper stem-leaves short and broad, rounded at the 
base 6.
Savoy R.
Upper stem-leaves clasping the stem.
Auricles of the stem-leaves short and rounded.
Stem- leaves several, ciliate.
Pappus dirty- white .
7. Prenanth R.
Stem-leaves very few, glabrous.
Pappus very white 
and soft RaivTcweed Crepis.
Auricles of the stem -leaves long and very pointed, or 
angular Marsh Crepis.
* For further details on the proposed species or permanent varieties, see Back- 
house's ' Monograph of the British Hieracia,' where the principal British forms are 
carefully described, and distributed into 33 species.
496 
THR COMPOSITE FAMILY.
1. Mouse-ear Hawkweed.
Hieracium Pilosella, Linn.
(Fig. 594.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1093.) 
Stock perennial, with spreading tufts 
of radical leaves, and creeping, leafy, 
barren shoots.
Leaves much smaller 
than in the British species, oblong or 
lanceolate, entire, tapering at the base, 
and often stalked, green above with a few 
long hairs, white underneath with a 
short stellate down.
Peduncles radical, 
with a single head of lemon-coloured 
flowers, often tinged with red on the 
outside.
Involucres and upper part of 
the peduncle more or less clothed with 
a minute and close, whitish down, mixed 
with short, stiff, spreading black hairs.
Achenes shorter in proportion to the 
pappus than in the other species.
In dry pastures, on banks and road- 
sides, throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, from the Mediterranean to the 
Arctic regions.
Yery common in Britain.
Fl. the whole season.
In 
southern Europe it is very variable, but in Britain presents no diffi- 
culties.
The only other species with creeping runners ever admitted 
into our Floras, the orange H.
{H.
aurantiacum, Eng. Bot.
t. 1469), is 
a native of the mountains of southern Europe, which may here and 
there have spread out of some cottage gardens, but is not naturalized ; 
it has radical peduncles, bearing a corymb of small, orange-red flower- 
heads.
Fig. 594.
2. Alpine Hawkweed.
Hieracium alpinum, Linn.
(Eig. 595.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1110.) 
Hootstock short and thick, sometimes shortly creeping, but without 
creeping leafy stems.
Leaves chiefly radical, oblong or lanceolate, 
slightly toothed, green, with a few long hairs.
Peduncles or flower- 
stems about 6 inches high, simple or rarely divided into 2 simple 
branches ; they usually bear 1, 2, or even 3 small narrow leaves, and 
a single rather large head of bright yellow flowers.
Involucres and 
COMPOSITOR.
497 
peduncles more or less clothed with long 
rusty hairs ; the outer bracts few and 
small, as in the wall H.
A high alpine or Arctic species, spread 
over the mountains of northern and 
Arctic Europe and Asia, and the higher 
ranges of central and southern Europe.
Not uncommon in the Highlands of 
Scotland and in the mountains of North 
Wales, and found also in some parts of 
north-western England.
Fl. summer.
In its ordinary state it is easily enough ^^> 
recognized, but in the Scotch Highlands ^|g 
varieties sometimes occur with broader 
leaves, more elongated flower-stems, 
and less shaggy involucres, almost in- 
termediate between this and the wall 
H., which has induced some botanists to 
believe that the former may be but a j^v 
high alpine variety of the latter.
^f^v 
595.
3. Wall Hawkweed.
Hieracium murorum, Linn.
(Eig. 596.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2082; H.
maculatum, t.
2121, H.
pulmonariwm, t.
2307, 
and H.
Lapeyrousii, Sup pi.
t. 2915.) 
The short perennial stock bears a 
spreading tuft of rather large, ovate or 
oblong leaves, always stalked, some- 
times very obtuse and nearly entire, 
more frequently pointed and coarsely 
toothed, especially near the base, some- 
times tapering into the stalk, sometimes 
more or less cordate at the base, usually 
slightly hairy, and often of a pale glau- 
cous-green underneath.
Elower-stems 
erect, 1 to 2 feet high, rarely quite leaf- 
less, usually with 1 or 2 leaves near the 
base like" the radical ones but smaller, 
and 1 or 2 smaller narrow ones higher 
up, but occasionally with several leaves.
Elower-heads rather large and yellow, 
usually 3 or 4 only, but sometimes as 
many as 20 or 30, in a loose terminal 
corymb.
Involucres and peduncles more or less clothed with 
VOL.
I. 2 Q 
Fig. 596.
black, 
498 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
glandular hairs, intermixed with a shorter, rusty-coloured down, 
whilst the stem is glabrous, or bears in the lower part long, white, 
woolly hairs, which are sometimes very dense close to the stock.
Scales of the involucres narrow, the inner ones nearly equal, the outer 
few and much shorter.
On banks and old walls, in meadows and rich pastures, bushy places 
and open woods, throughout Europe and Russian Asia, from the Me- 
diterranean to the Arctic regions.
Very common all over Britain.
Fl.
all summer and early autumn.
Exceedingly variable in the shape and 
teeth of the leaves, in colour and hairiness, in the number of stem- 
leaves and of flower-heads.
In alpine situations the leaves are usually 
much more entire, often obovate.
A marked variety, growing in woods 
and on banks, with a much more leafy stem, has long been distinguished 
under the names of H.
sylvaticum (Eng. Bot.
t. 2031) or H.
vulgatum, 
but it is everywhere connected with the more typical form by a series 
of intermediates which defy classification.
From the Savoy IT.
and 
the umbellate H.
it may be known by the radical leaves larger than 
the stem ones, and persistent at the time of flowering, except where 
they have been accidentally choked by the surrounding herbage, or 
withered by drought or other accidental causes.
4. Honey wort Hawkweed.
Hieraeium cerinthoides, 
Linn.
(Fig. 597.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2378, from a garden specimen.) 
The habit and radical leaves are those 
of the mountain varieties of the wall H., 
but the whole plant is still more glaucous, 
and has generally more of the woolly 
hairs, especially about the stock.
The 
flower-stems bear but few rather large 
flowers, and 1 or 2 leaves usually entire, 
and always clasping the stem with 
broad, rounded auricles, and the radical 
leaves are usually remarkably obovate.
In western Europe, chiefly in the 
Pyrenees, more doubtfully extending to 
the western Alps and Corsica.
A very 
doubtful British plant.
The only speci- 
mens I have seen which really resemble 
the Pyrenean ones (in the dried state at 
least) are from the mountains of the 
west and north of Ireland.
The Scotch 
and English and most of the Irish ones 
so denominated are usually varieties of 
the wall H.
or of the Savoy H.
Fig. 597.
COMPOSITE.
499 
5. Umbellate Hawkweed.
Hieracium umbellatum, Linn.
' (Fig. 598.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 1771.) 
The perennial stock only forms buds 
in the autumn, which do not expand into 
a tuft of spreading leaves, as in the wall 
H., but in the following year grow out 
into a leafy, erect, rigid stem, 1 to 3 feet 
high.
Eadical leaves, if any, few and 
withering away before the time of flower- 
ing.
Stem-leaves from narrow-lanceo- 
late to oblong, coarsely toothed or 
nearly entire; the lower ones stalked, 
and all tapering at the base.
Flower- 
heads rather numerous, on rather short 
lateral branches towards the summit of 
the stem, several of which usually (but 
not always) start from so nearly the 
same point as to form an irregular umbel, 
and there are often many others lower 
down in the axils of the upper leaves.
Involucres and peduncles glabrous or 
shortly downy.
Leaves glabrous or hairy underneath ; the stems 
usually more or less clothed at the base with long loose hairs.
Scales 
of the involucre more regularly imbricated than in the wall H., the 
outer ones usually spreading at the tips.
In woods and stony places or banks, throughout Europe and Russian 
Asia, from the Mediterranean to the Arctic regions.
Very common in 
Britain.
Fl. late summer, and autumn.
Fig. 598.
6. Savoy Hawkweed.
Hieracium sabaudum, Linn.
(Fig. 599.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 349.
H. denticulatum, Eng. Bot.
t. 2122.
H. boreale, 
Brit.
Fl.) 
Although intermediate forms between this species and the last may 
occasionally be found, yet the two are in most cases easily distinguished.
The Savoy II.
, though stout and equally tall with the umbellate H., is 
less rigid and more hairy ; the leaves larger, broader, and more toothed, 
the upper ones shorter, always rounded at the base, and sometimes 
almost clasping the stem ; and the flowering branches form a loose 
500 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
corymb, and never an umbel.
From the 
wall H., it is distinguished by the more 
leafy stem, without radical leaves at the 
time of flowering, and by the more re- 
gularly imbricated involucres.
In woods, under hedges, and in shady 
places, especially in hilly districts, in 
Europe, extending eastward to the con- 
fines of Siberia, and probably still fur- 
ther into Asia, and northward to the 
Arctic regions.
Distributed generally 
over Britain, but not so frequent as the 
umbellate H.
and especially as the wall 
II.
Fl. late summer, and autumn.
Fig. 599.
7. Prenanth Hawkweed.
Hieracium prenanthoides, Vill.
(Fig. 600.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 2235.) 
Yery near the Savoy H., but the stem- 
leaves are usually long, lanceolate, and 
slightly narrowed near the base, and 
always clasp the stem by rounded au- 
ricles, and even the stalks of the lower 
leaves are expanded at the base into the 
same stem-clasping auricles.
The in- 
volucres and peduncles have usually 
more of the short, black, glandular hairs 
intermingled with the minute down than 
either the Savoy H.
or the umbellate H.
In woods, shady places, and rich pas- 
tures, and on the banks of streams, in 
northern Europe and the mountain dis- 
tricts of central Europe.
Hare in the 
Highlands of Scotland, and in Wicklow 
county in Ireland, and very doubtfully 
extending into England.
Fl. late sum- 
Fiff 600 mer, or autumn.
COMPOSITE.
501 
XXXYIII.
CHICORV.
CICHORIUM.
Perennials, with the leaves mostly radical, stiff branching stems, 
and sessile heads of blue flowers.
Involucres oblong.
Achenes 
crowned by a ring of minute erect scales.
Besides the British species, the genus only includes the garden 
Endive, generally supposed to be a native of India, but it is very doubt- 
ful if it be wild even there, and it may be a mere cultivated variety of 
the common wild C.
1. Wild Chicory.
Cichorium Xntybus, Linn.
(Fig. 601.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 539.
Succory or Chicory.) 
Perennial stock descending into a 
long tap-root.
Stems more or less his- 
pid, 1 to 2 or even 3 feet high.
Eadical 
leaves spreading on the ground, and, 
as well as the lower stem-leaves, more 
or less hairy and pinnatifid, with a 
large terminal lobe and smaller lateral 
ones, all pointed and coarsely toothed ; 
the upper leaves small, less cut, em- 
bracing the stem by pointed auricles.
Elower-heads in closely sessile clusters 
of 2 or 3 along the stiff spreading 
branches, and 1 or 2 terminal ones.
In- 
volucres of about 8 inner bracts and a 
few outer ones about half their length ; 
the florets large, of a bright blue.
Achenes smooth or scarcely ribbed, 
closely packed in the hard dry base of 
the involucre.
In dry wastes, on roadsides, and bor- 
ders of fields, over the greater part of Europe and Asia, stopping only 
short of the Arctic regions on the one side, and the tropics on the 
other.
Not uncommon in some parts of England and Ireland, but 
does not extend far into Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 601.
XXXIX.
ARNOSERIS.
ARNOSEEIS.
A single species, distinguished as a genus from Lapsane, as having a 
different habit, and the achenes crowned with a minute raised border ; 
502 
THE COMPOSITE FAMILY.
and more naturally associated by older botanists with Hyoseris, a 
Continental genus, in which the achenes have a pappus of chaffy 
scales or bristles.
1. Dwarf Arnoseris.
Arnoseris pusilla, Gsertn.
(Fig. 602.) 
(Hyoseris, Eng. Bot.
t. 95.
Lapsana, Brit.
Fl.) 
Leaves all radical, obovate or oblong, 
toothed, and glabrous or nearly so.
Flower-stalks 4 to 8 inches high, slightly 
branched, and leafless; the erect branches 
or peduncles enlarged and hollow up- 
wards, each bearing a small head of 
yellow r flowers.
In dry, sandy or gravelly fields, in 
northern and central Europe, but not 
an Arctic plant, and apparently rare in 
the south.
Dispersed over various parts 
of England, especially in the eastern 
counties, and occurs in some of the east- 
ern counties of Scotland, but not re- 
corded from Ireland.
FL summer.
Fig. 602.
XL.
LAPSANE.
LAPSANA.
Leafy annual, with small yellow flower-heads, 
any pappus or border whatsoever.
The genus consists but of a single species.
Achenes without 
1. Common Lapsane.
Lapsana communis, Linn.
(Fig. 603.) 
(Eng. Bot.
t. 844.
Nipplewort.) 
Stem 1 to 2 or 3 feet high, with a few stiff hairs at the base, branched 
and glabrous upwards.
Leaves thin and usually hairy ; the lower ones 
ovate, coarsely toothed, with a few smaller lobes along the stalk ; the 
upper ones small, narrow, and entire.
Flower-heads on slender pe- 
ducles, in a loose panicle or corymb.
Involucre about 3 lines long, of 
about 8 nearly equal scales of a glaucous green, with a few very small 
COMPOSITE.
503 
outer ones.
Aehenes slightly com- 
pressed, with numerous longitudinal 
nerves.
A common weed in waste and culti- 
vated places, throughout Europe and 
Russian Asia, except the extreme north.
Extends over the whole of Britain, ex- 
cept the northern extremity of Scotland.
Fl. summer and autumn.
Fig. 603.
END OF VOL.
I. 
printed by 
john edward taylor, little queen street, 
Lincoln's inn fields.
SNI NVIN0SH±IWs"S3 I U VH 8 llf LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTlJ 
UJ 
lES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTITUTION^NOIinillSN^NVINOSHilWS S3IU1 
.SNI NVINOSHiMS S3 I UVU a II LI B RAR I ES W SMnHSONIAN~ INS" 
I Es"sMlTHSONIANf INSTITUTION"NOIiniliSN| 2 NVINOSHllWs"s3 I UV 
-?» CO • • f/j 
» 2'^Slr § (ft,..
Jl I f€ .
j!) s ^fij^ 1 
SNI~NVIN0SH1IWS~S3 I ava a I1~LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTITI 
ES^SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION^NOIinillSNrNVINOSHllWS^SS I «V 
!NI_NVIN0SHllWs"s3 I M VM 8 llf LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN JNSTITU 
/ H 
O 
2 
ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION^NOIinillSNI^NVINOSHllWS^Sa I MV1 
r* Z r" z 
,/J*'^ 5 
a> ^ 
LnillSNI NVIN0SHllWS < °S3iyvyan Z LIBRARIES t/> SMITHS0NIAN II 
co = to 
ES SMITHSONIAN_JNSTITUTION NOIinillSNI NVIN0SH1IWS S 
o 
3 
Z 
m 
millSNI NVIN0SH1IIAIS S3 !
HVH 8 H~LI B RAR I ES SMITHSONIAN 
2: o> Z ^ •' g!
z 
3 RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN 2 INSTITUTION NOIinillSNI NVINOSHIIWS^ 
to ^ _ co 5; co 
m 
linillSNI_NVINOSHHWS S3 I MV« a ll_LI B RAR I ES_SMITHSONIAN r 
to '** E w ± co 
BRARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNI NVIN0SH1IWS 
to Z "« CO z 
iiiniusNi NViNosHiiws^sa 1 y vy a ii z li b rar i es^smithsonian 
« = to 5 
-J Z -J Z 
.ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOI±nil±SNI_NVINOSHJLIWS_.