Hutt (Ealbge of Agnculturc 
At Qlotrnell Uniuerattg 
ffiihtarg 
Date 
Due 
DECS W 
Library Bureau Cat. No.
1137 
Cornell University Library 
QK 306.W33C 
A compendium of the Cybele britannica; or 
3 1924 001 689 326 
The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library.
There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text.
http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924001689326 
COMPENDIUM 
CYBELE BRITANNICA; 
§ntis| fknts in t\m §tqxn'^\M %tMmL 
HEWETT COTTRELL WATSON.
" There is scarcely any well-informed person, wlio, if he has but the 
will, has not also the power to add something essential to the general stock 
of knowledge, if he wiU only observe regularly and methodically some 
particular clas.s of facts which may most excite his attention, or which his 
situation may best enable him to study with effect." — Heesohell.
LONDON : 
LONGMANS, GREEN, READER, & DYER.
1870.
^ ?'7^ 9 7 
LONDON : 
E. NEWMAN, PBINTEE, DEVONSHIRE STKEET, 
BI3H0PSGATE.
PREFACE.
This Volume was printed in three successive Parts 
in the years 1868, 1869, 1870; the manuscript for the 
several portions having heen prepared cliiefly in the 
years preceding those dates.
Attention to the dates 
is requested, because they will shew that the earlier 
pages of the volume could scarcely take into account 
any facts ascertained or records made later than 1867; 
although in the pages last printed some few discoveries 
and records even of 1870 have been noted while the 
proof sheets passed through hand.
The additions given 
under the head of "Notes and Corrections," on pages 
606 — 615, wiU bring the whole volume nearly up to 
actual knowledge about British plants and their dis- 
tribution at the beginning of 1870.
The Author's personal experiences in British botany 
may be said to extend over most of the forty years 
preceding the last mentioned date.
In course of those 
years he has observed and collected plants in many 
different counties, from Cornwall and Kent southwards 
to Sutherland and Caithness northwards, from the 
coast liue to the summits of the highest hills.
But 
most of his botanical rambUngs were done in years 
before the railways had grown into such a network 
of locomotive facilities as they now afford for botanical 
purposes.
Thus, while much was seen, much also has 
remained unseen by him; advancing age and other 
conditions having latterly interfered to render him 
IV PEEFACE.
sedentary at home, or locomotive only to the range of 
a single-day journey to and fro.
Books and the manu- 
script communications of botanical friends have been 
largely resorted to, in order to extend and supplement 
the knowledge acquired by personal investigation.
His 
writings are thus to be looked upon as a combination 
between actual observation at first-hand and rather 
elaborate compilation at second-hand.
This present volume may be taken as a condensed 
summary from thousands upon thousands of individual 
facts, real or alleged, actually ascertained or accepted 
on faith.
It is not to be expected that such a sum- 
mary has been made without errors and oversights on 
the part of the Author himself, besides those which 
may have been taken on trust from other writers or 
communicators.
The attempted elimination of old 
errors, over and over again repeated in books, and of 
the many others of more recent date continually in- 
creasing their numbers, has been found one of the 
most unsatisfactory among the emendatory tasks under- 
taken.
On the -whole, however, it is believed that the present 
Compendium may be accepted by the botanists of 
Britain, as a fairly reliable exposition of that depart- 
ment of botanical science to which it relates.
If so 
accepted, it may claim to constitute a new and advanced 
starting ground for further investigations.
At any rate, 
the Author must himself feel well assured that his own 
past efforts would have been very greatly assisted, if 
he could have found any similar book forty years ago.
For want thereof he has been compelled to sacrifice 
much time and labour in the accumulation of small 
facts, to be methodically arranged and then selected 
PREFACE.
V 
from.
The course has been always onward, indeed, but 
at the deliberate pace of the tortoise.
Successors may 
march forward all the faster and surer for this slowness 
hitherto.
A work like the Cytele Britannica or its Com- 
pendium, the first of its kind, unavoidably assumes a 
good deal the character of being critical and polemical.
Distribution is primarily based on localities observed 
and recorded; and records of localities give frequent 
occasion to weigh critically the personal testimony, in 
reliance upon which the records are to be accepted 
and made use of as scientific truths or facts.
Dis- 
tribution, again, deals with plants as so many species; 
and under existing conditions of technical botany, 
that term itself immediately suggests controversial dis- 
crepancies of opinion about the validity of those entities 
intended by the specific names used.
It is not the Author's disposition to accept opinions 
on faith or facts non-inquiringly.
His creed is, that 
intellectual truth should be held paramount over all 
other considerations.
Such a creed is certain to give 
offence to individuals when practically carried out.
The 
official and, the influential are prone to think it quite 
proper that they should receive the largest amoimt of 
j)ersonal laudation, and yet they wiU inconsistently 
object against the smallest degree of personal censure, 
in reference to their published opinions or public 
practices in science.
While the Author has refused to 
be restrained by rules so inconsistent, he has never 
wittingly either misrepresented or misquoted the writers 
whom he has had occasion to criticize.
Not seldom 
he has himself been subjected to garbled quotation 
and intentional misrepresentation, usually anonymous or 
PEEFACE.
editorial.
But there is nothing surprising in the fact, 
that those who are base enough to be intentionally 
false, should also be mean enough to be covertly 
false.
The name Cyhele has been variously pronounced.
The two first vowels are short, the final e is sounded 
long.
This correct pronunciation is insured by making 
the two first syllables end with the consonants thus, 
Cyb-el-e.
Some persons insist on Cy-bel-e, and others 
even on Cy-be-le.
The Author prefers to sound the 
name nearly as if it were written Sib-el-e.
The Address of the Author remains at Thames 
Ditton, near Kingston, Surrey.
But the town of 
Kingston-on-Thames having been changed under postal 
arrangements to a Head country office, it is no longer 
proper to add the letters " S.W." which are the initials 
of a Metropolitan district.
Correspondents are requested 
to note this change in postal address.
CONTENTS.
I, Introductory Explanations : — 
1 .
Topographical Divisions .
. a 
2. Ascending or Climatic Zones .
. .11 
3. Types of Distribution .
. .
.23 
4. Grades of Species .
. .
.32 
5. Eelation of Varieties to Species .
40 
6. Nativity of the Species .
. 59 
7. Explanation of the Formula used .
. 63 
n. Synopsis of Species : — 
Orders Raljunoulace^ to Equisetace^ .
79 to 420 
III.
Segregates and their Nomenclature .
. .
425 
1. Ranunculus aquatilis, its history.
2. ThaUctrum minus, ditto.
3. Viola canina, ditto.
4. Hypericum quadrangulum, ditto.
6. Valeriana officinaHs, ditto.
6. Aspidium spinulosum, ditto.
IV.
Additional List .
. .
. 461 
1 Segregates, 461.
3 Aliens, 464.
3 Casuals, 465.
4 Extincts, 467.
5 Errors, 468.
6 Ambiguities 469.
Orders Ranunculace^ to Equisetace^ .
473 to 605 
V. Notes and Corrections in Synopsis .
. .
606 
Cybele Britannica, explanatory notice concerning it .
616 
Index of Names .....
617 
I. INTRODUCTORY EXPLANATIONS.
Phyto-geoqeaphy traces out the history and distrihution of 
plants, in connexion with the geographical position of countries, 
their conditions of climate, and the physical peculiarities of their 
surface.
It has been more specially described under two names 
or divisions, according to the different modes in which the subject 
matter is chiefly taken under consideration.
1. Oeographical 
Botany is understood to begin with the plants themselves, whether 
by individual species or in generic or ordinal groups, and to trace 
the distribution of the species or groups over the surface of the 
Earth, or over any portion of it immediately under consideration.
2. Botanical Geography regards the Earth's surface itself pri- 
marily, and examines the floral peculiarities of its various parts or 
divisions ; investigating the diversities and correspondences of 
their respective floras, and endeavouring to ascertain the circum- 
stances or influences which have determined the existing con- 
ditions of plant-distribution.
Briefly, the former may be said to 
treat about the places of the plants ; the second, conversely, to 
treat about the plants of the places.
If reduced into brief 
questions, the distinction may become stiU more clear.
1. In 
what places, and under what conditions, does this plant or group 
of plants occur ?
S. By what kind of plants, or combination of 
plants, is this country inhabited and characterized ?
— how did 
they first get to it?
— how maintained there ?
This present volume wUl be devoted to geographical botany.
Each British species will be treated separately and successively, 
and its geographical distribution will be indicated in accordance 
with a fixed form.
The ample details thus condensed within a 
8 INTRODUCTION.
small compass, and the uniformity of treatment ensured by ad- 
herence to one fixed formula of distribution, will be found advan- 
tageous to phyto-geographers.
AU the leading facts are thus 
placed ready for use, whether it be wished to compare the 
botanical geography of Britain with that of any other country, — 
or, to compare one part of Britain with any other part of itself, 
under the like view, — or, to compare the distribution of one 
species with that of another, or with the distribution of all others 
by means of general hsts.
Many of such comparisons have been shown in the fourth 
volume of the Cybele Britannica.
Those readers who may desire 
to see and understand such an application of the details of geo- 
graphical botany, can readily do so by consulting that fourth 
volume ; which may be regarded, indeed, as a second volume also 
to the present more epitomized work.
The three earlier volumes 
of the Cybele Britannica having been longer in print (1847— 
1852) their details were brought up of course less near to the 
actual knowledge of to-day ; while the later date of the fourth 
volume (1859) places it less in arrear, and more especially so on 
account of the more generalised character of its contents.
The 
present work will be understood to replace the three earlier 
volumes of the Cybele Britannica almost exclusively, and with 
only brief explanations drawn from the fourth volume and the 
Supplement.
But it is not simply an epitome of these three 
volumes ; being in fact almost a re-written work on a similar 
plan.
1. TOPOGBAPHICAL DIVISIONS.
For the purposes of phyto-geography it vfas found expedient to 
form and name some other partitions of the surface of Britain, 
besides those in current use for social or political geography.
The 
three antient divisions of the island — England, Wales, Scotland — 
were too few and too unequal ; while ninety counties and islet- 
groups were too numerous, and also too unequal, for some of the 
objects.
Intermediate divisions were especially required, and 
these were easily formed by uniting the counties into less numerous 
I. TOPOGRAPHICAL Dr\aSIONS.
8 
groups.
At the same time, it was souglit to obviate the prac- 
tical inconvenience of new sections and new names as far as 
possible.
A close adherence to county-boundaries was conse- 
quently resolved upon, for a basis of all the new divisions.
To 
this rule some slight exceptions will be found, where small 
portions of one county lie apart, being imbedded or insulated 
within the outline limits of other adjacent counties.
Provinces.
— In forming the intermediate sections, by grouping 
the counties, a wavy middle line was first traced from the south 
coast of England northwards into the Highlands of Scotland ; this 
line corresponding with the boundaries of counties, and being 
traced in that course which would best divide the counties whose 
rivers flow to the eastern coasts, from those other counties the 
waters of which are emptied into the western seas or ocean.
These 
two longitudinal portions of the island were then transversely sub- 
divided into Provinces, or groups of counties which together con- 
stitute the basin of a principal river, or have some other physical 
peculiarity in common.
The mesial line was not continued 
northward of Inverness, where Scotland becomes very narrow, 
and where counties extend from the east to the west coast, as 
Ross and Sutherland.
The wide county of Inverness itself, also 
extending from east to west, is bisected by the longitudinal hne ; 
the eastern portion being thus divided from the western portion ; 
its two portions being severally named East-Inverness and West- 
Inverness, abbreviated into Easterness and Westemess.
The 
small eastern county of Nairn is included with Easterness ; while 
that detached part of Argyle, situate on the north-west side of 
Loch Linhe, is taken along with Westemess.
In this manner eighteen Provinces, or groups of counties, have 
been traced on the map of Britain ; and though stiU being arbi- 
trary or conventional partitions of the surface, through conforming 
with county boundaries, they will be found on examination to be 
more natural sections of the island, than are the counties them- 
selves.
It will be observed that any needful new names are given 
to the provinces in accordance with some physical pecuUarity or 
character, usually that of a principal river basin, as Thames or 
4 INTEODUCTION.
Severn.
If other names were already in familiar use and suffi- 
ciently applicable, those customary names have been retained in 
preference ; as in the case of North or South Wales, or Highlands 
and Lowlands of Scotland.
In order to render these Provinces suitable for phyto-geogra- 
phical comparisons among themselves, it was sought to give to 
each a considerable portion of coast line ; as otherwise maritime 
plants in some of them, and not in others, would have rendered 
their local floras less comparable.
But the inland province of 
Severn was unavoidably left with a coast line of less extent than 
elsewhere.
For convenience of geographical nomenclature it was 
deemed better to keep the twelve counties of Wales to themselves ; 
and to have included all Somerset with the Severn counties, more 
strictly so designated, would have intruded their province too far 
into that of the Peninsula.
The existing conditions of botanical 
knowledge and records, at the date of 1840 — 5, likewise in some 
degree affected the provincial boundaries, more especitilly those of 
the Highland provinces.
The counties were so grouped that the 
then existing records should furnish a tolerably full Ust of the 
species for each group.
Otherwise, it would have been preferable 
to group the Highland counties into four provinces instead of 
three only ; also, to keep the Western isles of Scotland, Ebudes 
and Hebrides, united together as one province, apart from the two 
sub-groups of Northern isles, Orkney and Shetland.
But the 
botanical data on record a quarter century ago, though much 
increased by the present writer's own manuscript notes, were still 
too incomplete and imperfect to allow a compilation of local Floras 
for six instead of four Highland and Insular provinces.
By a 
subsequently adopted arrangement, presently to be explained, the 
same counties and isles can now be treated as ten sub-groups, 
instead of four chief groups, in cases where the more numerous 
partitions are Ukely to prove more useful.
Before proceeding to explain the other divisions and sub- 
divisions of Britain, more numerous than these eighteen pro- 
vinces, it seems advisable to present a list of the counties 
enumerated under their respective provinces ; this first grouping 
I. TOPOGBAPHICAL DIVISIONS.
6 
of the counties into the eighteen primary provinces being the 
guide to all other divisions and combinations, whether larger and 
fewer, or smaller and more numerous sections.
Through a 
reference to the subjoined list, any plain county map of Britain 
may readily be converted into a provincial map, by colouring such 
of the outlines of counties as constitute any portion of the bound- 
aries of the provinces.
For example, a coloured line along the 
contiguous boundaries of Devon and Somerset, on the one side, 
with Dorset and Wilts on the other side, will separate the province 
of the Peninsula from that of the Channel ; and in like manner a 
coloured line traced along the northern boundaries of Wilts, 
Hants and Sussex, will separate the Channel province from that 
of the Thames.
hist of Provinces and their included Counties.
1. Peninsula.
— Cornwall, Devon, Somerset.
2. Channel.
— Dorset, Wilts, Isle of "Wight, Hants, Sussex.
3. Thames.
— Kent, Surrey, Berks, Oxford, Bucks, Middlesex, Herts, Essex.
i. OuSE.
— Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Bedford, Huntingdon, North- 
ampton.
5. Sevekn.
— Gloucester, Worcester, Warwick, Stafford, Salop, Hereford, 
Monmouth.
6. South Wales.
— Glamorgan, Caermarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, Bre- 
con, Radnor.
7. NoBTH Wales.
— Montgomery, Merioneth, Caernai-von, Denbigh, Flint, 
Anglesea.
8. Trent.
— Leicester, Eutland, lincoln, Notts, Derby.
9. Meeset.
— Cheshire, Lancashire.
10.
HcMBEE.
— York.
11.
Tyne.
— Durham, Northumberland.
12.
Lakes.
— Westmoreland, Cumberland.
(Isle of Man).
13.
West Lowlands.
— Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Wigton, Ayr, Lanark, 
Eenfrew.
14.
East Lowlands.
— Berwick, Eoxburgh, Peebles, Selkirk, Haddington, 
Edinburgh, Linlithgow.
15.
East Highlands.— Fife, Kinross, Clackmannan, Stirling, Perth, For- 
far, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banff, Moray (including Nairn, 
Elgin, and the north-east of Inverness).
16.
West Highlands.
— Dumbarton, Argyle, Inverness, westward of Loch 
Erricht.
Isles adjacent, from Arran to Skye.
17.
NoBTH Highlands.
— Koss and Cromarty, Sutherland, Caithness.
18.
Nokth Isles.— Hebrides, Orkney, Shetland.
6 INTRODUCTION.
Siob-provinces.
— The varying width of the island in its different 
latitudes, and the necessity also for taking into account the then 
actual state of botanical records, caused the provinces to be less 
equalized in size or area than was desirable ; although they were 
made much less disproportionate than the counties themselves.
As the distribution of the plants became better ascertained, it was 
found to become practicable and useful to equalize the provinces 
more closely, by further subdividing the larger of them, and 
leaving the smaller undivided.
By this course the eighteen pri- 
mary provinces were increased into thirty-eight subordinate pro- 
vinces, to which the designation of Sub-province was given ; the 
original names being retained for the undivided provinces, and a 
prefix added to the original names for the severed portions of the 
others.
The great county of York, constituting alone the province 
of Humber, thus became apportioned between two sub-provinces, 
— those of East Humber and West Humber.
In other respects 
county boundaries were stiU adhered to in forming the sub- 
provinces ; several of which are identical with large counties.
There is one important difference between the provinces and sub- 
provinces, which is to be kept in recollection in all comparisons 
between their floras ; namely, that some of the EngHsh sub- 
provinces are entirely inland, presenting no coast line for maritime 
plants.
Thus, while several species of the sea-shore can be stated 
to occur generally in all the provinces, the like character of 
generality cannot be assigned to them, when their distribution is 
traced by the sub-provinces in England.
Vice-Counties.
— The still greater inequality and disproportion 
in the size of the counties, frequently rendering any comparison 
between their floras quite unsatisfactory and delusive, was also 
sought to be partially removed by cutting the larger counties into 
two or more sections designated Yice-counties, and leaving the 
smaller counties whole.
Some few of the smallest counties had 
previously been sunk or included in those adjacent to them, as 
Eutland in Leicestershire, and IGnross in Fifeshire ; and the 
fragmentary county of Cromarty was held as part of Koss, within 
which its detached portions are situate.
Through this course of 
I. TOPOGRAPHICAL DrviSIONS.
7 
subdivision, the counties and vice-counties together are increased 
to 118.
The familiar names of the counties are almost always 
retained, the vice-counties being distinguished by a prefixed word, 
usually denoting the points of the compass, — North, South, East, 
West, or Mid, — as being obvious and easily remembered.
Some 
few exceptions to this rule of nomenclature are introduced, where 
a famOiar name already existed, as Isle of Wight, or else in order 
to avoid the awkwardness of writing, for instance, " North North- 
umberland with North Durham ;" the name of " Cheviotland " 
being substituted for this latter compound.
The vice-counties, 
equally as the sub-provinces, came into use only in the fourth 
volume and Supplement of the Cybele Britannica ; the distribution 
of the species being traced by the provinces and counties only in 
the three earlier volumes.
In this work, the sub-provinces and 
the vice-counties will come fully into use in forming a ' Census ' 
scale ; and hence the necessity for explaining what they are and 
what their names represent.
Divisions of Britain.
— ^Taking the 18 Provinces as a basis, we 
are now prepared to trace larger divisions of the surface, which 
can often serviceably be substituted for the old divisions into Eng- 
land and Scotland, or England and Wales.
The single mesial line 
traced from south to north, as before explained, will make two 
longitudinal divisions into East and West Britain.
Two trans- 
verse lines will in turn divide the island into South, Mid, and 
North Britain.
These three longitudinal divisions are thus shown 
on the map prefixed to this volume : — 
S. Britain includes provinces 1 — 7 ; sub-provinces 1 — 18 
M. Britain 8—14 ; ....
19—28 
N. Britain 15—18 ; ....
99—38 
In subdividing the whole island longitudinally by provinces only, 
there comes the difficulty before mentioned, of the two most 
northerly provinces being partly eastern and partly western.
This 
difficulty is somewhat lessened by founding the two longitudinal 
divisions on the sub-provinces.
On this basis, the two sub-pro- 
vinces of Lower and Upper North Highlands, together with the 
Hebrides, and also the West Channel in England, are to be 
8 
INTEODUCTION.
reckoned in the nineteen Western Sub-provinces, forming West 
Britain ; while Shetland and Orkney, with Mid Channel and 
East Channel, are to be reckoned among the nineteen Eastern 
Sub-provinces, forming East Britain.
A clear understanding of these various divisions or sections of 
the whole area of Britain, more or less in use through this 
present work, as well as in the volumes of the original Oybele 
Britannica, is quite necessary to those readers who may consult 
either of the works.
The subjoined enumeration of them in 
detail, with the aid of the map, will shew all the provinces and 
their subordinate partitions, as well as the three series of.
con- 
secutive Nos. by which they are respectively distinguished.
' 
I. — Divisions of Britain into Eighteen Pboyinces, as indicated by 
Nos. on the margin of the Map.
I. PENINSULA.
n. CHANNEL.
IIL THAMES.
IV.
OUSE.
V. SEVERN.
VI.
SOUTH WALES.
Vn. NOETH WALES.
VIII.
TRENT.
rX.
MERSEY.
X. HUMBER.
XI.
TXNE.
XII.
LAKES.
XIIL WEST LOWLANDS.
XrV.
EAST LOWLANDS.
XV.
EAST HIGHLANDS.
XVI.
WEST HIGHLANDS.
XVII.
NORTH HIGHLANDS.
XVin. NOETH ISLES.
II.
— Suhdivisions of the primary Provinces into the 
38 SuB-PBoviNOBS, and 112 Counties and Vice-Counties.
L South Peninsula.
1 West Cornwall.
a East Cornwall.
II.
Mid Peninsula.
3 South Devon.
4 North Devon.
m. North Peninsula.
5 South Somerset.
6 North Somerset.
II.
IV.
West Channel.
7 North Wilts.
8 South Wilts.
9 Dorset.
V. Mid Channel.
10 Isle of Wight.
11 South Hants.
12 North Hants.
VI.
East Channel.
I. TOPOGEAPIIICAL DIVISIONS.
13 West Sussex.
14 East Sussex.
39 Stafford.
•10 Salop.
m. 
VII.
South Thames.
15 East Kent.
16 West Kent.
17 Surrey.
VIII.
NoHTH Thames.
18 South Essex.
19 North Essex.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
IX.
West Thames.
23 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
IV.
X. South Ouse.
25 East Suffolk.
26 West Suffolk.
XI.
North Ouse.
27 East Norfolk.
28 West Norfolk.
XII.
West Ouse.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
32 Northampton.
VI.
XVI.
South East Wales.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Radnor.
XVII.
South West Wales.
44 Caermarthen.
45 Pemhroke.
46 Cardigan.
vn.
XVm. North Wales.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Caernarvon.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
vni.
XIX.
East Trent.
53 South Lincoln.
54 North Lincoln.
XX.
West Trent.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
V. 
XIII.
South Severn.
33 East Gloucester.
34 West Gloucester.
35 Monmouth.
XIV.
Mid Severn.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
XV.
North Severn.
IX.
XXI.
:Mersey.
58 Chester.
59 South Lancaster.
60 West Lancaster.
X. 
XXII.
East Humbeh.
61 South East York.
63 North East York.
10 
INTRODUCTION.
XXIII.
West Humbeb.
63 South West York.
6i Mid West York.
65 North West York.
XI.
XXIV.
Tyne.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
XII.
XXV.
Lakes.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Isle of Man.
XIII.
XXVI.
South West Lowlands.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
XXVII.
North West Lowlands.
75 Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
77 Lanark.
XIV.
XXVIII.
East Lowlands.
78 Peebles.
79 Selkirk.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Si Linlithgow.
XV.
XXIX.
SoDTH East Highlands.
85 Fife, Kinross.
86 Stirling.
87 West Perth, Clackmannan.
88 Mid Perth.
89 East Perth.
XXX.
Mid East Highlands.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
93 South Aberdeen.
93 North Aberdeen.
XXXI.
NoETH East Highlands.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
96 Eastemess.
XVI.
XXXII.
Innee W.
Highlands.
97 Westerness.
98 Main Argyle.
99 Dumbarton.
100 Clyde Isles.
101 Cantire.
XXXTII.
OuTEE W.
Highlands.
103 South Ebudes.
103 Mid Ebudes.
104 North Ebudes.
XVII.
XXXIV.
LowEE N.
Highlands.
105 WestEoss.
106 East Boss.
XXXV.
Upper N.
Highlands.
107 East Sutherland.
108 West Sutherland.
109 Caithness.
XVIII.
XXXVI.
NoETH West Isles.
110 Hebrides.
XXXVII.
Lower North Isles.
111 Orkney.
XXXVin. Uppee North Isles.
112 Shetland.
II.
ASCEN'DIXG ZONES.
11 
2. AscEsmxG OE Climatic Zones- 
If a Botanist, while standing on the summit of one of our 
loftiest bills, will make out a list of all the plants he can see close 
around him, he will find that his list includes very few flowering 
plants.
Suppose that, while slowly descending from summit to 
base, he carefully sets down the names of all the other phanero- 
gamous plants successively as they may come under his notice.
His list will thus shew the highest point, or upper limit, attained 
by each species on that particular hill, and in that particular line 
of descent from its summit ; of course, not the absolute heights, 
but the upper limits of the species relatively to each other, or one 
above another.
If the Botanist should now reverse his course of observation, in 
ascending from base to summit, he will first make a much more 
numerous list of species at- and about his starting point at the foot 
of the hilL The species quite on the summit being veiy few, those 
of the base will be found gradually disappearing from his view as 
he ascends higher and higher towards that summit.
At the same 
time, a smaller number of other species, not descending so low as 
the base of the hill, will gradually come under his notice ; some of 
which will again disappear from view, while probably some others 
will continue to be found at intervals nearly or quite up to the 
actual summit.
All the species which were not seen at the base 
of the hill, and which first became obvious in succession during 
the ascent, may be said to have a lowest point, or lower limit on 
the bill supposed to lie under examination.
By a further supposition, our Botanist shall make like observa- 
tions on some other adjacent hill, one of nearly equal elevation, 
and in the character of its surface also resembling the hill before 
ascended and descended.
Often repeated experience warrants an 
expectation that the Botanist will find a nearly similar series or 
succession of species on this second hill, if comparing its plants 
with those on the former hill.
He would never find two lists 
corresponding precisely, if so made on different hiUs. Some of 
the species seen on the one hill, might likely not be observed at all 
12 INTRODUCTION.
on the other hill.
Those really seen would seldom or never be 
found exactly in the same series or order of succession on both.
Eeal differences would be traced, through some of the species 
themselves not invariably keeping the same upper and lower hmits 
relatively to each other.
Apparent differences would arise, through 
the Botanist failing to observe the highest or lowest points fur 
some of the species.
But the absolute heights by measurement, 
at which the same single species appeared or disappeared on the 
two hills respectively, would usually be found to differ more than 
the relative heights of the several species, one compared with 
another.
Again, the Reader will please to suppose that our botanical 
observer has repeated the described process on numerous hills 
within Britain ; making out so many lists of the species, as they 
were first observed in ascending or descending the hills.
The 
series of names in his various lists will present an approximate 
similarity, although not an actual sameness.
The closest approxi- 
mation towards sameness will be found among the very common 
species which occur almost everywhere ; the rarer species in 
general being less uniform in their relative position.
For 
instance, it will be found almost invariably that Erica cinerea 
ascends higher than Vlc.r europwus; that Culluna vulgaris ascends 
higher than i\\e Erica ; that Vaccinium Myi-tiUiis ascends higher 
than the Calluiin.
Conversely, Saxifraga stellaris will almost 
always be found to descend lower than lia.vifraga nivalis ; Empe- 
tni.m nigrum will be seen lower down than Azalea procumbens ; 
and Liiziila spicata will appear at a much lower elevation than the 
rarer Litzula arcuata is ever found at in Britain.
This tendency of plants to cease at different altitudes, to have 
upper and lower limits, and for several also usually to keep an 
approximate similarity in the distance apart of those limits, one 
species relatively to another, affords the facility for foi'minc 
ascending zones of plants.
Common and conspicuous species are 
selected, which usually cease at some considerable distance from 
each other, a distance tolerably uniform in measurement.
The 
intervening spaces between the limits of these species are taken to 
II.
ASCENDING ZONES.
13 
apportion the whole height of the hills into successive stages, 
which are denoruinated Ascending Zones.
If, for example, on one 
hill the TJlex europaus should cease at 1000 feet of altitude.
Erica 
cinerea at 2000 feet, Calluna vulgaris at 3000 feet, and Vaccinium 
Myrtillus at 4000 feet, — in such a case, their upper limits would 
divide the hiU into four ascending zones of 1000 feet each.
Again, on some more northerly hill, if the same shrubs should 
cease respectively at 500, 1500, 2500, and 3500 feet, — in this 
case, their upper limits would still form equivalent zones, rela- 
tively to each other, although their absolute altitudes differed by 
500 feet on the two hills.
The low horizontal surface of the island equally admits of zonal 
diYision.
A large number of the species which are seen in the 
southern counties of England, fail to reach the northern counties 
of Scotland ; disappearing or being left behind successively as a 
traveller proceeds from south to north.
Conversely, various other 
species which flourish in the northern counties, will be found to 
run out and disappear as the traveller returns southward.
But it 
is less easy to make or mark out horizontal zones on the low 
grounds, although in their general character they correspond vrith 
the vertical or montane zones, one single country being under 
view.
Zones must be bounded by imaginary lines, while species 
seldom or never cease thus abruptly in hard lines.
In the usual 
mode of cessation, especially on the horizontal surface, a species 
first becomes less abundant and less continuous in its distri- 
bution ; its localities gradually becoming wider and wider apart, 
and often less productive ; finally, a few outlying looahties may be 
found, far separated from each other, in which the species almost 
seems to re-appear after a cessation.
These extreme localities 
constitute the actual or true limits of tha species, southerly or 
northerly, easterly or westerly, as the case may be.
But if they 
were correctly marked on a map, such locaUties would be only 
minute dots wide apart, and not real lines.
It is the conventional 
custom, however, to connect these dots on a map by tracing hnes 
from one to another, and thus to make the terminal limits of 
plants to appear linear, instead of distantly dotted.
Something of 
14 INTRODUCTION.
the linear character may often be really traced along the upper 
limits of species, as seen on the acclivities of mountains; although, 
even on the hill-sides, there is the like tendency to run out 
gradually in detached spots, rather than to cease suddenly along a 
continuous line.
The mode in vrhioh it has been found most convenient to divide 
the surface of Britain into floral zones, horizontal and vertical 
taken together, is that of first tracing a line along the upper limit 
of grain crops, and then subdividing tho two spaces above and 
below that line into three zones each.
The two primary divisions 
have been designated the Agrarian Region, or region of culti- 
vation, and the Arctic Region, or region of (so-called) alpine plants.
The three subordinate zones into which each of these two regions 
is subdivided, are similarly named by prefixing the words Infer 
Mid Super to the names of the regions.
Tracing them upwards, 
— that is, from south to north, from lower grounds to higher 
grounds, — they may be said to stand thus 
I. Agrarian Region.
II.
Arctic Region.
3. Super-agrarian Zone.
6. Super-arctic Zone.
2. Mid-agrarian Zone.
5. Mid-arctic Zone.
1. Infer-agrarian Zone.
4. Infer-arctic Zone.
The manner in which they succeed and overlap each other, is 
shown by a diagram at the lower corner of the map.
These zones 
represent the facts of nature, but represent them by an artificial 
or conventional method.
The zones are arbitrary sections, in so 
far as the selected species and fixed boundary lines are concerned ; 
and yet they do correspond with and represent differences which 
actually exist in nature, inasmuch as the flora (the species) and 
vegetation (general mass of plants) of each single zone differ con- 
siderably from those of the other zones above or below.
In truth, 
however, the natural changes in flora and vegetation being every- 
where gradual, any line will unavoidably sever that which is 
nearly alike ; the vegetation being more similar on the contrary 
sides of any single dividing line, than it is on the two sides of the 
wide space between any two lined.
n. ASCENDING ZONES.
15 
It is to be observed also, tbat climatic or ascending zones of 
plants are designed to indicate the relative distribution of species 
under the joint influence of altitude and latitude, with other con- 
ditions of more local character, such as proximity to seas or moun- 
tains, the state of exposure or shelter, etc.
Connexions may be 
traced between the distribution of plants and each of those con- 
ditions singly ; but everywhere the influence of any one condition 
is more or less disturbed and modified by the influence of other 
conditions.
Their effect upon the species-flora, or upon the 
general vegetation, is mostly indirect or remote ; that is, the flora 
varies with the climate, and the climate varies with altitude, lati- 
tude, and other conditions of place and surface.
On a single 
isolated mountain floral stages are strongly marked in accordance 
with height ; some species disappearing, other species appearing, 
one above another, as we gradually ascend from base to summit.
Yet on a single mountain the regularity of its ascending zones 
will be somewhat disturbed by local differences in the character of 
its surface, as even or rocky, dry or damp ; and through dif- 
ferences of aspect on its acclivities, as feeing to or from the sun.
On an extended range of mountains the disturbing effect of local 
peculiarities will become much more obvious.
And when we 
require to generalize our zones from the facts noted on several 
groups of mountains, dissimilar in extent, elevation, latitude, 
maritime proximity and other circumstances, it then becomes 
difficult to define them with any exactness.
This difficulty is experienced within Britain.
The absolute 
elevation at which the same species is found to grow, varies by 
several hundred feet on the different mountain ranges of our own 
island.
And as this variation is by no means uniform among the 
different species, we find local changes in their relative elevation 
also, when the limit of some one species is constantly compared 
with the limit of some other species.
Notwithstanding such local 
exceptions, however, the general rule may still be held true, that 
a specks which ascends decidedly higher than another on one range 
of mountains, uill also usually be found higher on other ranges; 
16 INTRODUCTION.
and the commoner the species, the more constant is this rule 
found to be.
The primary division into Agrarian and Arctic Regions, adopted 
as the one best applicable in Britain, is ostensibly founded upon 
an artificial character ; namely, the presence or absence of culti- 
vation.
In the spontaneous flora or vegetation of Britain we can 
find no character equally obvious and general as is that afforded 
by the cultivation of grain.
The interests of mankind are so 
closely connected with the production of corn, that we shall every- 
where find cultivated fields as far up the valleys and acclivities of 
the mountains as their climate will allow.
We may doubtless see 
many spots where the nature of the soil or surface, rather than 
the climate by itself, forbids success in cultivation.
But a correct 
observer can scarcely be misled in such instances, since he will 
usually find cultivation sufficiently near to those spots, to show 
that it has not been prevented by inferiority of climate.
More- 
over, nature will afford us a second test of the Agrarian region, in 
the presence of a very common and conspicuous fern, the Pteris 
aqidlina.
This fern is abundantly distributed through the lower 
region, and from one extremity of our island to the other ; its 
upper limit usually running almost uniform with the climatic 
limit of corn cultivation ; so that the two characters in connexion 
afford a satisfactory test of the region.
The height to which cultivation ascends among the mountains 
varies much with aspect and position.
Among the Grampian 
mountains of Scotland, about the latitude of 57, the general line 
of corn cultivation runs from 1000 to 1200 feet ; rising in some 
favorable situations in Aberdeenshire even to 1500 or 1600 feet.
So likewise with the Pteris; which is seldom seen above 1200 
feet on the exposed moors of the Highlands, unless in sheltered 
depressions of the surface, or on acclivities which front to the sun ; 
while in the woods of Lochnagar, in Aberdeenshire, it was ob- 
served in two spots respectively estimated, and perhaps somewhat 
over-estimated, to be 1760 and 1900 feet of elevation.
In the 
Nofth of England, we are told by Mr. J.
G. Baker, oats have 
been grown as a field crop at 1650 feet, and that in Weardale he 
II.
ASCENDING ZONES.
17 
saw oats at 1340 feet, barley at 1000 feet, and wheat at 730 and 
800 feet.
Turnips and potatoes can be grown up to the extreme 
limit of the oat, or somewhat higher.
The highest point at which 
the Pteris has been noted in Yorkshire by Mr. Baker, is about 
1500 feet; and 1680 feet.
is the highest point indicated for it in 
the Lake province, at page 337 of the fourth volume of the Cybele 
Britannica.
The Arctic Region is couveniently subdivided into its three 
zones by the upper limits of Erica Tetralix and Galluna nilgaris ; 
the Mid arctic zone being understood to include any spaces which 
lie between the upper limits of these two heath shrubs on the 
acclivities of the mountains.
The spaces situate above the limit 
of cultivation, and below the hmit of Erica Tetralix, belong to the 
lufer-arctic zone.
Those above the limit of the Calluna, being 
only the upper portions of the highest hiUs, belong to the Super- 
arctic zone.
Of course, it is only in places where the upper limits 
of these shrubs are determined by general climate, that they can 
be correctly taken as tests and indications of the zonal stages.
On very arid ground, at any elevation, the Calluna might still be 
present, while the Erica Tetralix might be absent owing to lack of 
sufficient moisture ; and in any such case the absence of the latter 
would be no indication that the ground in question was really a 
portion of the Mid-arctic zone.
Neither would the absence of both 
always suffice to show that the surface spaces destitute of them 
were certainly within the uppermost or Super-arctic zone.
In 
England, we often find green pasturages, instead of heath-bearing 
moors, quite within the natural limits of those heaths.
The test 
derived from the presence or absence of either of those shrubs, 
indeed, is more obvious and more readily applied in the Highland 
provinces, than is found to be the case in those more southward, 
\^-here the ericaceous shrubs are more frequently and completely 
destroyed by fire, in order to the production of a pasturage suitable 
for sheep.
The three Arctic zones are further distinguishable by 
the presence or absence, respectively, of several other common 
plants ; so that we do not depend absolutely on any one species as 
a test of a zone.
Thus, in the absence of Erica Tetralix on dry 
D 
18 INTRODUCTION.
ground, the presence of Erica cinerea migbt be taken for a test 
instead.
The Agrarian Begion cannot be subdivided into its three zones 
rigidly by the presence or absence of single species.
As com 
cultivation of some kind extends tlirojigli the whole length of 
Britain, even into Shetland where crops of oats and barley are 
still grown, the whole low surface of the country has to be 
apportioned between the three Agrarian zones, along the sea coast, 
and thence upwards to the line or spots where cultivation ceases 
on the acclivities of the hills, and where the Pteris aquilina also 
usually disappears.
If we had to deal with a truly level or only 
slightly undulated surface, the region might conveniently be 
divided into three zones simply in accordance with latitude ; 
namely, South — Middle— North.
But the three zones must also 
be considered to overlap each other in succession on the lower 
acclivities of the mountains, and in their intervening valleys ; 
increasing elevation above the level of the sea, in any more 
southerly province, corresponding in a general manner vfith 
increasing latitude in a northerly direction.
Our indications of 
the zones must thus keep in view both elevation and latitude, and 
be adapted to both conditions.
On comparing a flora of one of 
the south-eastern provinces of England with a flora of the High- 
land valleys, or of the plains near the north coast of Scotland, the 
differences would be found decidedly marked, and this both in the 
species and in their comparative numbers or frequency ; and an 
intermediate tract between these two extremes of the agrarian 
region, would be sufliciently well characterised by its own dis- 
tinctive features taken in the aggregate.
But the difficulty is 
always renewed when we attempt to divide natural gradations by 
abrupt lines, or to lay down distinctions which rest upon single 
characteristics to be applied under varying circumstances.
Keepin" 
this practical difficulty in recollection, the three Agrarian zones 
may now be shortly described, rather than very rigidly defined.
The Super-agrarian zone may be said to comprise three different 
kinds or portions of the surface of Britain.
First, all the coast- 
line and low plains or moors in the north and north-west of 
n. ASCENDIXG ZONES.
19 
Scotland, where plants of an alpiue character are found descending 
to the sea level or sea shore, such as Thalictrum cdpinnm, Draba 
iiwaiui, Saxifraga oppositifolia, ArhUus alpina, and Dryas octopetala.
Secondly, all other spaces ia any parts of the island, where the 
elevation of the ground leads to the production of the same or 
usually associated species ; Arbutus Uva-Ursi, Saxifraga steUaris, 
Alclvemilla alpina, Tqfieldia pahistris, Imzula spwata, and Juncus 
triglumis being examples of the latter.
Thirdly, those tracts of 
slight elevation, upon which a corresponding flora "and general 
vegetation prevail, apparently in consequence of simple proximity 
to the high mountains ; Saxifraga aizoides growing so low as 300 
fiset among the mountains of Cumberland, and Epilobium aldni- 
fiilium at 600 or 600 feet in Carnarvonshire ; although these 
plants are never seen at so low an elevation in the English 
counties remote from the higher hills.
In addition to the species 
mentioned, which are to be regarded as descending from the 
Arctic into the Agrarian region, tliis upper zone of the latter 
region is characterised by the presence of Jlex, Quercus, Fraxinus, 
Lonicera, CratcBgus, and the fruticose BmU, which can scarcely be 
said to occur above the limits of cultivation or of Pterls aqnilina; 
equally so, by the absence of other species which are not seen 
ti'uly wild until we descend into the next lower zone.
The Mid-agrarian zone will comprehend all the low grounds, 
clear from the mountains, which are situate between the estuaries 
of the Clyde and Tay, on the north, and those of the Humber and 
Dee, on the south ; also, a narrow coast tract of the East High- 
lands, extending from Perth to Aberdeen.
To this space is to be 
added a narrow belt winding around and amid the hills of Wales, 
and characterised by the vegetation of the present zone, rather 
than by that of the zones above or below this intermediate one.
The higher hills of Wales rise to the Arctic region ; and as the 
surrounding coast line and low grounds inland belong to the 
lowest Agrarian zone, the middle and upper Agrarian zones will 
be found represented above the bases and below the summits of 
the Cambrian hills.
In descending from the Super-agrarian into 
the present zone, we find some of its characteristics in the first 
so INTRODUCTION.
appearance of Convolvulus sepium, Bryonia dioica, Tamm com- 
munis, Acer campestre, Rhamnus catharticus, Ule.v nanus, Vibur- 
num Lantana, Euonymus europtaus, and Cornus sanyuinea ; all 
of which occur also in the lowest zone, and more plentifully there ; 
while none of them are ascertained to occur trulj native in the 
uppermost portion of the Agrarian region ; and all certainly 
fail far below the upper limit of Pferis aquilina or of cultivated 
crops.
The. Infer-agrarian zone will embrace all the country southward 
from the Dee and Humber (continued into the river Trent) ex- 
cepting the mountainous tracts of Wales and the higher hills and 
moors in the provinces of the Severn and the Peninsula.
This 
zone is more particularly characterised by the increased prevalence 
of the species before mentioned as commencing in the zone above.
Clematis Vitalba is one of the conspicuous species almost (if not 
quite) restricted to this zone as a truly native shrub.
Eubia pere- 
grina is another characteristic species, partially prevalent in the 
southern and western counties ; while the Clematis affects the 
calcareous tracts of the southern, eastern and inland counties, 
where it is often abundant and conspicuous.
Though several 
species are quite peculiar to this lowest, or most southern, of the 
six zones, they are usually too scarce or too local to be relied upon 
as characteristic tests.
Examples occur in Erica ciliaris, lUece- 
brvm verticillatuni , Sibthorpia europaa, Cyperus longus, Scilla 
autumnalis, Pulicaria vulgaris, and Actinocarpus Daiiiasonium.
The six climatic zones, into which the two regions are thus 
subdivided, may be better understood and borne in memory, 
after presentation to the eye in closer connexion with each 
other.
Their Nos. are reversed here because it has been fniud 
more convenient to describe or explain the zones downwards, 
although the plants themselves arc in general traced more 
readily upwards, that is, from south to north, from low to hioh 
grounds, from the open country to the montane valleys and 
acclivities ; — 
II.
ASCENDING JZONES.
21 
II.
Arctic Region.
6. Super-arctic zone — Salix herbacea, without Calluna.
5. MiJ-arctio zone — Calluna vulgaris, without Erica, 
i. Infer-arctio zone — Erica Tetralix, without Pteris.
I. Agrarian Region.
3. Super-agrarian zone — Pteris aquilina, without Rhamnus, &c.
2. Mid-agrarian zone — Rhamnus catharticus, without Clematis.
1. Infer-agrarian zone— Clematis, Rubia, Cyperus longus.
" Unless the highest part of Snowdon can be deemed to attain 
the super-arctic zone, none of the before-explained provinces will 
include the full series of six zones.
Elsev\here the hills are not 
sufficiently lofty to pass the mid-arctic zone, until we arrive at the 
Highland provinces, all three of which have their highest summits 
clearly above the limits of the Calluna ; but the lowest portions of 
these provinces, near their coast-line and southern boundai-y, fall 
barely within the mid-agrarian zone." 
" It is probable that six such zones are quite as many as can be 
satisfactorily distinguished when attention must be directed to the 
whole surface of Britain.
Even with six only, it would be useless 
to attempt very great precision in assigning the species to their 
respective zones.
We must disregard the occasional and shght 
trespass of a species into a zone above or beneath those to which 
it is otherwise restricted by its natural adaptation to their climate.
Such trespasses (if the expression be allowable) are usually found 
in connexion with some local peculiarity by which the true climate 
is varied, or its influence on the plants modified.
For example, 
the cool spray of a waterfall, or the efflux of a cold spring, will 
support the species of a colder climate than is natural to the 
latitude and elevation.
And, on the contrary, the plants of a 
warmer climate will grow on the south face of rocks which are 
raised above the altitude where the same species cease to exist in 
more bleak situations.
These apparent exceptions come incon- 
veniently in the way of precise lines on botanico-geographioal 
maps.
Though such lines may be made to look very clear and 
23 INTRODUCTION.
satisfactory upon paper, nature refuses to trace them on her own 
domains.
" To take an example : — Gnaphalium supinum has been seen 
at the level of a corn-field by Loch Callater (1600 feet) in Aber- 
deenshire, and Pteris aqidUna has been found much above the 
same altitude, at a distance of half a dozen miles ; namely, at or 
near 1700 and 1900 feet.
Yet in ascending the gradual declivities 
of the same mountains, under equal conditions of surface and 
shelter, the Pteris always ceases before we attain the altitude at 
which the Gnaphalium commences.
On this account, they are 
assigned to different zones, although their limits can thus cross in 
respect of absolute elevation.
They belong to different climates, 
and are so placed by nature when under equal conditions of 
exposure, &c.
So, again, a bush of Corylus Avellana has existed 
during many years against the sunny face of a steep rock on the 
Clova Mountains, at nearly 20(I0 feet of elevation ; rather below 
which, and at a shght distance, some weakly plants of Saxifraga 
nivalis have been observed.
Nevertheless, this solitary instance 
cannot warrant the assignment of these two species to the same 
zone ; because the upper-line of the Corylus is usually 600 to 
1000 feet below the lower-line of Saxifraga nivalis.
In studying 
the climatic affinities of plants, we must reason as well as observe, 
and estimate as well as measure.
" Though examples of each may thus occur, it is more usual 
to find ' trespasses ' downwards than upwards.
The descending 
course of water conduces much to "this result in the mountain 
districts, not only by bringing down the seeds of plants from 
the higher zones, but also by bringing down the cold of the 
mountains ; so that the first appearance of alpine species, as we 
ascend the mountains, is usually by the side of the water-courses, 
or upon wet rocks which are kept cool by the dripping and oozing 
of water.
In such situations, Sileiie acatdis may be found a 
thousand feet lower than it is seen as a constituent of the drier 
and sun-exposed sward.
And there is also another circumstance 
which makes the lower limits appear more irregular and ex- 
ceptional than the upper ; namely, the fact that mountain species 
III.
TYPES OF DISTRIBUTION.
2:$ 
will re-appear on maritime cliffs, although absent from the open 
plains and low hills between the coast and the mountains.
Thus, 
on the southern acclivities of the Grampian mountains, Sa.rifraga 
oppositifolia is seldom seen below a thousand feet of elevation ; 
although still farther south, it was found on the west-coast of 
Scotland, by Professor Balfour, very little above the sea-level.
On the coast, consequently, this ' alpine plant ' intermingles with 
species which never occur at alpine elevations on the mountains." 
3. Types of DrsTKiBUTioN.
In addition to tteir distribution traced horizontally through 
provinces and counties, or northwards and upwards through 
ascending zones, a third mode of indicating the geographical 
relations of plants requires explanation here Many species are 
spread over the whole island ; at any rate, are so spread near the 
coast level ; while others are limited to one, two, three, or more of 
the provinces.
The same holds true of their distribution in 
ascending zones ; some species being found in all of the six zones, 
others only in one or more of them.
Perhaps no two species have 
exactly the same distribution or uniform frequency of repetition ; 
and yet certain general similarities can be traced, by which the 
native species can be grouped together under a few leading Types 
of Distribution, — as they are at present named, in the want of 
some better designation.
The groups into which it has been found 
convenient to congregate the plants of Britain, are primarily six ; 
to which two others are subordinate or supplementary.
They may 
be briefly shown thus : — 
1. British type, — species widely spread through S.
M. N.
Britain.
2. English type, — species chiefly seen in S.
or S.
M. Britain.
3. Scottish type, — species chiefly seen in N.
or in N.
M. Britain.
Intermediate type, — species chiefly seen in Mid Britain.
4. Highland type,— species chiefly seen about the mou.ntains.
5. Germanic type, — species chiefly seen in East England.
6. Atlantic type, — species chiefly seen in West England.
Local species, restricted to single or few provinces.
24 IXTRODUCTION.
No decided lines of separation can be traced between tbese 
Types of Distribution.
They may be said to pass gradually into 
each other ; the distribution of some of the species presenting 
a character so intermediate, as to render the choice of type to 
express it either dubious or optional.
Still, the differences be- 
tween them are real, inasmuch as a prevailing tendency to such 
peculiarities of distribution among the plants of this country has 
been made quite evident through the Cybele Britannica, and was 
also earlier shown, though perhaps less clearly shown, in the same 
Author's " Remarks on the Geographical Distribution of British 
Plants," pulilished so long back as 1836.
The transition from one 
group or type into another, is gradually brought about through 
some species having less of the distinctive character of the group 
to which they must be assigned on the general view, and thus in 
so far partially resembling the plants of some other group also.
Many of the species assigned to the British type, in becoming less 
plentiful towards the northern or southern extremities of the 
island, will thus approximate to the English or Scottish types.
In 
like manner, some of those placed under the English tj-pe may be 
regarded as passing into the Germanic or Atlantic type by their 
lessened frequency in the westerly or easterly provinces of Eng- 
land.
And between the Highland and Scottish types (or arctic 
and boreal types) the distinction is occasionally very slight indeed ; 
certain species being assignable to either with almost equal fitness.
Still, it is repeated, these geographic types do represent real 
peculiarities of distribution, thrown into combination according to 
some common points of similarity.
They will now be briefly 
described, each in succession, simply as facts in nature, and 
apart from all the idle and hypothetical fancies which have been 
spuriously connected with them.
1. The British Type.
— In this group will be included those 
species which are found in all, or in nearly all, of the eighteen 
provinces before explained ; and which, moreover, are not so 
exclusively prevalent in any particular portion of the island as to 
bring them clearly within one or other of the succeeding typos.
Some of them may be regarded as of universal occurrence in this 
III.
TYPES or DISTRIBUTION.
25 
country, having been well ascertained to occur in all the eighteen 
provinces, probably to be found in every county, and even in all 
the six ascending zones also.
Few species even of this most 
general type, however, are so very general in their distribution.
By far the larger number of them have a restricted zonal range.
Many, too, which are general with reference to the provinces, are 
absent from some of the counties.
And a considerable number of 
species, which are too widely and abundantly distributed to come 
properly under any of the other types, are yet rare or wholly 
wanting in one or more of the provinces ; particularly so in the 
northerly provinces of Scotland, and more especially in that of the 
North Isles, which has a very scanty flora.
These are the 
" common plants," too frequently disregarded by mere collectors of 
specimens ; and being seldom recorded, it has been found difficult 
to ascertain their fuU distribution from book records.
It is to be 
observed, that the name of ' British type ' is applied to them, not 
as indicating any hypothetical notions about their origin within 
Britain, but because such a general distribution and prevalence 
indicate great adaptation to the climate and other physical con- 
ditions of this island, and entitle them to be held Britons in the 
widest appHcation of the term.
Over one-third of the native and 
well-established species belong to this type, including ' natives,' 
' denizens,' ' colonists,' as presently to be explained.
Among the 
more thorough examples of the type may be instanced the fol- 
lowing, namely, Alnus glutinosa, Betula alba, Gorylus Avellaiia, 
Lonicera Periclymenum, Hedera Helix, Calluna vulgaris, Ranun- 
cuhts acris, Cerastium viscosum, Trifolium repens, Stellaria media, 
TLotus corniculatus, Bellis pereiinis, Carduus palustris, Plantago 
lanceolata, Polygonum avicuiare, Urtica dioioa, Juncus effusus, 
Carex panicea, Poa annua, Festuca ovina, Anthoxanthum odora- 
ratum, Pteris aquilina, Polypodium vulgare.
2. The English Type.
— The plants of this geographic type are 
distinguished from those belonging to the preceding type, by 
having tbeir chief prevalence in England, and particularly in its 
more southern provinces ; whence they gradually become rare in 
a northern direction, and finally (with few peculiar exceptions) find 
E 
26 INTRODUCTION.
an earlier northern limit or cessation than those of the preceding 
type.
Their terminal points or lines are very different among 
themselves ; some of the species heiiig entirely limited to two or 
three of the most southern provinces of England ; while other 
species occur in all the provinces of Britain, with an exception of 
two or three of the most northern ; the great majority having 
their limits between these extremes.
Those species which extend 
into nearly all the provinces, except two or three of the northern, 
approximate very closely to the less general examples of the 
British type ; and, in fact, there are cases where it becomes 
almost optional whether the species are to be referred to the one 
or to the other type.
To the characters of lessened frequency and 
earlier termination northward, which distinguish the species of the 
English from those of the British type, must be added that of 
spreading into both the eastern and the western provinces of 
England, and without any very decided difference of comparative 
frequency towards the two sides of the island, beyond that 
which may be caused by the repellent influence of the western 
mountains, which necessarily tend to banish such species as are 
naturally adapted to low situations, in a warmer and drier climate 
than that of our mountainous districts.
The name will not be mis- 
jinderstood to indicate that all the species are peculiar to England, 
but is to be understood only as implying that the species are 
apparently adapted to the climate of England, either being 
restricted to that part of Britain, or being more prevalent there 
than in Scotland.
Charaotei'istic examples of the English type of 
distribution may be cited in Rhamnus catharticus, TJlex nanus, 
Tamils communis, Bryonia dioica, Hottonia palustris, Chlora per- 
foliata, Sison Amomum, Linaria Elatine, Ranunculus parviflorus, 
Lamium Galeobdolon, Hordeum pratense, Alopecurus agrestis, Oe- 
terach ojficinarum.
3. The Scottish Type.
— This may be deemed the opposite of .the 
English type ; the distribution of the species referred hereto 
being characterised by a northern tendency, either by absolute 
limitation to Scotland or the north of England, or otherwise by a 
chief prevalence there and increased rarity southward.
Parallel 
m. TYPES OF DISTEIBDTION.
27 
witli some of the species referred to the English type, so some of 
those referred to this present one are quite restricted to two or 
three of the most northern provinces of Scotland, while others 
abound in Scotland, and also spread southward, although in 
diminished frequency, far down England ; others, again, finding 
their southern limits between the extremes of narrow and wide 
distribution.
With respect to those species of the type which are 
most widely distributed, their lessened frequency in the southerly 
provinces, or entire absence therefrom, applies more particularly to 
the south-east of England, where the climate is drier, and the 
summer temperature is higher, than usually experienced in the 
south-western provinces of England.
Along with this group, also, 
certain species may be associated which run out to diminished 
frequency, or early entire cessation, northward as well as south- 
ward ; occurring chiefly or only in the northern provinces of 
England and southern provinces of Scotland.
In these respects 
they constitute an " Intermediate Type." Equally with the rest, 
these are truly plants of a boreal distribution and prevalence, 
when we consider them with reference to the southern provinces 
of England ; although it may £dso be said that they are so far 
species of a southern distribution likewise, when considered with 
reference to the northern provinces of Scotland.
From most other 
species of the Scottish type, however, they differ chiefly by their 
more restricted areas ; for their tendency to the hilly districts of 
England and the Lowlands, like those which extend stiU farther 
northward in Scotland, indicates a general similarity of cHmatal 
adaptation, while it cleai-ly distinguishes them from species of the 
truly English type.
It will thus be understood that several of 
the species assigned to the Scottish type of distribution are not 
prevalent in Scotland only ; some few of them, as explained, being 
really more prevalent in the northern provinces of England, 
although nowhere very abundant.
But since the majority are 
prevalent in Scotland, the name of the type is taken from that 
northern portion of the kingdom, as a contrast against the name 
adopted for the more southern or English type.
Primula scotica 
and Ajuga pyramidalis are instances of an extremely restricted 
28 INTEODUCTION.
and quite boreal area.
Goodyera repens and Corallorhiza innata 
are also very partial, though less exclusively boreal.
Primula 
farinosa and Saxifraga Hirculus may be cited as examples of the 
Intermediate type, characterised by a comparatively early limit 
northward.
More characteristic examples of the Scottish type 
may be mentioned in Ewpetrum nigrum, Riibiis saxatalis, Trol- 
lius europcBus, Geranium sylvaticum, Trientalis europcea, Ligus- 
ticum scoticum, and Mertensia maritima.
4. The Highland Type.
— This may be considered the boreal 
flora in a more intense degree, as respects climate, than that of 
the Scottish type.
The species referred hereto are distinguished 
from those of the Scottish type by being more especially limited to 
the mountains or their immediate vicinity.
Some of them are 
wholly confined to the higher mountains, and never descend 
within the agrarian region ; these being the ' arctics,' less appro- 
priately called 'alpines.' Others, though prevalent on the 
mountains, do descend also into their glens and valleys quite 
within the agrarian region.
And others, again, may occasionally 
be seen outside the mountainous tracts, particularly along the 
courses of rivers which are fed by the mountain streams, or even 
upon the rooks of the sea coast.
As a group, these plants are 
either restricted to the mountains or very decidedly more pre- 
valent there.
Several of them, more especially the true arctics, 
are strictly peculiar to the Highland mountains ; while others 
occur also on the hills of England and Wales, though less plenti- 
fully there than in the Highland provinces of Scotland.
The 
name chosen for the type intimates their most appropriate habitat, 
alLhough some of them do likewise find a suitable climate on the 
mountains of England or Wales.
As examples of thoroughly 
Highland plants, such as do not occur in any province houtliuard 
of the Highlands, we may cite Azalea (Lohdciiria) procuiiibens, 
Cherleria sedoides, Veronica alpina, Alopecttrus alplnus, Phleuin, 
alpinum, Junciis trifulus, Sihhaldia procumhens.
Erigeron alpinus, 
and Gentiana nivalis.
And as examples of other species which 
occur also on the more southern mountains, and mostly descend 
lower than the preceding on the mountains of the Highland 
III.
TYPES OF DISTRIBUTION.
29 
provinces, may be enumerated Salix herhacea, Silene acavlis, 
Saxifraya stellaris, Oocyria reniformis, Thaliclrum alpinum, Luzula 
spicata, Juncus triglumis, Rubtis Chamoiviorm, Draba incana, 
Dryas octopetala, and Alchemilla alpina.
5. The Germanic Type.
— The distribution of several species 
which might otherwise be associated with those of the English 
type, is peculiarly characterised by a tendency to the eastern side 
of the island.
Some few of these are quite restricted to the south- 
eastern provinces of England, — Channel, Thames, Ouse, one or 
more ; while others of them extend farther northward or west- 
ward, yet decidedly diminishing in abundance in either direction.
As the cretaceous deposits lie almost exclusively in the eastera 
and south-eastern provinces of England, the " chalk plants ' are 
included with the others referred to the present type ; although 
the type itself is primarily founded upon botanico-geographioul 
peculiarities, and not upon any geological character or preference.
Some of the eastern species extend their area even into Scotland : 
but, for thie most part, they are the plants of England only.
The 
name of ' Germanic ' type is not applied in reference to any sup- 
posed origin from Germany, but simply as indicating the tendency 
of the plants to a distribution specially connected with those 
provinces of England which are bounded by the ' German Sea ' 
(otherwise called ' North Sea ') eastwai'd, including the Straits of 
Dover and upper part of the English Channel ; for the species of 
this present type, and those of the next (Atlantic) type, more or 
less intermingle in the counties of the English Channel.
Among 
the examples of the type may be mentioned the following ; namely, 
Frankenla Imvis, Anemone Pulsatilla, Reseda luteq,, Silene conica, 
Silene noctiflora, Pimpinella magna, PuUcaria vulyaris, Lactuca 
Scariola, Atriplex pedunculata, Aceras anihropophora, and Spar- 
tina stricta.
6. The Atlantic Type.— Contrarj to the peculiarity of distri- 
bution which constitutes the preceding type, there is in that of 
other species an evident tendency towards the western and south- 
western coasts or counties.
Some few species are known only in 
the single province of the Peninsula.
Others occur also in one or 
30 
INTRODUCTION.
more of the adjacent provinces.
And others, again, run far up 
the western coasts in a northerly direction, often plentifully there, 
and yet occur rarely, or not at all, towards the eastern coasts of 
the island.
These species, while thus dissimilar in their area and 
census, correspond in the one circumstance of having some evident 
tendency to the western or Atlantic side of the island, in contra- 
distinction to the eastern or Germanic (sea) side.
Although there 
may exist other grounds for specially designating some of these 
the " Atlantic species,"' the name of the type will be here under- 
stood in reference only to their distribution within Britain itself, 
and by itself.
As examples we may cite Sinapis monensis, 
Matthiola sinuata, Raphanus maritimus, Seiluin anglicuiii.
Coty- 
ledon Umbilicus, Bartsia viscosa, Pinijuicida lusltanica.
Euphorbia 
portlandica, and Scirpus Savii.
More strictly local examples are 
found in Sihthorpia europaa.
Erica ciliaris, Polycarpon tetraphyl- 
lum, Adiantum Capillus-Veneris, and Cynodon Dactylon, each 
occurring in very few counties.
7. A Local or Doubtful Type.
— Dispersed about the island, 
there are some species whose area includes only single or few 
counties.
Such plants can seldom exhibit that decided tendency 
to the east or the west, to the south or the north, to the mountains 
or otherwise, which would fully warrant their assignment to any 
one of the six preceding types of distribution.
In those instances 
where the single or few localities occur clearly and solely within 
the geographic limits of one of the types, the plants will usually be 
associated with the group to which they thus make the nearest 
approximation.
There can he no hesitation, for example, in 
assigning to the Highland type the extremely local Oxytropis 
campestris and Lychnis alpina, both mountain species ; and 
scarcely more doubt can arise in placing Arenaria norvegica of 
Shetland, and Priiinda scotica of the two most northerly pro- 
vinces, among plants of the Scottish type.
So also, the local 
Cicendia filiformis may join in with the English type; Veronica 
verna, with the Germanic type ; Erica vagans, with the Atlantic 
type.
But after thus disposing of a large portion of these very 
local plants, there still remain some others which cannot be so 
III.
TYPES OF DISTRIBUTION.
SI 
fairly assigned to any of the six principal groups.
Potentilla 
rupestris and Lloydia serotina are peculiar to single mountains in 
North Wtiles, and are found considerably below the highest 
summits.
As local western species they might seem properly to 
associate with those of the Atlantic type, did not the hilly and 
inland character of their special localities, and their absence from 
the provinces of South Wales and the Peninsula, come incon- 
veniently in conflict with the chief characters of the Atlantic type, 
Draha aizoides and Cotoneaster vulgaris, found very locally on the 
rocky coasts of "Wales, approximate rather nearer to that type, and 
might be associated under it in so far as Britain alone is con- 
cerned ; and yet, if we should extend our views, so as to take in 
their distribution upon the Cojitinent of Europe, this would be 
found a misposition.
Some other less local species have also a 
distribution which does not correspond well with that of any of the 
six types specified ; their localities being restricted to calcareous 
rocks, and being such as not to place them properly under one of 
those types.
Examples may be cited in Diaba muralis and 
HutcJiinsia petraa, the distribution of which is strictly neither 
eastern nor western, northern nor southern ; and though they are 
in some degree hill plants, they are unknown in the Scottish 
Highlands ; while their very limited area separates them as 
clearly from the British or general type.
Eriocauluii septangulare 
is another anomaly, limited to Ireland and a few islets on the 
western side of North Britain ; the species being otherwise 
American, not European.
This mode of viewing the distribution of plants is still 
essentially a climatic classification of them, though not exclusively 
so.
It would seem not incorrect to regard the types as repre- 
senting so many present climatic areas, which are not separated 
by limitary lines, as the climatic zones are supposed or feigned to 
be, but which amalgamate or at least intermingle one with 
another.
The actual areas and sites of the various species, as 
well as their directions of increase or decrease in abundance, 
appear on the whole to accord so closely with existing climatic and 
other physical conditions, as legitimately to warrant a conclusion, 
32 INTRODUCTION.
that the present distribution of plants within this country is 
mainty determined by its present physical circumstances.
4. Grades of Species.
Au ever recurring difficulty in treating the distribution of 
plants, and one continually increasing from year to year, is found 
in the uncertainty and inequality of species, as described in Floras 
and other botanical writings.
Independently of errors in nomen- 
chiture — very numerously in print — the same specific name unfor- 
tunately will too often be found not to include or intend the same 
species.
As used by one botanist, it means a gross whole ; and it 
is then applicable indifferently to any part or fraction of that same 
whole ; — while another botanist restricts the same name to express 
some special part or fraction of the whole, exclusively of all other 
parts or fractions ; — and more inconveniently still, the special part 
or fraction is itself occasionally made a varying portion of the 
whole.
In one book, the same single name may apply to two or 
more different species treated as a single species ; — in another 
book, it may be strictly limited to one of those two species solely 
and exclusively.
In the former case, the name is applicable alike 
to all or to any of the included forms or species which go to make 
up the aggregate union ; — in the latter case, it is applicable only 
to some one of the dissevered forms or species, the other forms 
taking different names.
These discrepancies in the meanmg of applied names cause 
enormous trouble to students in phyto geography.
Perhaps some 
clearer idea of the practical working of such discrepant meanings 
may be given by taking letters and numerals to represent the 
species and sub-species in successive grades.
Let it be supposed 
that two dozens of the many modern species carved out of the old 
book-species Rubits fruticosm, are each -represented by one letter of 
the alphabet Keeping to the old idea, the name ' Riihiis fruti- 
cosios ' means and includes the whole alphabet ; and as a name it 
may thus be applied aUke and indifferently to any one letter.
But some modern botanist will declare that it means only, and 
IV.
GRADES OF SPECIES.
38 
ought to be applied only, to the first six letters A B C D E F,— 
to any or all of these, but to none others.
Another botanist will 
demur to that narrowed application of the name, and will propose 
to limit the meaning and application of the word to A B C D, or 
any of these four, excluding E and F.
Yet another will restrict it 
to A B, or either of them.
And still another wiU next confine it 
to A alone, excluding all the rest of the alphabet.
Nor does the 
variation or inequality of name always end even here ; for other 
botanical species-splitters might subdivide species A, and then 
restrict the name 'fruticosm ' to only some special part or fraction 
of A itself, giving new and different names to the other part or 
parts.
The name thus means : 
Eubus frutioosus = the whole alphabet, belonging alike to each 
and every letter.
Eubus fraticosus = A B D E F, all or any of these six letters.
Eubus fi-uticosus = A B C D, aU or any of these four only.
Eubus fruticosus = A B, both or either of these two only.
Eubus fruticosus = A only, excluding all the other letters.
Eubus fruticosus = Some special part of A, not the whole.
A seeming exactness or definiteness was given to species in 
books, by the peculiar nomenclature of Linneus, which is now 
seen to be often far from true in nature.
That system of nomen- 
clature (with its false analogy to the surnames and christian-names 
of mankind) has thus proved in some respects a misleading inno- 
vation upon older methods, however great its redeeming practical 
convenience may be in other respects.
As the Linnean method of 
nomenclature came into general use, his named species also came 
at first to be considered the true natural or real species, which his 
disciples and immediate successors were unwilling to call in 
question, and were seldom allowed to alter.
More gradually, it 
became apparent to careful observers that many of the Linnean 
species were readily divisible ; two or more easily and constantly 
distinguishable forms having been united together by him under a 
single specific name.
The process of subdivision or re-division 
then commenced ; done cautiously and sparingly at first, freely 
and numerously of late.
34 INTEODUCTION.
As time wore on, the autliority and influence of the Linnean 
writings became lessened ; and more botanists began practically 
to admit that the bestowal of a Linnean specific name had not 
sufficed to prove the various forms of plants, which Linneus him- 
self had grouped under it, to be all rightly regarded as together 
making up one single fixed species.
For some time, it was more 
customary to keep up the Linnean species and its name, dis- 
tinguishing the included forms as so many " varieties " of the 
species ; the more familiar form being usually adopted as the type, 
or else that particular form to which the brief Linnean description 
best applied, or any fragment of which chanced to have been 
preserved in his wretched herbarium, as the representative of the 
species which he had named.
Subsequently, some of the varieties were quite separated from 
the supposed type ; and other specific names having been bestowed 
upon them, they came to be admitted as real species, and were 
then held entitled to take equal rank in botanical books with the 
supposed type forms of the original compound species, or with any 
other still undivided species.
But this was seldom accomplished 
without a good deal of disputation and denial ; some botanists 
stoutly maintaining the separated forms to be " only varieties,'' 
while other botanists earnestly advocated their "claims to the 
rank of species." 
This process has gone on to the present time, and with an 
increasing tendency among botanists to divide and subdivide the 
species named and believed in by Linneus and his earlier 
successors.
Most unfortunately, while thus splitting the Linnean 
species into two or more secondary species, the original Linnean 
name was usually retained for one of them, and it was thus taken 
away from the other or others of them.
As before illustrated by 
the alphabetical letters, the original name thus acquired two or 
more different meanings and applications, with a vast amount of 
confusion in botanical records, incidental on the double or multiple 
signification.
Tie old name now means either the aggregate 
species to which it was originally given by Linneus, or only some 
one of the segregate quasi- specific forms into which that aggregate 
IV.
GRADES OF SPECIES.
35 
species has since been subdivided.
Literally, the name in books 
8tni means the whole or any part of the whole, or it is used in a 
more restricted sense to mean one special part exclusively, — 
a logical equally as a mathematical absurdity.
It would certainly have been the wiser course, always to keep 
up the Linnean specific name for the original aggregate species, 
and thus to keep it still applicable to aU and any of the included 
forms ; and to give a new name to each of the segregate species, 
not excepting the type form itself, whether real or suppositious.
The Linnean name would thus have retained his own meaning 
and application of it, and would have been so far true and 
constant ; while the substituted modem practice makes an 
arbitrary and false limitation of it.
But the mere species- 
desoribers who have most delighted in dividing and re-na min g, 
have usually been persons of an unreasoning character of mind, 
and were perhaps seldom capable of seeing how illogical their 
practice was, and how inconvenient to their botanical successors it 
would prove to be.
In thus pointing out the process of separating original aggregate 
species into more modem segregate species, the name of Linneus 
has been used simply for convenience, and because many of his 
old species have been thus subdivided, or " split " as the process is 
more scornfully designated.
But of course the like may be said of 
the aggregate species originally named and described by any other 
botanical describer, which have been subsequently split into segre- 
gates.
For instance, many of Eobert Brown's original Australian 
species were probably aggregates ; their short characters having 
been since found applicable to more than one apparent species.
The same, I am assured by a resident botanist there, is true of 
New Zealand plants named and described by Dr. Hooker, or 
referred by him to the named species of Europe or other 
countries.
Partly owing to more exact discrimination, but it may be 
feared chiefly under a weak-minded craving for name-notoriety, the 
modem tendency is to subdivide species on differences so shght 
and uncertain that descriptive language now almost fails to make 
36 INTRODUCTION.
them intelligible to other botanists, without the aid of portrait 
figures or selected specimens.
To such an excess has this practice 
been carried of late, that we now find in print long and worthless 
descriptions, miscalled specific, made only from a single individual 
plant, or even from a fragment of an individual plant, — say, from 
a single fern frond or from the dried twig of a rose-briar or 
bramble-bush.
It would be about as wise to describe an individual 
Hottentot or Eskimo, a Tom Thumb or a Daniel Lambert, a one- 
legged Donato or a three-legged Baby, as a species distinct from 
the fair-skinned and two-legged Homo sapiens (Linn.) of medium 
size.
As the result of all this ingenuity in rightly or wrongly dividing 
and subdividing species, originally so considered and still retained 
as such by at least some botanists of authority, we have now 
various ' grades of species ' in Floras and other works of descriptive 
botany.
The conventional expression " rank of species '' means 
wide inequality of rank in its actual application to plants ; for 
there is truly no equality among book species, but instead many 
grades of them.
Some botanists of high authority will keep up 
an original aggregate species, or will even combine two or more 
such species into one ; while others divide the original into two 
segregates ; others again making three segregates out of it ; and 
still others going on to four, five, six, or any greater number of 
segregated sub-species, — occasionally, as in Rubus fruticosus (Lmn.), 
even a score or a hundred sub-species, — all carved out of the 
formerly supposed single species.
And much more troublesome 
than this, through the illogical methods in re-naming before 
adverted to, we too often find the same specific name now applied 
to quite different things, that is, applied alike to combinations and 
separations which are themselves widely unequal and variable.
Without attempting to define all the various grades possible, we 
may place plants under three ranks or categories which have been 
conveniently designated " Super-species, Ver-species, Sub-species." 
The first work on British plants in which these terms have been 
adopted and practically carried out, is Mr. Boswell Syme's Third 
Edition of 'English Botany.' The Siiper-spccies are those originally 
IV, GRADES OF SPECIES.
37 
described species which have been subsequently found (or supposed) 
to be correctly divisible into other subordinate species.
The Ver- 
speeies are those which remain undivided, and seemingly are 
indivisible.
The Sub-species are those into which the super- 
species have been or may be divided.
Of course, the same terms 
may be used in the reverse process, that of uniting or re-uniting 
species.
Various botanists still regard the ' super ' to be the true 
species, and only co-equal with the ' i;fir-species ;' while others 
look on the ' sub ' as co-equal with the ' ver-species.' 
Three other terms have also been employed ; namely, " Aggre- 
gate, Integrate, Segregate species ;" which certainly better express 
the facts, apart from all theory about the reality of species.
And 
just because of their superiority in sense and logic they will be 
longer in coming into use than the terms Super-species and Sub- 
species.
They might be defined in the same words as the other 
three terms ; but they better admit of practical application without 
involving any inconsistency real or seeming.
The Aggregate 
species is the compound which has been, or may be, divided into 
quasi-specific parts.
The Segregate species are those quasi-specific 
parts themselves.
The Integrate species stands between them, as 
an undivided or indivisible whole.
The chief advantage of these 
terms is, that they admit of any change or variation in use, to suit 
the actual views of botanists, however diverse and changeable 
those views may be.
The very same species may be placed as an 
aggregate by one botanist, as a segregate by another botanist, 
without contradiction between them ; because the words simply 
express the fact of union or severance, without necessarily raising 
the controversial question, as to which among them are equal to 
Ver-species.
For instance, in the English Flora by Smith the 
Linnean Ranunculus aquatUis is an aggregate species (there 
treated as a specific integrate) including four principal forms or 
varieties, which are now usually accepted for true species ; namely, 
heterophyllus, pantothrix, circinatus, and fluitans.
Kegarded as 
subdivisions of Ranunculm aquatilis, these latter may be denomi- 
nated four segregate species ; although Smith himself, like many 
other botanists, hit upon a false line of separation between 
38 
INTRODUCTION.
heterophyllus axiA pantothrix (now named tricJiophylhis and Droicetii).
But these two last have been again subdivided into other species, 
real or supposed ; thus, they also in turn become aggregates, when 
viewed relatively to the segregates into which they have latterly 
been further separated.
In using the words ' Super-speoies ' and 
' Sub-species,' we are checked at the first division ; for how are we 
to designate the two halves or the three thirds of a sub-species ?
The two words ' aggregate ' and ' segregate ' can be applied inde- 
finitely to any series of combinations in the one direction, or of 
severances in the contrary direction.
Treated in this form, the vexed question of species becomes a 
comparatively novel subject in botanical books, the right under- 
standing of which is truly a matter of much importance for young 
botanists.
Hence, even at the risk of tediousness, some further 
illustration by examples may still be presented to readers.
In the 
' Handbook of the British Flora ' Mr. Bentham united two Lin- 
nean species, by sinking Ranunculus hederaceus as a ver-speoies, 
and uniting it with Ranunculus aquatilis ; an union sufiiciently 
justifiable in the eyes of those who also combine B.
tripartitus and 
B. Lenormandi with either.
By that union, it will be seen, the 
two aggregate or super-species (now more usually so deemed) were 
reduced to segregates or sub-species ; and our illustration shall 
commence with this great combination of subordinate forms, 
divided and subdivided into successive segregates by other 
botanists, as here shown : — 
A. Kanunculus aquaticus (Bentham).
1. hederaceus (Linn.) 
a. hederaceus.
b. Lenormandi.
2. aquatihs (Linn.) 
a. heterophyllus.
heterophyllus.
floribundus.
peltatus, etc.
b. pantothrix.
tricliophyllus.
Drouetii, etc.
c. fluitans.
d. oircinatus.
IV.
GRADES OF SPECIES.
39 
Now, it may be asked, with which grade in the above treble or 
quadruple series should Rauuttculus Ficaria be associated as a 
co-equal ?
Mr. Bentham made it the equal of his very inclusive 
R. aquatints (A).
Sir James Smith made it the equal of the 
Linnean hederaceus and aquatilis as two disunited species (1 and 2), 
— a view to wh^ch Mr. Bentham himself has subsequently gone 
back.
Professor Arnott makes it the equal of hederaceus, Lenor- 
mandi, fluitansj circinatus, and also of aquatilis (Linn.) Professor 
Babington makes it the equal of the former four ; also (instead of 
aquatilis) the equal of heterophyllus, florihundus, peltatus, tricJio- 
phyllus, Brouetii, etc.
In further illustration, let us suppose a botanist to follow the 
nomenclature of Bentham 's Handbook, first edition, and to print 
the name of B,.
aquaticus in a list of plants seen in some given 
country or place, it would be impossible for a reader to know 
whether the Linnean hederaceus or the Linnean aquatilis was 
intended ; either or both might be there, and every form of both, 
or only one form of either.
Another botanist, avowedly using 
Smith's English Flora, might print nearly the same name in like 
manner ; and here we should know that he intended some form of 
the Linnean aquatilis, exclusive of hederaceus and its sub-forms, 
although we should still be uncertain whether heterophyllus, panto- 
thrix, fluitans, or circinatus, — or some one, two, three, or all of 
these, — had been found in the district under report.
StUl less 
should we be prepared by the name of B.
aquatilis (Linn.) or 
aquaticus (Benth.) to decide whether all or any of the sub-forms 
heterophyllus, florihundus, peltatus, trichophyllus, Drouetii, etc., 
had been found ; since our Benthamian or Linnean botanist might 
have intended to record fluitans or circinatus only by his use of 
the name Ranunculus aquatilis or aquaticus.
A practical consequence of much importance to works like the 
present one, arises out of these diverse ways of dividing or 
grouping, of segregating or aggregating plants.
As the phyto- 
geographer consults many recorded localities and lists of plants, 
written by various botanists at widely different dates, or by those 
severally using the same name to express various different unions 
40 IXTEODDCTION.
and severances of the quasi-specific forms, he is too frequently left 
uncertain what is really intended by the names used.
He is thus 
forced to go backward rather than forward, by keeping up the 
older and larger aggregates, and by shunning the more recent and 
smaller segregates, while endeavouring to trace out the distribution 
of plants by examining those discordant sources of information.
His motto must be " omne majus in se continet minus ;" for, in 
faUing back upon the larger aggregate, all the records become 
available; while the further he gets forward to the newer and 
smaller segregates, the less available for his purposes do the past 
printed records become.
In several instances in the present 
volume, two or more readily distinguishable segregates are un- 
avoidably treated together as one aggregate species, simply because 
the printed records of their localities would mostly be found non- 
available, in attempting to treat them apart.
5. Relation of Varieties to Species.
The antecedent remarks on the different grades of species will 
have prepared us to see that no theoretic line of distinction is 
always practically available between Species and Varieties.
That 
which is a good and true species, in the estimation of one botanist, 
is simply a variety of some other species, in the estimation of a 
second botanist; or, it may be held a sub-variety, by a third 
botanist ; even a sub-sub-variety, by a fourth botanist.
Thus, to 
revert to the illustration on page 38, if Ranunculus aquatilis 
(Linn.) be accepted as the true species, then heterophyllus is one 
of the forms or varieties of that species, and florihundus is a 
secondary or sub-variety of the primary variety.
And if, by any 
possible expression of technical characters, the florihundus itself 
could be further divided, any of its segregated parts would be in 
the position of tertiary or sub-sub-varieties to the Linnean species 
B,.
aquatilis ; — it even was so, without further subdivision, rela- 
tively to the very aggregate species, the Ranunculus aquaticus of 
Bentham's Handbook in its first edition.
In the actual practice of 
technical botanists, let the student understand and remember, 
V. VAEIETIES, ETC.
41 
there is no constant distinction made between species and 
varieties, other than a decision by individual opinion in each 
special instance.
Super-species, ver-species, sub-species, heredi- 
tary race or strain, greater variety, lesser variety, variation, are 
simply a series of terms expressing gradations of difference, not 
things shown to be absolutely distinct in their kind.
No doubt a theoretic distinction may be alleged between them 
at some one of the grades.
It is still hypothetically assumed that 
distinct species do exist in nature, and that one real or natural 
species can never pass into or produce another species.
This 
assumption, while accepted as a truth, will occasionally afford a 
practical and seemingly positive test for a variety, although it can 
never become such a test for a species.
However dissimilar any 
two plants or sets of plants may be, if it is known that they have 
descended from a common ancestor, or have been produced by the 
same parent, — then they are held to be varieties, or type-form 
and variety, of the species represented by that common ancestor 
or same parent.
On the contrary, however similar any two plants 
may be otherwise, if some constant and inconvertible difference 
seemingly exists between them, by which they can be dis- 
tinguished one from the other, one form never having been 
observed to produce or pass into the other form ;- — then, any 
botanist may hold himself warranted to name and describe them as 
two distinct species, in reliance on the negative evidence only, and 
with little fear of refutation.
But here comes the conflict of opinion about species and 
varieties ; because it can never be possible to ascertain that the 
seemingly constant difference is a really inconvertible difference, 
or even that it is a really constant difference.
In most cases it is 
made a matter of analogical inference, not one of experimental 
knowledge.
A decision must often be given simply in the absence 
of any positive evidence of sameness.
Where the differential 
characters do not exceed, either in kind or in degree, those which 
experienced botanists have observed to be convertible between 
other plants, some of them wUl usually declare the characters 
a 
43 INTRODUCTION.
insufficient to justify a severance into two species, and will prefer 
to place one as a variety of the other plant.
On the other hand, the " splitters " will too often " make 
species ' resting on differences of a very slight kind or degree, if 
they expect or hope to find them constant, — rather, that nobody 
else will find them inconstant.
Usually, all they look for is some 
difference which can be expressed in technical language, or shown 
in portrait drawings ; while they leave to others the far less facile 
task of trying whether the difference is constant or inconstant, of 
proving that the characters of the two alleged species are con- 
vertible, if such be the case.
This latter task and proof, though 
perhaps easy and rapid in some few instances, will more commonly 
require experiments or observations carefully carried on during a 
succession of years.
However injudicious or precipitate he may 
be, the " species-maker " has thus the chances largely in his favour 
for maintaining the species, truly or falsely so called ; although it 
may be much doubted by other botanists, it cannot be denied on 
proof, — at any rate, not for some considerable time after its first 
penni-facture.
The proper category or position of a " new species" 
so made, is eventually decided on the balance of conflicting 
opinions, which may be long in suspense before inclining either 
way so far as to become a quasi-unanimity.
And even if thus 
virtually decided at one time or by one generation, the question 
whether a given plant is a species or variety may be re-opened at 
any after time.
In the Floras of our own small and much 
examined island, there are probably more proposed and disputed 
species at the present time, than was the case half a century ago.
And certainly there never was a time when so wide a species- 
discrepancy could be found between two standard Floras, as is now 
seen between ' Babington's Manual of British Botany ' and ' Ben- 
tham's Handbook of the British Flora.' 
Thus, it must certainly be admitted.
Botanists have truly no 
clear and available line of severance between species and varieties.
Most of them still believe, or act as believing, that species are 
absolute and permanent realities in nature ; while they deem 
varieties fluctuating and temporary, always liable or tending to 
V. VARIETIES, ETC.
43 
revert into the type-species.
But when they come to practice, it 
is found that they too often cannot at all agree among themselves 
where to trace the dividing line between the two categories.
And 
we are at last practically left in this alternating definition: — 
Species are wider varieties ; varieties are closer species.
Much new light has been brought upon this debatable matter 
by the theory of Charles Darwin, so rapidly become known to all 
naturalists, and still so much discussed among them, although 
with an increasing tendency to acceptance.
It bears very im- 
portantly on phyto-geography in vaiious ways ; and thus some 
consideration of that theory has become unavoidable with every 
student in this department of botany.
According to the Darwinian 
theory, there is no absolute difference between species and varieties.
They are supposed to be the same in kind, differing only in age or 
degree.
A slight variety is held to be an " incipient species," the 
progeny of which, in course of many generations, and by increasing 
variation, may eventuate in a new and (so considered) distinct 
species.
Mr. Darwin's idea is, that organic life on the earth com- 
menced with extremely few original forms, possibly with one only ; 
all the thousands on thousands of present species, and all the 
countless numbers (millions on millions ?) of extinct species, 
having proceeded from those few original forms.
He does not 
insist upon this origin of all from one only ; but he writes, " I be- 
lieve that animals have descended from at most only four or five 
progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser number.'' (Edition 
2, p.
518).
The process by which those few original forms have 
become the million or so of species which now exist, is alleged to 
have been of a two-fold character, — accumulation of divergent 
variations by " Natural Selection." 
First, as to accumulating divergences or variations.
The imme- 
diate progeny usually resemble their parents, without being always 
exact repetitions of those parents, or exactly like each other.
Any 
little difference apparent in the progeny is so far a divergence 
from the characters of their parents ; and they thus become two 
varieties, or a normal and a varied form.
The progeny become 
44 INTRODUCTION.
parents in their turn ; and some of their descendants, immediate 
or remote, may again differ among themselves ; diverging still 
farther from the original stock, either by increase in the first 
variation, or by other variations superadded thereto.
Let such a 
process continue for an indefinite time, and through an indefinite 
number of generations, and the divergent variations from the 
original stock may (it is fancied) accumulate to any conceivable 
extent.
Given, the measureless time ; given, the countless gene- 
rations ; given, the variations gradually increasing in kind and in 
number; — all the differences now seen between the present 
species, and all the differences ascertained between the Uving and 
the extinct species, might thus have accumulated by way of 
repeated divergences from the original stock, whether single or 
sparingly multiple at first.
So far, many other naturalists had held views closely similar to 
those lately announced by Mr. Darwin.
Among animals and 
plants they have seen variations arise, and augment, and accumu- 
late, until some of the descendants have thus gradually become 
widely unlike their ancestors, certainly known or fairly supposed 
to be such.
And they have thought and argued, if such changes 
can be seen produced in course of a human life or of human 
history ; — then, why not all the changes Tvhich geology shows to 
have occurred between the former and the present, the extinct and 
the living, animals and plants of the globe ?
During time so vast 
and measureless, these wide changes may also possibly have come 
to pass, as gradual evolutions of life in the ordinary course of 
nature.
The result, as now seen or known, may perhaps have 
been practically and methodically brought about without the 
necessity of any direct interference of Creative Power, whether it 
be supposed to have been exerted immensely at some few distant 
intervals of time, or to be exerted very gradually and continuously 
through past and present time.
All undoubtedly fore-seen and 
fore-arranged ; but fore-arranged with such perfect fore-sight, that 
no man-like intermeddling or rectifying could ever have become 
requisite.
Sir Humphrey Davy, with others of his day and school, 
V. VAIIIETIES, ETC.
45 
contended for a few enormous efforts of destructive and re-creative 
powei', as well in the organic as in the inorganic world.
Sir 
Charles Lyell, with a curious inconsistency in so able a writer and 
reasoner, contended for the most gradual and ever-successive and 
still-continuous changes in the inorganic world, from past to 
present, by natural processes alone ; — yet also argued in favour of 
an absolute distinctness of species and their successive creations, 
not gradual evolution from those past to those present.
The doctrine maintained by LyeU conduced greatly to the 
advance of correct views in geology ; but at the same time all the 
influence of his deservedly high repute was repeatedly given in 
support of views in biology, which Darwin and many others 
declare to be incorrect.
The baneful effect of this influence could 
hardly be better exemplified than by citing the instance of Dr.
J. D.
Hooker.
'J'his illustrious Botanist appears to have been 
kept out of the light, in his earlier years, by the mere authority of 
Sir Charles Lyell ; — it could not have been so through the force 
or clearness of Lyell's arguments.
In ' Flora Indica,' vol.
1, 
page 20, Drs. Hooker and Thomson wrote in high eulogy of 
Sir Charles LyeU's inconsistent views, rather too dogmatically 
designating as " superficial naturalists " those who accepted " the 
doctrine of the mutability of species." Subsequently, it would 
now seem, both Sir Charles Lyell and Dr. J.
D. Hooker have 
adopted the Darwinian doctrines ; thus enlisting themselves into 
the ranks of the (so-called) " superficial naturalists," and rapidly 
rising to generalship over them.
But, might it not now be fairly 
retorted by any one satirically disposed, that the aforesaid de- 
signation has been fairly earned by both of them ?
Assuredly it 
was no great evidence of clearness or profundity, altogether to 
miss the right track until it was converted by Darwin into a 
broad highway, along which " he that runs, may read." 
True, the track then was indistinct in itself, and but dim in the 
early twilight.
Before Darwin's theory was formed and announced, 
all may justly be said to have failed in their attempts to show 
satisfactorily how the changes from past to present species could 
actually have been brought about.
According to present appearance.
46 ir^TEODUCTION.
Charles Darwin has made a really grand advance beyond his 
predecessors ; although he too, after much ingenious effort, has 
left the most important part of the problem for some successor to 
elucidate ; while he has unfortunately mixed up the probably 
sound portion of his doctrine almost inextricably with views which 
cannot be accepted for anything better than crude hypothesis 
unsupported by facts.
An example may here be permitted, in illustration of the similar 
but crudely unsettled ideas which were afloat before Darwinism 
gave a more precise direction to them.
The example is suitable 
for showing in contrast the onward advance made by the ' Origin 
of Species.' The Author of the Cybele Britannica, in a con- 
troversial pamphlet published so long ago as 1836, intimated his 
own leaning in favour of the transition-of species theory, as it was 
then designated.
That subject, however, was connected only 
indirectly and incidentally with the immediate purpose of the 
pamphlet, and was therefore only slightly alluded to.
But he 
introduces here some extracts from the pamphlet, as a record of 
the direction which his own thoughts had taken full thirty years 
ago, at a date when comparatively few naturalists would have 
admitted that species and varieties differ only in degree, and that 
the present species may be the actual descendants of the extinct 
species.
Witness the opposite views advocated by Dr. Hooker, a 
score of years later ; and still the prevailing views among botanists.
TJie extracts must in fairness he read by the rush-lights of thirty 
years ago, not by any luminous lamp of the present time.
" The facts of geology, explained by the only test which science 
can legitimately apply to them— namely, the causes now in action 
—lead to inferences showing a very different course of events 
prior to the time when man is supposed to have commenced his 
existence.
And thus explained, they give some probability that 
the earth has contained within itself the elements of all the 
changes hitherto unfolded to us by geological researches.
In the 
present state of scientific knowledge, a philosopher, reasoning 
solely on philosophical grounds, is not entitled to say that the 
productions of our globe were created by the direct exercise of 
V. VARIETIES, ETC.
47 
Divine Power.
The existence of the earth itself may be only one 
of a long series of changes in our planetary system, ultimately 
referable to the Power that has fashioned all things, but which 
may have required no more direct interference than the creation 
of Mr. Scott's essay itself has required." 
" Geology, be it observed, has shown nothing whatever con- 
cerning the creation of races or individuals.
Neither the mode of 
creation, nor the first state, nor yet the last state, of any race or 
species, has been in the slightest degree explained by geological 
discovery.
The fossil records of past life are limited to incomplete 
representations of the state of individuals at death ; and in the 
older deposits the remains are scarcely more than mere copies of 
their shapes.
In the more recent deposits good skeletons, etc., 
are found ; but in aU likelihood, the stony models and skeletons, 
which have hitherto met the eye of man, will not bear the pro- 
portion of one individual out of every million that have existed.
Granting this, how can any sober reasoner assert positively, on 
such meagre evidence, that intermediate forms and structures 
have not existed ?
Geology is far too imperfect yet, to allow of 
any fair presumption, from its individual facts, either of the 
transition or non-transition of one species into another.
On the 
great scale, it is as clear as such evidence can make it, that one 
species has been substituted for another, but we know not how this 
substitution has been brought about ; and, allowing for the dif- 
ference of time, it may well be questioned whether the changes 
brought to light by geological researches, at all exceed the changes 
now effected in the vegetable world by human efforts." ....
" The nearest approach towards bringing about a sudden 
change of species, occurs in the production of hybrids or mule 
breeds.
This is something ; but it is not the way for permanently 
converting or creating species, if it be possible to do so at all.
These hybrids rarely breed with each other ; and, when mixing 
with the original stocks, they soon revert back so far as to be 
undistinguishable.
If man is ever to create a permanent species, 
he must go to work in a much more gradual manner, by coupling 
together varieties becoming more and more unlike the original 
48 INTRODUCTION.
stock at each descent.
We have yet to leara what would be 
effected by following this course through several hundreds of 
successive descents.
It would almost seem as if the dog had 
been thus created.
If not, where is the original stock to be 
found?" ....
" In the vegetable world, it is peculiarly man's interest to bring 
hundreds or thousands of species (as they are called) into a domes- 
ticated state, to use his utmost skill in bringing about considerable 
changes in many of them, and to keep extending these changes.
The extent to which their external circumstances can be varied, 
and the facility of rapidly producing many successive generations, 
with other peculiarities appertaining to vegetable life, afford ad- 
ditional aids to his exertions.
Accordingly, we find varieties 
produced, and regularly continued by descent, having greater 
differences between themselves, than are seen between other races 
generally supposed to be distinct species.'' ....
" An illustration may assist in showing the liability to false 
inferences, by predicating of a long series of events from in- 
specting a small part of the series.
In the middle period of life, 
many individuals change so gradually that we see little difference 
between the same person on the first and last day of the same 
year.
Yet is a year one-seventieth part of a life ; and in the 
seventy years an individual passes from infancy to manhood, and 
thence wanes again to feebleness.
Now, two or three thousand 
years may not be the seventieth, or even the seven -hundredth part 
of the duration of a species ; so that an inappreciable change, 
were it established, would be no very cogent argument against a 
great change during the full series of time and events.'' (Exami- 
nation of Mr. Scott's Attack on Mr. Combe's Constitution of 
Man).
This last quoted passage has reference to the alleged identity of 
embalmed mummies of Egyptian animals with those now living.
It bears on a defect in the Darwinian hypothesis, to which 
allusion will shortly be made.
In the preceding extracts a very 
decided bias is evinced in favour of the transition-of-speoies 
theory ; especially so, considering that the subject was only an 
V. VARIETIES, ETC.
49 
incidental one in the pamphlet from which they are extracted.
The more matured views of the same writer were set forth in 
papers in the Phytologist for 1846, and partially copied thence 
into the Cybele Britannica, volume 4, pages 59 — 63.
They afford 
a fair sample of the state of the question in the years that inter- 
vened between the date of the ' Vestiges ' and that of the ' Origin 
of Species by means of Natural Selection.' At same time, a full 
conviction of the truth of the transition-of-species theory is not 
declared ; in either instance cited, being evidently withheld from 
lack of the one key or explanation which Llr. Darwin has brought 
to its support, whether successfully or unsuccessfully so brought, 
under the designation of " Natural Selection." 
The distinctive peculiarity of the Darwinian theory, is, that its 
Author has much more fully and clearly explained how (in his 
view) the changes between past and present life on the earth 
could have been brought about, and this in a manner so gradual 
and unobtrusive that it is even yet going on around us in ceaseless 
pi'ogress, long unobserved by most of us, imperfectly recognized 
by a very few, clearly and fully detected by none before Mr.
Darwin himself took up the subject.
By giving a name to this 
hitherto nameless process of nature, most ably marshalling an 
ample array of illustrative details, all more or less intimately 
bearing upon his leading principle of " natural selection," he has 
perhaps achieved the greatest advance in natural science that ever 
has been achieved by one individual.
What is th3 real advance ?
It is familiar even to triteness that 
variations do arise among animals and plants, and that some of 
these vaiiations do tend to become hereditary, by re-appearing in a 
second generation, and so on to succeeding generations.
It is 
well known, too, that the progeny of the variety will often also 
apparently tend back, by reproducing the original ancestral like- 
ness, more or less perfectly, instead of its own altered likeness or 
"characters." Here are two seeming tendencies, both inferred 
from actual facts ; the preponderance of one keeping up the 
species ; the preponderance of the other keeping up its varieties.
In the long run, which of the two tendencies will prevail, and 
50 INTRODUCTION.
why ?
We know that the full restoration of the original characters 
of the " species " may often be prevented by carefully breeding or 
seed-saving from select examples of the variety ; destroymg or 
letting die out those individuals that are tending back towards the 
original form.
And so long as this careful selection of parents is 
continued, whether among animals or plants, an apparent (but, 
still, only an artificial or humanly-dependent) character of per- 
manence is given to the variety.
We know also that, by this 
careful selection of parents, the peculiarities may be increased in 
their descendants; either some given peculiarity may become 
stronger, or other divergent peculiarities may be superadded 
thereto.
Is there any analogous selection in nature, ceaselessly in 
operation, especially tending to the increase and conservation of 
varieties, and eventually allowing or causing the ancestral species 
to become extinct as itself, and to be represented by descendants 
specifically changed ?
The Darwinian theory asserts that a like process is always 
operative in nature ; but it is one not truly identical in action, 
though supposed to be analogous in its effect.
Mankind volun- 
tarily and designedly select the varieties to be conserved, from 
those which are to be lost by neglect or purposely destroyed.
In 
this respect, Man is declared to be siaiply an imitator of Nature, 
in a small way and with few species, for his own purposes or 
advantage.
But always, as well now as through epochs long past, 
Nature is declared to have been selecting fresh varieties of 
animals and plants to be conserved, and further varied, and 
re-varied to any extent.
What is the " Nature " which has thus 
selected, and is still selecting ?
The Will of the Creator 
primarily, beyond question, but immediately acting on the animals 
and plants through the secondary instrumentality of all those 
external circumstances or conditions, to which they are indi- 
vidually subjected, and by which they are affected in health, 
existence, fertility, etc.
Thus, the external circumstances may be 
said to conserve the varieties best adapted to themselves, and 
gradually to destroy or let perish those which are less so adapted ; 
the ratio of increase by seed (in plants) allowing great numbers of 
V. VARIETIES, ETC.
51 
the less adapted forms to die in the struggle for ground whereon 
to live.
This is " Natural Selection," or selection by natural 
agencies.
The better adaptation of the variation or variety to the 
external circumstances conserves it ; the external circumstances 
select (figuratively) the variety or variations to be conserved.
Accumulated variations change the species, — even the genus or 
order.
From one point of view, and to a limited extent, this is such 
an obvious truth as to be simply a truism, which nobody would 
dispute, and nobody had taken the trouble to describe in detail or 
to endow with a special name.
But it is an old and just saying 
" Nomina si nescis, perit cognitio rerum." By giving a special 
name to the agency, describing its operation very clearly, illus- 
trating it in copious detail, showing its universality, and con- 
necting its phenomena together, Mr. Darwin has rendered vast 
sers'ice to the progress of natural science, and fairly made the 
previously rude recognition of this agency into a new and explana- 
tory theory of organic life.
It is the characteristic of Mr. Darwin's 
reasoning, to heap fact upon fact, and to convince his readers by 
accumulations of evidences and illustrations, — always the most 
successful mode of addressing the miscellaneous public of readers.
A more causal reasoner would have stated his principle or rule, — 
illustrated it by half a dozen examples, — left it then to make its 
own way, — and remained neglected or misunderstood for half a 
century.
A man who only convinces himself, how warrantable soever 
that conviction may be, has done but little.
Although guesses 
and suggestions about the gradual transition of past into present 
species, and even that varieties are less distinct species, and that 
species are more distinct varieties, were repeatedly made before 
Darwin wrote on the subject, — yet the scornful scepticism with 
which his first announcements were received by some of the most 
eminent naturalists of his day, abundantly testify that he had 
really carried onward previous crude ideas into something con- 
siderably different or more perfect, — virtually a novelty and a 
discovery, its truth being admitted.
52 INTRODUCTION'.
A pre-recognition of the Darwinian theory has heen claimed 
for Mr. Patrick Matthew, whose volume on ' Naval Timber and 
Arboriculture,' dated in 1831, bears much internal evidence of 
mental vigour and independent thought.
A theory of species was 
only incidental to the leading object of that book ; and hence 
perhaps in part the vagueness and brevity of its Author's remarks 
on species-conservation and species-transition ; both of which were 
recognized and alluded to, as fact and probable fact.
But the 
ambiguously worded and half-oonjectural remarks by Mr. Matthew, 
though certainly an advance beyond ideas currently prevailing at 
the date of his work, cannot thus late be fairly adduced as an 
exposition of the Darwinian theory of " natural selection," or even 
sis a real pre-recognition of it.
They read, indeed, like a near 
guess at it, if now interpreted under the light so clearly thrown 
upon the matter by Mr. Darwin's own publications.
But, it may 
fairly be asked, whether Mr. Matthew himself, or any of his 
readers, ever afterwards united the disjointed and incidental 
remarks into a connected theory of nature, or theory of species?
— 
into anything which would have required or justified a volume 
under the Darwinian title of " Origin of Species by means of 
Natural Selection"?
His views, on the whole, seem to have been 
more Lamarckian than Darwinian.
The reaction against a first sceptism has been great and rapid 
in favour of the Darwinian doctrines.
The danger now is, that 
Mr. Darwin will be supposed to have discovered and established 
much more than he truly has done.
Along with what is clear and 
presumable in his theory as a whole, there still remain points of 
primary importance left unexplained, and things assumed as 
probable or certain on the slenderest possible evidence, not to say, 
positively against the bearing of such evidence as can be adduced.
How far will this go towards accounting for the utter neglect of 
Darwinism in the only Journal of Botany maintained in England?
It can hardly be that none of the writers in that Journal are 
of intellectual calibre and training sufBoient to treat the subject ; 
one which bears so closely, not only on questions about species 
V. VARIETIES, ETC.
53 
and varieties, but otherwise also on the very foundations of phyto- 
geography, phyto-geology, and other departments of botanical 
science, so soon as we rise above the a b c of descriptive botany.
First, the selection theory cannot be accepted as a true causal 
theory of variation in plants and animals.
The variations must 
have already come into existence, before " natural selection " could 
begin at all.
It thus fails to explain the mutation of species into 
species, if such mutation does actually occur.
It assumes that 
new species are (and have been) coming into existence very 
gradually, and as gradually are gaining the places of other ceasing 
species which are ousted by them.
On this yet unsubstantiated 
assumption, the theory very plausibly explains how existing 
species might be lost or extinguished, and Jiow the new species 
might become substituted for them.
It tells us that when 
variations abed etc.
have successively accumulated or combined 
in the descendants of a given species, those descendants will have 
become so unlike their remote ancestor, as properly to be accepted 
in our systems of classification as a new and distinct species.
But 
this brings us no nearer towards a real answer to the question, 
how variation n or 6 or c or d can have arisen.
Unfortunately, Mr. Darwin has not kept his phraseology clear 
from the vulgar error of attempting to explain natural events by 
fitting them to the human standard of thought and language, 
instead of fitting that very plastic standard to the natural events 
observed.
Selection is a human act, an act of will and effort, and 
the prefixed Natxiral fails to change the fundamental idea of 
intentional choice, — choice for a purpose or with a motive.
Apart 
from Mr. Darwin's unlucky phraseology, and the false bias given 
by it to the thoughts of his followers, the true question is, ' Are 
new species developed from older species, by accumulated varia- 
tions, which better adapt them to changing external conditions ?
' 
But in answering this question of fact, we still fail to reach the 
causal origin of the variations.
Indeed, it would scarcely be wrong 
to assert, that the very title itself of Mr. Darwin's admirable 
volume is a misnomer, — false in phrase, unsound in idea.
Natural 
Selection cannot properly be said to originate either varieties or 
54 INTRODUCTION.
species ; — at best it can only be said to conserve some among 
those variations which have originated through other causes or 
agencies.
When the gardener selects good plants of any favoured 
variety, from which to save seed, he is not originating the variety, 
he is simply conserving it by his care in selecting the parents of 
the next expected generation.
The first variation, howsoever 
brought about, begins the new species ; the superadded variations 
being a gradual further mutation of it towards apparent distinct- 
ness, until their accumulation amounts to a difference sufficient to 
place it as an independent species.
Natural Selection may rightly 
be said to conserve the first variation, — to conserve the super- 
added variations, — to conserve the accumulation or totality'' of the 
variations.
But, if it does not originate any one of these variations, 
how can it be said to originate the totality of them, — the new 
species ?
Secondly, the Darwinian theory, as above intimated, is based on 
the hypothetical assumption that variations can and do accumulate 
sufiiciently to convert species into species ; forming new species 
from old species, by divergences of characters gradually accumu- 
lating until the descendants cease to resemble specifically their 
own remote ancestor.
And further still, the theory assumes that 
such divergences can go on in a limitless extent until, not only 
species is changed into other species, but also until genus is 
changed into other genera, — order is changed into other orders, —   
class is changed into other classes.
"What is there now seen 
adequate to sustain such bold assumptions ?
The varietal changes 
hitherto traced and recorded go such an infinitesimally small way 
towards such results, that they cannot be construed into giving 
much support to the likelihood of those results.
Is there any 
change now noted, that is really sufficient to warrant the belief 
that (say) a Fern and a Fir-tree, a Moss and a Mushroom, ever 
had the same common ancestor for both ?
Thirdly, the theory assumes a beginning of organic life in some 
eight or ten types, if not in one only ; all the countless species in 
subsequent succession, the extinct and the still existent, having 
hereditarily resulted from those eight or ten original species ; less 
V. VAEIETIES, ETC.
55 
than half being allotted to the present plant-species, as their 
primitive Adams.
How the first one, or first eight or ten, began 
and progressed, the theory fails to explain.
Surely a " Natural 
Selection " would not be potent enough to give an " origin " to 
these out of nothing !
But is there anything observed in the 
present age at all sufficient to show that species are still increasing 
in numbers ?
Is there any sort of evidence on record to show that 
they have increased in the historical time ?
(Book-species increase 
fast, no doubt, but that sort of increase is beside the true 
question.) Is the geologic evidence enough to show, or even 
reasonably to suggest, that species are truly more nuiToerous now 
than they were at any former period?
When it suits his pur- 
pose, Mr. Darwin is very justly disposed to lay great stress on the 
extreme " imperfection of the geologic record." The older in 
date, the more imperfect is it likely to be ; and thus there seems a 
sufficiently good explanation of the more numerous species now or 
less long ago living, in contrast against the remains of less 
numerous species at the more remote epochs.
On the other hand, 
if a single or half score original species could have increased by 
divergent variations into the tens or hundreds of thousands now 
existent, — what is to stay the progress of their numbers hence- 
forth ?
If eight or ten can diverge into (say) an existing million, 
why not one million into millions of millions ?
— the millions of 
millions into .
. .
. ?
At what figure or degree in the increasing 
thousands or millions is the limit to be fixed ?
Are not these 
simple queries something very like a reductiojxd absurdum ?
To 
assume or assert a period when only one, or ten, or a hundred 
species existed, is not reading the past by the present facts ; — it is 
inventing the past ; fitting it badly with the present, incredibly 
with the future.
Fourthly, to the writer of these pages it seems to be a great 
deficiency or insurmountable defect in the Darwinian theory, that 
it makes no provision for a counterbalance in nature which seems 
warrantable enough as an hypothesis, and is abundantly obvious 
as a fact.
The theory is wholly one of constantly successive 
divergence from antecedent forms, without taking into account 
56 INTRODUCTION.
tbat divergence from one form, as now witnessed, usually is and 
must be approximate convergence towards and with some other 
form.
To illustrate this counterpoise of convergence, as fully and 
clearly as Mr. Darwin has illustrated his principle of divergence, 
would demand a volume by itself.
One very simple example 
must here suffice to show what is meant by convergejice.
Let it 
be supposed that in some genus of plants there are two species 
respectively with ovate leaves and linear leaves ; these two forms 
of leaf being part of their specific characters or differences.
It 
would be a simple divergence, such as really does occur in nature, 
if a variety of either species should be found with lanceolate 
leaves, — an intermediate form of leaf.
In such a case, just to tlie 
extent to which the variety diverges from one species, it approxi- 
mates towards the other species.
And if varieties with lanceolate 
leaves should occur to both species, the convergence would be 
complete between the two, so far as tbe one simple character of 
lanceolate leaf is concerned.
Any number or kind of other characters might be taken in 
like manner.
Let any actual variation in any plant be taken, 
and the probability is great almost to certainty, that the so-far 
divergence from its own specific type is more or less approximately 
a convergence with some other type, whether belonging to the 
same or to some other genus.
The similarities among plants are 
equally numerous with the dissimilarities.
The convergences may 
be found to equal the divergences.
Mr. Darwin thinks that 
species arise through accumulated divergences.
Is it not as true 
that they are known by (not to say, result from) the convergence 
of numerous characters, — the classic — ordinal — generic — specific 
characters all converging in the individual plants put together as a 
species ?
Why should it be declared that all these combinations 
of character in each species have resulted from or through 
divergence solely ?
If divergence and convergence both be admitted — and truly the 
one seems as visible in nature as is the other — the two processes 
might reasonably be supposed to keep up, and perhaps to have 
ever kept up (that is, so far as we see or trace), an approximate 
V. VARIETIES, ETC.
57 
equilibrium in the number of species by tbeir compensating 
balance of action.
On present evidence, it might be unsafe to say 
that any one new species would ever actually be formed by gradual 
convergences of variation from numerous other species.
The 
tendency of convergence, as seen at present, may rather be said to 
operate by check or counterpoise against the limitless results of 
unbalanced divergence endlessly in action.
Still, there are not 
wanting facts which at least suggest the possibility, that indi- 
viduals of two closely allied species may converge into an inter- 
mediate species, by divergences from their own stocks, and 
without the intermediate being necessarily a return towards any 
more remote ancestor, from which those two had themselves 
originated by accumulated divergences.
There is a tendency 
among botanists to use the adjective " intermedia " as a specific or 
varietal name, because many plants do appear like intermediates, 
uncertainly assignable to either of the two allied species.
But 
botanists have never supposed that the two species had developed 
out of the ' intermedia ' by divergent variations therefrom ' natu- 
rally selected.' On the contrary, the name " hybrida" is now 
often substituted instead of " intermedia," clearly showing a belief 
that the intermediate has originated from the two species, and not 
itself given origin to both or to either of them.
It seems curious that Mr. Darwin should have failed to see, 
and have refused to admit when shown, that some such hypothesis 
as this one of convergence — indeed, the expression of actual facts 
which are continually in occurrence — would have saved his theory 
from the supposed necessity of tracing backwards all the past and 
present species into and out of scarcely half a score, completed 
somehow, without a beginning for themselves, — without stocks to 
diverge from in their turn, — without any aid from " Natural 
Seleetion " itself.
To step farther back, from this short half-score 
into one solitary species, cannot mend the matter.
In this respect, 
the theory is too much like the sage explanation of the Earth 
on an Elephant; — the Elephant on a Tortoise ;- the Tortoise 
on ...
? 
58 INTRODUCTION.
If it be granted that the Darwinian theory seems sonnd in the 
main, though disputable and perhaps false in some of its parts, — 
it is necessarily granted also, that there is and can he no absolute 
difference between species and varieties ; that they are groupings 
of individuals which differ in degree, but not in kind.
Where the 
differences are so many, or so wide, or so slowly convertible, that 
numerous generations must have been required for diverging one 
from the other, — or, it may be added, would be required for con- 
verging one into or with the other, — then, the two groups of 
individuals thus decidedly differing, may be accepted as two 
species.
On the contrary, if their differences are of a slighter 
character or constancy, of so small a degree that the production of 
one of them from the other seems probable on analogy, although 
not actually observed, — then they are more properly to be 
accounted varieties, or type form and variety, of a single species.
When the much discussed question is re-viewed under this 
theoretic light, the same conclusion is at length come to, as was 
almost unavoidably reached from a consideration of the wide dis- 
crepancies of opinion and practice among technical botanists ; who 
are so much at variance among themselves in deciding which are 
species, and which are varieties only, among their described 
plants.
Through Darwinism, or some modification of Darwinism, 
"we come back again to the former alternating definition, and may 
repeat that " Species are wider varieties ; varieties are closer 
species." Or, nearly the same idea may be expressed in another 
form by saying, ' Varieties are infantile species, — Species are adult 
varieties.' There are many stages between infancy and ado- 
lescence ; and botanists will continue to differ as to the stage of 
development where the one becomes the other.
Perhaps it may be thought that too many pages have been 
given to these remarks on the grades of species, and on the 
relation of varieties to species, which is but carrying the gradation 
into further detail.
Certainly the remarks have run out to con- 
siderable length ; but a writer on phyto^eography, during present 
unsettled opinions, ought to let his readers have a clue to his 
own views, and especially to make them aware of the difficulties 
VI.
NATIVITY OF SPECIES.
59 
and uncertainties which the discrepant views of the authors he 
must consult and rely upon, unavoidably introduce into his geo- 
graphical records and arrangements.
Further, it is to be hoped, 
that Darwinism may operate serviceably in checking the frivolous 
vanity of " species-making ;" while it will also stimulate to a more 
careful study of variation, and perhaps induce naturalists to 
discard that unphilosophioal expression " only a variety," far too 
frequent in use among botanists.
6. Nativity of the Species.
Among the plants now found seemingly wild in Britain, whether 
more or less widely distributed, are many species which occur 
" under conditions calculated to suggest an idea that they may have 
been first introduced into this island by the agency of mankind, 
and not by pre-human natural agencies.
Botanists are far from 
agreed on a line of separation between the admitted and disputed 
natives.
Inexperienced observers more readily believe in the true 
nativity of plants; while those of greater experience will frequently 
find grounds for doubt or distrust.
Besides this personal dif- 
ference, the desire of appearing as discoverers too often leads vain- 
glorious collectors to make out the best case they can in support of 
the " native claims " of species, and the " truly wild" character of 
their localities.
A good deal of actual misrepresentation, along 
with the fi-equent suppression of important circumstances which 
are adverse to an acceptance of the localities, thus comes into the 
records of plant-localities, greatly to the inconvenience of phyto- 
geographers ; some of whom have not been sparing of their 
censures upon the writers who are guilty of these paltry falsifi- 
cations, which always finally recoil in disparagement of their 
short-seeing perpetrators.
Various questions in botanical geography, retrospective and 
present, require an elimination of the introduced or non-native 
elements in a mixed flora ; leaving those only which are truly 
natural to the country as aboriginally native species.
Not that 
botanists expect ever to make an exact separation of the humanly- 
60 INTRODUCTION.
introduced species from the aboriginal natives of Britain ; because 
those species (if any) which were so introduced, and became 
thoroughly established before botanical history commenced, are 
now unavoidably looked upon as aboriginal natives ; while all 
degrees of uncertainty appertain to the other species, whose 
conditions here still show some sort of evidence of a foreign origin.
Cultivation has been carried on in this island during many 
centuries ; while our truly reliable records scarcely extend back 
one century.
Eeally careful observations and reasonings on the 
nativity of species can hardly be dated back half a century.
Even 
in the present day, the records made by a large number of the 
locality-reporters are too often unreliable by reason of their 
deficient knowledge, carelessness in observation, inaccuracy of 
language, or wilfully one-sided statements.
A series of terms, drawn from our own legal and social classi- 
fications, has been used to express the various grades of uncer- 
tainty or belief with respect to those plants whose aboriginal 
nativity is more or less unsettled.
The terms ' Native, Denizen, 
Colonist, Alien, Casual ' serve to express a descending series, from 
the truly wild and pre-historically established species, down to the 
occasional stragglers from cultivation, or the products of seeds 
accidentally imported with merchandize, ship-ballast, or otherwise.
The word " naturalised " has been so variously and carelessly 
applied by botanical writers, that it has ceased to carry with 
it any exact signification.
It ought to mean a species originally 
introduced by man, but now become thoroughly estabhshed, by 
seed or otherwise, among the native plants of the country, and 
existing without human aid in sowing its seeds or in preparing the 
ground for them.
We have two American plants fully coming up 
to this definition, — Impatlens Jidva and Elodea canadensis.
Few 
botanists indeed restrict the use of the term " naturalised " to this 
just and proper meaning ; while some will even apply it to mere 
casuals, stragglers from cultivation, with no permanent or certain 
locality.
The Natives, Denizens, and Colonists will be formally treated 
in this volume.
The Aliens and Casuals will be enumerated in 
VI.
NATIVITY OF SPECIES.
Gl 
an Appendix List ; as also the few species supposed to have 
become extinct, and most of which perhaps were Casuals only; 
and those improperly recorded as British species, through eiTors of 
name or mistakes about the localities of garden examples, or con- 
sequently on tricks and impositions practised by guides and others 
at the expense of incautious botanists.
Typographical convenience 
will necessitate a somewhat strict adhererence to this rule ; the 
adopted formula of seven lines of text just allowing four species to 
a page without break or division.
It would be scarcely possible, 
and little useful if possible, to exhibit the distribution of the 
Aliens and Casuals in the same form.
The definition and use of 
the three terms may be thus understood : — 
1. Native.
— Apparently an aboriginal British species ; there 
being little or no reason for supposing it to have been first intro- 
duced into this island by human agency.
Examples may be cited 
in Corylus, Calluna, Clematis, Bdlis, Butonuts, Teesdalici, Glaux, 
Littorella.
9. Denizen.
— At present maintaining its habitats as if a native 
species, without the direct aid of man, but liable to some suspicion 
of having been originally introduced by human agency, whether 
by design or by accident.
The single species of Acojiitum, Clieli- 
donium, Saponaria, Myrrhis, and Buxus, weU.
established in some 
of their localities, are perhaps not clearly native in any of them, 
and certainly introduced to several of them.
3. Colonist.
— A weed of cultivated land, by road sides or about 
houses, and seldom found except in places where the ground has 
been adapted for its production and continuance by the operations 
of man ; with a tendency also in some of them to appear on the 
shores, landslips, and in what are called " waste places." Hanun- 
culus arveiisis, Papca-er duhium, Thlaspi arvense, Centaurea Cyanus, 
Alopecurus agrestis are weeds of cultivated land, and would 
perhaps disappear if plough and spade ceased their work.
Several 
Chenopodia, Mercurialis annua, Rwnex pulcher, Lepidium rudemle; 
Asperugo procumbens, and others constitute connecting links be- 
tween the Colonists and Denizens, found chiefly by road sides, 
rubbish heaps, dunghills, and near the sea.
63 INTEODUCTION.
4. Alien species are those certainly or very probably of foreign 
origin ; though several placed in this category are now well 
established amid the indigenous flora of this island ; others less 
perfectly so.
5. Casual species are chance stragglers from culti- 
vation ; those occasionally imported and sown with agricultural 
seeds ; those introduced among wool, oil-seeds, or other mer- 
chandize ; foreign plants found on ballast heaps deposited from 
ships ; and generally such alien species as are most uncertain in 
place or persistence.
7. Explanations of the Forwdla.
In treating various questions of phyto-geography, and in forming 
comparative tables and lists for illustration, it is found convenient 
that the distribution of each and every species in a flora should be 
shown under some uniform plan or method, all treated alike.
Besides its more direct uses, such an uniformity of treatment has 
the considerable incidental recommendation of being easily read 
and understood by foreigners, whose knowledge of our language 
may be too limited for easily following a more varied diction.
And 
strict condensation of many details being an object especially 
sought to be attained in the present work, a fixed formula has.
been adopted, which will be found to express much within a 
compass comparatively short ; showing the distribution of each 
species under various aspects, and in various relations to the 
physical geography of Britain ; as well as tracing its area or 
geographic extension over many other countries.
Allowing seven hues to each, it is found that four species can be 
conveniently got on a page, without the awkwardness of disjoining 
the lines relating to the same species, by the necessity of carrying 
some of them over to a succeeding page.
Four of these lines will 
suffice for a condensed summary of distribution within Britain 
itself ; leaving three lines available for tracing out the geographic 
area beyond Britain, and in a manner which will exhibit the 
negative equally as the positive facts of distribution elsewhere ; 
a part of the inquiry far too much neglected by Authors who 
VII.
FORMULA EXPLAINED.
63 
profess to show the outside extension of the species treated in their 
Floras; — a good practice in itself, lately adopted by several 
botanists, but in this country almost exclusively in the ' Hand- 
book' by Mr. Bentham.
The Natives, Denizens, Colonists, as explained on pages 60— 
61, are treated under the formula.
Aliens and Casuals will be 
subsequently treated in a general commentary; as also several 
segregate species, the distribution of which is yet too imperfectly 
ascertained, to allow of the formula being adhered to for them, 
taken apart from each other.
Their localities having been 
recorded usually under the name formerly applied to them col- 
lectively as an unit, it remains at present too often impossible to 
distinguish which one of two or more segregates was observed in 
the places indicated ; fresh examination and corrected records 
being now required, in order to remove the uncertainty.
It is by 
no means always the separated or new-named segregate, whose 
distribution is the more difficult to show ; being even more fre- 
quently the remnant of the original aggregate species, which is 
thus uncertain.
The localities ascertained and recorded for the 
recently distinguished segregate, will often be found only incom- 
plete or insufficient, not uncertain or erroneous.
Those on record 
for the older aggregate must usually be uncertain between the 
two, and may be assigned erroneously to either.
By way of 
example, it would be easier now to trace the distribution of the 
segregate species Epilobium ohscurum, than that of the remnant 
Epilobium tetragonimi, from which the former was first separated 
many years ago.
We know exactly what is intended by the 
former of these names, supposing it correctly applied by a botanist 
of the present age ; but we do not know what was intended under 
the latter name in records of past ages, or in present records by 
botanists who stiU use the aggregate name of tetragonum, unless 
accompanied by some explanation that it intends the segregate 
remnant only, and not either or both of the two segregates 
formerly included under the one name.
It is this difficulty which 
prevents the distribution of Epilobium obscurum from being shown 
6-1 INTEODUCTION.
by the formula ; namely, because the other half of the aggregate 
cannot also be so shown apart.
The names and numbers of the plants will correspond with those 
used in the ' London Catalogue of British Plants,' sixth edition, 
published iii 1867, which thus becomes an arranged Index to the 
present volume.
The nos.
will not be found to run quite regu- 
larly ; and less so in this volume than in the Catalogue itself.
Plants peculiar to Ireland or the Channel Islands are enumerated 
in the Catalogue, as also various Alien species and some segre- 
gates, which must here be omitted from the regular series.
Hence, 
the omission of their appropriate nos.
in this volume.
Moreover, 
since the first edition of the London Catalogue was printed, 
various changes have been made in it, in order to adapt each 
successive edition to the actual knowledge and views of British 
botany at its date ; and these changes necessitated a doubling or 
repetition of some of the nos.
and a transfer of others ; so that the 
numeration of the Catalogue itself has ceased to be quite regular.
As the same Catalogue was followed in the original Cybele Britan- 
nica, the several volumes of that work corresponding with the 
successive editions of the Catalogue, the sequence of names will 
stiU be nearly the same in the present Compendium, and usually 
also the same nos.
will precede them.
This co-relatiou of 
Cybele and Catalogue was one among the several cogent reasons 
for continuing the original numeration of the latter through sis 
editions ; it being found altogether far more convenient to alter a 
few nos.
in each edition, than to have six editions differently 
numbered throughout ; which must otherwise unavoidably have 
been the case with respect to all nos.
after the first changes, which 
would each time have occurred almost at the beginning of the list, 
in the genera Thalictrum and Ranunculus.
No species is admitted into the series unless the Author has 
actually seen a specimen alleged on good grounds to be of British 
origin.
So many errors have got into our botanical literature, and 
have been transferred from book to book, as merely false names or 
otherwise incorrect reports, that some such rule for non-admittance 
seems to have become highly dcbirable.
And after his many years 
VII.
FORMULA EXPLAINED.
65 
of experience, there can be only very few known British plants 
which he has not seen living or dried.
All such plants or names, 
however, will have a brief notice in the latter portion of this work.
The records of locahties in local guide-books, county-histories, and 
such-like publications, are usually altogether ignored ; unless in 
those cases where they have been already adopted into some work 
expressly botanical ; an adoption unfortunately far too frequent, and 
giving permanence to many errors.
In such cases, the usual 
ordeal for acceptance or distrust is applied to them here ; hence 
the rejection of many plants adopted into Eavenshaw's Devon 
Flora, Balfour's Edinburgh Flora, etc., on bad authority or no 
authority.
The original series of the Phytologist has been care- 
fully consulted throughout, and has been found highly serviceable 
in its numerous facts, although not free from occasional errors by 
correspondents.
But the " New Series " of that periodical, under 
its incompetent editorship, and largely contributed to by ignorant 
pretenders in botany, has been wholly ignored, as standing too 
far below the grade of scientific reliability.
The statements of 
some few individual botanists and collectors are also disregarded, 
through grave distrust of their good faith or their botanical know- 
ledge.
If anything else has been overlooked, which ought to 
have altered the fiUing in of the formula under any species, it 
may be attributed to the errors or oversights which must be 
unavoidable in a work involving in its preparation the coUeotion 
and examination of thousands upon thousands of special details ; 
often very petty details, if looked at singly and separately, not in 
their collective bearings.
The First line of the Formula traces the area of the plant 
within Britain, from south to north, by citing the nos.
of those 
provinces, as explained on pages 8 to 5, in which it has been 
reported to occur.
The enclosure by crescent curves ( ) dis- 
tinguishes the provinces into which the species is known or 
suspected to have been introduced through human agency, 
although it may be indisputably native in other provinces.
In various cases of plants being fairly accounted indigenous in 
K 
66 INTRODUCTION.
some of the more southerly provinces, while they arc thought to 
have been introductions from thence into the more northerly 
provinces, it is found impossible to decide with confidence where- 
about the line of distinction should be drawn.
Under such 
circumstances the enclosed nos.
must be somewhat arbitrarily 
apportioned ; and perhaps this sort of optional separation may have 
been made unduly frequent at the border line which runs between 
the English and Scottish provinces, or between the Lowland and 
Highland provinces.
The angular enclosures [ ] are used for 
provinces, in regard to which there is so much distrust that it 
seems better to reject them until reported anew on some reliable 
authority.
Errors of name, mistakes about the localities, tem- 
porary casuals and planted examples recorded as if natives, and 
generally any circumstances which lead to an expectation that the 
plant will not long continue to be found in the province, if it ever 
really were seen there, may warrant the use of the angular 
enclosures ; which may thus be construed to mean either decided 
or only doubting rejection.
Little linear marks " - - " indicate 
absence from the province, usually real, occasionally perhaps only 
the want of record.
In the latter part of the line one of the three 
words before explained on pages 60 to 68 is introduced, with any 
brief remark added, to show whether the plant is deemed Native, 
or Denizen, or Colonist in this country.
The Second line gives the range of latitude within Britain by 
the even parallels south and north of the extreme known localities ; 
that is, all the true locahties ascertained for the species under 
consideration, fall between the two mathematical lines of latitude 
cited, although the area of the plant may not perhaps reach close 
up to either line.
The extreme south-west of Cormvall is slightly 
below the fiftieth line of latitude ; so that some plants might have 
been given as " 49 — ," by the rule specified, though it appeared 
not worth while to go below " 50 — " for the few of them so on 
record.
T'ollowing the indications of latitude, the names of the 
most southern and most northern counties known for the plant 
are also mentioned.
For native species the lines and counties are 
to be understood as indicating only the seemingly native localities, 
VII.
FORMULA EXPLAINED.
67 
exclusive of others to which they may have been extended by 
human agency.
If these latter are named, they are enclosed in 
the same manner as the provincial nos.
in the line above.
For 
denizens and colonists less strictness in this respect is unavoidable; 
none of their localities of course being clear from some degree 
of doubt or distrust ; and thus only the most distrusted are left 
out or enclosed.
The counties in which these plants become more 
evidently aliens or casuals, for instance, ai-e either not taken into 
account at all, or else, are enclosed like the provincial nos.
Usually, the citations of counties are so made as to include both 
the western and eastern sides of the island, so as to indicate also 
the longitude.
Thus, " Cornwall, Wight, Kent," will not only 
show an area extending into the most southern counties, but will 
serve also to show an intermediate along widi an extreme westerly 
and easterly extension.
It has been found not so easy to adhere 
closely to this rule in citing counties for the northern limits ; 
although it is usually acted upon in cases where those limits 
would not appear to be unduly contracted by so doing.
Botanists 
wiU scarcely require to be reminded, that the discovery of a new 
locality beyond the limitary lines specified, would in general be a 
more important fact in topographical botany, than would be the 
discovery of another locality within the limits specified.
Besides, 
they may hold with some approach to certainty, that localities 
beyond the indicated limits truly are new additions to our reliable 
records, not simply repetitions of the old facts.
The Third line indicates the zonal and altitudinal distribution.
The Ascending or climatic zones in which the plant occura, are 
fii-st shown by citing their corresponding nos.
The explanations 
about these zones were given on psiges 14 to HI.
Secondly, such 
notices of the range of altitude are added as can be compressed 
into the other portion of the line.
The relation of plants to 
elevation was treated in full in the original Cybele Biitannica ; 
and two lines of the formula there used were devoted to the indi- 
cations of upper and lower Hmits.
The subject is too complex to 
permit of full and precise indications within the space that can be 
allotted to it in this Compendium.
The citation of the zonal 
68 INTRODUCTION.
range will partly compensate for the brevity, more especially in 
reference to the lower limits which are seldom given.
With com- 
paratively few exceptions, less than a hundred, all the plants 
treated occur at or near the coast-level in some part of the island ; 
the greater, number of them being found on the low open country 
of the southern counties, away from hills of any considerable 
elevation.
Many of these also ascend the acclivities of the 
northern and western mountains, though to widely unequal 
heights, as previously explained on pages 11 to 13.
All the 
species indicated as occurring in the first zone, are found at a 
trifling altitude in South Britain, and far the greater number of 
them at or near the coast-level, — say, between the level of the sea 
and one hundred yards above it ; and thus " zone 1 " is almost 
equivalent with the words " descending nearly or quite to the 
coast-level in latitude 50 — 53." Of those which commence in the 
second zone, also, nearly all descend to the like low level in Mid 
Britain ; though of course not so low in South Britain, Titherwise 
they would have been assigned to the first zone.
Some few of 
those indicated to find their lowest climatal limit in the third 
zone, have not been recorded so low as the coast-level anywhere in 
Britain ; for instance Luzula spicata and Sibhaldla procumbens.
But most of them do descend nearly or quite to the coast-level in 
North Britain, although rarely found so low even there.
Thus, for 
the most part, it will suffice to give indications of upper limits only ; 
making occasional exceptions to this rule, when some indications 
of lower limits may seem specially desirable.
The figures (which 
denote the highest observed localities in yards of three English 
feet) are primarily divided into three sets, respectively belonging to 
North Britain, to Mid Britain, and to South Britain ; the last 
division being seldom mentioned, and then usually by naming 
instead some subordinate province or county, as North "Wales or 
Devon.
For those plants which rise to the greatest heights, only 
North Britain will need to be mentioned ; the hills of that division 
greatly exceeding those of Mid Britain in altitude.
The first 
numeral figure will indicate the highest station noted, whether by 
measurement or by estimation ; other heights being added thereto, 
VII.
FOEJIULA EXPLAINED.
69 
as space may admit or records supply them.
The ranges of High- 
land mountains, situate about the fifty-seventh line of latitude, 
and which culminate in Ben Nevis (1458 yards or 4374 feet) and 
Ben-na-muick-dhu (1440 yards or 4320 feet), have supplied most 
of the specified altitudes for North Britain.
The most carefully 
made measurements have been taken on these mountains ; and in 
general, owing to the greater elevation and extent of that mountain 
tract, it is the one best adapted for showing the heights attained 
by plants in this island.
But doubtless many of the species 
could exist at a considerably higher elevation in the latitude of 
North Britain, if its hUls were so much higher as to afford 
suitable situations for them above their actual limits.
For most 
of the plants which fail to reach the uppermost zone, some indi- 
cations of altitudes attained in Mid Britain are added.
These are 
mostly re-copied from a list given in the fourth volume of the 
Cybele Britannioa, supplemented by the statements of altitude 
since printed in Mr. J.
G. Baker's excellent work bearing the title 
of " North Yorkshire — Studies of its Botany, Geology, Chmate 
and Physical Geography." For many of the species which are 
found only in the three lower zones, the actual upper limits are un- 
ascertained, and can seldom be a matter of much interest.
Unless 
known to rise above 150 yards from the sea-level, their altitudinal 
position may be sufBciently expressed in general terms.
The 
words " Low grounds " will thus be understood to express places 
of any height between the coast-level and 150 yards or nearly 500 
feet; the words "Coast" or "Coast-level" being used for jilants 
known or supposed to grow considerably lower than 100 yards.
" Littoral " plants are those of the sea shore and its immediate 
vicinity ; mostly restricted thereto, as the Euphorbia Peplis and 
Atnplex arenaria; occasionally found inland likewise, at a low 
elevation, as the Asplenium marinum and Erodium maritimum, 
notwithstanding their sea-side names ; and some of them rising to 
or reappearing high upon the mountains, as the Armeria maritima 
and Silene maritima.
These terms are seldom introduced, how- 
ever, unless to intimate that no higher elevation has been ascer- 
tained ; although sometimes used with intent to show a descent to 
70 INTEODUCTION.
the lower situations, as in the case of arctic species which grow on 
coast rocks occasionally.
The Fourth line is somewhat miscellaneous in its subjects.
It 
begins with a " Census " of the species, founded upon the pro- 
vincial and sub-provincial, the comital and vice-comital sections 
before explained on pages 8 to 10.
The three nos.
set after that 
word show the number of provinces, of sub-provinces, and of 
counties (including vice-counties therewith) ascertained for the 
plant under treatment ; usually excluding all those in which it is 
deemed an alien only, as well as any others in which its existence 
is not sufficiently authenticated.
Such a census will thus un- 
avoidably fluctuate in respect of its exact numbers, according to 
fluctuations in knowledge or belief.
New localities may raise the 
figures, by adding counties or provinces to those previously ascer- 
tained ; while occasionally the figures may be reduced lower, either 
through detection of errors or by increased reasons for distrusting 
records of localities suspected to be erroneous.
For comparison it 
has appeared desirable to introduce here a Census for Ireland 
also; which is now made available by the publication of Moore 
and More's Cybele Hibernioa, — a very serviceable addition to the 
geographic botany   of the British Isles.
These Authors divide 
Ireland into twelve " Districts,'' which may be held to correspond 
with the eighteen provinces of this present volume.
The numeral 
figure set after the name of " Ireland " will show the number of 
Irish districts in which the species is recorded by the Authors named.
Details must of course be sought in the Cybele Hibernica itself.
The remainder of line fourth is devoted to the ' Type of Distri- 
bution,' in accordance with the expositions before given on pages 
33 to S3.
Where combinations are used, they will be understood 
to express something intermediate between two types, — a shading 
off from one to the other.
Thus, " British-english type " wUl 
intend that the species is widely distributed over Britain ; but that 
its lessened frequency or comparatively early termination in Scot- 
land, gives to it also somewhat the character of the English type 
of distribution.
'J'hc Fifth lino commences an outline of the area or extcu&iou of 
VII.
FOUMULA EXPLAINED.
71 
the species outside of Britain ; shown in this and the two 
succeeding lines, simply by naming a series of habitats in the 
extra-tropical portion of tlie Northern Hemisphere ; more particu- 
larly in Europe and adjacent portions of Asia and Africa.
This 
fifth line relates to Europe only, and is exclusive of Russia which 
comes under line sixth.
The plant is here traced over Europe by 
indicating its reKirded presence in fourteen countries of South and 
West Europe ; absence therefrom being likewise indicated by short 
marks " - - " the same as used for vacant provinces in line first.
As vrith the British provinces, so here with European countries, 
the comparative predominance of marks or abbreviated names in 
the line, will give at a glance the more or less general distribution 
of the plant, independently of the special details.
And as the 
enumeration runs from South to North, the shortened lines will 
indicate a restricted northern extension.
For convenience of using 
familiar names, those of the political and national divisions of 
Europe wiU mostly be adhered to, although not always repre- 
senting the sections most suitable for phyto-geography.
And in 
order to get a suflicient series of these names within the length of 
a single line, each name is abbreviated to its first three letters ; 
initial capitals being dispensed with.
Some of the abbreviated 
names must stand for more than a single political territory, and 
others for portions only of an empire or kingdom.
Spain (spa) 
will include Portugal also ; and this name may be omitted 
occasionally through lack of the needful information about the 
plants of the Spanish peninsula ; no completed or general list of 
its plants being yet in print.
Italy (ita) extends from Sicily to 
the southern sides of the Alps bordering Piedmont and Lombardy; 
and it may be held to include also the islands situated between 
the two peninsulas of Italy and Spain.
Turkey (tur) must still 
cover modern Greece also, together with some adjacent portions of 
Asia minor, included in the Prodromus Florm Gi-mca, by Sib- 
thorpe and Smith.
Austria (aus) is the heterogeneous empire 
so named, extending from Dalmatia to Galicia, from Tyrol to 
Transylvania; and in its flora but imperfectly separable from 
Germany and Italy.
Germany (ger) must be extended south- 
73 INTEODUCTION.
ward to take in Switzerland also ; its north-west angle being taken 
along with another section, as explained underneath.
France is 
the more compact country so named, exclusive of the quasi-italian 
isle of Corsica ; and since it must thus share the Alps with Italy, 
Austria, and Germany as here taken, the " Alpine plants " are so 
made to belong alike to the floras of western, middle and southern 
Europe ; as indeed many of them truly do belong by being 
repeated on the Pyrenees and Carpathians, and farther southward 
on the Sierras of Spain, and some even on the lower hills of Italy 
and Turkey.
Channel (cha) is intended to express a com- 
paratively narrow section of north-west France, bordering upon 
the English Channel, between Britany and Belgium.
As the 
citations are here mostly made from Brebisson's Flore de la 
Normandie the abbreviation ' nor ' might have been more appro- 
priate for this northerly portion of France, had it not been 
required for Norway instead.
Many of the plants equally belong 
to the ' Channel Isles ' still under the English Crown, and so far 
the name suits fitly enough ; although it is to be understood that 
not all of them occur there.
Netherlands (net) is an old name 
revived to include Belgium and Holland ; and it must be so far 
extended as to cover Hanover and other small territories of North- 
west Germany, completing the space between France and Den- 
mark.
N.B. These three comparatively small tracts are thus 
specialized in order to indicate the existence of our English 
species on the lands fronting opposite the southern and eastern 
coasts of Britain, and believed to have been united therewith 
formerly, as continuous land without intervening sea.
As a xi:lwle 
the flora of this country sufficiently accords with the belief of such 
a former land continuity, while there is now little or nothing 
special on the two coast lines, insular and continental, to be 
adduced as botanical evidence of that continuity.
Not only by 
these three sections, but throughout the three lines also, the 
habitats have been selected and arranged in order to relate to 
Britain as a quasi-centre, — to show where the species extend in 
neighbouring countries, not to trace them equally over the earth, 
independently of a fixed starting point.
Gothland (got) is a 
VII.
FORMULA EXPLAINED.
7-3 
name taken from the Summa VetjetahiUum Scandinavia;, by Fries, 
to express the southern portion of Sweden, — say, southward of 
latitude 59 or 60.
Norway (nor) is the country usually so 
designated ; the most northerly portions of which will come 
under the abbreviations for Lapland and Finmark, presently to be 
mentioned.
Sweden (swe) will here be restricted to the northern 
latitudes, that is, exclusive of Gothland above mentioned.
Lap- 
land (lap) is the still more northerly part of the long Scandinavian 
peninsula ; being partly Norwegian, partly Swedish, partly Russian.
Finmark (fin) is the most northern portion of Norwegian Lapland, 
about latitude 69 — 71 ; the less northern portion being known as 
Nordland.
Finmark is thus specially brought into the series, in 
order to give that far northerly latitude for such Britislj species as 
are known to grow there.
The lists given by Professeur C.
Martins, in his highly valuable Voyage Botanique, have proved an 
essential assistance in this respect ; though other authorities have 
likewise been consulted, for instance, a collection of plants riiade 
in Finmark by Dr. Lund.
The Si.Tth line traces the distribution eastward from Europe ; 
commencing with Eussia, and passing thence into Asia.
In Lede- 
bour's Flora Rossica the great country of Russia-in Europe is 
distinguished into four latitudinal zones or wide belts, with two 
added sections ; — 1 Arctic, to the northward of the arctic circle ; — 
2 Northern, thence to latitude 60 ; — 3 Middle, between latitudes 
60 — 50, or thereabouts; — 4 Southern, to the southward of lati- 
tude 50; — also, 5 Crimea; — 6 the Caucasian provinces, more 
Asiatic than European.
These sis figures or some of them follow 
the name of Russia at the beginning of line sixth ; being reversed 
in the order of their sequence, because it is found more con- 
venient, and more in accord with the divisions of Europe in 
the preceding Mne, to trace the extension of the plant from south 
to north.
West-asia, or simply Asia, will apply to the wide extent 
of countries southward from Caucasus, eastward from the Mediter- 
ranean sea to India.
Occasionally, more special habitats will be 
named, but without meaning that the plant is found only there, 
and not elsewhere in West Asia.
North India or India will be 
74 INTEODUCTIONT.
considered to include Affghanistan and Belookistan, together vdth 
the Himalaya Mountains ; the latter sometimes specially named 
instead of the wider name of India.
Unfortunately, the Flora 
Indica by Drs. Hooker and Thompson, and the almost equally 
important Flora Orientalis by Boissier, are yet only in their first 
volume, perhaps towards half a dozen which may be required to 
complete those valuable works on the same scale as volumes first.
And the botanical data for West Asia and India are otherwise 
widely scattered, and sparingly within reach of the present writer.
Siberia is the vast Russian territory stretching across Northern 
Asia, from the Ural Mountains to the Sea of Ochotz.
The Seventh line is more miscellaneous or inclusive than either 
of the two preceding lines.
North Africa with some of its islands 
will come into the first portion of the line.
For this division the 
Algerian Flore and Cntalogiie of Munby will be preferentially 
relied upon ; ' Algeria ' being thus often named to represent North 
Africa, with or without a second habitat added.
The Canaries 
must be understood to include Madeira and its islets, sometimes 
recognized by geographers as a second and distinct small group ; 
but too many subdivisions would here prove inconvenient and 
unnecessary.
The Azores, however, are kept distinct ; being in 
the latitude of South Europe, and lying wide apart from the 
Canaries and Madeiras.
— The remainder of line seventh will be 
devoted to America and the insular lands between America and 
Scandinavia.
The British Isles would be the intermediate stage 
between the Southern and Northern Isles, the African and Sub- 
arctic.
The name of America will be taken to include all the 
United States and British territories eastward from the Rocky 
Mountains.
The name of Columbia will be taken to represent all 
Western America, from the Aleutian Isles to the Rocky Moun- 
tains, southward to the borders of Me.xico, northward to the shores 
of the Arctic Ocean through Behring's Straits.
Greenland, Ice- 
land, Faroe are named apart, abbreviated or otherwise aocordincf 
to space in the hue.
And in this, as in either of the two pre- 
ceding lines, any space left on account of much restricted distri- 
bution, will occasionally be utilized by naming other habitats, or 
Vn. FOEMULA EXPLAINED.
75 
by exiDlanations reducible to words sufiiciently few.
It is not 
intended by this juxta-position of the three, to connect Faroe and 
Iceland as American Islands, equally with Greenland.
The two 
former are usually held by geographers to belong to Europe ; and 
they are European by their floras.
This is not quite the case 
with Greenland.
An elaborate attempt has been made lately, to 
show that the flora of Greenland is Scandinavian, not American ; 
also, that there is something very peculiar in it, at variance with 
the present climate and geographical position of Greenland itself.
After full consideration of these views, and of the facts and 
arguments by which they are supposed to be proved, the writer of 
this volume must entirely dissent from them ; believing the views 
to be unsound in themselves, and looking upon the arguments 
as curiously weak and inconclusive.
Nevertheless, it must be 
admitted, they were brought before the scientific public on very 
high authority ; whUe they have challenged denial by a bold con- 
fidence of assertion, barely short of authoritative dogmatism.
The flora of Greenland appears to correspond remarkably well 
with the present climate and surface character of that gelid land, 
and with its uitermediate position between Europe and America, 
more approximate to the latter.
By far the greater number of the 
Greenland plants are species common to Europe and America; 
some few being European only ; some few being American only.
If an European botanist starts from the one-sided notion of the 
species common to Greenland and Europe being " Scandinavian 
giants'' specially, because found also in that part of Europe, he 
can of course make out a seemingly close affinity between the 
plants of Greenland and Scandinavia.
On the other hand, if an 
American botanist as correctly calls most of them " American 
plants,'' because found elsewhere in America, he may then make 
out a like close floral relation between Greenland and America ; 
that is, by adding to the species found on both sides of the North 
Atlantic, those also which occur only on the American side ; thus 
leaving only a score or so to be designated Europeans.
On either 
side, this would simply be a mode of reasoning falsely or fal- 
laciously, — the usual style and manner of ratiocination performed 
76 
INTRODUCTION.
by English writers on questions in phyto-geography.
On the 
>Yhole, after eliminating from the Greenland list all the migratory 
weeds and other plants likely carried thither by human agency, 
Greenland may be found to possess a slight excess of American 
species and subspecific varieties ; though its floral balance is 
nearly even between the two sides of the Atlantic.
And the flora 
of arctic and boreal Europe being more exactly known, than is the 
flora of the corresponding latitude or climate in America, addi- 
tional identities are more likely to come from the latter side.
Of 
course, so far as British species alone are concerned, Greenland 
might be treated as an outlier of Europe, wanting some of the 
plants which extend westward to Iceland or Faroe, with milder 
climates.
The non-European plants found in Greenland and 
America, are non-British also.
An attempt was first made to show the distribution of our 
native plants outside Britain, by stating their limits in latitude 
and longitude, expressed in numerals or the degrees of mathe- 
matical geography ; but the result was found unsatisfactory, and 
was abandoned for the simpler and more intelligible plan of 
naming habitats.
Still, the habitats themselves have been so 
selected and arranged that they do indirectly express ranges of 
latitude with considerable accuracy.
For instance, in the series of 
names " Channel, Netherlands, Denmark, Gothland, Norway, 
Sweden, Lapland, Finmark," the range or limit of latitude north- 
ward is approximately indicated.
At whichever name in the series 
the northern extension is arrested, the latitudinal limit may be 
inferred with a near approach to exactness.
These three lines will bring together, in the form of habitats or 
names of countries, a considerable amount of information towards 
showing the areas and ranges of British plants beyond the small 
island of Britain itself, although not carried into the intertropical 
and austral lands.
Still, the Author requests his Readers clearly 
to understand, that the epitomized sketch of external distribution 
cannot pretend to be complete in itself, or to bo free from errors 
and oversights.
It is impossible to sift such indii-ations of widened 
VII.
FORMULA EXPLAINED.
77 
area, so as to separate the true and the false with anything like 
the same care and confidence given to the sifted records of 
localities within our own island.
Many errors likely exist in the 
numerous I'loras and other writings consulted, without an English- 
man being able to detect and correct all their errors ; — any more, 
for instance, than a Foreigner would be able to see and amend all 
the many errors about plants and their places, which are still to 
be found within our home books on the botany of Britain ; and 
which are repeatedly cited by the continental botanists as if they 
were true and unquestioned facts ; — even still so cited and re- 
peated by various English botanists themselves.
It is also to be kept in recollection, in attempting to trace 
species-distribution over distant lands, that the geographical inves- 
tigation becomes greatly entangled with questions and opinions 
about the technical distinctness of the plant-species themselves ; 
with questions as to what foreign forms ought to be united 
with, or to be kept separated from, the special forms known in 
Britain, or in Britain and Europe.
This is the case, for example, 
with various East-Asian and American plants ; their position 
under the names of European species depending upon the indi- 
vidual opinions of botanists ; some holding them entitled to dis- 
tinctive names, as species ; others placing them as varieties under 
single specific names.
Theories about centres of distribution, 
about migrations and modifications of species, also inconveniently 
interfere with good judgment.
Such theories cause alleged facts 
to be recorded in a misleading manner, or to be so tabulated as to 
become unavailable for any use beyond the one purpose of making 
out a seeming evidence in support of some foregone conclusion or 
fanciful hypothesis ; perhaps only such an one as would imme- 
diately fell before a fair and plain record of the simple facts 
themselves.
Enghsh writers on phyto-geography have sinned 
gi-eatly against a logical philosophy in this wise ; almost all of 
them treating their facts unequally and one-sidedly; the sup- 
pressed portion being just those facts which would alter or modify 
the bearings of the others, if all were fully and fairly given alike.
Moreover, aUoged similarities between plants are sometimes 
78 
INTRODUCTION.
only non-detected differences ; often so, likely, with general sys- 
tematists whose view seeks to take in the flora of the whole 
globe ; and who thus cannot compete on equal terms with the local 
botanists, engaged in minutely examining the species of very 
limited areas.
Curious examples of this non-appreciation of real 
differences might be adduced, by citing recent combinations and 
severances widely at variance with those which a more careful 
and continued observation of the living plants ought to suggest.
Would it not be held highly absurd in a gardener, for instance, to 
maintain that the Mack and red currants are simply varieties of 
the same single species, while the white currant is distinct from 
both?
Or, equally injudicious in a botanist to combine the 
cherry and hullace together as one species, keeping the she 
apart as a distinct species ?
And yet, it may be asserted 
confidently that the writings of our first-rate systematists show 
severances and unions quite as outrageous as these, only relating 
to plants of smaller size and less familiarity, when they write 
Local Floras or make out species-lists in support of their phyto- 
geographical theories.
Here is one of the many difficulties and 
error-traps for those who endeavour to trace out the geographic 
areas of species ; — the comprehensive knowledge of the general 
botanist is not sufficiently precise ; — the precise knowledge of the 
local botanist is not sufficiently comprehensive.
II.
SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES.
1. Clematis Vitalba, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 (7 8 9 10 11) - - [14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Pembroke, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 6 17 43.
(Ireland 4.) English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
" Holstein." 
Russia 6 - 4.
West Asia.
Syria, etc.
Barbary ; Lecoq geogr.
bot.
2. Thalictrum alpinum, Linn.
Provinces 7 - - 10 11 12 13 - 15 10 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Carnarvon, York.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
North Britain — 1300 yards.
Census 9 15 23.
Ireland 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - 3 1 .
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
3. Thalictrum minus, Auct.
Prov.
1 - 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Herts, Suffolk.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
Lakes to 600 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 17 30 50.
Ireland 9.
Scottish-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Finmark ?
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West Asia.
India.
Siberia.
— Greenland.
Columbia ?
T. saxatile, in Algeria.
80 1.
EANUNCULACE.'E.
4. Thalictruin flavum, Liun.
Pi-ovinoes 1 2 3 4 5 ?
7 8 9 10 11 13 13 U 15 16 [17].
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Devon ?
Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Fife.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds only.
Census 15 24 53.
Ireland 10.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6-4331.
Siberia.
Kamschatka.
Algeria.
N.B. An aggregate species.
5. Anemone Pulsatilla, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Gloucester, Berks, Herts, Essex.
— N.W. York.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 6 9 16.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor svfe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— N.B. Turkey doubtful.
" In agro Byzantino ;" Sibth.
prodr.
6. Anemone nemorosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17, continuously.
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland ; Oliver !
Zones 1 3 3 4 5.
Highlands to 960 yards.
England to 850 yards.
Census 17 34 87.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Eussia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
Eooky Mountains.
9. Adonis autumnalis, Linn.
^^p^^t-Goy 
Provinces (1) 3 3 4 (5 - - 8 9 10 -11 - 13 14).
Alien or Colonist.
Lat. 50—53.
Dorset, Kent.
— Somerset ?
Oxford ?
Norfolk ?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Imperfectly established.
Census 3 6 10.
(Ireland 2).
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa - tur aus ger fra cha (net).
Eussia 6 5 4 (3).
West Asia ; Syria, etc.
Algeria.
— (America, certainly introduced.) " Labrador.'' 
1. RANUNCULACE^.
81 
10.
Myosurus minimus, Linu.
Provinces ?9345--891011.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Chester, Northumberland.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
[South Devon ; on old authority.] 
Census 8 17 89.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Syria, Mesopotamia.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
11.
Ranunculus aquatilis, Auot.
Provinces all.
Native.
An aggregate species.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 18 36 90.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia, 
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Col.
11.
Ranunculus " trichophyllus " et " Drouetii," Anglor.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 13 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Devon, Wight, Sussex.
— Edinburgh, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Localities much confused.
Census 11 15 ?
Ireland 6.
English type ?
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia ?
West-asia ; Syria, etc.
India ?
— N.B. Distribution given, as variously recorded.
11.
Ranunculus circinatus, Sibth.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 - - 14 [15].
Native.
Lat. 50— 56.
Devon '?
Dorset, Kent.
— Edinburgh.
Fife?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Localities unsafely recorded.
Census 11 31 38.
Ireland 5.
English-germanic type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia - - - 3.
Siberia.
N.B. Kanunsulus divaricatus, of several Floras.
82 1.
EANUNCULACE^.
11.
Ranunculus fluitans, Liaa.
Provinces 123456789 10 11 --14 [15].
Native.
Lat. 50— 56.
Devon ?
Dorset, Kent.
— Berwick.
Fife?
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Many false localities.
Census 10 23 37.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution, 
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra clia net den.
Russia - - - 3.
" Lithuania, Warsaw, Moscow." 
Algeria.
A segregate hitherto insufficiently recorded.
11.
Ranunculus tripartitus, DeCand.
Provinces 1 2 3 - - 6.
Native.
Rare or overlooked.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Cornwall, Dorset, Hants, Kent, Surrey, Pembroke.
Zone 1.
Coast level, or Low grounds.
Census 4 5 6.
Ireland 0.
English-local type.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net.
Belgium.
— N.B. a western plant only ; but its habitats perhaps imperfectly 
recorded hitherto.
Algeria ?
12.
Ranunculus Lenormandi, Sohultz.
Provinces 1 to 13, and likely farther north.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Northumb.
Zones 13 3.
North Yorkshire to 550 yards; Baker.
Census 13 21 35.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha.
— N.B. Long confused with 'R.
hederaceus ; and habitats thus 
imperfectly on record.
Algeria ?
-^^/•-CLga.
&ey 
13.
Ranunculus hederaceus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Carnarvon to 770 yards, by estimate.
Census 18 36 85.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Norway ?
Russia - - - 3.
Isle of Oesel, Mid Russia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Zoega.
Greenland ; Giesecke.
1. EANUNCULACE*.
83 
14.
Ranunculus Ficaria, Linn.
.?««.
A-^*^"?
Provinces all ?
Native.
Province 16 needs verification.
Lat 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Carnarvon to 800 yards.
Highlands to 300 yards.
Census 18 35 82.
Ireland 12.
British type of distrihution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia ; " Charles Fellowes.'' 
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Columbia ?
15.
Ranunculus Flammula, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
R. reptans in province 15.
Lat. 60—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ; also at 810, etc.
Census 18 38 100.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
" Constantinople.'' 
Algeria.
" Azores." — Faroe.
Greenland.
Amer.
Columbia ?
16.
Ranunculus Lingua, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 15 30 63.
Ireland 11.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita ?
aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
India.
Siberia.
N.B. Likely in Turkey and Asia minor.
18.
Ranunculus auricomus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Any locality in province 16 ?
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 15 30 68.
Ireland 9.
British-engUsh type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Caucasus ?
Faroe.
In America, if R.
affinis united vrith this.
84 1.
EANUNCULACE^.
19.
Ranunculus acris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.-— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 3 3 4 S 6.
Highlands to 1330 yards ; also at 1810, etc.
Census 18 38 100.
Ireland IS.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Southward to Portugal and Sicily.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Mid-asia ; Hooker arc.
distr.
(Madeira).
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Col.
90.
Ranunculus repens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 (5).
Highlands to 910 yards ; also at 850, 830, etc.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Am. Col.
21.
Ranunculus bulbosus, Linn.
Provinces I to 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 68.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Moray.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 510 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 16 33 83.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
(Norway).
Eussia 6-432.
West-asia.
Constantinople.
Persia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
23.
Ranunculus hirsutus, Curtis.
R. Philonotis, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Province 16 needs verification.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Forfar.
Zones 13?
Low grounds.
Sparse or overlooked ?
Census 16 30 58.
Ireland 0.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got nor).
Eussia - 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
1. RANUNCULACE.E. 85 
23.
Ranunculus sceleratus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Hebrides, Eoss.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Census 18 35 85.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 6 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Egypt.
Algeria.
— America.
" South America." 
24.
Ranunculus parviflorus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 11.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Durham.
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds ; sparsely distributed.
Census 11 23 50.
L-eland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha net den.
Eussia - 5.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
23.
Ranunculus arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14.
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Edinburgh.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 26 59.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Eussia 6 5-3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
26.
Caltha palustris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. radicans in province 15.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1160 yards ; also at 1150, etc.
Census 10 38 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
86 1.
EANUNCULACEJE.
27, Trollius europaeus, Linn.
Prov.
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 (18).
Native.
Lat. 51 — 59.
Glamorgan, Worcester, Derby.
— • Sutherl.
(Shetl.) 
Zones - 2 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1050 y.
; also at 1010, 1000, etc.
Census 13 21 60.
Ireland 1 or 2.
Scottish type of distrib.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4331.
— Not in Africa or America.
29.
Helleborus viridis, Linn.
Provinces (1) 3 3 4 5 (6 7) 8 9 10 11 12 (13 14 15).
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Hants, Sussex.
— Westmorel., Durham.
Zones 1 3.
North Yorkshire 50 — 300 yards, native ; Baker.
Census 10 16 30?
(Ireland).
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
— This may be a true native in some of the English counties, 
though frequently an escape from gardens.
30.
Helleborus foetidus, Linn.
Provinces (1) 3 3 4 5 (6 7 8 -) 10 11 (12 13 14 15).
Denizen.
Lat. 60 — 55.
Dorset, Hants, Sussex.
— West York, Durham.
Zones 13?
West Yorkshire, above 200 yards ; Tatham.
Census 6 14 25 ?
(Ireland).
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net.
— The same remark may be repeated with this second species 
also, perhaps more dubiously native.
31.
Aquilegia vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 8 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 80 — 66.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumfries, Durham.
Zones 12?
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 13 33 49.
Ireland 4 (and 3).
English-intermed.
type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den) got nor swe.
Russia 6-43.
India.
Siberia.
Caucasus, var.
caucasica.
Canaries.
Azores ; but not clearly indigenous there.
1. RANUNCULACEa:.
— 1.* BEEBEBACEjE.
87 
33.
Delphinium Ajacis, Keich.
Provinces (1 2 3) 4 (5 6 - 8 9 10 11) - - [14].
Alien or Colonist.
Lat. 52 — 53.
Cambridge, Norfolk, etc., but scarcely establisbed.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; usually as an alien or casual.
Census 13 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra (cha - den).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
(Siberia).
Algeria.
Egypt.
(Canaries.
Azores.) 
33.
Aconitum Napellus, Linn.
Provinces 1 (3 3 4) 5 6 7 - - (10 11 13 14 16 - 17).
Denizen ?
Lat. 51 — 53.
Somerset, Monmouth, Glamorg., Heref., Denbigh.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; usually as an alien or casual.
Census 4 6 7.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Russia 6.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Columbia ; but a variety or sub-species there.
34.
Actsea spicata, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] 10 ?
12 - - [15].
Native ?
Lat. 53— 54 or 55.
E. and W.
Yorkshire.
Durham?
Cumb.
? 
Zones - 3 3.
Yorkshire 50 — 350 yards ; Baker.
Census 3 3 6.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate or local type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— America ; but the species perhaps distinct from our plant.
35.
Berberis vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 (11 12 13 14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Difficult to assign its.
native hmits.
Zones 1 2.
Yorkshire to 200 yards, " native;" Baker.
Census 10 20 30 ?
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den) got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Persia.
— (America, but probably introduced).
88 2.
NYMPH^ACEiE.
— 3.
PAPAVEEACEiE.
36.
Nymphsea alba, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—01.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lake province to 350 yards.
Census 18 33 65.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Columbia.
37.
Nuphar lutea, Smith.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
(Elgin, introduced).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall?
Devon, Kent.
— Isla, Aberdeen.
Zones 12?
Humber to 350 or 300 yards.
Census 16 31 69.
Ireland 12.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-432].
West-asia.
Mid-asia.
Siberia.
— America?
Columbia.
"Wooded country ;" Dr. Richardson.
38.
Nuphar pumila, DeCand.
S'ze-f^-a^^&oj 
Provinces - - - [4 5 - - 8 - - 11 13] - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Argyle, Perth, Kincardine, Moray.
Zones ?
3. Some uncertainty about the species in England.
Census 2 4 4.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra - net (den got) nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 3 1.
Siberia.
— America ?
39.
Papaver hybridum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 (9 10) 11.
Colonist.
Lat. 60 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Carnarvon, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; chiefly the calcareous soils.
Census 8 17 30.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
India.
Syria.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
3. PAPAVERACE^.
89 
40.
Papaver Argemone, Linn.
Provinces all; except 13 without record?
Colonist.
Lat. SO— 58.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— " Hebrides," Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds ; especially the arenaceous.
Census 17 33 74.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Caucasus to Palestine.
Algeria.
N.B. Is it a casual only in provinces 17, 18 ?
41.
Papaver dubium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
Lat. 60—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 38 85.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
42.
Papaver Rhoeas, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 -   (18).
Colonist.
Lat. 50—57.
CornwaU, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar.
(Shetland).
Zones 1 3 (3).
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 15 39 73.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
44.
Meconopsis cambrica, Vig.
Provinces 1 6 7 - (9) 10 - 13 (13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall?
Devon, Somerset.
— Westmorel., York.
Zones 12 3 4.
Carnarvonshire to 700 yards.
Census 5 7 15.
Ireland 7.
Atlantic-intermediate type.
Europe spa - fra cha.
— N.B. The area of this plant is restricted to Western Europe, 
extending from England to the Pyrenees.
00 3.
PAPAVEBACE^.
— 3*.
FUMARIACE^.
45.
Ciielidonium majus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 (18 1 6).
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lowlands.
Zones 1 2 (3).
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 14 28 70.
(Ireland 11).
English-british type.
Europe aU, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Persia.
" Canaries." (Azores).
— (America).
46.
Glaucium luteum, Scop.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 - (18).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Kincardine.
Zones 1 2 (3).
(One locality recorded for Shetland).
Census 18 24 46.
Ireland 6.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den nor.
Eussia 6 5 4.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
48.
Corydalis clavicnlata, DeCand.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 88.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cantire, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Devon to 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 30 64.
Ireland 2.
British-atlantic type.
Europe spa - - - ger fra cha net den.
— This otherwise western plant is reported to occur also in Sicily 
and Greece ; correctly so reported ?
50.
Fumaria capreolata, Auct.
Provinces aU.
Colonist.
Various segregates included.
Lat. 80—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 18 35 77.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia?
West-asia.
Syria, etc.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
91 
51.
Pumaria officinalis, Linu.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
Lat. 60— 6J.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 18 36 88.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Kussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Syria, etc.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
"Azores." — (America).
52.
Fumaria micrantha, Lag.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - - 11 - - 14 15 - - [18].
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— Forfar, Elgin.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds ; sparsely distributed.
Census 8 15 21.
Ireland?
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha.
" Hamburg." 
Russia?
West-asia.
India.
Persia.
Syria.
Egypt.
Azores ; Drouet flore.
53.
Fumaria parviflora, Lam.
Provinces - [2] 3 4 10 - - - 14 15 - - [18].
Colonist.
Lat. 51—58.
[Dorset?] Kent, Surrey.
— Perth, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 5 8 19.
Ireland 0.
English-germauic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia 6.
West-asia.
India.
Arabia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
53 (54).
Fumaria Vaillantii, Lois.
Provinces - 2 3 4 (10) - ?
[18].
Colonist.
Lat. 51 — 53 or 54.
Hants, Kent.
— Hunts, (York).
Zones 1 (2).
Low grounds.
Casual in Shetland.
Census 3 5 7.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den - - swe.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
92 4.
CEUCIFEE^.
55.
Cakile maritima, Scop.
Provinces 1 to 18, except 5 without authority?
Native.
Lat. 59—61.
ComwaE, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 9 3.
Littoral.
Census 17 30 64.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia - 5 - 3 3.
[C.
americana excluded underneath].
Algeria.
"Egypt." "Madeira." [Azores].
— Faroe.
Iceland.
56.
Crambe maritima, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 - 10 - 13 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Islay, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral ; now quite sparsely distributed.
Census 13 21 26.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe fra cha net 'den got nor.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
N.B. Germany, perhaps only in the north- 
west, or the Netherlands section.
57.
Coronopus didyma, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 (3 - 5) 6 7 (8 9 10 11 - - - 15).
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset.
— Pembroke, Carnarvon.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; and perhaps truly an ahen in Europe, etc.
Census 4 9 12.
Ireland 7.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra (cha net).
(Isle of Bornholm).
Russia 6.
Caucasus ; Bentham Handb.
br.
flo.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America, in the South States.
58.
Coronopus Ruellii, Gaertn.
s€& }^-a.ga, Coy 
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57 (or 58).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife, (Elgin).
Zones 1 2 (3).
Humber to 200 yards ; Baker.
Census 15 28 70.
Ireland 11.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
— (America).
4. CEUCIPEE.i;.
93 
60.
Thlaspi arvense, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
" Probably native;" A.
De CandoUe.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 33 63.
Ireland 7.
British type, sparsely spread.
Europe all.
More frequent than it is in Britain ?
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
"Azores."' — (America).
61.
Thlaspi perfoliatum, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] - 5 [10-19].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 63.
Gloucester.
Formerly in Oxford also.
Zone 1.
About 700 feet ; Rev. H.
Roberts.
Census 111.
L.-eland 0.
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net.
Bornholm.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Isle of Oesel.
Algeria.
63.
Thlaspi alpestre, Linn.
Provinces [1 - 3 - - 6] 7 8 - 10 11 13 - - 15.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 57.
Carnarvon, Derby.
— Cumberland, Forfai-.
Zones ?
3 3 4 5.
Forfarshire, at 900 yards or thereabouts.
Census 6 6 10.
Ireland 0.
Highland-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net - got.
— N.B. In the Flora Boreali-americana, this is recorded as a 
plant of Canada, on authority of " Mrs. Percival." 
63.
Capsella Bursa-pastoris, DeCand.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 400 yards.
England to same.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all ; northward to Mageroe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
loel.
(Gre. Am.) 
9i 4.
CEUCIFER^E.
64.
Hutchinsia petrsea, Br.
Provinces 1 - (3) - 5 6 7 8 - 10.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Somerset, Gloucester, Derby.
— Carnarvon, York.
Zones 13 3.
Wales to 450 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 6 9 11.
(Ireland).
Intermediate-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - got - swe.
Russia 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
65.
Teesdalia nudicaulis, Br.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Lanark, Elgin.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 15 26 54.
Ireland 0.
Britisb-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Kussia - - 4 3.
West-asia ?
Caucasus ?
Algeria.
Canaries ; Dr. Lemann's Madeira list.
66.
Iberis amara, Linn.
Provinces (1) 3 3 4 (5 - 7 8 - 10 - 12 13 14 15).
Colonist.
Lat. 50—53.
Dorset, Hants.
— Cambridge, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; chiefly on cretaceous soils.
Census 3 7 10.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 0.
West-asia?
— In West Europe, from Portugal to Hanover.
67.
Lepidium latifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 (3) 3 4 5 6 7 (8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 - 17).
Native.
Lat. 51 — 53.
Somerset, Glamorgan, Kent.
— Flint, Norfolk.
Zones 1 (3 3).
Coast-level ; introduced to many localities.
Census 6 8 9.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Tibet.
Algeria.
Egypt.
4. CRUCIPER^.
95 
69.
Lepidium Smithii, Hook.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native in England.
Scotland also ?
Lat. 50 — 58, Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards ; but introduced?
Census 16 28 62.
Ireland 7.
British-english type.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha.
Transylvania ?
Holland ?
— N.B. Synonyms unsettled ; more widely distributed, if united 
with L.
hirtum of South Europe.
70.
Lepidium campestre, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 60—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards ; Baker.
Census 15 30 68.
Ireland 6.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus gar fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Cilicia.
Constantinople.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
(America).
71.
Lepidium ruderale, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - - (9 10 11 - - - 15).
Denizen ?
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Hants, Kent.
— Pembroke, Norfolk.
Zones 1 (2).
Low grounds ; chiefly near the coast.
Census 6 12 20.
Ireland?
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
72.
Cochlearia oflScinalis, Linn, 
Provinces all.
Native.
Alpine segregate included below.
Lat 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1300 yards ; also at 1260, etc.
Census 1 8 30 62.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha net den got nor - lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Synonyms unsatisfactory.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America?
96 4.
CRUCIFEE.E.
72.
Cochlearia danica, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 ?
6 7 - 9 - 11 12 - 14 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Shetland; Neill, etc.
Zones 13 3.
Littoral.
Northern localities questionable.
Census 13 32 86.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net den got nor svpe.
Finmark ?
Russia 3 1.
Kamtschatka ; Ledeb.
flo.
ros.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
72*.
Cochlearia anglica, Linn.
Provinces 1234S67[8]9 [10] 12 13 ?
IS 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Mid-ebudes, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral ; the northern provinces uncertain.
Census 12 20 30.
Ireland ?
British type ?
Europe fra cha net den.
C. fenestrata, nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 3 1.
C. fenestrata in Arctic Russia and Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
74.
Subularia aquatica, Linn.
Provinces [5] 7 - [9] -- 12 13 - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Anglesea, Carnarvon, Denbigh.
— Ross, Sutherl.
Zones ?
3 3 4 5.
Highlands to 710 yards ; and low grounds.
Census 6 8 14.
Ireland 7.
Highland-Scottish type.
Europe - - - aus ger - - net den got nor swe lap.
France ?
Russia — 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Altai.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
Maine, America.
75.
Draba aizoides, Linn.
s€.s/^,^^ 4,0 s 
Provinces [12] 6.
Native?
Lat. 51 — 52.
Glamorgan.
Also in Somerset ?
Zone 1.
Coast-level, or thereabout.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Looal-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net.
West-asia?
N.B. The area varies according to the segregates 
included under the one name, or excluded.
4. CRUCIFER.E. 97 
76.
Draba rupestris, Br.
Provinces - [3] IS 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Perth, Forfar, Banff, Dumbarton, Sutherland.
Zones 6 6.
Highlands about 1000—1300 yards.
Census 3 4 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe nor swe lap fiu.
Altai and Eastern Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
Faroe?
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
77.
Draba incana, Linn.
Provinces - [9 - - 5] - 7 8 - 10 11 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Carnarvon, Derby.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands 0—1060 y.
; also at 960, 900, etc.
Census 9 13 18.
Ireland 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
78.
Draba muralis, Linn.
Provinces 1 - (3) [4] 5 - 7 8 - 10 - 12 (13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Somerset, Stafford.
— Westm., York, to 400 yds.
Zones 12 3.
Nearly down to coast-level, in Monmouth ; Babington.
Census 6 7 8.
(Ireland).
Intermediate-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - got - swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland.
America ?
79.
Draba verna, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
D. praecox included below.
Lat. 5€ — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
D. inflata in zone 5.
Census 18 35 83.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
98 4.
CE0CIFEE.E.
83.
Dentaria bulbifera, Linn.
I'rovinces - 9 3 - 5 13 - (15).
Native.
Lat. 51—56.
Sussex, Surrey, Herts, Midx., Bucks, Staff., Ayr.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
(Dupplin, Pertlishire).
Census 4 5 6.
Ireland 0.
English-germanio type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
Bithynia.
— N.B. Is it really indigenotis in Scotland ?
84.
Cardamine amara, Linn.
ProYinces (1) 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 68.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Elgin.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 14 35 57.
Ireland 3.
British-germanic type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe ?
Is tbis alleged habitat correct ?
86.
Cardamine pratensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wigbt, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080 y.
; also at 980, 810, etc.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Northward to Spitsbergen.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
80.
Cardamine hirsuta, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. sylvatica included.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1000 yds.
; also at 930, 900, etc.
Census 18 36 88.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra clia net den got (nor) swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Am. Col.
4. CEUCIFERiE.
99 
87.
Cardamine impatiens, Linn.
Provinces 1 (3) 3 - 5 6 7 8 (9) 10 - [13 13 - - 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Devon, Surrey.
— Denbigh, York^ 
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 7 10 17.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cba net den nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
— Faroe ?
An error for C.
sylvatica?
88.
Arabis thaliana, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 500 yards ; Baker.
Census 18 33 74.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution^ 
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 6 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.- Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America).
89.
Arabis petrsea, Lam.
Provinces [1 - - - 5] 7 [8 - 10 - 18] - - 15 16 17 18.
Native..
Lat. 53 — 61.
Merioneth, Carnarvon.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1800 yards, or " 1390 yards." 
Census 5 8 11.
Ireland 1.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger nor swe.
France ?
Russia 6 - - - 3.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.- 
90.
Arabis stricta, Huds.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 - [7 - - - - 18].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 53.
North Somerset, West Gloucester..
Zone ].
Altitude ...
? Below 300 yards?
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe spa aus ger fra.
Apparently limited to Mid-europe, 
North Spain to Transylvania.
— America ?
Labrador ; Pursh flo, amer.
sept.
100 4.
CEUCIFEEiE.
93.
Arabis hirsuta, Br.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight?
Kent.
— Sbye, Sutherland ?
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ; also at 830, 7S0, etc.
Census 17 34 73.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
94.
Turritis glabra, Linn.
Provinces ?
3 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 11 13 - - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Wilts, Hants, Kent.
— Dumbarton, West Perth.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 10 16 31.
Ireland 1.
English-germauic type.
Europe all, except Pinmark.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
Same species in America ?
95.
Barbarea vulgaris, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Segregates included below.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Eenfrew, Elgin.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 15 31 81.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe all northward to Sweden.
B. stricta in lap fin.
Eussia 6-43 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
— (America).
Columbia ; but a sub-species ?
98.
Nasturtium officinale, Br. s^ej-^a^bos 
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 13 8.
Humber to 350 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 18 36 86.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 - - 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries, Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(Am.) Col.
4. CEUCIFEEJE.
101 
99.
Nasturtium terrestre, Br.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
N. palustre, auct.
plur.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Forfar.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 16 30 89.
Ireland 9.
British- english type.
Europe all, except Finmark and Spain ?
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Egypt.
Libya.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
100.
Nasturtium sylvestre, Br.
Provinces 1 8 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 13 14 (IS).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Devon, Sussex.
— Dumfries, Edinburgh.
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds.
(Fife, perhaps introduced).
Census 13 33 46.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den) got nor swe.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
" Persia." " China." 
— (America, introduced).
101.
Nasturtium amphibium, Br.' 
Provinces 13345--89 10 (11) - 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Lanark, Fife.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Is it native in Scotland ?
Census 11 33 43.
Ireland 10.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
— America??
103.
Sisymbrium officinale, Scop.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 88.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland with Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (Greenland.
Amer.
Columbia).
103 4.
CRUCIFEE^.
103.
Sisymbrium Irio, Linn.
Provinces [1 3] 3 4 [5] 6 - [8] 14.
Denizen.
Lat. 51 — 86.
London, Oxford, Glamorgan.
— Berwick-on-Tweed- 
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Localities very uncertain.
Census 4 5 6.
Ireland 1.
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra clia net.
(Sweden).
Russia 6 - 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
"Arabia." 
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
"Azores." 
104.
Sisymbrium Sophia, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 - 17, Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones 1^3.
Low grounds ; widely but thinly spread.
Census 15 SB 53.
Ireland 4.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— America ?
Columbia.
" Straits of Magellan." 
106.
Erysimum cheiranthoides, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 (9 10 11 12 - 14 15 16).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon, Sussex, Kent.
— Denbigh, Lincoln.
Zones 1 (3 3).
Low grounds.
Well established in S.
B. 
Census 8 17 33.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - 4 3 3 1.
Mid-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
Arctic America ; Hooker dist.
arc.
107.
Erysimum Alliaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.' Cornwall, Wight, Kent; — Moray, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Lakes and Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 33 81.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got uor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
4. CEUCIFEE.E. 103 
110.
Matthiola incana, Br.
Provinces - 2 - - - (6).
Denizen.
(Sussex, Pembroke).
Lat. 50 — 51.
Isle of Wight, perhaps introduced ; A.
G. More.
Zone 1.
Coast cliffs ; deemed native by Dr. Bromfiold.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra.
Sicily, Crete, etc.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
"Canaries.
(Azores).
111.
Matthiola sinuata, Br.
Provinces 1 [9] 6 7.
Native.
[Dorset?
Sussex?].
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall ?
North Devon.
— Anglesea, Flint.
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Census 3 5 7.
Ireland 3.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Sicily, Crete, etc.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
113.
Brassica oleracea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 (4 5) 6 7 - - (10 11 13 - - 15).
Denizen ?
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Merioneth, Carnarvon.
Zone 1.
Coast cliffs, native ?
Inland only an alien.
Census 5 9 10.
(Ireland 3).
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe.
Wild on the western coasts of France ?
— N.B. Exceedingly difficult to trace the native habitats of this 
plant.
See De Cand.
Geog.
bot.
653 and 839.
114.
Brassica campestris and B.
Napus, Linn.
Provinces 12345678 9-10 (11 13 13 14 15 16).
Colonist?
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— York, Scotland ?
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds ; often through cultivation.
Census 10 30 30?
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger (fra cha) net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Barbary.
— (Faroe).
Distribution not satisfactory.
104 4.
CRUCIFEE.E.
116.
Sinapis arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist, or likely Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
(Azores).
— (America).
117.
Sinapis alba, Linn.
Prov.
I 3 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 U - 13 14 15 16 (17 18).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Kincardine.
Zones 1 3 (3).
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 15 38 50.
Ireland 7.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net den got nor (swe).
Russia - 5 - 3.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
118.
Sinapis nigra, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 ] 4 15.
Native ?
Lat. 50-57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife, (Elgin).
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 14 27 57.
Ireland 2 (3).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia ?
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
].30.
Sinapis tenuifolia, Br.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 - 14 15.
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Cumberland, Fife.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Alien in Scotland ?
Census 13 33 34.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Scandinavia).
Russia 6 - - 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
4. CRUCIFERiE.
105 
ISl. Sinapis muralis, Br.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 3 6 - - (9 10 11 13 - - 15).
Denizen.
Lat, 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Carmarthen, Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 6 11 14.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Russia - - 4.
Algeria.
198.
Sinapis monensis, Bab., etc.
Provinces (1) 6 7 - 9 - - 13 13 (14 15) 16.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
(Cornwall), Glamorgan.
— Cantire, Skye ?
Zones 12?
Littoral.
(S.
Cheiranthus, introduced).
Census 6 8 17.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net.
— Algeria.
— N.B. The native plant of West Britain is now held to be a 
slight variety of S.
Cheiranthus.
123.
Raphanus Kaphanistrum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands and Humber to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 87.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Mid-asia ; Hook.
arc.
pi.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
124.
Raphanus maritimus, Sm.
Provinces 1 3 - [4] - 6 7 - 9 [10] - 13 13 - - 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 67.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Bute, Cantire.
Zones 1 3.
Littoral.
Sufficiently distinct from Raphanistrum.
Census 8 13 17.
Ireland 6.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net.
Norway ?
Baleares ?
— A western species, reported from South Spain to Holland, or 
perhaps to Norway.
106 5.
RESEDACE^.
— 6.
CISTACEiE.
125.
Eeseda Luteola, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Denizen in North Britain.
Lat. SO— 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Eoss.
Zones 1 S 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 33 79.
Ireland 13.
British-english type, 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
136.
Reseda lutea, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 (15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumfries, Haddington.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
(Fife to Moray, introduced).
Census 13 35 53.
Ireland 4.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Scandinavia).
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
138.
Helianthemum vulgare, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native.
Any locality in 16 ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
• —   Moray, Eoss.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 670 yards.
Humber to 700 yards.
Census 16 31 73.
[Ireland].
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Finland ; Fries sum.
veg.
Algeria.
139.
Helianthemum polifolium, Pers.
Provinces 1 - - - [5].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
South Devon, North Somerset.
[Glouc, Wore] 
Zone 1 .
Somerset, at 150 or 300 feet ; T.
B. Flower.
Census 1 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra cha.
" Mouse et Moselle." 
— Not in Eussia or Asia ?
Algeria.
— America?
" Arkansas and Texas." 
6. CISTACE^.
— 7.
VIOLACE^.
107 
130.
Helianthemum canum, Dunal.
Provinces [1 - - - 5] 6 7 - - 10 - 13.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Glamorgan.
— Cumberland, Westmoreland, York.
Zones 13 3 4.
Humber to 600 yards or upwards.
Census 4 4 7.
Ireland 1.
Intermediate-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur fra cha aus ger.
Isle of Oeland.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
131.
Helianthemum (guttatum) Breweri, Planch.
Provinces [1 - - - 5] - 7.
Native in form of H.
Breweri.
Lat. 53 — ^54.
Isle of Anglesea only.
Zone 1.
Coast-level or cliffs.
Census 111.
Ireland 1.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Hanover.
West-asia.
Cyprus, Syria, etc.
Algeria.
— N.B. H.
guttatum in lines 5 6 7, and in Ireland.
133.
Viola palustris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1360 yards; also at 1300, etc.
Census 18 36 74.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
With varieties in lines 5, 6, 7.
Eussia - - ?
3 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
133.
Viola odorata, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 (13 14 15) - - [18].
Native in England.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland, York.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Alien in Scotland ?
Census 13 24 57.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
(Sweden).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores ; but doubtfully native there.
108 7.
YIOLACE^.
134.
Viola hirta, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Kincardine.
Zones 1 2.
Lakes and Humber to 300 yards each.
Census 15 29 63.
Ireland 1 or 4 ?
English-germauic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
135.
Viola sylvatica, Bab. man.
V. canina, Sm. eng.
flo.
Provinces all.
Native.
V. Kiviniana the prevailing form.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3 4 S.
Highlands to 980 yards.
Wales 1100 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark ; but synonyms uncertain.
Eussia 6 - - 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Faroe.
136.
Viola canina, Bab. man.
exol.
V. lactea, Sm.
Provinces 1 to 15 ; but no certain record for 13.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight Kent.
— Aberdeen, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 710 yards.
Census 14 27 54.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe, in all the divisions, if in Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Canaries ?
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
[Am. Col.] 
135.
Viola lactea, Sm.
Provinces 1 3 3 [4 - - 7 - 9 14].
Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
V. flavicornis often thus misnamed.
Census 3 3 5.
Ireland?
English type of distribution.
Europe.
Holland, Norway, France, Italy ; Nyman Sylloge.
— N.B. Confused with V.
stagniua in Continental Floras ; as 
was formerly the case in England also.
7. VIOLACEiE.
109 
135.
Viola stagnina, " Kit." Bab. man.
Provinces 1 - - 4 - - - 8.
Native, 
Lat. 50 — 64.
South Devon ?
Cambridge, Hunts, Lincoln.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Much confused with V.
lactea.
Census 3 3 4.
Ireland 1.
English-germanio type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den (got) nor (swej.
Eussia - - 4 3.
Siberia.
— N.B. See above, under V.
lactea.
186.
Viola tricolor, Auct.
Provinces all ; but in part perhaps V.
arvensis only.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Finmark excepted.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
(Azores).
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America ?
136.
Viola arvensis, Murr.
Provinces all ; apart from V.
tricolor.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands, Humber, each to 350 yards.
Census 18 34 64.
Ireland 12 ?
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den - swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Persia.
Canaries.
— America ?
136.
Viola Curtisii, Forster, and Mackay.
Provinces 1 - - - - 6 7 - 9.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 54.
Devon, Carmarthen, Anglesea, Cheshire, Lancash.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Sub-littoral.
Cornwall ?
Census 4 4 6.
Ireland 5 ?
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe ?
V. sabulosa, in Normandy.
— N.B. Two violets, ' Curtisii' much like a depauperised 'lutea'; 
and Mackaii (sabulosa '?) approximating to ' tricolor ' in colour.
110 7.
VIOLACE^.
— 8.
DROSEEACE^.
136.
Viola lutea, Huds.
Provinces ?
5 to 18.
Native.
Cornwall ?
Lat. 53 — 58.
Glamorgan, Monmoutli.
— Hebrides, Boss.
Zones ?
8 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980 yards.
Humber to 830 yds.
Census 14 81 53.
Ireland 4.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net.
Naples ; Nyman Sylloge.
— N.B. Much uncertainty yet remains respecting the affinities 
of this violet with Continental forms.
138.
Drosera rotundifolia, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 18 3 4.
Highlands to 770 yards.
Humber to 750 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia - - 4 3 8 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Altai.
Syria.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
139.
Drosera intermedia, Hayne.
Provincees 18345678910- 12 13- [15] 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Westerness, Fife?
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 34 43.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
" Syria." 
— America.
D. longifolia of several english works.
140.
Drosera anglica, Huds.
Provinces 1 3 - 4 5 6 - - 9 10 11 13 13 14 16 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60 or 61.
Devon, Dorset, Suffolk.
— Orkney, Shetland?
Zones 18 3 4.
Highlands to 580 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 14 85 40.
Ireland 10.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
D. longifolia of Auct.
cont.
Russia - - 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
D. longifolia of Authors.
9. POLTGALACE^.
10.
FEANKENTACE^.
Ill 
141.
Polygala vulgaris, Auct.
Provinces all ; including P.
depressa.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 a 3 4 fi.
Highlands to 930 yards ; also at 800, 760, etc.
Census 18 37 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Lapl.
and Finmark.
P. depressa, in Lapl.
etc.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Barbary.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
141*.
Polygala calcarea, F.
Schultz.
Provinces ?
2 3 - 5 [6] Native.
ScUly ?
Carmarthen ?
Lat. 50 — 52.
Wilts, Dorset, Kent, Surrey, Berks, Gloucester.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; also above ?
Census 3 5 6.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha.
Spain?
— N.B. The European distribution of this plant not satisfactorily 
made out.
141*.
Polygala uliginosa, Eeich.
Province 10.
Native.
Lat. 54—55.
In North Yorkshire only, as yet known.
Zone - - 3.
Humber at 550 — 600 yards ; Baker.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-intermediate type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia ?
Finland ; Fries sum.
veget.
scand.
— N.B. Distribution not satisfactorily made out.
142.
Frankenia l£evis, Linn.
Provinces (1) 2 3 4.
Native.
(11 Durham, on ballast).
Lat. 50—53.
Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— Suffolk, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Also in South Hants and Essex.
Census 3 6 10.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - fra cha.
Eussia - 6.
West-asia.
Tauria ; Boiss.
flo.
or.
Algeria.
112 11.
ELATINACEiE.
— 12.
CAEYOPHYLLACE^.
143.
Elatine hexandra, De Cand.
Provinces 12 3-5-789 IS 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Sussex.
— Bute, West Perth, Kincard.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 9 12 13.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra oha net - got.
Russia '?
Under E.
Hydropiper ?
Azores.
144.
Elatine Hydropiper, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 - 7.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 64.
Surrey, " Worcester," Anglesea.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 1.
English-local type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 2.
Siberia ?
— N.B. This and E.
hexandra are reunited by some authors.
145.
Dianthus prolifer, L.
Provinces - 2 3 4 [5].
Native ?
Lat. 50—53.
Wight, Sussex, Berks, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Middlesex ?
Worcester ?
Census 3 4 4 Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
146.
Dianthus Armeria, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - (9) 10 11 12 - (14 15).
Native?
Lat. 50 — 65 (or 57).
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(Edinburgh, Perth, Forfar).
Census 10 16 30.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
(Sweden).
Russia 6 6 4 3.
West-asia.
— (America, introduced).
12.
CARTOPHTLLACE.E. 113 
149.
Dianthus caesius, Sm.
Provinces 1 - - - (5) - - [8 - - - 12 - 14].
Native.
Lat. 51—52.
North Somerset.
Zone 1.
Somerset between 50 — 250 yards ; Thomas Clark.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net.
— In Europe only, eastward to Transylvania, southward to Lom- 
bardy, northward to Belgium.
150.
Dianthus deltoides, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2] 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—68.
Devon, Wight, Kent?
— Cantire, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds ; anywhere above 200 yards?
Census 14 22 35.
Ireland 0.
English-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia - - 4 3 2.
— In Europe southward to Sicily.
151.
Saponaria officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 1 6 ; usually by former cultivation.
Denizen.
Lat. 50—56 or 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ayr, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds ; by coasts, and near houses.
Census 15 28 50 ?
(Ireland 10).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— (America).
The native habitat very uncertain.
152.
Silene inflata, Sm.
Provinces 1 to 17 [18 also ?] Native.
Lat 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Islay, Eoss.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes, Humber, to 300 yards.
Census 17 34 83.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all the divisions.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
Q 
114 12.
CARYOPHTLLACE^.
153.
Silene maritima, With.
Provinces 1 to 18 ; but no record for province 8.
Native.
Lat. 80—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1060 yds.
; next at " 790" yds.
Census 17 33 61.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita fra cha net den got nor - lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 or 3.
South Finland.
Canaries.
[Azores ?] — Iceland.
154.
Silene Otites, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] 4 - [6 - - - 10].
Native.
Lat. 53—53.
Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge.
[York ?] 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 13 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus gar fra cha net den.
Russia 6 8 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Persia.
]88.
Silene anglica et gallica, Auct.
Provinces 133466789 10 (11) 13 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 88.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ayr, Moray.
Zones 13 8.
Low grounds.
Colonist in Scotland?
Census 14 36 48.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net got.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
186.
Silene nutans, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 [4] 5 - 7 8 - 10 - [12] - - 18 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 80- — 87.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Kincardine.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 8 9 15.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Canaries.
12.
CAEYOPHYLLACEiE.
115 
157.
Silene noctiflora, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 - - 14 15.
Colonist.
Lat. 50—57.
South Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— Perth, Forfar.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 10 16 33.
Ireland 3.
English-germanic type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
158.
Silene conica, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 [5] 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 51—57.
Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk, Haddington, Forfar.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 4 5 5.
[Ireland].
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
159.
Silene acaulis, Linn.
Provinces [1] 7 13 - - 1 5 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Caernarvon, Westmoreland.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1440 yards.
Shetland coast.
Census 6 11 9.
Ireland 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
160.
Lychnis alpina, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 - - 15.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 68.
Cumberland, Forfar.
Zone - - - ?
5. Highlands about 1000 yds.
Lakes at " 2000 ft." 
Census 3 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland-local type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia - — 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
116 12.
CAEYOPHYLLACE^.
161.
Lychnis Viscaria, Linn.
Provinces 6 7 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 52—57.
Eadnor, Montgomery.
— Stirling, Perth, Forfar.
Zones - 2 3.
North Wales to 300 yards ?
Census 5 6 9.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; Dr. Lauder Lindsay's list.
160.
Lychnis Flos-cuculi, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkne3^ Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3 4.
Highlands to 660 yards ; also at 650, 640, etc.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
163.
Lychnis (dioica) diurna, Sibth.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Humber to 450 yds.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland JO.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Greenland, between 72 — 76.
164.
Lychnis (dioica) vespertina, Sibth.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Colonist or Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 31 74.
Ireland 5.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia ( ) 5 18 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
12.
CARYOPHYLLACE^.
117 
165.
Lychnis (Agrostemma) Githago, Lam.
Provinces all.
Colonist ; but scarcely so in North Isles.
Lat. 50—59 (or 61).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross or Shetl.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 33 88.
Ireland I'-i.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe (lap).
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Persia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
166.
Moenchia erecta, Sm.
Provinces 123456789 10 11.
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Cheviotland.
Zones 12 3.
North Wales to 400 yards ; Bowman.
Census 11 21 43.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
— N.B. Replaced by M.
octandra in Asia minor.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
167.
Sagina maritima, Don.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 - 9 10 U 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
[Alpine also?] 
Census 16 28 47.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
— N.B. Distribution not sufficiently ascertained ; reported south- 
ward to Sicily, eastward to Greece.
167.
Sagina apetala, Linn, (in part).
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Kincardine.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 14 38 66.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
118 13.
CARYOPHYLLACE^.
167.
Sagina ciliata, Fries.
S. apetala, Auct.
var.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - - - 8 - 10 11 - - 14 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Fife, Aberdeen.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Distribution ill ascertained.
Census 9 18 24.
Ireland 3.
English-british type.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha net - got.
— N.B. Confused with Sagina apetala, as well in Britain as in 
Europe.
Likely to be found in Russia.
168.
Sagina procumbens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Clearly distinct from the annual species.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 3 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1360 yards ; also at 1080, etc.
Census 18 38 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
169.
Sagina saxatilis, Wimm.
Spergula saginoides, L.
Provinces [5 13] - 15 ' 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Easterness, Sutherland.
Zones - - - 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Descends to ...
? 
Census 2 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - - - 3 1.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
[Spitsbergen].
— Faroe, Iceland.
Greenland ?
America.
Columbia.
169.* Sagina subulata, Wimm.
Prov.
1 3 3 [4] 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5, Highlands to 700 yards, or upwards.
Census 15 35 39.
Ireland 4.
Scottish-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
— Absent from Russia and Asia?
— Iceland?
Columbia?
" Rocky Mountains ; Drummond." 
12.
c.vryophtIjLace,e.
119 
170.
Sagina nivalis, Fries.
Provinces 15 16 [17].
Native.
Lat. 56 — 57.
Perth, Dumbarton.
[Forfar, Skye, Ben Nevis]; 
Zones - - - - 5 6.
Altitude not ascertained.
Census 2 3 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Norway.
Elsewhere?
— Spitsbergen ; formerly as Spergula saginoides.
— Greenland ; under name of Spergula saginoides.
171.
Sagina nodosa, Meyer.
Spergula nodosa, L.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3.
Highlands to 510 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 18 36 79.
Ireland 11.
British type of disti-ibution.
Europe aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
172.
Spergula arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(Am. Col.) 
173.
Honkeneya peploides, Ehrh.
Provinces all ; unless 5 Severn is to be excepted.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 17 30 58.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Italy ?
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Spitsbergen.
Adriatic?
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
120 18.
CARYOPHYLLACEJE.
174.
Spergularia (or Lepigonum) marina, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
Several segregates included.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Localities of segregates much confused.
Census 18 83 60.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 6 4 3 3.
West-asia.
" Himalaya." 
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores ?
— Greenl.
Am. Col.
175.
Spergularia (or Lepigonum) rubra, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native ; but rather a Colonist in North Britain.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Orkney.
Zones 1 3 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 32 72.
Ireland 3.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Greenland ??
Am. Col.
177.
Arenaria norvegica, Gunn.
Provinces - 18.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 61.
Shetland only.
[" Orkney," erroneously].
Zone - - 3 or 4.
Altitude about " 200 feet " above the sea.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-local type.
Europe Norway.
Lapland.
Finmark.
Italy??
— N.B. A.
ciliata is distributed from Crete to Arctic Russia.
A. 
norvegica, true, occurs in Iceland ; Bab. list.
178.
Arenaria serpyllifolia, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
A. leptoclados, a slight var., is included.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 650 yards.
Lakes to 450 yards.
Census 18 37 87.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland ; Hooker list.
(America).
12.
CARYOPHYLLACEffl.
121 
179.
Arenaria tenuifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 - 10 - - - [14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55, Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Auglesea, York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 7 16 26.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 8.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— N.B. A.
viscosa included for ' den got' 
180.
Arenaria verna, Linn.
Provinces 1 [3] - - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 -'- 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Somerset, Stafford.
— Aberdeen, Shetl.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Higbdands to 850 yards.
Humber to 830 yds.
Census 13 16 27.
Ireland 3.
Scottisb-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 ?
Caucasus ?
Siberia ?
The British form ?
Algeria.
— Greenland ?
America.
Columbia.
181.
Arenaria rubella, Hook.
Provinces - -.
15 17.
Native.
Lat. 56—59.
Mid Perth, West Sutherland.
Russia - - - - 5 6.
Highlands 850 — 1300 yards.
Census 2 3 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Norway.
Nordland.
Dwarfed A.
verna?
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
181*.
Arenaria uliginosa, Schl.
Province 11.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 56.
Durham; G.
S. Gibson sp.
Zone - - 3 or 4.
A single station, " about 1800 feet." 
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-intermediate type.
Europe - ita - - ger fra nor swe lap.
Russia 1.
Siberia, middle and eastern.
— Greenland ; J.
D. Hooker distrib.
of arctic plants.
133 12.
CAEYOPHYLLACE^.
189.
Arenaria (or Mdehringia) trinervia, Linn, 
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50— S 8.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Eoss.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 800 yards.
Censas 16 33 76.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 8 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Canaries, a variety.
— Greenland ; Giseoke list.
183.
Holosteum umbellatum, Linn.
Province — 4.
Denizen or Native ?
Lat. 53—53.
Suffolk, perhaps extinct, and Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Coast-level, or low grounds.
Census 13 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
184.
Stellaria nemorum, Linn.
Provinces [1 3] - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 51—58.
Glamorgan, Monmouth.
— Dumbarton, Moray.
Zones ?
3 3.
Humber 50— 400 yards ; Baker.
Census 13 18 85.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia - - 4 3 3 1.
Caucasus, dubia civis ; Boiss.
flo.
or.
— N.B. Cerastium aquatioum occasionally thus misnamed.
185.
Stellaria media, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
• — Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ; also at 830, 530, etc.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Segregately named, through diversities of situation.
Eussia 6 5 4 8 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Ice.
Gre.
(Am. Col.) 
13.
CAETOPHYLLACEiE.
123 
186.
Stellaria Holostea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 1 S 3 4.
Highlands to 680 yards ; also at 600, 430, etc.
Census 18 35 86.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Sweden?
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia ?
187.
Stellaria glauca, "With.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 U 19 13 14 IS.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Dorset, Sussex.
— Renfrew, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 14 25 45.
Ireland 5.
English-british type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
, Siberia.
— Greenland ??
" Disco Island, Dr. Lyall ;" J.
D. Hooker.
188.
Stellaria graminea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 410 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 18 36 90.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
" Madeira." — • Faroe.
Iceland ; Mr. Isaac Carroll.
189.
Stellaria uliginosa, Murray.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1100 yards ; also at 1060, etc.
Census 18 38 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-432.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Canaries.
— Faroe.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
124 13.
CAETOPHYLLACE^.
190.
Stellaria cerastioides, Linn, 
Provinces - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56—58.
Perth, Aberdeen, Eastemess, Westemess.
Zone 6.
Highlands at 900—1860 yards.
Census 2 4 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6 - - - 2 1.
West-asia.
Mid-asia.
Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Cerastium trigynum, E.
B. 3.
191.
Cerastium aquaticum, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - - [13 14 15 - - 18].
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall?
Wight, Kent.
— North Yorkshire.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Does it occur in Scotland ?
Census 10 23 46.
Ireland?
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor) swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Stellaria aquatioa, Eng. hot.
ed.
3. 
193.
Cerastium glomeratum, Thuil.
Provinces aU.
Native.
C. vulgatum, Anglor.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
C. viscosum, Auct.
plur.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia?
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
(Am. Col.) 
193.
Cerastium triviale, Link.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. viscosum, Anglor.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1300 yards ; also at 1080, etc.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
C. vulgatum, Auct.
plur.
[Spitsbergen].
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Barbavv ?
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Ice.
Ore. Am.
Col.
12.
CAEYOPHTLLACEiE.
125 
19i.
Cerastium semidecandrum, Linn.
Provinces I to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 15 31 69.
Ireland 7.
British-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 9.
Barbary.
— Faroe ?
America ?
194.* Cerastium tetrandrum, Curt.
Provinces 1 to ] 6 - 18.
Native.
C. pumilum, in - 2 3 - 5.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 17 28 46.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha net den got.
— N.B. Mr. A.
G. More places C.
pumilum under this, rather 
than as a variety of C.
semidecandrum.
" Madeira." 
195.
Cerastium arvense, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— Kirkcudbright, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 13 25 49.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
(Sweden).
Russia 6-432.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Canaries.
— America.
Columbia.
" South America." 
196.
Cerastium alpinum, Linn.
Provinces 7 [8] - - - 12 - - 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Carnarvon, Westmoreland.
— Sutherl.
[Orkney?] 
Zones 5 6.
Highlands 800—1300 yards.
Census 5 6 9.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 2 1.
Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia, 
12G 12.
CARYOPHTLLACE^.
— 13.
LINACEiE.
197.
Cerastium latifolium, Auct.
Provinces 7 15 16 17 18.
Native; 
Lat. 53 — 61.
Carnarvon.
— Sutherland.
0. nigrescens in Shetl.
Zones ---456.
Highlands 1000—1210 yds.
Shetl.
" 200 ft." 
Census 5 7 10.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus gar fra - - - - nor - lap.
Russia 6.
— N.B. An unsatisfactory species.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
198.
Cherleria sedoides, Linn.
Provinces 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Ai-gyle, Perth, Forfar.
— Sutherland.
Zones - - - - 5 6.
Highlands 850 — 1310 yards.
Lovfer also ?
Census 3 6 16.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra.
— N.B. Area limited ; the plant being reported to grow on the 
Alps, Pyrenees, Carpathians, Parnassus.
200.
Linum perenne, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 4 [5] - - 8 - 10 11 [12 - 14].
Native.
Lat. 52 — 55.
North Essex, Suffolk.
— Durham, Westmoreland?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 5 9 12.
[Ireland].
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra.
[" Channel Isles."] 
Russia -- 4 3.
West-asia.
India?
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
The European species ?
201.
Linum angustifolium, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 [5] 6 7 [8] 9 [10] 12.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Man, Lancashire.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 8 13 22.
Ireland 4.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Channel Isles.
Russia 6.
West-asia.
" L.
marginatum, flo.
ross.'' 
Algeria.
Canaries.
13.
LINACE.E.
— 14.
MALVACEiE.
127 
20^.
Linum catharticum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yds.
Humber to 700 yds.
Census 18 88 97.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-433.
West-asia.
Persia.
Canaries ; Boissier.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
203.
Eadiola millegrana, Sm.
Provinces 1 to 18 ; except 14, East Lowlands.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds ; rather uncommon.
Census 17 31 65.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Eussia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
204.
Malva moschata, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 (16).
Native.
Alien in North Britain ?
Lat. 50—56 or 67.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lowl.
? Highl.
? 
Zones 12?
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 15 31 73.
Ireland 8.
EngUsh-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia - - - 3.
Lithuania only, by Led. flo.
ross.
— N.B. Occurs in Scotland, perhaps native in Lowlands.
305.
Malva sylvestris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 (17).
Native.
Alien in North Britain ?
Lat. 50—57 or 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, (Eoss).
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 360 yards.
Census 16 33 80.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Eussia 6 6 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Lybia.
— (America).
128 li.
MALVACE.E.
— 15.
TILIACE^.
206.
Malva rotundifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to ] 5 ; except 14, East Lowlands ?
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 900 yards.
Census 14 28 68.
Ireland 8.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 6 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Barbary.
Canaries ?
Azores ?
— (America).
208.
Althaea oflBcinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 6 - 8 (9 10 11 12 13 - - 16).
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall?
Wight, Kent.
— • S.Wales, Lincoln.
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds, or coast-level only.
Census 7 15 20.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
(Gothland).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
210.
Lavatera arborea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 (3 4) - 6 7 - - - [11] 12 13 (14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50— 56.
Cornwall, Dorset — Man, AUsa Craig.
(Fife?).
Zones 1 2.
Coast cliff's ; but often from gardens ?
Census 6 9 12.
Ireland 6.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Channel Isles.
N.B. Eastward to Greece ; but not in Russia or Asia?
" North Africa, Canaries ;" Boiss.
flo.
or.
(Algeria, introduced).
211.
Tilia (europsea) parvifolia, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 2 3 (4) 5 6 7 8 9 10 (11) 12 - (14).
Ncitive?
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 200 yards, " native ;" Baker.
Census 10 18 24.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— Apparently the T.
europsea of various authors.
15.
TILIACE.E.
— 16.
HYPERICACEiE.
129 
313.
Tilia grandifolia, Ehrh.
Provinces (- 3 3 4) 5 - (7 8 9) 10 (11 - - 14 15).
Denizen?
Lat. 51 — 65.
Gloucester, Worcester, Warwick, York.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds, and hill-sides.
Census 3 3 5.
(Ireland).
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra (cha net den got).
Russia 6-43.
— Difficult to know where really indigenous.
314.
Hypericum Androssemum, Linn.
Provinces 193456789 10 (11) 13 13 (14 15) 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
(Perthshire ?) 
Census 14 37 64.
Ireland 13.
Atlantio-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6.
West-asia.
" Pontus and North Persia." 
Algeria.
315.
Hypericum perforatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17 (18).
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Elgin, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 16 33 83.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
(America).
316.
Hypericum (quadrangulum) dubium, Leers.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Hants, Sussex.
— Argyle, Perth.- 
Zones 13?
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 16 27 56.
Ireland 6.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
,130 16.
HYPEEICACE/E.
216.
Hypericum (quadr.) bEeticum, Boiss.
Province 1.
Native.
Only recently distinguished.
Lat. 50 — 5].
Cornwall, Devon.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 19 3.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita.
France ?
Area not clearly made out, because 
the species was long confused with H.
tetrapterum.
Africa.
Canaries.
Azores.
H. undulatum?
216 (217).
Hypericum (quadr.) tetrapterum, Fries.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Moray, Ross.
Zones 1 2 3.
Humher to 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 31 84.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Loffoden ?
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
[Canaries.
Azores.
Misnomers for H.
bseticum ?] 
218.
Hypericum humifusum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westerness, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Highlands to 150 yards.
Census 1 6 33 81.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got 
Russia - 5 3.
Canaries.
Azores.
219.
Hypericum linarifolium, Vill.
Province 1.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornwall, Devon.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 1 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha.
— N.B. Eastward to Greece?
Not in Asia.
Canaries.
16.
HYPEEICACEiE.
131 
220.
Hypericum pulchrum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
CornwaU, Wigbt, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 750 yds.
; also at 700, 680, etc.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got) nor.
Russia - - - 3.
Lithuania only ; by Led. flo.
ros.
— Faroe.
Gothland, " sporadica seu inquilina;'' Fries.
223.
Hypericum hirsutum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Banff, Boss.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 16 31 73.
Ireland 2.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got) nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— N.B. Gothland, "sporadica seu inquihna;" Fries sum.
veg.
222.
Hypericum montanum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to ]2 [13].
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall?
Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 12 20 35.
Ireland 1?
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor) swe.
Russia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
Caucasus, a variety.
Algeria.
Norway, " sporadica seu inquilina;" Fries.
223.
Hypericum elodes, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 13 - - 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards, Wales to " 1000 feet." 
Census 14 28 52.
Ireland 10.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa - - - ger fra cha net.
Russia?
Simbirsk; Lepecli.
in flo.
ros.
Azores; T.
C. Hunt!
132 17.
ACERACEiE.
18.
GERANIACEiE.
98S.
Acer campestre, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 (12 13 14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 19?
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 11 93 56.
Ireland 3 (and 9).
English type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Kussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
• — Is it native anywhere in Scotland ?
937.
Erodium maritimum, Sm.
Provinces 1 9 3 [4] 5 6 7 8 [9] - - 19 13.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Cumberland.
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds.
Littoral ; rarely inland.
Census 9 15 98.
Ireland 6.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe - ita - - - fra cha.
— N.B. Eeported to grow also in Turkey, Greece, and Egypt ; 
but not admitted into ' Flora Orientalis.' 
298.
Erodium cicutarium, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
Two or three varieties included.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 19 3.
North Wales to 400 yards ; Edwin Lees.
Census 18 36 88.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
(America).
" Columbia." 
928*.
Erodium moschatum, Sm.
Provinces 1 9 (3 4) 5 6 (7 8 9 10) - [19 - 14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59 (or 54).
Cornwall, Dorset.
— Pembroke, Anglesea?
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Inland, but not wild there ?
Census 4 6 8.
Ireland 7.
Atlantic type of distribution, 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Scandinavia).
Russia ?
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
A/.oves.
18.
GERANIACE i;.
1G3 
230.
Geranium sylvaticum, Linn.
Prov.
[1 - 3 4] 5 - - 8 9 10 11 12 13 U 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 53 — 58.
Worcester, Warwick.
— Westerness, East Boss.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ; also at 760, 750, etc.
Census 11 16 37.
Ireland 1.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except the Channel section.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Barbary ?
—   Faroe.
Iceland.
231.
Geranium pratense, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Isla, Banff.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to " 600 yards." 
Census 10 31 69.
Ireland 1.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got) nor swe lap.
Russia 6-43 Siberia.
" Iberia, Constantinople." 
— Faroe '?
Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
232.
Geranium pyrenaicum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 [8] - 10 (U 12 - 14 15 16).
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Dorset, Surrey.
— Denbigh, York.
Zones 1 9.
Humber to 100 yards, " native ;" Baker.
Census 8 16 31.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got - swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
233.
Geranium rotundifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 [6 7 8 9 10.(11) 13 - 14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Gloucester, Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Many eiToneous records.
Census 5 10 16.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet flore.
134 18.
GERANIACEffi.
234.
Geranium pusillum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Banff.
Zones 18 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 15 29 63.
Ireland 2.
English-british type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Cyprus, Syria.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
235.
Geranium molle, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Two forms.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes, Humber, to 500 yards.
Highl.
350 yards.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
236.
Geranium dissectum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— South-east Sutherland.
Zones 1 2 3.
Lakes, Humber, to 300 yards.
Highl.
150 yards.
Census 17 35 88.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
237.
Geranium columbinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 1 6.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards ; Baker.
Census 16 29 56.
Ireland 0.
English-british type.
Europe all, excopt Lapland and Finmark.
Russia S 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
18.
GEKANIACE<=E.
— 19.
BALSAMINACE.E. 1.S5 
938.
Geranium lucidum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones 19 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 30 71.
Ireland 11.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5-3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Barbary.
Canaries.
939.
Geranium Robertianum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Two or three segregated forms.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney, 
Zones 19 3 4.
Humber to 650 yards.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Census 18 36 98.
Ireland 19.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
940.
Geranium sanguineum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
G. lancastriense in H only?
Lat 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Eoss.
Zones 19 3.
Highlands to 400 yards?
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 98 48.
Ireland 6.
British type?
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
— N.B. Three forms, the interme- 
diate one being of late confused with true Lancastriense.
2iS.
Impatiens Noli-me-tangere, Linn.
Provinces (1 9 3 4 5) - 7 (8 9 1 11) 13 (13 14 15).
Native ?
Lat. 53 — 55.
Montgomery, Merioneth, V\^estmoreland, Cumberl.
Zone ?
2. Is it truly wild in Somerset and Lancashire ?
Census 9 3 4.
Ireland 0, Local or doubtful type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Eussia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. Much mis-reported ; but it may be native in England.
136 20.
DXALIDACE.K. 23.
RHAMNACE^.
943.
Oxalis Acetosella, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
(Summer flowers apetalous, as in Viola).
Lat. 80—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney?
Zones 13 3 4 6 6.
Highlands to 1300 yds.
Lakes to 1020 yds.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia ?
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
• — Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
245.
Euonymus europseus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 (15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark?
Edinburgh.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 14 28 65.
Ireland 10.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
N.B. Kirkcudbright perhaps the true limit.
246.
Ehamnus catharticus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 (13 - 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50' — 55.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
• — Westmoreland, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 12 22 49.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, used for hedges, locally mituralised).
247.
Ehamnus Frangula, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 12 13 - 15 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ayr, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Is it native in Scotland ?
Census 13 25 40.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Constantinople.
Algeria.
23.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
137 
248.
Sarothamnus scoparius, Koch.
Provinces 1 to 17.
(Introduced to 18, Orkney).
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 660 yards ; also at 600, 570, etc.
Census 17 35 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - 4 3.
Siberia.
(Canaries.
Azores).
249.
Ulex europseus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
(Sown in 18, Orkney).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross or Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Wales to 700 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 17 33 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net den.
(Gothland).
Russia ?
Caucasus ; Georgi in flo.
ros.
(Canaries.
Azores).
Greece ; Chaub.
flo.
pel.
250.
Ulex nanus, Forster.
Provinces 1 to 13 [14 1 J].
Native.
U. Gallii included.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ayr, Northumberland.
Zones 1 2.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 13 26 53.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net.
D. Gallii in France.
— N.B. U.
Gallii, of Planohon, is likely the more frequent form 
in Britain, and more widely distributed.
251.
Genista tinctoria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14.
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Edinburgh.
Zones 1 2.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 14 27 63.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
T 
138 23.
LEGUMINIFEB.-'E.
259.
Genista pilosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 S 6 [7].
Native.
Extinct in 3 and 5 ?
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Pembroke, Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; and quite rare.
Census 6 6 6.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - 5 - 3.
— N.B. Found by Mr. Borrer in province 5, Worcestershire.
253.
Genista anglica, Linn.
Provinces ] to 17.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westerness, Pioss.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 730 yards ; also at 720, 710, etc.
Census 17 33 77.
Ireland 0.
British-english type.
Europe - - - - ger fra cha net den.
Italy ?
— The isolated habitat of Aspromoute, in Calabria, is recorded 
by Bertoloui, in Flora Italica.
254.
Ononis arvensis, "Linn." 
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 69.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Eoss, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humbcr to 250 yards.
Census 17 35 86.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Fiumark.
Russia - - 4.
India?
(Azores).
N.B. Includes 0.
repens of several authors.
255.
Ononis spinosa, "Linn."Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Much confused with 0.
arvensis.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Forfiir.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.* 
Census 16 30 68.
Ireland?
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Sweden ; \\'ahl.
Russia 6 4 o-^.
West-asia.
" I'alestine." 
" N.B Synonyms and habitats unsatisfactorv.
2'] LEGUMINIFEE,.E. l;)!) 
257.
Anthyllis vulneraria, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Irregularly- distributed.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 -2 o 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Humber to 600 yds.
Census 18 38 87.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker list from Zoega.
359.
Medicago falcata, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 4 [5 6 - - - 10 11].
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 51—53.
Surrey?
Kent?
Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
M. sylvestris, in province 4.
Census 2 4 7.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got"(nor) swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia ?
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. M.
sylvestris, of Fries, in Britain and Scandinavia.
S60.
Medicago lupulina, Linn.
Provinces all ; perhaps only an introduction in 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—58 or 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Eoss, Orkney?
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 320 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 34 87.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
261.
Medicago maculata, Sibth.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 (9) 10 ]1 - - - (15).
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 10 19 31.
(Ireland 3).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Sweden).
Eussia 6 5.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
140 23.
LEGUMIXIFER^.
262.
Medicago denticulata, Willd.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 (11) - - - [15].
Denizen?
Lat. 50 — 35.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— North-east York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 7 12 15.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5.
India.
Algeria; Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
" California." 
263.
Medicago minima, Lam.
Provinces [1] - 3 4 - (6) - - [9].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Kent, Surrey, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Glamorgan ; T.
Gissing.
Census 2 5 8.
(Ireland).
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Bornholm.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
264.
Melilotus officinalis, Willd.
Provinces 1 to 11 (12 to 15 less established).
Denizen.
Lat. 60—55 (or 58).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2 (3).
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 11 24 58.
Ireland 3 (or 5).
English type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Barbary.
— (America, introduceil).
265.
Melilotus vulgaris, Willd.
Prov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 - - (9 10 11 12 - 14 15).
Alien or Colonist?
Lat. 50 — 53 (or 58).
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Carmarth., Norfolk.
Zones 1 (2 3).
Low grounds ; often sown with clover seed.
Census 6 8 13.
(Ireland 9).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 6 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
2S.
LEGU.MINIFER^.
141 
266.
Trifolium (or Trigonella) ornithopodioides, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 - 9 [10 - 12] 13 14 IS.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Renfrew, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 10 16 21.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha.
Bornholm.
— N.B. Comparatively a restricted distribution ; from Portugal 
to the isle of Bornholm ; eastward to Constantinople '?
2U7.
Trifolium repens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Humber to 830 yds.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(Am. Col.) 
268.
Trifolium subterraneum, Linn.
Provinces 12345678 [9 10 11].
Native.
Lat. 60 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, Notts.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Cardigan ; Miss Atwood.
Census 8 16 29.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
India?
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
269.
Trifolium ochroleucum, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 4 [6 - - 8 9 10 11].
Native.
Lat. 52 — 53.
Essex, Herts, Su£f., Norf, Camb., Bedf , Hants.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Surrey?
Worcester?
Lincoln?
etc.] 
Census 2 4 7.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5 4.
" Belgrad, in Turkey." 
— N.B. Many localities in England need verification.
14-2 -i:].
LEGUjriNiFF.rv.q3.
970.
Trifolium Molinieri, " Balb." 
Province 1.
Native?
T. incaniatum oultivateJ.
Lat. about 50.
West Cornwall only.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 1 ] 1.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local tjpe.
Europe.
Italy.
France.
Channel.
Elsewhere '?
— N.B. Is this truly a variety or wild state of the cultivated 
T. incarnatum ?
371.
Trifolium pratense, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Common ; but much sown.
Lat. 80 — 6L Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 930 yards ; next highest 570 yds.
Census 18 3S 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, e.Kcept Finmark.
Russia 6 S 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
(Canaries).
— Iceland.
(America.
Columbia).
272.
Trifolium medium, Linn.
Provinces all ; but not an abundant plant.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight?
Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
.Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 35 79.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark and perhaps Spain.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
— (America).
" Temperate Asia ;" Hooker dist.
arc.
271.
Trifolium maritimum, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 -- -(11).
Native.
Cumberland?
Lat. 50—53.
Cornwall?
Dorset, Kent.
— Merioneth?
Norfolk?
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Cumberland ; Joseph Robson.
Census 7 10 14.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra^ha net.
Holland.
— Eastward to Greece and Crimea : Locoq.
Not in Ledeb.
flo.
ros.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
23.
LEGumNiFErwT;.
143 
275.
Trifolium arvense, Linn.
Provinces 1 to IT.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 17 33 78.
Ireland 5.
British-English type.
Europe, all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Iceland ; Hooker list.
(Am.) 
276.
Trifolium scabrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 ?
10 11 - - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Kincardine.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
"Cheshire;'' Miss Potts.
Census 12 24 40.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 6.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
277.
Trifolium striatum, Linn.
Provinces i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, W^ght, Kent.
— Stirling, Forfar.
Zones 12?
Highlands to 300 yards.
Census 14 26 52.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 6.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
277.
=i= Trifolium Bocconi, Savi.
Province 1.
Native?
Lat. about SO.
West Cornwall only.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Normandy.
— Not in Russia.
Portugal to Greece eastward.
Canaries.
144 23.
LEGUIIINIFEE.E.
278.
Trifolium glomeratum, Linn: 
Provinces 1234-[6 78--ll].
Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Scilly Isles, Wight, Kent.
— Suffolk, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Formerly in South "Wales ?
Census 4 10 12.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Channel Isles.
Kussia 6 A single locality in Caucasia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
278.- Trifolium strictum, Linn.
Province 1.
Native?
Once seen in Anglesea.
Lat. about 50.
West Cornwall only for certain.
Zone 1.
At or near the coast-level.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra.
(Channel Isles !) 
— Absent from Russia and Asia ?
Algeria.
Lybia.
279.
Trifolium suffocatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - - 7.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 5 9 10.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus - fra cha.
Russia 6.
A single locality in Caucasia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
280.
Trifolium fragiferum, Linn.
Provinces 123456789 10 11 (12) - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland, Fife ^ 
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 13 26 50.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
23.
LEGUMINIFERJE.
145 
281.
Trifolium procumbens, Lina.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
(18, Orkney ; Neill).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Comwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Boss.
Zones 1 S 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 17 34 86.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
282.
Trifolium minus, Relhan.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Often taken for T.
fiUforme.
Lat. 50— 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 33 70.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Scandinavia?
Russia 6 - - 3.
N.B. T.
filiforme of foreign authors.
Algeria ?
Canaries.
Azores.
282.* Trifolium filiforme, Angler.
Provinces 1 to 15 apparently.
Native.
Many false records.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife, Clackmannan.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
[Forfar to Ross, by misnomers].
Census 15 26 59.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita aus ger fra cha net.
Scandinavia ?
Russia 6.
Caucasia, certain in one locality.
Algeria?
" T.
micranthum, Viv.'' 
283.
Lotus corniculatus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 950 yds.
; also at 850, 830, etc.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
146 23.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
383.
b. Lotus tenuis, Wald.
et Kit.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 13 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Kincardine.
Zones 1 3.
Doubtfully distinct from L.
oorniculatus.
Census 18 33 ?
Ireland .
. ?
British-english type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4.
N.B. Habitats insufficiently recorded apart from 
those of L.
oorniculatus.
384.
Lotus major, Scop.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Banff.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards ; Baker.
Census 16 33 85.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 - - 3.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
385.
Lotus angustissimus, Linn.
Provinces 12[3 45--8 14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornwall, Devon, Hants, Sussex.
Suffolk?
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland?
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Channel Isles.
Russia 6 - 4.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria?
Canaries.
Azores.
285.
Lotus hispidus, Desf.
Provinces 1 2.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornvpall, Devon, Doreet.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland?
Atlantic-english type, 
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha.
— Absent from Russia and Asia ?
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
23.
LEGUMINIPER^.
147 
986.
Astragalus glyciphyllus, Linn.
Prov.
1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 - 10 11 12 13 14 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Banff, Eoss.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 27 59.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
287.
Astragalus hypoglottis, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 11 [12 13] 14 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58 or 59.
Wilts, Oxford, Essex.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Worcester to 250 yards ; Edwin Lees.
Census 10 19 31.
Ireland 1.
Germanic-british type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - den.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia.
Temperate Asia ; Hooker dist.
arc.
Barbary ?
— America.
Columbia.
288.
Astragalus alpinus, Linn.
Provinces 15.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58, or about 57.
Forfar, South Aberdeen.
Zone - - - - 5.
Highlands about 800 — 850 yards.
Census 112.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
— America.
Columbia.
289.
Oxytropis uralensis, DeCand.
Provinces 13 - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 55 — 59.
Wigton, Argyle, Fife.
— Sutherland, Caithness.
Zones - 9 3.
From coast-level to yards.
Census 4 6 8.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus - fra lap.
" 0.
Halleri," a var.
Russia 6 - - 3 9 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— America.
Columbia.
An aggregate species.
148 23.
LEGUMINIFER^.
290.
Oxytropis campestris, DeCand.
Province 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
North of Forfar only.
Zone 5.
Highlands about 700 yards ?
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - got - - lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Temperate Asia ; Hooker dist.
arc.
— America.
Columbia.
Also an aggregate species.
291.
Ornithopus perpusillus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dunbarton, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 16 30 72.
Ireland 2.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - - 3.
Eastward to Moscow.
Barbary.
Canaries.
Azores.
292.
Arthrolobium ebracteatum, DeCand.
Province 1.
Native.
Lat. 49- 50.
Scilly Isles, by West Cornwall.
Zone 1.
[South-west York; Ehhu Berry, in Phytol.
3, p.
366].
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha.
— Eastward to Greece.
Canaries.
Azores.
293.
Hippocrepis comosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 - 12 13 - 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Ayr, Kiucardme.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 12 23 38.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
— Eastward to Transylvania.
" Barbary." 
33.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
149 
294.
Onobrychis sativa, Linn.
Provinces (1) 2 3 4 5 - (7 8 - 10 - 12 - 14 15).
Native ?
Lat. 50—53.
Dorset, Hants, Kent.
— Salop, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Usually a relict from cultivation.
Census 4 10 20.
Ireland 0.
English-germanio type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra.
(Scandinavia).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
— N.B. In Britain, possibly native on the chalk.
295.
Vicia Orobus, DeCaud.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 - 7 - - [10] 11 12 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Somerset, Gloucester, York.
— Skye, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
" Somerset;" T.
B. Flower.
Census 9 14 22.
Ireland 2.
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe - - - aus ger fra - - den - nor.
— N.B. Distribution partial and interrupted ; from the Pyrenees 
to South Norway ; eastward to Transylvania.
296.
Vicia sylvatica, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— West Boss, Elgin.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 560 yards ; also at 460, 350, etc.
Census 17 29 62.
Ireland 9.
Scottish-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Temperate Asia; 'Hooker dist.
arc.
— N.B.
" Mountains of central Asia ;" Bentham Handb.
brit.
flo- 
297.
Vicia Cracca, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards ; also at 500, 400, etc.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
KamtSi.
Barbary.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
150 23.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
898.
Vicia sativa, Auot.
Provinces all ; but usually through cultivation.
Denizen?
Lat. 60 — 61.
Eeoords confused with those of V.
angustifolia.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 350 yards, sown ?
Census 18 35 77.
(Ireland).
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-43 (2).
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
—   (America).
298.
Vicia angustifolia, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
V. Bobartii, a small state.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds, and higher?
Census 16 26 52.
Ireland 6.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 6 4 3.
India.
Punjab ; Edgeworth.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America).
299.
Vicia lathyroides, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 17 26 45.
Ireland 2.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Riissia 6 8 4 3.
West-asia.
Cyprus ; Sibth.
Sm.
Algeria.
300.
Vicia lutea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - 4 - - - [B] 9 (10) - [12] 13 - 15.
Native.
Lat. 80—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Ayr, Kincardine.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds, or coast-level only.
Census C 10 11.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 - 4.
West-asia.
Caria ; Don, etc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
23.
LEGUIVUNIFERiE.
151 
301.
Vicia sepium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 19 3 4.
Humber to 650 yards.
Lakes to 560 yards.
Census 18 37 93.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4821.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Cyprus.
303.
Vicia bithynica, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 - 5 6 7 - - 10 (11).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 5S.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Flint, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 7 11 14.
Ireland 0.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia?
Algeria.
Azores ; T.
C. Hunt add.
303.
Vicia (Ervum) hirsuta, Koch.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
[18, Orkney; Lowe].
Lat. 50 — 89.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Caithness.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 34 83.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America.
Columbia).
304.
Vicia (Ervum) tetrasperma, Moench.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native in England.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Forfar.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Alien in Scotland ?
Census 15 39 65.
Ireland 4 English- british type.
Europe aU, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
15S S3.
LEGUMINIFEEiE.
304.* Vicia (Ervum) gracilis, Lois.
Proidnces 12 3 4 5.
Native or Colonist?
Lat. 50—53, Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Warwick, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 5 9 13.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia - 5.
Crimea : Bieb.
flo.
taur.
cauc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
305.
Lathyrus Aphaca, Linn.
Provinces ] 2 3 4 5 - - (8 9) [10 - - - 14].
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon, Dorset, Sussex.
— Warwick, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 5 13 23.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4.
West-asia.
India.
TUgeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
306.
Lathyrus Nissolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - [7] 8 - (10 11 12 - 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50—54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Derby.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 6 17 35.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5 4.
Algeria.
307.
Lathyrus hirsutus, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 [8 - ]0 11].
Colonist.
Lat. 51 — 52.
Surrey, Essex.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-germ anic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria.
23.
LEGUMINIPER^E.
153 
308.
Lathyrus pratensis, Linn.
Pravinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 18 38 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
-^ Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland ; Gieseoke.
309.
Lathyrus palustris, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2 3] 4 [5] - 7 8 [9] 1 - - [13].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 54 or 55.
Somerset, Suffolk.
— Carnarvon, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
" Hants." " Galloway." 
Census 5 8 11.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe all ; including var.
tenuifolius, in Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2, " Temperate Asia." Siberia.
Davuria.
— America.
Columbia.
A var.
pilosus in Kamtschatka.
310.
Lathyrus sylvestris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 (9) 10 - 12 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Mull, Forfar.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 26 49.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe aU,- except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Algeria.
310.* Lathyrus tuberosus, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Denizen, through ancient cultivation ?
Lat. 51—52.
Essex ; Gibson's Flora of Essex.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Surrey, Middlesex ;" Gerarde"].
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-germauic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria.
X 
154 23.
LEGUMINIFER^.
— 24.
ROSACEiB.
311.
Lathyrus maritimus, Bigel.
Provinces [1] S 3 4 - - - 8 - - - [13] 18.
Native.
Lax. 50 — 61.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent — Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Also in Suffolk and Lincoln.
Census 5 7 7.
Ireland 1.
Doubtful or local type.
Europe - - - - ger fra - net den got nor - lap.
Istria?
Russia 3 2].
East Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Behringia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
312.
Orobus tuberosus, Linn,.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 720 yards ; also at 680, 670, etc.
Census 18 35 81.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Pi/Ussia - - 4 3 2.
Dayuria ?
313.
Orobus niger, Linn.
Provinces [5] 11 - - - 15 - - [18].
Native?
Lat. 55—57 or 58.
Cheviotl., Perth, Forfar, Elgin?
Eastemess?
Zone - 2 or 3.
Altitude not ascertained.
Census 2 3 3 or 5.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
. 
Russia 6 5 4 3.
— N.B. O.
tuberosus often thus mislabelled by young botanists.
314.
Prunus (communis) spinosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 34 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution,.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
— (America, introduced).
24.
bosacejE.
155 
314.
Prunus (communis) insititia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 (14 15 17).
Native in England.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Dumfries, Northumb«rl.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Is it native in Scotland ?
Census 13 25 45.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 5 (4 3).
West-asia.
Smyrna.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
315.
Prunus Padus, Linn.
Provinces (1 2 3 4) 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 J6 17.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 59.
Glamorgan, Brecon, Gloucester?
— Ross, Sutherl; 
iZones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 13 19 40.
Ireland 4.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4821.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
" Canaries" ; Lecoq.
Geogr.
bot.
An error ?
316.
Prunus Cerasus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 12 - (14 15).
Denizen.
Lat. 50—55.
Coitiwdll, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, York?
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
WUd or well-estabUshed.
Census 12 16 22.
(Ireland 5).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Scandinavia).
Russia 6 5 (4 3).
India.
(Canaries.
Azores).
316.
Prunus avium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native ?
Often misnamed P.
Cerasus.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, ...
? 
Zones 12?
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 30 60?
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (awe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria; 
150 24.
ROSACEA.
317.
Spiraea Ulmaria, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 19 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ; also at 760, 700, etc.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4331.
Siberia.
Davuria.
" Temperate Asia.'' 
— Faroe.
Iceland, 
318.
Spiraea Filipendula, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 (13) 14 15 - (17).
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife, Forfar.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards ; J.
Tatham.
Census 13 36 50.
Ireland I.
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
(Azores).
321.
Geum urbanum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Elgin, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Lakes to 560 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 17 33 86.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— G.
striatum in America and Columbia.
332.
Geum rivale, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Devon, Dorset, South Hants, Sussex.
— Orkney.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 930 yds.
; again at 930, 900, etc.
Census 18 34 71.
Ireland 3.
British-scottish type.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
24.
EOSACEiE.
157 
323,b.
(331, b.).
Geum intermedium, Ehrh.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 - - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Dorset, North Hants, North Essex.
— • Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Eange of altitude ...
? 
Census 14 18 26.
Ireland 3.
British type?
Europe - ita - aus ger fra oha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia ?
— Iceland ; Dr. Lauder Lindsay's floral list.
323 (320).
Dryas octopetala, Linn.
Provinces 5 - 7 - - 10 [11 - 13] - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 54 or 53—60.
York, Stafford?
Carnarvon?
— Orkney.
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands — 900 yards, or upvrards.
Census 7 10 14.
Ireland 7.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - - 1.
Siberia, to the arctic coast, west and east.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
324.
Sibbaldia procumbens, Linn.
Provinces [13] 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Peebles, Stirling, Perth.
— Sutherland, Shetland.
Zones - - ?
4 8 6.
Highlands 500—1360 yards.
Census 5 8 16.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
325.
Potentilla fruticosa, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] 10 11 12 (1 3 14).
Native.
Lat. 54 — 65 (or 86).
York, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland.
Zones - 2 3 4.
Humber 250—400 yards ; Baker.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 2.
Intermediate-scottish type.
Europe fra net.
Isle of Oeland.
Russia 6-43.
" Temperate Asia." Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
158 24:.
E0SACEi9E.
326.
Potentilla rupestris, Linn.
Province 7.
Native.
[15, Perth, by mistake].
Lat. 82 — 53.
Craig Breiddin, Montgomery only.
Eone - 2.
Apparently about 150 — 200 yards.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net - got.
Norway ?
Russia 6 5-3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. A curiously local plant in Britain.
327.
Potentilla anserina, Linn.
Provinces all.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humbev, the same.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Russia 6-43 21.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Azores ?
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
328.
Potentilla argentea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 ?
14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset?
South Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Wales to 200 yards '?
Census 13 22 46.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
" Bithynia and Constantinople." 
— America.
"Canada!
North States " ; Torrey and Gray flo.
329.
Potentilla verna, Linn.
Provinces 1 - - 4 5 6 7 8 [9] 10 1112 - 14 15.
Native.
. 
Lat. 61—57.
Somerset, Cambridge, Suffolk?
— Fife, Forfar.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards ; Baker.
Census 11 14 18.
Ireland 0.
Doubtfully British type ?
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
" Azores " ?
— Faroe.
Iceland ?
Greenland.
America.
Col.
24.
ROSACEiB.
159 
330.
Potentilla alpestris, Hall.
fil.
Provinces 6 - - - 10 11 13 - - 15.
Native.
Lat. 62 — 57.
Brecon?
Cardigan, York.
— Forfar, Aberdeen.
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yds.
; again at 900, 830, etc.
Census 5 6 9.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus gar fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - 2 1.
West-asia.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland ; Babington, in Annals, 1847.
331.
Potentilla reptans, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cantire, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 16 32 78.
Ireland 12.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor) swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores ?
332.
Potentilla Tormentilla, Schreb.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to IJIO yards; also at 1060, etc.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-432].
Siberia.
Constantinople.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
332.
Potentilla procumbens et nemoralis, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17 [18].
Native.
Orkney?
Lat. 50—58 or 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Altitude ...
? TormentiUa reptans, Linn.
Census 17 30 47.
Ireland!
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Spurious aggregate ?
Russia --43; but no example seen by Ledebour.
Canaries, Azores.
— Labrador ; Torrey and Gray.
1160 24.
ROSACEA.
333.
Potentilla Fragariastrum, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 to 15 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney; Miss Boswell.
Zones 12 3 4.
Wales to 700 yards.
Lakes to 500 yards.
Census 17 33 82.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Eussia — 3.
Lithuania only.
Algeria.
334.
Comarum palustre, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 930 yards ; also at 710, 600, etc.
Census 18 36 80.
Ireland 12.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
336.
Fragaria vesca, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 650 yards ; also at 500, 450, etc.
Census 18 37 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Barbary.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
337.
Rubus Chameemorus, Linn.
Provinces 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 62 — 59.
Montgomery, Derby, York.
— Eoss, Sutherland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080 yards ; also at 1030, etc.
Census 10 14 30.
Ireland 1.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe — ger - - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
84.
ROSACEA.
101 
338.
Rubus saxatilis, Linn.
Prov.
[1] - - - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 U 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
[Corn., Dev.], Glamorg., Gloucest.
— Orli., Shetl.
Zones ?
2 3 4 5.
Highlands to 910 yards ; also at 900, 760, etc.
Census 14 23 42.
Ireland 11.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe spa ita - aus gar fra - net den got nor sw'G lap.
Russia 6-43 21.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America ?
Columbia ?
339.
Rubus Idseus, Linn.
trov.
1 to 17 (18).
Native ; but introduced to maily localities.
Lat. 50 — 69.
Oornwallj Wight, Kent.
— Rossj Sutherland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 660 yards ; also at 650^ 640, etc.
Census 17 32 77.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Wesfr-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatkai 
" Algiers." — Columbia?
340.
Hubus cSesius, " Linn.' Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57 or 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— terth, Elgin?
Zones 12?
Humber to 300 yards.
Lakes the same.
Census 15 28 63.
Ireland 4.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia; Siberia.
Finland ; Fries-.
— N.B. Distribution given, as nominally recorded.
340*.
Rubus corylifoliuS) " Sm." Auct.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— HebrideSj Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 16 ?
? Ireland 3.
British type of distribution; 
Europe - ita - ' ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6-43.
N.B. The distribution of this, as of the very 
aggregate R.
fruticosus, is that of a name only.
y 
1C2 -^ 24.
ROSACEA.
340*.
Rubus frnticosus, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
Including numerous segregates.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornw., etc.
— Hebrid.
; Balf., Bab. Ork.
; Neill.
Zones 1 S 3.
Humber to 300 yards; Baker, — "discolor," etc.
Census 18 37 99.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
341.
Rosa spinosissima et pimpinellifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
[18 Orkney; Lovve.J 
Lat. 50 — 59.
Devon, Wight, Sussex.
— Sutherland, Caithness.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 570 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 17 31 67.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den - nor.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland ; Lauder Lindsay flo.
" E.
pimpinellifolia." 
342.
Rosa hibernica, Sm.
Provinces - - 3 9 10 11 12.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 55.
Surrey, Chester, York, Northumberland, Cumb.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 200 yards ; Baker.
Census 5 5 6.
Ireland 1.
Intermediate type ?
Europe.
No habitat ascertained.
Russia.
The same remark.
— Iceland ; Hooker list.
" E.
villosa var.
hibernica " ; Lindsay flo.
343.
Rosa Sabini, Doniana, Wilsoni, etc.
Provinces 1 2 3 ?
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 - - [18].
Native, 
Lat. 50 — 58.
North Devon, Sussex.
— Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 13 17 25.
Ireland 2.
British type?
Europe.
No certain habitats ascertained.
— N.B. The distribution is filled in to accord with the use of 
these names by the botanists of Britain.
24.
EOSACEiE.
16-'i 
844.
Rosa villosa, mollis, mollissima, Auglor.
Provinces all, by safe and unsafe records.
Native.
Lat 60 — 60.
Isle of Wight; A.
G. More.
— Orkney; B.-Syme.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 500 yards; Baker.
Census 18 37 88.
Ireland 1 .
British type of distribution.
Europe fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia.
General in Finland ; Fries sum.
veg.
— N.B. European habitats taken from Baker and Fries.
345.
Rosa tomentosa, scabriuscula, Angler.
Provinces all, by safe and unsafe records.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58 or 61.
Devon, Sussex, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Shetl.
? 
Zones 12 3, Humber to 500 yards ; Baker.
Census 18 33 78.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
(Sweden).
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Algeria.
N.B. Distribution not satisfactory.
348.
Rosa Borreri, Woods.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 10.
Native.
[Query, 1 4 8 11 ] 4 IS].
Lat. 50 — 55.
"Sussex, Kent, Worcester, York"; Baker.
Zones 1 2.
Altitude perhaps 20 — 200 yards.
Census 4 5?
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution ?
Europe.
Identified with the German R.
inodora of Reichenbach, 
according to Mr. J.
G. Baker, but not identical with the 
Scandinavian R.
inodora of Fries^ 
349.
Rosa micrantha, Sm.
Provinces 12345678- 10 11.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham?' 
Zones 1 2.
North Yorkshire — 250 yards ; Baker.
Census 10 18 30.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe.
" Belgium.
Germany." Usually combined with R 
rubiginosa, hy the Continental botanists.
— (America.
New England, with R.
rubiginosa ; Gray).
164 84.
ROSACE.E.
350.
Rosa rubiginosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58 ?
True and false localities inextricably confuseij.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards ; Baker.
Census ?
? ?
(Ireland 1).
E,nglisb type of distribution ?
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia?
India.
Algeria.
— (Ameriea, naturalised in many places), 
351.
Rosa canina, Auct.
Provinces all ; including many segregates.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 420 yards.
Census 18 36 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
3.52.
Rosa systyla, Anglor.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 [7 - - 10 11 12 - 14 15].
Native, 
Lat. 50 — 53.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Cambridge.
Zoue 1.
Low grounds.
Strangely confused with R.
arvensia.
Census 6 12 22.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europ,e - - - aus ger fra cha net.
Normandy.
— N.B. Distribution in England uncertain.
By Nyman's Syl- 
loge it occurs in Austria, Switzerland, France, Belgium.
353,.
Rosa arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 (15).
Native.
Lat. 5.0 — 56- Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Haddington.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(Kincardine ; Boswell Syme).
Census 14 27 65.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
[Siberia?] Only a single locality in the Flora Rossica, uauiely, 
"in Siberia uralensi prope Jekaterinenburg ; Uspenski." 
24.
ROSACE^;.
105 
354 (323).
Agrimonia Eupatoria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland.
2ones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 17 34 85.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries Az;ores.
— America.
Columbia.
354 (393, b).
Agrimonia odorata, Mill.
Provinces 133-5678-10-12.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, York.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Distribution imperfectly known.
Census 9 13 19.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
" A.
procera, Wallr." 
Russia 6 5 4.
Canaries ; Lecoq.
geogr.
bot.
354*.
Sanguisorba officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 (15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset.
— Kirkcud., Roxburgh.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Lakes to 450 yards.
Census 14 23 49.
Ireland 3.
Intermediate-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net deu got nor.
Russia 6-43-1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
^Iceland ; Zoega.
America ?
Columbia ?
355.
Poterium Sanguisorba, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Perth, Forfar.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 550 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 15 39 61.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got) swe.
Russia 6 6 4 3.
Siberia.
Egypt.
Azores ; Seubert flo.
— (America).
166 24.
EOSACEiE.
355*.
Poterium muricatum, Spach.
Provinces 13 3 4 5.
Alien or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Hereford, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; introduced witli clover seeds ?
Census 5 10 15.
Ireland 0.
Bnglisli type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra - net.
Russia 6-4.
P. polygamum.
Algeria ?
Azores ?
356.
Alchemilla vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1200 yards ; also at 1080, etc.
Census 18 33 71.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
" Labrador ; Dr. Morrison." 
357.
Alchemilla alpina, Linn.
Provinces 10 - 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 61.
Cumberl., Westmorel., York.
— Hebrides, Shetl.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands 150—1330 yards.
Census 6 11 23.
Ireland 2.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
[West-asia ; "Bithynia."] Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
[N.
States; Pursh].
358.
Alchemilla arvensis, Scop.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 01.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to " 570 yards." Humber to 450 yds.
Census 18 37 87.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6-43.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
24.
EOSACE^E.
167 
360.
Crataegus Oxyacantha, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16 (17 18).
Native ; very frequently planted.
Lat. 80—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 or 600 yards.
Lakes to 450 yards.
Census 16 33 86.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America).
C. monogyna included above.
861.
Cotoneaster vulgaris, Lindl.
Province 7.
Native ?
Lat. 53 — S4.
Ormeshead, Carnarvonshire.
Zone 1 or 2.
Coast-cliffs, at or about " 150 yards." 
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local and doubtful type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net - nor swe.
Bornholm.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— .
How brought to the Ormeshead ?
363.
Pyrus communis, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 (9) 10 (11 12 13 14 16).
Denizen?
Lat. 50 — 85.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— North Yorkshire.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; usually chance-sown ?
Census 8 17 38.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 8 4 3.
N.B. Not clearly native in several of the Eu- 
ropean countries cited.
Algeria ?
363.
Pyrus Malus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 (15 16).
Native.
Denizen in Scotland.
Lat. 50 — 86.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Edinburgh.
Zones 13 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber the same.
Census 14 28 60.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
— Likely a native more vridely than P.
communis.
108 -24.
ROSACEiE.
— 25.
onagrace;e.
364.
Pyrus torminalis, Ehrh.
Provinces 12345678 (9 -111 2).
Native.
Lat. 50—54.
Cornwall, Wight; Kent.
— Anglesea, Notts.
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds ; very sparsely distributed.
Census 8 IS ?
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia?
Constantinople.
Algeria.
N.B. Decreasing in England ?
365.
Pyrus Aria, Auct.
Prov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 (9) 10 11 13 (13) 14 (15) 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 14 24 40 ?
Ireland 6 (2).
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - (got) nor.
Bornholm; 
Russia 6 5, India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Segregates included above.
366.
Pyrus Aucuparia, Gaertn.
Provinces all ; unless 4, Ouse, should be eJccepted.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 880 yards ; also at 830, 700, etc.
Census 17 34 70.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Madeira ?
— Faroe ?
Icel.
Var. americana in Gre. Am.
Col.
367.
Epilobium angustifolium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Dorset, Wight, Kent — Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yds.
; again at 550, 500, etc.
Census 18 31 72.
Ireland 4.
British-Scottish type.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamts.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
S&.
ONAGRACE^.
109 
368.
Epilobium hirsutum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Moray?
Zones 12?
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 15 30 76.
Ireland 11.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
369.
Epilobium parviflorum, Schreb.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wigbt, Kent.
— Hebrides, Moray.
Zones .1 2 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber to same.
Census 17 33 82.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
370.
Epilobium montanum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Lakes to 560 yards.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-432 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
371* (370*).
Epilobium lanceolatum, Seb. et M.
Provinces 1 (2) 3 - 5.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Cornwall, Devon, Surrey, Gloucester, Monmouth.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
English type x)f distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus gar fra cha.
Channel Isles.
— N.B. This is sufficiently distinct from ' montanum' or roseum, 
with which it has been confused.
Madeira ?
170 25.
ONAGRACE^.
371.
Epilobium roseum, Schreb.
Provinces 1 .2 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 - - 14 15 Native.
Lat. 50—57 or 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar?
Moray?
Zones 12?
Low grounds ; often overlooked or misnamed ?
Census U 17 30.
Ireland 1 ?
English type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Lapland and Finmark.
Kussia 6-43.
India.
Siberia.
— Faroe ?
Columbia.
Isle of Sitcha ; Led. flo.
ros.
372.
Epilobium palustre, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Segregates included in lines 5, 6, 7.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Humber to 650 yards.
Census 18 38 88.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Finmark excepted.
Eussia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Canaries.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Col.
373.
Epilobium tetragonum, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Probably in province 17.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— • Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 700 yards, Ep. obscurum.
Census 17 35 83.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3-1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
374.
Epilobium alpinum, Linn.
Provinces [7 8 - 10] 11 [12] - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Cheviotland.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highltods 500—1300 yards.
Census 4 7 17.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
25.
ONAGRACE/E.
171 
374=:-.
Epilobium alsinifolium, Vill.
Provinces [6] 7 - - 10 11 1-2 13 - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Camarvoo, York, Westmoreland.
— Sutherland.
Zone - - 3 i 5.
Highlands to 960 yards.
Wales 900 — ?
yards.
Census 8 10 18.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-43-1.
N.B. Two forms in Britain.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia; Flo. ros.
376.
Isnardia (or Ludwigia) palustris, Linn.
Province - 2.
Native.
[12 Cumberland; Joseph Robson].
Lat. 50 — 51.
South Hants, East Sussex.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Extinct in Hants ?
Census 1 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Hamburg.
Russia 6-4.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
Oregon ; Torrey and Gray.
377.
Circaea lutetiana, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 32 79.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
378.
Circeea alpina, Linn.
P. 10 - 12 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
[1-456789 11 13 14 - 18].
Lat. 54 — 59.
York, Westmoreland, Cumberland.
— Sutherland.
Zone - - 3.
Lakes to 450 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 5 6?
Ireland 5.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
. — America.
Columbia.
X.B. Ill understood in Britain.
172 26.
HALORAGIACE^.
379.
Hippuris vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 17 36 72.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Spain and Turkey to be excepted.
Russia 6-432 ] .
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
380.
Myriophyllum verticillatum, Linn.
Provinces ] 2 3 4 5 [6 7] 8 9 10 11 [12 - - 15 - - 18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Northumberland.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 9 15 35.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia 6-432.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
" China." 
Algeria.
— Faroe ?
Iceland ?
America.
Columbia.
381.
Myriophyllum spicatum, Linn.
Provinces all ; but much confused with no.
382.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Carnarvon, Wight, Kent.
- — Hebrides, Orlmey ?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 18 33 70.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland.
America.
383.
Myriophyllum alterniflorum, DeCand.
Provinces all.
Native.
Localities not fully recorded.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3.
Highlands to 400 yards ; also at 850, 300, etc.
Census ] 8 29 43.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - - ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia?
Not in Ledebour's Flora Rossioa.
Algeria.
Azores.
— S.
Greenland and Arc. Am.
; Hook.
dist.
arc.
26.
HALORAGIACEJE.
173 
383.
Callitriche verna, Auct.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Other species confused with this.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 750 yards ?
Lakes to 510 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finroark.
Segregates partly included?
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Ice.
Gre. Am.
Col.
384.
Callitriche platycarpa, " Kutz." 
Provinces 1 to 16 18.
Native.
Localities insufBciently on record.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 1 3 3.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Lakes the same.
Census 17 31 49.
Ireland 12?
British type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia.
Distribution not given apart from that of C.
verna.
Algeria.
385.
Callitriche hamulata, Kutz., et pedunculata, DeC.
Provinces all.
Native.
" C.
autumnalis," by frequent misnomer.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Dorset, Susse-x.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4?
Highlands to 710 yards, perhaps higher.
Census 18 31 45.
Ireland 4.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - 4 3.
Algeria.
386.
Callitriche autumnalis, Linn.
Provinces [- 3 3 4 5 6] 7 ?
9 ?
11 ?
? 14 15 J6 ?
? Native.
Lat. 53 — 57 or 60.
Anglesea.
— Islay, Kincardine.
Orkney?
Zones ?
3 3.
Alt....?
Much confused with no.
385.
Census 6 ?
? Ireland 4?
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus - - - net den got nor swe lap.
" Spain"?
Russia - - 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
"Algeria"??
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America?
Columbia?
174 36.
HOLOEAGIACE^.
27.
LYTHEACE.S:.
387.
Ceratophyllum demersum et submersum, Linn.
Proyinces I to 11 - - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Edinburgh, Forfar.
Zones ] 2.
Low grounds.
Localities imperfectly separable.
Census 13 36 40.
Lreland 4 English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6-43.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
389.
Lythrum Hyssopifolia, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 4 [5 6] - 8 9 [10 11 12].
Native?
Lat. 51—54.
Hertford!
Cambridge!
Derby?
Lancast.?
Cumb.
? 
Zone 1 ?
Old authorities for other counties, Kent to York.
Census 4 ?
? Ireland?
English type?
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net.
Hanover.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
390.
Lythrum Salicaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Perth.
Zones 12?
Humber to 250 yards.
Lakes 150 yards.
Census 16 3] 79.
Ireland 12.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— America, " probably native " ; Torrey and Gray.
391.
Peplis Portula, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones ] 2 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 18 36 80.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 4 3.
Algeria.
Azores.
29.
CUOUEBITACEaS.
— 31.
ILLECEBEACE^.
175 
393.
Bryonia dioica, Linn.
Provinces 12348-789 10 11.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 65.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Lancaster, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(Introduced to Northum.
; Mr. Chrisp).
Census 10 20 50.
Ireland 0.
Englislr-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6.
West-asia.
Lycia or Caria ; Fellowes.
Algeria.
394.
Montia fontana, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1060 yards ; also at 1000, etc.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 19.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia - - - 3 2 1.
West-asia.
East Siberia.
Smyrna.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
395.
Illecebrum verticillatum, Linn.
Province ] .
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornwall, Devon.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia - - - 3.
Isle of Oesel and Poland ; Led. flo.
ros.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
396.
Corrigiola littoralis, Linn.
Province 1.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornwall, Devon.
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 12 2.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia - - 4 3.
Shore of the Caspian sea ; Led. flo.
ros.
Algeria.
170 31.
ILLECEBRACE^.
— 32.
SCLEKANTHACE.E.
397.
Herniaria (vulgaris) glabra, etc.
Provinces 1 [2 3] 4 [5 6 - 8 9 14 15].
Native.
Lat. SO — 53, Cornwall, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Lincoln?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Two forms, " glabra " and "ciliata.'' 
Census 2 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
398.
Polycarpon tetraphyllum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 (3) - - 6 - - - (10).
Native.
Lat. SO — 51.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset.
(Middlesex; Hind, cat.) 
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
(Yorkshire; P.W.Watson; S.
Hailstone).
Census 2 3 3.
Lreland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cba net.
Eussia 6.
West-asia.
Syria.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
399.
Scleranthus annuus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Eoss, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 360 yards in several places.
Census 17 34 80.
Ireland 5.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland.
(America).
400.
Scleranthus perennis, Linn.
Provinces [1 - 3] 4 [5] 6 [7 - 9 15].
Native.
Lat. 52— 53.
Suffolk!
Norfolk!
Eadnor!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Kent?
Surrey?
Chester?].
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia - - 4 3.
Siberia.
N.B. An intermediate form of S.
annuus, sub-perennial, is mistaken for this.
;J3.
GEOSSULARIACE*.
177 
403.
Ribes nigrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16, by the records.
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 55 or 57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Islay, Aberdeen?
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census ?
? ?
(Ireland).
Intermediate type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra (oha net den) got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 8 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. Usually a garden-escape in Britain.
404.
Ribes rubrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16, by the records, usually as an Alien.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Aberdeen ?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census ?
? ?
(Ireland).
Type...?
Europe all, native or assumed as native.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
N.B. See the next.
404.
Ribes (rubrum) petrseum, Sm.
Province 10 11 12 - - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 57.
Cumberland, Westmoreland.
— Isla, Elgin.
Zones - 2 3.
North Yorkshire, 100—500 yards ; J.
G. Baker.
Census 5 7 13.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe.
Not distinguished from E.
rubrum.
— N.B. This is treated apart, as some approach towards showing 
the truly native area of R.
rubrum.
405.
Ribes alpinum, Linu.
Provinces (5 6) 7 8 9 10 11 13 (13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 53—55.
Stafford?
North Wales?
— Cumberland, York.
Zones 12?
N.Yorkshire to 250 yds., " clearly indigenous ;" Baker.
Census 6 7 15.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Labrador ; Hooker dist.
arc.
plants.
8 a 
178 (13.
GEOSSULARIACE/E.
— 34.
CEASSULACE^.
406.
Eibes Grossularia et Uva-crispa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15, by records.
Denizen in 9 to 12 ?
Lat. 54 — 56.
Cumberland, Westmoreland, York, Lancaster, etc.
Zones (1) 3 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber the same.
Census ?
? ?
(Ireland).
Intermediate type ?
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 - 4 3 S.
India.
Algeria.
— N.B. Doubtful where native.
407.
Tillsea muscosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 (3) 4.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Hants, Suffolk, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Spreading more widely of late ?
Census 3 6 8.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra cha net.
Holland.
— Not in Poussia or Asia ?
Eastward to Greece.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
408.
Sedum Rhodiola, DeCand.
Provinces 6 7 r - 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 or 52 — 61.
Glamorgan or Brecon.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - 3 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1300 yards.
Coast rocks, N.B.
Census 11 17 26.
Ireland 7.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Prussia - - - 3 - 1.
Himalaya.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
409.
Sedam Telephium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - (18).
NatiTC, but only Denizen northward.
Lat. 50—57 Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Perth?
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 150 yards.
Census 16 39 60 ?
Ireland 5 (5).
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Piussia 6-433.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— (America, introduced).
A single species in Britain ?
84.
CEASSULACE.E. 17'J 
410.
Sedum villosum, Linn.
Provinces [9] 10 11 12 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 58.
Westmoreland, York.
— Argyle, Elgin.
Zones 3 4.
Humber 200—700 yds.
Highlands to 660 yds.
Census 7 10 25.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor - lap.
Transyhania.
Russia - - 3.
Lithuania only, by Led. flo.
ros.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
412.
Sedum anglicum, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 8 7 - 9 10 11 12 13 [14] 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
North Wales to 1110 yards ; unusually high.
Census 15 26 46.
Ireland 10.
Atlantic-british type.
Euiope spa - — fra cha - - got nor.
Austria?
— A West-european species, reported from Transylvania.
— Iceland ; Dr. Lauder Lindsay's Flora.
414.
Sedum acre, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
416.
Sedum rupestre, Huds.
"S.
elegans, Lej." 
Provinces 1 (2 - 4) 6 6 7 [8 - 10] - 13 1 3.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 53 or 55.
N. Devon, Somerset.
— Westm.?
Wigton?
Zones 1 2.
Upper Umit not ascertained.
Two forms.
Censiis 6 9 12.
(Ireland 3).
Atlantic type ?
Europe spa ita tur aus - ger fra cha net.
Germany ?
— N.B. Confused with ' Forsterianum ' and ' reflexum.' 
— Iceland ; Lauder Lindsay's Flora.
Error?
180 34.
ORASSULACE^.
— 35.
SAXIFEAGACE^.
416.
Sedum Forsterianum, Sm.
Provinces [1 - ' 4] 5 6 7.
Native.
Two forms under this name.
Lat. 51— fil.
Glamorgan?
Heref., Radnor.
— Carn., Denbigh?
Zones 1 9.
Altitude not ascertained.
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe.
Germany, if S.
aureum, of Wirtgen, identical.
— N.B. Four forms occur in West Britain, confusedly ap- 
portioned to the two names of 'Forsterianum ' and ' rupestre.' 
418.
Cotyledon Umbilicus, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 3 [4] 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 12 13 - - 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Mid Ebudes, Argyle.
Zones 1 2 3.
North Wales to 350 yards.
Census 13 2'2 46.
Ireland 11.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha.
Tessin for " ger." 
West-asia.
Brought from Lycia or Caria ; D.
Don.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
422.
Saxifraga stellaris, Linn.
Prov.
[1] 7 - - 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 59.
Montgomery, Merioneth.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1440 yards.
Wales 150— ?
Census 10 14 30.
Ireland 7.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
S. foliolosa in Spitsbergen, etc.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Labrador.
423.
Saxifraga nivalis, Linn.
Provinces 7 - - - - 12 - - 15 10.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 57 or 58.
Carnarvon, Westmorel.
— Argyle, Aberdeen.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands 700—1310 yards.
Census 4 5 10 Ireland 1.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Switzerland?
Bohemia.
Scandinavia, nor swe lap fin.
Russia 2 1.
Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Frivoc.
Iceland, (ireenland.
America Columbia.
35.
SAXIFBAGACEiE.
181 
494.
Saxifraga Hirculus, Linn.
Provinces - - - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 53 or 54—57.
[Chester, extinct], York.
— Perth, Kiucard.
Zones - 2 3.
Humber 350—700 yards.
Census 7 8 9.
Ireland 2.
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4331.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
Spitsbergen.
425.
Saxifraga aizoides, Linn.
Provinces [7 8 9] 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 60.
Cumberland, Westmoreland, York.
— Orkney.
Zones - 2 3 4 5 6.
Highlands 0—1050 yards.
Census 8 12 27.
Ireland 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra iior swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
426.
Saxifraga oppositifolia, Linn.
Provinces 6 7 - - 10 - 13 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 61.
Brecon?
Merioneth, Carnarvon.
— Orkney, Shetl.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands 0—1310 yards.
Census 9 14 22.
Ireland 4.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
427.
Saxifraga granulata, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 16 - - (18).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset, Hants, Kent — Elgin, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 13 34 57.
Ireland 3.
British-intermediate type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3.
Himalaya.
North Asia ; Hook.
dist.
arc.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Lindsay Flo.
182 35.
SAXIFRAGACE^.
498.
Saxifraga cernua, Linn.
Province 15.
Native.
Lat. S6— 57.
On Ben Lawers, Mid Perth.
Zone 6.
Altitude about 1300 yards.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
Spitsbergen.
429.
Saxifraga rivularis, Linn.
Provinces 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 57 or 58.
Westerness, Aberdeen, Perth, Forfar?
Zones 6.
Highlands 1000—1200 yards.
Census 2 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe ?
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
480.
Saxifraga tridactylites, Linn.
Prov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 600 yards.
Lakes to 800 yards.
Census 15 30 64.
Ireland 1 1.
British-enghsh type.
Europe all, except Fiumark.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia?
Eastern Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
431.
Saxifraga hypnoides, Linn.
Prov.
1 [2] - - 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 59 or 60.
N. Somerset, Glamorgan.
— Sutherl., Ork.
Zones ?
2 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1800 y.
Somerset below 200 y.
Census 14 19 37.
Ireland 7.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe spa - - aus - fra - net.
Norway ?
Russia ?
Synonyms and habitats uncertain.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greeulaud; Gicsuuke.
i5.
SAXIFRAGACE/E.
183 
431.
Saxifraga decipiens, " Ehrh." Eng. bot.
ed.
3. 
Provinces 7 [8 12], Native.
Lat. 53 — 54.
Carnarvonshire only ?
Zones - - .
- ?
Altitude not ascertained.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local type.
Europe ?
Distribution not ascertained.
It is to be feared that 
the habitats of S.
decipiens, csespitosa, and hypnoides are 
much confused together in books.
Faroe ?
Iceland ?
432.
Saxifraga caespitosa, " Linn." Eng. bot.
edit.
3. 
Provinces 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58, about 57.
Banff.
Westerness.
[Aberdeen, etc.] 
Zone 6.
Altitude not ascertained.
Census 2 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa - tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Hub. unc.
Eussia 1.
Arctic Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
434.
Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1110 yards ; also at 1060, etc.
Census 18 35 87.
Ireland 12.
British-highland type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den - nor.
Russia -- 3.
"Himalaya.'' Siberia?
— Columbia?
C. oppositifolium var.
Scouleri; Hook.
bor.
am.
435.
Chrysosplenimm alternifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset, Hants, Kent.
— Nairn, Elgin.
Zones 12 3 4 5 Highlands to 1060 yards ; also at 900, etc.
Census 16 26 65.
Ireland 2.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, unless Spain to be excepted.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Greenland.
America.
Col. C.
tetrandrum in Spitsbergen.
184 35.
SAXIPEAGACE.E. 37.
CORNACE^.
436.
Parnassia palustris, Linn.
Provinces [1] 8 3 4 5 - 7 to 18.
Native.
[Somerset].
Lat. 50—61.
[Dorset], South Hants.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Lakes to 600 yards.
Census 16 39 64.
Ireland 11.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
• — Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
437.
Adoxa Moschatellina, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— East Ross.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080 yards ; rarely so liigh.
Census 16 33 74.
Ireland 1.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6-4331.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
438.
Hedera Helix, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Algeria ?
Canaries ?
Azores ?
A distinct species there ?
439.
Cornus sanguinea, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 (1 3 14 15 16).
Native in England.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 13 25 56.
Ireland 3 (3).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net deu got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— (Isla and Elgin, North Britain ; but introduced).
37.
COENACK/E.
38.
UMBELLIFER^.
185 
440.
Comus suecica, Linn.
Provinces 10 11 - - [14] 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 59.
North-east York, Cheviotland.
— Ross, Sutherl.
Zones -,3345.
Highlands 300—950 y.
Humber 150—350 y.
Census 5 8 13.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe net den got nor swe lap fin.
N.W. Germany.
Russia 3 3 ] .
Eastern Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
441.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Humber to 800 yards.
Census 18 37 86.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tuf aus ger fra oha net den got nor.
Russia 6 - - 3.
Caucasia, Lithuania, Poland.
Barbary.
— Iceland; W.
J. Hooker.
443.
Sanicula europsea, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 13 3.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 17 83 81.
Ireland IS.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Aland.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Finland; Fries sum.
veg.
North Africa ?
" Equatorial Africa." 
444.
Eryngium maritimum, Linn.
Prov.
] 3 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Mid Ebudes, Aberdeen.
Zones 1 3.
Littoral.
[Shetland, casually ?].
Census 16 34 44.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4.
Finland ; Fries sum veg.
Algeiia.
•i B 
186 38.
UMBELLIFER^.
445.
Eryngium campestre, Linn.
Provinces 1 - - 4 (5) 6 - - [9 10] 1 I.
Denizen.
Lat. 50— 55.
S.Devon!
N.Somerset!
Glamorgan!
Durham!
Zones ] 3.
Coast-level.
Extinct in Suffolk and NortLampton.
Census 3 4 4.
(Ireland).
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net.
(Denmark), 
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Western Siberia, 
Algeria.
Egypt.
446.
Conium maculatum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native ; becoming doubtfully so northward.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Caithness.
Ork.
; Neill, 
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 18 36 90.
Ireland II.
British type of distribution, 
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries, Azores.
— (America).
447.
Physospermum cornubiense, DeCand.
Province 1.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, South Devon, 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 1 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra.
Dansea aquilegifolia.
Hussia 6 5.
N.B. The identity of the Dansea and Physospermum 
appears still an unsettled question.
448.
Smyrnium Olusatrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Denizen on coast.
Alien inland?
Lat. 50—57 (or 58).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Stirling, (Aberd.) 
Zones 1 9.
Littoral ; possibly native on the coast.
Census 15 23 35.
(Ireland 12).
English type of distributiou.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha net.
Holland, 
Russia 6 - 4.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores, 
38.
UMBELLIFER^.
IK?
4.49.
Cicuta virosa, Liim.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 la 13 14 16 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Dorset, Sussex?
Kent?
— Dunbarton, Forfar.
Zones 1 S.
Low grounds.
Many erroneous records ?
Census 14 30 24.
Ireland 6.
English type?
Europe - ita - aus ger fra ?
net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— America ?
Columbia ?
In Scandinavia it is var.
tenuifolia.
450.
Apium graveolens, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 (14 15) 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wigbt, Kent.
— Cantire, Northumb.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Inland in province 5.
Census 14 23 48.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Columbia?
" South America." 
452.
Petroselinum segetum, Koch.
Provinces 123456-8- 10 [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lincoln, York.
Zones ] 2.
Low grounds.
Census 8 18 32.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - - - - ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6.
Western Temperate Asia ; Helmsley.
• — N.B. Portugal and Turkey also recorded for this plant.
453.
Trinia vulgaris, DeCand.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 - [7 - - - - 12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
South Devon, North Somerset, West Gloucester.
Zone 1.
[Hereford, Carnarvon, Cumberland, erroneously].
Census 2 3 8.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
— In Europe, southward to Greece.
188 38.
UMBELLIPER^.
454.
Helosciadium nodiflorum, Koch.
Provinces 1 to 14 [15] 16.
Native.
Including H.
"repens." 
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Haddington.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 950 yards.
Census 15 29 72.
Ireland 12.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Denmark ?
Russia - - - 3.
Lithuania only.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
455.
Helosciadium inundatum, Koch.
Provinces 1 to 17 ; perhaps to 18.
Native.
Lat. 60—58 or 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Orkney?
Zones 1 9 3.
Humber to 550 yards.
Highlands to 250 yards.
Census 17 33 79.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - - 3.
N.B. Dr. Neill included this among plants 
observed in Orkney; not found there by others.
456.
Sison Amomum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 (11 - - 14).
Native?
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Chester, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 10 93 49.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Normandy.
West-asia?
N.B. Looks indigenous in Southern England.
Dr.
Johnston thought it introduced into its single Scottish locality.
457.
.SIgopodium Podagraria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - (18).
Native?
Denizen in N.
Britain.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Elgin.
(Orkney).
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Highlands to 150 yards.
Census 16 32 69.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got swe.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Always near inhabited places in Britain ?
38.
UjrBELLIFER^,.
189 
459.
Carum verticillatum, Koch.
Provinces 1 6 7 19 13 - - 16].
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Devon?
Glamorg., Pembroke.
— Dunbarton, Argyle.
Zones 1 a 3.
Low grounds.
Census 6 8 17.
Ireland 3.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Corsica ?
— N.B. If truly found in Corsica, then "ita " should be added in 
the line above.
Barbary ?
460 Carum Bulbocastanum, Koch.
Provinces - [3] 3 4.
Native.
Lat. 52—53, Hertford, Bedford, Cambridge.
[Wilts, Middx.J 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 2 9 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6.
Siberia.
Algeria.
461.
Bunium flexuosum, With.
Provinces all.
Native.
Shetland ; G.
Tate.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent, — Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 19 3.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Lakes to 410 yards.
Census 18 37 65.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution, 
Europe spa ita - - fra cha net - nor.
Corsica.
Russia ?
By the references (erroneously ?) to Smith and De CandoUe, 
in the Fl. Ros., this would appear to grow in Crimea and Caucasia.
463.
Pimpinella Saxifraga, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— North-west Sutherland.
Zones 19 3 4.
Highlands to 570 yards.
Lakes to 600 yards.
Census 17 34 89.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— In Europe, southward to Grenada.
190 -"iS.
UMBETiTFEKJi.
463.
Pimpinella magna, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 - - (14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50—55 (or 57).
Devon, Sussex, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
(Fife or Perth ; Dewar !) 
Census 9 18 37.
Ireland 5.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor (svfe).
Russia 6-43.
N.B. Reported from province 14 in the Flora 
of Edinburgh, by Professor Balfour.
Correctly so ?
464.
Sium latifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 - 10 11 13 - 14 16.
Native.
Lat. 60 or 51 — 57.
Cornwall?
Sussex, Kent.
— Stirling or Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 12 33 35.
Ireland 5.
English-germanio type.
Europe aU, except Turkey and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
— America?
Columbia?
The European species?
465.
Sium angustifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Kincardine, Elgin.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 15 30 66.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger .fra cha net den got.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
India.
— N.B. Common in Orkney, according to Neill; an error?
466.
Bupleurum tenuissimum, Linn.
Provinces 1334 5 --89-11.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Lancashire, Durham.
Zones 1 S.
Low grounds.
Census 8 14 30.
Ireland 0.
English-germanio type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6.
Caucasus ; Bieb.
flo.
taur.
cau.
Algeria.
•38.
UMBELLIFEKiE.
191 
467.
Bupleurum aristatum, Barth.
Provinces 1 9 - - [5].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
South Devon, East Sussex.
Zone 1.
Coast-level, or low grounds.
Census 2 2 9.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Russia 6.
[Reported for Worcestershire, by Mr. Edwin Lees ; 
but very likely some error in nomenclature.] 
468.
Bupleurum falcatum, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Native ; Gibson's Flora of Essex.
Lat. 51 — 52.
Essex only, between Ongar and Chelmsford.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Looal-germanic type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Eastward to Japan ; Mr. Helmsley, in the 
Journal of Botany.
Ceylon ; Mr. Thwaites.
469.
Bupleurum rotundifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 (9) 10 11.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Dorset?
Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 8 17 35.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Barbary ?
— (America, introduced).
470.
Oenanthe fistulosa, Linn, 
Provinces 1 to 16 ; but authority wanted for no.
12.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dunbarton, Argyle.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 15 28 56.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
Algeria.
192 38.
UMBELLIFEE/E.
471.
Oenanthe pimpinelloides, Linn.
Provinces 13 3 4 5.
Native.
Not " pimpinelloides" of Smith, etc.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon, Wight, Sussex.
— Worcester, Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Many false localities on record.
Census 4 8 13.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia -5.
West-asia.
Lycia or Caria ; Fellowes.
Algeria.
471-.
Oenanthe Lachenalii, Gmel.
Provinces 1 to 14 - 16.
Native.
Oe. pimpinelloides of old authors.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Haddington.
Zones 1 3.
Littoral.
Occasionally inland.
Census 15 38 55.
Ireland 7.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6.
N.B. UntD a recent date, this was named " pimpi- 
nelloides " in hooks on British botany.
473.
Oenanthe silaifolia, Bieb.
Provinces [1] 3 3 4 5 [6 7] 8 [9 10 11 - 13].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— Notts, Lincoln.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Many erroneous localities.
Census 5 7 13.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe - ita - aus - fra cha net.
Habitats uncertain.
Russia 5.
Algeria.
In Britain, confused with " Lachenalii." 
473.
Oenanthe crocata, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Elgin.
Zones 13 3.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 16 30 70.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha.
Belgium ?
— N.B. Some of the British examples closely resemble those dis- 
tributed by Borgeau, no.
1880, as I H'.
apiifolia of Brotoro.
3B.
umbelliper;r.
1H8 
474.
Oenanthe Phellandrium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 19 - 14 - [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Hants, Kent.
— Cumberland, Haddington.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 1'2 21 48.
Ireland 9.
English-germauic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
— .
Southward to Andalusia and Sicily^ 
474 >-.
Oenanthe fluviatilis, Coleman.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8.
Native ; but a dubious species.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Dorset, Hants, Kent.
— Leicester, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 6 11 20.
Ireland 1.
English-germanic type.
Europe?
If existent in European countries, beyond the British 
islands, it would seem not to be distinguished by foreign 
botanists from the ordinary Phellandrium.
475.
.SJthusa Cynapium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - (18).
Native.
Colonist in N.
Britain.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Elgin.
(Orkney).
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 200 or 300 yards.
Lakes to 200 yds.
Census 15 31 78.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
476.
Fceniculum vulgare, Gaertn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (8 9 10 11 12) - [14 15].
Native?
Lat. 50—54.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Anglesea, Carnarvon.
Zone 1.
Littoral ; on coast cliffs.
Alien in most localities.
Census 7 10 21.- Ireland 3 (-3).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur (aus ger) fra cha net.
(Scandinavia).
Russia 6 - (4 3).
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
194 88.
UMEELLIFER^a^.
477.
Seseli Libanotis, Linn.
Province - 3 3 4 [12].
Native.
Lat. 50— 53.
Sussex, Herts, Cambridge.
Bucks?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra clia net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Himalaya.
— .
Cumberland, on worthless testimony.
478.
Ligusticum scoticum, Linn.
Provinces 11 - 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 55 — 61.
Ayr, Cheviotland.
—   Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 7 18 20.
Leland 2.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe den got nor - lap fin.
Russia 1.
Eastern Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
479.
Silaus pratensis, Bess.
Provinces 1 to 12 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 14 25 59.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net - got.
Russia - - - 3 2.
Siberia.
— .
Southward to South France, North Italy, Transylvania.
480.
Meum Athamanticum, Jacq.
Provinces 7 - 9 10 11 12 13 [14] 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 52—58.
Merioneth, York.
— Dumbarton, Moray.
Zones - 2 3.
Highlands to 460 yards.
Humber 300—350 yds.
Census 8 11 21.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net.
Belgium.
— .
Distribution much restricted ; eastward to Transylvania ; 
southward to Naples ; northward to Germany and Belgium.
38.
UMBELLIFER^.
195 
481.
Crithmum maritimum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 [4] - 6 7 [9] -- 12 13 [14].
Native.
Lat. 60—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Ayr.
Zones 1 2.
Coast-level.
Formerly found in province 4 ?
Census 9 13 24.
Ireland 9.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra oha.
Russia - 5.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
483.
Angelica sylvestris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ; also at 820, 670, etc.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
483.
Peucedanum officinale, Linn.
Provinces [- 2] 3 [4 - - - 8].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 53.
Kent, Essex.
[Sussex, Norfolk, Leic, Notts.] 
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Census 12 2.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net.
Russia 6 - - 3.
Siberia.
— N.B. Oenanthe Lachenalii occasionally mistaken for this plant.
484.
Peucedanum palustre, Moench.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 [5] - - 8 [9] 10 - [13 13 14].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 53.
Somerset, Essex.
— York, Notts, Lincoln.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 5 8 10.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-engUsh type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Is there any reliable locality for this plant in Scotland ?
1&6 38.
UMBELLIFEK.^L.
486.
Pastinaca sativa, Linu.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 - (13 - - 16).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber — 200 yards, "native''; J.
G. Baker.
Census 10 20 45.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Einmark.
Russia 6 5 4 8.
Siberia.
— = (America, introduced).
487.
Heracleum Sphondylium, Linu.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
ComwaU, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yds.
; again at 900, 630, etc.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Bussia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
— Columbia ?
488.
Tordylium maximum, Linn.
Provinces -.
-. 3 - [5].
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 61— 52.
Middlesex!
Oxford, 1799, 1819.
Bucks, 1803, 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[5, Gloucester; Buckman B.
G. C] 
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0.
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5.
^.- Gathered in Middlesex by the late R.
Castles.
489.
Daucus Carota, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall^ Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 10, British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Einmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (.\meriea., naturalised).
38.
UMBELLIFER.iL, 197 
491.
Caucalis daucoides, Linn.
Provinces 1 S 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 11.
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Hants, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
" At 650 feet near Bath' ' ; E.
Withers, 1 857.
Census 8 14 22.
Ireland 0.
G ermaiiic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Bai'bary.
493.
Torilis Anthriscus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 16 33 88.
Ireland 12.
British-en glish type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Algeria.
494.
Torilis infesta, Spreng.
Pro-v-inces 1 to 10 - - - [14 16].
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 10 22 46.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5 4.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries?
Azores?
495.
Torilis nodosa, Gaertn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, Forfar.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 27 62.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
India.
Alaeria.
Canaries.
198 38.
UMBELLIPEE^.
406.
Scandix Pecten-Veneris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 1-5 - 17 (18).
Colonist.
(18, Orkney !) 
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Eoss.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 16 31 78.
Ireland 10.
British-english tj'pe.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5-3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
497.
Anthriscus vulgaris, Pers.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17 18.
Native.
Shetland ?
Lat. 50—58 or 61.
Cornwall, AVight?
Kent.
— Sutherland.
Zones 12 8.
Low grounds.
Census 16 28 57.
Ireland 6 (2).
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5-3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
498.
Anthriscus sylvestris, Hoifm.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 430 yards.
Humber to 450 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
North Africa ?
500.
Chaerophyllum temulum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 33 82.
Ireland 3.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia?
"Davuria; Pallas." 
Algeria.
;39.
LORANTHAOEiE.
— 40.
CAPKIFOLIACE^.
199 
501.
Myrrhis odorata, Scop.
Prov.
(1 - 3 - S 6 7 8) 9 10 11 13 13 (U 15 16 17 18).
Denizen.
Lat. 53 — 56.
Chester, Derby.
— Eenfrew, Northumberland.
Zones - 2 3.
Humber — 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 5 8 15.
(Ireland 5).
Intermediate type ?
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - (net den got nor swe).
Russia 6 - - (3).
West-asia.
— Best established in Mid Britain ; but always an Alien '?
503.
Viscum album, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 (9) 10 (11 - - - IS).
Native.
Lat. 50—54.
Devon, (Wight), Kent.
— Denbigh, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 8 17 34.
[Ireland].
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
504.
Sambucus nigra, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 (17 18).
Native.
Denizen iu N.
B. 
Lat. 50—57 (60).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Fife.
Zones 1 3 (3).
North Yorkshire to 450 yards ; Baker.
Census 16 30 70.
Ireland 12.
British-engUsh type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
(Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores).
505.
Sambucus Ebulus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - (17).
Denizen.
Decreasing?
Lat. 50—57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar.
(Eoss).
Zones ] 2 (3).
North Yorkshire 0—300 yards ; " indigenous." 
Census 15 35 50.
(Ireland 10).
English type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got).
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria.
Madeira, dubiously native.
300 40.
CAPEIFOLTACEiE!.
506.
Viburnum Opulu^, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Eoss.
Zones 12 3.
Teesdale to 350 yards ; Baker.
Census 17 33 70.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Fiumark and nearly aU Lapland.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Viburnum Oxycoccos, in America and Columbia.
507.
Viburnum Lantana, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 8 - 8 - 10 (11 - 13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— South-west York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Surrey to 200 yards.
Census 8 15 34.
(Ireland).
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria ; variety glabrescens.
508.
Lonicera Periclymenum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
North of England to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net de& got nor.
Kamtschatka (Krascheninnikow) ; Ledeb.
flo.
ros.
Morocco ; Lowe.
(Madeira, introduced).
511.
Linnsea borealis, Linn.
Provinces 11 - - 14 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 55 — 58.
Northumberland, Edinburgh.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones - ?
3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Census 4 6 11.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe - ita - aus ger - - net - got nor swe lap fin.
Alpine Italy.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Cokiml)ia.
Newfoundland.
41.
BUBIACEiE.
201 
613.
Rubia peregrina, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 [4] 5 6 7 [12 - - - 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, Carnarvon.
Zone 1.
Low grounds only.
Census 6 12 21.
Ireland 6.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cba.
Russia - - 4 3.
Algeria.
Canaries.
513.
Galium verum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
G. elato-veriim in 12 3.
Lat. 50—61.
ComwaU, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Humber to 650 yards.
Highlands to 580 yards.
Census 18 38 100.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— Iceland.
(America, introduced).
514.
Galium cruciatum, With.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Elgin.
Zones I 3 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 15 33 83.
Ireland I.
British-en gKsh type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
515.
Galium palustre, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
G. elongatum and Witheriogii included.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3?
Tyne to 650 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Persia.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
2 D 
302 41.
RUBIACE^.
616.
Galium uliginosum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 [17 18].
[Orkney; Lowe.
Shetl.
; Edm. flo.] 
Lat. SO — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye ; Lawson.
Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 16 30 61.
Ireland, probably.
British-english type.
Europe all, unless Turkey excepted.
Eussia - 5 4 8 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland ; Lindsay list.
Greenland ; Hook.
arc.
517.
Galium saxatile, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1280, 1230, 1120, 1100 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa " ita" - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia?
Western Siberia.
— Faroe.
"Iceland." Greenland ; Hooker distr.
arc.
pi.
518.
Galium erectum, Huds.
Provinces [1] 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 - - - [14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50—55 [or 57].
Dorset, Kent.
— Derby, York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber province at 100 — 150 yards.
Census 6 14 27.
Ireland 1.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur " aus " - fra cha.
Eussia, apparently absent.
Algeria.
N.B. A species not well understood.
519.
Galium Mollugo, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, introduced?
Zones 1 2' 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Lakes to 320 yards.
Census 14 27 70.
Ireland 2.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Madeira ?
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega's list.
41.
RUBIACE^.
203 
520.
Galium sylvestre, Poll.
Provinces 1 2 [3 4] 5 - [7] 8 [9] 10 11 12 - 14 15 - - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Dorset, Somerset.
— Perth, Forfar, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 800 yards.
Highlands to 650 yards.
Census 9 13 19.
Ireland 4.
Intermediate-highland type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Absent from Eussia.
Eastward to Transylvania.
— Iceland ; Isaac Carroll, etc.
521.
Galium anglicum, Huds.
Provinces ?
2 3 4 [5 6 - - 9 10].
Native.
Somerset?
Lat. 51 — 53.
Sussex, Kent, Essex.
— Suffolk, Norfolk, Camb.
Zone ] .
Low grounds.
Many doubted localities on record.
Census 3 6 10.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
G. parisiense included.
Eussia 6 5 4.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
522.
Galium tricorne, With.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 - 10 11 13.
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Dorset, "Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Northumberl.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(E.
Cornwall, S.
Devon ; Briggs).
Census 10 19 39.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got).
Eussia 6 5.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
523.
Galium Aparine, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe lap).
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
India.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America.
Columbia).
204 41.
EUBIACE^.
534.
Galium Vaillantii, DeCand.
Provinces - - 3.
Alien or Colonist.
Lat. 5S.
North Essex.
(G.
spurium, casual in province 10).
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[G.
"spurium" in 4 5 8 10 11 15.] 
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net (den) got (nor swe).
Eussia - 5 - 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— N.B. G.
spurium included above.
525.
Galium boreale, Linn.
Provinces - - [3 - 5] 6 7 - - 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Brecon, Carnarvon.
— Orkney?
Shetland.
Zones - 3 3 4 5.
Highlands 0—930, 730, 700 yards.
Census 11 J 6 36.
Ireland 9.
Highland t3'pe of distribution.
Europe all, except Channel and Netherlands.
Eussia 6-4331.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
636.
Sherardia arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Colonist in (15 16 17 ?).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Eoss.
Zones 13 3?
Tyne to " 850 yards"?
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 17 34 88.
Ireland IS.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia 
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
527.
Asperula odorata, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Rare in provinces 17 and 18.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3.
Highlands to " 400 yards." Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 18 36 80.
Ireland 19.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
" Olympus." 
Algeria.
41.
RUBIACEiE.
— 42.
VALERIANACEiE.
205 
628 Asperula cynanchica, Linn.
Provinces 123456-89]0-12.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall?
Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland, York.
Zones 1 S.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 10 32 33.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
531.
Valeriana dioica, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dunbarton, Fife.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 15 27 60.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 5-3.
— Apparently unknown in Asia, Africa, America.
532.
Valeriana officinalis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
V. Mikanii in 3 3 4, local or rare ?
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
Lakes to 800 yards.
Highlands to 720 yards.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
V. sambucifolia and V.
Mikanii combined.
Eussia 6-433 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland.
534, Valerianella olitoria, Moench.
Provinces all.
Native ?
Colonist in northern provinces.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 34 77.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
206 42.
VALERIANACE^.
— 43.
DIPSACE^.
536.
Valerianella Auricula, DeCand.
Provinces 1 S 3 4 5 6 - - - 10 16.
Colonist.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife; Maoauley !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; perhaps often overlooked.
Census 8 16 22.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe " spa " " ita " - aus ger fra cha net.
— N.B. Apparently absent from Asia and Africa ; but its habitats 
not readily separable from those recorded for V.
dentata.
537.
Valerianella.
dentata, Koch.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 200 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 15 31 82.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 9.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
539.
Dipsacus sylvestris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Colonist in Scotland ?
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dunbarton, Fife.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 16 28 66.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 6 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
640.
Dipsacus pilosus, Linn.
Provinces 12345-789 10 (11) - - - [15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset?
South Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 9 21 43.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
43.
dipsacEjE.
— 44.
coMtosiT^.
207 
S41.
Scabiosa succisa, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 860, 850, 800, 750 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, Turkey (?) and Finmark excepted.
Eussia 6-483.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Madeira.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
C43.
Scabiosa columbaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 1 5.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 550 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 14 28 61.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria, a variety.
[Madeira, by misnomer].
543.
Knautia arvensis, Coult.
Provinces 1 to 17 (18).
Native.
Colonist in North Britain ?
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland.
(Orkney).
Zones 13 3.
Lakes, Humber, Tyne, each to 300 yards.
Census 17 34 85.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Algeria.
544.
Tragopogon pratensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - (17).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Moray.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 360 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census ] 5 30 74.
Ireland 6.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
N.B. T.
pratensis and T.
minor 
are taken together above, as one single or aggregate species.
208 44.
COMPOSITiE.
546.
Helminthia echioides, Gaertn.
Provinces 123456789 10 11 --(14 15).
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Northumberland.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 1 00 yards.
Census 11 94 65.
Ireland 3.
Enghsh type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia 6 - - y.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
547.
Picris hieracioides, Linn.
Provinces 13345678- 10 11- [13].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 10 33 49.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 8.
India.
Siberia.
Canaries.
548.
Leontodon hirtus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
(Aberdeen, introduced).
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Fife.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 15 38 59.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - - 3 
Algeria ?
Canaries ?
Azores.
549.
Leontodon hispidus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 [18].
Native.
Rare in North Britain.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Kincardine.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 16 30 78.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
44.
COMPOSIT.E. 209 
650.
Leontodon autumnalis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
L. Taraxaci or pratensis included.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1000, 960, 930, 900 yards.
Census 18 38 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia ?
5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
(America, introduced).
651.
Hypochoeris glabra, Linn.
Provinces 123456-89 10 [11] - 13 - 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Ayr, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 1119 28.
Ireland 0.
Germanio-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
562.
Hypochoeris maculata, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2] 3 4 [5] - 7 - - [10] - 12 - - [15].
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Essex, Cambridge, Carnarvon, Westm.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds only ?
Census 4 5 5.
Ireland 0.
English-local type.
Europe all, except Channel and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. In Britain, confused with maculate Hieracia.
553.
Hypochoeris radicata, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 580, 560, 530 yards.
Census 18 37 95.
Irelaiid 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Algeria.
(Madeira, introduced).
2 E 
210 44.
compositjB.
554.
Lactuca virosa, Linu.
Provinces 19 3 4 5 6 ?
8 - 10 11 - - 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall?
Wight, Kent.
— Stirling, Perth.
Zones 1 S.
Humher and Tyne, in each to 150 yards.
Census 11 20 40.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia - - - 3.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
555.
Lactuca Scariola, Linn.
Provinces - [2] 3 4 5 - - [8].
Native?
[Sussex, an error].
Lat. 51 — 53.
Kent, Surrey, Essex, Norfolk, Worcester.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Extinct in Cambridge ?] 
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Madeira.
Azores.
556.
Lactuca saligna, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 [5 - - 8].
Native?
Lat. 50— 53.
Sussex !
Kent !
Essex !
Suffolk.
Cambridge?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 5 6.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
557.
Lactuca muralis, DeCand.
Provinces 1 to' 16.
Native.
Doubtfully native in Scotland.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 16 28 58.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
— .
N.B. In Scotland, the localities are few and suspected.
44.
COMPOSITE.
211 
658.
SonohuB palustria, Linn.
Provinces [1 9] 3 4 [5 - - 8 - - - 13 - 14].
Native, but decreasing.
Lat. 51—53.
Kent; B.
Syme !
Essex; Newman!
Suffolk; Paget!
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
Huntingdon ; Rev. M.
J. Berkeley.
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got).
Russia 6-43.
N.B. Reported erroneously in several counties 
of Britain, through misnomers of S.
arvensis.
559.
Sonchus arvensis, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 330 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 37 89.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Northward to Finmark ; N.
J. Andersson.
Europe 6-433.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
560.
Sonchus asper, Hoffm.
Provinces all?
Native.
No authority for province 17.
Lat 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones ] 3 3.
Tyne to 430 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 17 33 67.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
561.
Sonchus oleraceus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
S. asper often confused with this.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 95.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
" Columbia." 
212 44.
COMPOSITE.
662.
Mnlgedium alpinum, Less.
Provinces [11] - - - ] S.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 67, about 57.
Forfar.
Aberdeen.
Zone 5.
Highlands about 700—900 yards.
Census 1 ] 9.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Siberia.
[Erroneously attributed to America, 
by an error explained in Torrey and Gray's Flora, 2, p.
498.] 
563.
Crepis virens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Orkney ; Lowe in Gillies flo.
Lat. 50—59 or 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Ross.
Zones 1 3 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humher to 350 yards.
Census 18 36 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6-43.
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet flore.
564.
Crepis biennis, Linn.
Provinces l?34???8-10[ll]2- 14].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 56.
Devon, Kent!
Essex!
Northampton!
Leicester!
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Floras of Suffolk, Cambridge, York.
Census 6 9 15.
[Ireland l.j Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Russia - - 4 3.
N.B. In England, this and Crepis or Borkhausia 
taraxacifolia have been confused together.
"America"?
666.
Crepis succisifolia, Tausoh.
Provinces 10 11 - - 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 57.
York.
— Dumbarton, Forfar, Kincardine?
Aberd.
? 
Zones - 2 3 4.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Humber 150—300 yards.
Census 5 6 11.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate-Scottish type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra.
Russia - 5 4 3.
— 1 America; Pursh].
44.
COMPOSITE.
213 
567.
Crepis paludosa, Moench.
Provinces [1 - - 4] 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 19 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 51 -59.
Glamorgan, Leicester.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones ?
a 3 4.
Highlands to 660 yards.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Census 13 18 47.
Ireland 9.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia -- 4 3 a.
Siberia.
N.B. This may have been truly 
reported in Norfolk, although needing to be verified there.
668.
Hieracium Pilosella, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
H. " coUinum " is reported in prov.
14.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 13 3 4.
Humber to 800 yards.
Highlands to 720 yards.
Census 18 37 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2].
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
570.
Hieracium alpinum, Auct.
Pro. 7 12 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Several segregates.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Carnarvon, Westmoreland.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 4200 feet ; Backhouse.
Census 5 9 13.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
" Labrador." 
570*.
Hieracium lingulatum, Backh.
Provinces 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 57 or 58.
Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, West-Inverness.
Zones - - - 4 5.
At 1500—2500 feet; Backhouse.
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe?
N.B.
"Not certainly described by Continental Authore." 
. ..." A strongly marked and handsome species ....
one of 
the most distinct of -our British Hieracia;" Backhouse.
214 44.
COMPOSIT^E.
571.
Hieracium pulmonarium, Sm.
Provinces 10 - 13 - - 1 5 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 59.
York.
— Sutherland.
H. chrysanthum, Baokh.
Zones 5 ?
Highlands to 1000 yards.
To " 3000 feet ;" B.
Census 5 7 11.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe r - - aus ger nor swe lap fin.
N.B. This must be 
understood as including H.
chrysanthum and H.
nigrescens 
of Backhouse's Hieracia.
" Arctic Russia." 
573.
Hieracium murorum, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
H. caesium inclusively.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Devon, Dorset, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
At " 0—3000 feet." 
Census 18 34 66.
Ireland 3.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, by the use of the name in books.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria ?
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America, 
573.
Hieracium sylvaticum, Sm.
Provinces all.
Native.
H, vulgatum included.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornvpall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1100 yards.
To " 3500 feet." 
Census 18 36 70.
Ireland 4.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey should be excepted.
Russia - - 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Greenland?
America?
Columbia; Ledeb.
flo.
ross.
575.
Hieracium pallidum, Fries.
Prov.
? - - - ?
6 7 8 - 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 58 or 60.
Cardigan, Derby.
— Sutherland, Orkney?
Zones ?
3 3 4.
Humber to 560 yards.
At " 1000—3000 feet." 
Census 13 15 33.
Ireland 3.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe.
" Almost all Europe." Italy.
Austria.
Germany.
Scan- 
dinavia.
N.B. Formerly assigned, by English botanists, 
partly to H.
murorum, partly to H.
angUcum.
4'4.
COMPOSITE.
215 
576.
Hieracium anglicum, Fries.
Provinces 10 11 13 - [14] 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 64 — 59 or 60.
Westmoreland, York.
— Hebrides, Orkney?
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yds.
At " 1500—2000 feet." 
Census 7 10 16.
Ireland 5.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
France.- Sweden.
Norway.
Finmark ; N.
J. Andersson.
N.B. The H.
Lawsoni of Smith and various other English Bota- 
nists.
Eeported in Faroe and Iceland.
577 (574).
Hieracium iricum, Fries.
Provinces - - - - 10 11 13-15 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 59.
York, Durham, Dumfries, Aberdeen, Sutherland.
Zones - - 3 4.
Tyne to 350—560 yards.
Census 5 5 5.
Ireland 6.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe ?
" Only found hitherto in Great Britain and Ireland." 
Apparently this means ' Hitherto found only in Great Britain 
and Ireland,' not elsewhere.
579.
Hieracium prenanthoides, Vill.
Provinces 10 11 IS - 14 J 5.
Native.
Edinburgh ?
Lat. 54 — 68.
York, Northumberland.
— Aberdeen, Moray.
Zones - - 3 4 6.
Highlands to 800 yards, or thereabouts.
Census 5 7 15.
Ireland 1 or 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6.
Siberia.
— " Greenland ; Fries." " America," probably an error.
580.
Hieracium crocatum, Fries.
Provinces - [2] 10 11 ?
- - 16 16.
Native.
, 
Lat. 64 — 58.
York, Durham.
— Argyle, Perth, Aberdeen.
Zones - - 3 ?
Highlands, Tyne, Humber, each to 400 yards.
Census 4 7 14.
Ireland 2.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Norway.
Sweden.
Lapland.
Russia 3 1.
Siberia, if H.
boreale of Led. flo.
ros.
— " Greenland"; Backhouse British Hieracia.
SIC 44.
COMPOSIT/E.
581.
Hieracium strictum, Fries.
Provinces 10 - 19 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 59.
Cumberland, York.
— Sutherland.
Zones - ?
3. Lakes and Humber to 300 yards.
Census 5 8 12.
Ireland 2.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
" Middle and North Europe."- Norway.
Sweden.
N.B. An unsatisfactory species, variously named by Eng- 
lish botanists of past years.
581*.
Hieracium gothicum, Fries.
Provinces 7 - - 10 11 15.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 58.
Merioneth, Carnarvon, York.
— Forfar, Aberdeen.
Zone - - 3.
Highlands 250—350 yards.
Census 4 6 11.
Ireland 4.
Highland type of distribution ?
Europe - - - - ger got nor.
Russia - - - 3.
N.B. Treated apart here, through the difficulty 
of assigning its alleged specimens to other reputed species.
582.
Hieracium tridentatum, Fries.
Provinces 12345--89 10 1113.
Native.
Lat. 50 — •56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Westmorel., Northumb.
Zones 12 3.
Humber and Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 10 14 20.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia.
Finland ; Fries sum.
yeg.
N.B. This is perhaps the 
the true ' rigidum ' of Hartman.
" Scotland " ; Bab. Man.
583.
Hieracium corymbosum, Fries.
Provinces 10 11 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 59.
York, Durham, Northumberland.
— Sutherland.
Zones - - 3 4.
Tyne and Humber 150 — 400 yards.
Census 7 8 13.
Ireland 2.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra - net - got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - - - 2.
— " Newfoundland." N.B. H.
rigidum included above.
44.
COMPOSITE.
'217 
584.
Hieracium umbellatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 [15 16 17].
Native.
Islay?
Cantire?
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Kirkcudb., Berwick.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 14 27 61.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe all ?
All Scandinavia ; Fries sum.
veget.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
Through misnomers ' 
. •> 
584.*.
Hieracium boreale, Fries.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Humber and Tyne, in each to 400 yards.
Census 16 33 70.
Ireland 3 or 4.
British-en glish type.
Europe all ?
Lapland ; Fries.
Finmark ; Martins voy.
hot.
Russia 6 5 4 3 [2 1].
[Arctic Russia and Siberia; Led. flo, ros.] 
— " Canada." Not likely?
585.
Barkhausia foetida, De Cand.
prodr.
Provinces - 2 3 4 [5] [11].
Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Sussex!
Kent!
Essex!
Suffolk!
Norfolk, Cambr.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Surrey?
Berks?
Hereford?
Census 3 7 10 or 12.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia - - 4.
Algeria.
Canaries.
586.
Barkhausia taraxacifolia, De Cand.
prodr.
Prov.
(1) [2] 3 4 -- 7 - [9 10 11].
Native.
(Tyne, on ballast).
Lat. 50—54.
Kent, Surrey, Essex, Suffolk, Carnarvon.
Zone I.
Low grounds.
[Lancaster?
York?].
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 1.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia -2.
Finland?
Algeria, N.B, Formerly confused with Crepis biennis.
? J- 
218 44.
COMPOSIT/E.
588.
Taraxacum officinale, Wigg.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 680 or 910 y.
Lakes to 500 y.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
688*.
Taraxacum palustre, DeCand.
Provinces all.
Native.
T. Itevigatum partly intended ?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, Wight, Sussex.
— Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1360, 1310, 1200, 1100 yards.
Census 18 31 ?
Ireland 6.
British-scottish type.
Europe all ?
Not always distinguished from T.
officinale.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
589.
Arnoseris pusilla, Gaertn.
Provinces ?
2 3 4 5 - - 8 15.
Colonist.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall?
Dorset, Hants.
— Banff, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 6 11 20.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus gar fra cha net den got.
Russia - - - 3 2.
• 590.
Lampsana communis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones ] 2 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Lapsana, L.
Lampsana, Diosc, DC, etc.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
44.
C0MP0SIT.13.
219 
591.
Cichorium Intybus, Liuu.
Provinces 1 to 13 (13 14 15 16).
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Northumb.
Zones 1 Q.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 13 35 60.
(Ireland 5).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
593.
Arctium majus, Schkuhr.
Provinces I 3 3 4 5 - - 8 9.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon, Wight, Sussex.
— Lancaster, Derby.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds ; imperfectly recorded.
Census 7 13 18.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Madeira ; Lemann.
— (America, introduced).
593'!=.
Arctium minus, Schkuhr.
Provinces all ?
Native.
" Lappa " and " Bardana " in all.
Lat. 50 — 38.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Skye ; Prof.
Lawson.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 15 23 37.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
West-asia.
Madeira ; Lowe.
— (America, introduced).
593.
Saussurea alpina, DeCand.
Provinces 7 - [9] - - 12 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Carnarvon.
— Hebrides, Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1310, 1000, 900, 850 yards.
Census 7 13 16.
Ireland 1.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
Not exactly the British plant there.
220 44.
COMPOSITiE.
594.
Serratula tinctoria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—66.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Northumberl.
Zones 12?
Humber, Tyne, Lakes, in each to 300 yards.
Censns 13 26 59.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
595.
Carduus nutans, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 550 yards.
Lakes to 370 yards.
Census 16 30 68.
Ireland 3 (2).
English type of distribution, 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - - nor swe.
Baltic.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
696.
Carduus crispus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
C. acantboides, Angl., included.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
(Highlands to 350 yards).
Census 16 30 74.
Ireland 5.
British- english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. The true C.
acanthoides is different from our plant.
597.
Carduus tenuiflorus, Curt.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50— S7 or 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Elgin?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
" Reported in Elgin " ; Gordon, cat.
Census 15 29 74.
Ireland 9.
English-british typo.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5.
N.B. Different from the English plant?
Algeria.
Lybia.
Mogador.
Madeira.
C. pycnocephalus ?
44.
COMPOSITE.
321 
599.
Carduus lanceolatus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Keut.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 650 yards.
Highlands to 570 yards.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(America).
600.
Carduus eriophorus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 [13 - (14 15) 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall?
Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber — 250 yards.
Census 10 20 41.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic t3rpe.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Turkey ?
Russia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
601.
Carduus palustris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Humber to 700 yds.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark ; — but Finmark list incomplete.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
602.
Carduus arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 660 yards.
Highlands to 430 yards.
Census 3.8 38 97.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
(America, introduced).
322 44.
composite;.
604.
Carduus pratensis, Huds.
Provinces I 2 3 4 5 6 ?
S 10 [11 16].
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber betvreen 150 — 400 yards.
Census 8 19 40.
Ireland 12.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa " ita " - - ger fra cha net.
Russia, apparently absent.
— [N.B. C.
tuberosus formerly in province 2].
606.
Carduus acaulis, Linn.
Provinces 123456-89 - [11 12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon?
Wight, Kent.
— Chester, Lincoln!
Zones 1 ?
Low grounds.
To 250 yards in Surrey.
Census 8 17 37.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
607.
Carduus heterophyllus, Linn.
Provinces - - [3 4] 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Glamorgan, Stafford, Derby.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones - 2 3 4.
Highlands to 720 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 13 17 70.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
" Persia." Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland.
608.
Onopordium Acanthium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 9 and (10 to 15) - - [18].
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Conwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Chester, Lincoln.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; often as a casual or alien.
Census 9 20 30.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced from Europe).
44.
coMPosiTiE.
22:f 
609.
Carlina vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 80—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Arran, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 16 30 63.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
611.
Centaurea nigra, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Radiate varieties 1 to 13 - 15.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 560 yards.
Highlands to 430 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net - - nor.' 
Russia - - 4 3.
— (America, introduced).
612.
Centaurea Cyanus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to ]5 - (17 18).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Renfrew, Moray.
Zones 1 3 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 16 28 70.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
613.
Centaurea Scabiosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 1 5 - (17).
Native.
Colonist in Scotland ?
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray.
(Sutherland ?) 
Zones 1 2 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 15 30 72.
Ireland 6.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
22+ 44.
COMPOSITE..
615.
Centaurea Calcitrapa, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 - - - [10 11].
Native ?
Lat. 50—52.
Cornwall, S.
Hants, Kent.
— Glamorgan, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Coast level or Low grounds.
Census 5 11 16.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net.
Russia - 5 - 3.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introdnced).
617.
Bidens cernua, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 16 81 64.
Ireland 11.
English-britisli type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
India.
Siberia.
^- America.
Columbia, — a variety ' elata.' 
618.
Bidens tripartita, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Clackmannan.
Zones 12?
Low grounds.
Humber to 1 50 yards.
Census 16 30 69.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— America; Hook, distr.
arc.
plants.
619.
Eupatorium cannabinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Introduced to N.
Britain ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census J 7 35 86.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
44.
COMPOSITE.
225 
620.
Chrysocoma Linosyris, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2] 7.
Native ?
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon !
Carnarvon !
[Dorset, Sussex.] 
Zone 1.
Low grounds or low hills.
Census 2 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantio type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Baltic Isles.
Europe 6 5 4 3.
Algeria.
621.
Diotis maritima, Cass.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - - 7.
Native ?
Lat. 50—54 formerly.
Cornwall, Kent.
— Anglesea, Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Littoral ; but now become almost extinct.
Census 5 7 7 (formerly).
Ireland 2.
English type ?
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha, 
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
Canaries.
623.
Artemisia campestris, Linn.
Provinces [1] - - 4 [10 11].
Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Suffolk!
Norfolk!
Cambridge?
(Durham!).
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
(On ballast, in provinces 10, 11.) 
Census 12 2.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— "Canada;" — likely something different.
624.
Artemisia maritima, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Any locality in province 16 ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent, — Wigton, Aberdetin.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 15 22 42.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
N.B. The plant of Russia 
and Asia may not be quite identical with ours.
2 G 
226 44.
COMPOSITyE.
633.
Artemisia Absinthium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - 14 15 - - (18).
Denizen.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Man, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Tyne to 400 yards, doubtless introduced there.
Census 14 38 55.
Ireland (IS).
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got nor swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia ; Led. flo.
ross.
626.
Artemisia vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
(Highlands to 400 yards).
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark?
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Barbary ; Desf.
flo.
atla.
— America.
Columbia.
Not typical.
627.
Gnaphalium dioicum, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2] 3 to 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornvpall, Devon, Herts.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 960, 930, 930, 920 yards.
Census 17 31 70.
Ireland 13.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all ; but as a variety in Turkey.
Piussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
630.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Extinct in Isle of Wight ?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Census 18 35 79.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland?
Labrador?
Canada.
Columbia.
44.
COMPOSITE.
227 
630*.
Gnaphalium norvegicum, Gunn.
Provinces 15-17 [18].
Native.
Lat 56— 58.
Forfar!
Aberdeen!
Epss.
[Shetland].
Zones 5 6.
Highlands about 800—1200 yards.
Census 3 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - 2 1.
Siberia.
— N.B. Do the American habitats for "sylvaticum" belong here?
631.
Gnaphalium supinum, Linn.
Provinces 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 56—59.
Stirling, Ochills, Forfar.
— Sutherland.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1430, 1 860, 1310, 1370 yards.
Census 3 6 13.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - 3 1.
— Faroe.
Iceland ; Lindsay list.
Greenland.
America.
633.
Gnaphalium uliginosum, Linn.
Provinces all?
Native.
Authority wanted for province 17.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Census 17 35 89.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia - 5 4 3 3 1.
India.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
634.
Filago minima, Fries.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
(F.
gallica, casual in 3 3).
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
—   Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 1 3 3.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Highlands to 250 yards.
Census 17 31 73.
Ireland 6.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Algeria.
228 44.
coMPosiTiE.
635.
Filago germanica, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Eare in North Britain.
Lat. SO — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cantire, Eoss.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Census 17 32 74.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6-43.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
635.* Filago apiculata, G.
E. Smith.
Proviuces - 2 3 4 5 - - - - 10.
Native ?
Likely elsewhere.
Lat. 50 — 54.
South Hants, Surrey, Essex.
— South-vrest York.
Zones 1 2.
Lovf grounds.
Distribution ill ascertained.
Census 5 9 12.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution ?
Europe spa fra cha net.
Eussia, not recorded.
Algeria.
N.B. It is the F.
lutescens of Jordan.
635*.
Filago spathulata, Presl.
Provinces - 2 3 4.
Native ?
Likely to occur elsewhere.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Dorset, Wight !
Sussex !
Kent !
— Cambridge !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Distribution imperfectly known.
Census 3 7 14.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha net.
Eussia ?
Siberia ?
Ledebour flo.
ros.
vol.
2, p.
616.
Algeria.
636.
Petasites vulgaris, Desf.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
[Hebrides, Orkney, Shetland].
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 315 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 33 78.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Barbary ; Desf.
flo.
atlant.
44.
COMPOSITE.
229 
637.
Tussilago Farfara, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
No authority for the Hebrides.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Comvpall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900, 900, 830, 700 yards.
Census 17 87 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Faroe.
Iceland.
— (America, introduced).
638.
Erigeron alpinus, Linn.
Provinces 15.
Native.
Lat. 56—57.
Perth !
Forfar !
Aberdeen I 
Zone 5.
Highlands at 850—1000 yards.
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - - - - 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
639.
Erigeron •acris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - - 15.
Native.
One county in Scotland.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar; Mr. Croall !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 13 25 56.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
— .
America.
Columbia.
Varieties there.
641.
Aster Tripolium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 18 31 69.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
330 44.
composiTjE.
641*.
Aster salignus, Willd.
Provinces - - - 4 13 - - 15.
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 52 — 57.
"Cambridge." "Perth." Oumb.
; Miss Edmonds !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Nativity unsettled.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe - ita - aus ger.
Central Europe.
N.B. Lately found 
passably well established in some few wide-apart localities in 
England, where it seems not likely to be a true native.
642.
Solidago Virgaurea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 980, 970, 910, 850 yards.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamts.
Algeria ?
— America.
Columbia.
643.
Senecio vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia - 6 4 3 2 1.
(India).
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(America).
644.
Senecio sylvaticus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney; B.
Syme.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 35 87.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 3 2.
Siberia.
Madeira ; Lemann.
Azores.
— Iceland ; Lindsay list.
44.
COMPOSIT.E. 231 
645.
Senecio viscosas, Liun.
Prov.
? -i 3 4 5 6 7 8 (9 10) 11 19 13 14 18 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon?
Dorset'.' Kent.
— Dumbarton, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Localities decreasing?
Census 13 18 29.
Ireland 2.
Germanic- british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - - 3.
" jNIadeira;'' probably by a misnomer.
647.
Senecio erucifolius, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14.
Native.
(13 Lanark ; Dr. Graham in H.B.F.) 
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, Berwick.
Zones 1 2.
Low gi'ounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 14 27 62.
Ireland 1.
English type of distiibution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
648.
Senecio Jacobsea, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Denizen in N.
Britain ?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 700 yards.
Tyne to 600 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmai'k.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
649.
Senecio aquaticus, Huds.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 510 yards.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ii-eland 12.
British type of distiibution.
Europe spa - tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4.
Siberia.
232 44.
composite;.
650.
Senecio paludosus, Linn.
Provinces 4 — S [9].
Native.
[9 Cheshire.] 
Lat. 62 — 54.
Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Lincoln.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 2 4 4.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got.
Russia - - 4 3.
Siberia.
651.
Cineraria palustris, Linn.
Provinces [1] - - 4 [5 6 7] 8 [9 - - 12].
Native.
Lat. 52—54.
Suffolk, Norfolk!
Cambridge?
Hunts?
Lincoln?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 2 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cba net den got.
Bussia - - 4 3 - 1.
West-asia?
Siberia.
Davuria.
— America.
Columbia.
Not typical there.
652.
Cineraria campestris, Retz.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - 7 [12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — .54.
Dorset, Wight, Sussex.
— Anglesea, Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 5 10 18.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia"?
Siberia.
Davuria.
— America.
Columbia.
Not typical there.
655.
Inula Helenium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 (3 4 5) 6 7 (8 9 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 17).
Native?
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, (Wight), Sussex.
— Anglesea, (Durham).
Zones 1 ?
Possibly native about the south coasts.
Census 4 ?
? (Ireland 7).
English type of distribution ?
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
(Sweden).
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
44.
composite:.
233 
656.
Inula Conyza, DeCand.
Provinces 123456789 10 (11) 12 - - [15].
Native.
Lat. 50—65.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 11 23 62.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fira cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
657.
Iimla crithmoides, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 [4] 5 6 7 13.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent, Essex.
— Wigton.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 7 12 15.
Ireland 3.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Russia, unrecorded.
Algeria.
658.
Inula dysenterica, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 - 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Haddington.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 16 29 69.
Ireland 12.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6-43.
Algeria.
659.
Inula Pulicaria, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - [10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Hereford, Leicester.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 5 11 22.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
2h 
234 44.
COMPOSITE.
660.
Bellis perennis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
No authority for S.E. Wales.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980, 910, 830, 820 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Europe - 5 4 3.
(Madeira).
(Azores ; Guthnick's coll.) — Faroe.
" Iceland." 
661.
Chrysanthemum segetum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 250 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 18 38 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Eussia 6-432.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
663.
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
No authority for the Hebrides.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Wales to 700 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 or 38 90.
Ireland 12.
British type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
663.
Chrysanthemum Parthenium, Pers.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Denizen.
Alien in Scotland ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Moray, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 17 32 ?
(Ireland).
British-english type.
Europe spa (ita) tur aus (ger) fra cha (net) den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Pyrethrum Parthenium of C.
B. 
Canaries.
(Azores).
— (America, escaped from gardens).
44.
COMPOSITE.
235 
663*.
Chrysanthemum Tanacetum, B.
Syme.
Provinces all.
Native.
Alien in North Britain ?
Lat. 50—58 (61).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— (Heh. Ork.
Shetl.) 
Zones 1 3 (3).
Humber to 200 yards.
(Highlands to 350 yards).
Census 18 37 ?
(Ireland 10).
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Tanacetum vulgare of C.
B. 632.
— Faroe.
(America).
Columbia ; in the Aleoutian Isles.
664.
Chrysanthemum inodorum, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Comvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Tyne to 330 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Pyrethrum inodorum of C.
B. vol.
S, etc.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Madeira.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Am. Col.
664, b.
Chrysanthemum maritimum, Auct.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 - 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Simply a litiwral form of C.
inodorum ?
Census 16 26 49.
Ireland - ?
British type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net.
Scandinavia to Finmark ?
Russia ?
C. maritimum and C.
sahnum not distinguishable.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
666.
Chrysanthemum Chamomilla, Mey.
Prov.
1 to 12 (13 14 15 16) - [18].
Colonist.
Casual northward.
Lat. 50—56 (57).
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— (Lanark, Fife).
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 13 24 51.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
236 44.
COMPOSITE.
667.
Anthemis nobilis, Linn.
Prov.
1 to 11 - - (14 - 16 - 18).
Native.
(Ma, Skye, Orkney).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, Durham.
Zones 1 a.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 11 21 39.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa - - aus ger fra cha (net).
Russia - - 4 3.
Madeira.
A. aurea, Algeria and Azores.
668.
Anthemis arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Colonist.
Lat. 80—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Moray !
Zones 1 S 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 15 28 56.
Ireland 5.
EngUsh-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Einmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America, introduced).
669.
Anthemis Cotula, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Colonist.
[Forfar?
Shetland ?] 
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton !
Fife !
Zones 12?
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 27 65.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
670.
Achillea Ptarmica, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 750 yards.
Highlands to 710 yards 
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Piussia - 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
(America, introduced).
44.
COMPOSITiE.
— 45.
CAMPANULACEffi.
237 
671.
Achillea Millefolium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Comvrall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Sheaand.
Zones 12 3 4 6 6.
Highlands to 1310, 1080, 900, 850 yards.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
675.
Campanula rotundifolia, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Absent from Orkney ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 1 S 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1180, 1080, 1060 yards.
Census 18 37 96.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
N.B. Confused with C.
linifolia elsewhere ?
Eussia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland?
Greenland?
America.
Columbia.
676.
Campanula patula, Linn.
Provinces 123 ?
56-8- 10 [11] 12.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Hants, Kent?
— Westmoreland, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; sometimes confused with C.
Eapunculus.
Census 8 14 25.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita ?
aus ger fra cha net (den got) nor swe.
Eussia 6-432.
Siberia.
— [Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega].
677.
Campanula Eapunculus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 (4) 5 - (7 8 - 10 11 - - - 15).
Denizen.
Lat. 50—54.
Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Stafford !
(York !).
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; uncertain in most localities.
Census 4 8 12.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got).
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
338 45.
CAMPANULACEffi.
678.
Campanula latifolia, Linn.
Provinces [1 3] 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 51 — SB.
Monmouth, Gloucester, Surrey.
— Isla, Moray.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Census 14 35 53.
[Ireland ?].
Scottish-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6-433.
West^asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— N.B. In English records sometimes confused with Trachelium.
679.
Campanula rapunculoides, Linn.
Provinces - [3] 3 4 5 - - 8 (9 10 11) - - 14 15.
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 51—57.
Oxford?
Surrey?
Bedford !
— Fife !
Perth?
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds ; likely not a native species.
Census 6 7 10.
Ireland 0.
Local-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den got) nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
680.
Campanula Trachelium, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 [9] 10 (11 13 13 14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, York.
Zones 1 3 (3).
Low grounds ; much confused with C.
latifolia.
Census 9 19 43.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
" Japan ; Thunberg !
" 
Algeria.
681.
Campanula glomerata, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 - 8 - 10 11 13 - 14 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Kincardine.
Zones 1 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 13 25 46.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe all, except Norway, Lapland, Finmark.
Russia 6-433.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
45.
CAMPANULACE^.
239 
683.
Campanula hederacea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 6 7 - 9 10 - 12 13.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Eenfrew, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
To 300 yards on Dartmoor.
Census 10 19 39.
Ireland 3.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa - - aus ger fra clia net den.
N.B. The European 
area is comparatively a limited one, extending from Portugal 
and Dalmatia to North-west Germany and Denmark.
684.
Campanula hybrida, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - (8 9) 10 11 - - (14 15).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; chiefly on chalk.
Census 7 19 41.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia - 5 4.
" Georgia." 
Algeria.
Canaries.
685.
Phyteuma orbiculare, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 [10].
Native.
[10 York?
see below].
Lat. 50—52.
Dorset?
Sussex !
Kent.
— Wilts !
Hants !
Surrey !
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; to 200 yards on chalk hills.
Census 2 5 8.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia - - 4 3.
N.B. Specimens were distributed in 1841 by the 
Botanical Society of London, as coming from S.W. Yorkshire.
687.
Jasione montana, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Wales to 350 yards.
Census 16 32 67.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6-43.
West-asia.
Algeria.
240 45.
CAMPANULACEiE.
— 46.
EBICACE^.
688.
Lobelia urens, Linn.
Provinces 1 [3].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
South Devon only.
Zone 1.
Low grounda.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Looal-atlantic type.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha.
Area very limited, comprising parts of 
Spain and Portugal, Western France northward to Normandy.
Madeira ; an isolated or outlying habitat, on present knowledge.
689.
Lobelia Dortmanna, Linn.
Provinces 5 6 7 12 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Glamorgan, Cardigan, Salop.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 530 yards, or upwards.
Census 9 17 89.
Ireland 9.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe - — ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia - - - 3 3.
— America.
690.
Erica Tetralix, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 790, 760, 730, 700, 700 yards.
Census 18 38 96.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa - - ?
ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - - 3.
Eastward to Transylvania, by records.
—   Iceland ; Lauder Lindsay's list.
An error?
691.
Erica ciliaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 [3].
Native.
[" Hants" !" Surrey" !].
Lat. 50—51.
Cornwall!
Dorset; Sir W.
C. Trevelyan!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 1.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe.
Spain.
West France.
Normandy.
N.B. Specimens have been distributed from the alleged 
localities of Alresford, Hants, and Farnham or Frensham, Surrey.
46.
ERicACEa:.
241 
699.
Erica cinerea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 730, 730, 715, 690, 680 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - ?
ger fra cha net - - nor.
Not in Russia.
Alleged to occur in Transylvania.
Madeira.
— Faroe.
N.B. The Madeira plant is a slight variety.
694.
Erica vagans, Linn.
Provinces 1 - - - [5 6 - 8].
Native.
[8 Notts].
Lat. 50— SI.
Cornwall!
[Devon ?
Glamorgan ?] 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 11 1.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe.
Spain.
France.
Normandy.
N.B. It is desirable to ascertain whether the counties of Devon 
and Glamorgan were correctly reported for this heath.
695.
Calluna vulgaris, Salisb.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1100, 1080, 1060, 1050 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
N.B. Authorities wanting for 14 counties of Britain.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Western Siberia.
Azores.
— Iceland.
Faroe.
Greenland ; Giesecke.
America !
696.
Menziesia cserulea, Swartz.
Province 16 - [17].
Native.
Lat. 56— 57.
Perthshire ; Brand !
Still there in 1866 ; Naylor, 
Zone - - - - 6.
Highlands at about 900 yards, by estimate.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
" Pyrenees." 
Russia 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
2i 
242 46.
EEICACE^.
698.
Loiseleuria procumbens, Desv.
Provinces [1] 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 56—61.
Stirling, Perth, Forfar.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 8 6.
Highlands to 1180 yards, or up to " 1230." 
Census 4 9 16.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Eussia — -SI.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
699.
Andromeda polifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 [9 3] 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 57.
Somerset, Hunts, Norf.
— Perth.
[Hants, Bucks.] 
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Anywhere higher ?
Census 10 16 22.
Ireland 4.
Intermediate-scottish type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Greenland ; Taylor list.
America.
Columbia.
700.
Arbutus alpina, Linn.
Provinces [12] - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 56—61.
Mull?
Perth?
Forfar.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
North Highlands at 50—900 yards.
Census 4 9 11.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
701.
Arbutus Uva-ursi, Linn.
Provinces [5 - - 8 9] 10 11 12 - 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 61.
Cumberland, York.
— Orkney, Shetland.
[Derby?] 
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands 0—930 yds.
Humber 380—800 y.
Census 8 13 26.
Ireland 8.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Hamburg.
Eussia 6 - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
46.
EEICACEiE.
243 
703.
Vaccinium Myrtillus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1400, 1310, 1250 yards.
Census 18 36 77.
Ireland 12.
British-highland type.
Europe aU.
Eussia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
Atlas ; Desf.
flo.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America ?
Aloutia.
704.
Vaccinium uliginosum, Linn.
Provinces [ 7 - - 10] 11 12 - - IS 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 61.
Westmoreland, Durham.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - ?
3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1160 yds.
Tyne 150 — i50 y.
Census 6 10 16.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe all, except the English-Channel countries.
Eussia - - 4 3 2 1.
Persia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
705.
Vaccinium Vitis-idaea, Linn.
Provinces 1 - ?
- 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
"Devon." Essex, extinct.
— Hebrides, Sutherl.
Zones - 2 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1110, 1100, 1080, 1066 yards.
Census 15 23 49.
Ireland 9.
Highland-scottish type.
Europe all.
Eussia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
706.
Vaccinium Oxycoccos, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Eare in South Britain.
Lat. 50 — 58.
" Devon," Hants, Sussex.
— Skye, Eoss.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900, 810, 660 yards.
Census 17 28 56.
Ireland 11.
British-intermediate type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America..
Columbia.
244 46.
EEICACE^.
707.
Pyrola rotundifolia, Linn.
Provinces [1 S] 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 [12 13] 14 IS -- [18].
Native.
Lat. 51—57 or 58.
Kent, Salop, Stafford !
— Forfar !
Aberdeen.
Zones 19 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 or 850 yards.
Census 8 12 19.
Ireland 0.
Soottish-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra oha net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4391.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
Greenland.
Am. Columb.
708.
Pyrola media, Swartz.
Prov.
- 2 [3] - 5 - - - 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Sussex, Worcester I— Mull !
Ross, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 600, 590, 580, 500 yards.
Census 11 18 30.
Ireland 4.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
" Norway northward to Tromsoe ; Blytt." 
— Faroe.
N.B. Has been often mislabelled " rotundifolia." 
709.
Pyrola minor, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Rare in South Britain.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Devon, Hants, Kent.
— Skye, Ross, Moray.
Zones 19 3 4.
Highlands to 500 yards, and likely higher.
Census 17 97 50.
Ireland 4.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuiia.
Kamtsohatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
710.
Pyrola secunda, Linn.
Provinces - [2] 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 54—58.
Cumberland !
York !
— Skye, Ross, Moray !
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Tyne at 900 yards.
Census 7 10 16.
Ireland 1.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except Channel and Netherlands.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
46.
ERICACE^.
— 48.
JASMINACE.E. 245 
711.
Pyrola uniflora, Linn.
Provinces [12] - - 13 17 18.
Native.
, 
Lat. 56—59.
Perth !
Forfar ?
— Hebrides, Sutherland, Koss !
Zones - - 3.
Only in low situations?
Census 3 6 8.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net (den) got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Greenland ; Giesecke.
America.
Columbia, 
712.
Monotropa Hypopitys, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 [6] - 8 9 10 [11 12] - - 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 9 20 37.
Ireland 3.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— [America ; but probably an error].
713.
Ilex Aquifolium, Linn, 
Provinces 1 to 17 (18).
Native.
(18 Planted near Roddal?) 
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to SOO yards.
Humber to 450 yards.
Census 17 34 83.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den [got] nor.
Eussia 6.
N.B. Destroyed by winter frost in N.E, Europe.
Algeria.
714.
Ligustrum vulgare, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 11 (12 13 14 15 16).
Native in England.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 180 yards.
Census 11 24 68.
Ireland 1 and (9).
English type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 6 4 3.
" Inter Smyrnam et Bursam." 
Algeria ; Desf.
flo.
atla.
— (America, introduced).
246 48.
JASMINACE^.
— 50.
GENTIANACE/E.
715.
Fraxinus excelsior, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17 (18).
Native.
Denizen in N.
Britain.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, (Hebrides).
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Lakes to 400 yards.
Census 17 31 89.
Lreland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den) got nor swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Algeria.
" F.
excelsior var.
australis, Gay." 
716.
Vinca minor, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 7 (8 to 15).
Native or Denizen in England.
Lat. 50—53 (58).
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Montgom., Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; frequently near dwellings.
Census 7 15 ?
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
We^t-asia.
N.B. In England it may perhaps 
be truly native in some places ; usually a stray from gardens.
718.
Gentiana verna, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] 10 11 13.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 55.
Cumberland?
Westmoreland?
York.
Durham.
Zones --34?
Humber 400—800 yards.
Tyne 350—550 yds.
Census 3 3 4.
Ireland 3.
Intermediate type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra.
Russia 6.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; an outlying habitat, if correct.
719.
Gentiana Pneumonanthe, Linn.
Provinces -334-678910- 13.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Hants, Sussex.
— Cumberland, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 9 13 26.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
. — America; Gray's Manual.
50.
GENTIANACE.E. 247 
720.
Gentiana nivalis, Linn.
Provinces IS [16].
Native.
Lat. 56 — 57.
Perth; Syme!
Gourlie !
— Forfar!
[Inverness].
Zones - - - - 5.
Highlands about 900 yards, and upwards.
Census 12 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Davuria ?
— Iceland.
Greenland.
Labrador.
"Arctic America." 
721.
Gentiana Amarella, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humher to 700 yards.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Census 17 82 67.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland?
" Altenfiord"; Martins voy.
hot.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland.
"America'' and " Columbia" ; a distinct species there ?
723.
Gentiana campestris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Cornwall!
Wight!
Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Humber to 600 yds.
Census 18 35 80.
Ireland 11.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
South Finmark; Andersson.
Russia - - - 3 2.
Western Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
723.
Cicendia filiformis, Reich.
Provinces 1 2 [3] - - 6.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Cornwall!
Devon, Dorset, Hants!
Sussex!
Perab.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 5 7.
Ireland 1.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia, absent.
Eastward to Greece and Transylvania.
Azores.
2<t8 50.
GENTIANACE^.
724.
Erythrsea Centaurium, Pers.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 19 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 36 91.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Morocco.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
734*.
Erythreea latifolia, Sm.
(vera).
Provinces [1 3 - - - 6 7] - 9 - - [13 - - - 16].
Native.
Lat. 53 — 54.
Lancashire only.
Formerly in Cheshire ?
Zone - 3.
Littoral.
An irregular growth of Centaurium ?
Census 111.
[Ireland].
Local type of distribution.
Europe?
N.B. The habitats of "France," "Norway," "Algeria,'' 
"Azores," are referred to Centaurium.
Authors who cite fig.
2719 in E.
Dot. Sup.
evidently misunderstand Smith's plant.
734*.
Erythraea littoralis, Fries.
Provinces 1 3 - 4 - 6 7 9-111313141516-18.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
" Cornwall," " Sussex." — Moray?
Heb.
? Shetl.
? 
Zones 12?
Littoral.
Suffolk !
Holy Isle !
Arran !
etc.
Census 13 18 31 (as reported).
[Ireland].
British type?
Europe spa - tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
N.B. This 
includes the E.
linearifolia or linarisefolia with E.
chloodes 
as a single aggregate species.
Range in Britain uncertain.
734*.
Erythraea pulchella, Fries.
Provinces 1234-6789 10- [13] 13 [14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55 or 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumfries, York?
Zones 1 2.
Littoral and low grounds.
Census 10 19 33.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries ?
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America, introduced).
50.
GENTIANACE^.
. 50*- POLEMONIACE^E.
249 
725.
Chlora perfoliata, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 [11 12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— York, Cumberland?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 10 21 41.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
Algeria; but the African plant is C.
grandiflora, Viv.
736.
Villarsia nymphseoides, Vent.
Provinces - 2 3 4 (5 - - 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Sussex, Surrey, Berks.
— Northampton, Norfolk.
Zones 1 (2).
Lotp grounds.
" Wild " in Sussex ; Mr. Hemsley.
Census 3 5 10.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
China.
727, Menyanthes trifoliata, Linn, 
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 -61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Lakes to 600 yards.
Highlands to 510 yards.
Census 18 38 88.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
728, Polemonium caeruleum, Linn.
Provinces (1 2 3 4) 5 - (7) 8 - 10 11 12 (13 14 16 16).
Native.
Lat. 52—56.
Stafford, Derby !
York !
.— Westmorel., Cheviotl.
! 
Zones - 2 3.
Cheviotland at 200 yards.
Cumberland ?
Census 5 5 6.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type of distributioi).
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - (got) nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya, Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtso, 
— [N.E. Greenland, by a misnomer].
America?
Columbia?
250 61.
CONVOLVULACE^.
— 51*.
CUSCUTACE^.
729.
Convolvulus arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Denizen in N.
Britain.
Lat. 60—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Kenfrew, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 15 30 79.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 S 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Sib. Dav.
" China." 
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
730.
Convolvulus sepium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Denizen in 14 15 16.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 180 yards.
. 
Census 16 33 79.
Ireland 11.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 6 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Azores.
— America, a variety or subspecies.
731.
Convolvulus Soldanella, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 ?
18 16.
Native.
Lat. 80—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 14 21 38.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
Algeria.
[Azores; Drouet flo.
a mistake].
732.
Cuscuta europsea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 [9 (10) - - 13 14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53 or 55.
Wight, Sussex.
— Leicester or York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Much confused with the other species.
Census 6 12 23.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe aU, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
The species not certain.
Algeria.
Egypt.
The same remark as in line above.
51*.
CtJSCUTACE^.
52.
SOLANACEiE.
851 
734.
Cuscuta Epithymum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 11 - 13 [14], Native.
13 C.
europsea, Burgess.
Lat. 60—66.
Cornvrall, "Wight, Kent.
— York or Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 12 20 36.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Eussia ?
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
735.
Cuscuta Trifolii, Bab.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 - - 14 13.
Alien or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Fife; alvfays sown?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 950 yards.
Census 11 20 ?
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe - ?
France ; South Sweden ; Nyman Sylloge.
N.B. Difl&cult to decide whether an old native in Britain, not 
distinguished apart, or a late introduction with clover seeds.
736.
Hyoscyamus nlger, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Denizen in Scotland.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Boss.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 17 32 76.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe aU, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
- 
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
737.
Solanum nigrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 (11 - 13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 10 21 41.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
" Columbia." 
25S 52.
SOLANACEiE.
— 53.
SCEOPHULAEIACEJi:.
738.
Solanum Dulcamara, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Denizen in N.
Britain.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 16 34 83.
Ireland 11.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
" China." 
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
739.
Atropa Belladonna, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 19 (13 14 15 16).
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Sussex, Kent.
— Westmoreland, Northumberland?
Zones 1 8 (3).
Humber to 250 yds.
Native in Yorkshire ; Baker.
Census 12 23 41.
(Ireland 4).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5.
Algeria.
— (America, escaped from gardens).
740.
Verbascum Thapsus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Denizen in North Britain.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Arran, Forfai'.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 16 30 74.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
(Azores, but likely introduced).
— (America, introduced).
741.
Verbascum Lychnitis, Linn.
Provinces (1 2) 3 4 5 - (7 8 - 10 15 16).
Native?
Lat. 50 — 54 (or 57).
Devon?
Sussex, Kent.
— Denbigh, Stafford.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; very sparsely scattered.
Census 3 ?
? Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den (got - swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia, a variety.
— (America, introduced).
53.
sceophulaeiacEjE.
353 
742.
Verbascum pulverulentum, Vill.
Provinces [1 2 3] 4 - - - [8 - 10 15].
Native ?
Lat. 52— 53.
Suffolk!
Norfolk!
Hants?
Surrey?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 12 4.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe " spa " ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
N.B. It is probable 
that V.
nigrum or Lychnitis has been mistaken for this in 
some of the English counties.
Madeira ?
743.
Verbascum nigrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 - (10 11 - - 14).
Native.
Lat. 50—64.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Stafford, Notts.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 7 17 38.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
Siberia.
— N.B. Next to Thapsus, the most native-seeming in Britain.
744.
Verbascum Blattaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 - - (9 10 11 12).
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 50—53.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Stafford, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; often temporary.
Census 6 ?
? (Ireland 3).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia?
Algeria.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America, introduced).
745.
Verbascum virgatum, With.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 6 (7 8 - 10).
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 50 — (55).
Cornwall, Devon !
— (Denbigh, Lincoln, York).
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; mostly as a Casual.
Census 5 ?
? (Ireland 2).
Atlantic-enghsh type.
Europe spa ita - - - fra cha (net).
Stated to extend northward into 
Belgium and even possibly into Holland.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Not in Flora Rossica.
254 53.
SCEOPHULAKIACE^.
746.
Veronica spicata, Linn.
Provinces [1 - 3] 4 5 6 7 12 [18].
Native.
Lat. 5 1 — 55.
Gloucester, Suffolk, Radnor, N.
"Wales, Westmorel.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds (spicata) and cliffs (var.
hybrida).
Census 5 5 8.
Ireland 0.
English-intermediate type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
N.B. Some other subordinate forms 
included for the European and Eussian areas.
747.
Veronica arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 650 yards.
Tyne to 600 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America).
748.
Veronica verna, Linn.
Provinces - [2 3] 4 - - [7].
Native.
Lat. 52— 53.
Suffolk !
NorfoUO 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[London.
Sussex.
Denbigh].
Census 13 3.
Ireland 0.
Local-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra oha net den got nor swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
749.
Veronica triphyllos, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] 4 [5] 10.
Native.
Lat. 50—54.
Suffolk !
Norfolk !
West York !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
[London.
Warwick].
Census 3 3 5.
[Ireland].
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
53.
SCROPHULAEIACE^.
255 
750.
Veronica serpyllifolia, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 3 3 4.
Highlands to 850 yards?
Humber to 850 yds.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland la.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, if it be this in Finmark, — not the V.
humifusa.
Russia 6 5 4 3 8 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
750,b.
Veronica humifusa, Dicks.
Provinces 7 - - - 11 12 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Denbigh; Bowman.
— Sutherl.
; Northern Flora.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1260, 1210, 1200, 1060 yards.
Census 6 7 11.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe?
N.B. Not distinguished apart from V.
serpyllifolia by 
Continental writers.
Said to occur ou the ' Eocky Mountains' 
of Western America.
Verification of " Denbighshire" desirable.
751.
Veronica alpina, Linn.
Provinces IS 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Stirling, Perth, Forfar.
— Westerness, Easterness.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands between 700 — 1230 yards.
Census 2 4 7.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra — - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
752.
Veronica saxatilis, Linn.
Provinces 15 ?
17.
Native.
Lat. 56— 59.
Perth !
Forfar !
— Sutherl.
Cruachan?
Nevis?
Zones 5 6.
Highlands between 700—1000 yards.
Census 3 4 6.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia, absent.
Eastward to Transylvania.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
256 53.
SCEOPHULAEIACE/E.
753.
Veronica scutellata, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17 [18].
Native.
"Orkney; Barry's list." 
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Humher to 750 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 17 34 79.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, e.xcept Finmark.
" Thrace''; Lecoq.
geogr.
Russia -- 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
"Persia." 
Algeria.
— Iceland.
America, Columbia.
764.
Veronica Anagallis, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Lake province to 300 yards.
Census 18 38 85.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Am. Col.
755.
Veronica Beccabunga, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 930 yards.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America ?
Aleutia.
756.
Veronica oflBcinalis, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shedand.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980 yards.
Huniber to 800 yds.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America, introduced ?
58.
SCEOPHULAKIACE^, 357 
757.
Veronica montana, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 16 32 72.
Ireland 10.
British-engHsh type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - 4 3.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
758.
Veronica Chamaedrys, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Humber to 800 yds.
Census IS 37 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Northward to Finmark ; N.
J. Andersson.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
759.
Veronica hederifolia, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 18 36 83.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Cyprus, Euphrates, &c.
Algeria.
— (America, an introduced weed).
760.
Veronica agrestis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 18 36 88.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
— Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
2 L 
258 63.
SCEOPHULAEIACE^.
761.
Veronica polita, Fries.
Provinces ] to 16.
Native.
Frequently recorded as V.
agrestis.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Forfar.
Zones 1 3.
Tyne to 330 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 16 30 69.
Ireland 13.
British-english.
type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra olia net den got - (swe).
Russia -?
Included under V.
agrestis in Ledeb.
flo.
ross.
But 
the two are abundantly distinct.
763.
Veronica Buxbaumii, Ten.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Alien, becoming a Colonist.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— (Aberdeen, Moray).
Zones 1 a (3).
Tyne to 330 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 38 ?
(Ireland 7).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
Punjaub ; Edgeworth.
— Algeria.
— (America, probably introduced).
763.
Bartsia alpina, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] 10 11 13 - - 15 [16 17].
Native.
Lat. 54 — 57.
York!
Durham!
Perth!
Westmoreland?
Ross?
Zones - - - 4 6.
Highlands about 900 y.
Humber 300—600 y.
Census 4 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate-highland type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - (got) nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 3 1.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Labrador.
764.
Bartsia viscosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - - - 6 - - 9 - - - 13 - - 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Argyle, Dumbarton.
Zones 13?
Low grounds.
Census 6 10 17.
Ireland 3.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Dalmatia for " aus." 
Russia 6.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Tunis.
Egypt.
Azores.
Canaries; Bentham.
53.
SOROPHULARIACEfi. 259" 
765.
Bartsia Odontites, Huds.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 93.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— North Africa ; Bentham, in De Cand.
prodr.
766.
Euphrasia officinalis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones-!
3 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1300, 1120, 1090, 1080 yards.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
[Azores ; Drouet flo.] — Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Am. Col.
767.
Rhinanthus Crista-galli, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
R. major included.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 850, 800, 680, 610, 580 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
768.
Melampyrum cristatum, Linn.
Provinces - (2) 3 4 [5 10].
Colonist ?
Lat. 51—53.
Herts !
Essex !
Suffolk !
Norfolk !
Beds !
Northton !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
(South Hants) — [York].
Census 3 4 8.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha - den got nor swe.
Russia - 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
260 58.
SCEOPHULARIACE^.
769.
Melampyrum arvense, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 [5 - - - 9].
Casual or Colonist.
Lat. 50—53.
Wight !
Essex !
Herts.
— Suffolk, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Dorset, Gloucester, Warwick, Chester.] 
Census 3 4 6.
teland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
770.
Melampyrum pratense, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Often misreported as "sylvaticum." 
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1030, 930, 900, 830, 800 yards.
Census 18 37 87.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey excepted.
Eussia 6-4321.
Siberia.
— America.
M. pratense var.
amerioana.
771.
Melampyrum sylvaticum, Linn.
Prov.
[1 2 3 - 5 - 7 8 9] 10 11 12 13 14 15 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 54 — 58.
Westmoreland, York!
— Moray!
Ross.
Zones - 9 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Census 7 10 17.
Ireland 1.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— "America "; but the species not certain.
772.
Pedicularis palustris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 600 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 18 38 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davm-ia.
— Faroe.
America; Hook.
flo.
bor.
am.
Columbia?
63.
SCROPHULAEIACEiE.
261 
773.
Pedicularis sylvatica, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 670 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Eussia - - - 3 2.
[Algeria].
— Iceland; Hooker list, from Zoega.
774.
Scrophularia nodosa, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Harris, Eoss.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 18 36 90.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6-433.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— America, Columbia.
S.marilandica, Linn.
775.
Scrophularia Balbisii, Hornem.
Provinces 1 to 14 [15 - - 18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent., — Eenfrew, Berwick.
Zones 1 3.
"Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 14 37 65.
Ireland 7.
EngHsh type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia 6.
Siberia ?
India ?
Algeria.
" Canaries." Azores.
775*.
Scrophularia Ehrharti, Stev.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 - 7 - 9 10 - - ?
14.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Sussex, Middlesex.
— Linlithgov?
or Edinburgh.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Humber at 300 — 250 yards.
Census 7 8 14.
[Ireland].
English-intermediate type.
Europe - - - aus ger fra - net den (got).
Imperfect ?
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia?
N.B. This and the 'Balbisii' have 
been confused under the common name of 'aquatica.' 
262 53.
SCEOPHULAEIACE^.
776.
Scrophularia Scorodonia, Linn.
Provinces 1 - [3].
Native.
Lat. 50— 51.
Cornwall!
Devon!
[Hertford].
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 12 2.
[Ireland].
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cba.
Russia 6.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
778.
Digitalis purpurea, L.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 660, 650, 630, 590, 570 yards.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net (den) got nor.
Russia - 5 - 3.
Madeira ; Lemann.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
Introduced ?
780.
Antirrhinum Orontium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - - (10 11 12).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, Norfolk.
Zone 1 ?
Low grounds.
Census 7 17 39.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia - 5 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
782.
Linaria spuria, Mill.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 - (10 11).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Notts, Lincoln.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 7 18 41.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net.
Russia 5-3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
53.
SCROPHULAKIACEiE.
263 
783.
Linaria Elatine, Mill.
Provinces 18345678(9 1011).
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Anglesea, York.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 8 19 49.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
784.
Liparia repens, Ait 
Provinces 1 S § 4 5 6 - (8 9 10 11) 12 (13 14 1 5).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent?
— Westmoreland.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 7 11 17.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net - - nor (swe).
Russia ?
- - 3.
West-asia?
N.B. Perhaps more usually native 
in the English habitats, than is indicated above.
785.
Linaria vulgaris, MUl.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 200 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 16 32 78.
Ireland 8.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark, and possibly Spain.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— (America, introduced).
787.
Linaria minor, Desf.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 - 13 14 (15).
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Roxburgh.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 12 25 43.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Algeria.
N.B. Prof De CandoUe holds it an alien in Britain.
364 53.
SCROPHDLAEIACEvE.
— 54.
OEOBANCHACE^.
788.
Limosella aquatica, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - Y 8 9 10 11 - - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 80 — 57.
Cornwall?
S. Hants, Sussex.
— Kincardine; D.
G. 
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds mostly.
Surrey to 300 yards.
Census 12 21 33.
Ireland ?
Germanic-english type.
Europe aU, except Turkey (?) and Finmark.
Eussia - - 4 3 3 1.
N.B. It is L.
tenuifolia below, in Am. Col.
Algeria; Lecoq.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland?
[Am. Col.] 
789.
Sibthorpia europsea, Linn.
Provinces 12 6 - [8 - - - 13].
Native.
Extinct in prov.
2. 
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Glamorgan, Caermarth.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Destroyed in Sussex; Mr. Hemsley.
Census 3 6 7.
Ireland 1.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa - tur - - fra oha.
So-called S.
"africana'' in Baleares.
Azores.
N.B. The Azore plant is not separable from the usual 
British form of S.
europsea.
790.
Orobanche rapum, Thuil.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 - [15 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Kirkudb., Cheviotland.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
O. major, of many authors.
Census 13 24 54.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia - - 4 3.
Algeria.
791.
Orobanche caryophyllacea, Sm.
Provinces [1] - 3 4.
Native.
O. "lucorum" in province 3.
Lat. 51 — 53.
South-east Kent.
Semer; Flora of Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha - den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
54.
OEOBANCHACEJE.
265 
793.
Orobanche elatior, Sutton.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 [7] 8 - 10 11 [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— York, Durham?
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Several localities are uncertain.
Census 9 16 24.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - net den got.
Eussia 6-43.
Siberia.
— N.B. This, not 0.
rapum, said to be the true O.
major, Linn.
793.
Orobattche minor, Linn.
Provinces 12345[6 7]-910H.
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 8 17 34.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra clia net (den got).
Eussia 6 - 4.
Algeria.
Madeira ; Lemann list.
793*.
Orobanche Picridis, F.
Schultz.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 6.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Wight.
Kent.
Cambridge.
Pembroke.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 4 4 4.
Ireland 0.
English or Germanic type 
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net.
N.B. Hitherto confused with 0.
minor, but alleged to be distinct 
by those botanists who have seen it living.
793*.
Orobanche Hederse, Duby.
Provinces 1 2 - - 5 6 7 8.
Native.
Likely in other provinces.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight.
— Carnarvon, Leicester.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Long united with 0.
minor.
Census 6 10 15.
Ireland 9.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net.
N. B.
The British stations 
recorded by old Authors for so-called ' minor ' on ' ivy,' have 
been transferred to the present species.
" West Asia." 
2 M 
266 54.
OEOBANCHACEiE.
— 54*.
VEEBENACEiE.
794.
Orobanche rubra, Sm.
Provinces 1 6 - - - 10 15 16 ] 7.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornvfall, York, Fife.
— Skye, West Eoss.
Zones 13 3.
Coast rocks.
Humber at 250 yards.
Census 6 7 8.
Ireland 4.
Scottish-atlantic type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra.
Baltic Isles.
Russia 6 - - 3.
N.B. The 0.
rubra, of Smith, latterly has been 
identified or united with 0.
Epithymum.
795.
Orobanche caerulea, Vill.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 [6].
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50—53.
Cornwall, Wight !
— Monmouth, Herts !
Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 6 5 6.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia - - 4 3.
India.
797.
Lathraea squamaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Westemess, Clackmannan.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 830 yards.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 24 48.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Western Siberia?
798.
Verbena ofiBcinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - - (15).
Denizen or Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Northumb.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; usually about inhabited places.
Census 12 25 60.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
" China.
Japan." 
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
(America).
65.
LAMIACE^.
267 
799.
Salvia Verbenaca, Linn.
Provincesl to 13- 14 15 -(17).
Native.
(17 Eoss).
La*.
50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife, Forfar?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 14 25 55.
L:eland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
" Denmark." 
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries ?
800.
Salvia pratensis, Linn.
Provinces [1 3] 3 [4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11].
Denizen.
Lat. 51 — 52.
Kent, certainly and for many years.
Oxford.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Many erroneous localities.
Census ] ?
? Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Sweden).
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
801.
Lycopus europseus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Rare in province 14.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westemess, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 17 34 83.
Ireland 11.
Britisli-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
803.
Mentha rotundifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 - 10 11 12 - (14) [15 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Northumb.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Denizen in Mid Britain.
Census 11 23 40.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Bornholm.
Russia - - - 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, from gardens).
268 55.
LAMIACE^.
803.
Mentha sylvestris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 - 12 - 14 15 16.
Native?
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
True area uncertain.
Census 13 ?
? [Ireland].
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Cashmere.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Morocco.
Canaries.
Azores.
805.
Mentha piperita, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 16.
Native?
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Dumbarton, Aberd.
? 
Zones 12?
Humber to 250 yards.
Distribution uncertain.
Census 15 ?
? (Ireland 5).
English type of distribution ?
Eiu'ope - - - aus ger.
N.B. So seldom indicated as a native 
plant, in the Local Floras of Europe, that its area cannot be 
satisfactorily traced out.
806.
Mentha aquatica, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Lakes to 450 yards.
Census 18 34 87.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution, 
Europe aU, except Lapland and Finmark.
Piussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Madeira ; Lemann list.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
807.
Mentha sativa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Exclusive of M.
rubra.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Isla, Kincardine.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 16 ?
? Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
(Sweden ?) 
Eussia?
As a variety of M.
arvensis, in Led. flo.
ross.
Canaries.
Azores ?
55.
LAMIACE.E. 269 
808.
Mentha arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Highlantls to 350 yards.
Humber to 300 yds.
Census 18 33 81.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
(America, introduced).
809.
Mentha Pulegium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 - (14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Comvfall, Wight, Kent.
— Man, Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 300 yds.
Is it wild in Lake province ?
Census 13 23 43.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— " America.'' 
810.
Thymus Serpyllum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
T. Chamsedrys included.
Lat. 50 -61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
-^ Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1180, 1100, 1010, 850 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
T. " Chamsedrys " from Spain to Norway.
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
[America].
811.
Origanum vulgare, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Moray.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 16 32 75.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria ?
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America).
270 55.
LAMIACE^.
819.
Calamintha Acinos, Clairv.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Colonist in Scotland?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 15 30 61.
Ireland S.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland (uncertain) and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Algeria.
813.
Calamintha Nepeta, Clairv.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 [7 8] - 10 [11 12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon?
Kent !
Essex !
Herts !
Oxford 1 Gloucester !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Native in N.
Yorkshire ; Baker.
Census 7 ?
? Ireland ?
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 4.
N.B. In England, confused with C.
officinalis.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America).
814.
Calamintha oflBcinalis, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 10 ?
13 - - (15).
Native.
C. sylvatica - 2.
Lat. 50—56 (57).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland !
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 200 yards.
Extinct in province 11 ?
Census 11 24 56.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 - - ?
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
815.
Calamintha Clinopodium, Spenn.
Provinces ] to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Elgin.
Zones 19 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 15 30 73.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
"Japan." 
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
55.
LAMJACE^.
271 
817.
Melittis Melissophyllum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 [» - 5] 6 - [8].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornw.
Dors.
Suss.
— Cardigan; MissAtwood!
Zone 1.
LovT grounds.
Census 3 7 10.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Eussia - - - 3.
Eastward to Greece and Transylvania.
— .
N.B. Apparently confined to Europe.
818.
Teucrium Scorodonia, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 18 36 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den).
Norway.
Russia, apparently absent.
" Algeria." " Morocco." Madeira ; Lemann list.
819.
Teucrium Scordium, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 - - - 8 - 10.
Native ?
Lat. 51 — 55.
N. Devon ; Mrs. Russell !
N.W. York; Bowman !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Oxf. Su£f.
Norf.
Camb.
North.
Line.
Census 5 7 9.
Ireland 3.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6-43.
West-asia.
Cashmere.
Siberia.
North Africa ?
" Abyssinia" ; but this is beyond our limits.
822.
Ajuga reptans, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4?
Highlands to 730, 620, 540, 530 yards.
Census 18 35 88.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net deu got.
Russia 6-43.
N.B. A.
"alpina," of Forfarshire, 1831, was 
simply a misnamed example of this species.
273 55.
LAMIACE,^.
823.
Ajuga pyramidalis, Linn.
Provinces [1 7] 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 60.
Argyle, W.E. Inverness.
• — Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones - - 3 4.
Orkney at 900 yards ; Boswell Syme.
Census 4 6 8.
Ireland 1.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except Channel and Finmark.
LofiFoden Isles.
Russia 6-432.
— Greenland; Giesecke.
N.B. Distribution in Britain anomalous.
824.
Ajuga Chamaepitys, Schreb.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - [6 7].
Colonist.
[Sussex, Gloucester, etc.] 
Lat. 51—53.
Surrey !
Kent !
— Herts !
Cambridge !
Bedford !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
" N.
Wilts.
N. Hants.
S. Essex." 
Census 3 5 8.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 6 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
825.
Ballota nigra, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
B. ruderalis in provinces 3 and 12.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Renfrew, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 15 28 69.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
827.
Lamium Galeobdolon, Crantz.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 12 - (14 IS) [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland?
York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 11 24 54.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution, 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3.
Western Siberia.
— .
N.B. A specimen came to Bot. Soc.
London, labelled "Argyle." 
55.
LAMIACE.E. 273 
838.
Lamium album, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 -- [18].
Native.
Denizea in N.
B. 
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornv?all, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Moray.
Zones 19 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 315 yards.
Census 15 31 74.
Ireland 7.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Davuria.
[Barbary ; Desf.
flo.
atla.] — Iceland ; Lindsay Ust.
830.
Lamium amplexicaule, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 18 34 79.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Iceland ; Lindsay list.
(Am.) 
830'i=.
Lamium intermedium, Fries.
Provinces - [2 - - 5 - 7] - - - 11 - 13 14 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 61.
Wigton, Dumfries, Cheviotland.
— Orkney, Shetl.
Zones - 2 3.
Low grounds.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Census 6 12 18.
Ireland 2.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger - - - den got nor swe.
Russia - - - 3 2.
Lithuania; flo.
ross.
Finland; Fries.
— .
N.B. In Britain the distribution not well ascertained.
831.
Lamium purpureum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census IS 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
2 N 
274 55.
tiAMIACEM: 
831*.
Lamium incisum, WilM.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Any record for N.
Highlands?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 18 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 31 53.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution, 
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cba net den got* 
Russia - - 4 3.
— .
N.B. Doubtless often confused with L.
pufpureiim, 
833.
Galeopsis Ladanum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Colonist.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Elgin.
Zones 19 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 30 59.
Ireland 3.
Euglish-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Armenia.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(America, introduced).
833.
Galeopsis ochroleuca, Lam.
Provinces - - 3 - [5] - 7 (8 9) 10 11.
Colonist.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Essex!
Carnarvon!
York!
Durham!
Zone 1 2.
Low grounds.
[AVarwick], (Notts?
Lancaster?) 
Census 4 6 7.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia - - - 3.- 
834.
Galeopsis Tetrahit, Linii.
Provinces all.
Native or Colonist.
G. bifida included.
Lat. 50-^61.
Colnwd,ll, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 18 88 &1.
Irelaiid 12.
British tj'pe of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia, Davuria.
Kamtsc; 
=^ Faroe.
Iceland.
(America, introdUcedj.
55.
LAMiACE^.
2T5 
836.
Galeopsis versicolor, Curt.
Provinces - a 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 1112 13 14 15 16 17.
Colonist.
Lat. 80 — 58.
Sussex, perhaps only casual ?
— Ross, west and east.
Zones 1 2 3.
Highlands to 250 yards.
Tyne to 230 yards.
Census 15 26 60.
Ireland 7.
Scottish-hritish type.
Europe - ita - aus ger - - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4331.
As a variety of G.
Tetrahit in Flo,.
Ross, 
— N.B. Perhaps truly a boreal variety of Tetrahit.
836.
Stachys Betonica, Benth.
Provinces 1 to 16, Native.
Betopica officinalis,, Lina, 
Lat. 60-^58.
.Cornvyall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Lakes to 860 yards.
Census 16 29 70.
Ireland 7.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra eha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Western Siberia.
[Barbary ; Desf.
flo, atla.] Madeira ; Lemann list, 
837.
Stachys palustri?, Linn, 
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to SOO yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 93.
Ireland 15i.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark., 
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria, 
. — America.
Columbia, 
837, b.
Stachys ambigua, Sm, 
Provinces all, by the records.
Native, Two or three sub-forms, 
Lat. SO— '61.
Cornwall!
Dorset!
Kent !
— Orkney !
Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Namo often misapplied.
Census 18 32 46.
Ireland 6.
British type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha net (den got) nor.
g,ussia - ?
Caucasus ?
N.B. In the Flora Rossica, a Stachys 
" ambigua " is made the type form of S, palustris.
276 55.
LAMIACE^.
838.
Stachys sylvatica, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to SOO yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census ]8 38 91.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Kussia 6 6 4 3 3.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
839.
Stachys germanica, Linn.
Provinces (1 3) 3 4 - - - (8 - 10).
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. SO— 53.
Formerly in Hants !
Kent !
— Oxford !
Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
(Cornwall — York, by report).
Census 3 ?
? Ireland 0.
Local-germ anic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Denmark, extinct).
Piussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Northward to the Isle of 
Oesel, in European Eussia.
840.
Stachys arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutheriand, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 18 35 83.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
den got nor (swe).
Prussia 6 - - 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
841.
Nepeta Glechoma, Benth.
Provinces all ?
Native.
18 North Isles uncertain.
Lat. 50—58 or 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Boss, Orkney?
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 430 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 18 35 79.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Glechoma hederacea, Linn.
Russia '65433.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Azores, perhaps introduced.
— (America, introduced).
65.
LAMIACE.'E.
277 
842.
Nepeta Cataria, Linn.
Prov.
1 9 3 4 5 6 7 8 (9) 10 11 - (13 14 15 - 17 18).
Native?
Lat. SO — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Northumberland!
Zones 1 8.
Low grounds.
("Lanark." "Berwick.'' "Perth.") 
Census 10 21 45.
Ireland 8.
English-germanio type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
843.
Marrubium vulgare, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 1 2 - (14 ] 5).
Native in England ?
Lat. 50—56 (or 58).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Man, Cheviotl.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; often as a casual escape.
Census 12 ?
? Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
844.
Prunella vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 800 yards.
Highlands to 730 yards.
Census 18 38 08.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark ?
Loffoden Isles.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
" Japan." 
[Barbary].
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Icel.
Am. Col.
845.
Scutellaria galericulata, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Harris, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 200 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 18 35 82.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Dav.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
278 55.
LAMIACE^.
— 56.
boraginace^.
846.
Scutellaria minor, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 - - 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Devon to 850 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 14 36 53.
Ireland 7.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Bussia - - - 3.
Siberia?
N.B. Chiefly a western plant, extended 
in Europe from Portugal to Holstein ; eastward to Transylv.
847.
Myosotis palustris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - [17 18].
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
-^ Perth !
Forfar.
Zones 1 3 ?
Humber to 300 yds.
["Aberdeen"— "Shetland"].
Census 15 30 74.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Partly M.
repens here ?
Eussia 6 - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Same query?
Algeria?
— [Faroe.
Iceland.
America], 
848.
Myosotis repens, Don.
Prov.
1 2 3 [4] 5 6 [7] 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 750 yards.
Highlands to 680 yards.
Census 16 37 44.
Ireland 7.
British-scottish type.
Europe — ?
Normandy?
South Sweden.
Russia?
N.B. Not included in the Flora Rossica ; but perhaps 
passed by on the Continent, as a form of M.
palustris.
849.
Myosotis csespitosa, Schultz, 
Provinces all.
Native.
Much confused with M.
palustris.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Humber to 550 yards.
Census 18 36 76.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution, 
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha - den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6-4331.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— America; Hook.
flo.
bor.
am.
and DC, prodr.
50.
BORAGINACE.I];.
279 
850.
Myosotis alpestriSj Schmidt.
Provinces 10 - 12 - - 15.
Native.
Lat. 64—57.
York !
Westmoreland ?
Perth !
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 1300 y.
Humber at 750—800 j.
Census 3 8 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Sib. Dav.
Confused with M.
sylvatica?
^^ America, Columbia.
" Common on the Rocky Mountains." 
851.
Myosotia sylvatica, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon?
Sussex, Kent.
— Forfar, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 15 22 38.
Ireland 0.
English-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra ?
net den got nor.
Finmark ?
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Canaries.
— America ?
Columbia ?
By misnomers ?
852.
Myosotis arvehsis, HofFm.
Provinces alL Native.
Lat. 5.0—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 3 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 410 yards.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Madeira.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(Am. Col.) 
853.
Myosotis coUina, HofFm.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Shetland?
Lat. 50 — 58 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Banff, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards?
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 15 29 62.
Ireland 3.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
N.B.
" Abundant in Shetland"; Edm.
280 56.
BOEAGINACE^.
854.
Myosotis palustris, Lehm.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 30—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 2 8.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 18 35 80.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 - - 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Iceland.
" Columbia." 
855.
Lithospermum officinale, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native ; but doubtfully so in Scotland.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Elgin, Ross !
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 17 32 69.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Fiumark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— (America, introduced).
856.
Lithospermum arvense, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 18 32 77.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
857.
Lithospermum purpuro-cseruleum, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 - [5] 6 7 - - [10 - 12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon, Somerset !
Kent!
Glamorgan!
Denbigh!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Hereford, York, Cumberland], 
Census 4 5 6.
Ireland 0.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
66.
BOEAGINACE^.
281 
858.
Mertensia maritima, G.
Don.
Prov.
[1 2] - - - ?
7 - - - 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Carnarvon, Cheviotland.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 a 3.
Littoral.
[Cornwall, Devon, Hants.'Cardigan?] 
•Census 9 15 28.
Ireland 4.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe den got nor lap fin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
859.
Symphytum ofHcinale, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Denizen in North Britain.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Kincardine.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 15 31 73.
Ireland IS.
EngUsh-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Western Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
860.
Symphytum tuberosum, Linn.
Provinces - (2 3 4 5) - 7 8 - 10 [11] 12 13 14 1 5 16.
Native.
Lat. 53—58.
(Beds !), Merioneth, York.
— Isla, Elgin.
Zones ?
3 3.
Low grounds only ?
(Sussex, Herts, Essex, etc.) 
Census 8 11 30.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate-Scottish type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra.
Russia - - 4 3.
" Davuria ; Pallas." N.B. Possibly a native in 
S. England, though usually recorded there with some distrust.
862.
Lycopsis arvensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native ?
Introduced ; Alph.
De Candolle.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 350 yards; sown with corn?
Census 18 38 88.
Ireland 6.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland (scarcely) and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Western Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
3 
282 56.
BOEAGINACEiE.
864.
Anchusa sempervirens, Lmn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Alien or Denizen.
(Cornwall to Ross).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Devon!
Sussex!
Kent!
— Dumbarton!
Kincard.
! 
Zones las; Low grounds.
Mostly a casual, from gardens.
Census 37??
(Ireland 6).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - - - fra cha.
— .
N.B. It would likely be wiser to discard this from the lists 
of quasi-british plants, and treat it as truly an alien.
865.
Asperugo procumbens, Linn, 
Prov.
[] 2 3 4] 5 - 7 - - - 11 - - 14 ] 5 17.
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 53—58.
Salop !
Cheviotl.
! Haddingt.
I Fife !
Forfar!
Ross !
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Misreported or extinct in many places.
Census 6 9 9.
Ireland 0.
Local-scottish type ?
Europe aU, except Channel.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
866.
Cynoglossum officinale, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - 14 15 - (17) [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—57 (or 58).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife.
(Ross).
Zones 12?
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 14 28 66.
Ireland 6.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Barbary ; Desf.
flo.
atla.
— (America, introduced).
867.
Cynoglossum montanum, Linn.
Provinces ^ [2] 3 4 5 - (15).
Native in England.
Lati 51 — 53(57).
Surrey!
Essex!
Gloucester!
Warwick I 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Sussex] — (Perth, Forfar).
Census 3 6 12.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia 6.
N.B. Apparently mis-records occur in English books, 
through mistaking 0.
officinale for the present species.
56.
BOEAGINACE^.
— 57.
PINGUICULA<!E.a;.
283 
868.
Pulmonaria angustifolia, Linu.
Provinces [1] 2 [3 4 - - 7].
Native.
[1 Ravenshaw Flo. Dev.] 
Lat, 50— 51.
Dorset.
Wight!
South Hants !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Devon, Surrey, Suffolk, Flint].
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0, Local-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net (den) got nor.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
N.B. P.
officinalis occurs in many counties of 
Britain, as an escape from gardens, and is confused with this.
869.
EcMum vulgare, Linn, 
Provinces all ?
Native.
Alien or Colonist in North Britain.
Lat. 50 — 56 or 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Harris, Caithness.
Zones 13 3.
Humber t» 250 yards, Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 18 33 78.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
-^ [Iceland ; Hooker list].
(America).
872.
Pinguicula vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Rare in the South of England.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Devon, Dorset, Hants.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 970, 930, 930, 900, 880 yards.
Census 18 34 75.
Ireland 12.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Aleutia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
873.
Pinguicula alpina, Linn.
Provinces - - - r 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 57—58.
Skye ; James Mackay 1 E.
Ross ; W.
A. Stables !
Zone - - 3.
Low grounds only?
Census 2 3 2.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin, 
Russia 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland; Giesecke, 
284 57.
PINGUICULACE^.
874.
Pinguicula lusitanica, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 - [4] 12 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. SO— 59.
Cornwall, Dorset, Wight.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds only?
[West Norfolk, by an error].
Census 8 18 34.
Ireland 13.
Atlantic-scottish type.
Europe spa — - fra cha.
Portugal to Normandy, and continued 
northwards only in Britain and Ireland.
A single locality in 
the East Highland province, in its extreme North-west.
875.
Utricularia vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17 18.
Native.
U. negleota in 9 3-5.
Lat. 50 -61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 500 yards ; Prof.
Dickie.
Census 17 33 66.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
U. neglecta, N.
Italy to Sweden.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
876.
Utricularia intermedia, Hayne.
Provinces [1] 2 - [4 5] 11 12 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Dorset, South Hants.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Several false localities?
Census 6 10 14.
Ireland 5.
Local-scottish type?
Europe - - - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— America.
N.B. The British localities mostly need verification.
877.
Utricularia minor, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Occasionally mislabelled " intermedia." 
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Sparee or overlooked.
Census 18 33 57.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
58.
PEIMULACE^.
285 
878.
Primula vulgaris, Huds.
Provinces all.
Native.
J_,at.
60—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 550 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got) nor.
Eussia 6 5 4.
"Syria; Labill"; DeOand.
Prodr.
Algeria ; Munby cat.
— Faroe.
879.
Primula elatior, Jacq.
Provinces - - 3 4.
Native.
Not P.
elatior of "With.
etc.
Lat. 51— 53.
Essex!
Suffolk!
Cambridge.
[Middlesex].
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Varieties of P.
vulgaris excluded above.
Census 2 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got.
Russia 6 - - 3.
Siberia.
Iceland ; Lecoq.
geogr.
Surely this is an error ?
880.
Primula veris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17 (18).
Native.
Orkney ; GiUies herb.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Caithness !
Sutherl.
! 
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Highlands to 450 yards.
Census 16 30 77.
Ireland 11.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Barbary ; Desf.
flor.
atla.
" Flores umbeUati," etc.
881.
Primula farinosa, Linn.
Provinces [1 3 - - - 7] - 9 10 11 1-2 - 14 - - [17 ] 8].
Native.
Lat. 53 — 56.
Lancaster, York.
— Cumberland, Peebles.
Zones - 2 3 4.
Humber — 600 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 5 6 11.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - den got - swe.
Lapland ?
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Mongolia.
— Iceland.
" Greenland." Am. Col.
The same species ?
286 68.
PEIMDLACE/E.
882.
Primula scotica, Hook.
Provinces 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 58— 60.
Sutherland!
Caithness!
Orkney!
Zones - - 3.
Low grounds only ?
Census 2 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe.
Scandinavian mountains, nor swe lap.
N.B. This seems 
quite satisfactorily distinct from P.
farinosa, with which it is re- 
united in the Handbook of the British Flora, and in DC.
prodr.
884.
Trientalis europsea, Linn.
Provinces 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53—61.
Westmoreland, York.
— Orkney?
Shetland!
Zones - 2 3 4 S.
Highlands to 930 yards.
Tyne 70—600 yds.
Census 9 13 30.
Ireland 0.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
T. arctica, in Kamtsc.
— Iceland ; Lindsay list.
T. arctica, in Aleutian Isles.
885.
Hottonia palustris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 - - [15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— Westmoreland, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
[Dorset, on old authority.] 
Census 11 19 41.
Ireland 0.
Enghsh type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Western Siberia.
886.
Lysimachia vulgaris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— MuU, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 32 70.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
68.
PRIMDLACE^.
287 
887.
Lysimachia thyrsiflora, Linn.
Provinces [1 3 3 - - - 7] 8 [9] 10 - [13] 13 [14] 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 53—57.
Notts, York !
— Lanark !
Forfar!
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Dumbarton or Stirling ?
Census 5 7 8.
Ireland 0.
Intormediate-scottish type.
Europe - - - aus ger Ira - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— America.
Columbia.
888.
Lysimachia nummularia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 (14 15).
Native.
(Renfrew to Forfar).
Lat. 50 — 66.
Devon, S.
Hants, Kent.
— Dumfries, Northumb.
? 
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 13 35 56.
Ireland 1 & (4).
English type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
889.
Lysimachia nemorum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native 
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 810, 710, 700, 680, 670 yards.
Census 17 35 87.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
[" Kamtschaika; Rudolph "].
Not elsewhere in the Russian empire.
["Azores"].
The Azorio plant is not identical Tvith the European.
890.
Anagallis arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Colonist in North Britain.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Banflf.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 200 yards.
A. ceerulea included.
Census 16 33 81.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
288 58.
PEIMULACE^.
891.
Anagallis tenella, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Native.
No authority for province 17.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 850 yards.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 17 36 87.
Ireland 1:2.
British type of distribution 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
[" Eastern Siberia"].
Otherwise, unknown in the Russian Empire.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
892.
Centunculus minimus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 - 12 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Kincardine.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 35 46.
L-eland 7.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - 4 3.
Siberia.
Azores.
— Said to occur in South America.
893.
Samolus Valerandi, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds ; chiefly littoral.
Census 16 31 72.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
Columbia.
894.
Glaux manitima, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 18 35 69.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
China.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
59.
PLDMBAGINACE,E.
289 
895.
Armeria maritima, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 2 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1270, 1200, 1100, 1000 yards.
Census ] 8 34 71.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all ; if A.
elongata or vulgaris be included herewith.
Eussia - - 4 3 2.
Arctic and Eastern Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia, 
897.
Statics Limonium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 - (15 - - 18).
Native.
Province 5 uncertain 
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
(Fife.
Shetland).
Census 13 21 33.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia, absent.
But S.
Gmelini of Rus. and Sib. is closely allied.
Algeria.
Azores ; the species not certain.
— America.
898.
Statice bahusiensis, Fries.
Provinces [1] 2 3 4 - 6 - - 9 10 11 12 13.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— Wigton, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
[Reported in Devon].
Census 10 11 18.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe -?
France.
Scandinavia, den got nor.
— .
N.B. Whether this is sufficiently and permanently distinct 
from Limonium, may be held an open question.
899.
Statice binervosa, G.
E. Smith.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 - - 12 13.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Wigton, Lincoln.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
S. Dodartii, Dorset?
Norfolk?
Census 10 14 20.
Ireland 4.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha.
S. occidentalis and Dodartii.
N.B. The prevailing form in England is S.
occidentalis, of Lloyd ; 
true Dodartii being very local or unknown.
2p 
390 60.
PLANTAGINACEiE.
900.
Statice caspia, Willd.
Provinces [1 - 3] 4 - - [7] 8 - - - [12].
Native.
Lat. 52 — 54.
Norfolk !
Cambridge.
" Lincoln ; Banks.
Herb." 
Zone 1.
Littoral.
[By misnomers, in other counties also].
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra.
Bussia - 5 4.
Siberia.
East Asia.
— .
N.B. Eriestone, Lincoln ; Bab. Man.
6. 
901.
Plantago major, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wigbt, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 19 3.
Tyne to 6S0 yards.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Census IS 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU.
N.B. Carried vridely over the earth.
Russia 6 6 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
Algeria, Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Am. Col.
(States).
902.
Plantago media, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
[Shetland, casual.] 
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornvi'all, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Lakes to 360 yards.
Census 15 99 70.
(Ireland).
English-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
[Azores ; Drouet flo.] — Faroe ?
Iceland ?
Columbia ?
903.
Plantago lanceolata, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Wales to 750 yards.
Highlands to 710 yards.
Census 18 38 101.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2; West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Am. Col.
(States).
60.
PLANTAGINACE^.
— 02.
CHENOPODIACE^.
291 
904.
Plantago maritima, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orlmey, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 600 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 18 35 76.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia - 5 4 3 9 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Barbary ; Desf.
flo.
atla.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
905.
Plantago Coronopus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds ; often littoral.
Humber to 200 yds.
Census ] 8 37 82.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
906.
Littorella lacustris, Linn.
Provinces sJl. Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 550 yards ; James Backhouse.
Census 18 34 64.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey (overlooked there ?) and Finmark.
Russia 3.
Lithuania only.
Azores ; only the leaves found.
— Faroe.
908.
Chenopodium olidum, Cart.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - - - 8 9 10 11 - 14 (15).
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Edinburgh.
(Fife).
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 9 18 32.
(Ireland 2).
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria.
293 63.
CHENOPODIACE.E.
909.
Chenopodium polyspermum, Linn.
Provinces 1234S6789 10 (11) - - - [15].
Native 
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Scarcely indigenous in prov.
9 10?
Census 10 20 38.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmavk.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
910.
Chenopodium urbicum, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 - [7] 8 9 10 11 - - [14 15].
Native?
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall !
Wight, Kent.
— Chester, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
" Colonist " in provinces 10 11.
Census 9 18 34.
Ireland ?
Germanic-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
911.
Chenopodium rubrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Renfrew, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 14 27 54.
Ireland 3.
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-489.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Azores.
— " America." " Columbia." 
911*.
Chenopodium botryoides, Sm.
Provinces [I 3] 3 4 - - [7 - - - 11 - - - 15].
Native.
Lat. 51— 53.
Kent!
Essex.
Suffolk.
Norfolk!
Zone 1.
Littoral.
[C.
pseudo-botryoides in 1 9 7 11 15.] 
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Local-germanic type.
Europe — ?
[Channel Isles, by a misnomer].
Scandinavia?
N.B. The European area (if any) of this plant cannot be determined 
until its proper synonyms are ascertained.
62.
CHENOPODIACE^..
293 
912.
Chenopodium murale, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 [7] 8 9 10 H [12 13 14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Northumb.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to ] 00 yards.
Census 10 20 38.
Ireland 3.
English-germanio type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
913.
Chenopodium hybridum, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 4 3 (11 - - 14).
Native ?
Lat. 50—53.
Dorset !
Kent !
— Salop, Cambridge, Norfolk !
Zonal.
Low grounds.
1 South Somerset ; Coleman.
Census 5 11 19.
Ireland 0.
English type of distriliution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
914.
Chenopodium album, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Including Ch. viride, etc.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Ch. candicaiis, viride, paganum.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
— Faroe.
(America.
Columbia).
913.
Chenopodium ficifolium, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3 4 [5 - - 8] - (10 11).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Dorset?
Sussex, Kent I — Cambridge, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Surrey !
Middlesex !
Essex !
Census 3 8 15.
Ireland 3.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa - tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia - - 4 3.
Siberia.
N. B.
In England, the ' paganum ' 
variety of Ch. album is occasionally mistaken for this.
294 62.
chenopodiacEjE.
916.
Chenopodium glaucum, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3 4 - 6 - - - 10 11 - - -(15).
Native?
Lat. 50—55.
[Dorset ?], Wight, Hants.
— Durham !
(Fife !) 
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; and very scarce.
Census 6 7 8.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
Cashmere.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
917.
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native ?
(Often near houses).
Lat. 50 — 58.
Carnarvon, Wight, Kent.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 1^ 33 74.
(Ireland 10).
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Often semi-domestic.
Eussia - - 4 3 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— (America, introduced).
918.
Obione portulacoides, Moq.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 [14 - 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Northumberl.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
[Dumbarton, Edinburgh.] 
Census 12 20 28.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Sweden, extinct.
Russia - - 4 3.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Azores; Drouet flo.
— "America." 
919.
Obione pedunculata, Moq.
Provinces - - 3 4 - (6) - 8 - - (11).
Native.
Lat. 51—53.
Kent!
Suffolk!
Norfolk!
Cambridge?
Lincoln?
Zone 1.
Littoral.
(Caermarthen and Durham, on ballast).
Census 3 4 5.
[Ireland].
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe - - - - ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
— .
N.B. Atriplex pedunculata in Cyb. Brit.
vdl.
2. 
62.
CHENOPOWACE^E.
295 
920.
Atriplex arenaria, Woods.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - - 7 ??
10 11 ?
13 ??
16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent !
— Arran, Sutherland?
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Much confused with A.
Babingtonii.
Census 10 13 18.
Ireland 3.
British-localtype.
Europe fra cha net den got nor.
" A.
crassifolia, May." 
Russia ?
N.B. This plant long stood in our books under the 
name of A.
laciniata, but is now alleged not to be that species.
921.
Atriplex Babingtonii, Woods.
Provinces all.
Native.
Perhaps a variety of A.
hastata ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
.Formerly confused with A.
arenaria.
Census 18 31 55.
Ireland 6.
British type of distribution.
Europe — ?
Channel Isles.
A. hastata, var.
salina, Fl. de Fr.
? 
— N.B. This plant is not satisfectorily identified with any Eu- 
ropean Atriplex.
922.
Atriplex hastata, Linn.
Prov.
all.
Native.
Including ' patula' (Sm.) and ' deltoidea' (Bab.) 
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 18 38 88.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India?
Siberia.
Azores ?
— Faroe ?
(America, introduced).
923.
Atriplex angustifolia, Sm.
Provinces all, if in 17.
Native.
A. patula, "Linn." 
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 2 3.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 17 34 6*.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, if in Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India ?
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
296 26.
CHENOPODIACE^..
9'23*.
Atriplex erecta, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 - 10 11 - 13 14 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat 50—58.
CornwaU, Wigbt, Kent?
— Skye, North Uist.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Scarcely separable from ' angustifolia.' 
Census 14 23 36.
Ireland 3.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - - ger fra oha.
Scandinavia ?
N. B.
Wide ex- 
tremes occur ; from a weakly state often merged in ' angusti- 
folia,' to an extra-luxuriant state figured in Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
924.
Atriplex littoralis, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— West Perth, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
A. marina is included.
Census 12 19 32.
Ireland 4.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Columbia?
" Kotzebue Sound," " Bay of Eschscholtz.'' 
925.
Beta maritima, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 6 7?
10 11 12 - 14 1 5 16 - (18).
Native.
Lat. 50—57 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Fife.
Zones 1 2 ?
Littoral.
(18 Orkney & Shetland; Neill).
Census 13 19 33.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ?
fra cha - den.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
926.
Salsola Kali, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 15 25 50.
Ireland 8.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries ?
Azores.
— America.
62.
CHENOPODIACEiE.
297 
927.
Suseda maritima, Dum.
Provinces all ?
Native.
No authority for province 13.
Lat. 50 -61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Schoberia maritima in Cyb. Brit.
Census 17 29 51.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except North Sweden, Lapland, Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— America.
928.
Suaeda fruticosa, Foersk.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 - - - (10 11) [12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Devon?
Dorset!
Essex.
— Glamorgan?
Norfolk!
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Cornwall ?
Somerset ?
Census 5 6 8.
Ireland 0.
Germanio-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra.
Dalmatia for ' aus.' 
Eussia 6 - 4.
West-asia.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
N.B. Schoberia fruticosa in C.
B. 
929.
Salicornia herbacea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
S. prooumbens (Sm.) included.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 18 31 55.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— America.
930.
Salicornia radicans, Sm.
Provinces [1] 2 3 4 - [6] - - - 10 [15].
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Dorset!
Wight!
Kent!
— Norfolk!
York!
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
[Somerset, Glamorgan, Forfar].
Census 4 8 10.
[Ireland].
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita fra - - den got.
N.B. The area is not well 
traceable by books, apart from that of 'fruticosa,' in which 
Smith's S.
radicans is merged as a variety by several authors.
298 60.
POLYGONACE^.
931.
Polygonum Bistorta, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17 (18).
Native; but introduced to many counties.
Lat. SO — 58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 18 3.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 ?
? Ireland 8.
British-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra clia net (den) got - (swe).
Russia 6-4391.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
Am.
? Col.
? A var.
there ?
933.
Polygonum viviparum, Linn.
Provinces [5] - 7 [8] - 10 11 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 01.
Carnarvon, York.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - ?
3 4 5 6.
Highl.
20—1310 y.
Humber 200—450 y.
Census 8 13 27.
Ireland 1.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
Spitsbergen.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
933.
Polygonum amphibium, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Dav. China.
Algeria.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
934 (935).
Polygonum lapathifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to IT.
Native.
P. laxum (of Eng. auth.) included.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 17 34 77.
Ireland 8.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
•iy.
POLYGONACEiE.
209 
935 (934).
Polygonum Persicaria, Linn.
Provinces ail.
Native.
No authority for Sutherland.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Lakes to 400 yards.
Census 18 37 93.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution 
Europe all.
Northward to Finmark ; N.
J. Andersson.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet fio.
— Far. Icel.
(Am.) 
936.
Polygonum mite, Schrank.
Provinces ?
2 3 4 - [6 7 9] 10 - ?
-. Native.
Lat. 50— 5.5.
Dorset!
Surrey !
— Hunts !
Northton!
York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
" Cornwall" to " Cumberland"?
Census 4 8 12.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra «ha net den got.
Russia 6 - - 3.
N.B. This is nearly allied to Persicaria, hut has 
been strangely confused with the less similar P.
minus.
937.
Polygonum Hydropiper, Liun.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Shetland?
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 450 yards.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 32 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Madeira.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
938.
Polygonum minus, Huds.
Provinces 123456789 10 11 -13- [15].
Native.
Lat. 53 — 55.
Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— Kirkcudbright, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 150 yards.
Somerset; Dr. Southby.
Census 12 19 33.
Ireland 10.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-43.
India.
Siberia.
" China." 
N.B. Clearly distinct from P.
mite, see mem : under 936.
300 68.
POLYGONACE^.
939.
Polygonum aviculare, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 600 yards.
Highlands to 460 yards.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Spread hence over the earth.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
(Am. Col.) 
940.
Polygonum Rail, Bab.
Provinces 1 2 - 4 - 6 7 - 9 - 11 13 13 14 15 16 - [1 8].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall!
Wight!
Sussex.
— Cantire !
Forfar!
Zones 12?
Littoral.
[Shetland, " common" ; Edm. flo.J 
Census IS 18 29.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe.
South France.
Bretagne.^ Channel Isles.
Euxine.
N.B. The range may be expected to extend from Spain to 
Scandinavia, but is ill ascertained as yet.
940*.
Polygonum maritimum, Linn.
Provinces [1] 2 - - - [6 7].
Casual or Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
South Hants ; Borrer, in 1847.
Extinct since ?
Zone 1.
Littoral.
[P.
Eaii thus misnamed in 1 6 7.] 
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Eussia 5 4.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
941.
Polygonum Convolvulus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Colonist northward.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Census 18 37 89.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamts.
Japan.
Algeria, probably introduced.
— (America, certainly introduced).
()-i.
POLYGONACE^i:.
301 
942.
Polygonum dumetorum, Linn.
Provinces 13 3-5 [U].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Somer.
! Dorset !
Hants !
Surrey !
Herts !
Monm.
! 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Sussex ; Borrer.
Essex ; Varenne.
Census 4 6 7.
Ireland 0.
English-germanio type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 9.
India.
Siberia.
— " America." But the American plant is P.
soandens exclusively?
943.
Eumex Hydrolapathum, Huds.
Provinces 1 to 13 - [16] 16.
Native.
Lat. 60— 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla!
Perth?
Zones 19?
Low grounds.
Formerly confused with E.
aquaticus.
Census 14 96 58.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita ?
aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Eussia -- 4 3.
Cyprus?
— America ?
944.
Rumex crispus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 19 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 18.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark ?
" Altenfiord." 
Eussia 6 5 4 3 9.
West-asia.
Siberia.
China.
Japan.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
944*.
Rumex aquaticus, Linn.
Provinces [1 - - 4 5] 10 11 19 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 64 — 61.
Westmoreland, York.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones -93?
Highlands to 530 yards.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Census 9 14 28.
Ireland 0, Scottish type of distribution.
Europe -?
Germany.
France.
Scandinavia all.
Eussia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
(Iceland).
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
302 63.
POLYGONACE.E.
945.
Eumex pratensis, Mert.
et Koch.
Provinces ] 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 - - - ].5.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen ; Syme.
Zones 12?
Tjne to 400 yards.
A species iU understood.
Census 10 21 34.
Ireland — ?
English type of distribution?
Europe spa - - aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5-3.
" Specimiua rossica non vidi " ; Ledebour.
— N.B. A dubious species, — "R.
cristatuSjWallr." "R.
acutus, L." 
947.
Kumex obtusifolius, Auct.
(Meisner, etc ) 
ProTinces all.
Native.
No authority for S.W. Lowlands.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Lakes to 510 yards.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
948.
Rumex nemorosus, Schrad.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
R. sanguineus et viridis.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Census 16 33 72.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
— (America, introduced).
948*.
Rumex conglomeratus, Mur.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Common in Shetland; Edm. flo.
Lat. 50—58 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye.
Shetland?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 17 30 73.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6-43.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.' — Faroe?
Iceland?
(America).
63.
POLYGONACE.E. 303 
949.
Rumex pulcher, Linn.
Provinces 133456-8--(ll- 13).
Native?
Lat. 50 — 64.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Notts, Lincoln.
Zones 1 ?
Low grounds.
(Northumberland, on ballast.) 
Census 7 17 38.
(Ireland 5).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 4.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
950.
Eumex maritimus, Linn.
Proviiices 12 3 4 5 ??
8 ?
10 11 - [13 - 15 - - 18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Durham; Prof.
Lawson !
Zones 1 U.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 8 17 30.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 8 5 4 3.
Siberia.
— America ?
950*.
Eumex palustris, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - [8] 9 10 [11 - - - 1 5].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall?
Dorset, Kent.
— Chester, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 100 yards.
Census 7 15 22.
[Ireland].
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
951.
Rumex Acetosa, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1350, 1320, 1270, 1230 yards.
Census 18 38 101.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtso.
Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
304 63.
POLYGONACE^.
— 65.
THYMELvEACE^.
952.
Rumex Acetosella, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3 4 5.
Humber to 850 yds.
Highlands to 7 1 yds.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Carried thence almost over the globe.
Eussia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. loel.
Greenl.
x\m.
Col.
953.
Oxyria reniformis; Hook.
Provinces [5] - 7 - - [10] - 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 60.
Merioneth, Carnarvon.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1330, 1300, 1250 yards.
Census 6 10 20.
Ireland 4.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - - 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Kamtsc.
Spitsb.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
954.
Hippophae rhamnoides, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 8 - 10 (11 - - 14 - 16).
Native in England.
Lat. 51—55.
Kent!
Suffolk.
Norfolk!
Lincoln.
York!
Zones 1 2.
Chiefly littoral.
(Islay, Fife, etc.) 
Census 4 5 5.
(Ireland).
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den - nor swe.
Eussia 6 - - 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
955.
Daphne Laureola, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - (7) 8 9 10 ,11 (12 13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— York, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(Lanark, Fife, Kincardine.) 
Census 9 19 42.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia, absent.
Mount Olympus, in Bithynia.
Algeria.
Azores, high on the Peak of Pico island.
65.
THYMEL^ACE^.
— 68.
EMPETRACE^.
305 
956.
Daphne Mezereum, Linn.
Provinces 12345--8-10 1112.
Alien or Denizen.
Lftt.
50 — 35.
Dorset, Hants, Sussex.
— Westmorel., Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 200 yards.
Sussex, truly wild ; Borrer.
Census 9 ?
? Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Denmark (introduced ?) and Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
N.B. A garden escape in various 
localities in Engl., and now difficult to decide where it is native.
957.
Thesium humifusum, DeCand.
Provinces 12 3 4 5.
Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Comwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Gloucester, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; littoral sands and chalk hills.
Census 5 12 21.
Ireland 0.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net.
T. divarioatum, DC prodr.
Russia 6.
West-asia.
" Crimea." 
Algeria.
958.
Asarum europaeum, Linn.
Provinces 2 3 (8) 9 10 (II 12 - 14 1 5).
Denizen.
Lat. 51—55.
Wilts !
— S.
Lancaster !
York !
Westmoreland ?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Herts; Ray Syn. Berks; B.
G. 
Census 4 5 6.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
(Scandinavia).
Russia 6-43.
Western Siberia.
— .
N.B. Decreasing in Britain, if ever well established.
960.
Empetrum nigrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2] - - 5 to 18.
Native.
[2 Sussex, extinct.] 
Lat. 50—61.
Devon, 1866.
Somerset!
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1350, 1170, 1130, 1110 yards.
Census 15 27 59.
Ireland 8.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
2 R 
304 63.
POLYGONACE^.
— 65.
THYMEL^ACE/E.
932.
Eumex Acetosella.
Xinu.
^"f>vinces all.
Native i-iative.
Very rare and uncertain.
Lat. 50-j?i- i^Cr^mwaU, 1831.
Wight, before ] 840.
Glam., 1834.
Zone I^ -.
Littori -1- D^'^on, Dorset, Somerset, Cardigan.
Census 3 P^ 7.
Ireland 1.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Dalmatia.
Piussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
Azores.
962.
Euphorbia Helioscopea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Colonist.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 2 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Japan.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— America, introduced.
963.
Euphorbia platyphyllos, Linn.
Provinces 123 4 5 (10 11).
Casual or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Worcester, Cambridge.
Zones 1 (2).
Low grounds.
Humber to 1 00 yards.
Census 5 10 24.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— (America, introduced).
963*.
Euphorbia stricta, Koch.
Provinces [1 2] - - 5.
Native.
Not E.
stricta of Smith.
Lat. 51 — 52.
W. Gloucester; Hort.
Monmouth; Watkins !
Zone 1.
Low grounds?
Census 112.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6- West-asia.
09.
EUPHOEBIACE.E. o07 
964.
Euphorbia hiberna, Linn.
Provinces 1 - [3] (10).
Native.
Lat. 51 — 5-^.
Linton, Nortli Devon ; Mrs. Russell !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 111.
Ireland 3.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe.
Italy.
Sardinia.
Corsica.
France.
Switzerland.
Russia, apparently absent.
Said to occur in Gallicia.
965.
Euphorbia pilosa, Eng. Bot.
Supp.
2787.
Provinces 1 9.
Alien or Denizen.
" Wild" in Sussex ; Hemsley.
Lat. 51 — 52.
1 Somerset.
2 Westmeston, Sussex; Hemsley.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Not E.
coralloides, found at Slinfold.] 
Census 2 2 9.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe — ?
N.B. According to Bentham and Syme, tbis is E.
pilosa of Linneus ; while Boissier (DC.
prodr.) and Babington 
hold it a form of E.
palustris of Linneus.
The area would be 
changed in accordance.
969.
Euphorbia Paralias, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 - 9 - (11) 12 - [14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— CumberL Suffolk.
Zones 1 9.
Littoral.
Census 8 14 97.
Ireland 6.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia, absent ?
West-asia, several habitats recorded.
Algeria.
Egypt.
Canaries.
970.
Euphorbia portlandica, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 [3] - - 6 7 - 9 - - 19 13.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent?
— Wigton, Cumberland.
Zones 1 9.
Littoral.
Census 7 10 16.
Ireland 6.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe.
Spain.
France.
Channel Isles.
Greece?
Russia, apparently absent.
Azores ; Drouet.
Perhaps a misnoiner here.
308 69.
EUPHORBIACE.E.
971.
Euphorbia exigua, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Colonist.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar, Banff.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 15 30 70.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cba net den got - (swe).
Russia 6 5-3.
West-asia.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
972.
Euphorbia Peplus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Caithness.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 17 33 82.
Ireland 12.
British-enghsh type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - - 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
974.
Euphorbia amygdaloides, Linn.
Provinces 12346678 1011.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cheviotland; Bigge !
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 10 20 46.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Isle of Oesel ?
Russia 6 5 4.
West-asia.
AVestern Siberia.
976.
Mercurialis perennis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17, possibly 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—58 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Orkney ?
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 570 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 17 34 83.
Ireland 6.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Western Siberia?
Algeria.
C9.
EUPHOEBIACE/E.
— 70.
UETlCACEJi. 309 
977.
Mercurialis annua, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (10 11 12 - 14 15).
Colonist?
Lat. 60 — 54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Notts.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(York — Perth, a casual weed.) 
Census 9 18 30.
Ireland 4.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net (den - nor).
Kussia 6 5 4.
West-asia.
Cyprus.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
978.
Urtica urens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 18 38 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Carried widely to other countries.
Kussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland, introduced ?
(America).
979.
Urtica dioica, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 830 yards.
Humber to 800 yds.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Barbary ; Desf.
atlan.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(America).
Aleutia.
982.
Parietaria officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - (17).
Native.
Lat. 50—57 or 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar !
(Ross).
Zones 1 2 (3).
Low grounds.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 16 30 74.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Western Siberia (P.
erecta).
Algeria.
Egypt.
Morocco.
Canaries.
Azores, 
310 70.
URTICACEiE.
71.
AMENTIFER^E.
983.
Humulus Lupulus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 (11 13 13 14 15).
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 S (3).
Highlands at 350 yards, doubtless introduced.
Census 10 33 50.
(Ireland 10).
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— America, " truly indigenous '' ; Gray.
984.
Ulmus montana, Sm.
Provinces all, wild or planted.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 18 36 ?
Ireland 1 and (9).
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
U. campestris var.
vulgaris.
— N.B. Difficult to assign habitats of "campestris" between the two.
985.
Ulmus suberosa, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 to 11 - (13 14 15).
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — S5.
Almost all England.
Planted in Scotland.
Zones 1 3.
Humber to 350 yards, not clearly native.
Census 11 ?
? (Ireland 13).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Baltic Isles.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
U. campestris var.
suberosa.
Algeria.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
U. campestris.
988.
Quercus pedunculata, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native in all?
" Robur" included.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 17 34 80.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
" Robur" included.
Russia 6-43.
Varieties in West-asia.
Barbary; Desf.
atlau.
" Q.
Robur.'' 
71.
AMENTIFERai;.
311 
988*.
Quercus sessiflora, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native in all?
Apart from " Robur." 
Lat. SO — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherl.
; G Johnston.
Zones 12 3.
Heights not ascertained for this species apart.
Census 17 33 ?
Ireland 1.
British type of distribution.
Eui'ope spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got (nor swe).
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia, with varieties.
— N.B. Few British botanists appear to understand this.
989.
Fagus sylvatica, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17, wild or planted.
Native in England.
Lat. 50 — 54.
(Cornwall).
Hants, Sussex.
— Chester.
(Ross).
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds.
Humber to 400 3'ards, planted.
Census 17 ?
? (Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
N.B. It has become impossible to 
fix the native limits of this in Britain.
990.
Carpinus Betulus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15, wild or planted.
Native in South Britain, 
Lat. 50—53 (58).
Sussex, Kent.
— Cambridge; Bab. flo.
Zones 1 (2 3).
Low grounds.
(Devon — Moray.) 
Census 15 ?
? (Ireland).
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
N.B. In Britain the true native 
limits cannot be determined now.
Decreasing ?
991.
Corylus Avellana, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Formerly in Lewis and Shetland.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Humber to 550 yards.
Census 18 36 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Limit within South Lapland.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Davuria.
Algeria.
312 71.
AMENTIFEE.?;:.
993.
Alnus glutinosa, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Wild in the Hebrides ?
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3?
Highlands to 550 yards.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Census 18 35 90.
Ireland la.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
"Japan." 
Algeria.
— [America.
Columbia.] 
993.
Betula alba, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Segregates included.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to (900 ?), 680, 670, 660, 630 yds.
Census 18 36 88.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
B. 'glutinosa' and 'pubescens' included.
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland; Hooker list, from Zoega.
"America." 
994.
Betula nana, Linn.
Provinces 11-13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 55 — 59.
Lanark, Peebles, Cheviotland?
— Sutherland.
Zones - - 3 4 5.
HighLmds to 920, 700, 650, 640, 600 yards.
Census 6 9 12.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
996.
Populus alba, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 1 6, wild or planted.
Native in England ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Cantire, E^rfar.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
N.B. provinces given as reported.
Census 16 ?
? (Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha (net) den got (nor swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka '?
Algeria.
N.B. Impossible to fix the native area in Britain.
71.
AMENTIFER^.
313 
996.
Populus canescens, Sm.
Provinces 1 to II, wild or planted.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 65.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Cheviotland, "denizen." 
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 11 16 ?
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - (net) den (got).
By use of the name.
Russia ?
Caucasus and Siberia ; if truly identical with P.
hybrida 
of Bieb.
flo.
taur.
cauc.
997.
Populus tremula, Linn.
Provinces ail.
Native.
No authority for S.W. Lowlands.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3?
Humber to 550 yards.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Census ]8 36 78.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
" Japan." 
Algeria.
999.
Salix pentandra, Linn.
Prov.
(1 2 3 4) 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 - (18).
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Pembroke; Bab. cat.
— Argyle, Moray.
(Harris).
Zones 12 3.
North Yorkshire 0—350 yards.
Tyne to 450 yds.
Census 12 18 33.
Ireland 6.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland.
1001.
Salix fragilis, Russelliana, etc.
Prov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 16 16 (17 18).
Native.
Lat. 50—67.
Cornwall, (Wight), Kent.
— (Moray, Ross).
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 260 yards.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Census 16 26 60.
Ireland 7.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
Planted only?
— (America, introduced).
2 s 
•^1^ 71.
AMENTIFEE/E.
1002.
Salix alba, vitellina, etc.
Provinces 1 to 16 (17 18).
Native in England.
Lat. 50— S8.
Cornwall, (Wight), Kent.
— (Harris, Sutherland).
Zones 12?
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Census 16 33 51.
Ireland 7.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
1004.
Salix triandra, amygdalina, etc.
Provinces 123 4 56789 10 11 (12) - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Perth.
(Kincardine).
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; usually planted.
Census 13 24 43.
Ireland 4.
English-british type.
Europe aU, except Lapland (uncertainly) and Finmark.
"Tornea.' 
Russia 6 - - 3.
Siberia.
" Amur river." 
— N.B. Surrey examples named " undulata" by Dr. Andersson.
1005.
Salix purpurea, Lambertiana, etc.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Sussex, Kent.
— Isla, Perth.
Zones 12?
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to nearly 500 yards.
Census 13 23 43.
Ireland 6.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 6 4 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega.
(America).
1005, e.
Salix Helix, "Linn." 
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Dorset, (Sussex), Kent.
— Isla, Kincardine.
Zone 12?
Low grounds ; distribution uncertain.
Census 13 20 36.
Ireland 3 or 5.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den (got).
Russia?
N.B. In England, this has usually been deemed i 
segregate of S.
purpurea.
See no.
1006.
71.
AMENTIFERJE.
315 
1006.
Salix rubra, Huds.
et Forbyana, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 - 10 11 12 - [14 15].
Native?
Lat. 60 — 56.
Devon, Hants, Kent.
— Cumberland, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; distribution ill ascertained.
Census 9 14 25.
(Ireland 3).
English type of distribution .' 
Europe - ita - aus gar fra - net den (got - swe).
Russia 6 - 4 3.
"Mid Asia." Davuria.
— .
N.B. Mr. Boswell Syme unites " Helix" herewith.
1007.
Salix viminalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - (18).
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— (Elgin, Harris).
Zones 1 2 (3).
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Census 16 32 58.
(Ireland 12).
British-en glish type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka ; Anderesou.
— (America, as an introduced species).
1008.
Salix Smithiana, Willd.
1009.
S. acuminata, Anglor.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50— S7.
Cornwall?
Sussex, Kent.
— "Isla." Fife;E.B.S.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Census 16 29 37.
Ireland 5.
English-british type.
Europe — -?
France.
Germany.
Netherlands.
Scandinavia.
Russia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
The English species?
— N.B. The British localities for these two are not separable.
1010.
Salix cinerea, aquatica, oleifolia, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. SO — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Harris, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 17 35 78.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland (in extreme south ?) and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka ?
— Recorded localities for these are not satisfactoiily separable.
816 71.
AMENTIFEE.'E.
lOia. Salix caprea, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - (18).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 68.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— W.
E. Inverness.
Zones 19 3 4.
Highlands to 700 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 16 33 73.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark, and perhaps Turkey.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3-1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Amur.
— Faroe.
Icel.
N.B. Our Highl.
form may be S.
grandifolia, Scr.
1013.
Salix nigricans, Fries ; cum segr.
var.
Provinces [1 3 3 4 5 - - 8 9] 10 11 19 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 68.
Cumberland, York.
— Isla, Aberdeen.
Zones - ?
3 4 5.
Highlands to 700 or 800 yards.
Census 6 9 16.
Ireland 1.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger f ra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 3 1.
Siberia ?
Kamtschatka ?
— .
N.B. Vix in Asia, nee in America; Andersson in DC.
prodr.
1014.
Salix laurina, Smith; cum segr.
Provinces [- 9 3 4 - 6 - - -] 10 11 19 - - ] 5.
Native.
S. Britain ?
Lat. 54—57.
Westmoreland, N.
W. York.
— Mid Perth, Forfar ?
Zones - 9 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Distribution uncertain.
Census 4 4 6.
Ireland 1 .
Scottish type of distribution ?
Europe - - - - ger - - - - got nor - (lap).
" Silvestris rarius oocurrit, 
in Saxonia, Anglia, parte meridionali Suecise et circa Petropo- 
lin observata; in hortis autem sat frequenter culta"; Andersson.
1015.
Salix phylicifolia, Linn, cum segr.
var.
Provinces [-93-4 ] 9 10 11 13 13 14 16 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 60.
" Cheshire," "Lancashire." — Orkney; B.
Syme.
Zones - 3 3 4 5.
Highl.
to about 700 y.
Humber at 80—560 y.
Census 9 13 19.
Ireland 1.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe spa - - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 - 1.
Wes^asia.
Siberia?
Kamtschatka?
— Iceland.
" E.x Siberia incerta, in America \ix crescit"; And.
71.
AMENTIFEE^.
317 
1016.
Salix ambigua, Ehrh.
et plicata, Sm.
Provmces ?
a 3 4 11 - - 14 15 - 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
S. Devon?
Sussex; Borrer.
— Orkney; Borrer.
Zones 12 3.
Highlands at " 400 yards." Tyne at 150 yards.
Census 8 10 10.
Ireland 1 or S.
Doubtful type.
Europe - - - - ger fra - - den got.
Eussia - - - 3.
N.B. A dubious species ; perhaps better included 
under S.
aurita, as a segregate form.
1017.
Salix repens, fusca, prostrata, etc.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 700 yards.
Humber to 550 yards.
Census 18 36 72.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia - - 4 3 2 1 .
Siberia.
Davuria ?
— Iceland.
America ?
1021.
Salix arbuscula, prunifolia, vacciniifolia, etc.
Provinces [13] - 15 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 56—58.
Argyle, Mid Perth, Forfar, South Aberdeen.
Zones - - - 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards, or upwards.
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - — nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6 - - - 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
1022.
Salix Lapponum, Linn, cum segr.
Provinces [6 11] - - 14 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 55 — 59.
Edinburgh; Maughan!
— Sutherland; Graham!
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 or 900 yards.
Census 4 7 10.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Eussia - - 4 3 9 1.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
318 71.
AMENTIFEK/E.
1083.
Salix lanata, Linn.
Provinces IS.
Native.
Lat. 56—57.
Mid Perth, Forfar, South Aberdeen.
Zones 5.
Highlands to 900, 860, 830 yards.
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Scandinavia - nor svpe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Arctic Siberia.
Altai.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Aleutia.
1025.
Salix Myrsinites, L.
1024.
S. procumbens, Forbes.
Provinces [8-10] 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Argyle, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Moray.
Zones 5 ?
Highlands to 900 yards, or upwards.
Census 2 4 5.
Ireland 1 " procumbens." Highland type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger f ra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia' 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Aleutia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Rocky Mountains.
1026.
Salix reticulata, Linn.
Provinces [ 7 - - 10 - 12] - - 15 - 17.
' Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Sutherland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 1080, 1000, 900 yards.
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1027.
Salix herbacea, Linn.
Provinces 6 7 - - 10 - 12 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 61.
Brecon, Carnarvon, York.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands at 620—1440 yards.
Census 9 15 24.
Ireland 7.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columliia.
71.
AMENTIFEE^E.
— 72.
CONIFERS.
319 
1028.
Myrica Gale, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Province 8 uncertain.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Sutherl., Caithness.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 600, 560, 530, 510, 500 yards.
Census 17 30 60.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka, 
— America.
Aleutia.
1029.
Pinus sylvestris, Linn.
Provinces (- 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14) 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Now truly wild in the Highland provinces only.
Zones (1 2) 3 4.
Highlands to 740 yards.
Planted to 840 yds.
Census 3 6?
Ireland ?
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all.
Extinct in Denmark, etc.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— N.B. Anciently spread throughout Britain.
1080.
Juniperus communis, Linn.
Prov.
? 2 3 4 5 6 7 (8 9) 10 11 12 13 ] 4 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Dorset?
Sussex, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4?
Highlands to 800, 732, 730 yards.
Census 15 30 58.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
N.B. Do some of the other habitats belong to J.
nana ?
Russia 6 5-331.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1030.
b. Juniperus nana, Willd.
Provinces 7 - - [10 11] 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 -61.
Carnarvon, Cumberland.
— • Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - ?
3 4 5.
Highlands to 920, 900, 890, 880 yards.
Census 6 9 13.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Dav.
Kamtsc.
"Algeria; Cosson !
" — Greenland, America, Columbia.
«^20 72.
CONIFERS.
— 73.
OECHIDACE^.
Taxus baccata, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
(Introduced to 9 ] 3 14 ?) 
Lat. SO — 57.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Argyle, Aberdeen.
Zones 13 3.
T3'ne to 500 yards.
Humber to 450 yards.
Census 14 20 ?
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra got nor svre.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
" River Amur." 
Algeria.
[Azores ; Drouet flo.] — T.
canadensis in Am. Col.
1032.
Goodyera repens, Br.
Provinces [-2 3 11 12] - 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Roxburgh.
Berwick, Linlithgow.
— Ross.
Zones - 2 3.
Highlands to 150 or 200 yards.
Census 4 6 13.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Pyrenees.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— America.
1033.
Spiranthes autumnalis, Rich.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 12.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland, York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber — 200 yards ; Baker.
Census 11 23 57.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Bornholm.
Russia 6 - - 3.
Algeria.
1034.
Spiranthes aestivalis, Rich.
Provinces - 2 - - ?
Native.
A single specimen found in Wore.
Lat. 50 — 53.
South Hants ; Brewer!
Worcester; Gissing.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 1 1 1 or 2 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
73.
orchidacea;, 8;ii 
1036.
Neottia Nidus-avis, Rich.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
16"Argyle; Carmichael." 
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Easterness; Miss Grant!
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Highlands to 200 yards.
Census 16 31 65.
Ireland 4.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finraark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Western Siberia.
— Iceland ; Dr. Lindsay's list.
1037.
Listera cordata, Br.
Provinces 1 2 - - 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
North Devon, South Hants.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yds.
Humber 0—600 yds.
Census 15 23 50.
Ireland 4.
Scottish-highland type.
Europe - ita - aus ger f ra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
" Turkey." 
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Aleutia.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1038.
Listera ovata, Br.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native, 
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Devon, Kent.
— N.W. Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 17 34 84.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
1039.
Epipactis latifolia, All.
Provinces 1 to 16 [17].
Native.
Lat. 50— 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Banff.
"Ross." 
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 16 3i 73.
Ireland 7.
British-english type, 
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark, 
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia, 
Algeria.
2t 
^^^ 73.
ORCHIDACE^.
1039.* Epipactis media, E.
purpurata, Auct.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 - 13 - 14.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland.
Linlithgow.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Distribution ill ascertained.
Census 9 15 36.
Ireland 3.
English-germanic type.
Europe.
Mid-Europe?
Scandinavia den got nor swe lap.
Russia?
N.B. Synonyms uncertain; some of the British lo- 
calities likely mis-assigned to E.
latifolia.
1039*.
Epipactis ovalis, Bab.
Provinces - [3] - 4 5 - 7 - - 10 - 13 17.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Norfolk, Heref., Carnarvon, York, Westm., Sutherl.
Zones 13 3.
Humber — 450 yards; Baker.
Census 6 6 7.
Ireland 1.
Intermediate type ?
Europe spa - - - ger fra cha net den.
" Ep. atrorubens." 
Russia 6-43.
Western Siberia.
N.B. Possibly the Ep. atro- 
rubens may include 'media' with 'ovalis.' 
1040.
Epipactis palustris, Sw.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 - 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Fife !
Skye ; Lightf.
Zones 12 3.
Humber — 350 j'ards ; Baker.
Census 15 34 51.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3, Siberia.
— .
N.B. Verification in " Skye '' desirable.
1041.
Cephalanthera grandiflora, Bab.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 - 13 - - [15 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55 [67].
Dorset, Kent.
— Cumberland.
Scotland?
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 8 12 36.
[Ireland].
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
N.B. Are both this and 'ensifolia' found in 
Scotland or one of them only ?
7 3.
ORCHIDACE^.
323 
1042.
Cephalanthera ensifolia, Eicli.
Provinces - 3 3 - 5 - 7 8 - 10 11 12 - 14 16 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— Isle of MuU, Perth.
Zones 13 3.
Humber 100—250 yards ; Baker.
Census 11 19 23.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Prussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
" Olympus." 
1043.
Cephalanthera rubra, Puch.
Provinces 1 - - 4 5 - [7 - - 10].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 52.
Somerset?
Huntingdon?
Gloucester.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; but rarely found.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 0.
English-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha - den got.
Norway ?
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Western Siberia.
N. B.
Ep. ovalis has been 
sometimes mis-labelled " C.
rubra" by English collectors.
1044.
Epipogium aphyllum, Sw.
Provinces - - - - 5.
Native, if still e.\istent iu England.
Lat. 52—53.
N.E. Herefordshire; Mrs. A.
Smith, July, 1854.
Zone 1.
Low grounds ; but found once only.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe.
Piussia 6-43.
Siberia.
1044=:=.
Corallorhiza innata, Br.
Provinces - - [3] 13 14 15 17.
Native.
Lat. 55 — 58.
Ayr, Berwick, Edinburgh.
— Moray, Ross.
Zones - 2 3.
Low grounds.
Census 4 5 10.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Pyrenees.
Russia 6 5-321.
Siberia.
Davuria.
* — Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
32i 73.
OKCHIDACE.li.
1045.
Orchis Morio, Liiin.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - [14 ?
- - 18].
Native.
Lat. SO— 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cnmberl.
Cheviotl.
Zones 1 2.
Humber 0—300 yards ; Baker.
Census 12 24 57.
Ireland 7.
Enghsh type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oh a net deu got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
"Cyprus." 
— [Faroe ; Trevelyan, from Lingbye].
[Icel.
; Hooker, from Zocga] 
1040.
Orchis mascula, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 18.
Native.
16 Flo. Glot.
"very common." 
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2.
Lakes to 500 yards.
Humber to 350 j-ards.
Census 18 34 80.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Western Siberia.
Barbary ; Desf.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
1048.
Orchis ustulata, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 12.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
• — Cumberland, Northumb.
Zones 1 2.
Humber — 900 yards ; Baker.
Census 10 21 39.
[Ireland].
Germanio-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Norway?
Russia 6-43.
Western Siberia.
— [Faroe ; Landt desor.] 
1049.
Orchis militaris, "Linn." 
Provinces - - 3.
Native.
Lat. 51— 52.
Berks!
Oxford!
Bucks.
Herts?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Middlesex, Kent].
Census 12 4.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Localities of this and next two much eonfubcd.
73.
ORCHIDACE.ii.
325 
1049*.
Orchis Simia, Lam.
Provinces - - 8.
Native.
Lat. 51— 52.
Berks.
Oxford!
[Kent, Surrey].
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 1 2 S.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net.
Normandy?
Belgium.
Russia 6 5-3.
Barbary ?
1049=!=.
Orchis fusca, Jacq.
Provinces - [2] 3 [8].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 52.
Sussex, extinct.
Kent!
Surrey.
Bucks.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Lincoln; Carrington].
Census 12 3.
[Ireland].
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net.
" Holland." 
Russia 6 5-3.
Siberia?
Algeria ?
1050.
Orchis hircina, Scop.
Provinces - - 3 4 - - - [8 - - - 12].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 53.
Kent and Suffolk, stiU or recently.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Very rare, nearly extinct.
Census 2 2 2.
[Ireland].
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia - - - 3.
Algeria.
1051.
Orchis pyramidalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 - [15 16].
Native.
[Fife, Colonsa].
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
H umber — 150 yards; Baker.
Census 13 25 55.
Ireland 10.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Baltic Isles.
Russia 6 5-3.
Alseria.
326 7 3.
ORCHIDACEJ!.
1053.
Orchis latifolia, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
0. inoarnata inclusively.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orimey, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 530 yards.
Humher to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 83.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
O. inoarnata spread more widely.
Eussia 6-4321.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria ?
— Faroe.
Iceland.
" Columbia." 
1053.
Orchis maculata, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1010, 960, 950, 930 yards.
Census 18 37 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia, Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
1054.
Orchis conopsea, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Any authority for South Wales ?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Shetland, one locality.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 680 yards.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Census 18 35 85.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU.
Russia 6 5 i 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Gymnadenia conopsea, of several authors.
1055.
Habenaria bifolia, Auct.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
H. chlorantha included.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 17 36 86.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
H. chlorantha not in Lapland.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
N.B. Localities of ' bifolia' and 'chlorantha' much confused.
73.
ORCHIDACE.i:.
327 
1056.
Habenaria viridis, Br.
Proviuces all.
Native.
Eare in South England.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Dorset, "SMglit, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 850, 800 j-ards ; also " 830." 
Census 18 38 76.
Ireland 10.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, if in Turkey.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
1057.
Habenaria albida, Br.
Provinces - 2 - [4 5] 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Sussex; Borrer.
Cardigan.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Huraber '200—450 y.
Census 12 18 38.
Ireland 10.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Turkey.
Eussia - - - 3 2 1 .
Western Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
1058.
Aceras anthropophora, Br.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - - - 8 - 10.
Native.
Lat. 51—84.
Wilts?
Sussex, Kent.
— S.W. York?
Lincoln.
Zones 1 ?
Low grounds.
Census 5 9 16.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Eussia - - - 3.
Algeria.
1059.
Herminium Monorchis, Br.
Provinces [1] 2 3 4 5 [10-12].
Native.
Lat. 50— S3.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— Cambridge, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Somerset; Dr. Davis, in F.
B.] 
Census 4 10 19.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Himalaya.
N.B. Extinct or mistaken in several English localities.
328 73.
ORCHIDACE^,.
1060.
Ophrys apifera, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 10 11.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 55.
" Cornwall," Wiglit, Kent.
— Lancaster, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Severn to 350 yards; Rev. H.
Roberts.
Census 11 S5 50.
Ireland 9.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia ?
Algeria ; but not a typical form.
1060,b.
Ophrys arachnites, Reich.
Provinces - [2] 3 [4 5].
Native.
Lat. 51—52.
Kent, Surrey?
West Gloucester?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[" Suffolk," by an error].
Census 1 1 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia?
" Isle of Oesel." N.
B. If a good species, this would 
seem to be imperfectly known in England.
1061.
Ophrys aranifera, Huds.
Provinces [1] 2 3 4 [5 - - 8 - 10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Northampton, Gamb.
? 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Apparently decreasing.
Census 3 7 13.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia --- 3.
N.B. The 'aranifera' and ' fucifera ' of English 
botanists are here taken together.
1062.
Ophrys muscifera, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 U 12.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Westmoreland, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Humber at 50 — 200 yards ; Baker.
Census 12 21 40.
Ireland 5.
English germanic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - - ?
" Warsaw." 
73.
OECHIDACE.E.
— 74.
lEDDACEyE.
320 
1063.
Malaxis paludosa, Sw.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 - 7 - 9 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent?
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Census 14 22 32.
Ii-eland 5.
British type of distribution ?
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Sparingly, though widely, distributed in Britain.
1064.
Liparis Loeselii, Rich.
Provinces - - [3] 4.
Native.
Lat. 52—53.
Hunts, Cambridge, Suffolk, Norfolk.
[Kent].
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 13 4.
L'eland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3.
N.B.
" Ham Ponds near Eastry, Kent"; DiUwyn in B.
G. 
1065.
Cypripedium Calceolus, Linn.
Provinces [5] 10 11 12.
Native.
Lat. 34 — 55.
York, Durham, Westmoreland.
[Cumberland].
Zone - 2.
Humber at 150 yards.
Nearly extinct.
Census 3 4 4.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net - got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 5 4 3 9 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Very local and now rarel3' found in England.
1066.
Iris fcEtidissima, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 - - (14 13).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 33.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Durham.
(Fife).
Zones 1 9.
Low grounds.
Census 10 23 45.
Ireland 6 (and 3).
English type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Russia 6.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores ; Diouet flore.
2 u 
330 74.
lEiDACEa:.
1067.
Iris Pseudacorus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Three segregates, in E.
B. edit.
3. 
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
1068.
Gladiolus illyricus, Koch.
Provinces (1) 2.
Native?
Lat. 50—51.
(Devon, Dorset, Wight).
South Hants !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra.
Russia 6.
Algeria.
N.B. Distribution varying with the nomenclature.
1068*.
Trichonema Columnse, Reich.
Province 1.
Native.
Lat. 50—51.
South Devon ; Sir W.
0. Trevelyan !
Zone 1.
Coast level.
Census ill.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Dalmatia for " aus." 
Russia, absent.
West-asia.
" Caria or Lycia.'' 
Algeria.
Azores.
1070.
Crocus nudiflorus, Sm.
Provinces - - - - 5 - - 8 9 (10).
Denizen or Native.
Lat. 52 — 54.
Warwick, Salop, Stafford.
— Lancaster, Notts.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 3 4 7.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type.
Europe.
Spain.
France.
Greece ?
Russia, absent.
N.B. Area not sufficiently known, and syno- 
nyms somewhat uncertain.
75.
AMARYLLIDACEaS.
— 76.
LILIACE^.
3:]1 
1073 (1073).
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 (13 14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberl., Norfhumb.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 13 23 46.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net (den) got (nor swe).
Russia 6.
N.B. Several recorded localities in England belong 
to N.
major escaped from gardens.
1074.
Leuoojum vernum, Linn.
Provinces - 2 - - (5).
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 50—51.
Dorset; J.
C. Mansel !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Predial claim unsettled.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha (net den got).
Russia, absent.
N.B. The right of this species to be hold a 
British plant, is yet undecided.
1075.
Leuoojum sestivum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 (5) [11 12].
Denizen.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Devon, Dorset, Kent.
— Oxford, Suffolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 4 5 7.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - (net) den.
Russia 6 5.
N.B. This may perhaps be a native in province 3 ; 
less likely so in other provinces of Britain.
1078.
Fritillaria Meleagris, Linn.
Provinces (1) 3 3 4 (5 - - 8 - 10) - [13].
Denizen.
Lat. 51 — 53.
Dorset, Hants, Sussex?
— Bedford, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 8 15.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha (net den got) nor swe.
Russia 6-48.
West-asia.
N.B. Is this truly wild in Warwick or Stafford ?
333 76.
LILIACE^.
3081.
Allium Scordoprasum, Linn.
Provinces [I 2 - - 5] - - - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 57.
Lancaster, York.
— Fife, Perth, Forfar?
Zone - 2.
Humber — 300 yards ; Baker.
Census 7 9 15.
Ireland 3.
Litermediate-scottish type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Eussia 5 4 3 2.
West-asia?
"Cyprus"; Sibthorpe.
N.B. Confused with A.
vineale, through the name " arenarium." 
1083.
Allium oleraceum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 S [6] - 8 - 10 11 IS [14] 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Sussex, Kent.
— Fife, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 300 or 300 yards.
Census ]0 18 30.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Eussia - - 4 3 3.
Himalaya.
Western Siberia.
Madeira; Dr. C.
Lemann's manuscript list.
1083.
Allium vineale, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Aberdeen.
Zones 1 3.
Humber — 200 yards ; Baker.
Census 15 29 65.
Ireland 5.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia - - - 3.
Canaries; Webb.
phyt.
can.
— (America, introduced).
1081.
Allium sphserocephalum, Linn.
Provinces - - - - 5.
Native ?
Lat. 51 — 53.
St. Vincent's Eocks, West Gloucester; Stephens !
Zone 1.
Slight elevation.
Another station in 1869.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra cha net (den).
Belgium.
Eussia 6-43.
Algeria.
Canaries.
76.
LILIACE.E. 333 
1083.
Allium Schoenoprasum, Linn.
Provinces 1 - - - (5 - - 8 - 10) 11 13 (13 14 15) [16].
Native?' 
Lat. 50 — 36.
Cornwall !
Westmorel.
! Northumb.
! Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Tyne at 130—250 yards; New Flora N.D.
Census 3 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Local-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - (net).
Finmark, ' sibirioum.' 
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtscliatka.
— America.
Columbia.
1086.
Allium ursinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 17 34 82.
Ireland 11.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-4331.
Siberia.
Kamtscliatka.
1087.
Gagea lutea, Kerr.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 3 - - 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 13.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset, Somerset, Surrey?
— Moray; Stables!
Zones 1 3 3.
Humber, Tyne, in each to 250 yards.
Census 13 18 29.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
1088.
Ornithogalum pyrenaicum, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 [3] 4 [5].
Native.
Extinct in Cambridge.
Lat. 50— 53.
Devon?
Somerset!
Wilts!
Sussex.
Bedford.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Surrey, Middlesex, Salop].
Census 3 4 3.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5.
Tripoli ; Yiviani flo.
lyb.
334 76.
LiLiACE^.
1091.
Scilla verna, Linn.
Provinces 1 [3] - - - 6 7 - - - 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, [Wight].
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Orkney to 300 yards ; Dr. Gilhes.
Census 11 18 23.
Ireland 3.
Atlantic-Scottish type ?
Europe spa - - - - f ra cha.
Norway ?
Russia, ahsent.
— Faroe.
1092.
Scilla autumnalis, Linn.
Provinces 13 3-5 [7 12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Gloucester, Middlesex " 
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 4 5 7.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fi-a cha.
Russia 6 5.
Algeria.
1093.
Hyacinthus non-scriptus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native Not native in province 18 ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— " Harris," Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 500 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 18 34 84.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Lombardy to Holland.
Russia, absent.
Algeria ?
1094.
Muscari racemosum, Mill.
Provinces - (2 3) 4 - - - (8).
Denizen.
Lat. 52 — 53.
Sufifolk, Norfolk ; alleged to be wild there.
Zone 1.
Census 13 3.
(Ireland).
Germanic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha (net).
Russia 6 5 4.
Barbary ; Lecoq geogr.
hot.
70.
LILIACE^.
335 
1096.
Lloydia serotina, Reich.
Provinces 7.
Native.
Lat. 58 — 34.
Snowdon mountains, in Carnarvonshire.
Zone - - - 4.
At 700 — 800 yards, or thereabouts.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra.
Russia 6 - - - - 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
109S*.
Simethis bicolor, Kunth.
Provinces - 3.
Alien or Denizen.
Lat. 50.
— 51.
Dorset; Borrer!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 111.
Ireland 1.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe.
Spain.
Italian isles.
South France.
Normandy.
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
1095- (1175).
Narthecium ossifragum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland 
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1060, 1010, 1000 yards.
Census 18 37 83.
Ireland 19.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Loffoden Isles.
Russia - - - 3.
" Livonia " ; otherwise non-russian.
— Faroe.
N. americanum, its representative in America.
1096.
Asparagus oflScinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 (2 3 4 5) 6 7 (8 9 14).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall.
(Wight, Kent).
— (Lancaster, Lincoln).
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Often only the garden variety escaped.
Census 3 5 5.
Ireland 2.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, naturalised on the coast near New York).
336 7{).
LILIACE^.
1097.
Euscus aculeatus, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 [5] 6 - (8 - 10 ]] - 13 14 15 16).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Glamorgan, Suffolk.
Zones 1 (2).
Low grounds.
(Ayr, Lanark, Isla).
Census 6 11 20.
(Ireland).
Gerraanic-english tj'pe.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 5.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
1098.
Maianthemum bifolium, DeCand.
Provinces - - (3 4) [9] 10 (11).
Denizen.
Lat. 54 — 56.
N.E. Yorkshire, "wild"; James Ward!
Zone - 2.
Humher at 150—200 yards ; Baker.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Eussia - - 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya, Siberia, Davuria, Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
America, not typical.
" Columbia." Aleutia.
1099.
Convallaria majalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 6 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 fl 4) 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Somerset, Hants, Sussex, Kent.
• — Moi-ay.
Zones 12 3.
Humber 50-300 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 13 26 50.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Clearly native ; though introduced to some of its localities.
1100.
Polygonatum verticillatum, All.
Provinces - - [3] 10 - - (13) - 15.
Native ?
Lat. 55 — 57.
Northumberland !
Perth !
(Dumfries, Forfar).
Zones - 2 3.
Tyne, probably about 200 yards.
Census 2 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 5-3.
Himalaya.
— .
N.B. Usually accepted as a native in Britain.
76.
LILIACE;E.
— 77*.
DIOSCOEEACE^..
337 
1101.
Polygonatum multiflorum, All.
Provinces 1 3 8 4 5 - - 8 9 10 (11 12 13 14 15) [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Humber at ] 50 yards.
Census 8 15 91.
(Ireland).
English-germanic type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Difficult to decide where truly wild in Britain.
1102.
Polygonatum oflBcinale, All.
Provinces 1 2 [3 4] 5 6 - - 9 10 11 [12 - - loj.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 56.
Somerset, Wilts, Hants?
— Lancaster, Cheviotl.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne about 150 yards.
Census 7 7 8.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. Localities of this and ' multiflorum' confused in books.
1103.
Paris quadrifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— Renfrew, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 15 28 78.
[Ireland].
British-english type.
Europe aU.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; Hooker's list.
1104.
Tamus communis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55 or 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumb., Northum.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 12 25 65.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6 .").
West-asia.
" Cyprus." 
Algeria.
2 X 
338 78.
MELANTHIACE^.
— 79.
HYDBOCHAEIDACE^.
1105.
Colchicum autumnale, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - - [IS].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Hants, Surrey.
— Westmorel., Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Humber, Tyne, in each to 200 yards.
Census 12 18 37.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net deu - - (swe).
Russia ?
? 4 3.
Algeria.
1106.
Tofieldia palustris, Huds.
Provinces [8] - 10 11 - - [14] 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 59.
York, Durham.
— Skye, Ross, Sutherland.
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800, 750, 710, 600 yards.
Census 5 9 13.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Arctic Russia.
Western Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1107.
Eydrocharis Morsus-ranse, Linn.
Provinces 123456789 10 ]1-- [14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, (Wight), Kent.
— Lancaster, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 11 23 43.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
Siberia.
1108.
Stratiotes aloides, Linn.
Provinces - (3 3) 4 [5] - - 8 9 10 11 [12] - (14 15).
Native.
Lat. 52 — 56.
Northampton, Suffolk.
—   Lancaster, Northumh.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 5 7 14.
(Ireland 3 or 5).
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6-433.
Siberia.
N.B. Certainly wild in the eastern provinces of England.
80.
ALISMACE^.
339 
1109.
Alisma Plantago, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50— 38.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross.
[Orkney?] 
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 200 yards.
Census 17 34 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
Not typical in America.
1110.
Alisma ranuncnloides, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— East Ross !
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 17 34 73.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - - 3.
" Lithuania." " Kursk." 
Algeria.
1111.
Alisma natans, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] - 5 6 7 - - 10 - 12 13.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Glamorgan ?
— Wigton ?
Cumberland?
York"!" 
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Salop !
Carnarvon !
Census 6 7 9.
Ireland 3.
Looal-atlantic type.
Europe spa - - aus ger fra cha net den - nor.
Russia - - - 3.
" Nowgorod." " Livonia." " Lithuania." 
N.B. British localities mostly need verification.
1112.
Actinocarpus Damasonium, Brown.
Provinces [1] 2 3 4 5.
Native.
[Cornwall; Bree].
Lat. 50—53.
South Hants, Susse.x:.
— Salop, Suffolk?
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 4 9 12.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha.
Dalmatia.
Russia 6 - - 3.
Eastward to Moscow ?
[Algiers].
840 80.
ALISMACE^.
1113.
Sagittaria sagittifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13.
Native.
Lat. 50—66.
Devon, Sussex, Kent.
— Eenfrew, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 13 24 53.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-4331.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— America.
Columbia.
Not typical in America.
1114.
Butomus umbellatus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 - (14 1.5).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland, Durham.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 12 35 53.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.- Davuria.
1115.
Triglochin maritimum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Littoral.
Census 18 35 61.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
1116.
Triglochin palustre, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 960, 880, 710, 710 yards.
Census 18 38 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
Bai'bary.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia 
80.
ALISMACE^.
— 81.
POTAMACE/E.
341 
1117.
Scheuchzeria palustris, Linn.
Provinces — - 5 - - 8 9 10 - - - - 16.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 57.
Salop, Notts, Chester, York, Perth.
Zones 12?
North Yorkshire at 50 yards.
Census 5 5 6.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type of distribution.
Europe aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Eussia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— America.
Kocky Mountains.
1118.
Potamogeton densus, Linn.
Provinces 1 S 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 13 13 14.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Edinburgh.
Zones 1 3.
Lakes to 340' yards.
Census 13 24 53.
Ireland 6.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia - - - 3.
Algeria.
— America ?
1119.
Potamogeton pectinatus, Auct.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 - 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney.
[Shetland ?] 
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 16 38 63.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
P. flabeUatus inclusive.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1119*.
Potamogeton filiformis, Nolte.
Provinces - [2 - 4 -- 7 8] 14 15 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 61.
Berwick, Fife, Forfar, Orkney, Shetland, etc.
Zones ?
3 3.
Sub-littoral.
Imperfectly on record.
Census 4 6 6.
Ireland 3.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - den got - swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
"P.
marinus, Linn.
spec.
184." 
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Bab. cat.
America ; Gray hot.
342 81.
POTAMACE^.
1130.
Potamogeton trichoides, Cham.
Prov.
i - [6].
Native.
Var. of P.
pusillus ; Benth.
Handb.
Lat. 53—53.
Norfolk; A.
M. Barnard!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
An unsatisfactory species.
Census 113.
Ireland 0.
Local type of distribution ?
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net.
Russia - - - 3.
N.B. Lombardy to Petersb.
Schlesvvigto Hungary.
America.
1131 (1120).
Potamogeton pusillus, Linn.
Prov.
1 to 16 - ] 8.
Native.
P. " compressus " partly included.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney ; Gillies herb.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 17 33 69.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Russia 6-433.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Icel.
Greenl.
America.
1123 (1131).
Potamogeton obtusifolius, M.
et K.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - ?
8 9 10 11 ?
13 14 IS - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Sussex, Kent!
— Lanark!
Kincardine!
Zones 1 3.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 13 20 86.
Ireland 5.
English-british type.
Europe - - - aus ger fra oha net den got.
Sweden, very local.
Russia - - - 3.
Western Siberia.
N. B.
The P.
gramineus of 
British botanists ; not so of several Continental botanists.
1123*.
Potamogeton acutifolius, Link.
Provinces - 3 3 4 - - - 8 - [10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Dorset!
Sussex!
Surrey!
Norfolk!
Lincoln.
Zones 1 ?
Low grounds.
Kent.
Herts.
Yorkshire?
Census 4 5 6.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 - - 3.
N.B. In Britain ,this also has occasionally been 
labelled as P.
gramineus.
81.
potamacEjC.
343 
1123=:=.
Potamogeton zosterifolius, Sohum.
Provinces - [a] 8 4 5 - - 8 - [10] IS.
Native.
Lat. 5] — S7.
[Sussex], Surrey.
— East Perth, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 6 8 12.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - - 3 9.
P. compressus, Led. ross.
et Fries sum.
— America.
1124.
Potamogeton crispus, Linn.
ProTinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Native.
[Shetland].
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Ma, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 16 32 71.
Ireland 11.
Biitish-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; Hooker's list, from Zoega.
[America].
1125.
Potamogeton perfoliatus, Linn.
Provinces all ?
No authority for South Wales?
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Corn vf all, Dorset, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 17 34 68.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
1126.
Potamogeton lucens, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 14 28 55.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
344 81.
POTAMACEvE.
1137.
Potamogeton praelongus, Wulf.
Provinces - - 3 4 S - - 8 - 10 11 12 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Berks!
Surrey?
— Westmoreland, Moray.
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds ; area not sufficiently ascertained.
Census 9 14 18.
Ireland 5.
Scottisli-intermediate type.
Europe aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 3.
Himalaya.
— America.
1129.
Potamogeton heterophyllus, Schreb.
Provinces - 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 1 12 13 14 IS 16 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Dorset?
Sussex?
Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 37 48.
Ireland 0.
British-english type.
Europe spa - - aus ger fra cba net den got nor swe lap.
Russia?
N.B. Mucb confused with obtusifolius, nitens, poly- 
gonifolius, and other species.
1129*.
Potamogeton nitens, Weber.
Provinces 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 55— 58.
Bute, Perth, Elgin, Nairn.
Zones - 2 3.
Low grounds.
Census 3 3 4.
Ireland 2.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra cha - den got nor swe.
Russia - - - 3 3.
N.B. The P.
lanceolatus (Sm.) is made up of this 
and the next species ; the Scottish localities belonging to this.
1129* (1130).
Potamogeton Janceolatus, Sm. in part.
Provinces [1--- 5] -7-- [10 - ]2 13 15 - - 18].
Native.
Lat. 53—54.
Isle of Anglesea only, as yet known.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Confused with P.
nitens.
Census 111.
Ireland?
Local type of distribution.
Europe ?
N. B.
The Anglesea plant has not been certainly 
identified with any European species.
By name it is enu- 
merated in Babington's list of Ii-eland plants.
81.
POTAIEACE.E.
-Hf> 
1131.
Potamogeton rufescens, Solirad.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall?
Sussex, Kent.— Isla, Caithness.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Census 17 Q6 38.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 3.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland ; Lindsay flo.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
llB'i.
Potamogeton natans, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16, or all by safe and unsafe records.
Native.
Lat. 50—58 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides?
Shetl.?
Zones 13 3.
Low grounds.
Confused with ' polygonifolius.' 
Census 15 33 ?
Ireland 13.
British tj'pe of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4331.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores?
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Col.
1133(1133).
Potamogeton polygonifolius, Pourr.
Provinces all.
Native.
Often mislabelled ' natans.' 
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— • Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Lakes to 590 yards.
Highlands to 5:^0 yards.
Census 18 34 05.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - - 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries ?
Azores !
• — America.
1132 (1134).
Potamogeton plantagineus, Ducros.
Provinces - 3 3 4 - 6 7 8 - 10 11 13 - 14 - 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Wight, Hants, Kent.
— Arran, Argyle.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
Area ill ascertained.
Census 11 15 33.
Ireland 9.
Englisli-british type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den.
N.B. Apparently re- 
stricted to Europe; but this and 'polygonifolius' have been 
much confused with each other and with 'natans.' 
2t 
346 81.
POTAMACE.53.
H3S (1136).
Ruppia maritima, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 14 IS 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Littoral.
P. rostellata, Wight to Orkney.
Census 15 29 43.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra oha net den got nor swe.
B,ussia 6-433.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
1136 (1137).
Zannichellia palustris, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 - - 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland, Orkney.
Zones 13 3.
Huraber to 160 yards.
Census 16 38 56.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-433.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— America.
Columbia.
1137.
Zostera marina, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 - 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Littoral.
Census 16 38 44.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Pvussia - 5 4 3 3.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1137*.
Zostera nana, Roth.
* 
Provinces 12 11 - 13 - 15 16 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Dorset, Wight, Sussex.
— Argyle, Forfar?
Zones 12?
Littoral.
Localities overlooked ?
Census 6 8 10.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe fra cha net den got.
Russia - 5.
Algeria.
82.
LEMNACE-E.
347 
1138.
Lemna minor, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes, Humber, in eacli to 300 yards.
Census 18 34 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
1139.
Lemna gibba, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 - - - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Fife; B.
Syme, 1840.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Perhaps often overlooked.
Census 11 20 37.
Ireland 3.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries, — America, rarely.
1140.
Lemna polyrhiza, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 8 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - - 13 14.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Edinburgh.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 12 21 46.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Madeira.
— America.
1141.
Lemna trisulca, Lyin.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 60—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— " Banff; Dr. L.
Stewart." 
Zones 1 2 3.
Low grounds.
Census 15 28 60.
Ireland 6.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 4 8 2.
Siberia.
— America.
348 82.
LEMXACE.?^.
— 82*.
AEACE/E.
1J41*.
WolflBa arhiza, Wimm.
Provinces - 3 3.
Native.
Likely in other provinces.
Lat. 50— 53.
Middlesex ; Trimen, 1866.
Hants.
Surrey!
Essex.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Full area not ascertained.
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Local-germanio type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
From England to Transyl- 
vania, from Naples to Holland.
Sparsely reported, bat 
minute and likely to be disregarded.
1142.
Arum maculatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 14 (15).
Native.
(Edinburgh — Moray).
Lat. 50—56 (58).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Berwick, Roxburgh.
Zones 1 2.
Tyne to 325 yards.
Humber to 250 yards.
Census 14 28 62.
Ireland 12.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oh a net den got.
Russia - - - 3.
" Livonia.
Lithuania.
Warsaw.'' 
Algeria ; Desf.
atlant.
1142*.
Arum italicum, Mill.
Provinces - 2.
Native ; but also planted at Steephill.
Lat. 50—51.
Isle of Wight; A.
G. More !
Zone 1.
Coast level or thereabout.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Loeal-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
Madeira ?
Azores.
1143.
Acorus Calamus, Linn.
Provinces 123456-89 10-- (13).
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Somerset, Hants, Surrey.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
(Devon, Sussex — Ayr, Renfrew).
Census 9 17 25.
Ireland©.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-432.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— (America, probably introduced; Gray Bot. N.
S.) 
82*.
TYPHACE.E. 849 
1144.
Sparganium natans, Auot.
Provinces all.
Native.
S. minimum inclusive.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Census 18 32 66.
Ireland 8.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
S. minimum included.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1145.
Sparganium simplex, Huds.
Provinces 1 to 17 [18].
Native.
[Orkney; Neill].
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Pioss.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 17 34 76.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia - - 4 3 2.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— ximerica.
Columbia.
1146.
Sparganium ramosum, Huds.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Orkney.
Zones I 2 3.
Huraber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 18 35 85.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— America.
1147.
Typha latifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Formerly in Orkney ?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Renfrew, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 15 30 67.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria, "La Calle"; Desf.
atlant.
350 82*.
TYPHACE/E.
— 84.
JUNCACE^.
1148.
Typha angustifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 13 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Kirkcudbright, Fife.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Truly wild in Fife ; Arnott.
Census 13 85 48.
Ireland 2.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 S.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— America.
1149.
Eriocaulon septangulare, With.
Provinces 16.
Native.
Lat. 56—58.
Mid and North Ebudes.
Zones - - 3.
Low grounds only ?
Census 119.
Ireland 5.
Scottish-atlantic type.
Europe, absent.
Eussia, absent.
— America.
Order 83.
Rbstiaob^e.
1150.
Juncus filiformis, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] [9] - - 12 - - 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 54 — 58.
Westmoreland.
Cumberland!
Kincardine!
Perth?
Zones - 2 3.
Lakes to 150 yards.
Census 2 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type of distribution.
Europe all, except the Channel division.
Russia 6 - - 3 9 1 .
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1151.
Juncus conglomeratus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Any authority for Sutherland ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Lakes to 560 yards.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Loffoden Isles ; Martins.
Eussia 6-432.
Himalaya ?
Siberia.
^Madeira?
— Faroe.
8i.
JUNCACE/E.
351 
1151*.
Juncus eflfusus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Any authority for Hebrides ?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Humber to 800 yards.
Census 18 37 96.
Ireland la.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 9 1.
Himalaya?
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
1151* (1153).
Juncus diffusus, Hoppe.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11 13 - - 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Dorset, Wight, Sussex.
— West Perth; Bab. Man.
Zones 1 2.
Humber, Tyne, in each to 250 yards.
Census 11 17 23.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - ger fra - net den got.
Russia, not recorded in Ledebour's Flora.
N.B. A dubious species, usually or always infertile.
1152.
Juncus glaucus, Sibth.
Provinces 1 to 15 -- [18].
Native.
Orkney?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Aberdeen.
Zones 12?
Lakes, Humber, Tyne, in each to 400 yards.
Census 15 30 71.
Ireland 10.
EngHsh-british tj'pe.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores ; Drouet flore.
1153.
Juncus balticus, Willd.
Provinces 15 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Forfar, Kincardine.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones - 3 3.
Littoral and Sub-littoral.
Census 3 5 9.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe.
North Germany.
Scandinavia den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
353 84.
.TuxcACE.ij.
1134.
Juucus maritimus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Nairn.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 14 25 43.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ?
fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 6.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
1153.
Juncus acutus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 [3] 6 7 [12 18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornvfall?
Sussex, Kent.
— Carnarvon, Flint ?
Zone 1.
Littoral.
[North Lancashire ?
Kirkcudbright?] 
Census 6 10 ]3.
Ireland 3.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Eussia 6.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1156.
Juncus acutiflorus, Ehrh.
Prov.
all.
Native.
Any authority for subprovinces 16 and 26 ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 600 yards.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Census 18 36 89.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark?
Loffoden Isles.
Eussia ?
Siberia ?
— America.
Eocky Mountains.
1157.
Juncus lamprocarpus, Ehrh.
Provinces all.
Native.
Any authority for Sutherland ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards ; Prof.
Dickie.
Census 18 37 89.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsohatka.
Algeria.
Madeira.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
S-L.
jCN'CACE.i;.
y53 
1158.
Juncus obtusiflorus, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 [15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Wigton, Haddington.
Zones 1 S.
Humber to 200 yards ?
Census 13 25 47.
Ireland 3.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia, probably absent.
Algeria.
1159.
Juncus supinus, Moench.
Provinces all.
Native.
Any authority for S.E. Lovs'lands ?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkne}', Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 800 yards.
Tyne to 700 yards.
Census 18 37 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Loffodeu Isles.
Russia 6 - - o 2.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America?
1160.
Juncus compressus, Jacq.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18 ; but doubtful in several of them.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Skye?
Shetland?
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Surrey and Middlesex ; H.
C. W.
Census ?
? ?
Ireland — ?
British type of distribution?
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Persia.
— Iceland ; Hooker list.
America.
Columbia.
1160,b.
Juncus Gerardi, Lois.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Often labelled " compressus.'' 
Census 16 30 50.
Ireland — ?
British type of distribution.
Europe all ?
Scarcely distinct from   compressus.' 
Russia 6-4331.
Siberia.
America ?
Is it this, not ' compressus,' in Iceland '.' 
2z 
354 84.
JUNXACE^.
1162.
Juncus bufonius, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3?
Lakes to 650 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 18 88 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6-4321.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
1163.
Juncus squarrosus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Any authority for S.W. Wales?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Oikney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080, 1000, 960 yards.
Census 18 37 84.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Pvussia - - 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
1164.
Juncus castaneus, Linn.
Provinces [1] [11] - - - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Mid Perth !
Forfar !
South Aberdeen !
Argyle !
Zones - - - 5 6.
Highlands at 800—1000 yards.
Census 2 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Alps of Switzerland and Austria.
Norway, Sweden, Lapl.
Eussia - - - - 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1165.
Juncus trifldus, Linn.
Provinces [12] - - 15 18 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Dumbarton, Perth.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Orkney?
Zones 5 6.
Highlands at 550—1410 yards.
Census 3 7 10.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 2 1 .
West-asia.
Siberia.
Persia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
8-1.
JDNCACE/E.
355 
1167.
Juncus biglumis, Linn.
Provinces IS [16].
Native.
Lat. 56— 58.
Perth!
Forfar?
Aberdeen.
Banff?
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 1100 y.
Down to 2000 ft.
; Dickie.
Census 13 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Norway, Sweden, Lapland, Finmark.
Russia 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1168.
Juncus triglumis, Linn.
Provinces 7 - - (10) 11 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Carnarvon, Durham.
— Sutherland, Shetland.
Zones - - ?
4 5 ?
Highlands at 400—1000 yards.
Census 7 11 17.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - ?
2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Rocky Mountains.
1169.
Luzula sylvatica, Bich.
Provinces all.
Native.
Orkney?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 ?
Highlands to 1030, 900, 900, 860 yards.
Census 18 36 85.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den nor - lap.
Loff, 
Russia ?
- - ?
6 Caucasia ?
3 Isle of Oesel ?
— Faroe.
" America." 
1170.
Luzula pilosa, "Willd.
Provinces all.
Native.
L. Borreri - 2 3-5.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Lakes to 560 yards.
Census 18 36 86.
Ireland 6.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
:3.")6 Hi. JUNCACE.t.
1171.
Luzula Forsteri, DeCand.
Provinces 13 3-56 [1-^ 13 - J 5].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Coruwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cardigan, Essex.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Cumb.
Ayr. Forfar.] 
Census 5 13 S5.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra; oha.
Russia 6.
Algeria.
1172.
Luzula campestris, Willd.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60— Ul. Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1 080 yards.
Wales to 1080 yds.
Census 18 37 91.
Ireland 12.
British tj'pe of distribution.
Europe aU.
Piussia 6 5 13 3 1.
Himalaya?
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
Madeira.
Azores.
— Iceland ; Hooker list.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
1173.
Luzula multiflora, Lej.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Any authority for N.
Highlands ?
Lat 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980 yards.
Tyue to 850 yards.
Census 17 34 73.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Confused with ' campestris ' in the older books.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Madeira.
• — Iceland ; Bab. cat.
America ; Taylor, etc.
1174.
Luzula arcuata, Hook.
Provinces 15 17.
Native.
Lat. 66— 59.
Forfar?
Aberdeen I BanfF.
Sutherland!
Zones 6.
Highlands at 1100—1440 yards.
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Norway, Sweden, Lapland.
Russia - - - - 9 1.
Siberia.
L. hyperborea to Spitzbergen.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
^il.
.irXCACE.'E.
Hfl. CYPFRACE.K. o57 
1175.
Lnzula spicata, DeCand.
Provinces 7 13 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 59.
Ciirnarvon, Westmoreland.
— Hebrides, Sutherl.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1440, 1310, 1270, 1200 yards.
Census 6 10 14.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra — - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 - 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1170.
Cyperus longus, Linn.
Provinces ?
2 3 [4 5] 6.
Native.
Cornwall?
Somereet?
Lat. 50—52.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Pembroke, Wilts.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Norfolk.
Stafford.] 
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fi-a cha.
Russia 6 5 4.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
1177.
Cyperus fuscus, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 [10].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 52.
Surrey, Middlese.x.
[York, an error].
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 1 2 2.
Ireland?
Local-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
1178.
Cladium Mariscus, Brown.
Provinces 1 to 14 [15] 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Berwick, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
[Formerly in Forfar].
Census 15 22 30.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 6 5 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries, a variety.
Azores.
358 85.
CTPEEACE^..
1179.
Schoenus nigricans, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Eare in provinces 2 3 5 and 13 14.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Dorset, Hants.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
West Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 34 56.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den - nor.
Baltic isles.
Russia 6 - - 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
1180.
Rhyncospora alba, Vahl.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 80—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 17 33 61.
Ireland 11.
British t3'pe of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
" North States, common in bogs." 
1181.
Rhyncospora fusca, Sm.
Provinces 1 3 - - [6] 6 - - - [10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Cornwall?
Somerset!
Dorset!
Glamorgan.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Reported in Salop and York].
Census 3 5 5.
Ireland 4.
Atlantic ty{)e of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia --- 3.
" Isle of Oesel." "Lithuania'' 
— America ; Gray's Botany of the Northern States.
1182.
Blysmus compressus, Panz.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 - [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornvfall?
Dorset, Kent.
— Ayr, Haddington.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 13 25 45.
[Ireland].
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; Hooker's list, from Zoega.
85.
CYrEKACE^.
359 
1183.
Blysmus rufus, Liuk.
Provinces r - 9 - 11 ] 2 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Aiiglesea, Durham.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 10 16 31.
Ireland 4.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe.
North Germany.
ScaiiJiuavia den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland ; Lindsay flo.
1184.
Scirpus lacustris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 18 38 75.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega.
America.
Columbia.
1184, b.
Scirpus glaucus, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 13 14 15 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50-57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Forfar.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds ; sub-littoral.
Census 14 25 32.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. S.
Taberneemonti of Continental authors.
1184*.
Scirpus carinatus, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3 - [5 - - 8 - - 11] .
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Sussex, Kent, Surrey, Middlesex.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Provinces 5 - - 8 by misnomers].
Census 2 3 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe aus ger fra - net den.
Russia, absent.
N.B. An unsatisfactory species ; its localities 
confused with those of ' triqueter ' and 'glaucus.' 
300 85.
CYPEEACE.E.
1185 (1188).
Scirpus triqueter, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 [4 8].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Norfolk.
Leicester.] 
Census 3 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic tj'pe of distribution.
Europe spa ita ?
aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6-4.
— [America].
" Columbia.'' 
1186.
Scirpus setaceus, Liun.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 500 yards.
Lakes to 480 yards.
Census 18 36 79.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria ?
Azores.
— Iceland.
1187.
Scirpus Savii, Seb. Maur.
Provinces 12-4-67 - - 12 13 - - 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Devon, Wight.
— Isla; Prof.
Balfour!
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Eastward in Suffolk and Norfolk.
Census 9 15 23.
Ireland 7.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha.
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
Azores.
1188 (1185).
Scirpus Holoschoenus, Linn.
Provinces 1 [2 - - 5 13].
Native.
Lat. 51— 53.
North Devon!
[Somerset?
Dorset?
Hants?] 
Zone 1.
Sub-littoral.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra.
Russia 6 5 4.
Siberia.
Algeria.
(!'anarics.
85.
CYPERACE/E.
3C1 
1190.
Scirpus maritimus, Liun.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 17 29 56.
Ireland 10.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
America Columbia.
1191.
Scirpus sylvaticus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Occasionally mislabelled " carinatus." 
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Huraber, Tyne, in each to 150 yards.
Census 16 31 61.
Ireland 6.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— America.
Columbia.
1192.
Scirpus palustris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
S. uniglumis partly included?
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 36 84.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
1193.
Scirpus uniglumis, Link.
Provinces - 2 7 - 9 - 11 - - 14 15 16-18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Dorset, Sussex.
— Orkney; Boswell-Syme.
Zones 12 3.
Altitude -?
Localities imperfectly known.
Census 8 10 13.
Ireland 1.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
— Iceland.
N.B. Ill understood in Britain.
3 A 
362 85.
CYPEEACE.E.
1194(1193).
Scirpus multicaulis, Sm.
Provinces all.
Native.
Partly confused with S.
unigluinis?
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney; B.-Syme.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds ; also higher ?
Census 18 30 55.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - - - 3.
Lithuania; Ledeh.
flo ross.
Algeria.
Azores.
— America.
Columbia.
1195 (1194).
Scirpus pauciflorus, Lightf.
Provinces 1 to 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 19 3 4.
Humber, Lakes, in each to 700 yards.
Census 17 33 61.
Ireland 5.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Madeira; Lemann's list.
— Faroe.
" Rooky Mountains." 
1196.
Scirpus caespitosus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Occasionally mislabelled "pauciflorus." 
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones ] 2 3 4 6 6.
Highlands to 1160, 1060, 980 yards.
Census 18 36 77.
Ireland 12.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1197.
Scirpus acicularis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
[Orkney; Lowe].
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Perth, Forfar?
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 15 28 49.
Ireland 4.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
85.
CYPEEACE^E.
363 
1198.
Scirpus fluitans, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Any authority for S.
Wales?
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 1 S 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 17 33 69.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha net den got.
Russia 3.
Warsaw; Ledeb.
flo.
ross.
Azores.
— Faroe.
1199 (1200).
Eriophorum vaginatum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
[E.
alpinum, 15 - 17], 
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980 yards.
Lakes to 950 yards.
Census 18 34 73.
Ireland ] 1.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Earoe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1200 (1201).
Eriophorum angustifolium, Roth.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1160, 1060, 1030 yards.
Census 18 38 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
West-asia ?
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1201 (] 200).
Eriophorum latifolium, Hoppe.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Ross !
Sutherland !
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Humber 100—400 yards.
Census 16 25 37.
Ireland 3.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland ; Lindsay flo.
America.
Columbia.
364 85.
CYPERACE.^!.
1202.
Eriophorum gracile, Koch.
Provinces - [2] 3 - [5 - 7] - - 10 [IS].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Surrey!
York; Woods, Borrer.
Zones 1 2.
Humber at 1 00 yards.
[Sas. Wore.
Carn.
Per. Forf.] 
Census 2 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Looal-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark and perhaps Spain.
Kussia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
1203.
Kobresia caricina, Willd.
Provinces [1] 10 11 13 - - 15.
Native.
[Devon].
Lat. 54 — 57.
York !
Durham !
Westmoreland ?
Perth !
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands (say) 900 y.
Humber 400—600 y.
Census 4 4 4.
Ireland 0.
Intermediate type of distribution.
Europe.
Alps - ita aus ger.
Scandinavia - nor swe lap.
Eussia 6.
— Greenland.
America.
Eooky Mountains.
1204.
Carex dioica, Linn.
Provinces all; but the Peninsula not certain.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Dorset, Sussex; Borrer.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 960, 900, 830, 710 yards.
Census 17 34 62.
Ireland 9.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all, except Turkey and perhaps, Channel.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
" Columbia." 
1205.
Carex pulicaris, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900, 810, 810, 800 yards.
Census 18 37 81.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cba net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
85.
CYPEEACE*.
365 
1206.
Carex pauciflora, Lightf.
Provinces [6] 10 11 13 - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 6i — 59.
Dumfries, N.E. York.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones - ?
3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Tyne ISO— 250 yds.
Census 6 10 19.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia ---32].
— America.
Columbia.
1207.
Carex rupestris, All.
Provinces 15 17.
Native.
Lat. 66 — 59.
Perth.
Forfar.
Aberdeen!
Sutherland!
Zones ?
5. Highlands at 800 or 850 y.
Also "low rocks." 
Census 3 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap iin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Rocky Mountains.
1208.
Carex incurva, Lightf.
Provinces 14 15 - 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 55 — 61.
Holy Isle, in Cheviotland.
— Shetl.
; Edmondston.
Zones - 2 3.
Littoral or Sub-littoral in Britain.
Census 4 7 14.
Ireland 0.
Scotish type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger den got nor - lap fin.
Russia 6 --- ^.
"India." Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1209.
Carex stellulata, Good.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 990, 980, 960, 700 yards.
Census 18 38 87.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Loffoden Isles.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
366 85.
CYPERACE^.
1910.
Carex lagopina, Wahl.
Provinces 15.
Native.
C. leporina, in C.
B. 
Lat. 57 — 58 (about 57).
Aberdeenshire; Prof.
Dickie !
Zones 6.
Highlands at about 1200 yards ; Dickie.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
Pvocky Mountains.
1311.
Carex ovalis, Good.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. leporina of various authors.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight^ Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Lakes to 660 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 18 35 81.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finraark.
Loffoden Isles.
Russia - - 4 3 3.
Siberia.
La Calle ; Desf.
atla.
— Iceland ?
Greenland ; Taylor list.
Col.
1313.
Carex curta, Good.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Elgin.
Zones 18 3 4?
Highlands to 750 yards, more or less.
Census 16 30 53.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Spain and Turkey.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Kamtsohatka.
'* 
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1312, b.
Carex alpicola, Wahl.
Prov.
7 - - 10 11 - - - 15 - 17.
Native.
" C.
curta, var." 
Lat. 53 — 58.
Merioneth ; Hort.
York; Mudd.
Ross ; Babington.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1300 y.
Humber below 300 y.
Census 5 6 8.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 3 1.
As varieties of C.
curta.
— America?
Columbia.
"Unalaschka; Eschsc." 
86.
CYPERACE^.
3G7 
1213.
Carex elongata, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 - - - 9 10.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Surrey, Kent, Essex.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Also in Salop and Chester.
Census 4 5 7.
Ireland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia — 3 3.
Western Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
Columbia.
" Sitcha." 
1214.
Carex remota, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Eoss.
Zones 1 2 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Tyne to 330 yards.
Census 17 32 69.
Ireland 9.
British-en ghsh type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 - - 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
— Columbia.
" Sitcha." 
1215.
Carex axillaris, Good.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 - - - [14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 8 15 27.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe.
Tyrol.
North-west Germany.
Eussia ?
The Caucasian plant, apparently C.
Boenninghauseni- 
ana, is placed as a variety of this, in Ledeb.
flo.
ross.
1216.
Carex Boemiinghauseniana, Willd.
Provinces - 2 3 ?
14 15.
9 Chester?
Lat. 50 — 58.
Wight?
Sussex, Kent.
— Aberdeen, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 4 8 10 Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution ?
Europe.
Germany.
Denmark.
Scania.
N. B.
A most un- 
satisfactory species ; some examples approximating to C.
axillaris, others to depauperised C.
paniculata.
368 85.
CYPERACE^.
1317.
Carex intermedia, Good.
Provinces 1 S 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Kincardine.
Zones las.
Highlands to 400 yards ?
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 15 97 56.
Ireland 11.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - - 3 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— America ?
1318.
Carex arenaria, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Any authority for Severn province ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Littoral ; rarely inland.
Census 17 33 58.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
1319.
Carex divisa, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 - [10 11 - - 14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50—54.
Cornwall, Wight!
Kent!
— Lincoln?
York?
Zone 1.
Littoral.
[Northumb.
Edinb.
Forf.] 
Census 7 15 21.
L'eland 1.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India?
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
1220.
Carex muricata, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50^58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Dumbarton, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber, Tyne, in each to 350 yards.
Census 16 31 65.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
— Iceland.
(America).
Columbia ?
85.
CYPERACE.E. SG'3 
l-i-2l.
Carex divulsa, Good.
Provinces 1 2 3 -t 5 - 7 8 - 10 [11 - 13 14].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 65.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Denbigh!
York!
Zones 1 3.
Humber to ISO yards.
[Renfrew, Edinburgh].
Census 8 19 40.
Ireland 4.
English-germanic tj-pe.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
liussia, absent ?
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1222.
Carex vulpina, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 17 34 76.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe .all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 6 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Iceland.
America.
1223.
Carex teretiuscula, Good.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Jloray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 150 (or, to 400 ?) yards.
Census 14 25 42.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Turkey and Finmark.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Himalaya.
Canaries.
— America.
Rocky Mountains.
1223*.
Carex paradoxa, Willd.
Provinces [4] 10.
Native.
Lat. 54 or thereabouts.
Yorkshire only ?
[Suffolk].
Zones - 2.
Low grounds.
A dubious species.
Census 1 2 2.
Ireland 1.
Local-intermediate type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
Siberia.
— " America ; Dr. Richardson." 
370 85.
CYPERACE/E.
1224.
Carex paniculata, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Native.
Any authority for tlie Lake province ?
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney; B.
Syme.
Zones 12 3.
Humher to 230 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 17 30 62.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Eussia 6 - - 3.
Western Siberia.
Canaries.
— America.
1225.
Carex alpina, Vahl.
Provinces 15.
Native.
C. Vahlii, Schk.
Lat. 56 — 57.
Forfar, Aberdeen.
Zones - - - - 5.
Highlands at 800 — 850 yards, or thereabouts.
Census 112.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Switzerland.
Tyrol.
Scandinavia - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Caucasus?
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1227.
Carex atrata, Linn.
Provinces 7 - [9] 13-15.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 58.
Carnarvon.
Dumfries?
Perth!
Forfar!
Aberdeen!
Zones 5 6.
Highlands at 850—1250 yards.
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6-43-1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1228.
Carex vulgaris, Fries.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. caespitosa Of Smith, etc.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980, 900, 880 yards.
Census 18 36 88.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Finmark excepted.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
85.
CYPERACE^,.
371 
1229.
Carex rigida, Good.
Provinces [I] 7 - - 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 01.
Carnarvon, York.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 1440, 1310, 1270, 1200 yards.
Census 10 15 23.
Ireland 4.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1230.
Carex aquatilis, Wahl.
Prov.
? - 15.
Native.
Two species included ?
Lat. 56—58.
Lanark?
Fife?
Forfar!
Aberdeen!
Zones - - ?
- 5 6.
Highlands at 900—1100 y.
And much lower?
Census 12 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Scandinavia - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - 3 3 1.
— Iceland ; Nyman SyUoge.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1231.
Carex striata, Good.
Provinces 1 to 12 [13 14 15 16].
Native.
In Scotland?
Lat. 50 — 55.
Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— Westmoreland, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Confused with C.
acuta, etc.
Census 12 25 38.
Ireland 11.
English-intermediate type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
1233.
Carex acuta, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 1 - 13 14 1« 16 - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 200 yards.
" Kingussie, 1830." 
Census 15 29 56.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
372 85.
CYPEEACE^.
1238.
Carex saxatilis, "Linn." 
Provinces 15 16 17.
Native.
C. pulla, Good.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Dumbarton, Perth, Forfar.
— Slye, Sutlierland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands about 800—1030 yards.
Census 3 6 10.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Scandinavia - - nor swe lap fin.
Prussia - - - - 2 1.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1334.
Carex flava, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. " Oederi " unavoidably included.
Lat. 60 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 960, 000, 800, 800 yards.
Census 18 86 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
For ' flava ' and ' Oederi ' alike ?
Kussia - - 4 8 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Madeira.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
1235.
Carex extensa, Good.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 [5] 6 7 - 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, WigVit, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 15 26 41.
Ireland 7.
British type of distiibution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Russia 6 5 4.
Algeria.
1236.
Carex pallescens, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Devon, Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland 
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 630, 600, 410 yards.
Census 17 31 65.
Ireland 6 or 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Spain and Finmark.
Loffodeu Isles.
Kussia 6-4321.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
85.
cypekacea:.
373 
1337.
Carex fulva, Good.
Provinces all ?
Native.
C. speirostachya inclusive.
Lat. 50—59.
Devon?
Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 030 yards.
Huraber to 600 yards.
Census 18 33 69.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Kussia 6 - - 3 2.
— America; " Dr. D.
B. Greene" and "Dr. Goodenough." 
1338.
Carex distans, Linn.
Prov.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 [8] 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornvpall, "Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral or Sub-littoral.
Census 16 27 44.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2; but perhaps C.
binervis, not our distans.
Algeria.
1239.
Carex binervis, Sm.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1030, 1010, 800 yards.
Census 18 36 75.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - ger fra cha net - - nor.
Portugal to Norway.
Russia ?
See the preceding species.
Algeria.
1240.
Carex laevigata, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— MuU, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 350 yards.
[Easterness; Ball].
Census 15 27 46.
Ireland 8.
British-english type ?
Europe spa ita - - ger fra cha net.
Gallicia.
Holland.
Russia 6 - - 3.
N.B. In Britain, confused with C.
binervis.
Algeria.
— America ?
374 85.
CYPERACE^.
1241.
Carex panicea, Liun.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 760 yards.
Tyne to 750 yards.
Census 18 36 86.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
1241*.
Carex vaginata, Tausch.
Provinces -15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Dumbarton, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Sutherland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 1260, 1230 yards.
Census 3 5 6.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger nor swe lap.
Russia - - - - 3 1.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Arctic America.
1243.
Carex depauperata, Good.
Provinces 1-3 [15 16].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 52.
N. Somerset ; Norman !
Surrey ; Salmon!
Kent.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 2 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia 6 5.
Kamtschatka; Ermann, in flo.
ross.
— N.B. Alleged to be " frequent" in Devon ; is it so ?
1343.
Carex capillaris, Linn.
Provinces [5] 10 11 ??
- 15 - 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 54—61.
Dumfries?
Cumberland?
York.
— Shetland?
Zones - - 3 4 5.
Highlands 0—900 yds.
Humber 400—700 y.
Census 5 7 9.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
85.
CYPEEACE.E. 375 
13-11.
Carex limosa, Linn.
Provinces [1] 2 - 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50— fi9.
Dorset, Hants, Sufifolb.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne — 200 yards.
C. irrigua included.
Census.
14 21 32.
Ireland 7.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
C. irrigua in Finmark.
Russia 6 - - 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1245.
Carex rariflora, Wahl., Sm.
Provinces 15-17.
Native.
Lat. 56—59.
Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, Moray, Sutherland?
Zones 6.
Highlands at 800—1000 yards.
Census 2 3 5.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Scandinavia - - nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1246.
Carex strigosa, Huds.
Provinces I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - - - [14 - - 17].
Native.
Lat. 50—54.
Dorset, Wight, Kent.
— Chester, York.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 10 18 31.
Ireland 5.
English type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6.
Algeria.
1247.
Carex sylvatica, Huds.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Moray.
Zones 12 3 4?
Highlands to 700 yards, or thereabout.
Census 15 29 67.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - - 3.
Siberia.
Davuria.
376 85.
CYPEEACEiE.
1348.
Carex pendula, Huds.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
C. maxima, Scop.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lanark, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 15 39 57.
Ireland 5.
British-englisli type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Eussia 6 5.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
C. myosuroides, Lowe.
1249.
Carex pseudo-Cyperus, Linn.
Provinces 12345-789 10 (15) [16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, York.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
(Elgin, planted).
[Isla?] 
Census 9 20 38.
L-eland 8.
English type of distribution 
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-43.
India.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega.
America.
1250.
Carex glauca, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
C. recurva, of various books.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 750 yards.
Highlands to 670 yds.
Census 18 36 89.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia.
Algeria.
1261.
Carex prsecox, Jacq.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 750 yards.
Humber to 600 yds.
Census 16 32 75.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— (America, introduced ; Griiy's Bot. nor.
sta.) 
85.
CYPEBACE.L. 37 7 
1S51=:=.
Carex ericetorum, Linn.
Provinces - - - 4.
May occur elsewhere ?
Lat. 63— 53.
Cambridgeshire; Mr. Boswell-Syme !
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local- germanic type.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-4321.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— X.B. A recent addition to the English flora.
1251*.
Carex montana, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - - 5.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 52 or 53.
Sussex, Gloucester, Monmouth, Heref., Wore.
Zone 1.
Low grounds; and higher?
Census 2 3 5.
lieland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Russia — 3 2.
Western Siberia.
— "Iceland"; but likely C.
pilulifera.
1252.
Carex pilulifera, Linu.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones ] 2 3 4 6 6.
Highlands to 1100, 1080, 1030 yards.
Census 18 35 69.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia - - - 3 2.
West-asia.
Kamtschatka.
— Iceland ?
Greenland.
America.
1253.
Carex tomentosa, Linn.
Provinces - 2.
Native.
Lat. 61—62.
North Wilts !
East Gloucester?
Zone 1.
Channel at 150 yards; T.
B. Flower.
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Baltic Isles.
Rusbia 6 5 4 3.
378 H5.
CYPEKACE/E.
1264.
Carex clandestina, Good.
Provinces 1 a - - 5.
Native.
C. hutnilis, Bab. Man., etc.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Somerset, "Wilts, Dorset, Gloucester, Hereford.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 4 6.
Ireland 0.
Local-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Belgium.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia.
1255.
Carex digitata, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - - 5 - - 8 - 10.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Devon?
Somerstt, Wilts.
— Notts, York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber at 0—200 yards ; Baker.
Census 5 8 18.
Ireland 0.
English-local type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5-32.
Siberia.
1256.
Carex filiformis, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Devon?
Somerset!
Hants ; Borrer.
— Sutherland.
Zoues 12 3.
Humber to 200 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 15 20 31.
Ireland 8.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all, unless Spain and Turkey e.xcepted.
Eussia - - - 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— America.
1257.
Carex hirta, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cantire, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Humber to 350 yards.
Census 16 30 73.
Ireland 11.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
— Iceland.
85.
CYPEliAOK.F,.
:!70 
1258.
Carex ampullacea, Good.
Provinces all.
Native.
0. " iuvoluta " in province 9.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 t^ 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900, 780, TOd, 710 yards.
Census LS 37 8'2.
Ireland 1'^.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 - 4 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1-2j9.
Carex vesicaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 38.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Isla!
Moray!
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 230 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 16 32 58.
L-eland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all, unless Turkey excepted.
Russia B - 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya?
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
— Faroe ; Landt.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Am. Col.
1260.
Carex paludosa, Good.
Provincesl 2 3 45 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross ; W.
A. Stables !
Zones 1 2 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 31 62.
Ireland 4.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
— Columbia.
" Sitcha." 
1261.
Carex riparia, Curtis.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Banff', Dumbarton ?
Zones 1 2 3.
Humber to ISO yards.
Tyne to 100 yards.
Census 15 31 64.
Ireland 5.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Rus'ria 6-43.
Sibeiia.
Ak'eria.
— Faroe.
» 
;)H0 8li.
GKAMIXA.
126-2.
Leersia oryzoides, Sw.
Provinces - 8 3.
Native.
Lat. 60or51 — 52.
South Hants !
West Sussex!
Surrey!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 2 3 3.
Ireland 0.
English-germanio type.
Europe spa ita -aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 - - 3.
— America.
1263.
Spartina stricta, Roth.
Zones 1 2 3 4 - - - 8.
Native.
(S.
alterniflora 2).
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon, Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— Lincoln.
Zone 1.
Littoral.
Census 5 8 10.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha net.
Russia, absent.
N. B.
S. alterniflora, established in South 
Hants, is supposed to have been introduced from America.
1264.
Cynodon Dactylon, Pers.
Provinces 1 2 (3).
Native.
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset.
(Surrey).
Zone 1.
Littoral or Sub-littoral ; on sand.
Census 2 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic-local type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
1265.
Digitaria humifusa, Pers.
Provinces - 3 3 4 (10 - - - - 15).
Colonist or Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Hants, Surrey, Suffolk, Norfolk.
(York).
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe tpa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia 5 4 3.
— America ?
8G.
GRAMIXA.
381 
1267.
Setaria viridis, Beauv.
Provinces - (9) 3 4 (5 - - - 9 10 11) - - - [15].
Colonist or Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Surrey, Suffolk, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
(Wight to Tyne, occasionally).
Census '-i 3 4.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Azores ; Drouet flo.
— (America, introduced).
1269.
Phalaris arundinacea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 18 37 93.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
1271.
Anthoxanthum odoratum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1130, 1080, 1000 yards.
Census 18 37 95.
Ireland 1'2.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark ?
LofFoden Isles.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
(Algeria).
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am.
1271*.
Hierochloe borealis, Linn.
Provinces [IS]- 17.
Native.
Lat. 58 — 59 ; formerly also 56 — 57.
Caithness; Robert Dick!
Zones - - 3.
Low grounds ?
[Forfarshire, formerly].
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
382 8().
GEAirxNA.
1372.
Phleum alpinum, Liun.
Provinces 15 [16].
Native.
Lat. 56— 58.
Perth, Forfar, Aberd.
" Garvay Moor "; Dickson.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands about 700 — 1200 yards.
Census 13 4.
[Ireland].
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra got nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6 - - - 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Katntsc.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1273.
Phleum pratense, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
(Hebr.
Ork. Shetl.
introduced ?) 
Lat. 50—59 (61).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 18 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(America).
" Columbia.'' 
1274.
Phleum arenarium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen; Dickie.
Zones 1 2 3.
Low grounds.
Census 13 23 38.
Ireland 6.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra oha net den got nor.
Russia - - - 3.
" Speoimina I'ossica non exstant"; Ledebour.
Algeria.
N.B. Three reporters for it in West Russia.
1276.
Phleum Boehmeri, Wibel.
Provinces - - 3 4 [5].
Native?
Lat. 51— 53.
Essex.
Herts!
Suffolk!
Norfolk!
Cambridge!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Gloucester ; Buckman B.
G. C] 
Census 2 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
N.B. No certainly English P.
asperum seen by myself.
86.
(iUAMiNA.
883 
1'277.
Alopecurus alpinus, Linn.
Provinces 15-17.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Perth?
Forfar, Aberdeen, Easterness, Ross.
Zones --.-56.
Highlands about 700 — 1200 yards.
Census 9 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe, absent.
Piussia 1.
Arctic Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
l'<!78.
Alopecurus pratensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Highlands to 430 yards.
Census 18 36 85.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Barbary; Desf.
atlan.
— Faroe.
"Am. Col." (North States).
1279.
Alopecurus geniculatus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 8.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Lakes to 520 yards.
Census 18 38 91.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6-4321.
India.
Siberia.
Davui-ia.
Algeria.
Egypt.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
(States).
1280.
Alopecurus fulvus, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 - [10 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Sussex, Wilts, Surrey.
— Denbigh, Leicester.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[York?
"Fife, Forfar."] 
Census 6 11 17.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
A. paludosus, Beauv.
Russia - - 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
— .
N.B. Not to be coflfused with A.
agrestis.
384 86.
GEAMINA.
ISBl. Alopecurus bulbosus, Linn.
Provinces 123456--910 [11].
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Chester, York.
Zones 1 3.
Lovr grounds.
Census 8 18 18.
[Ireland].
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha net.
N.W. Germany.
Eussia, absent.
N.B. Perhaps a state of A.
geniculatus, as 
held in Bentham's Handbook.
1282.
Alopecurus agrestis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 (13 14 1 5).
Colonist.
(Casual in Scotland).
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, "Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Northumberl.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 12 23 55.
(Ireland).
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Baltic.
(Svs'edenj.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
1283.
Knappia agrostidea, Sm.
Provinces - - [3] - - - 7 (14).
Native ?
Lat. 53 — 64.
Anglesea only, at present.
Zone 1.
Coast level.
[Essex, extinct].
(Haddington, sown).
Census 111.
Ireland 0.
Local-atlantio type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Hanover.
Eussia, absent.
Algeria.
N.B. Agrotis minima.
Mibora minima.
1284.
Gastridium lendigerum, Gaud.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 6 7.
Colonist ?
Lat. 50—54.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Flint?
Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 7 15 25.
Ireland 0.
English type of distribution 
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia, absent.
Asia minor.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azures.
86.
GEAMINA.
385 
1-285.
Polypogon littoralis, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3 4.
Native.
Lat. 50—53.
Dorset?
Hants!
Kent!
Essex.
Norfolk!
Zone 1.
Littoral or Sub-Uttoral, 
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net Constantinople?
N.W. Germany.
Russia, absent 
1286.
Polypogon monspeliensis, Desf.
Provinces (I) 2 3 4 (5 11 - - 14).
Native?
Lat 50— 53.
Hants!
Kent!
Essex!
Norfolk!
Zone 1.
Coast-level.
(Devon to Fife, casually).
Census 3 4 5.
Ireland 0.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cba net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1287.
Milium eflfusum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Moray.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 350 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 17 31 67.
Ireland 7.
British-engUsh type.
Europe all.
Northward to Mageroe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; Hooker list, from Zoega.
America.
1988.
Apera Spica-venti, Beauv.
Provinces - 2 3 4 (5 6 7 8) 9 10 1 1 [12 - 14].
Colonist 
Lat. 50 — 56.
Hants, Sussex, Kent.
— Durham, Northumberl.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
Census 6 10 22.
[Ireland].
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 '2 1.
Siberia.
" Russian Lapland." 
Barbary ; Desf.
atlant.
3d 
386 86.
GRAMINA.
1288*.
Apera interrupta, Beauv.
Provinces - - [3] 4.
Colonist.
Lat. 51— S3.
Essex?
Suffolk!
Norfolk!
Cambridge.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 1 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cba net.
Holland ?
Eussia 6 - 4.
— .
N.B. Barely distinct from Spica-venti.
1289.
Agrostis setacea, Curtis.
Provinces 1 2 [3] - - 6 [7 - - 10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 52.
Cornwall, Wight, Sussex.
— Glamorgan.
Surrey!
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Census 3 7 9.
Ireland 0.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa - - - - fra cha net.
Northward to Belgium.
Russia, absent.
1290.
Agrostis canina, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber, Tyne, in each to 150 yards.
Census 18 35 67.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Northward to Mageroe.
Eussia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America ?
Eooky Mountains ?
1291.
Agrostis vulgaris, With.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1060 yards.
Tyne to 850 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6-4321.
India.
Algeria, — Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
86.
GRAMINA.
387 
1293.
Agrostis alba, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 92.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Am. Col.
1293.
Ammophila arundinacea, Host.
Provinces all.
Native.
Psamma arenaria, Bab. man.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 18 33 57.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3 2.
Algeria.
— Iceland.
America.
1294.
Arundo Phragmites, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Phragmites communis, Bat. man.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 350 j'ards.
Tyue to 150 yards.
Census 18 38 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Madeira.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1295.
Arundo Calamagrostis, Linn.
Provinces 123466-89 10 11 [12].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 10 20 33.
[Ireland].
English type of distribution.
European?
Calamagrostis lanceolata.
Roth.
Russia - 5 4 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Labrador; Meyer pi.
labr.
388 86.
GEAMINA.
1296.
Arundo Epigejos, Linn.
Provinces 123456789 10 11??
[14] 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Mull, Aberdeen.
Zones 1 2 3.
Highlands to 250 yards?
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 13 25 48.
Ireland 1.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Spain and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega.
1298.
Arundo stricta, Schrad.
Provinces 9 [15].
Native.
Lat. 53— 54.
Cheshire ; F.
M. Webb !
[Forfar, extinct].
Zones - 2.
At about 650 feet; Mr. J.
Robinson.
Census 111.
Ireland 2.
Local-intermediate type.
Europe - - - - ger - - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Rushia 3 2 1.
Davuria.
C. neglecta, Gsertn.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1299.
Sesleria casrulea, Scop.
Provinces [1 - - - 5] 10 11 12 - - 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 54 — 58.
Westmoreland, York.
— West Ross; Lightfoot.
Zones - ?
3 4 5.
Highlands to 850 y.
Humber at 200—800 y.
Census 5 5 8.
Ireland 4.
Highland-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - got - svfe.
Russia --432.
— Iceland ; Babington cat.
1300.
Aira c£espitosa, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980, 970, 930, 900 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6-4321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
86.
GRAmNA.
389 
1301.
Aira alpina, Linn.
Provinces ?
- - - [11] - - - 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 53 or 56 — 58.
Carnarvon?
Perth.
— Harris?
Sutherland.
Zones 5 6.
Highlands to 1380, 1360, 1930 yards.
Census 3 5 8.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe.
Scandinavia - - nor swe lap.
Russia - - - - 2 1.
Spitsbergen.
Deschampsia alpina, E.
et S.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Columbia.
1303.
Aira flexuosa, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
"Aira uliginosa," provinces S, 15.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1230, 1920, 1200 yards.
Census 18 37 78.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
A. uliginosa in Ireland ; A.
G. More !
Russia 6 5-331.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1303.
Aira caryophyllea, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 450, 400, 360, 350 yards.
Census 18 36 89.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia - 5 - 3.
Siberia?
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1304.
Aira praecox, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Humber to 600 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 86.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - 5 - 3.
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega.
(America, introduced).
390 86.
GEAMINA.
1305.
Aira canescens, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 4 - - - [8].
Native.
Lat. 51—53.
Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
[Notts, Dorset, Somerset].
Census 2 3 3.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia.
— .
N.B. Corynepliorus canescens, of Bab. Man.
1307.
Avena fatua, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 11 - - (14 15 - - 18).
Colonist.
Lat. 50— (61).
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— (Orkney, Shetland).
Zones I 2 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Census 11 23 55.
Ireland 3.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Finmark; and scarcely in Lapland.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
1309.
Avena pratensis, Liun.
Provinces 1 to IV.
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 1 2 3 4 5.
Highlands to 760 yards?
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 17 30 61.
Ireland ?
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
1310.
Avena pubescens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Highlands to 450 yards.
Census 18 34 68.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra oha net den got nor swe lap.
Loflf.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
N. B.
The British localities for 
' pratensis ' and ' pubescens ' are somewhat confused together.
80.
GRAWINA.
391 
1311.
Avena flavescens, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 12 - 14 16 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Aberdeen; Dickie.
Zones 19 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Humber to 450 yards.
Census 14 28 67.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra clia net den got nor fswe).
Eussia 6-43.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
1312.
Arrhenatherum avenaceum, Beauv.
Provinces all.
Native.
Avena elatior, Linn.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orlmey, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Highlands to 350 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 1 2.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6-432.
Armenia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
1313.
Holcus lanatus, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 600 yards.
Highlands to 610 yards.
Census 18 38 100.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
(America, introduced).
1314.
Holcus mollis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Harris, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 600 yards.
Humber to 450 yards.
Census 18 36 82.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Eussia - - 4 3.
Barbary ; Desf.
atlant.
— Faroe.
892 86.
GRAMINA.
1315.
Triodia decumbens, Beauv.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 600 yards.
Highlands to 560 yards.
Census 18 37 84.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finniarlt.
Russia - - - 3 2.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
1316.
Koeleria cristata, Pers.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
South Wales; Miss Atwood.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 600 yards.
Highlands to 450 yards.
Census 17 83 62.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den (got - swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
— America.
Columbia.
1317.
Melica uniflora, Retz.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Elgin ; Coll.
Mor.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne, Humber, in each to 350 yards.
Census 15 29 68.
Ireland 10.
English-british type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-43.
— .
N.B. Northward to Shetland, by Edmondston's Flora.
1818.
Melica nutans, Linn.
Provinces [1 2 8 4] 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 52—58.
Salop, Stafford, Derby.
— Argyie?
Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne, Highlands, in each to 450 yards.
Census 12 18 32.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except the Channel division.
Russia 6-432 1.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— .
N.B. M.
uniflora formerly thus misnamed in England.
86.
GRAinxA.
393 
1319.
Molinia caerulea, Moench.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 950, 850, 750, 660 yards.
Census 18 3T 85.
Ii-eland 13.
British type of distrihution.
Europe all.
Enodium cseruleum, Fries, sum.
veget.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland ?
1320.
Catabrosa aquatica, Presl.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Devon, "Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3, Humber to 300 yards.
Census 17 33 74.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, if in North-west France.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1321.
Glyceria aquatica, Sm.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Forfar.
(Moray).
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 15 29 63.
, Ireland 4.
English-british type.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— America.
Columbia.
Is it the European species there ?
1322.
Glyceria fluitans, Brown.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 550 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Himalaya.
Western Siberia.
Algeria?
Madeira.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
Am. Col.
3e 
394 86.
GEAMINA.
1332, b.
Glyceria plicata, Fries.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 - - 14 IS - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50— 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife.
Orkney?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 250 yards.
Census 12 21 36.
Ireland 3 or more.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra oha - den got nor.
Russia, absent or not distinguished from ' fluitans.' 
Algeria ; Munby cat.
G. fluitans ; Munby flore ?
1393.
Sclerochloa maritima, Lindley.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 16 30 53.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - - fra cha net den got nor.
" Finmark." 
Russia 6 - - - - 1.
Siberia.
G. angustata, Sib. Spitsbergen.
Algeria.
— Iceland ?
Greenl.
? G.
angustata, Gre. Am.
Col.
1324.
Sclerochloa distans, Bab.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - - 15 - - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Shetland; Tate cat.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral ; occasionally inland.
Census 14 25 43.
Ireland 3.
English-british type.
Europe all, if in Turkey.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Columbia ; Dr. Soouler.
1324*.
Sclerochloa Borreri, Bab.
Provinces - 2 3 4 10.
Native.
Lat. 50—55.
Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— York ; Mudd, in N.
Y. 
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Localities imperfectly ascertained.
Census 4 6 8.
Ireland 1.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe - - - - ger fra - - - got nor swe.
Likely elsewhere.
Russia, absent or overlooked.
— N.B. An unsatisfactory species, not understood by H.
C. W.
86.
GEAMINA.
395 
1325.
Sclerochloa procumbens, Beauv.
Provinces I 2 3 4 3 6 - - 9 10 11 - - - [15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Cheviotland.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 9 14 22.
Ireland 2.
English-germanic type.
Europe spa ita - - - fra cba net.
Holland.
Russia, absent.
13'26.
Sclerochloa rigida, Link.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 - 14 15 - 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross; Boswell-Syme.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 15 29 62.
Ireland 7.
British-englisli type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Holland.
Russia 6 5-3.
Canaries.
Azores.
1327.
Sclerochloa loliacea, Woods.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 - 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Fife !
[Harris].
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 13 20 33.
Ireland 7.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Dalmatia for " aus." 
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
Azores.
Festuea rotboeUoides, Kunth.
1328.
Poa annua, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080, 1060, 1000 yards.
Census 18 38 99.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
And carried to the Southern hemisphere, 
Russia 6 3 4 3 3 1.
Westasia.
India.
Sib. Dav.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
396 86.
GEAMINA.
1329.
Poa bulbosa, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 4.
Native.
Lat. 50—33.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Somerset?
Norfolk!
Zone 1.
Low grounds, sub-littoral.
Census 4 7 9.
Ireland 0.
Germanic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - got - swe.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
1330.
Poa alpina, Linn.
Provinces - - [3] - - - 7 - - 10 - 12 - - 15 ] 6 17.
Native.
Lat. 84 — 59.
Westmoreland, York.
— Sutherland.
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1310, 1260, 1180 yards.
Census 6 8 13.
Ireland 2.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - — nor swe lap fin.
Eussia 6 - - - 2 1.
Olympus.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1330*.
Poa laxa, Haenke.
Provinces ; - - 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 86 — 58.
Westerness?
Forfar?
Aberdeen ; Boswell-Syme !
Zones 6.
Highlands at " 1200 yards." 
Census 3 2 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap.
Finmark ?
Eussia 1.
Siberia.
Spitsbergen.
— Iceland ; Lindsay flo.
Greenland.
America.
1330*.
Poa minor, Gaud.
Provinces 18 16.
Native.
Lat. 56 — 58.
Westerness.
Aberifeen; Boswell-Syme.
Zones 6.
Highlands at " 1200 yards." 
Census 2 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor - lap.
Eussia, absent?
— America?
N.B. Much confused with P.
laxa.
86.
GBAMNA.
397 
1331.
Poa pratensis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Humber to 800 yards.
Highlands to 750 yds.
Census 18 88 91.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
P. pratensis var.
alpigena, Spitsbergen.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
Azores ; Drouet.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
(States).
1339.
Poa trivialis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5.
Highlands to 830 yards.
Lakes to 710 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(Am.) 
1333.
Poa compressa, Linn.
Prov.
1 2 8 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 12 13 14 15 - 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Eoss; Boswell-Syme.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 800 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 15 37 53.
Ireland 1.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Icelsmd ?
(American States, introduced).
1334.
Poa nemoralis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
P. Parnellii, 10 11.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Elgin.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 530 yards, perhaps higher.
Census 16 39 59.
Ireland 3.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6 5 4 8 3 1.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtso.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
398 86.
GKAMINA.
1334*.
Poa csesia, Sm. P.
Balfourii, Bab. Man.
Provinces 7 - - 10 11 - - - IS 16.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 58.
Carnarvon, York.
— Argyle, Aberdeen.
Zones - - - - 5.
Highlands about 750 — 1000 yards.
Census 5 6 8.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita tur aus ger fra - - - - nor svre lap fin.
" Sleswig.'' 
Eussia 1.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1335.
Briza media, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 ?
17 (18).
Native.
16 " about Glasgow." 
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, "Wight, Kent.
— Boss.
(Orkney).
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 700 yards.
Highlands to 630 yards.
Census 10 30 80.
Ireland 13.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
— (America, introduced).
1336.
Briza minor, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 (3) - [5 - - - 9].
Casual or Colonist.
Lat. 50 — 51.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Wight, Hants.
Zone 1.
Low grounds.
Somerset?
(Middlesex).
Census 2 4 5.
(Ireland 1).
Atlantic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha.
Russia 6.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1337.
Cynosurus cristatus, Linn.
Provinces aU.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 600 yards.
Highlands to 530 yards.
Census 18 38 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
Algeria.
Azores; Drouet.
86.
GBA>nNA.
399 
1339.
Dactylis glomerata, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent — Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to .950 yards.
Highlands to "450 yards." 
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries ?
— Faroe.
(America, introduced).
1340.
Festuca uniglumis, Sol.
Provinces 12 3 4-67-9 [10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Lancaster, Norfolk.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral or Sub-littoral.
Census 7 13 19.
Ireland 3.
English-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia, absent.
Algeria.
1341.
Festuca sciuroides, Roth.
Provinces 1 to 17 (18).
Native.
F. bromoides, Anglor.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Ross.
(Orkney).
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 300 yards.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Census 17 33 74.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Russia ?
V. Myurus, " Ind. cauc.
p. 32 cum var.
bromoide." 
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1341*.
Festuca pseudo-myurus, Soy.
Provinces 123456789 10 (11) - [13 14 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 54.
Cornwall, Dorset, Kent.
— Chester, York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 10 20 38.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Russia 6 5 ?
" F.
pseudo-myurus, C.
Koch." 
Algeria ?
Canaries ?
— Col.
; Hook.
bor.
am.
" E.
Bot. 1.
1412." 
400 86.
GRAMINA.
1343.
Festuca ovina, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Muoli confused with F.
duriuscula.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 19 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1440, 1310, 1370 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 S 4 3 2 1.
India.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1343.
Festuca duriuscula, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Much confused with F.
ovina.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zonesl2 34 5.
Highlands to 900 yards ?
Tyne to 750 yards.
Census 18 34 75.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark ; and scarcely in Lapland.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
(America, introduced).
1344.
Festuca rubra, "Linn." 
Provinces all ?
Native.
Confused with F.
duriuscula.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Eoss.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 250 yards ?
Humber to 200 yards ?
Census 17 28 45.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey excepted.
Eussia 6-4331.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1345.
Festuca sylvatica, Vill.
Provinces - 3 - - 5 [6] - - - 10 11 13 13 14 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Wilts, Sussex.
— Westerness, Elgin, Banff.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Tyne to 350 yards.
Census 9 13 20.
Ireland 6.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor.
Russia--- ?
"Lithuania; Eichw." " Grodno ; Lindem.'' But 
Ledebour adds the words " Speciraina rossica non oxstant." 
86.
GRAMINA.
401 
1346.
Festuca elatior, F.
arundinacea, Anglor.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 18 18 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 460 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 16 33 70.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark ; but not certain.
Eussia - - 4 3 2.
Himalaya.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Azores.
— Far. Tcel.
Am. Col.
(States).
1347.
Festuca pratensis, F.
loliacea, Anglor.
Provinces all.
Native.
Much confused with F.
elatior.
Lat.
.80 — 60.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Ross, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Humber to 400 yards.
Census 18 32 69.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark ; but synonyms uncertain.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Columbia; Douglas.
1348.
Bromus giganteus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Festuca gigantea of Bab. Man.
etc.
Lat. 50—68.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Elgin.
Zones 1 2 3.
Humber to 350 yards.
Lakes to 250 yards.
Census 16 32 77.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6-433.
Siberia.
N.B. A Bromus in general ap- 
pearance, rather than a Festuca.
1349.
Bromus asper, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cantire, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 400 yards.
Tyne to 330 yards.
Census 16 32 80.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-43.
Siberia.
3 F 
402 86.
GRAMINA.
1350.
Bromus sterilis, Linn.
Provinces ] to 15.
Native.
16 Dumbarton ?
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Elgin, BaniF.
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 250 yards.
Tyne to 150 yards.
Census 15 29 76.
Ireland 10.
British-englisb type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - (swe).
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
1351.
Bromus madritensis, Linn.
Provinces 12 3-56 (11 - - 14 15).
Native ?
Lat. 50- — 5^.
Devon, Hants, Kent.
— Pembroke, Surrey.
Zone 1.
Coast-level or low grounds.
Census 5 9 11.
Ireland 1.
Atlantio-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha.
Dalmatia for " aus." 
Russia - 5 4.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1353.
Bromus erectus, Huds.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— Kirkcudbright, Fife.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 150 yards.
Dorset?
Census 13 22 40.
Ireland 3.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got   swe.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Algeria.
1354.
Bromus secalinus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Colonist; but uncertain in its localities.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Isla, Ross.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 17 32 60.
(Ireland 5).
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland ("inquilina") and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
— (America, introduced).
86.
GRAMINA.
403 
1355.
Bromus commutatus, B.
racemosus, Anglor.
Provinces 1 to 16 - (18).
Native.
Lat. 50—58 or 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Moray.
(Shetl.) 
Zones 19 3.
Highlands to 400 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 16 31 VO.
Ireland 8.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus gar fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - - ?
" Specimina rossica non exstant"; Led. flo.
ross.
Algeria.
N.B. In Britain, confused with ' moUis,' ' secalinus,' etc.
1356.
Bromus mollis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Any authority for S.E. Wales ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Tyne to 600 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4.
3 3.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores, a var.
— (America, introduced).
1357.
Brachypodium sylvaticum, Beauv.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney; GiUies herb.
Zones 12 3.
Humber, Tyne, in each to 350 yards.
Census 18 35 84.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
India.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1358.
Brachypodium pinnatum, Beauv.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 [11 13 - - 15}.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Devon, Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— W.E. York.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 7 17 36.
[Ireland].
Germanic-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Russia 6-432.
Siberia.
Algeria.
i04 86.
GRAMINA.
1359.
Triticum caninum, Huds.
Provinces 1 to 15 - 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 50— 59.
Comvrall, Wight, Kent.
— Sutherland.
Orkney?
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 450 yards.
Tyue to 400 yards.
Census 16 32 73.
Ireland 7.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Rassia 6 • - 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
(N.
States).
1360.
Triticum repens, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 450 yards.
Highlands to,400 yards.
Census 18 38 93.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
1362.
Triticum junceum, Auct.
Provinces all.
Native.
Two or more species here.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Census 18 34 56.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— " Columbia ; Douglas.'' 
1363.
Lolium perenne, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Humber to 500 yards.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 5 4 3 3.
West-asia.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
— (America, introduced).
86.
GRAMINA.
405 
1364.
Lolium temulentum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Colonist.
L. arvense, With., included.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Islay, Elgin.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds ; usually sown with the crop.
Census 16 30 ?
Ireland 9.
British-english type.
Europe all, except Lapland and Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Madeira.
— (America, introduced).
1365.
Elymus arenarius, Linn.
Prov.
[1 2] 3 4 - [6] 7 8 [9] 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51—61.
Devon?
Dorset?
Es^x.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral.
Confused with Ammophila.
Census 13 18 30.
Ireland 4.
Scottish-british type.
Europe aU, except Italy ?
Russia 6-4331.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1366.
Hordeum sylvaticum, Huds.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - [7] 8 9 10 11.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 56.
Wilts, Hants, Kent.
— Chester, Northumberland.
Zones I 2.
Tyne to 200 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 8 13 24.
Ireland 1.
Germanic-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got.
Russia 6-43.
Elymus europeeus, Linn.
— " Canada ; Mrs. Percival," in Hooker flo.
bor.
am.
1367.
Hordeum pratense, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 50—57.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Fife, Perth.
Zones 1 3.
Low grounds.
Census 14 25 59.
Ireland 5.
EngUsh type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net den got.
Russia 6 - 4.
India.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— " Columbia." 
406 86.
GEAMINA.
1368.
Hordeum murinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - - 14 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Kincardine.
(Elgin).
Zones 1 S.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 13 37 66.
Ireland 6.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got.
Kussia - 5 4 3.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1369.
Hordeum maritimum, With.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 [13 - - 15].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Chester, Durham.
Zones 1 2.
Littoral.
Census 10 17 25.
[Ireland].
Enghsh-germanic type.
Europe spa ita tur aus - fra cha net den.
N.W. Germany.
Eussia?
" Dubia imperii rossici civis est"; Led. flo.
ross.
Algeria.
Canaries.
1370.
Nardus stricta, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1100, 1070, 1060 yards.
Census 18 37 84.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eussia 6-4321.
Azores; T.C.Hunt!
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
1371.
Lepturus filiformis, Trin.
Provinces 1 to 14 (15).
Native.
L. incurvatus, a casual ?
Lat. 50—56.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Linlithgow.
(Fife).
Zones 1 3.
Littoral.
Census 14 23 41.
Ireland 9.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus - fra cha net den (got).
N.W. Germany.
Eussia, absent.
Algeria.
L. incurvatus and L.
filiformis both there.
87.
FILICES.
407 
1372.
Ceterach officinarum, Willd.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 [11] 13 13 [14] 15 16.
Native.
Lat. 60—57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Argyle, Perth.
Zones 12 3, Humber to 250 or " 450 " yards.
Census 14 27 54.
Ireland 12.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia 6 5.
West-asia.
Cashmere.
Siberia?
Warsaw?
Algeria.
Canaries.
1373.
Woodsia ilvensis, Brown.
Provinces 7 - - [10] 1 1 12 13 - 15.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 57.
Carnarvon, Durham.
— Dumfries, Perth, Forfar.
Zones - - - 4 5.
Highlands 630—900 yards.
Census 5 6 6.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - - - aus ger - - - - got nor swe lap.
Eussia 6 5-321.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtso.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Eooky Mountains.
Sitcha.
1373*.
Woodsia hyperborea, Brown.
Provinces 7 [13] - 15.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 56.
Carnarvon!
Perth!
[Dumfries.
Forfar].
Zones 5.
Altitude ...
? 
Census 2 2 2.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor swe lap.
Eussia 2 1.
Himalaya.
Sib.
"Mandschuria(Maack)"; Milde.
— Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1374.
Polypodium vulgare, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 800 yards.
Highlands to 700 yards.
Census 18 38 97.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
" South Africa.
Mexico.
Japan." 
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Am. Col.
408 87.
FiLiCES.
1375.
Polypodium Phegopteris, Linn.
Prov.
1 2 [3] - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 ] 6 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Sussex.
— Ork. Shetl.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1150, 910, 900, 850 yards.
Census 16 38 63.
Ireland 9.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all, unless Spain to be excepted.
Eussia 6 - - 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka, a var.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1376.
Polypodium Dryopteris, Linn.
Prov.
[1 3 3] - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Glamorgan, Gloucester.
— Sutherland, Shetland.
Zones 19 3 4 5.
Highlands to 910, 850, 830, 830 yards.
Census 14 33 54.
Ireland 3.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
Russia - - - 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Dav.
Kamtsc.
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1377.
Polypodium Robertianum, Hoffm.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - - [15].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 55.
Somerset!
Bucks.' — Westmoreland!
Durham!
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 400 yards.
Reported in Perth.
Census 11 13 18.
Ireland 0.
English-intermediate type.
Europe - - tur aus ger fra cha net - - nor swe.
Russia 3.
Lithuania ; Siberia altaioa ; Ledebour flo.
ross.
— America ; Gray hot.
under P.
Dryopteris.
1378.
AUosurus crispus, Bernh.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 59.
North Devon or Somerset.
— Harris, Sutherland.
Zones - 2 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1160 yds.
Wales to 1110 yds.
Census 15 24 38.
Ireland 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net - - nor swe lap.
Loffoden.
Eussia 1.
Olympus.
Himalaya?
Siberia?
— Iceland ; Lindsay.
Greenland ; Milde.
America?
Columbia?
87.
FiLiCES.
409 
1379.
Cystopteris fragilis, Bernh.
Provinces all.
Native.
Numerous segregate forms.
Lat. 50 — 60.
Devon, Sussex, Kent?
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 1300, 1080, 960 yards.
Census 18 28 57.
Ireland 10.
British-highland type.
Europe all.
" Omnium filicum maxime boream versus progreditur." 
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Far. Icel.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
1381.
Cystopteris montana, Link.
Provinces [7] 15.
Native.
Lat. 56— 57 or 58.
Mid Perth!
Forfar!
S. Aberdeen.
[Cam.] 
Zones - — 5 6.
Highlands at about 1200 yards.
Census 12 3.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra nor swe lap.
Denmark?
Belg.
? 
Russia, absent.
Kamtschatka.
— Rocky Mountains, in America.
1382.
Polystichum Lonchitis, Roth.
Provinces - - - [4 - 6] 7 - - 10 11 [12 13] - 15 16 17 [18].
Native.
Lat. 53 — 69.
Carnarvon, York.
— Sutherland.
[Orkney].
Zones - ?
3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080, 1000, 960, 920 yards.
Census 6 10 16.
Ireland 3.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - - - 1.
Olympus.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1383.
Polystichum aculeatum et lobatum, Angler.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Confused with P.
angulare.
Lat. 50—58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Ross.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humbfer to 800 yards.
Highlands to 700 yards.
Census 17 34 85.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cba net.
" Scandinavia." 
Russia 6.
West-asia.
[Azores; Drouet], — America.
Columbia.
3 G 
410 87.
FILICES.
1384.
Polystichum angulare, Newm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - 14.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 66.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Cumberland!
Roxb.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 13 25 49.
Ireland 12.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net - [got nor].
Eussia 6.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Synonyms uncertain.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
1385.
Lastrea Thelypteris, Presl.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 - - 15 - - [18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Dorset, Wight, Sussex, Kent.
— Forfar!
Zones 1 2.
Lovr grounds.
Census 13 31 36.
Ireland 8.
English type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia 6 - - 3 2.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland ; Hooker, from Zoega.
America.
1386.
Lastrea Oreopteris, Presl.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 980 yards.
Humber to 550 yds.
Census 18 37 81.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Sweden and Finmark.
Russia - - - 8.
West-asia.
1387.
Lastrea Filix-mas, Presl.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland?
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 800 yards.
Highlands to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 96.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
" Japan." 
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
87.
FILICES, 411 
1388.
Lastrea rigida, Presl.
Provinces [1] 9 10 - 12.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 55.
Lancaster, York, Westmoreland, [Somerset].
Zones - - 3.
Probably about 400 — 500 yards.
Census 3 3 6.
[Ireland].
Intermediate type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - - - - nor.
L. pallida, spa ita tur.
Russia, absent.
L. pallida.
West-ask.
L. pallida, Tunis.
— [America?] 
1389.
Lastrea cristata, Presl.
Provinces [1 - 3] 4 [5] - - 8 9 [10 15].
Native.
Lat. 53—54.
Suffolk, Norfolk, Hunts, Notts, Chester.
Zones 1 2.
Low grounds.
[Essex ?
Derby ?] 
Census 3 5 6.
[Ireland].
English-intermediate type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - net den got nor swe.
Eussia 6-43.
Western Siberia.
— America.
1390.
Lastrea spinulosa, Anglor.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 ?
? 8 9 10 11 12 - - 15 16 [17 18].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Perth !
Inverness !
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
West Inverness ; Mrs. Maskelyne !
Census 14 24 53.
Ireland 9.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Scandinavia ?
Russia - - - 3 3 1.
"Amur.
Manchuria." Kamtsc.
a variety.
[Pico, Azores; Milde].
— America, " forma genuina." Sitcha, "var." 
1391.
Lastrea dilatata, Anglor.
Provinces all.
Native.
Strangely confused with L.
spinulosa.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1330, 1200, 1150 yards.
Census 18 36 86.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, unless Turkey and Finmark to be excepted.
Russia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Siberia ?
Azores.
— America.
Columbia.
419 87.
PiLiCES.
1399.
Lastrea semula, Brack.
Provinces 1 3 3 - 5 6 7 - - 10 11 13 - 14 [15] J6 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall !
Sussex !
Kent !
— Mull, Skye, Orkney !
Zones 19 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 19 18 94.
Ireland 19.
Atlantic-biitish type.
Europe.
Bretagne, in herbario Preslii ; Milde, p.
142.
Russia, absent or not observed.
Madeira.
Azores.
Fcenisecii of Lowe, recurva of Bree.
1393.
Pseudathyrium alpestre, Newm.
Provinces 15 16 17.
Native.
P. flexile, 15.
Lat. 56 — 59.
Argyle, Perth, Forfar — Sutherland; Oliver !
Zones - - - 4 5 6.
Highlands between " 600—1800 yards." 
Census 3 5 8.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa - - aus gar f ra - - - - nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - - 3 - 1.
West-asia.
— Greenland.
Columbia ; Dr. Lyall.
1394.
Athyrium Filix-foemina, Roth.
Provinces all.
Native.
Two species, but localities confused.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Tyne to 750 yards.
Highlands to 550 yards.
Census 18 38 88.
Ireland 19.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Loffoden Isles.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Dav.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Am. Col.
1395.
Asplenium viride, Huds.
Prov.
- (9 8) - ?
6 7 8 9 10 11 19 13 ?
15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 61.
Glamorgan!
Worcester, extinct?
— Shetl.
; Tate.
Zones - 9 3 4 5.
Highlands to 960 yds.
Humber 900—800 yds.
Census 19 17 30.
Ireland 5.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra - - ?
- nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 5 - - 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
. — New Brunswick.
Rooky Mountains.
Aleutian Isles.
87.
PILICES.
413 
1396.
Asplenium Trichomanes, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
A. anceps included below.
Lat. 50 — 66.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3 4.
North Wales to 650 yards.
Tyne to 550 yards.
Census 18 37 88.
Ireland 19.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Lapland ; Milde, not Fries sum.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Japan ; Milde.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
America.
Columbia.
1397.
Asplenium marinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 - - - 6 7 - 9 10 11 la 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Littoral ; rarely far inland.
Census 14 25 46.
Lreland 10.
British-atlantic type.
Europe spa ita - - - fra cha.
Corsica ; Milde fil.
eur.
Russia, absent.
"Jamaica.
Helena.
Bermudas." 
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— British America.
1398.
Asplenium lanceolatum, Huds.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 6 7 - - [10].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Merioneth, Gloucester.
Zones 1 2.
North Wales to 200 yards.
Census 6 9 10.
Ireland 1.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur - ger fra cha.
Russia, absent.
N.B. A.
obovatum, spa ita tur - - fra.
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azores.
1399.
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland, 
Zones 12 3 4.
Highlands to 680 yards.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Census 18 37 90.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia 6 - - ?
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
Abyssinia; Milde fil.
414 87.
FILICES.
1400.
Asplenium Euta-muraria, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—60.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Orkney.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 650 yards.
Tyue to 650 yards.
Census 18 37 87.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution, 
purope all.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Ca&hniere.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— America.
1400*.
Asplenium germanicum, Weiss.
Provinces 7 - - - 11 12 - 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 57.
Carnarvon!
Cheviotland!
— Cumberland, Perth f 
Zones ?
3. Tyne at about 150 yards.
Census 5 5 7.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net - got nor swe.
Pbussia - - - - 2.
" Fennia australi prope Hekingfors." 
" Desideratur in Asia, Africa et America" ; Milde fU.
eur.
1401.
Asplenium septentrionale, Hull.
Provinces 1 - [3] - - - 7 - - 10 11 12 - 14 15 -   [18].
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
North D^von, Carnarvon.
— Perth, Aberdeen.
Zones - 2 3 4 5.
North Wales to 1000 yds.
? Lakes to 500 yds.
Census 7 8 11.
Ireland 0.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Lapland ; Milde, not Fries.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
— Iceland ; Hooker list.
Greenland ; Giesecke.
America ; Milde.
1402.
Scolopendrium vulgare, Sym.
Provinces 1 to 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney?
Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 17 35 88.
Ireland 12.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net.
Gottland.
Russia 6 - 4 3.
West-asia.
Western Siberia.
"Japan."' 
Algeria.
Madeira.
Azo'res.
— America, very local.
SiLoha ?
87.
FILICES.
415 
1403.
Blechnum boreale, Sw.
Provinces all.
Native.
Blechnum Spicant, Newm.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 1 2 3 4 S 6.
Highlands to 1300, 1160, 1080 yards.
Census 18 38 95.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Crete ; Heldreich.
Eussia 6 - - 3.
Kamtschatka.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
Columbia.
1404.
Pteris aquilina, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3.
Highlands to 640 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 18 38 98.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Finmark.
Eussia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Dav.
Kamtsc.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
Columbia, a var.
1405.
Adiantum Capillus-Veneris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - - [5] 6 - [8 - 10] - 12 - - [15 16].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 55.
Cornwall, Devon, Som., Dorset, Glamorgan, Man.
Zones 1 2.
Coast level.
[Sal. Staff.
Derb.
Kino.
Arran].
Census 4 6 7.
Ireland 4 or 5.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra.
" Limbourg." 
Eussia 6.
West-asia.
North-west India.
Western Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
" Sandwich Islands.'' 
1407.
Hymenophyllum tunbridgense, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 - ?
6 7 ?
9 10 11 13 13 14 ?
16 [17].
Native.
Lat. 50 — 57.
Cornwall, Sussex, Kent.
— Mull, Argyle.
Zones 1 2 3.
Peninsula to 350 yards.
Tyne at " 300 yards ?
" 
Census 13 15 25.
Ireland 8.
Atlantic type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha net.
Eussia, absent.
Extends to the Southern hemisphere.
Canaries.
Azores ; Drouet.
410 87.
FILICES.
1408.
Hymenophyllum Wilsoni, Hook.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 60 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4?
Hebrides to 950 yards?
Census 14 92 40.
Ireland 9.
Atlantic-highland type.
Europe.
Norway.
Overlooked elsewhere?
Kussia, absent.
Extends to the Southern Hemisphere.
Canaries.
Azores.
— Faroe.
1409.
Osmunda regalis, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Very rare in Shetland.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Hebrides, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 300 yards.
Humher to 130 yards.
Census 18 34 70.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den got - swe.
Russia 6 - - 3.
West-asia.
India.
China.
Japan.
Algeria.
Azores.
— America, if 0.
spectabilis, Willd.
1410.
Botrychium Lunaria, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
B. rutaceum in province 15 ?
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards.
Humber to 550 yds.
Census 18 34 78.
Ireland 12.
British-scottish type.
Europe all, unless Turkey to be excepted.
" Australia." 
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Sib. Dav.
Kamts.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1111.
OpMoglossum viilgatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 - 18.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Lakes to 300 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 16 32 69.
Ireland 11.
British type of distribution.
Europe aU, except Turkey and Finmark 
Russia 6 5 4 3 2.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Western Siberia.
Madeira; Milde.
Azores.
— Iceland; Hooker.
Am. Col.
82.
LYCOPODIACE^.
417 
1412.
Lycopodium clavatum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, Sussex.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4.
Humber to 850 yards.
Highlands to 650 yards.
Census 18 34 67.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia -- 4 3 a 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Amur; Milde.
fil.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1413.
Lycopodium annotinum, Linn.
Provinces 7 8 [9 - 11] 12 - - 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 60.
Carnarvon, Leicester.
— Eoss, Orkney.
Zones - ?
3 4 5.
Highlands to 900, 900, 880, 860 yards.
Census 7 10 14.
Ireland 0.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia - - 4 3 2 ].
"West-asia.
Siberia.
"Amur.
Kamtsc." 
— Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1414.
Lycopodium inundatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 - 13 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 53.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex, Kent.
— Eoss.
Zones 12 3.
Low grounds.
Census 12 24 43.
Ireland 1.
British-english type.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra cha net den got nor swe.
Russia - - 4 3.
— America ; but perhaps a species sufficiently distinct.
1415.
Lycopodium alpinum, Linn.
Prov.
1 - - - [5] 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 51—61.
Somerset, Wales, Derby.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - - 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1300, 1200, 1130 yards.
Census li 24 45.
Ireland 7.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa ita - aus ger fra - net - - nor swe lap.
Loffoden.
Russia 1.
West-asia.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Kamtsc.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
3 H 
418 88.
LYCOPODIACEiE.
— 89.
MARSILEACE^.
1416.
Lycopodium Selago, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Eare in South-east England.
Lat. SO — 61.
Cornwall, Devon, Susse,K.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1440, 1330, 1300 yards.
Census 18 34 68.
Ireland 9.
British-highland type.
Europe all, except Turkey.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Azores.
— • Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1417.
Lycopodium selaginoides, Linn.
Prov.
[1] 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 61.
Anglesea, Carnarvon, Derby?
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones - 2 3 4 5 6.
Highlands to 1080, 930, 910, 900 yards.
Census 12 19 43.
Ireland 10.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe spa - - aus ger fra - - den got nor swe lap fin.
Russia 6 - - 3 3 1.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Selaginella spinulosa.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
1418.
Isoetes lacustris, Linn.
Provinces [5 6] 7 - - [10 11] 12 - - 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 52 — 59.
Salop?
Glamorgan?
Merioneth.
— Skye, Sutherl.
Zones - 3 3 4.
Highlands to 600 or 700 yards, or upwards.
Census 5 7 16.
Ireland 6.
Highland type of distribution.
Europe aus ger fra - net den got nor swe lap.
Russia - - - 3 2 1.
Western Siberia.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
1419.
Pilularia globulifera, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 59.
Cornwall, Dorset, Sussex.
— Skye, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3.
Wales to 300 yards.
Humber to 150 yards.
Census 17 33 47.
Ireland 3.
British type of distribution.
Europe - - - - ger fra cha net den got nor.
Russia - - 4 3.
90.
EQUISETACE^.
419 
1490.
Eqnisetum maxinnim, Lam.
Provinces 1 to 16 - [18].
Native.
E. Telmateia, Ehrh.
Lat. 50 — 58.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Skye, Aberdeen.
Zones 1 2.
Humber to 400 yards.
Rarely above 200?
Census.
16 30 67.
Ireland 8.
English-british type.
Europe spa ita tur aus ger fra cha net den.
Russia 6 5 4 3.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Algeria.
Canaries.
Azores.
— America.
Columbia.
1421.
Equisetum umbrosum, Willd.
Provinces [8] 9 10 11 19 13 14 15.
Native.
Lat. 53 — 68.
Lancaster, York.
— Perth, Aberdeen.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne 30—400 yards.
Humber to 300 yards.
Census 7 8 15.
L-eland 2.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe - ita - aus ger fra cha - den got nor swe lap.
Russia 6 - 4 3 2.
"All Siberia, to 70 lat." Caucasus ; Milde fil.
— Iceland.
America.
Rocky Mountains.
1422.
Equisetnm arvense, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3.
Tyne to 650 yards.
Humber to 550 yards.
Census 18 38 94.
Ireland 12.
British type of distribution.
Europe all.
Eastward to China and Japan.
Russia 6-4331.
Himalaya.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
North Africa; Milde.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenl.
Am. Col.
1423.
Equisetum sylvaticum, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Devon, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Sutherland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands to 900 yards on several hills.
Census 18 36 79.
Ireland 10.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6-4321.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtsc.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
Greenland.
America.
Columbia.
420 90.
EQUlSETACEiE.
1434.
Equisetum palustre, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 12 3 4 5.
Highlands 830, 810, 790, 710 yards.
Census 18 37 86.
Ireland 9.
British tj'pe of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eastward to Japan.
Russia 6 5 4 3 2 1.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Davuria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1425.
Equisetum limosum.
Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
E. fluviatile, Linn., not of Smith.
Lat. 50—61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 710 yards.
Humber to 600 yards.
Census 18 36 81.
Ireland 13.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia - 5 4 8 3 1.
Siberia.
Davuria.
Kamtschatka.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
1426.
Equisetum hyemale, Linn.
Provinces [1 2] 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 17.
Native.
Lat. 51 — 58.
Hereford, Surrey, Kent.
— Eoss, Moray.
Zones 13 3.
Humber 0—300 yards ; Baker.
Census 14 31 36.
Ireland 5.
Scottish-british type.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Eussia 6-4331.
West-asia.
Siberia.
Kamtschatka.
Algeria.
— Faroe.
Iceland.
America.
Columbia.
1438.
Equisetum variegatum, Schl.
Provinces 1 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17.
Native.
Lat. 50— 58.
Devon!
Somerset?
Chester!
York !
— Ross !
Zones 13 3.
Humber to 600 yards.
Tyne to 500 yards.
Census 10 13 16.
Ireland 3 or 5.
Scottish type of distribution.
Europe spa - tur aus ger fra - net den - nor.
Baltic Isles.
Eussia - - - 3 3 1.
Siberia.
Algeria.
— Iceland; Mr. Carroll.
Greenland.
America.
INDEX TO GENERA.
421 
Index to the Genera 
In the FOEEQOiNa Synopsis op SPECiEg.
Acer, 132.
Aoeras, 327.
Achillea, 236.
Aconitum, 87.
Acorus, 348.
Actea, 87.
Actinocarpus, 839.
Adiantum, 415.
Adonis, 80.
Adoxa, 184.
^gopodium, 188.
jEthusa, 193.
Agrimonia, 165.
Agrostemma, 117.
Agrostis, 385.
Aira, 388.
Ajuga, 271.
AlchenuUa, 166.
Alisma, 339.
Allium, 332.
AUosorus, 408.
Alnus, 312.
Alopecurus, 383.
Althtea, 128.
Ammophila, 387.
AnagalUs, 287.
Anchusa, 283.
Andromeda, 243.
Anemone, 80.
Angelica, 195.
Anthemis, 336.
Anthoxanthum, 381.
Antirrhinum, 262.
Anthriscus, 198.
AnthyUis, 139.
Apera, 385.
Apium, 187.
Aquilegia, 86.
Arabis, 99.
Arbutus, 342.
Arctium, 319.
Arenaria, 120.
Armeria, 289.
Arnoseris, 218.
Arrhenatherum, 391.
Artemisia, 235.
Arthrolobium, 148.
Arum, 848.
Arundo, 387.
Asarum, 305.
Asparagus, 335.
Asperugo, 282.
Asperula, 204.
Asplenium, 413.
Aster, 229.
Astragalus, 147.
Athyrium, 412.
Atriplex, 295.
Atropa, 353.
Avena, 390.
Azalea, 242.
BaUota, 272.
Barbarea, 100.
Barkhausia, 217.
Bartsia, 258.
BeUis, 334.
Berberis, 87.
Beta, 296.
Betula, 313.
Bidens, 324.
Blechnum, 415.
Blysmus, 358.
Botrychium, 416.
Brachypodium, 403.
Brassica, 103.
Briza, 398.
Bromus, 401.
Bryonia, 175.
Bunium, 189.
Bupleurum, 190.
Butomus, 340.
Cakile, 93.
Calamintha, 270.
Callitriche, 173.
CaUuna, 340.
Caltha, 85.
Campanula, 237.
CapseUa, 93.
Cardamine, 98.
Carduus, 220.
Cai-ex, 304 to 379.
Carlina, 223.
Carpinus, 311.
Carum, 189.
Catabrosa, 393.
Caucalis, 197.
Centaurea, 223.
Centnneulns, 288.
Cepbalanthera, 333.
Cerastdum, 134.
CeratophyUum, 174.
Ceterach, 407.
ChEerophyUum, 198.
Chelidonium, 90.
Chenopodium, 291.
Cherleria, 136.
CMora, 249.
Chrysanthemum, 234.
Chrysocoma, 386.
Chrysosplenium, 183.
Cioendia, 347.
Cichorium, 219.
Cicuta, 187.
Cineraria, 233.
Circsea, 171.
Cladium, 357.
Clematis, 79.
Cochlearia, 93.
Colchicum, 338.
Comarum, 160.
Conium, 186.
ConvaUaria, 336.
Convolvulus, 350.
Corallorhiza, 323.
Cornus, 184.
Coronopus, 93.
423 
INDEX TO GENERA.
Corrigiola, 175.
Corydalis, 90.
Corylus, 311.
Cotoneaster, 167.
Cotyledon, 180.
Crambe, 92.
Crataegus, 167.
Crepis, 313.
Crithmum, 195.
Crocus, 330.
Cuscuta, 250.
Cynodon, 380.
Cynoglossum, 283.
Cynosurus, 398.
Cyperus, 357.
Cypripedium, 339.
Cystopteris, 409.
DaotyUs, 399.
Daphne, 804.
Daucus, 196.
Delphinium, 87.
Dentaria, 98.
Dianthus, 112.
Digitalis, 362.
Digitaria, 380.
Diotis, 225.
Dipsacus, 306.
Draba, 96.
Drosera, 110.
Dryas, 157.
Eohium, 283.
Elatine, 113.
Elymus, 405.
Empetrum, 305.
Epipogiu'm, 323.
Epilobium, 168.
Epipaotis, 331.
Equisetum, 419.
Erica, 340.
Erigeron, 299.
Eriooaulon, 350.
Eriophorum, 363.
Erodium, 132.
Ervum, 151.
Ei'yngium, 185.
Erysimum, 103.
Erythraea, 948.
Euonymus, 136.
Eupatorium, 224.
Euphorbia, 306.
Euphrasia, 259.
Fagus, 311.
Festuca, 399.
Pilago, 237.
Eoeniculum, 193.
Fragaria, 160.
Fraukenia, 111.
Fraxinus, 246.
Fritillaria, 331.
Fumaria, 90.
Gagea, 333.
Galeopsis, 374.
Galium, 301.
Gastridium, 384.
Genista, 137.
Gentiana, 246.
Geranium, 133.
Geum, 156.
Gladiolus, 330.
Glaucium, 90.
Glaux, 388.
Glechoma, 376.
Glyceria, 393.
Gnaphalium, 226.
Goodyera, 330.
Hahenaria, 336.
Hedera, 184.
HeUanthemum, 106.
Helleborus, 86.
Helminthia, 908.
Helosciadium, 188.
Heracleum, 196.
Heiminium, 337.
Herniaria, J.76.
Hieracium, 213.
Hieroohloe, 381.
Hippoorepis, 148.
Hippophae, 304.
Hippuris, 173.
Holcus, 891.
Holosteum, 193.
Honkeneja, 119.
Hordeum, 405.
Hottonia, 286.
Humulus, 310.
Hutchinsia, 94.
Hyacinthus, 334.
Hydrocharis, 338.
Hydrocotyle, 185.
Hyoscyamus, 251.
Hymenophyllum, 415.
Hypericum, 129.
Hypochoeris, 209.
Iberis, 94.- 
Ilex, 945.
lUecebrum, 175.
Impatiens, 135.
Inula, 932.
Iris, 339.
Isnardia, 171.
Isoetes, 418.
Jasione, 339.
Junous, 350.
Juniperus, 319.
Enautia, 207.
Knappia, 384.
Kobresia, 364.
Koeleria, 393.
Lactuca, 910.
lamium, 272.
Lampsana, 218.
latbrrea, 966.
Lastrea, 410.
Lathyrus, 159.
Lavatera, 128.
Leersia, 380.
Lemna, 347.
Leontodon, 90S.
Lepidium, 94.
Lepigonum, 190.
Lepturus, 406.
LeuGojum, 331.
Ligusticum, 194.
Ligustrum, 945.
LimoseUa, 964.
Linaria, 369.
Linntea, 300.
Linum, 136.
INDEX TO GEXEBA.
423 
Liparis, 329.
listera, 321.
lithospermum, 280.
Littorella, 291.
Lloydia, 335.
Lobelia, 2iO.
Loiseleuria, 343.
LoUum, 404.
Lonicera, 200.
Lotus, 145.
Luzula, 355.
Lychnis, 115.
Lyeopodium, 417.
Lycopsis, 281.
Lycopus, 267.
Lysimachia, 286.
Lythrum, 174.
Mainthemum, 336.
Malaxis, 329.
Malva, 127.
Marrubium, 277.
Matthiola, 103.
Matricaria, 235.
Meconopsis, 89.
Medicago, 139.
Melampyrum, 259.
MeKea, 393.
Melilotus, 140.
MeHttis, 371.
Mentha, 267.
Menyanthes, 249.
Menziesia, 241.
Mercurialis, 308.
Mertensia, 281.
Meum, 194.
Milium, 385.
Mcenchia, 117.
Moehringia, 122.
MoUnia, 393.
Monotropa, 245.
Montia, 175.
Mulgedium, 212.
Muscari, 334.
Myosotis, 278.
Myosurus, 81.
Myrica, 319.
Hryriophylhim, 173.
Myrrhis, 199.
Narcissus, 331.
Nardus, 406.
Narthecium, 335.
Nasturtium, 100.
Neottia, 321.
Nepeta, 276.
Nuphar, 88.
Nympheea, 88.
Obione, 294.
Oenanthe, 191.
Onobrychis, 149.
Ononis, 138.
Onopordum, 323.
Ophioglossum, 416.
Ophrys, 328.
Orchis, 334.
Origanum, 269.
Omithogalum, 333.
Omithopus, 148.
Orobanche, 264.
Orobus, 154.
Osmunda, 416.
OxaKs, 136.
Oxyria, 304.
Oxytropis, 147.
Papaver, 88.
Parietaria, 309.
Paris, 337.
Pamassia, 184.
Pastinaca, 196.
Pedicularis, 260.
PepUs, 174.
Petasites, 328.
Petroselinum, 187.
Peucedanum, 195.
Phalaris, 381.
Phleum, 382.
Physospermum, 186.
Phyteiuna, 239.
Picris, 208.
Pilularia, 418.
Pimpinella, 189.
Pinguicula, 283.
Pinus, 319.
Plantago, 290.
Poa, 395 to 398.
Polemonium, 249.
Polycarpon, 176.
Polygala, 111.
Polygonatum, 336.
Polygonum, 298.
Polypodium, 407.
Polypogon, 385.
Polystichum, 409.
Populus, 312.
Potamogeton, 341.
PotentOla, 157.
Poterium, 165.
Primula, 285.
Prunella, 277.
Prunus, 164.
Pseudathyrium, 413.
Pteris, 415.
Pnlmonaria, 283.
Pyrola, 244.
Pyrus, 167.
Quercus, 310.
Eadiola, 127.
Eanunculus, 81.
Eaphanus, 105.
Eeseda, 106.
Ehamnus, 136.
Ehinanthus, 259.
Ehyncospora, 358.
Eibes, 177.
Eosa, 163.
Eubia, 201.
Eubus, 160.
Eumex, 301.
Euppia, 346.
Euscus, 336.
Sagina, 117.
Sagittaria, 340.
Salicomia, 397.
Salix, 313.
Salsola, 296.
Salvia, 267.
Sambucus, 199.
Samolus, 288.
Sanguisorha, 1C5.
424 
INDEX TO GENERA.
Sanioula, 185.
Saponaria, 113.
Sarothamnus, 137.
Saussurea, 219.
Saxifraga, 180.
Scabiosa, 207.
Scandix, 198.
^ 
Soheuchzeria, 341.
Schoberia, 297.
Schoenus, 358.
SciUa, 334.
Scirpus, 359.
Sclerantbus, 176.
Sclerochloa, 394.
Soolopendrium, 414.
Scrophularia, 261.
Scutellaria, 277.
Sedum, 178.
Seneoio, 230.
Serratula, 220.
SeseU, 194.
Sefileiia, 388.
Setaria, 381.
Sherardia, 204.
Sibbaldia, 157.
Sibthorpia, 264.
Silaus, 104.
Silene, 113.
Simethis, 335.
Sinapis, 104.
Sison, 188.
Sisymbrium, 101.
Sium, 190.
Smymium, 186.
Solanum, 251.
SoMago, 230.
Sonohus, 211.
Sparganium, 349.
Spartina, 380.
Spergula, 119.
Spergularia, 120.
Spiraea, 156.
Spiranthes, 320.
Stachys, 275.
Statice, 289.
SteUaria, 122.
Stratiotes, 338.
Suaeda, 297.
Subularia, 96.
Symphytum ,281.
Tamus, 337.
Tanacetum, 235.
Taraxacum, 218.
Taxus, 320.
Teesdalia, 94.
Teucrium, 271.
Thalictrum, 79.
Thesium, 305.
Thlaspi, 93.
Thymus, 269.
Tilia, 128.
Tillffia, 178.
Tofieldia, 338.
TordyUum, 196.
ToriHs, 197.
Tragopogon, 207.
Trichonema, 330.
Trientalis, 286.
Trifolium, 141.
Triglochin, 340.
TrigoneUa, 141.
Trinia, 187.
Triodia, 392.
Tritioum, 404.
Trollius, 86.
Turritis, 100.
Tussilago, 229.
Typha, 349.
Ulex, 137.
Ulmus, 310.
Urtica, 309.
Utricularia, 284.
Yaccinium, 243.
Valeriana, 205.
Valerianella, 205.
Verbascum, 252.
Verbena, 266.
Veronica, 254.
Viburnum, 200.
Vicia, 149.
Villarsia, 249.
Vinca, 246.
Viola, 107.
Viscum, 199.
Wolffia, 348.
Woodsia, 407.
' 
Zannichellia, 346.
Zostera, 346.
III.
SEGEEGATES and their NOMENCLATURE.
In explaining tlie formula used in tte ' Synopsis of Species,' 
on pages 79 — ISO, it was intimated that a general commentary 
afterwards would include the Alien plants and " also several 
segregate species, the distribution of which is yet too imperfectly 
ascertained, to allow of the formula being adhered to for them, 
if taken apart from each other." Great difficulty is experienced 
in the attempt to shew the topographical distribution of that 
miscellaneous group of plants, which ought to include everything 
not already treated in the foregoing ' Synopsis.' Brevity is 
absolutely necessary in a single volume which professes to be 
only a Compendium ; while sometliing like sameness of plan is 
needful, to prevent brevity lapsing quite into non-intelligibility.
Looking to the Segregates in the first place.
These may be 
distinguished roughly into three groups.
First, those which have 
long been separated in books, more or less clearly, and which 
have thus become passably well known to botanical collectors and 
recorders of localities.
Many of this first group have been already 
treated in the Synopsis, because the records of their localities 
were found suflBciently numerous, and in the main also sufficiently 
reliable, to afford the necessary data, when joined with those in 
the Author's own notes and herbarium, the accumulations of 
many years.
Second, there are numerous recent severances, not 
yet become familiar to botanists who are guided by descriptive 
books in which these recent segregates remain unnoticed, or who 
have not seen such authentic examples as would suffice to render 
the novel species or variety (it matters not which it be called here) 
426 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
clearly understood by them.
Of course, the localities for these 
segregates are yet sparingly on record ; and, if on record at 
all, they may usually have been assigned to some other more 
aggregate species.
Third, there is the very troublesome class of 
" splits," in which not only are old familiar species subdivided into 
these recent and yet unfamiliar segregates, but in -which also 
transfers of name from one thing to another, the raking up of old 
obsolete names to displace those in habitual use, and perverse 
misapplications of names so as to give them different meanings 
from heretofore, — all come in more or less, to make confusion and 
to insure false records and frequent misnomers.
The simple fact of severance always creates the topographical 
dif&culty, even though quite warranted by clear differences in 
nature, and distinctly explained in books, without confusion- 
creating name-changes.
Under these most favorable conditions 
it takes a long time before the segregates become so generally 
understood by botanists, that the recorded localities for them can 
also become numerous and generally correct.
Too many of those 
which must here be treated after some fashion, have only quite 
recently been distinguished in books, as quasi-species, with special 
names and descriptions ; and they have become known as yet to 
very few botanists.
Some of them which have been admitted only 
into the latter editions of Professor Babington's carefully worked 
' Manual of British Botany,' or have first appeared in this country 
in the new edition of ' English Botany,' under Mr. BosweU- 
Syme's discriminating Editorship, are yet imperfectly known to 
myself as living realities, or even remain still unknown either 
alive in nature or mummified in the herbarium.
To the general 
body of botanical observers and collectors, scattered through 
England, several of them must be utterly unknown, or be so 
unfamiliar that little of rehance can be placed at present on 
reports of localities for them.
Thus, in too many instances, the 
records being few, and not always reliable if made, the time is 
not yet come for condensing the localities into any fixed formula 
that would truly illustrate the distribution of the plants geographi- 
cally considered.
TIIF.TR NOMENCLATURE.
-i27 
Unfortunately, they are not the novel segregates only which are 
thus difficult to trace.
The severance of any one of these from an 
older species, as previously recognized in books, must usually 
nullify all the past records about that old species, if the object now 
be to shew also its own distribution apart from the severed 
novelty ; such former records having been made for the undivided 
aggregate, not specially for either of its severed portions, that is, 
neither for the segregate nor for the remnant.
When aggregate 
species AB comes to be made into two by the severance of B from 
it, leaving A equally alone, what are we to do with all its old 
recorded localities ?
None of them were reported for A or for B 
specially by itself; and often the places must be re- visited, or 
authentic specimens be re-examined, in order to determine the 
doubtful alternative between A and B for each locality.
Such is the difficulty, at present almost an insurmountable 
difficulty, to be met in this division of the 'Compendium.' It 
must take inclusive notice of segregate species and varieties, 
familiar to few of us, and some of which are certainly ill-understood 
even by their own proposers or introducers into English books ; 
and the localities for which are at best very sparingly recorded, if 
not in some cases already misrecorded for the wrong thing.
A 
commencement only can be attempted here, by putting into an 
abbreviated form so much or so little as is yet known to the writer 
concerning the distribution or localities of the segregates.
Some 
half-century henceforward, when new Local Floras and Lists and 
other records have accumulated, a successful attempt will become 
possible to the botanists of that future time.
As to now tracing 
their distribution through other countries (which has been 
advised), the attempt to do so would be only a futile mockery of 
the former portion of this work, so meagre and uncertain would 
any such enumeration of foreign habitats unavoidably become.
Before proceeding to the brief summary alluded to, some pages 
will be devoted to expositions of the manner in which the 
aggregates (the recognized species of the older botanists, and still 
accepted in the same character by influential botanists of the 
present time) have passed into the modern segregates ; which too 
428 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
often bewilder us by their ill-defined pettiness, and doubtless drive 
away in disgust some of the students who might have become 
botanists under more encouraging conditions.
The tendency of 
the practice must be to make book-botany attractive only to the 
lowest class of minds which can engage in science at all ; the 
minds which devote themselves exclusively to minute details, and 
which find their right vocation there, simply because incapable of 
anything higher.
A few aggregates will here be taken as special 
instances, and will be traced quasi-historically into their smaller 
segregates ; the names of which now so greatly puzzle us, over 
and above the difficulty in distinguishing the things intended, one 
from another.
It is trusted that some few such expositions will not only bring 
home to readers the botanico-topographical difficulties consequent 
on the changes, but may serve also in some degree as warning 
suggestions, that other mischiefs and inconveniences will arise 
through the making or adopting of such changes with ill-considered 
haste.
It will become apparent, that practically a good deal of 
confusion is the immediate result, chiefly through the name- 
transfers and misnaming which too often have accompanied well- 
meant changes supposed to be elucidations ; and that the taste for 
this kind of innovation has already introduced much confusion 
into our nomenclature, by making the same name mean quite 
different things,- — applicable to one species at one date, — to 
another, not identical species, at a second date, — to a third still 
varied species at a third date, and so on.
The expositions must be understood as examples only, on the 
rule of " ex uno disce omnes.'' This work would lose its title and 
intended character of ' Compendium,' if similar expositions in 
detail should be entered into for anj- considerable number of the 
many other old aggregates, which of late have been converted into 
their more numerous modern segregates.
And yet, in order 
clearly to understand these recent segregates, and to connect them 
at all with the past records of their localities, and too often even 
with the present records, such details ought to become known 
to botanical investigators.
In the absence of that knowledge, 
THEm NOMENCLATUEE.
439 
recorders of localities will be continually making mistakes, through 
their use of specific names which only confuse, instead of 
explaining, what the records were intended to make known.
1. Ranunculus aquatilis, Linn.
— The various and very un- 
equal divisions of this great aggregate species into a larger or 
smaller number of subordinate species, with their recombination 
into a single aggregate, in Benthani's ' Handbook of the British 
Flora,' have previously come under notice as illustrations of the 
"grades of species." They are well adapted further for illustrating 
the more immediate bearing of such changes upon those records 
of localities, at different dates, which must frequently be taken as 
present evidences in tracing out distribution, and also for shewing 
how inconveniently they nullify the usefulness of the records.
Independently of the hederaceus and Lenonnandi, and leaving 
the intermediate tripartitus non-assigned to anything else, the 
Liunean aquatilis was treated as four several species on pages 
81 — 9.
The first of the four, the aquatilis of many authors, may 
be taken as synonymous with the type form which very usually 
has been named also heterophyllus in books.
The second, given 
under the two modern names of tricliophyllus and Drouetii very 
confusedly applied among English botanists, may be said to 
correspond with the old segregate recorded under the names of 
tenuif alius or capillaceus, or more lately as pantothrix ; but 
excluding those terrestrial states of heterophyllus, which out of 
water are of course destitute of "floating" leaves, and which 
usually have only the multipartite leaves on them.
Fries would 
absurdly restrict the old name of heterophyllus, used in so many 
books to mean aquatilis (after deducting tenuifolius, circinatus, 
and Jiuitans), to some very special form closely aUied to Drouetii 
and tricliophyllus ; in other words, he tries to give the name an 
application and meaning quite different from what it has in all 
works of older date than his own.
And he has found English 
imitators in this mischievous folly.
The remaining two out of the four, the circinatus and fluitans, 
also have been frequently confused with jjantothrLv, and indeed 
430 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
still are so confused by some desoribers of plants and recorders of 
localities in the present day.
And examples of heterophyllus, 
drawn out in running water, have been repeatedly mistaken for 
fluitans, while destitute of floating leaves ; these mistakes having 
led to some false records for the latter.
On the whole, however, 
it may be said that circinatus and fluitans are now familiar to 
most botanists, and that they are seldom confused with the other 
two unless by beginners.
But as to the limits and distinctions 
between heterophyllus a.-ad^ pantothrix, or between the two groups 
of segregates into which they are cut up, these may still come 
under the old showman's liberally given choice to the childish 
mind, "Which you please, my little dears." 
The four species were recognized as such by the ante-Linnean 
botanists two centuries ago.
But for the object now in view it 
will be quite far enough to go back to the 'Synopsis' of Ray, 
edition of 1794, which Dillenius rendered the most convenient 
edition for reference.
Bay's four species are thus characterized in 
the name-descriptions of ante-Linnean times : 
1. R.
"aquatilis' ....
" aquaticus foho rotundo et capillaceo." 
" Water Crowfoot with various leaves." 
2. R.
"aquatilis omnino tenuifolius " ....
"aquations capil- 
laoeus." " Fine leaved Water Crowfoot." 
3. R.
" aquaticus albus, circinatis tenuissime divisis foliis, 
floribus ex alis longis pediculis innixis." 
4. R.
" sive Polyanthemo aquatili albo affine Millefolium Ma- 
ratriphyUum fluitans." " Fennel leaved Water Crow- 
foot." 
There is no room for dispute as to what these name-descriptions 
intended ; notwithstanding any mistakes or confusion which may 
have occurred among botanists, in actually applying the names to 
individual plants.
Evidently, they intended the four species 
treated in this volume at pages 81 — 2.
In the ' Flora Anglioa ' of 1762 the Linnean aquatilis appears 
as a single species, including all the above four combined into 
one.
" Eanunculus foliis suhmersis capillaceis, emersis peltatis" is 
made the type form or variety ; the three others being added as 
THEIR NOJEENCLATUEE.
-i^U 
subordinate varieties.
They still appeared the same in the ' Flora 
Britannioa,' as also in the ' English Flora ' just a century later 
than the third edition of Kay's ' Synopsis ' above quoted.
In the ' Flora Oxoniensis,' before the dates of Smith's Floras, 
Sibthorpe had treated the same plants as four separate species, 
under the names of heterophyllus, aquatilis, circinatus, and 
fluviatilis.
Three of these names were adopted from Wiggers 
(or Weber) ; that of circinatus being a specific adaptation of the 
adjective used in the old name-description before quoted from 
Ray. In Gray's ' Natural Arrangement of British Plants,' dated 
iu 1821, all four were also continued as separate species ; the 
heterophyllus being subdivided into two species distinguished by 
their " smooth" or " bristly" achenes ; a \eaietj peltatus also being 
distinguished by its leaves " orbicular, three-lobed, peltate.'' This 
was a movement towards the more recent pseudo-specific sub- 
divisions of heterophyllus.
In the ' British Flora ' of Hooker, in which a leading aim 
was condensation of matter, occasionally becoming injudicious 
omissions, Smith's single species was adhered to ; the fourth 
variety fluviatilis or fluiians being entirely ignored in some 
editions, but it was restored in the fifth.
(All the editions are not 
at hand, only three, five, six, eight.) In edition sixth, 18S0, 
Dr. Arnott re-promoted fluitans and circinatus to the " rank of 
species " ; keeping the specific name aquatilis to include hetero- 
phyllus and pantothrix, as the two forms or varieties of that 
species.
The same arrangement is continued in edition eighth, 
1860, with some mention of the segregate species of the ' Manual,' 
treated as subordinate forms under the two primary varieties 
mentioned above.
We can now turn to the ' Manual of British Botany,' a little 
book, but as great an Innovator among the various Floras of 
Britain, as Gray's great book the 'Natural Arrangement' had 
been.
The latter work, being in some respects a quarter of a 
century in advance of its cotemporaries in 1831, was neglected 
accordingly ; thus it effected neither good nor harm.
The inno- 
vations of the ' Manual ' have come much into use.
Occasionally 
432 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
they have been uncalled for, and simply mischievous ; but more 
usually warranted, and made circumspectly.
They seem to have 
been suggested by looking into foreign books or upon the labels of 
foreign specimens, rather than by looking at English plants.
Examples of this fault will shortly be given, with its confusing 
consequences to our own botanical nomenclature ; here given, not 
for the purpose of finding fault with the fault, but in order to 
shew the confusion brought into our names of plants through the 
characteristic mentioned.
Of course, where the object is to shew 
the uncertainty of our locality records, arising from transfers of 
names and other changes in them, it is unavoidably to the defects 
of our descriptive Floras in this wise, rather than to their com- 
pensating excellencies otherwise, that attention must here be 
drawn.
In its first edition the ' Manual ' differed from the ' English 
Flora,' as to the plants now under consideration, only by again 
describing the circinatus and fluitans as two species instead of 
two varieties.
This course might be called giving judgment in 
favour of Ray, Sibthorp, Gray, and others, as against Linneus, 
Hudson, Smith, etc.
Few botanists of the present time will be 
disposed to reverse that judgment ; and the Author may well be 
forgiven for not so clearly recognizing the differences between the 
two first of the four species above quoted from Ray's book.
Indeed, the Author of the ' Manual ' seems to have less of that 
discriminative tact for recognizing tenable species, apart from 
casual variations, which is more a characteristic of Mr. Boswell- 
Syme's writings ; and it is so pretty much because this latter 
botanical writer studies the real plants themselves in nature, more 
than at second-hand as described in the books of Fries or Koch.
In the second edition of the ' Manual ' the pantothri.v, which 
had been placed under aquatilis in the former edition, is now lost 
sight of in the Author's growing tendency to believe in anything 
Friesian, sound or unsound.
After there describing B.
aquatilis 
a remark was added which merits some critical notice, because it 
involves a fallacy frequent and detrimental among botanists, and 
not unknown among zoologists ; although it is not usually made so 
THEIE NOIiEENCLATURE.
433 
naively obvious.
The words run : " Probably two or more 
species are confounded under this name, viz.
(B) heteropliyllus 
(Fries) ; floating leaves with dentate or cut lobes, flowers from the 
axils of the submersed or floating leaves ; or (B) peltatus (Fries) ; 
floating leaves subpeltate with a cordate or truncate base and 
crenate lobes, flowers from the axils of the floating leaves alone.
Often the floating leaves are wanting in the former ; never in 
fertile plants of the latter." It was not a very sublime efibrt of 
reason to find out, after restricting the name peltatus to the plants 
with flowers "from the axils of the floating leaves alone," then, 
that the floating leaves would never be wanting on the fertile 
(i.
e. on the flowering) plants of peltatus.
If only men with red 
hair should be baptised Rufus, assuredly red hair would "never be 
wanting" on any bearded Homo rufus; and such men would thus 
admirably be proved a species of themselves, distinct from all 
other men, by the constancy of the character !
The premisses so 
being laid down, the inverted conclusion is more undeniable than 
profound.
But how about Ranunculus peltatus when it flowers 
out of water, and has no floating leaves above its multipartite 
leaves ?
Ceasing to be peltatus, what does it become ?
In edition third of the 'Manual' R.
confusus was separated from 
aquatilis as a distinct species ; the rest of aquatilis being now 
distinguished into three varieties, — heteropliyllus, trichophyllus, 
suhpeltatus ; the middle one of these three presumably being the 
omnino tenuifolius of the ancient authors, the pantothrix of edition 
first, slipt out of edition second to make room for that fine 
touch of Friesian ratiocination indicated above.
The distinctions 
between the two other varieties, separated by its interposition 
between them, were perhaps better known to the writer than 
expressed to the reader.
In edition fourth a much larger change is ventured upon.
R. aquatilis at length disappears, having diverged into seven 
other species, including its former divergence confusus.
On the 
Darwinian theory there ought to have forthwith commenced 
among them an arduous struggle for e.xistence on the same extent 
of habitable country which had so recently held only the one 
3 K 
431 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
undiverged parent species.
But all of them have held their 
ground or water through editions five and six, without extinguishing 
each other.
In this last edition they are even placed in living 
competition with an eighth divergence under name of pseudo- 
fluitans, given to our ancient friend heterophyllus when better 
adapted to external circumstances by elongating its growth and 
shape in running water.
This being a state of aquatilis which had 
often been mistaken for true fluitans, the name is apt enough.
The Author of the ' Manual' assigned the sponsorial paternity of 
this eighth species to Mr. Newbould ; but he omits to tell us from 
which one of his own adopted species in former editions this 
eighth one had diverged by natural selection, or had been excised 
by botanical art 
The first volume of ' English Botany,' edition third, bears date 
one year after the fifth edition of the 'Manual.' Mr. Boswell- 
Syme keeps up the ancient name aquatilis to fit an aggregate or 
super-species, which is divided into four " sub-species," namely, 
peltatus, heterophyllus, Drouetii, and trichophyllus ; all of them 
being names and species of the 'Manual'; but the first of these 
four being re-composed of the peltatus and florihundus (with 
pseudo-fluitans), admitted into the 'Manual' as distinct species.
This may be regarded as a case of orthodox convergence, rapidly 
supervening upon heterodox divergence.
The other two species 
of the 'Manual' are represented by Baudotii as a type, with 
confusus for its subvariety.
The eight species of the ' Manual ' 
thus are represented in ' English Botany ' by five species or sub- 
species and three subordinate varieties.
So that, at any rate, 
these two good authorities for British plants agree in recognizing 
eight forms, more or less separable, of our familiar friend 
aquatilis ; while they difier widely in the varietal or specific rank 
which they assign to the plants.
Having smaU.
faith indeed in these eight alleged species, I 
should really have preferred to continue the opposite extreme of 
Mr. Bentham's ' Handbook,' where all are converged into one, if 
that extreme did not also involve the necessity for re-sinking the 
long recognized fluitans and vircinatus into varieties of aquatilis, 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
435 
and not distinguishing the circinatus even as a mere variety from 
the tenuifoKus of the ancient botanists, the pantothrix of their 
successors.
As to the distinctions of this latter in England into 
Drouetii and trichophyllus, perhaps that may he found a matter of 
more or less confervoid growths in the water.
Certainly such an 
intermixture often causes the finely divided leaves of tenuif alius 
and heterophyllus to cling together when drawn out of water ; thus 
producing that valuable specific distinction of " collapsing seg- 
ments." 
And now, looking back to the dates of our first acquaintance 
with the eight species recently made out of aquatilis, will the 
Reader be pleased to declare how it is possible to trace their 
geographic or topographic distribution apart from each other ?
The older segregates fluitans and circinatus having become known 
to botanists before the present century, and having usually been 
distinguished in books indifferently well, a goodly number of 
localities are now found on record for them ; although some 
confusion has occurred from time to time between those two and 
the plants now calleA pseudo-fluilans and trichophyllus or Drouetii.
It is with these three and their five other congeners that the 
impossibility begins ; for not only are the plants themselves ill- 
distinguished as species, but their names are contradictory and 
chaotic in their meanings, that is, in their applications to the 
plants.
In example, the botanists who have sought to follow the 
nomenclature of the 'Manual,' in its successive editions, must 
unavoidably have been using the same names with diverse 
meanings.
Under what name, for instance, was the B.
floribundus 
recorded in local lists before 1856 ?
How are we to know, when 
meeting with an earlier record for a "peltatus," whether the 
peltatus, or the floribundus, or the pseudo-fluitans of later editions 
is intended by that name ?
And so on with the other names ; 
each one in turn including more forms as we go back in dates, 
fewer forms as we go forward.
This uncertainty will meet us 
even while keeping to the one single book, the ' Manual ' only.
And if we look to the records of botanists who name their plants 
436 
III.
SEGEEGATES AND 
by other Floras, — say, by those of Hooker or Bentham, — how 
are we to understand their names as .
applicable to the eight 
segregates of the ' Manual ' ?
All becomes inconsistency and 
confusion !
But without going outside the one book, the ' Manual ' in its 
successive editions, the diversity of names, and especially the 
diversities in their meanings, is sadly perplexing.
Here are the 
dates and names ; the alleged species being numbered as a dis- 
tinction between them and their included or component varieties : 
1843.
1. aquatilis.
a. heterophyllus.
b. pantothrix.
1851.
1. aquatilis.
a. heterophyllus.
b. trichophyllus.
c. subpeltatus.
S. confusus.
] 856— 67.
1. trichophyllus.
2. Drouetii.
3. heterophyllus.
4. confusus.
5. Baudotii 
6. floribundus.
7. peltatus.
8. pseudo-fluitans, 
added in 1807.
1847.
1. aquatilis.
- heterophyllus.
- peltatus.
Thus, in tracing backwards, the eight species of 1867 were 
compressed into two species, one of them composed of three 
varieties, before 1856 ; — into one species, of two varieties, before 
1851; — into one species, of two other varieties, before 1847; 
that is, the two varieties of 1847 — 1850 not corresponding with 
the two preceding varieties of 1843 — 1846.
If it be wished to trace the distribution of any one of the seven 
or eight nominal species of 1856—1867, either by help of records 
made before 1856 or by records made since that date by botanists 
to whom the newly dissevered species are unfamiliar, — how is it 
to be done ?
The name aquatilis used before 1856, or since that 
date under the conditions mentioned, may mean any one of them, 
except perhaps confusus in the latter part of the time.
Again, 
the name heterophyllus used as the only alternative of pantothrix 
in 1843, must have had quite a different meaning from that of the 
same name used as the only alternative of peltatus in 1847.
So, 
the heterophijlliis of 1851, as the third alternative ayainst both 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
437 
tricliophyllus and subpeltatus, and these three all independently of 
coiifusus, must have had a much different and more restricted 
meaning in 18S1 — 6.
Further, the same name heterophyllits, in contradistinction 
against six others in 1856, or against seven others in 1867, must 
have meant and belonged to a fragment quite different from the 
half of aquatiUs in 1843, or a different half in 18 i7, or the third 
of a half in 1851 ; for it becomes only the quarter of a half 
(an eighth) of the old aquatiUs in 1867.
How are we ever again 
to know what is truly intended by this name heterophyllus so 
diversely employed, when finding it in a list of plants or con- 
nected with a locality ?
The ' Manual' has made it unmeaning in 
England, by giving to it a different meaning in each edition.
Truly, a Bentham to keep aUve old names, used with some real 
and constant meaning, is not an useless Conservative for British 
botany, even if he do pull rather to an extreme in some cases.
I could wish he had been conservative enough to retain in his 
' Handbook ' a prefixed arrangement of genera under the Linnean 
system.
But that system left out of question, I will here take 
the opportunity somewhat indirectly produced, to record my own 
conviction that Mr. Bentham 's ' Handbook of the British Flora' is 
(time, 1869) the most recommendable Flora I have ever seen for a 
beginner in botany.
It wanted only a little more fulness and 
clearness in noticing the severed segregates under their proper 
aggregates, to render it a thorough model guide for students of 
British botany.
Those of them who might afterwards wish to 
acquire a more exact knowledge of the segregate species or 
varieties, could then very rapidly have passed on to Floras 
written under that view.
For making records of localities, and for 
other such like uses, a good knowledge of the subdivisions in 
these latter works has now become indispensable ; otherwise the 
records, though not wholly useless, are left much less useful than 
they might be made.
2. Thalictrum minus, "Linn."Auct.
— This was treated as a 
single species on page 79 by reason of the impossibility of 
438 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
bringing its localities under the formula in any other way.
It 
must shortly be noticed in partition, as four or five segregate 
species of the 'Manual' and 'English Botany,' little as can yet be 
shewn about their areas or distribution when taken singly, apart 
from each other.
In books it has been treated as one species, — 
then divided into two species, — then re-united into a single 
species, — then re-divided into two other species, not the same 
as the former two, — then further divided into four species, these 
reduced to three, and again expanded into four species, in rapid 
succession.
At length, the old specific name minus (always 
retained for one or other of the fragments) has thus ceased to 
have any precise significance or fixed application, unless when 
used for the four-fold totality or old aggregate species ; the manner 
in which it is applied in Beutham's ' Handbook ' before quoted, 
and on page 79 of this volume.
In the ' Synopsis ' of Ray the plant in question was entered as 
two species, namely, Thalictrum minus and Thalictrum montanuvi 
minus foliis latioribus.
These two were still kept up in the third 
edition of Ray's work, by DOlenius ; but they were accompanied 
by a note, on the testimony of Richardson, stating that culture in 
the garden had proved the two identical.
This was virtually 
reducing the two into one species ; and accordingly we find them 
so treated in the ' Flora Anglioa ' by Hudson, who there plsices 
the montanum as a variety of the Linnean minus.
In the ' Flora Britannioa ' and in the ' English Flora,' as in 
various other works based on those Floras of Smith, a two-fold 
division of this aggregate was again made, namely, into minus and 
majits ; the species in this new dual division not corresponding 
with those in Ray's dual division, for Smith imitates Hudson in 
placing the montanum as a variety of minus, disconnecting his 
own majus from them.
While this division by Smith served 
passably well for distinction in most instances, it naturally led 
botanists to look to size as a chief difference between the species ; 
thus doubts would arise occasionally as to which of the two names 
was most applicable, whether an individual example was large 
enough to be majus, or small enough to remain miiais.
And 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
439 
the T\-hole plants of the former would seldom be accessible for 
examination in the study, because only fragments of such large 
plants could be conveniently preserved in the herbarium.
Eventu- 
ally, it was found necessary to discard Smith's name of majus ; 
because the species of Jacquin, to which that specific name more 
properly belonged, wns different from Smith's plant, and one not 
found in Britain.
Unfortunately, too, the same name majus had 
been used earher for our British species flavum ; the consequence 
being, that at later dates some of the localities for flavum were 
mis-assigned to Smith's majus in books, ex.
gr.
in the original 
' Botanist's Guide,' page 37.
The subsequent changes will best be shewn through the 
successive editions of the ' Manual of British Botany.' In the first 
and second editions the accustomed names of minus and majus were 
stOl retained, and the species were treated accordingly as two only.
In the third edition of that work (1831) a change began.
Two other 
names, those oi flexuosum and saxatile, to represent newer species 
carved off from the two older, were placed between minus and 
majus ; both the latter still retained there, and thus raising the 
alleged species from two to four.
The two new names were both 
applied to plants at Cheddar, in Somerset ; making it appear that 
two distinct species had been found in that locality; the latter 
name of the two being also applied to a plant from Brathay 
(by Windermere), in "Westmoreland.
In preceding books the 
Cheddar plants had been designated minus, as a single species.
The plant of Brathay had probably been named the same ; as, 
under the county of Westmoreland, in the ' Botanist's Guide,' we 
find Dawson Turner recording minus on the borders of Winder- 
mere, and majus located only on the " banks of Ullswater." The 
former is the plant erroneously published as flavum in Martineau's 
Guide to the Lakes.
In the fourth edition of the ' Manual ' comes a further change.
T. majus of Smith ceases to be a distinct species, and its name is 
made a synonym of flexuosum.
The number of species is thus 
reduced back from four into three.
In the same edition the 
T. Kochii of Fries is entered as a synonym of T.
sa.vatile ; the 
440 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
localities assigned to this latter now being " Damp places in the 
Lake district "; but the locality of Cheddar was not repeated for it.
Now, as Cheddar, in Somerset, is not a damp place in the Lake 
district, we had only the name of flexuosum left for the plants 
of Cheddar ; and yet Smith's inajus, pre-eminently a plant of 
the Lake district, was still made synonymous with flexuosum.
Altogether, these were sufficiently puzzling emendations of the 
arrangements in former editions.
In. the fifth edition of the same 'Manual' (1863) we find still 
other changes ; the same names being retained, but applied in a 
somewhat difierent manner.
The four names there used were 
minus, flexuosum, Kochii, and saxatile.
The two first of these 
four specific names apparently were applied nearly as before ; 
Kochii supplanted the name of saxatile (Bab. ed.
3, 4) for the 
species of " damp places in the Lake district " ; and another 
saxatile (of Schleicher) was brought in, and the name bestowed 
upon a species of " stony places " in England exclusively.
From 
which of the three species in edition fourth this new saxatile was 
spUt off, the Author of the ' Manual ' did not explain to its readers.
In 'English Botany' (1863) and in the sixth edition of the 
'Manual' (1867) the same four segregates last above named are 
adhered to.
In the latter work they stand as so many equivalent 
species.
But in the former work, the flexuosujn figures only with 
the equivocal dignity of a " sub-species " under minus, and it 
is given as made up from parts of minus (Sm.) with parts of 
majus (Sm.) clubbed together.
These various variations, whether 
approximating nearest to the sublime or to the ridiculous, may be 
epitomized historically in this fashion : —   
Ray, 1696.
Two species, minus and montanum.
Hudson, 1762.
One species, minus with var : vioyitanum.
Smith, 1800.
Two species, minus and majus.
Babington, 1851.
Four species, minus, flexuosum, saxatile, majus.
Ditto, 1856.
Ihraee&'peQ.ies, minus, flexuosum, saxatile no.
\. 
Ditto, 186"3.
Four species, minus, flexuosum, Kochii, saxa- 
tile no.
2. 
English Botany, 1863.
Four species, minus (including the two 
subspecies eu-minus and flexuosum), Kochii, 
saxatile no.
2 (this last not quite certainly a 
full species).
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
441 
The minus of the ' Manual' (or the eu-minus of ' English Botany ') 
is divisihle further into var : maritimum and var : montanum.
Including these two varietal subdivisions, the segregates now 
stand at five, and have remained so since 1862, but indications of 
other variations have already been given.
I confess myself unable 
to apportion half the specimens in my own herbarium satis- 
factorily among the five ; and hardly care to do so, in truth, under 
an expectation of other changes impending.
And now, puzzled Reader, can you instruct me how the 
localities recorded for minus or majus nominally, in the times of 
Ray, or Hudson, or Smith, or Babington up to 18S6 inclusive, 
are to be apportioned among the four species of 1862 — 70 ; among 
the eu-minus, flexuoswn, Kochii, saxatile no.
2, and the two 
varietal halves of eu-minus ?
Lists and localities, in or for which 
the old names of minus and 7najus have been used, have now 
become unavailable in attempting to trace out the distribution of 
any of the four or five segregates adopted for the present ; but 
how soon to be rejected in favour of some other mode of dividing 
and naming the aggregate minus, who can say ?
Even should 
the writer of a Local Flora, or the recorder of a locality, expressly 
foUow the ' Manual of British Botany ' (and, it is fuUy admitted, 
he could hardly do better at present), it would still be necessary 
for him to inform his own readers, which one of the six editions 
he supposed himself to be following, in his nomenclature and 
species of Thalictrum.
The next score years will prove insufficient 
time, in this instance, to rectify the mischief arisen, and still 
to arise, through an unwise introduction of new names and 
descriptions into books, before the plant-species themselves had 
been properly investigated and understood.
3. Viola canina, Auct.
— The canine violets have been divided 
and treated under several names on page 108, because the 
separate distribution of some of these modem segregates could be 
shewn with fair approximation to accuracy, although still not 
fuUy shewn even in Britain by itself.
Originally, they were 
treated as a single species by Ray and his predecessors ; perhaps 
3l 
442 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
not all of them known to him.
They still appeared as such so 
late as 1858, in the ' Handbook ' of Bentham, where the Linnean 
specific name canina is made apjilicable to the aggregate species, 
which has been treated segregately on pages 108 — 9 of this 
volume, under the names of sylvatica, canina, lactea, and stagnina.
Possibly with the exception of stagnina, Mr. Bentham 's use of the 
name is more truly the Linnean one, than is any restriction of it 
to forms exclusive of sylvatica.
In the ' Flora Britannica ' (quoting Eng. Bot.
t. 445) a severed 
species appears under name of lactea.
But it seems that Smith 
(perhaps misled by Edward Forster) then confused with his lactea 
the other plant afterwards described under name of flavicorins.
His words " Folia in hortis cordata evadunt, floresque caerulei " 
were Hkely suggested by a garden example of flavicornis confused 
with lactea.
In the ' Flora Scotica ' Hooker went farther astray ; 
for he there transferred the name lactea to the species flavicornis, 
as is shewn by the specimens from Mr. Maughan, which belong 
to the latter.
Has any botanist ever found true lactea in 
Scotland ?
In the ' English Flora ' the Viola canina minor of Dillenius 
(page 479) and his successors is again raised to the grade of 
a species under the name of flavicornis above mentioned.
But it 
can hardly be questioned that Smith himself never clearly under- 
stood any one of his three species of canine violets.
His canina 
certainly intended what is now called sylvatica ; but along with 
this he seems to have constantly confused the larger examples of 
flavicornis.
In situations the most favorable to its growth this 
latter rivals sylvatica in size ; and yet Smith particularly dis- 
tinguishes it as a "little plant," with leaves " scarcely half an inch 
long," and which remained of the like " humble stature " for 
above a dozen years in a garden.
Edward Forster went beyond 
this union by size ; clubbing together the little examples of 
sylvatica along with the little examples oi flavicornis, to make up 
his idea of the latter species.
Again, by Smith or others, the 
lactea has been confused viiih flavicornis on the one side, and with 
stagnina on the other side.
No wonder that we, the immediate 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
443 
successors of Smith and his cotemporaries, so long failed to make 
out his species clearly.
We may now look into the ' Manual of British Botany ' for a 
gradual clearing away of the confusion, hy hringing into use and 
prominence the real and sufficient distinctions between the several 
species.
In this instance, the imitation of foreign Floras proved to 
be nearly the right course.
Unfortunately, the clearance came so 
gradually and hesitatingly, as to put the successive editions of the 
'Manual' inconveniently inconsistent with each other.
In the 
first edition a retrogression was made, hy re-combining or re- 
confusing Smith's three species into one ; which was, however, 
correctly designated canlna (Linn.) In the second edition a better 
course was taken, by separating sylvatica on the one side, and 
lactea on the other side ; but still leaving the shorn canina some- 
thing of an ill-understood jumble between them ; and incon- 
sistently keeping up the same name restrictedly to a third of the 
whole, which in edition first had meant the whole of the whole.
It 
is this bad practice, as already shewn under Ranunculus aquatilis, 
which has repeatedly caused confusion, instead of elucidation, in 
Professor Babington's writings about English plants.
True, at the date of his second edition, he had not yet seen his 
vray clearly among these plants.
The sylvatica is far the most 
abundant of the three in England, and it had consequently 
become the representative of the Linnean canina in our herbaria, 
and was figured for it in ' English Botany.' But in that second 
edition it was indicated as questionably "common?" While the 
less plentiful flavicornis (the canina of that edition) was reported 
positively " common." These indications, taken in connexion with 
the imperfect descriptions, shew the Author of the 'Manual' not 
yet become quite familiar with the true species in their living 
reality, apart from hooks, so lately as 1847.
And at that date, 
it may be, no English botanists were more clear and advanced in 
their knowledge of these canine violets.
In the third edition of the same book there is further progress ; 
perhaps also an unwarranted retrogression.
Viola stagnina is 
there added ; having been previously confused with lactea.
It 
444 ni.
SEGREGATES AND 
would have made a fourth species, had not this numerical increase 
been prevented by placing the true lactea as a variety of the 
Babingtonian canina.
The three adopted species — sylvatica, 
canina (including lactea), and stagnina — are there at length fairly 
discriminated by physiological characters, derived from their 
different modes of growth or evolution.
Nature is at length 
understood.
Thus have these canine violets remained up to edition sixth, in 
which another of them is added by name of arenariaj whether a true 
species, or a dwarf hill and sand form of sylvatica, for the present 
may be held " an open question." The Author of the ' Manual ' 
keeps it away from its near-akin sylvatica, by placing his canina 
between them, and so getting arenaria between his subform lactea 
and stagnina.
Thus, the important character of " flowering 
branches axillary from a short flowerless central rosette of leaves," 
the very character which connects them, is virtually blinked.
In 
' English Botany,' more faithful to natural affinities, the plant is 
mentioned under sylvatica, as the " V.
arenaria D.C. which closely 
resembles Riviniana." 
The arrangement of these canine violets in ' English Botany,' 
though not materially different, is improved in clearness and 
expressiveness.
Three primary " species " are described there ; 
two of them subdivided into secondary or segregate "sub-species," 
thus : — 
I. Viola sylvatica, Fries.
1. Riviniana, Reich.
2. Reichenbaohiana, Bor.
(? arenaria, DC.) 
II.
Viola canina, Bab.
1. flavicornis, Sm.
3. lactea, Sm.
III.
Viola stagnina, not subdivided.
This arrangement shews well the similitudes or relationships 
between the plants ; in each instance, the distinctions between 
1 and 2 being of slighter kind or character, than are those 
between i, ir, iii.
Fuvbuana and llciclienhacliiana, however, seem 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
445 
more closely allied than are flavicornis and lactea.
For instance, 
it would seem to my expectations more likely that Reichenhachiana 
should evolve from a seed of Biviniana, than that lactea could 
evolve from a seed of flavicornis.
It may be said that ' English 
Botany ' virtually shews five species, which are treated as three 
only in the 'Manual.' But this is simply a question of degree; 
since all five are recognized in the ' Manual,' editions fifth and 
sixth, and are there distinguished either as species or as varieties.
In making Tleichenbachiana the type for sylvatica, instead of the 
more robust and abundant Biviniana, Professor Babington fol- 
lowed his too frequent course of steering as wide of nature as he 
well could get ; certainly not from an inability to understand 
nature, but in adhesion to some pet writer on the Continent.
To 
prefer foreign writers before those of our own country, looks 
learned and may be held optional ; but to prefer the artificial 
arrangements in foreign books, before the living nature we see 
around us at home, is surely something short of wisdom.
This historical sketch of Viola canina brings us again to the old 
difficulty.
How are we now to know, when seeing the name of 
canina in a list of plants or connected with a locality, what exactly 
is intended by the name ?
(1).
Is it the all-inclusive canina of 
Bentham's 'Handbook' and of the ante-Smithian botanists?
If 
so it may intend any one of the five species or sub-species of 
' English Botany.' (9).
Is it the canina of Smith, made up from 
sylvatica with the large examples of flavicornis added in ?
If so, 
it may intend any of the three sub-species, exclusive of lactea.
(3).
Is it the canina of the ' Manual,' latter editions only, or of 
' English Botany,' edition third ?
In this case, how are we to 
know whether it intends flavicornis or lactea, as the plant of the 
locality ?
The name of Viola canina has come to signify only 
' this,' ' that,' or ' the other species.' How curiously exact and 
clear are we making our botanical nomenclature !
4. Hypericum quadrangulum, Auct.
(say, of DC.
prodr.) — The 
segregates of this have been more confused by false-naming, than 
by changeability of division in England.
It affords an equally 
446 in.
SEGREGATES AND 
instructive example, althougli one of a different kind from the 
three preceding aggregates.
Its three segregates, treated apart on 
pages 129 — 30 of this vohime, are now generally recognized and 
well understood ; although an exclusive use of some descriptive 
works and editions might still much mislead a student.
Begin- 
ning this time with the ' Flora Anglica,' we find Hudson's curt 
Linnean character for his one species "floribus trigynis, caule 
quadrato herbaceo " applicable to any of its three segregates now 
recognized as so many good species.
In ' Flora Britannica ' the dubiuni appears as a distinct species, 
disconnected in print from quadrangulum by the interposition of 
perforatum between them.
Smith there shews that he sufficiently 
understood these plants, by his contrasted characters of " foliolis 
calycinis lanoeolatis " for the quadrangulum, and of " foliolis caly- 
cinis elliptiois " for the duhium.
Hooker's ' British Flora ' and 
other descriptive works kept up the same easily distinguished 
species ; and thus there seemed scarcely a chance left for any 
English botanist to throw them into confusion.
And yet, through 
the help of foreign importations, the chance has been found and 
acted upon twice over !
The Authors of the ' Flora of Shropshire ' and ' Primitise Florae 
Sarnicse,' with the good intention of correcting the imputed errors 
of everybody else, did contrive to confuse our otherwise clear 
nomenclature, by their efforts to rectify it.
They transferred the 
name quadrangulum to Hypericum duhium, discarding this latter 
specific name.
They compensated our familiar species, the true 
Hypericum quadrangulum, by giving to it the name of tetrapterum 
instead of its own.
This was an imitation of the Friesian model ; 
being about equivalent to a declaration, that a misnomer by Fries 
was more reliable than a correct name used by all English 
botanists, themselves only excepted.
The two species thus each became blessed with two specific 
names.
And as if to convert that simple inconvenience into 
a compound confusion, in each instance one of its two names now 
meant the other species also.
The nomenclature was rectified into 
this highly unsatisfactory position : — 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
447 
Species 1.
H. tetrapterum, alias quadranguluin.
Species 2.
H. quadrangulum, alias dubium.
Thenceforth, when recorders of localities used the familiar name 
of quadrangulum, the question would necessarily arise, ' Which of 
the two species they intended by that name ?
' The first or the 
second ?
This quadrangulum or That quadrangulum ?
By good chance, that unlucky blunder never got into the much- 
used 'Manual'; it blemished only some local Floras and other 
works of less botanical importance.
But one of the two plants 
under notice nevertheless seemed destined to keep up error and 
confusion among us, sown broadcast through the 'Manual' itself.
There appeared a sort of unwillingness to let it get back its true 
name of dubium fully and honestly.
In the first edition of the 
'Manual' that poor victim was split unequally into two supposed 
species respectively named maculatum, and dubium.
And with a 
curious taste for confusing innovation, the old name was specially 
restricted to a " rare" plant, a very local and lesser half, while the 
new name maculatum was freely bestowed upon the better half, 
the comparatively common plant, which all preceding botanists 
had known as dubium.
This perverse crotchet was carried into 
the second edition also.
More wisely, in the third edition, the 
legitimate name dubium was restored in full to the species ; that 
of maculatum being now in its turn restricted to a trifling variety 
of it.
The recent discovery of Hypericum bmticum in Cornwall and 
Devon, by Mr. Archer Briggs, has completed the trio of quadran- 
gular species, as treated in this volume at pages 129 — 30.
Professor Babington takes up the older name undulatum, instead 
of the more recent bmticum, for the plant of the peninsular 
province ; and perhaps he is technically correct in doing so.
Reichenbach's figure of undulatum may possibly have been 
intended for our species, although (if so) it is made an un-likeness 
of the plant through the exaggerated waving of the margins of the 
leaves and other defects.
Equally exaggerated in another way, 
is the better figure in the 'Journal of Botany,' where the artist 
has represented our plant with the large flowers of dubium or 
448 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
perforatum; whereas its own flowers are nearer to those of true 
quadrangulum (tetrapterum) in size, though still somewhat larger, 
and also deeper in their colour.
Under which of the two names, 
dubium or quadrangulum, had the haticum passed before its 
distinctness was observed by Mr. Archer Briggs ?
Some among 
the many botanists who had sought plants in Cornwall and South 
Devon must surely have noticed it there ?
Through some unexplained error it is enumerated in Seubert's 
' Flora Azorioa ' under the name of idcrforatum.
In Lowe's ' Flora 
of Madeira' it passes for the Linnean quadrangulum.
Equally 
with dubium it was made one of the varieties of quadrangulum 
in the ' Prodromus ' of De CandoUe ; that is, assuming it to be 
certainly the undulatum of Schousboe.
Not conceiving it to be a 
variety distinguished from the Linnean quadrangulum in the 
' Prodromus ' only by the three words " foliis margine undulatis," 
I described it in the ' London Journal of Botany ' under name of 
H. decipiens, a name suggested by the uncertainties about it.
Subsequently, it was found to have been named and described 
independently by Botanists in different countries ; and in con- 
sequence it had a different name in each country.
The purpose of this story is, to shew that the name quadrangu- 
lum may now unfortunately intend any one of the three species ; 
it having been specially applied to each of them singly, and also to 
all of them unitedly.
Hence a necessity now for using some other 
name for each one apart from the other two, or else for giving 
some sort of explanation, as to which of the three plants is really 
intended by the use of a name made inconveniently common to all 
of them.
5. Valeriana officinalis, Linn.- — This plant affords an illus- 
tration of more simple character than the preceding examples.
Originally treated as one species in Kay's ' Synopsis,' it was 
divided into two, or a second species added, by Dillenius.
The 
original was recorded under the appropriate names of " Valenana 
sylvestris major" and " sylvestris magna aquatica." The added 
or parted species was described as " Valeriana sylvestris major 
THEIE NOMENCLATUEE.
449 
montana " and "folio angustiore." Both are adopted in ' Flora 
Anglica' and in ' Flora Britannica,' as a single species under the 
Linneau name officinalis, the second being placed as a variety.
They are still the same in the ' English Flora'; but an important 
distinction is there made in indicating their situations of growth, 
namely, while the officinalis is located " in marshes, and about 
the banks of pools and rivers,'' the montane variety is assigned to 
"dry mountainous woods and pastures"; the word dry being au 
addition to the previous description of place in the ' Flora Britan- 
nica.' This addition shewed that Smith had ascertained the 
narrow-leaved variety to be the inhabitant of drier situations.
Between the dates of Smith's two Floras, Gray's ' Natural 
Ariaiigement ' had more decidedly distinguished the variety thus ; 
— " Stem slender ; leaves narrower ; root more aromatic." In 
Gray's book the name montana was adopted for the narrow-leaved 
variety, with a reference to Dillenius.
In the 'British Flora' by 
the late Sir William Hooker, the variety is lost sight of ; and thus 
we got back to the single species of Ray. This neglect of the 
variety prepared the way for a subsequent confusion in our 
nomenclature presently to be pointed out.
None of the above 
mentioned authors would appear to have observed the more 
numerous leaflets of the montane or narrow-leaved variety.
Perhaps that variety was little known to them ; for, if nut 
absolutely rare in Britain, it is certainly much rarer or more local 
than their type form, that of the marshes and such like wet 
places.
The Author of the 'Manual' foreshadowed an innovation in his 
first edition, and carried it into effect in his second.
He did so 
with a neglect of his English predecessors, in favour of anything 
foreign, which he had sdmost promised us on the first page of 
his first Preface.
And here again, as in the preceding instance of 
Hypericum, an iU-considered foreign importation has thrown our 
nomenclature into confusion.
In that second edition an alleged 
species is disjoined from Valeriana officinalis, under the name of 
" sambucifoUa (' Mikan')." It is distinguished by its less numerous 
leaflets ; which are stated at 7 — 10 pairs in officinalis, and at 
3 M 
450 III.
SEGBEGATES AND 
4 — 5 pairs in sambucifolia.
This difference prevails, but is far 
from constant ; it being no unusual thing to see plants of samhuci- 
folia with six pairs of leaflets, and others of officinalis with only 
five or six.
And as the less numerous leaflets are usually wider 
and more serrate, the two chief differences almost disappear in 
many instances ; for flowers, fruits, and stolons are the same 
in both.
The change in the 'Manual' was in truth only repeating in 
a topsy-turvy manner the distinctions made of old by Dillenius, 
Hudson, Withering, Smith, and Gray ; converting their second 
species or variety into the type, and their type into the variety ; 
disguising the real character of the change by help of the new 
foreign name sambucifolia.
Much inconvenience and confusion 
were sure to arise through an unnecessary exchange of names 
such as this.
The localities of the old type (re-named sambucifolia) 
are fifty times more numerous in Britain, and consequently that 
usual form represented V.
officinalis in most of our herbariums, 
and had been figured for it rightly in ' English Botany.' Thus, 
when botanists were told 'of a supposed second species, under 
the new name of sambucifolia, they compared specimens of this 
imagined novelty with specimens of the same thing under its old 
name officinalis.
Of course, they were only mystified by an 
attempt to enlighten them, which was so badly carried out.
The 
matter has remained in this confused condition in the ' Manual ' 
up to its latest or sixth edition ; very likely, it has so remained 
because the Author of the book has never yet clearly understood 
his own handiwork.
Even the same misleading notice as to 
situation of growth has been regularly repeated.
Notwithstanding 
the differences more correctly indicated in ' English Flora ' two 
score years ago, and even intimated by the mere names 
("aquatioa" and "montana") used in Ray's Synopsis, edition 
third, we have this information substituted in the 'Manual' : — 
V. ofiicinalis.
'' Ditches and damp chalky places." 
V. sambucifolia.
" Damp places." 
So that, as far as any difference of site is expressed by these 
words, students are told that it is the broad-leaved form, the one 
THEIE NOMENCLATURE.
451 
with few leaflets, which grows in the less watery places.
But 
sambucifoUa, the form with 4 — 6 pairs of hroad leaflets, is more 
especially the plant of ditches and watery places ; while the other 
form, that with usually more numerous and narrower leaflets, is 
the plant of the less humid places.
This difference is con- 
spicuously shewn near Godalming in Surrey, for instance, where 
the narrow-leaved form is plentiful among nut-hushes on a sand- 
stone hill infiltrated with chalk, known as Frith Hill ; while the 
broad-leaved sambucifoUa alone grows in a deep bog at its base, 
among alder bushes and various swamp plants.
This is a note- 
worthy difference, considering that seeds from the hill plants are 
likely to he blown into the adjacent bog year after year.
In each 
place the plants occur by hundreds ; and elsewhere in the same 
county I observe the like connexion between the varieties and 
their places.
When Mr. BosweU-Syme took the question in hand for 'English 
Botany,' edition third, a more accurate observation and a better 
botanical judgment were brought to bear upon it.
This botanist 
adheres to the single species, and gives it under its proper specific 
name officinalis.
He distinguishes the two segregates, as varieties 
differing but little from each other.
And he avoids the confusion, 
by giving to each of the segi-egates its own distinctive name ; 
adopting that of sambucifoUa for the abundant broad-leaved form, 
and fitting that of Mikanii to the rarer narrow-leaved form.
In 
consequence, those botanists who may have occasion to speak of 
these plants, or to record localities for either, can now do so in an 
intelligible manner, by using the names of ' English Botany.' 
They can record any form of the species by its old and true name 
officinaUs ; or they can shew exactly which variety of it is 
intended, by using Mikanii or sambucifoUa, as the case may 
require.
Truly, we much needed a BosweU-Syme, to adjust our 
botanical nomenclature to the requirements of science and the 
dictates of common sense !
6. "Aspidium spinulosum, Sw." is the name used in ' Ben- 
tliam's Handbook ' to include under its broad wings the three 
453 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
ferns treated separately on pages 411 — 2, under the specifio 
names of spinulosa, dilatata, and mmula.
The most dissimilar 
views still hold place among our botanical authorities in respect to 
the specific relationships of these ferns.
They had, however, been 
described as distinct species so frequently, with so many special 
localities recorded for each, that it was found pi-acticable to treat 
their distribution apart on preceding pages.
Such was the rule 
followed in all cases where it was found at all possible to act up to 
it.
But those botanists who have looked over the examples of 
name-confusion given on preceding pages, will hardly experience 
difficulty in believing that the rule must have proved an 
impossible one in some instances.
Ferns appear to have been understood very imperfectly by the 
ante-Linnean botanists ; and even through the books of the 
eighteenth century there runs a want of clear distinctions between 
them.
Perhaps some Fern-lovers will be ready to declare, that 
such want of clearness is still to be found in the writings of 
leading botanical authorities even past the middle of the nine- 
teenth century.
This want of clear perception about them may be 
attributed mainly to the examination of dried fronds in the 
herbarium, more than a careful observation of the whole living 
plants in the wilds, or even under less natural conditions in the 
gardens.
Several of the allied species are so closely similar 
during the first few years of their existence, that single fronds of 
them in the herbarium can scarcely be distinguished, unless by 
those botanists who have become specially familiar with the 
several species as they appear at their different ages.
In this 
respect they may be likened to shells, many species of which 
must be traced from young age to mature growth, through 
series of specimens, before they can be understood sufficiently.
The manner of growth or evolution, the kind of rootstook or 
rhizome, so seldom shewn by herbarium specimens of ferns, will 
occasionally serve well to decide a question about difference, 
which fronds alone in the herbarium would leave unsolved.
An instance of this sort of assistance will not be unuseful, 
and here scarcely out of place, because it throws light on the 
THEIR KOMENCLATUEE.
453 
distiuctious of the ferns which have heen bundled together under 
the same name of spinulosa.
Two of the species included under 
spinulosa by Mr. Bentham, Sir W.
Hooker, and other botanists of 
the highest authority (the spinosa and multiflora of Newman, the 
spinulosa and dilatata of this volume), are quite easily dis- 
tinguished by their root-like stems or rhizomes at all seasons of 
the year ; so that a thousand plants of them promiscuously 
mingled in the winter, with every frond cut away, could still be 
sorted into their two kinds ; perhaps without a single mistake, if 
no plants of less age than half a dozen years should be mingled 
among them.
And yet, strange to say, a veiy recent and able 
writer on the Ferns of Europe (Milde) prints such an erroneous 
statement on this head, as almost to force a doubt whether he had 
ever seen both of these ferns alive.
He writes " Rhizoma Aspidii 
spinulosi nulla modo ah A.
dilatato differi." Mr. Newman tells a 
different tale in the 'History of British Ferns;' although perhaps 
he rather over-states (or un-clearly states) the differences, instead 
of denying them altogether ; thus : — 
L. spinulosa.
" Caudex stout, slowly but extensively creeping." 
L. dilatata.
" Caudex large and tufted ; I have never found it 
either horizontally elongated or branched." 
The spreading caudex of L.
spinulosa had been correctly repre- 
sented in ' EngHsh Botany,' no.
1460 ; a plate strangely referred 
to by Hooker and Arnott, as a figure of L.
recurva.
A record in four words may be seen on page 411 of this 
volume, the detailed explanation of which will shew us a practical 
refutation of Milde's statement, and equally practical confirmation 
of Newman's description.
The four words are " West Inverness ; 
Mrs. Maskelyne !
" When raj manuscript for the page quoted 
from was sent to the printer, I was not aware of any sufficiently 
reliable record for true spinulosa farther northward than Perth- 
shire.
Before receiving the printer's proof of page 4111 had been 
shewn examples of that fern brought from Inverness-shire by the 
Lady named.
She knew it apart from dilatata by the loose or 
less-tufted crowns of leaves, consequent on the branched and 
horizontally spreading character of the rhizome.
Now, if the 
454 in.
SEGREGATES AND 
rhizomes of the two species differ in no wise " nulla moclo,'' how 
did the Lady named manage to distinguish one from the other by 
a difference in leaf-growth, depending entirely on the difference of 
undergi'ound stem or rhizome ?
It may be useful to explain here, however, that plants of 
spinulosa may be found often enough without rhizomes extending 
horizontally under-ground.
For example, such plants may be seen 
growing above the surface of the ground, about the branching 
stocks of alder bushes, in coppices periodically cut down, or on the 
mossy trunks of trees in swamps.
Horizontal extension is only 
slightly possible in such situations ; but the tendency to it is 
shewn by the crowns of spinulosa loosely dividing into small tufts 
of leaves, after few years of growth ; not remaining like the dense 
crowns of dilatata under similar conditions.
And there are still 
the other differences, in the form and colour of the scales, to assist 
diagnosis.
But this is digressive ; the object properly before us at 
present, is the change of segregate nomenclature, rather than the 
purely distinctive characters.
In 1858 Mr. Bentham stood not alone among us in England, 
by uniting into one all the three species now more usually 
accepted as distinct.
Sir William Hooker was still doing the 
same up to the sixth edition of the ' British Flora.' (Edition 
seventh has not come under my own examination.) But in edition 
eighth the late Dr. Arnott diverged rather remarkably from that 
aggregation.
Both the other great Botanists named had kept 
cristata quite apart from their inclusive spinulosa ; Hooker even 
interposing Filix mas and rigida between them in his Flora ; 
while Bentham, more true to nature, has avoided that unnatural 
separation, by bringing the two former into immediate sequence.
Dr. Arnott equally makes two aggregate species out of the four ; 
but he does this in a different manner, namely by uniting cristata 
and spinulosa ; thus leaving the Hookerian and Benthamian 
aggregate reduced to dilatata with cemula, under the name of 
Aspidium dilatatum.
This is a curious instance of discordant 
views ; for it is taking away a part of one species {Jide Hooker and 
Bentham) and patching it on to another and distinct species {Jide 
THEIR NOMENCLAT0EE.
455 
Hooker and Bentham still).
Nevertheless, this was sound dis- 
crimination (borrowed from other observers) on the side of Dr.
Amott, for the two couples so formed bring each one of the four 
segregates into union with its next of kin ; and we have only to 
split Arnott's couples (or perhaps only one of the two couples) to 
work down to things pretty clearly distinct from each other by 
physiological characters.
The dilatata and amula seem to be 
sufficiently distinct, by several permanent characters ; and if once 
clearly known, they cannot afterwards be confounded with each 
other.
But the uliginosa of Newman, a variety diverging from 
cristata towards spinulosa, or vice versa, keeps these two latter in 
closer relationship ; seeing that botanists are ill agreed to which 
of the two it ought to be assigned.
Sir William Hooker referred 
it to spinulosa.
I thought him correct in this, while judging only 
from dried fronds.
But after watching it in cultivation through 
some years, side by side with spinulosa, I now separate it from 
this latter and refer it to cristata.
The three are closely alike in 
form and general habit, though divergent in the cutting of their 
fronds ; and when they are full-grown and perfect, they look wide 
apart from the living dilatata.
I think that scarcely any botanist 
oould confound this last with the others in a wood or swamp, 
although he might readily do so through book descriptions, or 
even in the herbarium.
On young or weakly plants of dilatata 
and spinulosa the fronds are short and subtriangular.
On older 
and vigorous plants they are deltoid-lanceolate in dilatata, deltoid- 
linear in spinulosa ; that is, lanceolate and linear, always tending 
to deltoid by the length of the lower wings, in much the same 
manner as angulare may be distinguished from truly lanceolate 
lohatum, or Filixfoemina from rhaticum.
Now going back some time in the chronological nomenclature of 
these ferns, we find Hudson's Flora (1769, etc.) describing a 
Polypodium cristatum to represent them, with the addition of a 
Polypodium rhaticum from Westmoreland, possibly to stand for 
a variety of one of them, not of Cystopteris fragilis.
But we may 
hold it almost certain that Hudson had not seen either csmula or 
true cristata ; and if so, his Polypodium cristatum meant simply 
45G III.
SEGREGATES AND 
the two ferns we now know as dilatata and spinulosa.
It is not 
conceivable that London botanists had seen only one of those two 
plentiful ferns before the end of the eighteenth century ; but, like 
leading botanists of this time, they doubtless held them forms of a 
single species.
In the ' Flora Britannica,' 1804, we find a dual division into 
the spinulosa and dilatata as now understood, — the Polypodium 
rhmticum of Hudson alluded to as seemingly a variety of dilatata, 
— a declaration that the cristata of Liuneus is a species quite 
distinct from those, — with a compliment to Withering as the 
elucidator of spinulosa.
This was a good advance beyond Hudson ; 
but unfortunately succeeding botanists retrograded into confusion 
again.
In ' English Flora,' a quarter century later, the dual 
division of its Latin predecessor was made tripartite by addition of 
a supposed third species under name of dumetorum, a fern which 
has since led to considerable discussion.
On faith of the Banksian 
hei'bavium the rhmticum of Hudson is quoted as synonymous, and 
it may be so.
By some fern-men it has been thought that Smith's dumetorum 
was the more modern species amula.
(See Newman's ' History,' 
pages 60 and 61 of first edition, page 330 of second edition).
I assume this to have been a mistake, relying on the evidence of 
five fronds sent by Shephard to Smith, from a Derbyshire root 
cultivated in the Botanic Garden of Liverpool ; also, of one frond 
picked by Dr. Godfrey Howitt, in " Smith's original locality of 
Cromford Moor," as stated on its label in my herbarium.
These 
six fronds all belong to dwarf dilatata.
The garden specimens are 
conspicuously convex (not concave or recurve) on their upper 
surface, their outline is not triangular as in amula, and the scales 
on the stipes are dark and eutire.
They were found among 
miscellaneous plants bought at the sale of the Linneau Society's 
collections ; and putting little circumstances together, I inferred 
that they had been sent to Smith in the year 1825.
They are 
passably represented by Newman's figures of dumetorum on page 
60 of the first edition, especially the upper figure, which is given 
for nana on page 232 of the second edition, repeated on page 153 
THEIR NOMENCLATURE.
-157 
of the third edition.
I may add, however, in referring to Mr.
Newman's nana, that my experience with living roots sent to me 
as " dwarf dilatata " by Mr. Tatham, is exactly the opposite of the 
statements made on the pages referred to.
In my own garden, 
Mr. Tatham 's plants have gradually increased in size and resem- 
blance to ordinary dilatata, until they have become so similar 
thereto, that I should doubtless have passed by them as simply 
dilatata, if found wild.
It seems safe to assume that Smith never 
knew L.
amula.
As Gray had done in 1821, so Smith in 1828 
added true cristata to his enumeration of English ferns ; but his 
specimens of it had been received from Francis in 1806, after 
publication of the ' Flora Britannica.' 
Mr. Newman's beautiful ' History of British Ferns ' began a 
new era in our fern-literature.
True, the work of G.
W. Francis 
was the first to meet the rising taste for ferns, being three years 
earlier in the field ; but his figures were too small for clearness, 
and wanted the artistic elegance of those which adorn Newman's 
works.
The first edition of the ' History,' indeed, gave only faint 
prognostication of what it subsequently became.
In that edition, 
Mr. Newman started as a severe unionist ; and it was not until 
the second edition, 1844, that he changed sides (on better know- 
ledge ?) and became as decidedly a separatist.
In the fiirst edition 
we find cristata kept apart, but Smith's other three species 
[dilatata, dumetorum, spinulosa) clubbed together under the one 
name of dilatata, made applicable to all.
But four subordinate 
forms are clearly enough distinguished even in that first tentative 
edition, namely.
Smith's three species with the addition of Bree's 
recurva, subsequently known as Fcmisecii of Lowe, and then 
as amula.
In the second edition three several species are 
described under the names of multijiora, spinosa, and recurva ; 
the dumetorum, of Smith figuring as variety nana of the first.
These names meant the species now familiar to us as dilatata, 
spinulosa, and amula; names much more correct than those of 
Mr. Newman, according to botanical rules.
In his successive 
editions Mr. Newman fell more and more into the egotism of 
8 N 
4 58 III.
SEGREGATES AND 
uame-changing ; a procedure which has justifiably created some 
bias against his fern-books, otherwise so very recommendable.
The ' Manual of British Botany ' may be said to have imperfectly 
imitated ' Newman's History.' In its iirst edition, 1843, Bree's 
recurva is unnoticed by name ; dumetorum is mentioned as a sub- 
variety of " triangularis,'' which is assumed as the first or type 
variety of dilatata ; while spinulosa is made a second variety 
under name of "linearis.'' In the second edition, 1847, we find 
Newman's three species recognized, and the 'History' referred to; 
but the better established names of dilatata and spinulosa, with 
Fcenisecii, were kept to instead of those taken up by Mr. Newman.
Little change has been made subsequently.
It thus appears that Newman in 1840, Babington in 1843, 
Hooker in 1850 and later, and Bentham in 1858, were about on 
equality in their ideas concerning these three ferns, that is, they 
then alike clubbed all three into one inclusive aggregate.
But 
subsequent to those dates, Mess.
Newman and Babington have 
held that one aggregate to be more properly divisible into three 
true species with subordinate varieties ; while Dr. Arnott, in 
dividing into two, united with cristata the form (spinulosa) which 
he severed from dilatata.
The state of the nomenclature and 
division at different dates may be thus shewn : — 
Hudson, 1763.
Two species, cristata and rhaetica.
Smith, 1804.
Two species, spinulosa and dilatata.
Smith, 1828.
Three species, spinulosa, dilatata, dumetorum.
Babington, 1843.
One species, dilatata, with var : linearis.
Babington, 1847.
Three species, spinulosa, dilatata, Fcenisecii.
Hooker & Arnott, 1850.
One species, spinulosa.
Bentham, 1858.
One species, spinulosa.
Hooker & Arnott, 1860.
One and a half species, dilatata (in- 
cluding (Binula) for one species ; spinulosa (become a portion 
of cristata) for the half species.
Thus, through a long history, comes out again another illustration 
of the old difficulty.
Writers of local Floras or other botanical 
records may profess to follow one or other of these Authors in 
their nomenclature, or to abide by that of Mr. Newman.
This 
THEIE NOMENCLATURE.
459 
would be insufficient explanation, although some local writers 
might excusably be unaware how or why it would be insufficient.
If they wish to be intelligible, they must tell us further which 
edition they suppose themselves to be following.
In cases where 
we do not find this more explicit information, and unfortunately 
in some instances even when we have it given, we may remain 
quite at a loss to know what is really intended by a specific name 
used.
Take the name spinulosa in illustration of this uncertainty.
According to the ' British Flora' of 1850 it may mean itself as a 
segregate species, corresponding with the spinosa of Newman ; or 
it may mean dilatata, corresponding with the multiflora of 
Newman ; or it may mean amida, corresponding with the recurva 
of Newman.
According to the same work, edition of 1860, it 
cannot mean either dilatata or amida, but must exclusively mean 
a form of cr'mtata.
Or, take the name dilatata, almost equally 
confused and uncertain.
According to the first editions of the 
' History ' or the ' Manual,' it will include and may mean either 
dilatata or spinulosa, or even ainula more or less confused with 
dumetorum.
Thus, when meeting with localities on record for 
" spinulosa " or for " dilatata," without further and special 
explanation, how are we to know whether spinulosa, or dilatata, or 
mmula, or dumetorum is truly intended by either name ?
Each 
name may mean any one of the four ferns.
These instances given at some length from the genera Ranun- 
culus, Thalictniin, Viola, Hypericum, Valeriana, and Aspidium, 
are only samples of many such confusions in our descriptive 
Floras.
I could have wished to give other illustrations from the 
yet more confused and changeable nomenclature in the genera 
Rubus, Rosa, Hieracium, Mentha, Salix, and Potamogeton ; were 
it not that their unavoidable length and tediousness would too far 
exhaust my own pages and the Eeader's patience.
Those Readers 
who may have thus far got through the half dozen illustrations, 
and have begun to estimate the difficulties they bring in the way 
of a writer on geographic or topographic botany, will feel no 
surprise that he should be so hostile to needless innovations 
which add to the difficulties by further increasing the confusion.
460 III.
SEGREGATES ETC.
In general, however, the differences between our describing books 
turn more frequently on the greater or less number of segregate 
species which are taken up by them.
And where this only has 
been the case, without such injudicious transfers of name from one 
plant to another, or from one combination to a different com- 
bination, the recorded localities can be made available so long as 
-we are keeping to the larger aggregates.
But nothing is gained 
in this way, towards ascertaining the special distribution of the 
segregates.
For this latter purpose the requirements are different 
and more rigid.
The subordinate forms, whether held to be 
species or varieties, need to be clearly discriminated ; they must 
be mentioned by names which tell precisely what is meant, and 
nothing else ; and whenever possible it should be stated whether 
only the one special form is found in the locality, or other forms 
also.
So little hitherto has been done in this way for many of the 
segregate forms, that their treatment in the following pages can be 
only a meagre beginning.
How far to notice the more petty segregates, usually the more 
difficult to trace topographically, is a matter of some hesitation.
Where it is practicable to do so, I am inclined to notice even 
petty segregates.
But some limit must be set to this ; and in 
general mere differences of size, or colour, or pubescence, will not 
be deemed sufiioient to warrant separate treatment ; even though 
such differences are made into speoifio distinctions by some 
botanical describers.
In the old writers, of ante-Linuean times, 
the white-flowered varieties were not seldom taken up as species.
And at the present time we find rather a tendency to make 
varieties " minor," different only by size from the typical forms.
The absolute difference between " glabra '' and " hirsuta " may be 
allowed usually to constitute good varieties ; but that of a 
graduated pubescence, a little more or a little less, will be held 
insufficient distinction, 
IV.
ADDITIONAL LIST.
INCLUDING 
Segregates, Aliens, Casuals, Extincts, Errors and 
Ambiguities.
Preliminary Explanations.
This miscellaneous List is intended to include any plants 
reported to have been found seemingly wild in Britain, under 
conditions which have not been deemed sufficient to warrant 
their inclusion in the foregone ' Synopsis of Species,' — or, con- 
cerning the localities for which our knowledge is yet so imperfect 
that it was found practically impossible to bring them under the 
formula there adopted.
The heterogeneous assemblage is divisible 
into various groups or categories, as above indicated; although 
such divisions will be found to pass one into another by almost 
insensible gradations, widely different in meaning as the terms 
used to designate them may appear to be.
Just as gradually do 
they pass into the three categories of plants before treated in the 
Synopsis.
These still remaining for notice, in the following list, 
are separated from those previously treated in the Synopsis, by an 
uncertain line, chiefly determined by our lack of sufficient know- 
ledge about their localities, or by our individual differences of 
opinion respecting the degree or character of their wildness in this 
country.
Nevertheless, it seems desirable to classify them into 
groups, if only to obtain a series of terms to epitomize explanations 
in the List presently to follow, by the substitution of single terms 
instead of many words.
The sense or meaning of the several 
terms will be rendered more familiar by the subjoined brief 
account of them.
1. Segregates.
— The character of this group has been fully 
shewn in the half-dozen examples which were taken to explain 
462 IV.
EXPLANATIONS OF THE 
the relations between Aggregates and Segregates, or the division of 
the former into the latter.
The practicability of bringing these 
under the formula, which is mainly a question of time and 
familiarity, was unavoidably made the test for inclusion or ex- 
clusion, more than the recognizable distinctions between the 
plants themselves.
Thus, Habenaria bifolia and chlorantha, 
Epilobium tetragonum and obscuruni, Polygala vulgaris and 
depressa, Salix Smithiana and acuminata, Sparganiwn 7iatans 
and minimum, with other such couplets, were before treated 
together as unit-species ; so treated, not because there is now 
much difficulty in distinguishing the plants themselves, but 
because usually they have not been distinguished by recorders 
of localities.
The result of that non-distinction being, that 
localities recorded under the first name of the two, long in use 
for both, cannot be safely assigned to either without re-examina- 
tion.
If the plants now understood by those couplets of names, 
had been well distinguished in books half a century ago, and 
habitually kept apart by subsequent authors and collectors, a 
stock of data would have been gradually accumulated, enabling 
us of the present time to trace their separate distribution suffi- 
ciently well.
The great impediment to this satisfactory result 
has been raised by the very authors who did treat them apart; 
for, by adhering to the first of the two names for expressing the 
one half only, while in other works it expressed both halves or the 
whole, they stultified their own subdivision, and rendered the 
name meaningless through its uncertainty of application.
With very few exceptions, all the segregates may be held native 
plants ; and in this respect they differ from the plants placed in 
the other groups.
In the following pages they can be dis- 
tinguished readily from almost all the rest, the non-indigenous 
plants, by their names being given in triplets ; the name of the 
aggregate species being inserted between the generic name and 
the distinctive name of the segregate, as a brief and uniform 
manner of expressing the relation of one to the other.
It is at 
the Reader's own choice to receive that distinctive name as varietal 
or as specific, in accordance with his own views in each separate 
ADDITIONAL LIST.
403 
instance.
And he will always be reminded of the more inclusive 
aggregate to which others refer the segregate plant, through the 
middle name so interposed.
It should he mentioned, however, 
that the abbreviated authority given with the distinctive name has 
been often accepted here along with the name, without other more 
special verification ; and it may mean either a variety or a species 
in the views of the Author cited.
A general reference may be 
given here to the Third Edition of English Botany for explana- 
tions more special and complete.
A further circumstance should be noted.
In some cases it will 
be necessary to notice all the segregate forms which go to make 
up the total aggregate, as treated in the Synopsis.
Such will be 
the case when the distribution of the aggregate, as before set 
forth, will too uncertainly represent that of any one of the 
segregates by itself.
Thus, according to present knowledge, the 
formulary distribution of Thalictrum minus, as given for the 
aggregate on page 79, would not be correct for any one of its 
five segregates.
The same must be held true for the present, 
if not permanently so, in regard to the three segregates of 
Thalictrum flaviim ; the distribution of which, apart from each 
other, is yet almost entirely unascertained.
And in the couplets 
of species shortly above quoted, we may find instances where the 
indicated distribution of the aggregate would perhaps less well 
represent that of the segregate retaining the like name, as its 
typical form, than it would represent that of the segregate named 
as a second or aberrant one.
Certainty is not attained ; but it 
seems likely on present knowledge, that Polygala eu-vulgaris is 
less general than P.
depressa, and that Epilobium eu-tetragonum 
is less general than E.
obscurum.
If so, the formula filled in for 
the aggregate certainly over-states the distribution of the type 
form, while it may or may not over-state that of the segregate; 
a question to be answered only on further and more complete 
knowledge about their respective localities.
In other cases the segregate is so rare or local that its severance 
from the aggregate makes no difference in the stated distribution.
Thus, Caltha radicans being known only from one or two of the 
464 IV.
EXPLANATIONS OF THE 
Highland counties, which certainly produce Caltha palustris also, 
the stated distribution in the Synopsis equally answers for the 
C. palustris, whether the C.
radicans be included or be excluded.
The same holds true of Ranunculus reptans and Geranium lan- 
castriense; but here subject to some differences of opinion, as to 
whether these names should be applied strictly to very local 
plants, or more loosely to include other plants and localities also.
Sarothamnits prostratus and Genista humifusa are very local 
varieties ; and whether we unite them with the widely diffused 
Sarothamnus scoparius and Genista tinctoria, or separate them, 
the formulary distribution of these two latter remains unchanged.
9. Aliens.
— These follow close on the denizens of the Synopsis.
They may be said to differ from the latter only by being under 
greater distrust of their claims to be accounted aboriginal natives 
of Bi'itain.
Some few of them are so perfectly established amid 
the native vegetation, that no question might have arisen against 
their nativity here, had it not been known that their wildness in 
Britain is recent, and that they came into the Old World from 
America within the dates of modern history.
Such are Elodea 
canadensis, so recently and so rapidly spread through England in 
damaging abundance ; Impatiens fulva and Mimulus luteus, locally 
well established; Erigeron canadensis and Oxalis stricta, more 
casual and changeable in their places.
Others, of unknown origin, have become so well estabhshed in 
many places that botanists are beginning to believe that they 
must have existed in this country from pre-historic times, having 
originally got into it through natural agencies alone, quite inde- 
pendently of human agency.
If all or most of us had concurred in 
this view, of course the plants in question would have been treated 
as natives.
If opinions and evidences had seemed to be about on 
an even balance, the plants would have come under the category 
of denizens.
They are classed with the aliens because only a 
minority regard them in the higher predial character ; whUe the 
majority among those botanists best prepared to give a verdict, 
through general experience and trained judgment, hold a contrary 
ADDITIONAL LIST.
465 
opinion about them.
As examples, we may take Geranium 
phcBum, Spiraa scdicifoUa, Saxifraga umbrosa, Lonicera Kylos- 
teum, Valeriana rubra and Galanthus nivalis.
On the contrary, 
at the other extremity of a series, some of the aliens are so very 
local, or so uncertain in persistence at any given place, as to be 
scarcely separable from the next group.
3. Casuals.
— These together make a wide range of plants 
between the two extremes of the group.
Some few of them are 
met with almost as frequently as some of the colonists ; being 
now hardly separable from the latter, unless on the ground of 
only recent notice, that is, by the absence of records for them 
in the books of past generations.
Veronica Buxbaumii was 
unnoticed in the ' English Flora ' of Smith, under date in 185i4.
Now, it is seen so frequently on arable land, as to demand pro- 
motion to the quasi-indigenous rank of colonist.
Midway between 
1824 and 1869, it might have passed as a casual, occasionally 
introduced among clover or other agricultural seeds.
Perhaps 
others of the plants, which remain still to be curtly noticed here 
£is casuals only, may be gradually advancing now to the higher 
predial grade.
It can scarcely be doubted that Galinsoga parvi- 
jlora, Crepis setosa, Cynosurus echinatus, Bromus arvensis, with 
some other weeds of cultivated ground, are now met with more 
plentifully than was the case with them not many years back.
As far as it can be applied, the best test to separate the colonists 
from the casuals, is that of regular self-maintenance in this 
country by seed ripened here, vfithout the necessity of renewal 
through fresh importation.
From other aliens, the casuals are to 
be distinguished chiefly by less persistence in their localities ; 
a distinction often turning on their physiological character of 
annuals or perennials.
Passing to the other extreme of the series, we reach plants 
which have been so rarely seen, or have proved so transitory in 
any given place, that it is barely justifiable to enumerate them 
among things only casually quasi-british.
Through such plants, 
the present group gradually merges into that of extinct plants; 
3 o 
466 IV.
EXPLANATIONS OF THE 
some of these latter having been seen once or oftener, but being 
found here no longer.
Echinophora spinosa may be one example 
of an extinct casual.
Others appeared on or near the sites of the 
Exhibitions of 1851 and 1868, and lingered there a brief time; 
long enough, unfortunately, to encumber our book lists with 
names which it would have been more convenient, if not also more 
sensible, never to have admitted into them.
It is to be regretted 
that more reticence is not practised by our juvenile botanists, so 
hurriedly anxious to make book records of such valueless facts.
If all of us freely indulged in that practice, our list of casuals 
would soon be made longer than the list of all others put together.
Almost anything in cultivation for use or ornament, outside 
hothouses, could be made into an occasionally-wild plant, through 
an industrious examination of the rubbish-heaps of gardeners and 
farmers.
The refuse from oil and flour mills, dock sides where 
ship rubbish is thrown, and such like chances, might equally 
reward an equally useless industry.
One warm autumn, I met with a luxuriant plant of the Tomato, 
bearing ripe fruit, on a bit of waste space near the bridge over 
the Thames at Walton, But I did not make haste to recoi'd that 
grand discovery in a Journal of Botany, and to declare Lyco- 
persicum esculentum " perfectly established " by the Thames in 
Surrey.
I knew that the spot had been often used for throwing 
down waste refuse from a neighbouring house and garden ; and 
as might readily have been expected, no descendants of my Tomato 
were to be seen there the two autumns following.
In the same 
neighbourhood, I once saw the blue Nemophila quite abundant 
in a com field ; and repeatedly I have seen stray examples of the 
same favourite garden annual, in fields and on rubbish heaps.
But I am guiltless of making a formal record of it as a 
"naturalised plant," and arguing for "the propriety of including 
it in the British Floras " for ever thereafter.
It is to be hoped 
that the mention of the two plants here will not be pounced upon 
as an excuse for adding them to the list of Surrey plants, to be 
printed in any future Flora of the county.
Not that I can myself 
be held wholly innocent of book records for merely casual aliens ; 
ADDITIONAL LIST.
4 67 
but my sius in that line have not goue so far as to encumber our 
books with names and localities for evanescent plants seen as 
single stragglers, or more numerously for a single season only.
Here, it is wished to notice those only which have already been 
noticed elsewhere.
4. Extincts.
— This is a very small group, while limited to native 
plants which are known to have become extinct ; say, like Carex 
Davalliana, in Somerset.
When we take in also other plants 
reported for localities at former times, but at present not found in 
the places named, the group becomes enlarged ; and no absolute 
line of separation can then be traced between it and the temporary 
casuals, on the one side, or between it and the errors, on the other 
side.
If a plant, otherwise not known ^as British, have been 
reported in a place once only by a supposed eye-witness, and 
cannot be again found in the same place when sought by others, 
there would seem fair reason to suspect an error or misnomer by 
the " eye-witness." The alternative would be, to regard the 
plant as a temporary casual on the spot indicated ; while there 
would still also remain a bare possibility of a real extinction of a 
native plant, made no longer so.
In this way, the small group of 
extincts lapses into the two others, or stands with undefined 
limits between them.
Some truly English plants are gradually 
decreasing in the number of their localities, and in their own 
numbers in localities where they stiU linger.
The Scirpus 
parvulus, so small and easily overlooked, may not really have 
been made extinct.
Cypripedium Calceolus and Orchis hircina 
still exist, though in great risk of extirpation by gardeners and 
botanists.
Potentilla rupestris is reported to be now (1869) very 
rare in its only locality, on Craig Breiddin.
It is doubtful whether 
Eriophorum alpinum is extinct or not so.
Like the Hierochloe 
borealis it may really turn up somewhere else in Scotland, away 
from its one county of Forfarshire, where it was destroyed by 
drainage.
Professor Balfour's alleged habitat of Sutherland 
should belong to the category of errors, rather than to the present.
While some actual extinctions among plants are probable, both 
468 IV.
EXPLANATIONS OF THE 
retrospective and prospective, the larger number of species no 
longer findable in recorded localities, may have more truly 
belonged to the list of errors, next to be mentioned.
S. Errors.
— Unfortunately these are rather numerous.
At 
first thought, it might seem allowable and even more judicious to 
let them drop out of notice altogether.
An objection arises 
against this course, in the difficulty of deciding which are certainly 
errors, and which are only uncertainly so ; these latter of course 
linking the present category closely with the others.
If a plant 
cannot be found now in a locality formerly reported for it, there 
is a more or less uncertain choice between declaring it a case of 
extinction or a case of misnomer, as before intimated.
Even the 
preservation of specimens in herbaria is by no means always 
satisfactory evidence, to warrant a decision in favour of extinction 
as against error.
If it v^fere held so, we should be compelled to 
accept the American Potentilla tridentata as having been a 
' genuine britisher ' up to a modern date, though found only by 
George Don. And the same with several other plants, alleged 
by Don to have been found wild in Scotland, and his specimens 
of which still exist in herbaria.
In some cases, too, we seem to 
have better authority than Don, for the former finding of plants 
on the northern mountains, which have svibsequently been 
sought there unsuccessfully.
Examples of this occur in Veronica 
fruticulosa, alleged to have been found in Scotland by Robert 
Brown ; and in Hieracium villosum, alleged to have been picked 
there by Thomas Drummond.
Considering the wild character of 
their reported habitats, and that wide spaces among the Highland 
mountains remain still almost unexamined, we are scarcely yet 
entitled absolutely to dismiss these plants unnoticed in any full 
enumeration of plants British and possibly British.
That the list 
of Highland plants was not completed by our predecessors, has been 
made quite clear by the first finding or first recording of some 
of them in post-Donian times.
Pseudathyrium alpestre, Sagina 
nivalis, Astragalus alpinus, and other indisputably native plants 
are among such recent additions to tlie Scottish flora.
ADDITIONAL LIST.
469 
On the other side, if it be scarcely possible to trace a decided 
line of separation between errors and extinctions, or between errors 
and out-of-sight rarities, it is found equally impracticable to separate 
the errors from the casuals.
A local botanist, of little botanical 
authority or experience, may report a non-british species, say, in 
Somerset or Gloucester, in Argyle or Perth.
How are other 
botanists to know for certain whether he named his plant 
correctly or misnamed it?
The plant may have been misnamed, 
or it may have been a rightly named casual, introduced with 
ballast or merchandize and soon extinct there.
Add to such 
instances as these, the cases where the impositions of guides or 
dealers have caused temporarily planted species to be actually 
found, and their localities reported by indiscreet botanists ; and 
it will be admitted that too many errors (very probably such, at 
best) must be allowed to remain in our lists of quasi-British 
plants.
Still, it would be well to begin the practice of dropping 
them out of the regular lists in our General and Local Floras, by 
committing them to an Appendix list, altogether apart from the 
proper enumeration.
6. Ambiguities.
— This term is sufficiently ambiguous itself to 
cover many cases which may fall more appropriately under one or 
other of the preceding heads.
As here used it may be held to 
mean or include those doubtful plants which do not clearly fall 
into the other groups.
The ambiguity may attach either to the 
plant itself, or to the fact of its existence wild in Britain.
The 
latter case is illustrated by Hutchinsia alpina.
Some ground 
has been shewn for admitting this true species among the 
plants of Britain, but the evidence in support seems incomplete 
or insufficient.
The same may be held true of Malva horealis 
and Thesium humile, which cannot certainly be assigned to 
the category of errors, although not verified in the localities 
reported for them.
Alchemilla conjwncta is a more comphcated 
example.
Though very similar to A.
alpina, it has physiological 
or climatal peculiarities to assist in keeping it apart, so that 
as yet Professor Babington appears to have been quite warranted 
470 IV.
EXPLANATIONS 01' THE 
in uamiug and describing it with the techuical rank of 
species.
The ambiguity lies in the testimony to be accepted 
in evidence of its alleged localities within Britain.
Looliing 
to its habitats outside of Britain, there seems a geographical 
probability in favour of this country ; the species having 
been found in Faroe and probably also on the Alps and 
Pyrenees.
Four different localities have been reported for it 
within Britain.
In a collection of " British Plants " competing 
for a prize at a flower-show, there was a living example of this 
plant; but it was labelled "A.
alpina — ^Wales." Mr. J.
E. Bow- 
man was cited as the authority for conjuncta having been found 
in Gatesgarth Pass or Dale, Cumberland ; but he himself has 
expressly declared that the plant he brought thence was alpina, 
which remained unchanged in his garden ; and Mr. Borrer 
unsuccessfully sought the conjuncta in the locality named, finding 
alpina there only.
George Don distributed examples from the 
Forfarshire hills ostensibly ; but Don habitually sent garden 
examples of supposed wild plants ; so that his testimony alone 
goes for nothing.
Mr. A.
0. Black also reported the plant from 
Forfarshire, and shewed exaroples ; but Mr. Black was convicted 
of reporting a planted American shrub as if also a true native of 
that county ; so that, in relying on his testimony, we ought 
equally to include the Diervilla canadensis among truly British 
plants now and for ever.
" Dr. Tyacke " is also stated to have 
found the plant in Arran, an island frequently visited by botanists, 
less fortunate than this Dr. Tyacke.
If that habitat can be 
verified by some second collector, it will remove A.
conjuncta from 
the group of ambiguities into that of native segregates.
In other cases the ambiguity inheres in the plants themselves, 
not in their localities ; that is, the doubt being as to whether they 
ever existed as quasi-species anywhere, except in the printed words 
of their inventors.
Through these instances, the ambiguities 
pass by insensible gradations into the segregates.
Professor 
Babington described his Cerastium atrovirens and Cerastium 
pedunculatum, with usual parade of technical words ; grandiose 
verbiage having a wonderful effect in decking petty varieties with 
ADDITIONAL LIST.
471 
the cloak of species.
Fuitber cousideration of tbose supposed 
species led their inventor to abandon them altogether, even as 
varieties seemingly.
Instead of making haste to encumber our 
lists with false species, it would have been a wiser course first to 
ascertain their validity, and then to name and describe them only 
if warranted in doing so.
Now, by the course taken, other 
botanists are left in this ambiguous position : — Are we to treat 
those two specific names simply as synonyms with tetrandrum, or 
are we to deal with them as representing segregate plants of a 
grade below species ?
Surely there must have been, and so stiU 
must be, some differences to warrant a specific severance of them 
from the ordinary C.
tetrandrum ?
Again, the Ranunculus flori- 
bundus of the same botanist, the Hieracium nudicaule of Edmond- 
ston, Poa polynoda of Parnell, with various other names in 
printed books, may optionally represent either word-alone species 
or very ambiguous segregates.
The plants to come within the following List are thus seen 
to be so very miscellaneous in kind and in their claims to notice, 
that no precise plan for treating their distribution can be made 
successfully applicable to them ; while they are so numerous that 
strict bi'evity is indispensable.
As a rule, occasionally to be 
departed from, only three lines can be allowed to each plant; and 
the first of the three will be required for the name, which ought 
to stand alone for the sake of typographical clearness.
The second 
line will enumerate the provinces, as was done in the Synopsis ; 
and in cases where the provincial nos.
are very few, the full series 
of intermediate blanks will be omitted ; a little space being so 
gained for a brief remark, the citation of an authority, or name 
of a county, etc.
The character of the plant in Britain will be 
indicated in the third line, by one of the terms before explained ; 
in the case of 'Segregates' the Xo. of the 'Aggregate,' under 
which they fall in the Synopsis, is substituted instead of the 
categorical term.
Many of the Alien plants and others were 
commented upon at some length in the original Cybele Britannica ; 
and as they cannot be so treated within the much less space 
' ~ IV.
EXPLANATIONS OF THE 
allotted to them in the present Compendium, it seems desirable 
to substitute references to that more extended work.
Occasionally 
it may be found desirable to add some few lines of comment or 
explanation ; but any such addition will be the exception rather 
than the rule, or this Third Part would soon swell into a volume 
of itself.
Looking forward to the many plants which may be held 
to claim some notice, however brief, eight or ten of them must be 
brought on a page ; such closeness necessarily implying a very 
curt notice for each.
Eecords sufficiently in detail to show at least the county 
distribution of each plant, whether native or introduced, are still 
much to be desired.
This subject was alluded to on page 119 of 
the ' Supplement to the Cybele Britannica.' The wish then 
expressed is still felt, although the prospect of its aocomphshment 
becomes less with each year of delay ; whilst the need of such a 
topographical summary is yearly becoming more apparent.
In the 
absence of some such tabulated record, false statements are 
continually made by provincial collectors, to the effect that some 
given species had by them been discovered in some given county, 
and is there recorded for the first time ; although the fact may be, 
that the same plant had been previously and even repeatedly 
found and recorded for the same county by other botanists.
Of 
course, such false statements are simply exhibitions of half-learned 
self-sufficiency, not intentional deceptions ; but equally their 
obvious tendency is to mislead other persons.
Take an instance 
in point, printed so recently as this present year of 1869 : — 
In the Phytologist for 1844, page 650, a communication from 
Mr. Alfred Knight, then of Cii'encester, points out the distinctions 
between Fragaria vesca and F.
elatior better perhaps than they 
had been explained by any preceding English botanist.
His 
opportunity for comparing them together in the living state, was 
found in the county of Gloucester and is thus stated ; — " I found 
the two species growing together in Earl Bathurst's park in this 
neighbourhood." The Phytologist is a well-known repertorium of 
facts in local botany; and tlie original series of that journal was 
contributed to by many among the best English botanists at its 
1. RANUNCDLACE^.
473 
dates ; and thus it is always consulted by writers on local botany.
Mr. Prentice includes the same strawberry in his list of plants 
found in the neighbourhood of Cheltenham ; whether Mr. Buck- 
man has it also in his ' Botanical Guide,' cannot be ascertained 
here just now.
At any rate, F.
elatior was reported in Gloucester- 
shire long before this present year of 1869 and by botanists fairly 
trustworthy.
Nevertheless, in the Journal of Botany for July, 
1869, we find the Fragaria elatior included in a short list of 
"New Gloucestershire Plants, collected by Dr. St.
Brady in 1868." 
From that one county alone, and by that self-same botanist, a 
dozen or score of such easily contradicted asseverations about new- 
ness might be adduced.
Such misleading statements would 
become utterly inexcusable in printed journals and other hooks, if 
there existed some ready means for ascertaining whether any given 
species had been already put on record for the county under con- 
sideration.
But while no tabulated records specially for counties 
are available for consultation, there is some excuse for the 
ignorance of the mis-announcement, even in one who thus vir- 
tually announces himself thoroughly acquainted with the botanical 
records for his county.
Obviously a most thorough knowledge 
must be first acquired, in order to warrant a printed assertion 
by any one that 'I alone, I by myself I, have found this 
plant in this county.' 
For the present, the less precise provincial enumerations in 
this Compendium, with the help of the subordinate divisions in 
the Supplement to the Cybele Britannica, seldom for single 
counties, are the best tabulated summaries available in cases 
where county floras or other more local lists do not yet exist 
elsewhere.
And although many blanks may remain to be 
afterwards filled in, a continuance of the similar provincial nos.
through the following List will not be unuseful.
1. Ranuncui.ace,e.
Thalictrum (minus) maritimum, Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
Provinces 4 10 11 - - 14 IS - ?
And others also ?
Synopsis no.
3. The provinces are here indicated exclusively on 
the evidence of specimens in the herbarium of Mr. Boswell 
3p 
4.74 1, RANUNCDLACEiE.
Sjme.
Not seeing the way to any clear separation between the 
eu-minus of Syme (which includes the two sub-varieties mai-i- 
timum and montanum) and the flexuosum, I do not venture to 
fill in the provincial nos.
from my own herbarium ; still less from 
books.
Tlialictruin (minus) montanum, Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
Provinces 1---6-78-10---- ?
From Syme herb.
Synopsis, no.
3. Somerset to York, possibly to Fife, etc.
Thalictrum (m,inus) flexuosum, Bernh.
Provinces 1 - - 4 - - 7 - - 10 11 IS - 14 IS ?
Synopsis, no.
3. Cornwall to Kincardine ; Syme herb.
West 
York ; Baker North bot.
Durham ; Cheviotland ; New flo.
Thalictfwn [minus) Eochii, Fries.
Province 13.
Damp places in the Lake district ; Bab. man.
ed.
5, 6.
Synopsis, no.
3. See pages 439 — 441 of this volume.
Thalictrum, [minus) saxatile, Schleicher.
Provinces - - 3 4.
North Essex ; Gibson flo.
Cambridge ; Bab. flo.
Syn. no.
3. [Cheddar, Somerset.
Disserth, Flint] 
Thalictrum majus, Sm.
(not of Jacquin).
Provinces [1 8 3 4J 10 11 13 13 14 15.
York to Perth.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
73.
This may be regarded now as a spurious 
species, made up from the larger examples of any of the preceding 
segregates.
Professor Babington holds it synonymous with his 
flexuosum ; while Mr. Boswell Syme thinks this latter made up of 
majus partly and of minus partly.
See pages 488 — -441.
Thalictrum (flavum) spharocarpum, E.
B. 3.
Provinces -??45--8--??
Camb.
Heref.
Derby ; Eng. bot.
Syn. 4.
This and the two succeeding segregates are unnoticed in 
the 'Manual of British Botany'; and thus they are yet scarcely 
known among English botanists.
Most of my herbarium examples 
of T.
flavum are in flower, not in fruit.
According to the aohenes 
figured in ' English Botany,' plate 8, I have examples of this 
segregate from South Hants, Middlesex, Essex, Durham, and 
Westmoreland.
Thalictrum [flavum) riparium, "Jord." E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 10.
Surrey; Essex ; York; Eng. bot.
Syn, 4.
Middlesex; Trimen & Dyer flo.
Thalictrum [flavum) Morisoni, E.
B. 3.
Provinces .
. .
? 
Syn. 4.
" T.
flavum, E.
B. 367, is quoted by Reicheubach, under 
his figure of T.
Morisoni "; Eng. bot.
i. p.
9. 
Anemone apennina, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 - - - - 10 IS.
Devon to Banff.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
75.
Long established in Surrey.
1. EANUNCULACE^.
475 
Anemone ranimculoides, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 - - 8 - ] 0.
[1 Devon.
14 Berwick.] 
Alien.
Oyb. i.
7S.
iii.
373.
iv.
87.
Ranuncultis [aquatilis) peltatus, "Fries.'' E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 - 13 - 15.
Aberdeen ?
Syn. 11.
Including R.
fbribundiis in part?
Ranunculus (peltatus) floribimdus, " Bab.'' E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 15.
England ; Bab. man.
Syn. 11.
Northward to Braemar, Aberdeen (" Bab. herb.") Syme.
Ranunculus (peltatus ?) pseudo-fluitans, " Newb.'' E.
B. 3.
Provinces 12 8-5.
Probably in other provinces.
Syn. 11.
Pages 434—436 of this volume.
Ranunculus (aquatilis) heterophyllus, Auot.
Provinces all, or few, according to the use of the name.
Syn. 11.
See pages 439 — 437 of this volume.
Ranunculus [aquatilis) Baudotii, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 - - 14 - 16.
Syn. 11.
More or less including confusus, Godr.
Ranunculus (aquatilis) confusus, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 ?
6 - - 10 11 - 13 14.
Partly R.
Baudotii ?
Syn. 11.
England only; Bab. man.
1867.
Edinburgh; Eng.
hot.
1863.
It would seem that Professor Babington and Mr.
Boswell Syme assign the individual examples differently between 
Baudotii and confusus; and if these two leading British botanists 
are thus in contradiction about the precise name applicable to the 
Scottish specimens, it may fairly be supposed that a like un- 
certainty must attach to the records made by less experienced 
botanists.
There is even wider inconsistency between the two in 
regard to R.
florihundus.
In the first volume of English Botany, 
with the title-page date of 1863, we are told by the Editor that a 
specimen gathered by himself in Braemar, Aberdeenshire, " stands 
in Professor Babington's herbarium as R.
florihundus ; " yet in the 
two last editions of the Manual, 1863 and 1867, the Professor 
limits his florihundus to England exclusively.
The like contradic- 
tion between them is shewn under the next two segregates.
' Who 
must decide, when experts disagree ?
' 
Ranunculus (pantothrix) Drouetii, Schultz.
Provinces 13345---91011--14.
Edinburgh ; Syme.
Syn. 11.
England; Scotland; Eng. bot.
Englandonly; Bab.man.
'Ranunculus (pantothrix) trichophyllus, Chaix.
Prov.
1 3 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 13 - 14 15 16 - 18.
Clydesdale flo.
Syn. 11.
England; Scotland; Eng. bot.
Englandonly; Bab.man.
Ranunculus (trichophyllus) radians, "Eev.'' Jour.
Bot. no.
84.
Province 10.
" Silverdale, Yorkshire"; Mr. Hieru.
Syn. 11.
Said to be trichophyllus with floating leaves.
476 1.
RANUNCTJLACE^.
Ranunculus (fluitans) Bachii, " Wirtgen." E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - - - 5 14.
Glouc.
Staff.
Berwick.
Syn. H, page 83.
Simply as a variety even in Bab. man.
Ranunculus [Ficaria] incumbens, F.
Schultz.
Provinces 1-3-14.
Likely to be found in other provinces.
Syn. 14.
North Devon !
Surrey !
Near Edinburgh ; Eng. bot.
The differences between this and the commoner divergens are 
not more than are seen between individual examples of Caltha 
palustris or of some other plants with cordate leaves.
Ranunculus (Flammula) reptans, Linn.
Province 15.
And almost certainly elsewhere also.
Syn. 15.
Cyb. i.
84.
This may prove an instructive segregate 
either to the " splitters " or to the " lumpers " of species.
"Whether 
the reptans seen at Loeh Leven, Kinross, be included or excluded, 
still the extreme forms of Flammula are so dissimilar that perhaps 
no describing botanist would have Yentured to unite them as 
one single species, if only those extremes had been separately 
brought from some different and distant countries, without the 
intermediate links of connexion so plentifully found in this country.
Is the R.
reptans but a short grade farther in the series ?
— or, is it 
a ver-species apart ?
After years of hesitation, Mr. Boswell Syme 
has unintentionally induced me to answer the former alternative of 
the query in the affirmative.
In 1869 he kindly sends me a 
plentiful supply of specimens from Loch Leven, the locality from 
which my herbarium before included onl3' a solitary example.
While it might be difficult to find a clear distinction between some 
of Mr. Syme's Scottish specimens and the Scandinavian examples 
of U.
reptans, I deem it quite impossible to separate others of them 
from examples of the plant called Flammula pseudo-reptans, 
collected in other localities in Britain ; notably so, from a series of 
specimens collected at Coniston, in the Lake province, by Mr. A.
G. 
More, one of which is more filiform and replant, than are several 
of those from Loch Leven.
As to the leaves, I have examples 
from Surrey and other counties, with leaves inseparable from those 
of Loch Leven either by shape or by size.
On the whole, but 
with only few Scandinavian examples to guide a decision, I think 
the differences between the Scottish and Scandinavian specimens 
rather stronger than are the differences between the Scottish- and 
English specimens.
It is worth while to note a change between 
the earher and the more experienced views of Wahlenberg iu 
relation to E.
reptans.
In ' Flora Lapponica ' he declared it so 
unlike Flammula, that he deemed it nearer akin " afSniorem " to 
R. hyperboreus.
But fourteen years later, in ' Flora Suecica,' he 
compares it with Flammula only, and writes of it " Itaque quan- 
quam prsecedenti forsan nimium afBnis, tamen est forma valde 
memorabilis." 
1. EANUNCULACE^.
477 
Ranunculus gramineus, Linn.
Province 7.
Brought from North Wales, hy Pritchard ; With.
Error.
Cyb. i.
8ft.
The Eev. W.
W. New'bould informs me that 
there is a specimen of this plant in Withering's herbarium, 
received from Pritchard, but without locality stated.
Ranunculus alpestris, Linn.
Province 15.
Clova mountains ; G.
Don, in Smith herb.
Error.
Cyb. i.
83.
Now generally excluded from our flora.
Ranunculus (aciis) Steveni, E.
B. 3.
Ranunculus {acris) vulgatus, Ditto.
Ranunculus (acris) rectus, Ditto.
Provinces .
. .
? The two first of these segregates are stated to be 
" very common throughout the kingdom " ; the third " on Loch- 
nagar, Aberdeenshire, and probably in other places." I have not 
yet clearly understood them apart.
Synopsis 19.
Caltha ipalustris) minor, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 12 - 14 15 16.
In other provinces also.
Syn. 96.
Cyb. i.
93.
A series of intermediate, apparently 
connecting, forms between the typical C.
palustris and the widely 
aberrant C.
radicans ; some of which were certainly included under 
the latter name by Smith and his cotemporaries, as is shewn by 
the descriptions and the cited localities in ' English Flora.' The 
four provinces enumerated above are those in which J.
have 
gathered specimens, still kept in my herbarium ; and some of those 
specimens seem more nearly allied to the C.
radicans now under 
culture in gardens, than to the ordinary wild form of U.
palustris, 
as seen in Surrey and elsewhere.
" Guerangerii " is unknown 
to me.
Caltha (palustris) radicans, Forster.
Province 15.
In a ditch, Carse, Forfarshire, 1790; G.
Don.
Syn. 26.
Cyb. i.
92.
In English Botany the Editor restricts 
the name of radicans to the garden plants, representatives of the 
ditch plant found by Don, as above indicated.
The same name 
has been applied by others to examples of Caltha in various 
counties, even southwards to Dorset ; and in this manner the topo- 
graphical distribution is made into a question of nomenclature, or 
a difference between Caltha radicans (limited) and Caltha radicans 
(unlimited).
Eranthis hyemalis, Salisb.
Helleborus, L.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 - - 8 - 10 - - - 14.
Sussex to Edinburgh.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
93.
iii.
376.
Surrey!
Notts!
Derby!
York!
Delphinium Consolida, Linn.
Provinces .
. .
? No province certainly known for this.
Casual?
Error?
Eeported from several provinces by name; 
erroneously so in all or most of them.
The plant which is seen 
478 ]*.
BERBEllACE.E 3.
PAPAVERACE^.
occasionally in English corn-fields, and in places where garden 
refuse is cast, is the D.
Ajacis, no.
33 in the Synopsis.
Paonia corciUina, Retz.
Provinces 1-5-10.
Steep Holmes island, in Severn estuary.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
99.
iii.
378.
" Bath.
Bristol.
Yorkshire." 
1*.
BERBEHAOBJil.
Epimedium alpinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 10 - 12 - 14 15 16.
Leigh woods, Somerset ?
Alien.
Cyb. i.
393.
York.
Cumb.
Westm.
Fife.
Mor. Dumb.
3. Nymph^iace^.
Nuphar {luted) intermedia, '' Ledeb." 
Province 1 1.
Chartner's Lough, Northumberland.
Syn. 37.
Cyb. i.
103.
Formerly this was mistaken for ^Y.
pumila ; which gave occasion to the report that the latter changed 
into N.
l.utea in the garden.
N. " pumila," rightly or erroneously 
so named, has been recorded also for Dorset, Salop, Notts, and 
Chester ; counties from which I have not seen specimens.
Rev.
M. J.
Berkeley informed me that the plant of " Thoruey Abbey, 
Notts," is not distinct from N.
lutea.
Possibly that one and those 
from Salop and Chester may equally belong here.
The county of 
Dorset may be entirely erroneous.
3. PAPAVEEACE.E.
Papaver (Rhmas) strigosum, Boenn.
Provinces - 3 3 10.
Probably in other provinces.
Syn. 43.
Seldom noticed in the local Floras.
Papaver (dubium) Lamottei, Boreau.
Provinces all?
The ordinary P.
dubium of England.
Syn. 41.
"A common weed throughout Britain, more frequent in 
Scotland than P.
Rhoeas, and reaching even to the Oi-kney and 
Shetland Islands ; " Eng. bot.
ed.
3. 
Papaver {dubium) Lecoqii, Lamotte.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 S 6 15.
Fife ; Syme cat.
1869.
Syn. 41.
"Apparently much more local than P.
Lamottei, and 
preferring a calcareous soil ; " Eng. bot.
ed.
3. Barely distinguish- 
able from the other segregate ?
Mr. Boswell Syme thinks other- 
wise, and elevates them to the grade of "sub-species." Professor 
Babingtonalso treats them as two clear species.
Papaver somniferum, LAnn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
But some may belong to P.
setigerum.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
106.
Some explanations seem required here, to 
3*.
FUMARIACE^.
479 
account for discrepancies of nomenclature.
In English Botany, 
edition third, this poppy is divided into two sub-species named 
hortense and officinale.
Two forms of it are found in our gardens, 
and both are occasionally found sub-spontaneous; namely, one 
having the peduncles hispid, the other having them glabrous.
The 
former is the more frequent casual, and it has usually single 
flowers with narrower petals of a pale dull-purple colour.
The 
latter is the stock of the handsomer garden varieties ; its single 
flowers being often milk-white; it is represented in English 
Botany, original edition, no.
3143.
In the 'London Catalogue of 
British Plants,' editions 5 and 6, the specific name setigerum was 
used for the former, that of somniferum being kept for the latter.
In Enghsh Botany, third edition, the name hortense includes both 
these plants ; that of officinale being given to a third segregate, 
unknown to myself, hut as the representative of which " there is a 
specimen in the British Museum from Battersea meadows, 
collected by the late Mr. E.
Forster." P.
setigerum (Godron, not 
of De Candolle, _/ide Syme) is the colonist-casual of the corn-fields, 
I believe; and P.
somniferum (Lond.
cat.) more usually that of 
refuse heaps near gardens and river-sides.
Papaver setigerum, Godr.
Province - - 3.
And elsewhere ?
See the preceding.
Casual.
In Surrey, rarely.
" Abundant in corn-fields at Green- 
hithe, Darenth, Cobham, and several other places in Kent, where 
it seems as well established as the common red Poppies ; but this 
is the only county where I have seen it in the same places year 
after year ; " Eng. bot.
ed.
3. On faith of Kent specimens from 
Mr. Boswell Syme himself, that passage is assigned to the setigerum 
specially.
Too often I have myself neglected to collect herbarium 
specimens of casual plants, assumed to be sufficiently known 
at the time of seeing them ahve in situ.
Glaucium violaceum, Linn.
Roemeria hybrida, DC.
Provinces - 3 4.
Cambridge.
Norfolk.
Surrey.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
109.
Extinct in Norfolk.
Once seen in Surrey.
Glaucium phceniceum, Crantz.
G. corniculatum, Curt.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 10.
" Horned Poppy " of the gardens.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
109.
iii.
379.
Jour, of Bot. iv.
149.
3*.
Fdmaeiace^.
Corydalis lutea, DC.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 12 - - 15.
On walls, etc.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
110.
Well established in many places.
Corydalis solida, Sm.
Provinces - 3 3 - 5 - - 8 9 10 11 13.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
110.
iii.
379.
An escape from gardens.
480 4.
CRDCIFER.E.
Declytraformosa, DC.
Corydalis formosa, Pursh.
Provinces - 10 11.
Seamerdale, in 18S9.
Hulne Eocks, Alnwick.
Casual or Planted.
Botany of N.
Y. New Flora of N.
D. 
Fumaria (cajjreolata) pallidiflora, Jord.
Provinces 1 2 - - 5 6 7 - 9 10 11.
South Somerset; E.
B. 3.
Syn. 50.
Devon.
Somerset.
Wight.
Salop.
Glam.
Caern.
Fumaria [capreolata) Borai, Jord.
Provinces ?
3 3 - 5 6 - - 9 10 11 13 - 14 15 - - 18.
Syn. 50.
Probably common and generally distributed ; Eng. Bot.
i. 106.
"Extremely like F.
pallidiflora"; Ditto.
Fumaria {capreolata) confusa, Jord.
Provinces 1 3 - - - 6 7 - 9 10 - 13.
Cornwall to Westmoreland.
Syn. 50.
F. agraria, Bab. in Bot. Gaz., i.
61.
" F.
Bastardi." 
Fumaria {capreolata) muralis, Sender.
Provinces 13345-7-9 10 11.
Wight to Durham.
Syn. 50.
Apparently rather rare ; Eng. Bot.
i. 108.
" Very like 
F. confusa, but the flowers are rather smaller " ; Ditto.
Fumaria media, DC.
Provinces - 3 9-15.
Dorset.
Chester.
Forfar.
Ambiguity.
Perhaps this name may have intended F.
muralis 
with us, as it certainly did in lists for Madeira and Azores ; but it 
has been applied variously to forms of aggregate capreolata and 
also to luxuriant officinalis.
Fumaria spicata, Linn.
Province - (i.
Kelvedon, Essex ; E.
G. Varenne !
Casual.
Introduced with grass seed in 1853.
4. CBUOIFEE.E.
Bunias orientalis, Linn.
" Crambe orientalis," Coll.
Mor.
Provinces 3 - 15.
Surrey !
Middlesex ; Dyer !
Moray ; Gordon !
Casual.
Cyb. i.
115, from N.
B .G. E.
C. rep.
1866.
Isatis tinctoria, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - - 8 9 - 11 - - 14 15 16.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
117.
Many counties; perhaps best established 
near Guildford, in Surrey, where it has been seen several years in 
large quantities.
Thlaspi {alpestre) sylvestre, Jord.
Provinces - 11 15.
Durham.
Northumberland.
Forfar.
Syn. 63.
One of the three segregates in Cumberland also.
Thlaspi [alpestre) occitanum, Jord.
Provinces - 7 10 11.
Caernarvon.
York.
Durham.
Syn. 63.
Bab. in Bot. Gaz.
i. 4.
New Flora of N.
D. 
4. CEUOIPERiE.
481 
Thlaspi (alpestre) virens, Jord.
Province - 8.
Derby ; Mr. Joseph Whittaker !
Syn. 62.
Bab. in Bot. Gaz.
i. 4.
Eng. Bot.
i. a06.
HutcJiinda alpina.
Brown.
Province - 10.
Ingleborough, Yorkshire; but very uncertain.
Ambiguity.
See the Journal of Botany, i.
359.
Lepidium Draba, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 12.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
124.
iii.
381.
Joum.
Bot. iii.
349.
Lepidium hirtwn, Linn.
Province .
. .
? L.
Smithii vpas intended under this name.
Error.
"A plant in the Sloane herbarium, from the Welsh 
mountains, may be L.
hirtum, but has the pods broader and more 
oval"; Eng. bot.
i. 224.
Lepidium sativum, Linu.
Provinces 12 3 etc.
On rubbish heaps.
Not uncommon ; E.
B. 
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
317.
A waif from cultivation.
Cochlearia [officinalis] alpina, Bab. Man.
Provinces - [2] 7 ?
- 10 11 13 [13] 15 16 - 18.
Syn. 72.
Cyb. i 137.
C. groenlandica, With., etc.
Armoracia rusticana, FI.
Wett.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 - - - 18.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
129.
iii.
381.
Bot. Gaz.
iii.
141.
DeCand.
Geog.
654.
Draba (vema) brachycarpa, E.
B. 3.
D. prsecox, Reich.
Provinces 13 3 9 10 11 - - - 15.
18 Orkney ?
Syn. 79.
It seems quite easy to distinguish this from D.
eu-vei-na 
in a book.
The words, " pods once and a quarter to once and a 
half as long as broad " and " pods twice or more times as long as 
broad," read like a positive distinction.
But this leaves only a 
distinction of one-half in the width relatively to the length, and 
I find in Surrey that variations of relative length from less than 
twice to more than thrice are intermediately connected by gradual 
transitions.
I found, however, that some seeds of a short-podded 
form, brought from sterile gravel in Surrey, produced only the 
same short-podded form when sown in good garden mould.
A 
second descent was not tried by re-sowing with the seeds produced 
in the garden ; which would have been a better test.
Draba [verna) inflata.
Hook.
Province - 15.
Mid Perth.
Also North-east York?
Syn. 79.
Has come up true in a garden, freely and repeatedly, 
self-sown from seed originally brought from Breadalbane.
Camelina sativa, Crautz.
Provinces all, or nearly aU, but nowhere permanent.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
134.
Often appearing among crops of flax, and 
3q 
48.9 4.
CIlUGlFEEiE.
occasionally among clover and ryegrass.
In English Botany, 
edition third, it is distinguished into two sub-species, under names 
of eu-sativa and fcetida ; the latter stated to be the more frequent 
segregate.
Alyssum maritimum, Lam. Koniga maritima, Br.
Provinces 123456--9 15.
A waif from gardens.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
134.
Partially established on south-west coast.
Alyssum calycinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 S 3 4 - - - 8 9 10 11 - - 14 15.
Devon to Forfar.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
135.
iii.
383.
Nowhere persistent ?
Alyssum incanum, Linn.
Berteroa incana, DC.
Province - 3.
Dorset; Pulteney, 1766.
Sussex; Borrer.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
317.
Bab. man.
ed.
3. Eng. hot.
i. 234.
Lunaria biennis, Moench.
Province - 3.
" Gerarde," in Middlesex flora.
Casual.
Occasionally on refuse heaps in Surrey, etc.
VeUa annua, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3.
Wilts; Lawson, in Ray Syn. Oxford ; Gulliver cat.
Error in 2.
Casual in 3.
A specimen of this plant is in my 
possession, labelled "Eiohmond, Surrey, 1846, perfectly naturalised.
A. W.
Mac Ivor.
Ex herb.
E. Edwards"; J.
G. Baker, msc.
It 
is mentioned also among many other non-british plants in a hst 
appended to the Flora of Surrey, being foreigners which " have 
evidently originated from the siftings and sweepings of corn from 
the Distillery, situate at the Water-side, Wandsworth." Many of 
the same plants are further noticed in the Journal of Botany 
iv.
149 — ]50.
In Gulliver's Catalogue of Banbury Plants the 
Vella is said to be " not uncommon " there.
Some error of name is 
to be suspected in this case, as Mr. Beesley failed to find the plant 
there.
In English Botany, edition third, we are told on authority 
of the Rev. W.
W. Newbould, " that the plant which represents it 
in the Sloane Herbarium is Reseda lutea." 
Rapistrum orientale, DC.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; G.
Don, the sole authority.
Error?
Cyb. i.
136.
The "Myagrum orientale" of Don's list.
Neslia paniculata, Desv.
Provinces - 3 - 16.
Kent.
Surrey.
Forfar?
Casual.
Cyb. i.
136.
The "Myagrum paniculatum" of Don's 
Forfarshire list.
It has occurred " on the beach, Sandown, by 
Deal ; " but a flour-mill stands close by.
Also, has been found at 
Mitcham and Wandsworth, probably introduced with corn for a 
distillery, as recorded in the Journal of Botany, iv.
149.
These 
distillery plants are occasionally noticed in this Compendium, in 
connexion with any other localities recorded for them ; not so, if 
hitherto found there only.
4. CEUCIFER^.
483 
Cardamine [hirsuta) eu-hirsuta, Syme, E.
B. 3.
Provinces all ?
Cornwall to Shetland, by the records.
Syn. 86.
Cyb. i.
138.
iii.
317.
My herbarium specimens of this 
are from provinces 1 3 9 10 13 15.
See the next.
Cardamine [hirsuta) sylvatica.
Link.
Provinces all ?
Devon to Hebrides by the records.
Syn. 86.
Cyb. i.
139.
iii.
318.
Much confusion has occurred 
between the localities for the two segregates of C.
hirsuta ; and 
dissimilar as they may seem in their extreme forms, some of the 
examples are so intermediate that they can hardly be assigned 
with confidence to either one specially.
My herbarium specimens 
here positively assigned to the sylvatica are from provinces 12 3 5 
8 11 12 15 16.
Occasionally, this segregate has been mistaken 
for C.
impatiens.
Cardamine beUidifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1-5-7-10.
" Scotland; With.
Herb." 
Error.
Cyb. i.
140.
Misnomers of Arabis striata or hirsuta and 
Cochlearia alpina ; Eng. hot.
edit.
3. 
Arabis (ciliata) hispida, Bab. Man.
E. B.
3. 
Province - 6.
Lidstep, Pembroke; Bab. Man.
ed.
6. 
Syn. 92.
Dr. Boswell Syme adds, "And probably in other places 
in the West of England, but overlooked on account of its resem- 
blance to A.
sagittata"; Eng. hot.
i. 167.
George Don reported 
Arabis ciliata as found in Forfarshire; see Gardiner's Flora of 
that county.
In the ' Manual ' this is placed as a variety of the 
Irish Arabis ciliata, usually so named.
In ' Enghsh Botany' this 
latter is made a sub-species of Arabis hirsuta; the other sub- 
species being A.
sagittata, DC, which is the usual plant of Britain, 
luiown under our more familiar specific name of hirsuta.
Arabis Turrita, Linn.
Provinces - 3 4 5 - 15.
Kent.
Oxf. Camb.
Warw.
Kinross.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
143.
On old walls rarely.
(The Arabis alpina has 
been established many years, clinging in quantity on the outside 
of a high garden wall, in Walton-on-Thames.) 
Barbarea arcuata, Reich.
Provinces ?
2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 - - - 15.
All erroneous?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
145.
iii.
383.
" I believe the English ' Bar- 
barea arcuata' a mere variety of B.
vulgaris, whatever the foreign 
one, which differs a little, may be"; W.
Borrer, in letter of October, 
1850.
This opinion is so far borne out by comparing Mr. Borrer's 
garden plant with the wild examples sent to me labelled as 
arcuata from Worcester, Warwick, York, and Cheviotland; the 
wild examples being different, and apparently vulgaris.
484 4.
CEUCIFEE^.
Barharea stricta, Andrz.
Pro-vinces - 2 3 4 5 10 - - [13].
Mostly errors?
Casual?
Cyb. i.
145.
iii.
319.
Hereford!
York!
Native in 
Yorkshire, according to Mr. J.
G. Baker.
Barharea intermedia, Bor.
Provinces 1 - 3 - 9 10.
Surrey.
Chester.
Lancaster.
York.
Colonist or Casual.
In cultivation the pods become longer and 
spread away from the stem, much the same as they spread in 
arcuata and some states of vulgaris.
In the ' Botany of North 
Yorkshire ' Mr. Baker designates it a ' Colonist'; but he had seen 
it only "in one place and that quite recently." I brought a 
specimen from the neighbourhood of Manchester in 1845, and it 
has been frequently met with there since date.
Eeported also from 
South Devon and Surrey; but I have seen no specimen really 
of this from either county.
Barharea prmcox, Brown.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 18 13 14.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
146.
Said to have become well established in the 
Isle of Wight and about Bristol ; but more usually it appears to 
be only a casual waif from gardens.
Nasturtium, [officinale) siifolium, Reich.
Provinces - 14 15.
Apparently rare; Eng. bot.
i. 177.
Syn. 98.
A luxuriant variety; a near approach to which, though 
perhaps not quite identical, occurs about streamlets in Surrey ; the 
plants of these places having stems rising from a procumbent base, 
not strictly " erect." 
Nasturtium (sylvestre) anceps, " DC.
non Reich." 
Provinces - 5 11 - 14, etc.
Bab. man.
editions 1,2; not in 3 — 6.
Syn. 100.
Cyb. i.] 48.
Eng. bot.
i. 180.
Sisymbrium polyceratium,, Linn.
Provinces - 3 4.
About Bury, SuffoUt, introduced.
Essex ?
Alien.
Cyb. i.
153.
iii.
384.
Botanist's Guide, page 557.
Sisymbrium austriacum, Jacq.
Provinces - 3 - 11.
Hartlepool, Durham, in 1852; J.
G. Baker.
Casual.
Phytologist iv.
720.
Flora of Surrey, app.
314.
Sisymbrium pannonicuin, Jacq.
Provinces - 3 - 9.
Crosby sand-hills, Lancashire ; Fisher !
Casual.
E. C.
report, 1862.
Flora of Surrey, app.
314.
Erysimum virgatum, Roth.
Province 1.
A weed near Bath; Bab. man.
ed.
1. 
CasuaL Extinct?
Cyb. i.
153.
Phytologist i.
310.
Erysimum orientale, Br. Brassioa orientalis, L.
Provinces 123456----H 13 14.
Devon to Renfrew.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
154.
Rep. IVisley P.
S. 1865.
Berw.
proc.
1869.
5. RESEDACE^.
— 6.
CISTACE^.
485 
Cheiranthus Cheiri, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
On old walls, ruins, etc.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
155.
iii.
109.
Well established in some places.
Malcolmia maritima, Brown.
Provinces - 3 - 9.
Kent.
Chester.
Surrey flo.
app.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
157.
Waif from garden culture, etc.
Hesperis matronalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Nowhere really permanent?
Alien or Casual.
Cyb. i.
157.
A waif from gardens.
Brassica Napiis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - 18 ; by name, but no reliable record.
Casual?
Cyb. i.
160.
iii.
385.
No specimen seen by me.
Brassica Rapa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 ; always a waif from culture.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
160.
iii.
385.
Journal of Botany, vii.
846.
Erucastrum incanum, Koch.
Sinapis incana, L.
Provinces - 8 3.
Sussex, Surrey fio.
app.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
386.
Jour.
Bot. iv.
149.
E. B.
S. no.
2843.
Erucastrum Pollichii, Schimp.
et Spenn.
Province - 3.
Near Saffron Walden ; Joshua Clarke.
Casual.
Seemann's Journal of Botany, iii.
169 & 381.
Sinapis Cheiranthus, Koch.
Provinces 1 - 11.
[6.
South Wales, by misnomer ?] 
Casual.
Cyb. i.
166.
iii.
386.
Apart from S.monensis, in Syu. 122.
Enarthrocarpus lyratus, DC.
Provinces - 3 - 9.
Surrey; Boswell Syme.
Lancaster; Windsor.
Casual.
E. C.
report, 1861.
Surrey flo.
app.
314.
5. Resedace^.
Reseda fruticulosa, Linn.
Also R.
alba, L.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 12 - 14.
From gardens.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
170.
iii.
387.
One or other, as above.
Reseda Phyteuma, Linn.
Province - 10.
Ballast-hills, Middlesborough, York.
Casual.
Baker pit.
crit.
no.
2. 
6. CISTACE.E.
Heliaiithemum (yulgare) Surrejanum, Eng. bot.
1321.
Province - 3.
Surrey ; extinct, unless in gardens ?
Syn. 128.
Cyb. i.
170.
H. tomentosum is another slight variety.
A third is distinguished by its large flowers.
486 7.
VIOLACE^.
Helianthemum (canum) vineale, " Pers." E.
B. 3.
Province - 10.
On Cronkley Fell, Teesdale, N.
W. York.
Syn. 130.
Barely a variety, when series of specimens from 
Cronkley Fell and other localities are examined together; the 
distinctions becoming very slight, if any left at all.
Helianthemum guttatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 - 7.
Somerset.
Gloucester.
Caernarvon.
Error.
Cyb. i.
173.
iii.
388.
See H.
Breweri, in Syn. 131.
Helianthemum ledifoliiim, WiUd. C.
salicifolius, Huds.
Province L Brean Down, Somerset ; Hudson flo.
ang.
Error.
Cyb. i.
172.
[Correction : — At the foot of page 48, in the 
Phytologist for 1848, the name of H.
ledifolium was inadvertently 
substituted for that of H.
polifolium ; thus making it appear, but 
incorrectly, that specimens of this present species had been 
received for distribution by the Botanical Society of London.] 
7. VlOLACE^E.
Viola hiflora ?
? 
Province - 10.
Ambiguity.
" A Viola (probably a variety of 
palustris) with roundish kidney-shaped leaves and yellow flowers, 
was found on the wolds near North Dalton, in the spring of 1834, 
by Mr. Fenton of Londesbro' ; " Baines Flora of Yorkshire, p.
] 4.
Viola epipsila, Ledeb.
Province - 18.
North Uist, Scotland ; Bab. man.
ed.
9. 
Ambiguity.
Omitted from later editions of the ' Manual.' 
Viola [odorata) purpurea, lilacina, alba, L.C. 6.
Provinces.
Same as for the species ?
Syn. 133.
I am not prepared to shew the provincial distribution 
of these apart ; not having kept them so in my own notes, whether 
original or copied.
The lilac variety is less frequent, and passes 
gradually to the white, as far as colour is concerned.
Viola (odorata) imberbis, Leighton.
Province - 5.
Leighton, in Flora of Shropshire, p.
116.
Syn. 133.
Cyb. i.
174—176.
A sub-variety of alba?
Viola (hirta) calcarea, Bab. man.
Provinces - 2 - 4.
Portland and Gogmagog hills ; Bab. man.
6. 
Syn. 134.
A dwarf state, becoming larger in its progeny.
Viola (hirta) perrnixta, Jord.
V. sepincola ?
Provinces 1-3-10.
Devon ; Briggs !
Surrey !
York ; Baker !
Syn. 134.
Forms inconveniently intermediate between hirta and 
odorata.
Mr. Baker distributed the specimens from Beckdale, 
Yorkshire, labelled interrogatively as V.
sepincola of Jordan.
Those 
collected by Mr. Archer Briggs in South Devon, coixesponding 
with others found by myself near Eashing in Surrey, have been 
7. VIOLACE^.
487 
labelled permixta.
By their scentless flowers, pubescence, position 
of stipules, and more divergent lobes of the leaf, they approximate 
to hirta ; by their elongate runners, some of them a foot long, they 
approximate to odorata, although the runners root less freely, less 
strawberry-like.
Mr. Baker's specimens from Beckdale appear to 
me to be divisible between hirta and odorata, not strictly connective 
of the two.
Viola (sylvatica) Riviniana, Reich.
Provinces all ?
The usual representative of V.
canina, Sm.
Syn. 135.
See pages 441 — 5, for explanations about this plant.
Viola [sylvatica) Reiehenbachiana, Bor.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 10 11.
Cornwall to Durham.
Syn. 185.
Two sub-forms of this occur in Surrey.
Viola arenaiia, DC.
Provinces - 11 13.
Durham.
Westmoreland.
Page 444.
Ambiguity.
Eng. Bot.
ii.
31, also 335.
Jour.
Bot. i.
335.
Viola stricta, Homem.
Province -4.
Cambridge; Mr. Pol whole.
Ireland; Prof.
Babington.
Error.
Phytologist iv.
434, 615, 649.
Bab. Man.
ed.
4. 
Viola Upida, Jord.
" V.
eu-tricolor " ; fide Syme.
Province - 15.
Glen Shee, Perthshire ; J.
G. Baker.
Ambiguity.
E. C.
report, 1863.
Eng. Bot.
ii.
27.
Viola (Curtisii) Forsteri, L.
C. ed.
6. 
Provinces 1 - 7.
North Devon !
Anglesea.
Yellow-flowered.
Syn. 136.
Cyb. i.
183.
Cornwall?
Caermarthen?
Cumbrae?
By favour of Mrs. RusseU, there are specimens in my herbarium, 
collected by that Lady at the Land's End, Cornwall, which I 
cannot separate from luxuriant garden examples raised from seeds 
of the diminutive Curtisii brought from In stow sands.
North 
Devon.
And those specimens may be said to pass into the 
mountain V.
lutea, through a Tenby example labelled " lutea " by 
Professor Babington.
Curtisii and lutea thus apparently meet by 
transition forms, although their opposite states seem so dissimilar 
by the habit of the plants and the size of their flowers.
Viola (Curtisii) Mackaii, L.
C. ed.
6. 
Province - 9.
Flowers party-coloured, purple and yellow.
Syn. 136.
Cyb. i.
183.
M. Jordan identifies with Viola sahulosa, 
Boreau, the pansy of the New Brighton Sand-hills, which seems 
the same with that of Portmarnock Sand-hills, Dublin, called 
' Curtisii ' by Mackay ; Exchange Club report, 1858.
Viola {Curtisii) Symei, Baker.
Provinces ?----?
Cornwall ?
Glamorgan ?
Syn. 136.
This is a variety of V.
Curtisii found in Ireland.
See 
Eng. bot.
ii.
37.
Is the so-called V.
luUa at the Land's End in 
488 8.
DROSEEACE^.
— 10.
FRANKENIACEa:.
Cornwall, and Crumlyn Burrows in Glamorgan, the same with 
variety Symei ?
Viola [luted) hamulata, Baker.
Province - 10.
Near Eichmond, Yorkshire ; Baker.
Syn. 136.
Botany of N.
Yorkshire, 207.
E. C.
rep.
1865.
8. DHOSERACE.B.
Drosera {anglica) ohovata, Mert.
Provinces - 18 17.
Aberdeen.
Sutherland.
Syn. 140.
To my eyes this seems a very slight variety of anglica.
Dr. Boswell Syme holds it a hyhrid between anglica and rotundi- 
folia ; which may be true of foreign specimens.
The " only 
British specimen of it " seen by Dr. Syme is in flower, not advanced 
in fruit.
See Eng. hot.
ii.
33.
9. P0LTGALACE.E.
Polygala [vulgaris) eii-vulgaris, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - - - 7 14 IS.
And doubtless elsewhere.
Syn. 141.
Less common than P.
depressa, which frequently 
represents the aggregate P.
vulgaris in the herbarium, and bears 
that specific name in books.
Polygala [vulgaris) ciliata, Lebel.
Provinces - - 3 4.
Surrey.
Cambridge.
And probably elsewhere.
Syn. 141.
Apparently a spurious species, made up by specimens 
of any segregate which has the enlarged sepals ciliated, a character 
observed in eu-vulgaris and oxyptera, and perhaps also in depressa.
E. C.
reports, 1866 and 1867.
Polygala [vulgaris) oxyptera, Reich.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 - - 9 10 11 13.
Cornwall to Man.
Syn. 141.
Cyb. i.
186.
Eng. hot.
ii.
36.
Polygala [vulgaris) depressa, Wenderoth.
Provinces - 2 3 4 9 10 11 - - 14 15 - - 18.
General ?
Syn. 141.
The most frequent of the segregates, and probably to 
be found in every province.
See the remark under eu-vulgaris.
10.
FaANKENIAOBJi.
Frankenia pulverulenta, Linn.
Province - 3.
Sussex ; Brewer, in DiU.
R. Syn.
& Hudson.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
187.
Brit.
herb.
Linn.
Soc. Jide D.
Oliver.
12.
CARYOPHYLLACEiE.
489 
19.
Caeyophyllace^.
Dianthus barhatus, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 10 - 13 14.
Essex.
York.
Renfrew.
Edinburgh.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
191.
A waif from garden culture.
Dianthus plumarius, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 15.
On walls, etc.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
191.
Several counties have been reported for this 
under the erroneous name of Caryophyllus.
Dianthus Caryophyllus, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Walls in Kent; originally planted there?
Alien.
Cyb. i.
191.
See above under D.
plumarius.
Dianthus (deltoides) glaucus, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 10 - 14.
Surrey.
York.
Edinburgh.
Syn. 150.
Cyb. i.
193.
[Cumberland ; Hutton.] 
Saponaria (officinalis) hybrida, MiU.
Provinces - 4 - 9.
Northampton.
Lancashire.
Syn. 151.
" A curious variety, or rather monstrosity " ; E.
B. ii.
53.
Saponaria Vaccaria, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 - - - - 10 - - - - 16.
Kent to Moray.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
194.
iii.
391.
Among flax crops, corn sittings, etc.
Cucuhulus bacciferus, Linn.
Province - 3.
Middlesex.
[7 Anglesea, by a misnomer.] 
Ahen.
Cyb. i.
194.
Isle of Dogs, 1837— 1853.
Extinct?
Silene Armeria, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 9 10.
Surrey.
Herts.
Chester.
York.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
201.
A waif from gardens, etc.
Silene quinquevulnera, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 - - - 10.
Anywhere native ?
Casual.
Cyb. i.
198.
Perhaps this name has been applied alike 
to casual waifs from garden culture and to native varieties of 
S. anglica with more coloured and larger flowers.
In province 6 it 
was an imported casual, found " on ballast near the Custom House, 
Llanelly"; fide Motley msc.
And it is enumerated among the 
foreign plants found near the Distillery at Wandsworth.
Silene [nutans') paradoxa, Sm.
Province - 3.
On Dover cliffs, Kent.
Syn. 156.
Cyb. i.
199.
A form of nutans which has been 
variously reported under the three names of italica, patens, and 
paradoxa.
Dr. Boswell Syme rightly declares that it " is not 
distinguishable even as a variety"; that is to say, as imperfectly 
distinguishable as many other plants which pass for varieties.
3 R 
490 
12.
CABYOPHYLLACE^.
Silene italica, Pers.
S. patens, E.
B. supp.
i-rovinoes - - 3 4.
Kent.
Cambridge.
(Edinburgh, sown?) 
Alien?
Cyb. i.
200.
"It occurs along the side of tlie road 
^®™'®?'" Dartford and Darenth, apparently perfectly wild" ; Eng.
Silene annulata, Thore.
Province 4.
Near Bungay.
Mr. D.
Stock.
Casual.
Introduced among the ' Excluded' plants of the London 
Catalogue, on faith of Mr. Stock's report that it was found " In 
some plenty in a meadow half a mile from Bungay, about the year, 
1845." I have not seen any example of it.
Silene alpestris, Jacq.
Province - 15.
Forfar; " G.
Don, in Borrer Herb." 
Error?
Cyb. i.
203.
Specimens from Don are now distrusted.
Bufonia tenuifolia, Sm. B.
annua, DC.
Provinces - 3 - 8.
Middlesex.
Lincoln.
Error.
Cyb. i.
233.
Middlesex flo.
52.
Bot. Guide 387.
Sagina (maritima) alpina, E.
B. 3.
Province - 16.
Summit of Ben Nevis.; G.
Don.
Syn. 167.
Apparently not found by any living botanist; and the 
summit of Ben Nevis is almost destitute of phasuogamous plants.
Sagina [maritima) genuina & debilis ; E.
B. 3.
Provinces .
. .
? As on page 117?
" Rather common." 
Syn. 167.
A third variety, under name of " densa, Jord.", dis- 
tinguished by stouter stems and shorter internodes, is mentioned 
in English Botany, ii.
117; and is said to be found "at Christ- 
church, Hants, and Wisbeach, Cambridgeshire." I do not under- 
stand these three segregates apart from each other.
Sagina pilif era, Fenzl.
Spergula pilifera, DC.
Province - 15.
Hill of Moncrieflfe, Perth; Mr. John Sim.
Planted Alien.
Supplement to Cyb. Brit.
p. 38, for particulai-s.
Spergula (arvensis) pentandra, Sm.
(not of Linn.) 
Provinces - 4 - 9.
Bedford.
Lancaster.
Elsewhere ?
Syn. 172.
8. ai-vensis var: vulgaris; Eng. Bot.
ii.
127.
Spergularia [marina) neglecta, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 18.
Syn. 174.
Cyb. iii.
394.
Including also var.
media & salina.
Spergularia [marina) marginata, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 12 7-9-11 18.
And others ?
Syn. 174- Perhaps this is general along the coasts.
Spergularia [marina) rupestris, " Lebel (non Camb.)" 
Provinces 12 7 - 9 - - 12.
Probably elsewhere.
Syn. 174.
Lepigonum rupicola, of Bab. man.
18.
CAEYOPHYLLACE33.
491 
Arenaria montana, Linn.
Province - 3.
Wimbledon Common, Surrey, 1858, 1865.
Alien.
Prof.
W. T.
Dyer, in E.
C. report 1865.
Arenaria [serpyllifolia) Lloydii, Jord.
Provinces 1 9 3 - 10 11.
Com. Wight.
Kent.
York?
Durham?
Syn. 178.
A contracted form, growing on stony or sandy soils 
exposed to sea winds.
I cannot separate Mr. Lloyd's own French 
specimens from those of our southern coasts, notably, of the Isle 
of 'VCght; and seeds of these latter, sown in an inland garden, 
produced plants scarcely distinguishable from the forms usually 
seen in fields and by road-sides.
York and Durham are quoted 
from the Exchange Club report for 1861; but whether the 
examples from those counties are the same with those of the 
southern coasts, I am not prepared to say.
Arenaria {serpyllifolia) leptoclados, Guss.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11.
Scotland?
Syn. 178.
An opposite state to Lloydii; being distinguished by 
slendemess and diifuseness, with small capsules, narrower sepals, 
etc.
Dr. Boswell Syme remarks that the extreme forms of this 
and sphcerocarpa (the type fdVm) are widely different, " but so many 
specimens have come under my notice which cannot be satisfactorily 
assigned either to the one or to the other, that it seems to me 
better to consider them as varieties than to admit them as sub- 
species"; Eng. hot.
ii.
103.
Certaiuljf, some good English 
botanists label specimens by the name ' leptoclados ' which appear 
to my own eyes to be inseparable from ordinary serpyllifolia.
Arenaria [verna] Gerardi, Willd.
Province 1 .
The Lizard, West Cornwall.
The only county ?
Syn. 180.
Cyb. i.
219.
This form alone in Cornwall?
Arenaria laricifolia, Lightf.
(not of Linn.) 
Province - 15.
Castle hiU, near Forfar; Lightf.
Scot.
Error.
The plant intended was A.
verna.
Arenaria fastigiata, Sm.
Province - 15.
Eorfar; Fife; G.
Don.
Error?
Cyb. i.
220.
Dr. Arnott intimated in the British Flora 
that he was in possession of Clova specimens " from Drummoud as 
well as Don." But Drummond may have got them from Don or 
from Don's garden.
And Dr. Arnott himself suggests, under 
the head of Carex hordeiformis, that Drummond did distribute 
specimens from Don's garden, as if collected elsewhere and wild.
Stellaria {media) BorcBana, Jord.
& 8.
neglecta, Weihe.
Provinces - 2 - 10.
" Isle of Wight and Yorkshire ; " Eng. hot.
ii.
93.
Syn. 185.
Two forms of chickweed learnedly named.
Stellaria {media) umhrosa, " Opitz." Bab. man.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 10.
Kent; Ed. Edwar-ds, 1846.
^93 13.
CARTOPHYLLACE^.
Syn. 185.
Dr. Boswell Syme remarks of this, " most probably a 
sub-species, as the seeds are different in colour and sculpture," 
from those of the two other ohickweeds above noticed.
I raised 
this by seed taken from the Kentish specimens of Mr. Edwards.
The characters of glabrous sepals and pedicels, with larger and 
somewhat paler seeds, were repeated in the garden seedlings.
The 
other characters of " long slender peduncles " and " acuminated 
leaves" are occasionally seen on examples of media with hairy 
sepals ; thus, are not distinctive.
Stellaria (graminea) Babingtonii, Deakin.
Province .
. .
? " Flor.
Brit.
ii.
643, f.
735 " ; Bab. man.
ed.
2. 
Syn. 188.
Cyb. i.
924.
Omitted from later editions of Bab. man.
Stellaria scapigera, Willd.
Provinces - l5 16.
Perth; Inverness; G.
Don, in Eng. Flo.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
225.
According to Dr. Boswell Syme this 
is "apparently a monstrosity of S.
graminea"; whereas Professor 
Babington "can scarcely believe that this is a state of S.
graminea." 
Professor Arnott says that its seeds produce S.
graminea.
Cerastium (triviale) holosteoides, Fyes.
Prov.
- 11 -15.
Durham; Mr. Baker!
Northumbrl.
; Mr. Storey!
Syn. 193.
Also in Perth, according to the 'Manual.' 
Cerastiunb pimiilum, Curtis.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - [7 - 11 15].
Wight !
Gloucester !
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
229.
To my apprehension this remains still 
an ambiguous species.
Is Professor Arnott right in referring it to 
triviale ?
Cerastium [tetrandrum) atrovirens, Bab.
Provinces all.
Isle of Wight ; Bromfield.
Shetland ; Edm flo.
Syn. 194*.
Cyb. i.
228.
iii.
328.
Mag. Zool.
Bot. ii.
201.
Scarcely more than a synonym of C.
tetrandrum ; but having been 
elaborately described as a novel and genuine species, it cannot well 
be left out of a miscellaneous list in which even segregated varieties 
are generally noticed.
The like remark may be applied to the 
next also.
See pages 470 — 1 .
Cerastium [tetrandrum) pedunculatum, Bab.
Provinces - 2 3.
Isle of Wight and Essex ; Bab. 1.
c. infra.
Syn. 194*.
Cyb. i.
228.
iii.
328.
Mag. zool.
& bot.
ii.
200.
Cerastium [latifoHum?) nigrescens, Edm.
Province - 18.
Shetland ; Edmondston flo.
29 — 30.
No. 197.
Cyb. i.
233.
iii.
397.
I am not able clearly to dis- 
tinguish apart the other two forms of C.
latifolium in English 
Botany ; namely, the Smithii and compactum.
13.
LINACEiE.
— 15.
TLLIACEa;.
493 
13.
LiNAGBJE.
Linum usitatissimum, Linn.
Provinces any.
Sown as a crop, or casually among clover.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
235.
Occasionally scattered by bird-catchers.
14.
MALTAOE.E.
Malva horealis, WaUm. M.
pusilla, Sm.
Provinces - - 3 - - 6.
Hythe, Kent.
Cardiff, Glamorgan.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
340.
Eay syn.
271.
Eng. bot.
ed.
1, no.
341.
More like parviflora, than rotundifolia, although it is usually 
compared with the latter.
Malva parviflora, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - ?
Journ.
Bot. iv.
149.
Midx.
flo.
Kent ; Syme !
Casual.
" Meadows, Gloucester." Not a pratal plant.
Malva verticillata, Linn.
Province - 6.
Corn-fields, Llanelly, Caermarthen ; Motley !
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
329.
Phytol.
ii.
973.
E. B.
supp.
3953.
Malva niccemis, All.
Province - 3.
Surrey ; Mr. Thomas Moore !
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
329.
Surrey flo.
app.
314.
Malva crispa, Linn.
Province - 3.
Surrey, on refuse heaps.
Middlesex flo.
61.
Casual.
Occasionally kept in gardens, for table decoration.
Malva Alcea, Linn.
Provinces - S - 8.
Warwick.
Leicester.
Notts.
Error.
Cyb. i.
340.
Misnomer for M.
moschata ?
Althma hirsuta, Linn.
Province - 3.
Near Cuxton, Kent.
Surrey flo.
app.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
241.
Established many years in the Kent locality.
Lavatera Olbia, Linn.
Province - 3.
Essex; H.
Doubleday, in Phytol.
1842.
Surrey flo.
app.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
342.
(L.
punctata has been found as a chance 
waif in a quarry at Northampton, along with Datura Stramonium.
It is also enumerated in the Appendix to the Flora of Surrey.) 
15.
TlLIACE.®.
Tilia intermedia, DC.
T. europsea, Anglor.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Always a planted tree.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
344.
Apart from misnomers of Tilia grandifolia 
(which is satisfactorily distinct) this may be simply a cultivated 
variety, or set of varieties, of T.
parvifolia.
494 16.
HYPEEICACE/E.
— 17.
ACEEACEJE.
16.
HrPERICACEiE.
Hypericum (diibium) maculatum, Bab. man.
Provinces 1 to ] 6 ; according to the use of the name.
Syn. 216.
Cyb. i.
247.
See pages 447—8 of this volume.
Hypericum hircinum, Linn.
Provinces --34 56--9 IS.
Surrey to Stirling.
Alien.
Springs freely from fallen seed, and creeps much at the 
root where planted about shrubberies, etc.
Hypericum elatum.
Ait. H.
anglicum, Bab. man.
Provinces 1 - - 4 13-15 16.
Cornwall to Argyle.
Alien.
Cyb. iii.
330.
Not H.
grandifoUum, Choisy ?
Somewhat 
impatient of severe frost in Surrey gardens, and killed to the ground 
in winters of unusual severity.
The fruit is dry, quite dissimilar 
from that of Androscemum, as is the whole plant ; and yet they 
have somehow become confused together.
Hypericum barhatum, Jacq.
Province - 15.
Perth; G.
Don, sole authority.
Ambiguity.
A garden plant?
Cyb. i.
254.
In English Flora 
Smith accepts this as a true native, and without a word of doubt ; 
attributing it to " bushy places in Scotland," as though there were 
any number of localities for it in addition to the one specially men- 
tioned, " by the side of a hedge," in Strath Earn.
Smith was too 
exclusively a botanist of the study, not of living nature in the 
wilds, to warrant any reliance on his decisions about the genuine 
nativity, or otherwise, of plants in Britain.
And yet not alone 
foreign botanists (excusably) but even some English botanists 
(inexcusably) cite him as an authority whose decisions are to be 
received and abided by.
Hypericum calycinum, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 6 6 - 8 9 10 11 12 13.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
253.
Much planted in shrubberies and on banks ; 
where it readily spreads by its creeping rootstocks ; thus mis- 
leading the inejfperienced botanist to suppose it native in this 
country.
17.
ACERACE.E.
Acer Pseudo-platanm, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Much planted, and springing freely from seeds.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
255.
iii.
400.
Described as a ' Denizen' in Baker's 
Botany of North Yorkshire ; but given as an ' Alien ' by the same 
botanist in the New Flora of Northumberland and Durham.
18.
GEEANIACEiE.
4'J5 
18.
Gebaniace^.
Erodium (cicutarium) cheer ophyllwn, DC.
Province - - 8.
Surrey, and probably elsewhere.
Syn. 228.
Scarcely separable from the ordinary state of E.
cicu- 
tarium.
The special notice of this variation in English Botany, 
third edition, is my only warrant for a special notice of it here ; 
and the Editor himself said that " the transition between the two 
seems to be gradual." In the 'Manual of British Botany,' as in 
the ' English Flora' also, three subforms are mentioned.
But 
Babington's three do not exactly correspond with Smith's three, 
nor of course can they do so with Syme's two.
Erodium, littoreum, Willd.
Province - 3.
Middlesex Flora, quoting "Irv. H.
B. P.
752." 
Casual.
Near the Chelsea old water-works, Pimlico.
Oeranium phaum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 - - [18].
Has been seen in many counties.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
259.
iii.
400.
Included in Edmondston's Flora of 
Shetland ; but too likely only a garden plant there.
Oeranium striatum, Linn.
Province 1 6 - 10.
[12.
Cumberland.] 
Alien.
Cyb. i.
258.
Said to be well established in Cornwall.
Geranium angulatum, Curtis.
Province - 12.
Cumberland, as pretended by a Lake guide.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
259.
Phytologist ii.
430.
Geranium nodosum, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 10 - 12 - 14.
Herts.
York.
Cumberland.
" Tweed." 
Alien.
Cyb. i.
259.
iii.
401.
The subject of several errors, and 
perhaps of one wilful imposition.
Geranium macrorhizum ?
Province - 10.
Washerlane, near Halifax ; S.
Gibson.
Ambiguity.
This was recorded in the ' New Botanist's Guide ' 
under the name of " G.
nodosum;" its locality being misread into 
Waterham.
In Phytologist ii.
556, Mr. Gibson denies it as 
nodosum and declares it pyrenaicum ; which latter name certainly 
is given on its label in Mr. Gibson's own handwriting.
The 
specimen is a mere scrap, the top of a flowering stem or branch, 
and assuredly wide away from G.
pyrenaicum.
It may perchance 
be the old garden flower, as above named; the fragment itself 
perhaps picked in a garden.
But " Washerlane " might be examined 
by a resident botanist.
Geranium [inolle) innominatum, Lond.
Cat. ed.
6. 
Provinces - 3, etc.
This means a " nameless " variety.
There are 
two forms or states of the species, differing much in pubescence, 
49 G 19.
BALSAMINACEiE.
— 21.
CELASTEACE.E.
and slightly in other charactere ; but they remain for further 
observation.
Geranium (Robertianum) purpuremn, Forster.
Provinces 1 2 a 4 - 6 7.
Cornwall to Suffolk.
Syn. 239.
Cyb. i.
266.
iii.
403.
(What is the variety " inn- 
guescens," on Holy Island, recorded in Johnston's Flora of the 
Eastern Borders, but not mentioned in the New Flora of Nor- 
thumberland and Durham ?) 
Geranium [JRobertianum) modestmn, Jord.
Province 1.
" Torquay; Mr. G.
Eyre Parker"; E.
B. ii.
204.
Syn. 239.
Unknown to myself, apart from the type or other var.
Geranium {sanguineum) lancastriense, "With.
Province - 12.
Walney Isle, Lake Lancashire.
Syn. 240.
Cyb. i.
267.
Borrer in Phytol.
ii.
430.
Page 464.
19.
Balsaminaoe^.
Impatiens fulva, Nutt.
Provinces - 2 3.
Sussex; MissCarr!
Surrey!
Midx.
flo.
71.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
268.
Thoroughly established by the river Wey 
and Basingstoke Canal, Surrey, and in several places about the 
Thames.
Impatiens parviflora, DC.
Provinces - - 3 4.
Surrey.
Middlesex.
Oxford.
Cambridge.
Casual.
Likely to become an established weed.
20.
OXALIDACE.E.
Oxalis corniculata, Linn.
Provinces 123-5 13 15.
Several counties.
Alien or Casual.
Cyb. i.
271.
iii.
402.
Alph.
De Cand.
geog.
bot.
660.
Thought to have originally migrated from Asia into 
Europe.
Although the first recorded, it is now less frequent than 
O. striata within Britain ; which latter is perhaps still occasionally 
mistaken for the present.
Oxalis striata, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 - - - 9.
Several counties.
Alien or Casual.
Cyb. i.
272.
iii.
403.
Alph.
DC.
geog.
bot.
724.
Thought to have immigrated from America.
See the preceding.
21.
CeLASTEjVCE^.
Staphylea pinnata, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - - - 7 - 9 10 11 12 13 14.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
273.
iii.
404.
Nowhere permanent ?
23.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
497 
93.
LEGUMINIFEUyE.
Saroihamnus [scoparius) prostratus, Bailey.
Province 1.
West Cornwall ; Charles Bailey.
Syn. 248.
Described in the Manchester Phil.
Trans.
Ulex (nanus) eu-nanus, Syme, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 12 8.
And probably in 4 to 6 or 8.
Syn. 250.
Distribution ill ascertained apart from "nanus." 
Ulex [nanus) Gallii, Planchon.
Provinces 1 2 3 ?
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13.
Cornwall to Ayr.
Syn'.
250.
Cyb. iii.
830.
Chiefly in the 'western counties.
" Ulex strictus, Lindley.'' 
Provinces 1 2.
Cornwall and Devon; Hore, in Phyt.
i. 162.
Error ?
Sussex ; F.
A. MaUeson, in Gardener's Chronicle ?
Genista [tinctoiia) humifusa, " Dickson." 
Province 1.
Kynance Cove, Lizard, Cornwall.
Syn. 251.
"Between Caerthilian and the Lizard Lights"; C.Bailey.
Ononis reclinata, Linn.
Provinces - 2 - 13.
Mull of Galloway; Graham, 1835.
Casual?
Cyb. i.
282.
Devon, 1865; "Mr. E.
Holmes,"— as 
reported in the Journal of Botany vi.
51 ; but erroneously referred 
to Dorset in the Index of same.
Ononis ramosissima, Desf.
Province - 15.
Ballast.
heaps, Fife; Graham excurs.
1833.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
282.
In 1834, and only once found ?
Anthyllis (vulneraria) Dillenii, Schultz.
Provinces 1 - - - - 6 7.
Com. Dev.
Glam.
Pemb.
Angl.
Syn. 257.
"May be a distinct sub-species"; E.
B. iii.
20.
Medicago sativa, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Many counties ; but usually temporary.
Casual or Alien.
Cyb. i.
283.
Frequently sown as food for 
cattle ; and occasionally found to linger awhile in fields, perhaps 
more especially in dry ground near the coast.
Medicago [falcata ?) sylvestris, Fries.
Province - 4.
Suffolk.
Norfolk.
Cambridge.
Also Cheshire ?
Syn. 259.
Cyb. iii.
331.
Cambr.
flo.
53.
Eng. hot.
iii.
23.
Medicago (denticulata) apiculata, Willd.
Provinces 5 10 11-15.
Hereford.
York.
Durham?
Fife?
Syn. 262.
The examples from Boss, Hereford (Purchas !) and 
Scarborough, Yorkshire (Bean !) have short straight spines ; those 
from Hebburn baUast-hills (Storey !) and Charlestown, Fife (Syme !) 
are without spines, though the prominent nerves of the pod do 
make a sort of marginal tubercles.
498 23.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
Medicago muiicata, All.
Province - 4.
Said to have grown at Orford, Suffolk.
Extinct, if not Error.
Cyb. i.
287.
Bab. man.
71.
" The Rev.
W. W.
Newbould informs me that Ray's plant was denticulata, on 
the faith of the specimens in the old herbaria"; Eng. hot.
iii.
112.
Melilotus arvensis, Wallr.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 6 6 - - 9 10 11 - 13 15.
Casual or Alien.
Cyh. iii.
332.
Among crops, and on ballast, etc.
This seems likely to become established as something more than a 
Casual, although unnoticed by Smith or Hooker (edition 6) and 
even in the earlier editions of the ' Manual.' 
Melilotus parviflora, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 8 - 9.
Sur. Mid.
Glouc.
Ches.
Lane.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
332.
(Some other species are mentioned in the 
Middlesex Flora and Appendix to the Flora of Surrey; namely, 
sulcata, messanensis, cmndea.
The second of these also in the New 
Flora of Liverpool.) 
Trigonella Fcenum-grmcum, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 9.
New roads ; New Flora of Liverpool.
Casual.
E. C.
report 1861.
Surrey flo.
app.
316.
(In the Journal 
of Botany, iv.
149, Trigonella laciniata is enumerated among various 
exotics introduced at Mitcham, in Surrey, through com imported for 
a Distillery at Wandsworth.) 
Trifolium incamatum, Linn.
Provinces any.
Where sown, and left as a straggler.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
294.
In the sown fields this occurs occasionally 
with pale yellowish flowers ; yet is then hardly the same with 
T. Molinerii.
Trifolium hybridum, Linn.
Also T.
elegans, Savi ?
Provinces any.
As a waif or relict of sown crops.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
332.
Frequently sown of late.
The T.
elegans 
of English botanists, whether or not that of Savi also, seems to be 
just the same thing with the hybridum under rather different 
conditions of growth.
Trifolium stellatum, Linn.
Province - 2.
Sussex, established on old ballast heaps.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
297.
[Som. Kent.
Essex.
Glouc] 
Trifolium resupinatum, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 6 - - 9.
Cornwall to Liverpool.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
301.
iii.
409.
Nowhere permanent.
Trifolium patens, Schreb.
Province - 8.
Leicestershire; Rev. W.
H. Coleman.
Casual.
Particulars in Phytologist, iv.
1100.
S3.
LEGUMINIFEE^.
499 
Trifolium agrarium, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 11 - 15.
Sown with grass or clover seed.
Casual.
Eng. bot.
iii.
61.
"This species has been seen lately 
in many parts of England in forage fields laid down with imported 
seeds"; New Flora of Northumberland and Durham.
Omithopus compressus, Linn.
Province - 9.
Cheshire; F.
M. Webb, in E.
C. report 1861.
Casual.
Ballast heaps by the Birkenhead Docks ; New Flora of 
Liverpool, page 45.
Scorpiurus subvillosus, Linn.
Province - 3.
Surrey; G.
Lawson, in Phytol.
iv.
461.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
335.
Field near Wandsworth Rail Station.
Coronilla varia, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - 4 - 9 - 12.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
331.
Dr. Bromfield tried to force this plant into 
the lists of British natives, on very unsatisfactory evidence wordily 
set forth in the Magazine of Nat. Hist.
ix.
604.
Two extracts 
from letters written by the late W.
L. Notcutt will help to shew 
the worthlessness of such hearsay evidence.
" It was gathered last 
year, I am informed, plentifully wild about four miles from Faken- 
ham"; Letter of September 17, 1849.
Again, a fortnight later, 
" I went to Bagthorpe, the station for Coronilla varia, last week ; 
and though it looked wild at first, on inquiry I found that it had 
been planted there ; the person who had planted it acknowledged 
this to me"; Same, October 1, 1849.
Dr. Bromfield habitually 
tried to make out a case in support of nativity, much as though he 
were an advocate retained to support a side, right or wrong.
]\Ir.
Notcutt endeavoured to find out the truth.
It will be well for 
future botanists to know of such differences between those of our 
own time.
I should myself have been spared much trouble, and 
been saved from several false conclusions, if earlier put on my guard 
with respect to the trusty or untrusty peculiarities of botanists who 
flourished before (say) 1800 or even 1825.
Vicia villosa, Linn.
Provinces - 5 - 1 0.
Gloucester.
North-east York.
Casual.
E. C.
reports for 1867 and 1868.
Vicia varia, Host.
Province - 10.
North-east York, 1861 ; Mr. W.
Foggitt.
Casual.
Botany of N.
Y. p.
333.
Same as the preceding?
Vicia (angustifolia) Bobartii, Forster.
Provinces - 3 - 15.
Essex.
Middlesex.
Oxford.
Fife.
Elsewhere.
Syn. 298.
Common and generally distributed in England, more 
rare in Scotland ; Eng. bot.
iii.
98.
A small state of V.
angusti- 
folia, not kept apart in my own notes of localities ; nor, indeed, do 
1 know where to trace the line of severance between angustifolia 
500 34.
ROSACEA.
and Bohartii.
" The two varieties pass insensibly into each other, 
and intermediates often occur " ; Eng. hot.
1. c.
Vicia hyhrida, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 8.
Somerset.
Lincohi.
Extinct?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
319.
A variety of F.
ZwJea .^ 
Vicia IcBvigata, Sm.
Province - 9.
Portland Isle, Dorset ; Cullum.
Ambiguity.
Not found of late on Portland Isle.
Vicia pannonica, Jacq.
yax purpurascens, DC.
Province 1.
South Devon; Mr. Briggs, E.
0. report 1866.
Casual.
" Weed in a garden, Honicknowle." 
Ervum Monanthos, Linn.
Province - 11.
AUenheads; New Flora of Northumberland.
Casual.
Among cultivated Vicia sativa, July, 1865.
Ervum Ervilla, Linn.
Province 1.
Somerset ; Bab. man.
ed.
3. 
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
336.
Omitted from Man. ed.
4. 
Lathyriis latif alius, Linn.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 - - 10 - 19 13 14 15.
Partly errors ?
Alien.
Cyb. i.
397.
In several counties, originating from gardens ; 
but simply misnomers of L.
sylvestris in others.
Lathyrus (maritimus) acutifolius, Bab.
Province - 18.
Shetland ; Edmondston's Flora.
Syn. 311.
A slight variation or starved state of the species.
Orohus {tuberosum) tenuif alius.
Roth.
Provinces l' 9 3 - 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 19 - 14 15.
Syn. 819.
Cyb. i.
398.
Widely dissimilar as the extremes are, 
leading some botanists to hold this variety distinct specifically from 
the type, the one form quite gradually passes to the other by 
intermediate variations.
94.
EoSACEiE.
Primus domestica, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
As recorded, with exception of province 6.
Alien?
Cyb. i.
330.
Never truly wild ; but whether an imported 
tree, or a gradual improvement of the wild bullace (or even sloe) 
seems an unsettled question.
Professor Alphonse De Candolle 
considers the bullace and plum both as being wild species, natives 
of Caucasus and other Eastern lands ; the bullace perhaps also of 
Europe.
See Geogr.
Bot. 878, 986.
Spirma salicifalia, Linn.
Provinces ] to 1 7.
Chiefly in Wales and Scotland.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
335.
Much planted ; long lasting.
24.
EOSACEiE.
501 
Aremonia agrimonioides, DC.
Provinces - 10 - 15.
York ; Gissing flo.
Perth ; E.
C. rep.
1858.
Alien.
Not noticed before 1856 ; fide E.
B. iii.
260.
Potentilla norvegica, Linn.
Provinces - 4 5.
Norfolk.
Gloucester.
Casual.
Journal of Botany, vi.
302.
E. C.
rep.
1868.
Potentilla hirta, Linn.
Provinces - 3 7-16.
Surrey.
Merioneth.
Perth.
Casual.
Casual in Surrey.
Planted in Perth ?
(P.
recta, Linn.
Mitcham Station, Surrey; Jour.
hot.
iv.
150.) 
Potentilla opaca, Sm.
" P.
intermedia, Nestl," 
Province - 15.
Perth and Forfar; G.
Don only.
Error.
Cyb. i.
345.
Possibly in Merionethshire, 
Potentilla [reptans ?) mixta, Nolte.
Province - 3.
Near Valebridge, in Keymer, Sussex ; Mr. Mitten.
Syn. 331.
London Jour.
Bot. ix.
529.
Eng. bot.
iii.
148.
Potentilla alba, Linn.
Province - 7.
Reported to have been brought from Wales.
Error.
Cyb. i.
347.
Still regains unverified.
Potentilla tridentata, Sm.
Province - 15.
Forfar; G.
Don, the sole authority.
Error.
Cyb. i.
348.
iii.
418.
Not British or European.
Fragaria (vesca) calycina, Lindley (not Lois.) 
Province - 11.
Northumberland ; Eng. Bot.
supp.
2742.
Syn. 335.
New Flora of Northumberland and Durham, 158.
Fmgaria elatior, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Partly errors?
Alien.
Cyb. i.
349.
iii.
419.
The true elatior (Hautbois straw- 
berry) is very rare.
Stragglers of other garden strawberries are 
reported under this name ; so that it becomes impossible to say in 
how many of the provinces enumerated this plant has truly 
occurred.
Once I saw it copiously in a wood in Surrey, over a 
space about fifty yards across.
Two years afterwards not a plant 
of it was to be found there.
Rubus arcticus, Linn.
Provinces - 10 - 15 16.
York.
Perth.
MuU.
Error.
Cyb. i.
350.
No safe authority for it in Britain.
Rubus Leesii, Bab.
Province 1.
Devon ; Bab. man.
Somerset ; Miss Gifford !
Ambiguity.
Seemingly a variety of Rubus Idaus.
Rubi Babingtoniani.
" Botanists are not held in over-reverence by the outer world, 
and collectors of Brambles are often rated very low even by 
botanists." Thus writes one of the Bramble-brotherhood, whose 
502 24.
ROSACEA.
own social position is too assured, to leave it matter of the slightest 
importance to himself, that no honour is gained by carrying a 
wicker basket behind his shoulders, suggestive of fish, hut really 
stored instead with clippings from the bramble-bushes.
The 
article which commences with the two lines of humility quoted, is 
deserving of perusal and of thought.
Its" tendency is sound ; to 
recommend description and arrangement of the Bramble forms 
met with, hut not prematurely or too dogmatically to make them 
into fixed species " of such diverse equivalent values," to wit, non- 
equivalents.
StiU, something must be done with the quasi-speciea here and 
elsewhere.
" We must faggot our Eubi forms into bundles some- 
how," it is remarked.
And now that we find presented to us a 
volume which does faggot them into species, which shew the 
results of long continued attention to the living bushes, to the 
herbarium fragments, and to the descriptions of them in other 
books, all duly combined, — ^it seems safest and wisest for the 
"outer-world" of non-brambledom to accept the ready-made 
arrangement in thankful fealty.
For the purposes of this Com- 
pendium, indeed, it would be useless to make any attempt at 
tracing out the areas or localities of the species, aggregate or 
segregate, unless on the rule of adhering to those named and 
treated in the writings of some one Botanist, known to have 
bestowed especial attention upon these entangling bushes, and 
whose species combinations or severances, with more or less 
continued sameness of nomenclature for them, are known to other 
reporters of localities, and practically accepted by them.
This consideration determines the course to be taken in the 
present volume ; namely, strict adherence to the names and 
species, as they have lately been set forth in ' The Bkitish 
RuBi,' by Professor C.
0. Babington of Cambridge.
It is the 
course which has been rendered practically convenient, too, through 
the Professor's own method for shewing the distribution of his 
species being based on the same provinces and provincial nos.
which are used in this present volume and in the original ' Cybele 
Britannica.' More detailed records by counties and special 
localities will be found in ' The British Rubi ' itself.
Its Author's 
own words may best express the reliability of the topographical 
portions of his Work : 
" The localities for each species are with comparatively few 
exceptions founded upon specimens preserved in my own her- 
barium." And previously, " In the attempt that is made to point 
out the geographical distribution of the species I have been 
obliged to trust chiefly to my own collection for information ; for 
in the present uncertain state of the nomenclature of brambles it 
is not advisable to accept the names given even by the best 
botanists." 
24.
EOSACEJ];.
503 
The subjoined table, copied from Professor Babington, includes 
the 41 species of 'British Eubi'; the common Kaspberry with 
the two herbaceous species being omitted, because already treated 
in this volume, on pages 160 — 1 of the Synopsis.
These 41 
Babingtonian Brambles are to be considered as segregates of 
ccesius, corylifolius, and fruticosus ; most of them belonging to the 
latter.
I do not here take heed of segregates of lower grade than 
Professor Babington's species ; partly because be himself has not 
exhibited their provincial distribution after the same methodical 
and quasi-complete fashion ; partly because I am abundantly certain 
that even the species themselves will never become generally 
known to botanists, much less therefore their sub-varieties.
They 
may become familiar to the very few who will spare much time 
for their critical study, and who can work under the assisting 
advantage of mutual instruction direct or indirect.
Botanists will 
never generally name segregate brambles by printed descriptions 
only.
Obviously, they are not usually named by book characters 
alone even among the few who care to study them.
The species 
are empirical; their names given and communicated much after the 
methods resorted to by florists in naming their varieties of Kose or 
Geranium ; that is, by oral communication, by labelled specimens, 
or by pictures.
Individuals, not species, are described technically.
Still, ' The British Eubi' must be received as a very acceptable 
and truly valuable contribution to the literature of descriptive 
botany, even though it may give only the selected species of the 
individual writer.
For this country we may be said now to possess 
a fair approximation to a definite standard.
It matters less that 
some botanists may deem the species too numerous, or that others 
may deem them too few ; and that Professor Babington neither 
can nor does claim oracular infallibility.
The impossibility of any 
individual doing so is well illustrated in a Review of ' British 
Eubi' in the Journal of Botany for October, 1869.
The reviewer 
thus writes, in reference to the vexed question as to what is or 
what is not a true species in bramble-dom : 
" For our own part, we can only say that we heartily wish, — 
that, at any rate, it would save an enormous amount of trouble, — 
if he had iu this work and his other writings on this subject, and 
if the numerous writers of the class which he represents had as 
firm ground under their feet as they seem to think that they are 
standing upon ; but we cannot admit that the ground is firm, for 
this reason, amongst others, that after having examined authenti- 
cated specimens of every one of Professor Babington's species, and 
studied most of them in a growing state, we have had the oppor- 
tunity of comparing with M.
Genevier's work [Brambles of the 
Loire] a large collection of English and French specimens labelled 
by the latter, and that we cannot see that the 203 species in the 
504 24.
ROSACEJE.
one case, individualized and defined in perfect good faitli as the 
deliberate result of the labour of many years, cover a wider range 
of form, or a materially greater degree of variability within that 
range, than the 43 species in the other, individualized and defined 
with a sincerity and an amount of labour which every one in 
England, who knows anything about the matter, is fully prepared 
to appreciate." 
The argument here seems unanswerable, and is in itself more 
clear than the language in which it is interred.
It shews that 
bramble-species are really optional even among the special experts.
Certainly, it does not show that bramble segregates cannot be dis- 
criminated ; but it does show that those segregates are not species 
in the strict and usual acceptation of this term.
Professor 
Babington writes, page 93, " I believe in the distinctness of 
species, although unable to demonstrate it." But in whose species 
of Eubi are we to believe ?
In the two hundred of M.
Genevier ?
— In the two score of Professor Babington?
— In the two units, 
fruticosus and ccesius, of Mr. Bentham's Handbook ?
Rubus.
Provincial Distribution, from ' British Eubi.' 
3 suberectus 1 S 3 5 7 8 10 - 12 IS 14 IS 16 
4 fissus 1 - 5 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 15 16 
5 plioatus 123 6 6 8 9 10 1112 13 14 15 16 
6 affinis 13 3 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 12 13 14 15 16 
7 Lindleianus 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 lO 11 J2 13 15 16 
8 rhamnifolius 12346 78 10 12 ...
9 incurvatus - 3 3 - 6 7 - - 12 - - - 16 
10 imbricatus .
. 5 - .
. 
11 latifoKus 5 - - - 14 15 
13 discolor 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 16 
13 thyrsoideus 3 3 4 5 7 8 - - 
14 leucostachys 123 56789 10 11 13 14 
15 Grabowskii - 2 - 7 8 - - .
16 Colemani 5 8 - 10 
17 Salteri 19 - 5 7 8 - 10 .
- 
18 carpinifolius 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 - - 16 
19 viUicaulis, 17.
1 2 3 5-78 10 11 13 14 15 
20 macrophyllus 1 2 8 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
21 mucronulatus 1 - 5 7 8 - 14 16 16 
22 Sprengelii - 2 3 5 7 8 9 10 12 
33 Bloxamii 1 - - 6 - 8 11 - .
34 Hystrix 12 3 4 5 8 10 11 
95 rosaceus 133 5 78 10 1113- 
26 pygmseus - 3 ...
27 scaber 19 3 5-78 10 - 
28 rudis 12 3 6 6 7 8 10 11 12 13 14 
29 Radula 13 3 4 5 6 8 10 11 13 14 - 
24.
ROSACEA.
505 
30 Koehleri 12 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 - 15 16 
31 fusco-ater - 2 5 - - 8 10 11 
32 diversifolius 1234567 9 10 
33 Lejeunii 2 3 6 7 9 10 12 
84 pyramidalis 1 5-7 
35 Guntheri 1 3 5 - 8 10 
36 humifusus 3 5 7 9 10 11 12 13 15 
37 foliosus 1 - - - 5 ....
38 glandulosus 2 3 5 7 8 - 10 ...
39 Balfourianus 13 4 5 9 10 12 14 
40 corylifolius 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - 13 15 16 
41 althaeifolius 12 3 4 5 - 9 10 11 12 
42 tuberculatus 2 3 4 5 8 10 12 
43 csesius 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 U 13 14 
Rubus (glandulosus) ohliquus, Wirtgen.
Provinces 1-3-7-10.
Devon.
Surrey.
Anglesea.
N. York.
An additional species reported by the Kev. Andrew Bloxam, in the 
Journal of Botany, for April, 1870 ; — -while these pages are going 
through press.
Hosa cinyiamomea, Linn.
Provinces - 10 11 13.
York.
Cheviot.
Ayr.
[12 Cumb.J 
Alien.
Cyb. i.
359.
New Flora of Northumberland & Durham.
Bosa lucida, Ehrh.
Prov.
- 12.
Cumberland ; Phytol.
ii.
427.
" Tunbridge Wells." 
Alien.
Cyb. i.
369.
Planted in a hedgerow, Keswick.
Rosa pomifera, Herm.
Province - 5.
Gloucester.
Stafford.
B. B.
E. 210.
Alien.
E. C.
report, 1868.
Eng. bot.
iii.
261.
Rosa rubella, Sm.
Pro-sauce - 11.
New Flora of N.
D. p.
162.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
366.
Baker's British Eoses, p.
203.
Rosm BakeiiancB.
Woods, Smith, Borrer, and others successively tried their skiU in 
" descriptions " and " revisions " of the British wild roses.
Smith 
began with half-a-dozen in 1800, and ended with a score in 18'24.
The species of Woods were more numerous ; those admitted by 
Borrer were somewhat less numerous.
In 1858 ' Bentham's 
Handbook' fell back on the very condensed number of five species.
Which of these botanical writers was nearest to Nature ?
As in 
the Brambles, so in the Briars, evidently any number of species 
may be made at the option of the individual botanist, say from five 
to fifty.
The labours of his English predecessors have failed to satisfy 
the re-modelling mind of my much-esteemed friend in botany, 
3 T 
506 S4.
ROSACEA.
Mr. J.
G. Baker.
He in his turn has twice again sought to 
improve upon former species-arrangements.
In 1864 he published 
his ' Review of the British Eoses, especially those of the North of 
England.' And in 1869 he brings out 'A Monograph of the 
British Roses.' This latter >commeuces with an account of his own 
personal qualifications for the task, on the ground of long study, 
practical observation, and special facilities for acquiring knowledge 
about our wUd roses themselves, and about the ideas and nomen- 
clature of other botanical Dog-rose-fanciers.
These quahfications are 
so ample as to have required a full page of close text for the simple 
enumeration of them.
Thus, on Mr. Baker's own assurance and 
shewing, it may be held certain that no other English botanist is 
now in so good a position for arranging over again the wild roses of 
this country.
The essay of Woods was published in the Transactions of the 
Linnean Society of London.
The Monograph by Baker appro- 
priately comes forth in the Proceedings of the same Society.
Not 
many years ago, an Address by the President of that Society 
informed its Fellows that Authors on Brambles were providing the 
world with waste paper.
Apropos of Briars, will another Address 
inform the Fellows that their funds are expended in the same 
serviceable manner?
In regard to uncertainty of their species 
Brambles and Briars are in one category ; and alike they require 
longer study than the generality of botanists care to bestow upon 
them.
The uncertainty is curiously illustrated in Mr. Baker's 
Monograph set against the earlier Linnean paper by Woods.
Not 
one of the various species invented by Woods appears to be retained 
as such by Baker.
The names of Woods used in the Monograph 
of Baker are there made to represent varieties of more aggregate 
species, or are treated as no better than synonyms, not representing 
even separable varieties.
The characteristic of the new Monograph is combination of 
species, with severance of varieties ; the latter being numerous ; 
the former being comparatively few.
In the Review of 1864 
Mr. Baker intimated that the dozen roses there treated were what 
he understood as being " species of primary value," and of which 
he had "seen specimens from the six northern counties of England." 
Those 12 species, with systyla oxstylosa for a thirteenth, were placed 
in 5 chief groups thus : — 
1. spinosissima, Sabini, hibernica.
3. mollissima, tomentosa.
3. rubiginosa, micrantha, Borreri, Jundzilliana, cryptopoda.
4. canina, — alone, but including many varieties, 
ft.
arvensis, systyla.
In the 'Monograph' of 1869 these thirteen are reduced to eleven 
species; two of those in the middle group being lowered to the 
rank of varieties.
And it is further illustration of the uncertainty 
24.
EOSACE^.
507 
or changeability of species, even those of "primary value," that the 
two reduced species are now not placed as varieties of their con- 
geners in the same group, but each of them is changed into a 
variety of another species in a different group.
Borreri has become 
a variety of canina, the sole species of group 4 ; while Jundzilliana 
has sunk into a variety of tomentosa in group 2.
Cryptopoda is 
retained in group 3, but there sinks into a variety of pulverulenta, 
an aggregate species first appearing in 1869.
Other evidences are to be found in the ' Monograph,' shewing 
that the combination of varieties into species of " primary value " 
is really much a matter of whim or fancy.
Pretty full diagnoses 
are given for the species, which look very important and imposing 
in their latin words; — and then succeed descriptions of varieties 
which decidedly contradict the diagnosis, through the variety of 
one species assuming some of the distinctive characters attributed 
to the other species.
Contrast the diagnoses of rubiginosa and 
micrantha, for instance, and then compare the descriptions of their 
varieties with the words of their specific diagnoses.
It will be seen 
that the diagnostic characters of the one species appear in the 
varieties of the other species.
Such uncertainties and inconsistencies are not here imputed as 
faults in Mr. Baker's workmanship.
Their true significance is 
quite different.
They really shew that the various forms of our 
wild roses are so connected by the interchange and crossing of 
technical characters, only imagined to be diagnostic between them, 
that the book-species really depend on an arbitrary preference given 
to this or to that set of characters, as indicating affinity, and as 
necessitating union or severance.
With the omission of Jundzilliana and cryptopoda, two spe- 
cies which I was unable to understand at all, and the reluctant 
acceptance of Borreri, the species of the Synopsis on preceding 
pages of this volume are essentially the same with those of 
Mr. Baker's Eeview.
Substituting pulverulenta for Borreri, they 
would be made to correspond with those of the new Monograph, 
although not absolutely so in respect to all included varieties.
Probably much less so in respect to the recorded localities, on 
faith of which the formula for their distribution was filled in.
Anticipating now that the names and arrangements of the 
Monograph will be generally accepted by English botanists, I wish 
to add a tabular arrangement of the provincial distribution, as 
nearly similar to the one taken from ' The British Rubi ' as the 
different treatment by the two Authors will allow it done.
I shall 
seldom venture to add any province besides those in which 
Mr. Baker has cited localities, either in the Monograph or else- 
where and recently.
The provincial nos.
will thus be few, and 
blanks be numerous; for Mr. Baker has accomplished in the 
topographical department of his British Roses nothing like the 
508 24.
EOSACEiE.
ample store of information to be found in ' The British Rubi.' 
The nos.
preceding names will distinguish the species of " primary- 
value"; the unnumbered names being those of their varieties; 
many of these latter being segregates held as proper species in the 
writings of Woods and his successors in the species-making line of 
botanical business.
The two first roses in the series, spinosissima 
and rubella, need not be repeated here.
The distribution of the 
former was given on page 162; and the ambiguous rubella is 
mentioned above, page 505.
No. 5 in Mr. Baker's series is 
B. pomifera, not native.
Rosa.
Provincial Distribution from Baker.
3 involuta 
3- 5- 
10 11 
15 16 17 
Sabini 
2- - 
10 11 
15 17 
Doniana 
2- 5 
Robertsoni 
10 11 
- 
Smithii 
10 
16 
Isevigata 
Wilsoni 
7 
10 
4 hibemica 
3- 
9 10 11 12 
17 
cordifolia 
11 
- 
6 moUissima 
7 8 
- 10 11 \Z 
16 17 
cserulea 
10 11 1-2 
16 
ps.
rubigiuosa 
7 tomentosa 
12 34- 
7- 
10 
10 11 12 13 
15 16 17 
subglobosa 
12 34- 
7- 
10 11 
farinosa 
10 
15 
scabriusoula 
1- 
- U 
sylvestris 
obovata 
10 
11 
8 rubiginosa 
12 34 
10 11 
13 
15 16 
permixta 
sylvioola 
9 micrantha 
3- 
12 3- 5 - 
7- 
10 
9 10 11 
Briggsii 
Hystrix 
10 pulverulenta 
Billietii 
1 
3- 5 - 
1 5 - 
5- 
10 n 
' 
cryptopoda 
11 canina " 18" 
10 
1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 ?
lutetiana 
1 
10 11 
surculosa 
2- 
sphasrioa 
1 - 
senticosa 
1 
- 
dumalis 
1 5 - 
8 
- 10 11 12 
13 
16 
biserrata 
- 10 
urbica 
- 
10 11 
24.
: 
ROSACE.i;.
frondosa 3 - 
10 
arvatica 
9 10 11 
dumetorum 
10 11 
pruinosa 
10 11 
- 
incana 
- 15 
tomentella - 2 8 - 
10 11 
- 
andegavensis 
verticillacantha 1 - 
- 
- 15 
collina 1 3 - 
. 
csBsia - 3 - - 
- 8- 11 
16 
concinna 1 
decipiens - - 
Reuteri 
8 9 11 
10 
- 
suboristata 
10 11 
15 
Hailstoni 
10 
- 
implexa 
coriifolia 
10 - 
10 11 12 
14 15 
Watsoni 
11 12 
15 16 
celerata 
11 
? 
Borreri 2 3-5 
10 11 
Bakeri 
- 10 
marginata 
12 stylosa 1 2 8 - 5 
systyla 1 2 3 - 5 
Desvauxii 2 - 
7 10 11 
16 
opaca 3 - 
gallicoides 5 
MonsonifR 3 - 
- - 
] 3 arvensis 1-3 5 
10 11 12 
bibracteata 12 3 4- 
11 
509 
Rosa sepium, Thuiller.
" R.
rubiginosa, var.
sepium, DC.
prodr.'' 
Province - 3.
Southern slope of Hind Head, Surrey, 1869.
Additional species, recorded by Mr. Baker in the Journal of 
Botany, April, 1870 ; who writes, " I saw only a single bush .
. .
and could find no other anywhere else in the neighbourhood." 
The Rosa sepium of Eng. Bot.
Supp.
2558 is the BiUietii of 
Baker's Monograph.
Sanguisorba {officinalis) media, Don.
(not Linn.) 
Province - 13 or 16.
West of Scotland ; G.
Don.
Syn. 354.* Cyb. i.
360.
A variety of S.
officinalis; Mr. Borrer.
Sanguisorba canadensis, Linn.
Province - 15.
Perth ; Mr. John Sim.
Error ?
Journal of Botany, iv.
392.
Perhaps the Canadian plant 
may have been found and rightly named ; for it is pretty manifest 
that somebody has made a practice of introducing foreign plants to 
wild-seeming localities about Perth.
510 24.
EOSACEJi:.
Poterium (muricatum) platylophium, Jord.
Provinces 12 3-5.
" Som. Wight.
Warw." And elsewhere.
Syn. 355.* Not clear to me, apart from the next.
Poterium {muricatum) stenolopMum, Jord.
Provinces - 3 4.
" Newmarket, Cambr." " St. Margaret's, Kent." 
Syn. 355.* "There is so much difference between the fruits of 
the two forms, that very probably they ought to be separated 
as sub-species"; Eng. hot.
iii.
135.
But a specimen from St.
Margaret's, given to me labelled " stenolophium" by Dr. Syme 
himself, has the " denticulated" wings attributed to platylophium 
in Eng. hot.
Alchemilla (vulgaris) montana, " Willd." 
Provinces - - 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 - - 13 14 15.
Midx.
to Aberdeen.
Syn. 356.
Eng. hot.
iii.
138.
Glot.
flo.
35.
Among the specimens 
of A.
vulgaris, promiscuously in my British herbarium, 1 find 
those with the " petioles and under-side of leaves pilose " are more 
numerous than are those with the same parts "sub-glabrous"; 
and so far it would seem that the alternative variety " genuina" 
may be the less usual form.
Alchemilla conjuncta, Bab.
Provinces - 7 - 12 - 15 16.
See pages 469 — 70 of this volume.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
363.
iii.
423.
Eng. hot.
iii.
139.
Mespilus germanica, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - - 9 10.
Alien?
Cyb. i.
364.
iii.
424.
Some reliable botanists hold this 
tree to be truly native in England.
Cratagus [Oxyacantha) oxyacanthoides, Thuil.
Provinces - - 3 10 (11 - - - 15).
And elsewhere.
Syn. 360.
Usually this has not been well distinguished in books; 
the aggregate name " Oxyacantha" being set against the segregate 
name monogyna or eriocarpa.
In Surrey this appears equally wild 
with the latter or type variety ; but it is less frequent, and 
certainly less sown.
Pyrus (communis) Achras, " Boreau," E.
B. 3.
Province - - 3.
And elsewhere ?
Syn. 362.
In English Botany this is separated as a sub-species 
from the commoner variety there named Pyraster.
The evidence 
for it, as a tree really wild in England, is most unsatisfactory.
Pyrus (Malus) acerha, DC.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 - - - 9.
[Scotland ?] 
Syn. 363.
Two chief varieties of Crab-Apple are found in hedge- 
rows and copses.
The true or austere Crab has nearly glabrous 
leaves, with small very sour fruit on slender pedicels.
The wilding 
Apple has the under-side of the leaves and other surfaces clothed 
with cottony pubescence ; its fruit is usually larger and less sour, 
24.
EOSACEiE.
511 
and on a shorter and thicker stalk.
This latter is the more 
frequent variety, or rather series of varieties, filling up the interval 
between the sour Crab and the Garden Apples ; and no doubt it is 
often produced directly from the latter, if not always so.
I have 
seen the acerba certainly in Surrey and Cheshire, and very 
probably in other counties, without making special notes of it.
In English Botany we are told that it is " not unfrequent, and 
generally distributed in the south and midland counties of 
England," but that it has never been seen in Scotland by the 
Editor.
Pyrm {Aria) eu-Aria, Syme in E.
B. 3.
Provinces 19 3-5.
(Teesdale.
Scotland.) 
Syn. 365.
This segregate unfortunately has been labelled " scan- 
dica" by some botanists, and thus the recorded localities of the 
two have become confused in books.
Pyrus [Aria) rupicola, Syme in E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 7 8 - 10 11 - - 14 - - - 18.
Syn. 365.
Devon to Sutherland ; Eng. bot.
This is the Aria of 
many botanists ; and really I do not see how to distinguish it 
satisfactorily from the eu-A.ria.
Pyrus (Aria) scandica, E.
B. 3.
P. intermedia, Ehrh.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 - 7 - - 10 11.
Partly errors?
Arran?
Syn. 365.
Cyb. iii.
348.
Bot. Gaz.
iii.
34.
The line of separa- 
tion between this segregate and Aria or eu-Aria, on the one side, — • 
between this a.u&.
pinnatifida or fennica, on the other side, is traced 
differently by botanists.
Specimens from Arran have very usually 
been labelled as pinnatifida or fennica ; but Dr. BosweU Syme 
informs me, while these pages are going through the press, that 
the Arran species is scandica not fennica.
Pyrus {Aria) pinnatifida, Sm. P.
fennica, Bab. man.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 - - 8 14 16.
Partly alien.
Syn. 367.
Cyb. iii.
347.
Wild in Arran, subject to the recently 
formed opinion of Dr. Syme that it is scandica, not fennica, which 
occurs there.
Mr. Borrer held it wild also in North Hants, 
between Farnham and Famborough; where it was observed 
sparingly along with Aria and Aueuparia, both more plentifully.
A specimen in my herbarium was picked by Mr. James Macnab 
in Darenth Wood, Kent ; and this I cannot separate from Arran 
examples distributed by Professor Balfour and Mr. Bell through 
the Botanical Society of Edinburgh.
For the present I must 
dissent from the changed opinion of Dr. Syme, by regarding the 
Arran pinnatifida (Sm.) as the same species with specimens sent 
me from Sweden labelled hyhrida and fennica; not the same with 
others also sent me thence labelled as scandica.
Both these 
apparent species differ evidently from eu-Aria and rupicola of 
Syme, by their venation and tomentum.
512 S5.
0NAGEACE2:.
Pyrus domestica, Linn.
Provinces 13 3-5 - - 8.
All erroneous, except 5.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
369.
One aged tree in Wyre Forest, Worcester 
or Stafford, makes the only certain locality ; and it may have been 
planted there.
35.
Onageaoe^.
Epilobium [angustifolium) brachycarpum, Leighton.
Provinces - 3 - - 5 7 - - 10 - - - 14.
Anywhere native ?
Alien?
Syn. 367.
Cyb. i.
370.
Possibly this variety, dis- 
tinguished by its short capsules and other characters, is always of 
garden origin, though established in places by its creeping roots.
Epilobium rosmarinifoUum, Haenke.
Province - 15.
Glen TUt, East Perth ; Mr. Robertson only.
Error?
See Annals of Natural History, second series, 17, 317.
Epilobium [parviflorum) rivulare, Wahl.
Epilobium {parviflorum) intermedium, Merat.
Provinces .
. .
? Distribution not ascertained for either.
Syn. 869.
Two slight varieties mentioned in Eng. bot.
iv.
13 ; 
the former being " sub-glabrous " ; the latter having " most of the 
leaves alternate." Perhaps hardly requiring notice here.
Epilobium (tetragonum) eu-tetragonum, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - - 8.
No certain locality in Scotland.
Syn. 373.
See page 63 of the present volume.
Epilobium [tetragonum) obscurum, Schreber.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15.
Orkney?
Syn. 373.
More frequent than Ep. eu-tetragonum.
Epilobium virgatum, "Fries." Bab. man.
ed.
1, S, 3.
Provinces - 3 3 4 - - - 8 10 11 - 13 - 15 16.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. i.
373.
iii.
350.
Ill understood ; apparently 
states of eu-tetragonum and obscurum confused together; but in 
editions 4, 5, 6 of the 'Manual' it is made simply synonymous 
with E.
obscurum.
Epilobium Lamyi, " F.
Schultz." 
Provinces - 3 3 4 5.
Kent; Mr. T.
Moore.
Hants, Hereford, etc.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
350.
Phytol.
iv.
933.
Apparently poor 
examples of Ep. obscurum thus named.
Epilobium (alpinum) anagallidifolium, Lam.
Provinces - 11 13 - - 15 16.
Syn. 374.
A new name for the plant which has been usually (and, 
I believe, quite rightly) named Epilobium alpinum by the botanists 
of Britain.
After separating this form from the Linnean alpinum, 
it is supposed that the remnant segregate would be held limited to 
three Highland provinces ; all the alpinum of England being 
assigned to this present segregate.
26.
HALOEAGIACE^.
613 
(Enothera hiennis, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
375.
Introduced from America.
Now seen occa- 
sionally in abundance on waste spots where the ground is sandy, 
both on the coast and inland.
(Enothera odorata, Jacq.
Provinces 1 - 3.
Devon.
Somerset.
Middlesex.
Casual.
{CE.
pumila, Linn, is mentioned in Middlesex flo.) 
Cireaa {alpina) intermedia, Ehrh.
Provinces 5 - 7 8 9 10 ?
13 13 14 15 16.
Partly errors ?
Syn. 378.
Cyb. i.
377.
Eng. hot.
iv.
39.
This is made up from 
specimens which are more or less dubious between alpina and 
lutetiana.
Several examples received from Continental botanists, 
labelled as the intermedia of Ehrhart, best unite with alpina.
The 
same usually holds true with the specimens so labelled by English 
botanists ; although some of the latter extend their ideas of inter- 
media to examples which would be assigned to lutetiana by myself.
I am unable to trace any satisfactory line of severance between 
alpina and intermedia.
In the garden, alpina and lutetiana remain 
conspicuously dissimilar through many years.
36.
HA10EAGIACE.B.
Myriophyllum [verticillatum) pectinatum, DC.
Provinces - - 3 4 5, etc.
Nearly through England?
Syn. 380.
According to English Botany this and the type form 
(" genuinum " with longer, more leaf like, bracts) are " about 
equally common"; and the two varieties "pass insensibly into 
each other." Is there not something unsound or inconsistent 
implied in these two admissions?
To take the two contrary 
extremes of a series, — to name one as the type, and the other as 
the aberrant variety, — and so virtually to ignore all the inter- 
mediate forms, which constitute the insensible grada.tion between 
them, while thus dividing the aggregate into its two extremes ?
The intermediate should rather be the true type of the species; 
unless in those cases where one extreme is the usual or prevalent 
form, and the other only an occasional departure from it, which 
cannot be declared the case when the two are "about equally 
common." 
Ceratophyllum (aquaticum) suhmersum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - [10 14].
Localities uncertain.
Syn. 387.
Cyb. i.
383.
iii.
430.
Eng. hot.
iv.
124.
Connected 
with demersum by the intermediate apiculatum ?
But the latter 
has not been found certainly in England.
3u 
514 28.
TAMAEISCACE^.
— 33.
GEOSSULAEIACEiE.
S8.
TAMARISCACEyB.
Tamarix anglica, Webb.
T. gallica, Sm.
Provinces 12 3 4-6.
Planted near the coast for hedges, etc.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
385.
An unfortunate specific name.
30.
PoBTDLACACEiE.
Montia (fontana) rivularis, Gmel'.
Provinces .
. .
? Not separately noted, by the seeds.
Syn. 394.
Perhaps ought to be considered as a sub-species ; E.
B. 
iv.
136.
Claytonia perfoliata, Don.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - - 9.
May occur elsewhere.
Casual.
Cultivated in gardens ; easily becomes weed-like.
Claytonia ahinoides, Sims.
Provinces - 8 9 - 13 - 16.
Derb.
Ches.
Lan. Renf.
Bute.
Casual.
Reported as Ukely to become naturalised " in woods." 
31.
iLLECEBRACEiE.
Herniaria {vulgaris) glabra, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 - 8 9 - (14 15).
Partly erroneous?
Syn. 397.
Cyb. i.
388.
A sub-variety " siibciliata" in Cornwall.
Herniaria [vulgaris) ciliata, Bab.
Province 1.
Lizard Point, Cornwall ; Bab. man.
Syn. 397.
Cyb. i.
388.
A very dubious species.
Herniaria hirsuta, Linn.
Provinces [1] - 3 - 5 - [8].
Middlesex.
Warwick.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
389.
I have seen a specimen of this which was 
found in Warwickshire ; and according to the Flora of Middlesex 
it was found at Highgate by Dickson.
The Botanical Society of 
Edinburgh distributed Cornish specimens of vulgaris labelled 
impartially both for glabra and for hirsuta.
33.
Geossulahiaoe^.
Ribes [rubrum) sylvestre, Reich.
Provinces - 2, etc.
Var. Bromfieldianum, E.
B. 3.
Syn. 404.
The name sylvestre was used by Dr. Bromfield in the 
Phytologist, ii.
519 for a variety of R.
rubrum.
His wordy paper 
includes several inaccuracies; to correct which would make this 
present notice inconveniently long also.
The Editor of EngUsh 
Botany, edition third, unites the sylvestre and petraum along with 
spicatum into one " sub-species," to counterpoise Ribes sativum for 
34.
CRASSUI.ACE^.
515 
the other.
This is an unfortunate division and naming ; some of 
the hest garden varieties of the Eed Currant corresponding more 
closely with his character of sylvestre, than they do with the 
character given for his sativum ; for instance, by their pubescent 
leaves and coloured calyx, with less pendulous racemes while in 
flower.
I do not believe Hibes rubrum really native in the southern 
counties, although it often springs from seeds scattered by birds.
By an unlucky mistake in Eng. Bot.
pages 44 — 5, a remark of 
mine about the shape of the young fruit in the half-wild Goose- 
berry, has been misplaced to the Eed Currant sub-species sylvestre.
Rihes {rubrum) spicatwn, Robson.
Provinces - 10 - 16.
Extinct in Yorkshire.
Skye, 1868.
Syn. 404.
Said to have been found by Professor Lawson and 
Mr. Fox " in abundance, in Skye, in 1868." Apparently a form 
of rubrum with the raohis still less developed (or simply less 
pendulous) than in the petraum of Smith.
While the garden 
varieties are more or less divergent from typical rubrum sylvestre 
in one direction, the wild petraum and spicatum of EngUsh botanists 
are divergences from it in the contrary direction.
34.
Ceassulace*.
Sedum [Telephium) Fabaria, Koch.
Provinces - 5 - 7 - 13 13.
Salop.
Cam. Westm.
Eirkc.
Syn. 409.
A specimen from Lydhole, Salop, collected by Mr.
Hinds, has leaves stiU narrower and more cuneate downwards than 
are those of the Westmoreland plant represented in English 
Botany, third edition.
But between the Salop specimen and the 
quite opposite extreme drawn for purpurascens, in the same work, 
come too many intermediate forms to allow of any certainty that 
the extremes have been well designated " sub-species." In Surrey, 
plants brought from dry sterile spots into garden ground, acquired 
considerably wider leaves than they produced in their wild or 
quasi- wild condition.
The distribution set forth for Telephium, 
on page 178, may be held to represent that of the other segregate 
or " snh-speoies" purpurascens.
Sedum dasyphyllum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 - 12 - 14.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
398.
Only on walls ?
Sedum album, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15 ; with exception of 13.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
399.
iii.
434.
This has been held native at Pen- 
pole Rooks, below Bristol.
Some years ago Mr. Flower shewed 
me the locality, a cavity from which stone might have been 
quarried formerly, and which was evidently then used as a 
receptacle for -garden refuse from the adjacent grounds of a 
516 34.
CEASSULACEffi.
gentleman's house.
The Sedum had become well established 
there.
I do not recollect now whether it was the sub-species 
teretifolivm, or otherwise.
Sedum [album) teretifoUum, "Haworth'"; Borrer.
Province - 5.
Native on the Malvern HiUs ; Mr. Lees.
Denizen or Alien.
Syn. 413.
Cyb. i.
397.
iii.
434.
The opinion 
of Mr. Lees must be of some worth, in the question of seeming 
nativity ; but that gentleman is the authority also for Delphinium 
Consolida being native on Swansea Bay (Cyb. iii.
877); for Men- 
ziesia polifoUa being found on the Bromsgrove Lickey (Cyb. ii.
152); and for other very deniable notions in topographical botany.
Sedum micranthum, Bast.
Province - 3.
" At Arundel and elsewhere in Sussex." 
Ambiguity.
Entirely unknown to rae, unless as a garden plant ; 
equally unknown to the Editor of English Botany, third edition.
" S.
micranthum represents S.
album in the Linnean herbarium"; 
Eng. bot.
iv.
63.
Sedum sexangulare, Linn.
Provinces 193436-8- 10- 13.
Several erroneously?
Alien.
Cyb. i.
401.
iii.
435.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
94.
Phytol.
iii.
1060.
S. sexangulare is represented in the Linnean Herbarium by the 
lax form of S.
acre; Eng. bot.
iv.
56.
Perhaps the same may be 
true of some of the provinces indicated above.
Sedum reflexum, Linn.
S. eu-reflexum, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 to 16 ; more or less established.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
401.
iii.
435.
Planted on banks, etc.
Sedum glaucum, Donn.
S. albescens, Haworth.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 - - 7 8.
As reported, but very uncertain.
Alien.
Closely allied to S.
reflexum..
The " glaucous" equally as 
the "green" leaves are occasionally reflexed.
Sedum anopetalum, DC.
Province 1.
Devon ; but perhaps some error.
Ambiguity.
Phytologist, v.
47.
Eng. bot.
iii.
63.
Sedum stellatum, Linn.
Province - 2.
Sussex ; an escape from Mr. Borrer 's garden.
Casual.
See particulars in Phytologist, v.
47.
Sedum Cepcea, Linn.
Province - 3.
Hedgerley, Bucks ; Mrs. W.
James !
Casual.
I have no particulars about this plant.
Sempervivum tectorum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Cornwall to Moray.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
403.
iii.
435.
Almost exclusively on or about 
houses and walls.
But in the Flora of Cornwall and Devon, 
Mr. Keys writes, "I do not think it is in all cases 'planted', 
35.
SAXIFEAGACE^.
517 
having seen it in both counties in out-of-the-way nooks, which, if 
not always inaccessible, could offer no temptation to any one to 
take the trouble to plant it there." 
Cotyledon lutea, Huds.
Provinces 1 10.
Somerset ; (Clement) Huds.
York ; Tofield.
Error.
Cyb. i.
404.
The plant of it in Chelsea Garden, given by 
Hudson, was more likely brought from Mr. Clement's garden, not 
from Yorkshire.
35.
SAXIFBAGAOEiE.
Saxifraga Cotyledon, Linn.
Province - 12.
Westmoreland ; Phytol.
ii.
429.
Error.
Cyb. i.
405.
Perhaps more truly an imposition.
Saxifraga umhrosa, Linn.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 - - 8 9 10 11 19 13 14 15.
Alien?
Cyb. i.
406.
Planted in many places.
Mr. Tatham 
deemed it native in Heseltine Gill, West Yorkshire.
And Mr.
Brand is quoted in Cyb. Brit, as follows : " On Craig-y-barns, a hiU 
to the northward of the Park at Dunkeld, covering acres, and, in 
some places, to the exclusion of everything else, forming the entire 
turf.
But for the occurrence also of Hypericum calycinum, and 
other introduced plants, it would have been considered native." 
But against this fairly-given testimony of Mr. Brand there is 
something more positive than the suggestive counter-evidence of 
Hypericum calycinum and its associates.
In the ' Correspondence 
of Sir J.
E. Smith' i.
516-7, we find a letter from Mr. Winch, 
expressly stating that the Saxifrage was introduced into the woods 
at Blair Athol, by the gardener.
Whether his introductions 
extended as far as Craig-y-barns does not (from memory) appear in 
the letter.
Saxifraga Oeum, Linn.
Provinces - 10 11 [12] 13 14 15 16.
" Only where planted." 
Alien.
Cyb. i.
405.
[12 Westmoreland.
Cumberland.] 
Saxifraga rotundifolia, Linn.
Province - 13.
Cumberland ; Phytologist, ii.
376.
Error.
Cyb. i.
404.
Eecorded on hearsay report only.
Saxifraga Sibthorpii, Boiss.
& Sprun.
Province - 16.
Near the Crinan Canal, Argyle; Mr. W.
Bennett.
Casual.
Eng. bot.
iv.
87.
" S.
Cymbalaria." 
Saxifraga muscoides, Wulf.
Province - 12 - - ?
Westmoreland; Huds.
"Highlands"; E.B. 3.
Error.
Cyb. i.
416.
Eng. flo.
ii.
272.
Eng. bot.
iv.
87.
518 38.
UMBELLIFEEaj.
Saxifraga pygmaa, Haw.
Province?
" Highlands of Scotland ; Mr. James Donn." 
Ambiguity.
Smith's English Flora, ii.
273.
Saxifraga (hypnoides) platypetala, Sm.
Provinces - 7 - - 10 - 13 - - 15.
As recorded.
Syn. 431.
Dr. Boswell Syme places this as the type form of 
S. hypnoides, including with it Smith's elongella as a synonym^ 
simply.
His alternative or second form is named gemmifera in 
English Botany.
This latter is far the more frequent, according 
to my own observations, and why it should be assigned to the 
subordinate place of variety, instead of being the leading variety or 
type form, is not made clear.
Other names appear in books, but I 
am unprepared to say anything about the distribution of the special 
forms they are supposed to mean ; such are Imte-virens and denudata, 
names bestowed upon varieties of hypnoides alleged to occur on the 
Highland mountains.
Saxifraga hirta, " Donn Cant." 
Province -7 -?
North Wales and Scotland ; Eng. Flo.
Ambiguity.
Quite unknown to me.
Saxifraga pedatifida, Ehrh.
Province - 15.
Clova mountains, Forfar ; G.
Don in E.
F. 
Error.
Cyb. i.
417.
iii.
437.
" Don does not pretend to have 
found it, but sends a garden specimen, saying he has heard it 
has been found iq Scotland " ; Dr. BosweU Syme, letter, 1864.
Mitella diphylla, Linn.
Province - 5.
Stoke on Trent, Staffordshire.
Casual ?
" An American plant, originally escaped from a garden, 
on a bank near Stoke upon Trent " ; Garner's Natural History of 
the county of Stafford.
38.
Umbellifek^.
Astrantia major, Linn.
Province - 5.
Hereford.
Shropshire.
[1 Devon.] 
Alien.
Cyb. i.
424.
The A.
major is recorded in Eavenshaw's 
Flora of Devon, on authority of the Eev. G.
B. Warren ; but 
Mr. Eyre Parker says that it is the A.
minor which is found in 
Mr. Warren's locality.
Echinophora spinosa, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3 - [13].
Dorset.
Kent.
[Lake Lancashire.] 
Extinct Casual?
Cyb. i.
464.
iii.
447.
Dill.
R. Syn. 330.
Petroselinwn sativum, Hoffm.
Provinces 1 3, etc.
Casual in 3 to 16.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
439.
Established on cliffs of the south coast.
38.
UMBELLIFERa:.
519 
Trinia Kitaibelii, Bieb.
Province 1.
Uphill, Somerset ; Joseph Woods.
Error.
English Botany, ed.
3, iv.
179.
Helosciadium [nodifloruni) repens, Koch.
Provinces - - 3 4 - 14.
Suffolk; Paget !
Hadd.
Edin.
Syn. 454.
Cyb. i.
431.
By name this plant is reported from the 
first 14 provinces, and from two-thirds of their included counties.
The only specimens I have seen which truly accord with the book 
characters of "umbellis pedunculo brevioribus" are from Mid- 
dlesex, Suffolk, and Edinburgh ; all others seen so labelled being 
simply prostrate or creeping states of nodiflorum.
The figure in 
English Botany, no.
143], repeated in the third edition, is the 
pseudo-repens of the London Catalogue, the variety with short 
peduncles.
The two varieties pass gradually into each other ; two 
of my examples even having long and short peduncles on the same 
plant.
Ammi majus, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - 6.
Surrey.
Middlesex.
Gloucester.
Casual.
Journal of Botany, January, 1863 ; where it required 
thirty-two lines of close print, — say, near 400 words, — to record 
Dr. St.
Brody's remarkable discovery of some chance examples of 
this foreign plant near Gloucester.
How many volumes would be 
filled in doing the like with every chance locality of every foreign 
plant so found anywhere in England ?
In the Flora of Middlesex 
it took a line and half for the record of a similar locality for the 
same imported plant.
Both this and Ammi Visnaga are enumerated 
in the list of foreign plants introduced into Surrey among com 
imported for a Distillery.
Carum Carui, Linn.
Provinces - 8 - 10 - 12.
As a Casual in several others.
Alien or Denizen.
It seems desirable to make a printed record 
here from a manuscript note about this plant which was communi- 
cated to me by letter from Mr. Thomas Kirk: —  " I have picked 
the Carui on the banks of the L.
& N.
W. Railway at various 
spots between Hampton and Brandon, a length of 14 or 15 miles.
Curiously enough, a policeman at Hampton informed me that he 
recollected a package of Caraway seeds being injured whilst on a 
truck, and he supposed the seeds would be scattered ' all the way 
up the line.' It is sufficiently plentiful at Hampton to be collected 
by the porters and others for culinary purposes." Compare this 
account with Teesdale's record quoted in ' Cyhele Britannica ' and 
'The Botanist's Guide.' 
Bupleurum protracium.
Link.
Province -3.
Surrey ;.Trimen.
Middlesex; T.
D. flo.
126.
Casual.
" Probably introduced with foreign seed ; " Midx.
flo.
The 
620 38.
UMBELLIFEE^.
same origin at Wandsworth and Mitcham, Surrey, as shewn in the 
Journal of Botany, iv.
150.
Archangelica officinalis, Hoffm.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 11 - - 14.
Misnomers in some ?
Casual.
Cyb. i.
451.
iii.
444.
Flora of Middlesex, 130.
Peueedanum Ostruthium, Koch.
Provinces 5 - - 8 to 16.
Chiefly in provinces 10 11 12.
Alien.
Cyb. i.
453.
Mr. Baker holds it originally planted about 
farm houses in York and Durham, for use as a cow medicine.
See 
Botany of North Yorkshire, 238, and New Flora of Northumberland 
and Durham, 180.
Tordylium officinale, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Middlesex and Oxford, through misnomers.
Error.
Cyb. i.
45S.
Essex; Eev..S. Palmer, in Mag. nat.
hist.
ii.
385 ; but Mr. Palmer was a sad mis-recorder.
Daucus (Carota) maritimus, With.
Provinces 123--67-9-11-- [14] - 16.
D. gummifer, Lam.
Syn. 489.
Cyb. i.
456.
iii.
444.
Seeds sown in a Surrey garden, 
two different years, in each case produced D.
Carota only ; one set 
of the seeds brought by myself from the coast of Jersey ; the others 
given to me by Dr. Boswell Syme.
Besides this direct change, 
intermediate forms occur on the coast ; while on inland examples 
of Carota, growing on dry exposed ground, the umbel occasionally 
remains perfectly convex in fruit.
" Daucus Oingidiuni; Linn." Bab. man.
ed.
2, not 3.
Provinces 1 - 3.
" Kent, Cornwall." " Probably distinct." 
Ambiguity.
Unknown to me.
The intermediates mentioned 
above ?
Caucalis latifolia, Linn.
Turgenia latifolia, Hoffm.
Provinces 12 3 4-6.
[8.
Dovedale ; Dr. Johnson, in B.
G.] 
Casual.
Cyb. i.
457.
iii.
445.
Seldom found.
Anthriscus CerefoUum, Hoffm.
Provinces 1 to 15, interruptedly.
Devon to Moray.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
463.
iii.
446.
An escape from gardens.
Charophyllum aureum, Linn.
Provinces - 14 15.
Edinburgh and Eorfar; G.
Don only.
Error or Casual.
Cyb. i.
463.
Flora of Forfarshire, 85.
Charophyllum aromaticum, Linn.
Province - 15.
Forfar; G.
Don, sole authority?
Error.
Cyb. i.
463.
Flora of Forfarshire, 86.
Coriandrum sativum, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 - - 8 9 - 11 - 13 - IB.
Kent to Aberdeen.
Casual.
Cyb. i.
464.
I have not seen specimens of this.
40.
CAPEIFOLIACE^i — 41.
EUBIACE^.
521 
40.
CAPEIFOLIAOE.E.
Lonicera Caprifolium, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - 7 - 9 10 - 13 13 14.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
10.
iii.
448.
Frequently planted ; and stated to 
have become well established in Cambridgeshire.
Lonicera Xylosteum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 12 - 14 15.
Wild in Sussex?
Alien?
Cyb. ii.
10.
iii.
448.
"In a coppice called the 'Hacketts,' 
to the east of Hough Bridge, four miles from Arundel, plentiful 
and certainly wild"; Mr. Borrer in B.
G. 1805.
At that date, 
Mr. Borrer was a young botanist ; at a later age, experience had 
made him much less ready in declaring garden shrubs " certainly 
wild." Besides, " wUd " is an ainbiguous term.
A plant may 
have become certainly wild, although originally introduced by 
human agency ; ex.
gr.
the Udbra canadensis and Impatiens fulva ; 
which are now wEd, although not natives aboriginally.
Lonicera alpigena, Linn.
Province - 14.
CoUinton woods, near Edinburgh.
Planted Alien.
See Enghsh Botany, iv.
210.
Diervilla canadensis, WUld.
Provice - 15.
Planted in Forfarshire.
Alien.
Explanations in Cyb. Brit.
Supp.
34.
Symphoricarpus racemosiis, Mich.
Symphoria, Hort.
Provinces ...
? Eng. hot.
edit.
3, iv.
210.
Alien.
I am not aware of any alleged locality ; and thus include 
the shrub here only because enumerated in English Botany, as 
cited.
It belongs to a small group of shrubs which are often 
planted for ornament, and which keep the ground by their 
creeping roots ; such as the Diervilla above mentioned, the 
Hypericum hircinUm, Spircea salicifolia, etc.
41.
RubiacejE.
Galium {verwn) oohroleucum, " Wolf." 
Provinces 12 3.
Gr. elato-verum, Eng. hot.
iv.
214.
Hybrid ?
Cornwall and Devon ; A.
Briggs !
Sussex.
Kent.
Galium cinereum, Sm. G.
difFusum, Don. Hook.
Provinces - 14 15.
Edinburgh and Forfar; G.
Don.
Ambiguity.
See Eng. Bot.
iv.
216.
Eng. Flo.
i. 203.
Galium (palustre) Witheringii, Sm.
Provinces all ?
" Rather rare ; " Eng. bot.
iv.
223.
Syn. 515.
Cyb. ii.
14.
It would seem that authors and collectors 
apply the name ' Witheringii ' differently.
If it be understood 
simply to mean G.
palustre with the stem hispid, not smooth, 
then it represents a plant not at all rare, I think.
3x 
622 41.
ETJBIACE^.
Galium (palustre) elongatum, Presl.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 S - - 8 9 10 11.
Infrequent ?
Syn. 515.
Differing from ordinary G.
palustre chiefly by its 
much larger flowers and fruit ; otherwise, very similar.
Made the 
first or type form in English Botany ; while the name ' genuinum ' 
is given to the more usual form, placed as a second variety.
Galium debile, Desv.
G. constrictum, Ohaub.
Province - 10.
Exchange Club report for 1858.
Ambiguity.
Probably " passed over as G.
uliginosum,.'' 
Galium {erectum ?) aristatum, Sm.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; G.
Don.
Syn. 518.
" It is evidently one of the intermediate forms which 
connect the two sub-species " of Mollugo, namely, erectum and 
elatum ; Eng. bot.
iv.
217.
Galium [Mollugo) scabrum, With.
Province - 5.
Near Worcester ; Stokes in With arr.
Syn. 519.
A species, by Withering; a variety of Mollugo, by 
Smith ; disregarded by subsequent describers.
Galium (Mollugo) insubricum, " Gaud.
Koch." 
Province - 12.
Winandermere ; Eev. C.
A, Stevens.
Syn. 619.
Bab. man.
"A distinct species?" The " G.
insu- 
bricum, Gaud." of the Botany of North Yorkshire, perhaps is the 
next variety, the Bakeri of English Botany, not this present one ?
Galium [Mollugo) Bakeri, Syme.
Province - 10.
Near Thirsk, Yorkshire ; J.
G. Baker.
Syn. 519.
" One of three or four of the intermediate forms which 
connect G.
erectum with G.
elatum " ; Eng. bot.
iv.
218.
Galium [sylvestre) montanum, VUl.
Provinces - 8 - 10, etc.
G. pusillum of Cyb. Brit.
Syn. 520.
Made the type of sylvestre in E.
B. iv.
220.
Galium [sylvestre) nitidulum, ThuU.
Provinces - 8 - 10.
Botany of North Yorkshire, 242.
Syn. 520.
See English Botany, iv.
221 and 232.
Galium commutatum, Jordan ?
Province - 10.
Cronkley Scars, North Yorkshire ; Baker.
Ambiguity.
" The Teesdale plant, supposed to be G.
commu- 
tatum of Jordan, for specimens of which I am obliged to Mr.
Baker, is certainly not the plant described by Grenier and 
Godron "; Eng. bot.
iv.
221 ; — but see also page 232.
Galium saccharatum, AU.
" G.
vernioosum, E.
B." 
Provinces - 10 - 15.
[3 - 8, misnomers.] 
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
19 and iii.
449.
Galium' spurium, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 11 12 - - 15.
Mostly erroneous.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
30.
A synonym for Q.
VaiUantii in province 3.
41.
BUBIACEJE.
— 43.
VALEEIANACE^.
523 
Casual in 10 and possibly 15.
Misnomers of G.
tricorne in 
others.
Asperula taurina, Linn.
Provinces - 8 - 13 - 14 15.
Leio.
Westm.
Hadd.
Edin.
Perth.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
S3, iii.
450.
Bng. hot.
iv.
229.
Asperula arvensis, Linn.
Provinces 1-3-10-13.
Dev. Midx.
Herts.
York.
Renf.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
23.
Eng. hot.
iv.
230.
Crucianella stylosa, DC.
E. B.
3. 
Province - 10.
Scarborough, Yorkshire; J.
G. Baker.
Casual.
On a railway embankment.
42.
VALERIANAaE.E, 
Centranthus ruber, DO.
Provinces 1 to 11 - - 14.
Escaped from gardens.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
24.
iii.
529.
Well established in chalk-pits in 
the southern provinces.
Centranthus Calcitrapa, Dufr.
Province - - 3.
Garden walls, Kent and Middlesex.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
25.
Phytologist, iii.
649.
Valeriana (officinalis) sambueifolia, Mikan.
Provinces all.
Cornwall to Orkney.
See page 205.
Syn. 532.
Cyb. ii.
36.
" Sambueifolia " is simply a second name 
for the ordinary or usual form of Linnean V.
officinalis in Britain 
and elsewhere ; as explained on pages 448 — 51.
Valeriana [officinalis) Mikanii, Syme E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 3 3 4.
Likely in other provinces.
Syn. 533.
Cyb. ii.
36.
Number of leaflets very variable.
Valeriana pyrenaica, Linn.
Provinces 5-7 13 13 14 15 16.
[4 Ipswich.] 
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
27.
Well established in Scotland.
Valerianella carinata, Lois.
Provinces 1 - 3 - 5 - 7 8 - 10.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
37.
iii.
334.
An escape from culture.
Valerianella (dentata) mixta, Dufr, 
Provinces 13 3 10.
Common ; Eng. hot.
iv.
343.
Syn. 537.
Cyb. ii.
28.
A slight variety, chiefly noticeable be- 
cause several times mislabelled as eriocarpa.
Valerianella eriocarpa, Desv, 
Province 5.
[2 - 7 - 10 - 14, by misnomers only?] 
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
38.
iii.
356.
In English Botany we are told 
that Dr. BosweU Syme has actually seen a specimen alleged to 
have been found in Worcestershire in 1845.
524 43.
DIPSACE^.
— 44.
COMPOSITiE.
43.
DIPSACE.B.
Dipsacus fullonum, Mill.
Provinces 1 2 - - 5 6 - - 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Partly misnomers ?
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
39.
An occasional waif from culture.
44.
C0MP0SIT.E.
Tragopogon (pratensis) grandiflonis, E.
B. 3.
Province - - 3.
Kent and Surrey ; Eng. bot.
v. 139.
Syn. 344.
This remains unknown to myself.
Of the other two 
forms, treated together on page 307, the minor is much more 
frequent.
In herbarium specimens, the relative length of florets 
and phyllaries depends partly on the age of the head when 
pressed, partly on the degree of pressure used ; but the relative 
length differs even at first expansion of the head or compound 
flower, although becoming less after expansion.
I am not pre- 
pared to state the distribution of an intermediate form, apart from 
the two extremes of minor and grancliflorus.
Tragopogon porrifalius, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 ; chiefly in 1 to 5.
Casual in 7 to 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
34; treated as a denizen.
Two forms of this 
also are mentioned in Eng. Bot.
v. 141, difiering by the relative 
length of florets and phyllaries ; perhaps in this case, too, varying 
with age and pressure.
Picris [hieraeioides) arvalis, Jord.
Province - 8.
" Groby Pool and Market Bosworth, Leicestershire." 
Syn. 847.
Eng. bot.
v. 136.
Not known to me.
Picris striata, Jord.
P. hieraeioides, var.
Province - 3.
Herts ; Eev. W.
W. Newbould.
Casual.
Eng. bot.
v. 317.
Equally unknown to me.
Leontodon [a,utumnalis) pratensis, '' Koch,'' E.
B. 3.
Provinces - IS 16.
Dalwhinnie !
Skye; Balf.
& Bab.
Syn. 550.
A synonym of Taraxaci, fide E.
B. v.
135.
My Dal- 
whinnie plant, from a corn-field there, differs from the ordinary 
state of autumnalis only by the copious green pubescence.
Taraxaci is single or few-flowered, with black wooUy pubescence.
Either one is but a slight va-riety.
Leontodon (autumnalis) Taraaiaci, Willd.
Provinces - - - [4] - - 7 15 16 17 18.
Syn. 580.
Cyb. ii.
39.
See preceding segregate.
Hypochairis (glabra) Balbisii, Lois.
Provinces - - 3 - 5.
Kent and Salop ; Bab. man.
Syn. 551.
Eng. hot.
v. 128—9.
44.
composite:.
525 
Prenanthus purpurea.
Lam.
Provinces - 14 - 16.
Skye ; Balf.
Bab. Ace.
Hebr.
S. 
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
44.
On Salisbury Craigs, Edinburgh, about 1839.
Crepis barbata, Linn.
Province 1.
On the Downs near Sidmouth, in 1833 ; W.
E. Crotch.
Casual ?
Reference lost ; where was this published ?
Crepis pulchra, Linn.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; G.
Don, sole authority.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
49.
Flora of Forfarshire, 99.
Hieracium (Pihsella) pilosissimum, Fries.
Provinces - 3 - - - - 7 8.
Wight.
Montgomery.
Derby.
Syn. 568.
H. Pilosella var.
peleterianum, Bab. man.
Hieracium stoloniferum, W.
K. 
Province - 14.
" Granton Railway banks, Oct. 1869." 
Ambiguity or Alien ?
Eng. hot.
v. 318.
See H.
dubium below.
Recorded as Scottish, in the Journal of Botany for November, 
1869, on authority of " Professor Balfour and Mr. J.
Saddler." 
The names of these two botanists stand on the title-page of a 
recent "Flora of Ediburgh," — a work which includes unquestioned 
so much that is most questionable.
A variety of Pilosella ?
Hieracium dubium, Sm. in Eng. Flora.
Provinces - ?
- - - 13 - ?
Derby ?
Westmoreland.
Scotland ?
Ambiguity.
Mr. Backhouse states that the figure of dubium in 
English Botany, 3333, was taken from garden specimens of 
H. stoloniferum of Fries, whilst Smith's description in the English 
Flora was made from H.
Auricula, Linn.
Hieracium Auricula, Sm. in Eng. Flora.
Province - 13.
On Dale-head, Westmoreland.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
53.
Phytol.
ii.
434.
Smith's description 
and figure in English Botany, 3368, are alleged by Mr. Backhouse 
to have been " taken from a Swiss specimen of H.
glaciale of Fries 
and Lachen." 
Hieracium collinum, Fries.
Province - 14.
Banks of the Ettrick, Selkirkshire.
Ambiguity?
Particulars in Journal of Botany, for December, 1868.
I am not aware whether the name has been confirmed by Dr. Bos- 
well Syme or Professor Babington ; nor whether the locality can 
be relied upon, as a native one, if assuming the name to have 
been correctly applied.
Hieracium aurantia/ium, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 - - 6 - - 9 10 11 13 ?
14 15 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
53.
An escape from gardens.
536 44.
coMPOSiTiE.
Hieracium (alpinum) Halleri, Hook.
Scot.
Province - 15.
Perth.
Forfar.
Syn. 570.
Hooker cited the figure of so-called viUoswm, in 
English Botany, 2379, for his Halleri ; Mr. Backhouse cites it for 
his eximium.
Hieracium divaricatum, G.
Don.
Province - 15.
Clova Mountains ; G.
Don.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
61.
"H.
lingulatum?" Backh.
mon.
30.
Hieracium rupestre, Bab. man.
ed.
3. 
Province - 15.
Aberdeenshire; Bab. man.
Ambiguity.
Oyb iii.
360.
Backhouse in Bot. Gaz.
iii.
46.
Hieracium nudicaule, Edmondstone.
Province - 15.
Perth.
Moray.
12 Westmoreland?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
54.
Phytologist iv.
843-4.
Hieracium imdsum, Tausch.
Hoppe ?
Provinces - 15 ~ 17.
Forfar ; Gard.
flo.
Eoss ; Bab. man.
Ambiguity.
As a variety of H.
murorum, in Man. ed.
3. 
Hieracium maculatum, Sm.
Provinces 12 3 4 5.
And elsewhere?
Alien.
This name has been used for maculate varieties of several 
modem species.
It is now specially applied to a plant known only 
on walls and about gardens, as an escape from cultivation, in 
Devon, Somerset, Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex, Norfolk, Warwick, 
and perhaps other counties.
See especially English Botany, 
edition third, v.
196.
Hieracium prcecox, Schultz.
Province - 7.
" Denbigh ; J.
E. Bowman." 
Ambiguity.
In the Journal of Botany for 1866, page 228, it is 
stated by Dr. Schultz that his H.
pracox occurs at Castle Dinas 
Bran, Denbighshire, and on the great Ormeshead, collected by 
Mr. Bowman, and deposited in the British Museum.
According 
to my herbarium, Mr. Bowman's specimens from Dinas Bran are 
more like pallidum or Gibsoni, while the pracox of Schultz is very 
like 7naculatum of Smith.
Hieracium pictum, Auct.
Provinces 5 - 7 - - - 11 12 13 - 15 16 17.
By reports.
Ambiguity.
Maculate varieties of sylvaticum, tridentatum, rigidum, 
gothicum, and perhaps some others, have passed under this name.
Hieracium plumbeum.
Fries.
Provinces - 11 - 15.
Durham ; Baker in Phytol.
iv.
64.
Scotland?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
363.
Bot. Gaz.
iii.
134.
This " is regarded 
by Fries as British, but as no native locahty is known to British 
botanists I am best satisfied to omit it"; Backhouse mon.
64.
Hieracium Schmidtii, " Tausch." Bab. man.
ed.
2. 
Provinces 7 8 - 10 - 12 - - 15.
44.
COMPOSITiE.
627 
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
56.
iii.
358.
Caernarvon, Leicester, York, 
Pertb; C.
C. Babington, in C.
B. ii.
56.
Westmoreland; Borrer, 
in Phytol.
ii.
434.
Forfar; J.
Backhouse, lq Phytol.
iii.
768.
Hieracium Oreades, Fries.
Province - 10.
" Yorkshire ; Dill." See Bab. man.
ed.
3. 
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
361.
Backhouse mon.
53.
Hieracium saxifragum, Fries.
Provinces - 10 or 11 - - 14 15.
Bab. man.
ed.
3. Eng. hot.
v. 218 
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
361.
Backhouse, in Bot. Gaz.
iii.
47.
Hieracium cerinthoides, Linn.
Provinces - 10 - 13 14 15.
True plant not British.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
59.
ui.
453.
Misnomer of H.
anglicum.
Hieracium villosum, Linn.
Provinces - 10 - 15 16.
Aberdeenshire ; Drummond ?
Error?
Cyb. ii.
60.
Journal of Botany, iii.
91.
Extremely 
doubtful Tvhether this ever has been found in Britain ; most of 
the supposed examples were certainly other species misnamed.
Possibly Drummond's specimens came from the garden of his 
predecessor George Don.
Hieracium amplexicaule, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 15.
Oxford.
Kinross.
On walls there.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
61.
[Forfar; G.
Don, probably false.] 
Hieracium Borreri, Syme, E.
B. 3.
Province - 14.
Harehead wood, near Selkirk ; Dicltson.
Ambiguity.
At present, known in gardens only.
My own examples 
came originally from the garden of Mr. Borrer.
No botanist would 
mistake this for prenanthoides after culture of both in the garden.
The name of denticulatum, apparently intended for this speciesy 
has been confusedly applied to several others.
Hieracium denticulatum, Sm.
Provinces 6 - - - 10 - - 13 14 15 16 17 18.
All uncertain.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
63.
iii.
359.
See the preceding.
Hieracium dovrense, " Fries," Bab. man.
ed.
3. 
Province - 15.
"Scotland; Fries." Aberdeenshire?
Ambiguity.
Backhouse mon.
66.
Bot. Gaz.
iii.
1 34.
Hieracium virescens, Sender.
Province - 3.
Surrey; Fries, _/ii« Mr. Woods.
Ajnbiguity.
See Backhouse mon.
p. 80.
Eng. bot.
v. 905.
Hieracium pallescens ?
Province - 15.
Forfarshire ; James Backhouse.
Ambiguity.
Bot. Gaz.
iii.
135.
Not in Back.
mon.
Hierada Backhousiana.
In the preceding enumeration of Hawkweeds the usual course has 
been a(Uiered to, that of noticing the introduced and the nominal 
5.28 44.
COMPOSITE.
species which had not been treated in the Synopsis.
There still 
remain the thirty odd species of Mr. Backhouse's elaborate Mono- 
graph ; the majority of which were not noticed segregately in the 
Synopsis, or were absolutely unnoticed there.
But it is impossible 
to disregard a treatise so sedulously worked out, and from the pen 
of a botanist much more famUiar with the genus in question, than 
is any other English describer of plants.
The great diflBculty in 
using that Monograph, is, that nobody could possibly name his 
specimens by it ; there must be the further aid also of examples 
already labelled by Mr. Backhouse himself, or through direct com- 
parison with other individual specimens so labelled.
I cannot 
doubt that several of the so-called " species " are optional and 
arbitrary; that the forms are associated ("fagotted") into species, 
or separated into species, and named accordingly, by the will of a 
Backhouse or a Fries, and not by anything more real in nature.
For example, Mr. Backhouse arbitrarily restricts the old Linuean 
name " alpinum " to a segregate which is comparatively of rare 
occurrence in this country, and is not specially or exclusively the 
alpinum of any preceding author.
Dr. BosweU Syme, endowed 
with a better appreciation of Science, its ends and means, writes 
thus in English Botany; — "I have adopted the name H.
melano- 
cephahim (Tausch.), which doubtless belongs to this form, instead of 
restricting the name of H.
alpinum to this aberrant member of the 
group.
There is no custom which has introduced greater con- 
fusion than that of applying the name properly belonging to a 
whole series of forms to one of its parts only; — where this has 
been done, and generally received by botanists, of course such 
names ought to be retained, as they do not lead to confusion ; but, 
in the present case, it is only two or three British authors who use 
H. alpinum in the sense intended by Mr. Backhouse ; so that their 
H. alpinum does not represent the H.
alpinum of continental 
authors"; E.
B. v.
173.
This is sound and clear; but why not 
acted on in the case of Ranunculus heterophyllus ?
(See page 489 
of the present volume).
In the subjoined list of names from the 
work of Mr. Backhouse, his own recorded localities, those of 
English Botany, those on labels in my herbarium, with some very 
few other additions, are condensed into their corresponding 
provincial nos.
Hieracium.
3 alpinum IS 16 
4 holosericeum 12 15 16 
5 eximium 15 16 
b. tenellum - - 16 16 
6 calenduliflorum - - - - 15 
7 gracilentum - 15 
8 globosum - 15 
9 nigrescens - IS 16 
44.
COMPOSIT.E. 529 
10 lingulatum - 16 16 
11 senescens 15 16 
12 chrysanthum 15 16 17 
b. microoephalum - - - - - 12 15 
13 cerinthoides (b) 11 12 - 15 
b. anglicum - - 10 11 12 - - 15 18 
c. acutifolium ...
. 15 
14iricum - - 10 11 13-15 17 
15 pallidum ?
7 - 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
16 lasiophyllum - 7 - U - - 15 ?
17 Gibsoni - .
- - 10 
18 argenteum 7 - 11 12 - 15 18 
19 nitidum ....
- 15 
20 aggregatutn - - - ...
15 
21 murorum 12 3 4 5 6-8-101112- - 15 
b. rotundatum - - - - 15 
22 csesium ....
? - 10 11 - - 15 1718 
...
obtusifolium ....
15 
23 steUigerum - - - 15 
24 vulgatum 1 2 3 4 - 6 - 8 9 10 11 12 - 15 16 
b. cinereum - 7 
c. rubescens - - 10 
26 gothicum - - 7 - 10 11 18 
b. latifolium ...
. 15 
26 tridentatum 1 2 3 - 5 - 8 9 10 11 
27 prenanthoides - - - - 10 11 - 14 15 
28 strictum - - 10 12 15 16 17 
29 umbeUatum 123456789 10 11 12 13?
? ?
30 crocatum - 10 11 - 15 
81 rigidum - 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 
32 corymbosum ....
. 15 
Barkhausia setosa, DC.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 - - - 9 10 11 - - - 16.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
68.
Sown with imported clover seed; thus 
uncertain and temporary, though not very rare.
Taraxacum {officinale) erythrospermum, Andrz.
Provinces - 2 3.
" Chalk downs and sandy places." 
Syn. 588.
Eng. bot.
v. 143.
Perhaps frequent.
Taraxacvm (officinale) lavigatum, DO.
Provinces - 2 ?
4 5 - 7.
" Sandy places "; E.
B. v.
143.
Syn. 588.
Localities confused with those oi palustre.
Calendula arvensis, Linn.
Provinces - 2 - 11.
2 Sussex coast, extinct.
11 Ballast-hills.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
92.
iii.
457.
[C.
officinalis, so much cultivated, 
is occasionally seen by waysides.
Bot. N.
Yorkshire, etc.) 
3t 
530 44.
COMPOSITE.
Arctium Lappa, Linn.
With varieties.
Provinces all.
A. Bardana in all, unless 12 and 17 excepted.
Cyb. ii.
73.
In the Flora Anglica and Flora Britannica only a 
single aggregate species was treated under name of Lappa, with 
subordinate varieties.
In the English Flora it was divided into 
two species, Lappa and Bardana.
In the British Flora these two 
were re-united into one.
In English Botany, edition third, that 
dual division is discarded in favour of another, into the two species 
majus and minus; the latter subdivided into three sub-species.
I can recognize the two species as probably real, and have so 
treated them on page 219.
Other names need a notice here.
Arctium intermedium, Man. ed.
4, 5.
A. nemorosum, Bab. 6.
Arctium intermedium, Man. ed.
6. A.
pubens, Bab. ed.
4, S.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 - - - 14.
Ambiguities.
Professor Babington having applied the name 
intermedium differently in successive editions, it will become 
usually impossible now to say which of the two segregates is 
intended by recorders of localities who use that name.
In the 
sixth edition it means pubens, but in former editions it means 
something which is not pubens, but whether the nemorosum of 
edition sixth is not made apparent there.
Probably both are 
slight varieties of A.
minus.
In English Botany they are made 
sub-species under this latter ; but the Editor intimates non- 
acquaintance with A.
nemorosum.
Arctium tomentosum, " Pers." Bab. man.
ed.
4, 5.
Provinces -23?
Sussex.
Oxford.
East England.
Ambiguity.
"Apparently not a native of England, but may have 
been found in E.
Anglia"; Bab. man.
ed.
5. Oxford Botanic 
Garden in 1867 ; to which Mr. Baxter says he brought it from 
Bagley Wood, many years before ; Eev. W.
W. Newbould.
Sussex ; 
Mr. Hemsley, in Journal of Botany, no.
60.
I must leave to others 
the reconcilement between these contradictory records, finding 
myself only mystified thereby.
Se7Tatula (tinctoria) monticola, Bor.
Province 1.
In the Lizard, Cornwall!
Syn. 694.
" Scarcely deserves the name of a variety, though 
made a species by Boreau ; ....
it is represented in E.
B. No. 38 "; 
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
Carduus {crispus) genuinus, Gren.
& Godr.
Provinces .
. .
? Probably as they are shown on page 220.
Syn. 596.
Cyb. ii.
75.
iii.
454.
This and the other two segre- 
gates made up the  ' acanthoides "' of most English botanists until 
very recent dates.
I am unable to apportion my own herbaiium 
specimens among them with the needful confidence ; and thus am , 
compelled to leave the provinces in blank, not finding special 
localities on record.
44.
COMPOSITE.
531 
Carduus (crispus) polyanthemos, Godr.
"Koch Syn." 
Provinces .
. .
? Not ascertained for this apart.
Syn. 593.
Indirectly said to be " common", in E.
B. 3.
Carduus [crispus) Utigiosus, Gren.
& Godr.
Provinces .
. .
? Less abundant than the other forms ; E.
B. 3.
Syn. 596.
"C.acanthoides, Koch Syn." " C.
polyacanthos, Schreb." 
Carduus Marianus, Linn.
SUybum Marianum, Gaertn.
Provinces 1 to 17.
Cornwall to Ross.
Garden escape.
Casual or Alien.
Seldom permanent.
Cyb. ii.
77.
iii.
454.
Carduus oleraceus, Pers.
Province - 8.
Lincoln ; Mr. Cole, fide E.
Edwards.
Alien.
Particulars in Phytologist ii.
53 and 115.
Carduus setosus, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 - 3 - 11 - 15.
Surrey; Irvine !
Fife; Dewar!
Orkney?
Casual or Alien.
Cyb. ii.
80.
The Surrey plant came to my 
herbarium, thus labelled, through the Botanical Exchange Club, 
with the date of 1860.
The Fife plant came through the extinct 
Botanical Society of London.
The two examples are widely dis- 
similar in their stem-leaves and bracts.
It has also been reported 
in South Devon and Durham.
Carduus tuberosum, Linn.
Province - 2.
Formerly found in Wilts.
Extinct?
Cyb. ii.
83.
iii.
455.
[6 Glamorgan, erroneously.] 
Carduus Woodwardii, Cyb. brit.
C. acauli-pratensis, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - S - - - 6.
Wilts.
Glamorgan.
Hybrid?
Cyb. ii.
83.
iii.
455.
A series of examples, wild and 
garden-grown, shew a range of form sliding almost into pratensis 
at one extremity, and into caulescent acaulis at the other extremity.
Carduus Forsteri, Bab. C.
pratensi-palustris, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 2 3 - [5].
Sussex; Coleman!
Surrey!
Hybrid?
Cyb. ii.
80.
iii.
455.
The true plant has seldom been 
found.
Forms of C.
pratensis have been reported occasionally 
under name of Forsteri, as from the Isle of Wight and Stafford, 
and probably from Gloucester.
Carduus Oibsoni, Lend.
Cat. C.
arvensi-acaulis, E.
B. 3.
Province - 3.
Essex ; Mr. G.
S. Gibson.
" C.
dubius, Willd." 
Hybrid?
Cyb. ii.
84.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. Phytol.
iii.
902.
Carduus Newhouldi, L.
C. C.
nutanti-crispus, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 3 - 11.
" C.
acanthoides, Flore de France." 
Hybrid ?
North Essex ; Rev. W.
W. Newbould, in E.
B. 3.
A similar intermediate has been found near Wooler, in the Tyne 
province, by Mr. J.
G. Baker.
See E.
C. report for 1866 ; also 
New Flora of N.
D. page 196.
^^^ 44.
COMPOSITE.
Centaurea montana, Linn.
Provinces -S 10.
Staflford; Garner.
York ; Mr. James Ward !
Alien.
Oyb. ii.
987.
A waif from gardens.
Centaurea Jacea, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3.
Sussex ; Borrer.
Middlesex ; Dyer !
Syme !
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
88.
iii.
466.
Eng. Bot.
v. 31.
Flora of Middlesex, 
164.
The so-caUed "Jacea" of Forfarshire, and of various other 
counties, was the C.
nigrescens or radiate states of C.
nigra.
Centaurea {nigra) nigrescens, " Willd." 
Provinces 1 to 15 ; but authority wanting for 7 9 12.
Syn. 611.
Cyb. ii.
88.
iii.
456.
The name " nigrescens" included 
almost any radiate form of C.
nigra or C.
nigra decipiens.
Centaurea (nigra) decipiens, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 15.
Cornwall to Cambridge.
Fife.
Syn. 611.
Scarcely distinguishable from C.
nigra.
Centaurea melitensis, Linn.
Centaurea centaurioides, Linn.
Province 5.
Gloucestershire ; Dr. St.
Brody.
Casuals.
Exchange Club reports, 1867 and 1868.
Centaurea sohtitialis, Linn.
Provinces - 9 3 4 6 - 7 8 9 10 11 - - 14.
Chiefly in S.E. England.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
93.
Among lucerne, clover, etc.
Centaurea Intyhacea, Linn.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire ; G.
Don, sole authority.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
91.
Artemisia [maritiiha) gallica, Willd.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 - - - - 10 - - - 14 15.
And elsewhere?
Syn. 634.
I have not kept notes of this segregate apart from 
" maritima." In English Botany it is said to be " about equally 
common" with the more typical form, from which indeed it differs 
very slightly.
Artemisia carulescens, Linn.
Provinces - 2 - 8.
Wight.
Hants.
Sussex.
Lincoln.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
99.
Phytologist iii.
491.
Eng. bot.
v. 316.
Artemisia scoparia, Wald.
& Eat.
Province - 3.
South Kensington, Middlesex, 1865-7.
Casual.
Site of the Exhibition of 1863 ; Midx.
flo.
Artemisia compacta, Fischer.
Province - 14.
" Tweedside, Melrose"; Mr. G.
C. Stuart.
Casual.
Proceedings of the Berwickshire N.
H. Club, 1869.
Gnaphalium (dioicum) hyperboreum, " Don." " Winch." 
Province - 16.
Stated to have occurred in the Isle of Skye.
Syn. 637.
I have not seen au example of this variety.
44.
composit;e.
533 
Gnaphalium margaritaceum, Linn.
Provinces - - 8 4 5 6 7 - - 10 - 13 - 14 15 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
101.
iii.
458.
From America.
See De Candolle 
Geog.
Bot. Eais.
669 and 728.
Gnaphalium luteo-alhwm, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 4 - 9.
Sussex.
Norfolk.
Cambridge.
Lancaster.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
101.
Noticed very seldom.
Gnaphalium [uliginosum] pilulare, Wabl.
Province - - - 4.
Toft, Cambridge ; Eng. bot.
v. 
Syn. 633.
" May be common"; Eng. bot.
Not yet known to me.
Filago gallica, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 - - 8 - - - 13 - - 15.
In corn-fields.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
104.
iii.
4S8.
Has occurred in Kent, Surrey, 
Herts, Essex, Bucks.
Errors elsewhere?
Tussilago alpina, Linn.
Homogyne alpina, Cass.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; G.
Don, sole authority.
Cyb. ii.
110.
iii.
459.
Absent from Scandinavia.
Tussilago fragrans, Vill.
Nardosmia fragrans, Eeich.
Provinces I 3 3 - - 6 7.
Escape from gardens.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
108.
Too impatient of severe frost to become truly 
naturalised, although its roots will endure long in sheltered spots 
or near the coast.
Tussilago alba, Linn, Petasites albus, Gaertn.
Provinces - 5 - 10 - 15.
Warwick.
York.
East Highlands.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
108.
iii.
459.
E. C.
rep.
1868.
Eng. bot.
v. 118.
Erigeron uniflorus, Linn.
Province - 15.
Perthshire ; G.
Don in Eng. Flora, etc.
Error.
A misnomer of E.
alpinus single-headed.
Erigeron canadensis, Linn.
Provinces 1-3-56--9-11.
Chiefly about the Thames.
Alien or Casual.
Cyb. ii.
111.
A weed in several places.
Aster salicifolius, Scholl.
Province - 11 - 15.
By the river Tay, below Perth ; Syme 1 
Alien.
Comp.
641*, Aster salignu^ in part.
Perhaps more than 
one species pass under the name salignus.
The examples sent 
to me from Perth, by Dr. Boswell Syme, well correspond with a 
specimen from [name not legible] labelled by Homung as 
"A.
salicifolius Scholl." I am not certain that the Cumberland 
plant belongs to the same species ; and have not seen that of 
Cambridge.
The Perth specimens iU accord with one from 
Strasbourg, sent as salignus.
11, N.
H. of Eastern Borders.
Aster Novi-Belgii, Linn.
A. brumalis ?
Provinces - 3 - 10 - 15.
Surrey.
Essex.
York.
Perth.
Alien.
One or both of these occur occasionally as garden escapes; 
534 44.
COMPOSITE.
And some other American species of this large genus have been 
found in isolated localities in Britain.
Aster leucanthemos (Desf ) 
grew increasingly for several years, near to ' Three Thimble 
Bridge,' in the parish of Thames Ditton, Surrey.
But in 1869 a 
new bridge was built, the channel of the stream altered, houses 
erected on one side of it, a garden made on the other side, — and 
the Aster became utterly destroyed.
Some other species have 
been piclied in that much be-planted locality, the Tay-side below 
Perth.
Solidago [Virgaurea] canibrica, Huds.
Provinces" 6 7 - - 10 - 12 - - 15 - - 18.
And others ?
Syn. 642.
An opposite variety to tliis is noticed in English 
Botany, by name of angustifolia.
Solidago lanceolata, Linn.
Provinces .
. .
? Where are the localities ?
Alien.
" Sometimes found naturalised"; Brit.
Flora.
Senecio squalidus, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5.
Devon!
Oxford!
Worcester I Warwick!
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
115.
Midx.
flo.
Suff.
flo.
Norf flo.
Senecio erraticus, Bert.
Provinces - 6 6 14.
Flora of Shropshire, but a misnomer.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
117.
iii.461.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
9. Mag. N.
H. iii.
563.
Senecio [aquaticus) pinnatifidus, Gren.
et Godr.
Provinces .
. .
? Probably general ; localities not noted.
Syn. 649.
Eng. bot.
v. 86.
A slight variation or state.
Senecio saracenicus, Linn.
S. salicetorum, Godr.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
118.
Occasionally misrecorded as S.
paludosus.
Cineraria (campestris) maritima, Davies.
Province - 7.
On sea cliffs, near Holyhead, Anglesea.
Syn. 652.
The severance of this variety would take province 7 
from the area of C.
campestris ; but Professor Babington states 
that the latter becomes converted into the variety maritima during 
wet seasons.
See Mag. Nat.
Hist.
v. 88; and Bot. Gaz.
iii.
69.
Doronicum Pardalianches, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 6 - - 8 9 10 11 - lU 14 15.
Partly errors?
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
121.
Some of the localities which have been 
recorded for this species, may belong perhaps to the other.
My 
herbarium specimens of the present one are from Somerset, 
Norfolk, Northumberland, Perth, and Forfar.
Doronicum plantagineum,, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 8 9 10 - - - 1 4 15.
And others ?
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
121.
See note to the preceding species.
44.
COMPOBITiE.
535 
Anthemis {arvensis) anglica, Spreng.
A. maritima, Sm.
Province -11.
Durham; Eobson, Backhouse.
Syn. 668.
Cyb. ii.
129.
[By misnomers, in S - 6 - 11 - 13 - 15.] 
Anthemis tinctoria, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 11 15.
Sur. Ess.
Dur. North.
Fife.
Forf.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
131.
iii.
463.
Journal of Botany, iv.
150.
(Winch enumerates also the Anthemis Valentina, tomentosa, and 
mixta among " Exotics found on the ballast-hilk of Tyne and 
Wear ; " Geog.
dist.
38.
It would needlessly extend this List if 
all the plants ever seen on the ballast in Tyne province should be 
included in it.) 
Achillea decolorans, Schrad.
A. serrata, Sm.
Provinces 1 - 8 - 10.
Somerset.
Derby.
York.
Extinct Casual ?
Cyb. ii.
138.
Garden examples only ?
Achillea tomentosa, Linn.
Provinces - 10 - - 13 - 15 16.
York.
Renf.
Banff.
Dumb.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
133.
iii.
463.
Brit.
fio.
ed.
6, p.
345.
Achillea nobilis, Linn.
Province - 6.
Gloucester; Dr. St.
Brody.
Casual.
Exchange Club report for 1868.
" Achillea asplenifolia, of gardeners." 
Province - - 3.
Twickenham, Middlesex ; Boswell Syme !
Alien.
In the same field with Centaurea Jacea and Hieracium 
aurantiacum ; a triplet tending much to shew each other simply 
Aliens, rehcts of some garden.
It is apparently the Millefolium- 
with purple or deep pink flowers.
Achillea tanacetifoUa, All.
Provinces - 8 - 10.
Derby ; C.
C. Babington.
York ; J.
Hardy.
Extinct casual.
Cyb. ii.
184.
iii.
464.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
96.
Cotula coronopifolia, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Highbury, Middlesex ; Mr. Peter Gray !
Casual.
In 1869 a rather dense patch of it " was growing in a 
building lot nearly opposite the new church of St. Augustine in 
Highbury New Park Road"; Peter Gray.
It would be of some 
interest to know how this plant had got to the place named.
Perhaps originally from the Southern Hemisphere, it had become 
established in HoUaud in the time of Linneus.
It has spread into 
north-west Germany and Denmark ; and it has also settled itself 
on the coasts of Spain and Portugal.
(" Cotula aurea, a native of 
South Europe and the East, occurred a year or two ago in corn- 
fields at Mitoham, where it was associated with many other exotics 
obviously introduced with foreign grain"; Journal of Botany, 
Feb. 1870.) 
580 45.
CAMPANULACE^.
46.
EEICACEifi.
Galinsoga parvifiora, Cav.
Province - - 3.
Surrey ; Dr. Gray, 1860.
Middlesex ; Mr. Britten.
Alien.
Journal of Botany, i.
104 and 375.
Midx.
flo.
151.
Xanthium Strumarium, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 - 11.
Dor. Ham.
Sur. Midd.
Dur. North.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
135.
Journal of Botany, i.
375.
Xanthium spinosum, Linn.
Provinces - 5 6 - 10 - 13 14.
Hereford ; Dr. Bull !
Casual.
Wakefield flo.
50.
E. C.
rep.
1867.
Berw.
proc.
1869.
45.
CAMPANnLAOE.E.
Campanula persicijolia, Linn.
Provinces - 10 - 14 15.
York.
Edinburgh.
Banff.
Casual or Alien.
Cyb. ii.
141.
Bot. N.
Y. 255.
Phyteuma spicatum, Linn.
Provinces - 2 - - 5.
East Sussex ; W.
Christy !
Alien.
One plant of it found in Warwickshire, in 1865.
46.
EHICACE.B.
Erica [Tetralix) Watsoni, Benth.
in DC.
prodr.
Province 1.
West Cornwall !
Syn. C91 or 692.
Cyb. ii.
147.
A series of intermediate forms, 
to all appearance hybrids, between Tetralix and ciliaris; hence 
re-named " Tetralici-ciliaris " in English Botany edition third.
One of the forms, a living plant of which was kindly given to me 
by the Rev. C.
A. Johns, has been distributed numerously through 
the Botanical Exchange Club ; though not the special form 
described by Mr. Bentham.
Erica multiflora, Linn.
Province - 8.
Derbyshire ; Pilkington, quoted in B.
G. 
Error.
What could this name have intended in Derbyshire?
Erica mediterranea, Linn.
Province - 6.
Pontardulais, Glamorgan ; Dr. Turtou.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
349.
Phytologist i.
142.
Dillw.
mat.
31.
Erica carnea, Linn.
Province 1.
Newton Abbot, South Devon ; Dr. Hance.
Alien or Error?
Journal of Botanj^ v.
136.
Calluna [vulgaris) atlantica, Seem.
Provinces .
. .
? Probably any or aL..
Syn. 695.
See Journal of Botany, iv.
306 and v.
84, for an 
account of the characters by which Dr. Seeman proposed to dis- 
tinguish his atlantica from the ordinary vulgaris.
Since attention 
was called to their differences, in the Journal referred to, I have 
49.
APOCYNACE^.
— 50.
GENTIANACEJE.
537 
particularly examined some hundreds of the living shrubs on the 
heaths in Surrey and neighbouring counties, besides a number of 
herbarium examples from other countries than England.
The 
result is, that the distinctive characters indicated for atlantica 
entirely fail when a sufficient series of specimens is under examina- 
tion ; those of ordinary vulgaris so shading off towards atlantica, 
as to leave little or nothing to keep them apart.
In Enghsh 
Botany, a different dual division is adhered to ; namely, into 
gldbrata and incana, dissimilar in their extreme states, but quite 
connected by a series of intermediate states.
Menziesia polifolia, Juss.
Provinces - 5 - 8.
Worcester; E.
Lees.
Notts; N.
B. G.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
162.
Hast.
Illus.
Wore.
Andromeda (polifolia) curta, Tate.
Province - 8.
Derby ; Rev. A.
Ley !
Ireland ; Dr. Tate.
Syn. 699.
Journal of Botany, iv.
377.
E. C.
rep.
1868.
Pyrola [rotundifolia) arenaria, Koch.
Province - 9.
Coast of Lancaster.
P. maritima, Kenyon.
Syn. 707.
Phytol.
ii.
737.
Liverpool Nat. Jour.
no.
17.
Vaccinium macrocarpum, Ait.
Province - 7.
Flintshire, doubtless planted there.
Alien.
Extinct.
CyKii. 158.
An American species.
49.
ApocynacEjE.
Vitiea major, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Cornwall to Forfar.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
167.
An escape or relict of gardens.
50.
Gentianace^.
Gentiana acaulis, Linn.
Provinces - 6 - 9.
Pembroke; B.
G. Lancashire; "Mr. Townley.'' 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
168.
Misnomers or mis-reports.
Gentiana (Amarella) gennanica, Willd.
Provinces - 3 3 - [5] 6 - - - 10.
Hants to York, by report.
Syn. 731.
Cyb. ii.
173.
Hants ; Mrs. RusseU !
It has been 
found also in Bucks and Herts.
Among five specimens sent to 
me from as many different counties, labelled " germanica," two are 
simply Amarella ; these latter being from Monmouth and Hereford.
Not admitted into the ' Botany of North Yorkshire.' 
Swertia perennis, Linn.
Province - 6 or 7.
Wales ; Richardson, in Huds.
flo.
ang.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
177.
Never verified ; but what was the plant ?
3 z 
638 50*.
POLEMONIACE^.
52.
SOLANACEiE.
50*.
POLBMONIACE^.
Collomia grandiflora, Douglas.
Provinces 1 - 10.
Shingle, Exmouth.
Fields, Thirsk.
Casual.
Eng. hot.
vi.
83.
A very hardy annual or biennial from 
America, readily becoming weed-like in gardens.
— (Gilia tricolor, 
another garden flower in the same order, is also mentioned vei 
English Botany, vi.
83.) 
51.
CoNVOLVULACEiE.
Cuscuta epilinum, Weihe.
Provinces 1 to 17, interruptedly.
Sown with flax seeds.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
182.
iii.
470.
— (C approadmata, Bab. in Cyb.
ii.
183.
Found on a cultivated Melilot.) 
Cuscuta hassiaca, Pfeif.
Provinces - - 3 4.
Essex, Varenne !
Herts ?
Cambridge.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
364.
E. 0.
rep.
1867.
E. B.
vi.
93.
52.
SOLANACE.B, 
Hyoscyamus albus, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 11.
Middlesex ; Dyer.
Durham ; Robson.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
184.
Jour.
Bot. iv.
181.
Surrey flo.
app.
317.
— 
( H.
aureus has occurred on the ballast-hills of Tyne.
— And 
H. pallidum, a variation of niger without coloured veins in the 
corolla, has been seen in Surrey, Norfolk, and Edinburgh.) 
Solanum [Dulcamara) marinum, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 2 3 - - - 7.
Likely in others also.
Syn. 738.
Unless I misunderstand the plant intended under the 
name, it seems only a trifling variation, arising from its sea-side 
localities.
The words of Ray express a different view : " Hanc 
plantam toto habitu suo et omuino specie a priore (Dulcamara) 
diversam." The description of it in English Botany, edition 
third, is more accurate than that in the Manual of British 
Botany.
Lycium harharuni, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 10.
Only where planted?
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
187.
" Not a native, but quite naturalised on the 
south and south-east coasts"; Eng. Bot.
vi.
Doubtless it lives 
where planted ; but is it renewed by seed ?
Datura Stramonium, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 11 - - - 15.
Cornwall to Moray.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
186.
An escape from garden culture.
53.
BCBOPHCLAEIACEiE.
539 
Datura Tatula, Linn.
Province - 3.
East Kent; Eng. bot.
vi.
103.
Midx.
flo.
196.
Casual.
Now usually held a variety of Stramonium.
Physalis Alkekengi, Linn.
Provinces -- 3 - 5.
Middlesex; Dyer.
Warwick; Kirk.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
187.
Phytol.
ii.
971.
Jour.
Bot. iv.
151.
Nicandra physaloides, Gaertn.
Provinces - 2 3.
Wight.
Sussex.
Kent.
Middlesex.
Casual.
Declared to have become " partidly naturalised in waste 
and cultivated ground " in the Isle of Wight A plant so certainly 
destroyed by slight frost, can never become truly naturalised in 
England, although it seeds freely in gardens about London during 
hot summers.
Nicotiana rustica, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Occasionally about London ; Midx.
flo.
Casual.
Jour.
Bot. iv.
151.
One year a plant of it appeared 
casually in my own garden, in Surrey ; and I cannot at all guess 
through what agency it got thither ; there was not then a seeding 
example of it in my herbarium, to suggest an explanation.
53.
ScKOPHULABlAOEiE.
Verbascum thapsiforme, Schrader.
Province - - 3.
Kent.
"A mistake of Dr. Lindley." 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
88.
English Botany, vi.
187.
Verbascum phlomoides, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3.
Sussex, accidentally ; Borrer.
Surrey, sown ?
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
193.
iii.
470.
Bot. Gaz.
iL 9.
Eng. bot.
vi.
187.
Verbascum phceniceum, Linn.
"V.
ferrugineum, Andr." 
Provinces 1 - 7.
Anglesea, 1803-4.
Somerset, 1 plant, 1830.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
193.
iii.
470.
" In a scattered old fence, on the 
right hand from Beaumares to the Almshouse, in 1803.
In the 
following year, it nearly covered acres of ground in the adjoining 
field.
1 have never seen it in a garden in the neighbourhood"; 
Davies, in Welsh Botanology.
Verbascum Thapso-Lychnitis, E.
B. 3.
Thapsoides, Huds.
Province - - 3 - - (6 7).
Kent ; Dr. Boswell-Syme !
" Hybrid." Cyb. ii.
188.
(Wales, in gardens ; Motley, Griffith.) 
Verbascum Thapso-nigrum, " Schiede," E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 4.
Kent and Surrey ; Syme.
Norfolk.
"Hybrid." English Botany, vi.
118.
"V.
collinum, Schrad." 
Verbascum nigro-pulverulentum, " Sm." E.
B. 3.
Province - - - 4.
Norfolk; Eng. flo.
ii.
310.
" Hybrid." Re-found by the Eev. K.
Trimmer, in 1863 ; E, B.
540 53.
SCE0PHULAIIIACE,?3.
Verhascum nigro-Lychnitis, " Scliiede," E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 2 3 4.
Kent ; Syme !
Sussex.
Norfolk.
" Hybrid." Phytologist, iv.
861.
Eug. Bot.
vi.
119.
Veronica (spicata) genuina, E.
B. 3.
Provinces [--3] 4.
[18].
Suffolli !
Cambridge; Bab. flo.
Syn. 193.
Cyb. ii.
193.
East of England.
Veronica (spicata) hybrida, Linn.
Provinces [1] - - - 5 6 7 12.
Glouc.
Wales.
Westm.
Syn. 746.
Cyb. ii.
193.
West of England.
Veronica fruticulosa, Linn.
Provinces - 15 16.
(14.
Wall near Edinburgh.) 
Error.
(Alien in 14.) Cyb. ii.
198.
Veronica [scutellatd) piihescens, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 — 9 - - - 13 - 15.
Probably in others.
Syn. 753.
Simply a pubescent state of the type form.
Veronica (officinalis) hirsuta, Hopkirk.
Provinces - 13.
Ayrshire only, and now extinct?
Syn. 756.
Cyb. ii.
200.
A specimen from Perthshire is in my 
herbarium, given to me labelled as hirsuta by Mr. Maughan ; but 
this is not quite like the garden plant from Ayrshire.
Veronica Allionii, Villars.
Provinces - 15 -- 18.
Forfar; Don. Shetland; Edmondston.
Error.
Hook.
Scot.
10.
Shetland flo.
16.
Forfar flo.
136.
Veronica peregrina, Linn.
Provinces -3-15.
Middlesex, sown.
Perth, in gardens.
Casual.
Ireland, in cultivated land ; Cyb. Hib.
Veronica (politd) grandijlora, Bab. man.
Provinces - 2 - 4 - 14 15.
Wight.
Camb.
Berwick?
Fife.
Syn. 761.
Eng. bot.
vi.
150.
Omitted from the latter editions of 
the Manual.
In the ' Eastern Borders ' the Berwick plant is 
named " Buxbaumii," but the figure of "V.
filiformis" in the 
Flora of Bermck has the capsule of polita, not that oi Biucbaumii.
Bartda (Odontites) vulgaris, E.
B. 3.
" 0.
verna, Reich." 
Provinces all?
" Bather common, especially in the South"; E.
B. 
Syn. 765.
Naming the specimens in my own herbarium, by the 
printed characters in English Botany, this segregate seems to be 
the more frequent form.
Bartsia (Odontites) serotina, E.
B. 3.
" 0.
rubra, Gr.
& Godr." 
Provinces all?
" Very common"; Eng. Bot.
vi.
175.
Syn. 765.
" Seems to have little claim to be considered a distinct 
species, as most continental botanists regard it"; E.
B. 
Bartsia (Odontites) rotundata, " Ball, in Ann. N.
H." 
Provinces - 2 - 4.
Sussex.
Cambridge.
Syn. 765.
Eng. Bot.
vi.
171.
Not known to me.
53.
SCEOPHDLAEIACEa:.
541 
Euphrasia (officinalis) gracilis.
Fries.
Provinces all ?
A slender state, frequent on heaths.
Syn. 766.
The E.
officinalis is so very variable with situation 
that it appears scarcely possible to select a fixed type for the 
species.
Rhinanthus [Crista-galli) major, Ehrh.
Provinces ?
2 - - 5 - - 8 - 10 11 12 - 14 ] 5 - - 18.
Sussex to Shetl.
Syn. 767.
Cyb. ii.
207.
iii.
472.
Not readily distinguished from 
the type, though held a true species by many good botanists.
The 
recorded localities are not always reliable.
Melampyrum [pratense] latifolium, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5.
Wight.
Oxford.
Monmouth.
Syn. 770.
In English Botany, this segregate is made the primary 
" variety" of the species, although it is is stated to be " rare"; the 
"common, and generally distributed" form being placed as the 
second " variety." This runs counter to established usage in 
botanical books, where the prevailing or usual form of a species 
stands for the type, and the less usual forms of it for the varieties.
Why should a " rare " exception be accounted the primary form ?
Melampyrum (pratense) montanum, Johnston.
Provinces 5 7 - - 10 11 - - 14 15 - - 18.
And elsewhere ?
Syn. 770.
Cyb. ii.
209.
A boreal or montane form.
Scrophularia vemalis, Linn.
Provinces 1-345 7 - - 10 1112 13 14 15.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
214.
iii.
472.
An introduced plant; Alph.
De 
Cand.
Geog.
hot.
rais.
675.
Said to have become weU established 
in some places.
Antirrhinum majus, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Cornwall to Argyle.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
216.
iii.
473.
On walls, chalk rocks, etc.
lAnaria Cymbalaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Cornwall to Moray, on walls.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
217.
Well estabhshed in many places.
Linaria purpurea, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 - - 6 11 - - 14 15.
On walls, etc.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
219.
Cornwall to Edinburgh or Aberdeen.
Linaria vulgari-repens, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 3 - 12.
Cornwall.
Wight.
Hants.
Sussex.
Lake Lane.
" Hybrid." Cyb. ii.
219.
iii.
473.
Eng. hot.
vi.
143.
A series 
of forms, apparently hybrid, some of which were referred to 
L. italica formerly, but erroneously.
Linaria (vulgaris) speciosa, Bromf.
Provinces - 2 3.
Isle of Wight ; Bromfield I 
Syn. 785.
Cyb. iii.
473.
Phytol.
iii.
627.
Eng. hot.
vi.
141.
643 54.
OEOBANCHACEa:.
This reverts to the typical form under culture ; and in the wild 
state they are connected by intermediate forms.
Linaria supina, Desf.
Provinces 1 3 - 11.
Cornwall.
Devon.
Dorset.
Durham.
Alien.
Oyb. ii.
221.
Probably not native ; DC.
geogr.
hot.
rais.
Linaria spartea, Hoffmansegg ?
Province - - 3.
Recent inclosures by Walton Station, Surrey.
Casual.
Oyb. ii.
221.
Seen in quantity in 1843 — 5 ; less plenti- 
ful afterwards ; extinct before 1860.
— (The African Linaria 
bipartita is occasionally found in Surrey, in places where game has 
been fed on imported seeds.
— And L.
triphylla has occurred in a 
newly made road near Birkenhead, Cheshire.) 
Mimulus luteiis, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 6 6 - - 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
224.
iii.
474.
Established in Scotland.— (The 
M. guttatus has been reported in Scotland also, by Dr. Arnott in 
the British Flora.) 
Mimulus moschatus, Douglas.
Provinces - 3 7.
Surrey ; Dr. Trimen.
N. Wales ; Mr. Pamplin.
Alien.
Journal of Botany, iv.
151.
Increases rapidly in damp 
loose ground, and likely may become established as a naturalised 
plant in Britain.
Erinus alpinus, Linn.
Province - 10.
Near Tanfield, York; Bab. man.
ed.
6. 
Alien.
" In abundance on the old bed of the river." 
54.
OKOBANCHACE.E.
Orohanche lucorum, Koch.
O. elatior, j^cie Borrer.
Province - - 3.
Corn-field near Epsom, Surrey, in 1846.
Error of name.
Cyb. ii.
226.
iii.
475.
Eng. bot.
vi.
197.
Orohanche (minor) amethystea, Thuil.
Provinces 1 ?
3. East Cornwall.
South Devon.
Kent.
Syn. 793.
Cyb. ii.
228.
iii.
475.
Sussex?
" I much doubt the 
correctness of the name "; Mr. Borrer, 1859.
But the name is 
adhered to in Bab. Man.
ed.
6, and in Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
Orohanche ramosa, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 4.
On Hemp, and thus very uncertain.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
231.
— [0.
speciosa, DC, was found in 1860 by 
the late Thomas Clarke in a garden at Bridgewater, parasitical in 
a row of pease.) 
54*.
ACANTHACEvE.
— 55.
LAMIACE^E.
543 
54*.
ACANTHACE/E.
Acanthus mollis, Linn.
Province 1.
Near Penzance; Jones Tour, 31.
" Scilly Isles." 
Alien.
Cyb.ii.932.
iii.
475.
Phytol.
iv.
408.
" A.N.H. viii.
505." 
55.
LAMIACEiE.
Salvia clandestina, Linn.
Province 1.
Lizard Point, West Cornwall ; Bab. man.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
234.
The corolla of Verbenaca elongates 
after first expansion, and thus perhaps gave occasion to make out 
a second species in England.
The figure in Eng. Bot.
154 repre- 
sents the corolla with the short tube of its earliest expansion, not 
as seen when elongated beyond the calyx.
ElsholUia cristata, Willd.
Province - - 3.
Middlesex, 1856, lost in 1857.
Scarcely admissible.
Casual.
T. D.
flora, with reference to Irvine's Handbook.
Menthm Bakerianm.
In the Journal of Botany for August, 1865, Mr. J.
G. Baker 
published an article " On the English Mints." He groups these 
proteiform plants into thirteen species, exclusive of Pulegiwn.
In 
English Botany, third edition, Dr. Boswell Syme has, " for the 
most part, adopted the views of Mr. Baker," as expressed in the 
paper referred to.
In the Manual of British Botany, sixth 
edition, Professor Babington keeps some of the Bakerian species 
in combination ; thus reducing the number into nine.
In the 
Synopsis, pages 267-9, only six aggregates are treated.
These 
half-dozen correspond with the Babingtonian species, except that 
viridis was omitted, as not being a real native ; and no account 
was taken of alopecuroides and protends, known to me imperfectly 
by garden examples only.
Among plants so readily multiplied 
through division of roots, all the garden examples of any one 
variety may have been only a single plant originally.
To me now it would be an useless and most uninteresting 
trouble to re-learn Mints by the species and varieties of Mr.
Baker's selection.
I regard them, especially the varieties, simply 
as optional and arbitrary, as artificial arrangements of dried speci- 
mens and of portraits of individual plants ; any other botanist 
having equal right to make either more or fewer species and 
varieties out of the same materials ; and being just as likely to be 
correct by doing so.
My indifference to them is not lessened by 
the circumstance that Mr. Baker enters very slightly into topo- 
graphical details ; his scanty citation of localities warrantably 
suggesting that his arrangement rests reaUy on a narrow experience 
altogether, as well in himself as in those from whom he adopts or 
544 55.
LAMIACEiE.
adapts.
Still, this may not be at all the feeling of other botanists 
who will use the present Compendium ; and thus it seems proper 
to imitate for Mentha the examples heretofore set in treating 
segregately the Roses, Brambles, and Hawkweeds.
Accordingly 
a list of Mr. Baker's named Mints is given here, along with such 
provincial nos.
as his own scant enumeration of localities will 
warrant ; assisted further by a few added in English Botany.
As 
in Rosa, the prefixed numbers here also distinguish the Bakerian 
species, the non-numbered names which follow being those used 
for their varieties ; — 
Mentha.
1. rotundifolia 1 2 - - - 14.
9. sylvestris 
a. sylvestris 
h. nemorosa 
c. moUissima - 4 - - 14 15.
d. alopecuroides 3 4 - - - 15 16.
3. viridis 
4. crispa 3 - - - 11.
5. piperita 15.
a. officinalis 
b. vulgaris 1 - 3 - 10 
6. pubescens 
a. palustris 1 - 3 4 - - 7 
b. hircina 1 - 3 
7. hirsuta, 18 2 3 - 10 15.
8. citrata - 4 5-7 9 
9. cardiaca 2 
b. gracilis 3 4 - 8 - 11 
10.
sativa ...
. 15 16.
b. paludosa 
c. subglabra 3-5 9 11 15.
11.
rubra 5-9 14.
12.
gentilis 12-45 7 9 10 11 12 13.
a. gentihs 
b. Wirtgeniana 
c. Pauliana ?
- 13 14.
d. pratensis 2 
13.
arvensis 
a. arvensis 
b. nummularia 
c. preecox 1 
d. agrestis 1 2 - 11.
e. AUionii 
f. parietarisefolia - 3   10.
66.
LAMiACEa:.
545 
Thymus (Serpyllum) eu-Serpyllum, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 10.
And elsewhere ?
Syn. 810.
Cyb. iii.
478.
Both are widely distributed in Britain ; 
Borrer msc.
Especially in mountainous districts ; Eng. hot.
Dry 
heaths ; Bab. man.
Thymus (Serpyllum) Chamadrys, Fries.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - - - 10 11.
And elsewhere ?
Syn. 810.
Cyb. iii.
478.
Dr. Boswell Syme writes, " This is the 
only Thyme I have been able to meet with in the vicinity of 
London"; and moat of the specimens in my own herbarium, 
brought together there from various parts of Britain, apparently 
belong to this segregate.
But I find that the book-characters, 
taken as distinctive between the two, are occasionally cross- 
combined in nature.
For instance, the stems or branches of 
Chamadrys may be seen variously "procumbent, rooting, much- 
branched," instead of " ascending, not rooting, slightly branched "; 
— the printed words being very satisfactory distinctions between 
the two Thymes, if Nature would only act up to the rules of a 
Fries, a Babington, or a Boswell-Syme, instead of perversely going 
contrary to their printed text.
Origanum virens, Link.
& Hoffmg.
Province - 2.
Isle of Wight; Dr. J.
E. Gray.
Ambiguity.
A pale variety of O.
vulgare, and perhaps not quite 
the true O.
virens of Link, although near to it.
Origanum megastachyum.
Link.
Provinces - 5 - 14.
Herefordshire and Edinburgh ; E.
B. 3.
Alien?
As a variety of O.
vulgare, in Eng. bot.
vii.
29.
Origanum Onites, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Essex ; Dale, in Huds.
flo.
ang.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
243.
A misnomer of 0.
vulgare ?
Calamintha (officinalis) menthifolia, Host.
Provinces 1 to 12, probably.
The usual form in England.
Syn. 814.
The distribution of C.
officinalis, page 270, represents 
that of the present segregate.
Calamintha (menthifolia) Briggsii, Syme E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 2.
South Devon ; Briggs !
Wight ; Stratton.
Syn. 814.
A slight variety; E.
C. report, 1867.
Calamintha (officinalis) sylvatica, Bromf.
Province - 2.
Isle of Wight; Dr. Bromfield !
Syn. 814.
Cyb. ii.
245.
This is the C.
officinalis of some conti- 
nental botanists ; our more usual form being the C.
ascendens of 
Jordan, which may be taken as the same thing with the var.
menthifolia treated above.
4 A 
646 55.
LAMIACEJE.
Melissa officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3-86-8.
Likely in others also.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
246.
A waif from gardens, by railways, etc.
Hyssopus officinalis, Linn.
Province - 2.
Ruins of Beaulieu Abbev, Hants ; Bromfield.
Planted Alien ?
Cyb. iii.
364.
Pbytologist, iii.
688.
Teucriwm (Scordium) scordioides, Bab. Man.
Provinces 1 - - 4.
Devon.
Cambridge.
By misnomer ?
Error.
The English plant is a broad-leaved variety of Scordium.
The T.
scordioides of Sclireber looks specifically distinct.
See 
Phytologist ii.
129.
Teucrium Botrys, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Surrey, in 1844 — 1866 ; found several years.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
248.
iii.
364.
Phytol.
iii.
308 & 737.
Teucrium Chammdrys, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 - 10 11 - - - 16.
Cornwall to Forfar.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
248.
iii.
480.
I have never chanced to find this.
Teucrium regium, Sohreber.
Province - 5.
"Near Abergavenny; Mr. E.
Y. Steele." 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
249.
Phytol.
i. 310.
A. N.
H. v.
377.
Ajuga (reptans) alpina, Anglor.
Provinces -78--lil2--15.
A. genevensis in part?
Syn. 822.
Cyb. ii.
249.
Eng. hot.
vii.
87.
Scarcely a var.
Ajuga genevensis, Linn.
Provinces - 7 - 11 - 13.
Wales.
Durham.
Lanark.
Casual or Alien.
From gardens?
Eng. bot.
vii.
87.
Ballota [nigra] ruderalis, Fries.
Provinces - 3 - 11.
Casual in 5.
Misnomers in 2 3 4 5.
Syn. 825.
Cyb. ii.
251.
Midx.
flo.
221.
A solitary plant of it 
picked in Oxfordshire ; Newbould and Syme !
Near Newcastle ; 
John Storey !
A white flowered variety of the commoner segre- 
gate, B.
[nigra] fcetida, has occasionally been mistaken for this 
one.
Leonurus Cardiaca, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
I have seen it in North Devon only.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
252.
iii.
481.
Originally brought from Asia, 
according to Dr. Godron, in Cons.
p. 21.
Lamium maculatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 - - 13 14 15 - 17.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
254.
A waif from gardens, often casual.
" Lamium lavigatujn, Linn." " L.
rugosum, Ait." 
Provinces 1 - - - 5 13 14 15.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
354.
iii.
481.
Scottish examples of L.
OTacwZatMrn 
have been distributed through the Botanical Society of Edinburgh 
56.
BORAGINACE^.
547 
under both the names cited ; perhaps they ought properly to be 
held synonyms of maculatum, not as representing anything clearly 
distinguishable.
Lamium [purpureum) decipiens.
Sender.
Provinces all ?
Localities not noted for this apart.
Syn. 831.
An intermediate form, sometimes enough so to puzzle 
more than young botanists, whether they should label it purpureum 
or incisum; and on this account it may demand a notice here.
See Eng. hot.
vii.
73.
Gcdeopsis {Ladanum) intermedia, Vill.
Province - 15.
Elgin; Wilson!
Gordon!
Syn. 832.
In English Botany we find the Ladanum first divided 
into two "sub-species," this one and the more usual form; the 
latter named angustifolia, and again subdivided into two " varieties," 
genuina and canescens.
I can myself barely keep apart the two 
sub-species, and that by general physiognomy only, not by the 
technical character of leaves " rounded and abruptly contracted 
into the petiole at the base." The leaf in my herbarium which 
best of all meets this description, is on a specimen from Dalhousie, 
and perhaps the nest best is on one from Dunfermline ; neither of 
these places being in Moray, and the specimens less like those 
from Moray, than others from England.
" Known to occur only 
in Moray"; Eng. hot.
vii.
64.
But the quoted words may 
perhaps have truly intended, ' Only known to occur in Moray ', 
— a very different statement.
Galeopsis (Tetrahit) bifida, Boenn.
Provinces - 3 - 10 - 16.
And doubtless most others.
Syn, 834.
Slender claims to be considered distinct ; E.
B.vii.
67.
Sta<ihys annua, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Kent, in 1830 and 1835.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
264.
[5 Stafford.
12 Cumberland.] 
Scutellaria hastifolia, Linn.
Provinces 1 3.
Cornwall!
Bree?
Herts; S.Warner.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
268.
Botanical Gazette, ii.
97.
36.
BORAGINACE^.
Myosotis [palustris) strigulosa, Reich, 
Provinces - - 3 12 13 14 15.
Likely in others.
Syn. 847.
Phytol.
iv.
647 & 693.
Eng. bot.
vii.
99.
Myosotis multiflora, DC.
'? 
Province - 6.
Glamorgan; Joseph Woods, in Phytol.
iii.
1059.
Ambiguity.
In a moist hollow, in Kenfig Pool, near Pyle.
54S 56.
BOEAGINACE^.
Myosotis stricta, Link.
Provinces 1 2.
Devon ; Torquay flo.
Sussex ; Mr. Mitten.
Ambiguity.
A note by Mr. W.
Mitten, in Phytol.
ii.
220.
Echinospermwn Lappula, Lebm.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 13.
Kent.
Herts.
Suff.
Glouc.
Renf.
Casual.
Cjh. 11.0.83.— {E.
deflexum also; Cyb. iii.
365.) 
Symphytum [officinale] patens, Sibth.
Provinces 1 - 3 - 5 - 14 15.
And probably elsewhere.
Syn. 859.
A variety in colour only ?
In examining the plants 
by the Thames side I have not found any other constant difference 
between the pale and purple varieties, besides that of colour.
Symphytum asperrimum, Bieb.
Provinces 1-3-9.
Somerset.
Essex.
Cheshire ?
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
279.
iii.
486.
"An evident escape, having 
formerly been cultivated at the Rocks Estate, near Bath"; 
R. Withers msc.
notes on Flora Bathoniensis.
Symphytum tauricum, Willd.
Provinces - - - 4 5.
Flora of Cambridge.
Warwick ; Kirk.
Casual or Alien.
" Permanently established" at AUesley ; Kirk.
Symphytum orientale, Linn.
Provinces .
. .
? Has " been noticed in England," but is " not 
native " ; Bab. man.
Distinct from the preceding ?
Borago officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Chiefly through culture in gardens.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
280.
iii.
486.
Anchusa officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 - 5 - - 8 - - 11 - 13 - 15 16.
Several erroneous ?
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
280.
Northumberland, very local, but during 
many years.
Penzance, very sparingly in 1867 ; C.
Bailey msc.
Mitcham, Surrey ; Trimen in J.
B. iv.
ISO.
Bute ; Clydesdale 
Flora.
Uddingston, 8 miles from Glasgow ; British Flora, ed.
8. 
Cynoglossum Omphalodes, Linn.
Provinces [1] - 6 - 16.
[Devon.] Glamorgan.
Fife; Syme.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
284.
Dillwyn's Swansea Materials, page 37.
Pulmonaria officinalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Authority wanting for 7 North Wales.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
285.
iii.
366 & 487.
Phytol.
iii.
577.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
97.
Pulmonaria virginica, Linn.
Mertensia, Don.
Province - 2.
Ruins of Netley Abbey, South Hants.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
285.
iii.
365.
Phytologist iii.
576.
Echium italicum, MOl.
Provinces - 6 - 11.
Glamorgan, erroneously.
Durham, extinct.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
286.
On ballast hills, in Durham, formerly.
— 
67.
PINGUICULACEa:.
58, PBIMULAOE^.
549 
{Echium violaceum has occurred in Surrey, introduced among com 
for a Distillery; see Journal of Botany, iv.
160.) 
87.
PiNGUICULACEiB.
Pinguicula longicomis, Edinb.
cat.
1841.
Province - 12.
Phytologist i.
310.
Botanical Gazette ii.
9. 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
287.
iii.
488.
A form of P.
vulgaris.
TJtricularia [vulgaris) neglecta, Lehm.
Provinces - 2 3 ?
6 - - 8.
Dorset to Notts.
Elsewhere ?
Syn. 875.
Journal of Botany, 1867.
Naming by the elongate 
and nearly erect pedicels, examples are preserved in my herbarium 
from Sussex, Surrey, Notts ; perhaps also (judging by the smaller 
bladders) from Hants, Suffolk, Norfolk; all of them formerly 
labelled as vulgaris.
58.
Pbimulacb^.
Primula [vulgaris) intermedia, L.
C. P.
elatior, With.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 .5 - 7 8 - 10 11 12 13 14 15.
[18 Orkney.] 
Hybrid?
Cyb. ii.
292.
iii.
489.
A series of intermediate forms, 
very probably hybrids ; some of them closely approximating to 
veris, others to vulgaris.
Usually labelled Primula elatior, after 
Withering, until recently, and thus confused with the true 
P. elaiior of Jacquin.
In English Botany it is named " officinali- 
vulgaris " by Dr. Boswell Syme.
Primula [scotica) acaulis, L.
0. ed.
6. 
Province - 17.
North-west Sutherland !
Syn. 682.
This is a variety of P.
scotica, differing from the usual 
form by having the umbel sessile, so that the elongated pedicels 
appear to be one-flowered peduncles, as in the common Primrose.
Thus far, the two forms are in analogy with veris and vulgaris ; 
but there is no corresponding change of character in calyx or 
corolla.
Cyclamen hederifolium, Willd.
C. europasum, Sm.
Provinces 12 3 4-6-8.
Yar. ficariifolium formerly in 4.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
295.
iii.
490.
A considerable wish would seem 
to have been felt by various botanists to enrol this plant among our 
true natives ; even single stray roots of it have been so reported, 
and deceptively swell the number of localities on record in books.
Sir James Smith gradually changed the original memorandum of 
the Bramfield locality, and for what other purpose it might be 
difficult to find out.
I am informed by the Eev. W.
W. Newbould 
that the msc.
note on the original drawing, made for Eng. Bot.
548, 
is in these words ; — " D.
E. Davy, Esq. from a bank in the parish 
of Bramfield in a situation that gives no reason to suppose it has 
crept (at least lately) in there from any garden, it being 200 or 300 
yards from any house." Surely, it is no uncommon thing for 
550 68.
PEIMULACE^.
garden plants to be 230 yards from a house!
But in the text of 
English Botany, the words " 200 or 300 yards from any house " 
are changed into "far from any house." And in English Flora, 
the situation becomes simply " on a wet clay soU," without mention 
of house or garden.
Prof.
Alphonse De CandoUe deems the plant 
introduced to Britain ; and, thus countenanced, I now act up to 
my own inclination by placing the Cyclamen among the Aliens, 
though before assigned to the doubtfully intermediate rank of 
Denizen in the Cybele Britannica, as a compromise with the ideas 
of some other English botanists.
Lysimachia punctata, Linn.
L. quadrifolium, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1-11-15.
Devon.
Northumberland.
Forfar.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
299.
iii.
493.
Eng. hot.
vii.
147.
Naturalised 
and abundant in Mr. Sewell's grounds at Heaton Dene, near New- 
castle ; John Storey !
Glen Glova, Forfar ; George Lawson !
In 
English Botany, Dr. Boswell Syme reports that he has the 
American L.
quadrifoUa " under the name of L.
punctata," col- 
lected by Mr. Storey in the locality here quoted.
But the 
examples in my own herbarium, sent by Mr. Storey himself, are 
certsxcAj punctata ; they are widely dissimilar from the quadrifoUa 
of America, as described by Gray, and as shown by an example in 
the herbarium of the late Dr. Boott.
Again, in his Manual, 1867, 
Professor Babington tells us that " Dulverton, Devon, is the only 
station" ior punctata ; but without explaining what name he would 
give to the plants of Heaton Dene or Clova.
Not having seen any 
specimen from Dulverton, I cannot confidently say that we mean 
the same plant by the same name of punctata ?
If not, what is 
the Devon plant ?
Lysimachia ciliata, Linn.
Provinces 8 9 - - 12 - - 15 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
298.
iii.
491.
" East bank of Leven Water 
about a mile from Dumbarton, growing rather plentifully amongst 
Carices and Jimci with Carum verticillatum.
This species, 
probably introduced by aquatic birds, deserves a place in our 
Floras"; John Ball, in Bot. Gaz.
iii.
68.
Mr. Ball's locality is 
not the same place, I suppose, but must be in the same neighbour- 
hood as that explained in the following more guarded report by 
Mr. Gait ; — " Wood in which the Aconitum grows at Balmaha, 
about half a mile from the Quay, left hand side going towards 
Buchanan House.
Although now a wood, there was a small 
cottage here some thirty or forty years ago ; the plants doubtless 
the remains of its garden"; W.
Gait in 1869.
The two records 
will help on the history of L.
ciliata, as before partly given in 
Cybele Britannica, vol.
ii.
pages 398-9.
Anagallis {arvensis) cmrulea, All.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Authority wanting for no.
7. 
Syn. 890.
Cyb. ii.
801.
iii.
493.
Two different plants seem to 
69.
PLUMBAGINACE^.
551 
be included under this name in England ; one being the " true 
blue " species ; the other being a variety of arvensis, the flowers of 
which are purplish-blue in colour, but otherwise not differing from 
those of the red-flowered phcenicea ; this latter varying also into 
pinky white and pale lilac varieties.
59.
Plumbaginace^.
Armeria (maritima) plani/olia, E.
B. 3.
Province - 15.
Highlands ; H.
C. Watson, cited in E.
B. vii.
157.
Ambiguity.
I should prefer this held uncertain as a British plant, 
for the present.
In 1841, I brought an Armeria from the High- 
lands, probably from some hill near Dalwhinnie or Dalnacardoch, 
as something apparently distinct from A.
maritima; after which it 
was left several years almost unnoticed in my garden.
I cannot 
feel sufficiently assured that no transfer of peg-label had been made 
during those years by the gardener ; this being a source of error 
which I have experienced much difficulty in guarding against.
The 
hoe or rake catches a peg and draws it out of the ground; the 
gardener sees it loose among weeds or leaves, sticks it in again 
somewhere, and too often does so by sheer guess at best.
Armeria maritima, pubescens, scotica, duriuscula.
Provinces .
. ?
Bab. Man.
editions 3 to 6.
Ambiguities.
These segregates of Armeria maritima are unknown 
to myself, and were left unnoticed by Dr. BosweU Syme, in the 
third edition of English Botany.
Statice tatarica, Linn.
Province - 3.
By a misnomer of S.
bahusiensis.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
305.
Where originally reported ?
Statice (Limonium) pyramidalis, Syme, in E.
B. 3.
Provinces 13 3 4 9 10.
" S.
serotina, Gr.
& Godr." 
Syn. 897.
Dr. Boswell Syme gives only Kent, Sussex, and Dorset 
for this segregate.
I do not see how to separate his Kent speci- 
mens from others in my herbarium received from Somerset, Norfolk, 
Chester, and York.
Statice (binervosa) intermedia, Syme, in E.
B. 3.
Provinces — 4-67.
Norfolk.
Glamorgan.
Carnarvon.
Syn. 899.
Dr. Boswell Syme remarks that this passes insensibly 
into our type form of binervosa, which is the occidentalis of Lloyd.
Statice (binervosa) Dodartii, Gir.
Provinces - 3 - 4.
Dorset?
Norfolk?
Syn. 899.
Ambiguity.
This and the preceding one bear about 
the same relation to occidentalis, as it is usually seen in England, 
that Idmonium var.
genuina bears to its segregate var.
pyramidalis.
But some uncertainty about the habitats remains to be cleared up.
552 60.
PLANTAGINACEiE.
— 62.
CHENOPODIACEai.
60.
Plantaginace^.
Plantago {laneeolata) Timbali, Jordan.
Provinces - - 3 - ] 0.
Sown with imported seeds of clover.
Casual.
Surrey !
Midx.
flo.
Essex ; Syme !
York ; Baker !
Plantago {maritima) hirsuta, E.
B. 3.
Province - 18.
Mainland of Orkney ; Eng. bot.
vii.
173.
Syn. 904.
" Singular from being densely hairy." 
Plantago arenaria, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3.
Somerset ; Clark !
Flower !
Essex ; Syme !
Casual.
English Botany, third edition, vii.
175.
Plantago Psyllium, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3.
Isle of Wight?
Middlesex, extinct.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
49S.
Phytol.
iii.
745.
Midx.
flo.
S30.— (Also 
Plantago Lagopus, casual in Surrey ; see J.
B. iv.
150.) 
61.
AMAEANTHACEiB.
Amaranthus Blitum, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 11 - 14.
Dorset to Northumbl.
& E.
Lowlands.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
313.
Very seldom met with.
Amaranthus retroflexus, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 - 10.
Sur. Hert.
Midx.
Glouc.
York.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
313.
Webb flo.
Jour.
Bot. iv.
150.
62.
CHENOP0DIACE.E.
Blitum virgatum, Linn.
Province - 14.
Fisher-row, Edinburgh ; Boswell Syme.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
367.
Eng. bot viii.
38.
Chenopodium (polyspermum) cymosum, or ohtusifolium.
Chenopodium (polyspermum) spicatum, or acutifolium.
Provinces, as given in the Synopsis; same for both?
Syn. 909.
These two segregates, differing by their inflorescence 
and by the forms of their leaves, may be said to correspond with 
the candicans and viride, segregates of G.
album.
Chenopodium [urbicum) intermedium, M.
& K.
Provinces 12 3 4 5.
Doubtful in 1 and 5.
Syn. 910.
Cyb. ii.
315.
The distribution to be assigned to this 
segregate will vary with the application of the name.
If it be 
restricted to the plants with the leaves more rhomboid than 
triangular,, and with the inflorescence less spicate and less erect, 
and quite independently of the marginal divisions of the leaves, — 
then the present segregate reverts gradually to our type form 
under culture.
The continental form of C.
urbicum., that mth the 
63.
CHENOPODIACE^.
553 
sub-entire leaves and much elongated spikes, is found in Britain 
only as a Casual, on ballast, etc.
Chenopodium {rubrum) pseudo-botryoides, Lond.
Cat.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 - - 7 - - - 11 - - - [15].
Sja. 911.
Eng. bot.
viii.
23.
Since the second volume of the 
Cybele Britannica was printed, it has become quite clear that 
a form of C.
rubrum had been mistakenly reported for true 
hotryoides of Smith, in several counties.
Hence the name of 
pseudo-botryoides, given to it in the London Catalogue, to facilitate 
the acquisition of specimens of both by those who mark their 
Desiderata in that Catalogue.
In its extreme state, the present 
segregate is a dwarf depressed form, with leaves entire or very 
slightly toothed, thick in substance and usually much reddened ; 
its place of growth being about ponds in a gravelly soil, especially 
where much trodden by geese.
Having been distributed nume- 
rously through the Exchange Club, it thus ought no longer to be 
mis-reported for Smith's C.
hotryoides, which is a sea-side plant.
Unnoticed in Bab. Man.
ed.
6. Mistaken for botryoides in the 
former editions.
Chenopodium [album) cayidicans.
Lam.
Provinces, probably all.
" C.
album, Linn, herb." 
Syn. 914.
Eng. hot.
viii.
15.
Varenne, in Phytologist iv.
1111.
A less expanded form, often found in some relation to cold, 
drought, or sterility of soil.
Chenopodium (album) paganum, Reich.
Provinces, possibly all.
C. (a.) virens, Lond.
cat.
ed.
6. 
Syn. 914.
Journal of Botany vi.
289.
Contrasted only in their 
extreme forms, these three segregates of Ch. album do indeed 
appear widely dissimilar.
But the other two are so completely 
connected with this one by intermediate or transition forms, that 
specific separation of them is rendered ridiculous or impossible.
Probably this ought to be regarded as the typical form of the 
species, not candicans, although it is the one which has been 
repeatedly labelled C.ficifolium by English collectors.
It is the 
plant of rich and loose ground, and perhaps of a warmer season.
The most frequent form in Surrey ; but apparently less common 
in the northern counties, and possibly quite absent from some of 
the most northern provinces of Britain.
Chenopodium (album) viride, Linn.
Provinces 1-3-15, etc.
Not ascertained apart.
Fife ; Syme.
Syn. 914.
Cyb. ii.
318.
Especially the form of loose rubbish- 
heaps, and of the autumn season.
In Surrey, it is the least 
frequent of the three segregates.
Chenopodium opulifolium, Schrader.
Provinces - - 3 - 10.
Surrey.
Middlesex.
York ?
Casual.
Eng. bot.
viii.
38.
Midx.
flo.
833.
J. B.
iv.
160.
4 B 
554 63.
CHENOPODIACE^.
Chenopodium Botrys, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 - 9 10.
Berks.
Liverpool.
North York.
Casual.^(The C.
multifidum and C.
ambrosioides also have been 
recorded, in E.
C. report for 1866, as found casually near 
Gloucester).
Atriplex nitens, Keb.
Province - 3.
Isle of Wight ; Dr. Bromfleld.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
323.
iii.
498.
Phytologist iii.
735.
Atriplex hortensis, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3 etc.
A waif from culture.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
333.
Occasionally also on ballast-heaps.
Atriplex laciniata, Linn.
Provinces all, or nearly all, by name.
Ambiguity.
This name formerly intended the plant now called 
arenaria, along with which the very distinct A.
Bdbingtonii was 
also confused.
What was intended by the name of laciniata in 
Neill's Tour in Orkney?
— (The true A.
rosea, Linn., is recorded 
in the list of plants imported into Surrey among corn for a 
Distillery ; Jour.
Bot. iv.
150).
Atriplex (Bahingtonii) glahriuscula, Edmondston.
Province - 18.
Shetland; Edmond.
flo.
39.
Syn. 931.
Not known to other botanists.
Atriplex (hastata) patula, Sm. E.
B. ed.
1. 
Provinces all ?
A. Smithii of Syme, in Eng. bot.
ed.
3. 
Syn. 923.
Cyb. ii.
334.
iii.
499.
A. hastata, Bab. man.
Atriplex {hastata) deltoidea, Bab.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 - - 13 14 16-18.
Syn. 933.
Cyb. ii.
335.
iii.
499.
Including A.
prostrata, Bab.
Atriplex microspemia, Bab.
Provinces 1 - 3.
Near Bath.
Wouldham, in Kent.
Ambiguity.
A name representing three leaves and one calyx valve, 
as figured in the Transactions of the Botanical Society of Edin- 
burgh ; not otherwise known to me, but seemingly a form or state 
of hastata.
Atriplex [erecta) Symei.
" A.
erecta, Huds." 
Provinces - 3 3.
North Hants.
Surrey.
Middlesex.
Syn. 923=;=.
Cyb. iii.
499.
Flora of Middlesex, 237.
In English 
Botany Dr. Boswell Syme unites the angustifolia of Smith and the 
erecta of English botanists generally, as two varieties under the 
specific name of Atriplex patula, Linn.
He there distinguishes a 
third variety, one of very vigorous growth, to which he would 
specially restrict the name of erecta, Huds.
This was found at 
Twickenharti in 1867, and " at the entrance of Battersea Fields 
from Nine Elms" many years back.
In 1869 I found the same 
variety in a potato field between Fleet and Farnborough Stations, 
63.
POLYGON ACE^.
655 
North Hants, but not quite so luxuriant as the Twickenham 
plants, or as some of those plants.
In turn, the Hants examples 
were more luxuriant in growth than specimens of so-labelled erecta, 
received from other counties ; and hardly separable from these last 
by any character other than that of size or vigour in growth.
Dr. Syme would distinguish Hudson's erecta from Babington's 
deltoidea by the leaves " wedge-shaped at the base, with the cusps 
ascending".
But Professor Babington's figure of his prostrata 
(placed under deltoidea by Dr. Syme) shews us nearly such a leaf 
as described in the words quoted.
Further observation of the Hving 
plants would thus seem to be needed.
Atriplex (littoralis) marina, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 8 - 10 11.
Wight to Northumberland.
Syn. 924.
Cyb. ii.
327.
English Botany, viii.
28.
Salicornia {herbacea) procumbens, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 - 6 - 8 - 10 - 12 - - 15 16.
Syn. 924.
A very slight variety of S.
herbacea.
63.
PoL¥GONACE.S;.
Polygonum [amphibium) terrestre, Auct.
Provinces all ?
More frequent than the aquatic form.
Syn. 933.
A state, rather than a variety; and yet so unlike the 
typical or floating form of the plant, that it would assuredly have 
been considered quite a distinct species, if it had been brought 
into herbaria from distant countries only.
In this instance, the 
more frequent state cannot well be held the typical one ; and 
perhaps it becomes the more frequent only because the surface of 
our lands so much exceeds the surface of our waters.
The ter- 
restrial stems are often flowerless.
Polygonum [lapathifolium) laxum, " Eeich." E.
B. S.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10.
"P.
nodosum, Auct.
plur." 
Syn. 934.
Cyb. ii.
335.
" I do not see how it can be separated " 
from the type form "even as a sub-species"; Eng. bot.
viii.
77.
Polygonum (Persicaria) elatum, Gren.
& Godr.
Province - - 3.
" P.
biforme, Wahl." " P.
nodosum, Pers." 
Syn. 933.
I have only seen it from Battersea Fields, and else- 
where about the neighbourhood of London ; Dr. Boswell Syme, in 
Eng. bot.
viii.
75.
Not known to me.
Polygonum (aviculare) agrestinum, Jord.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 10 15 16.
And most others ?
Syn. 939.
"Common and generally distributed"; E.
B. 3.
Polygonum {aviculare) vulgatum, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - - - - 8 - 10.
And all others ?
Syn. 939.
"Very common, and generally distributed".
The 
556 63.
POLYGONACEiE.
. 
segregates of P.
aviculare are unnoticed even in very recent Floras, 
as those of Cambridge, North Yorkshire (except agrestinum) and 
Northumberland and Durham.
Polygonum {aviculare) arenastrum, Bor.
Provinces - - 3 4 11 - 14 15.
And others?
Syn. 939.
Common near London, but apparently less abundant 
in the north ; Bng. hot.
viii.
65.
Polygonum (aviculare) microspermum, Jord.
Provinces - 3 3 11.
Surrey.
Durham.
Northumb.
Syn. 939.
Apparently rare ; Eng. hot.
viii.
66.
Polygonum [aviculare) rurivagum-, Jord.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 - - 8 - - 11.
And others probably.
Syn. 939.
" Common in sandy and chalky districts in Kent, 
Surrey, Essex, and Norfolk.
I have it also from Warwickshire 
and Durham ; " Eng. hot.
viii.
67.
Polygonum [aviculare) littorale.
Link.
Provinces ?
2 3 10.
Wight.
Kent.
Essex.
York.
Syn. 939.
Probably not uncommon; Eng. bot.
viii.
67.
Polygonum [Convolvulus) pseudo-dumetorum, L.
C. 
Provinces - 3 3.
Probably in many others also.
Syn. 941.
Flora Vectensis, p.
435.
Simply P.
Convolvulus 
growing luxuriantly, and with the angles of the fruit perianth 
conspicuously winged ; in so far somewhat resembling P.
dume- 
torum, for which it has been mistaken in some places.
Polygonum Fagopyrum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Devon fio.
to Forfar flo.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
341.
Sown for feeding game ; not permanent.
Riiniex maximus, Sohreber.
Province - 3.
Sussex ; Bab. man.
edit.
1 only.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
343.
iii.
503.
A misnomer?
Rumex conspersus, Hartm.
Province - 15.
Kinross ; Dr. Arnott !
Native ?
For particulars, see Eng. bot.
viii.
48 — 49.
Rumex alpinus, Linn.
Provinces - - - [4] - - - 8 - 10 11 13 13 14 15 16.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
344.
[4 Norfolk ; Eev. Mr.
Small.] 
Rumex [nemorosus) sanguineus, Linn.
Provinces - - (3) 8 - - (11) - - 14, etc.
Syn. 948.
CylD.
ii.
345.
Midx.
flo.
340.
The name sanguineus 
is usually given by English collectors for the type form of the 
species.
Assuming it to have intended the plant only when it has 
a network of purplish veins in the leaves, it ought surely to be held 
the variety, not the typical form, both as being less usual and as 
being a less natural condition of the species.
There arc two states 
65.
THYMELiEACEiE.
— 67.
ASARACEvE.
557 
of it with coloured veins ; a wild state, with the colour nearly con- 
fined to the midrib and veins themselves ; a garden form, in which 
the colour extends to the substance of the leaf alongside the veins, 
and thus giving the appearance of widened (varicose) purple veins.
This latter state perhaps is seen only as a casual escape from 
gardens.
By book records the localities for "sanguineus" are 
numerous ; but usually it is not clear whether viridis or one of the 
other two states is intended by the name.
Rumex limosus, Thuill.
Province - 8.
Lincoln.
Derby.
Ambiguity.
Cyh. iii.
503.
Bot. Graz.
i. 296.
Given as a third 
species, between maritimus and palustris, by Professor Babington, 
in the Gazette referred to.
The name is cited simply as a synonym 
of JJ.
palustris, in Eng. bot.
viii.
43.
Rumex scutatus, Linn.
Provinces - 6 - 9 or 10 - IS - 14.
Glamorgan to Edinburgh.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
848.
Naturahsed near Settle (Mr. J.
Back- 
house) ; Moore's msc.
Flora of Yorkshire.
Is this Mr. Tat- 
ham's locality of Silverdale?
If so, it is the Silverdale in 
Lancashire, according to Mr. J.
G. Baker ; which I suppose to be 
situate in the extreme north of province 9, being " 8 mUes north 
of Lancaster," according to Sharp's Gazetteer.
But in English 
Botany Dr. Syme writes the locality " at the head of Silverdale in 
Yorkshire".
Hence the uncertainty between provinces 9 and 10.
65.
THTMELiEACE^.
Daphne Cneorum, Linn.
Province - 7.
Beddegelart, Carnarvon ; Mr. Meyrick.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
353.
Botanist's Guide, 83.
66.
Santalace^.
Thesium humile, Vahl.
Province 1.
DawHsh, Devon, 1829 ; C.
C. Babington.
Error?
Cyb. ii.
353.
Not verified.
Thesium intermedium, Schrader.
Province 0.
" Said to be a native of Britain"; Bah. man.
ed.
3. 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
353.
Where and by whom so said ?
67.
ASAEACE^.
Aristolochia Clematitis, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10.
S. Devon to N.
E. York.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
355.
Ruins, and near gardens.
658 69.
EUPHORBIACE^.
69.
EuPHOEBIACEiK.
Euphorbia dulcis, Linn.
" var.
purpurata." 
Provinoes - 7 - 15.
Denbigh.
Ochills.
Moray.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
366.
Coll.
Mor. E.
B. viii.
117.
E. C.
rep.
1868.
Euphorbia coralloides, Linn.
Province - 2.
Slinfold, Sussex.
Now extinct?
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
360.
iii.
S05.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
98.
Euphorbia Esula, Linn.
Provinces [1] 2 - - 8 11 - - 14 15.
Chiefly in 14.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
360.
iii.
505.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
98.
One of the 
recorded localities for this plant may afford us an illustration of the 
difficulty in distinguishing between artificial and natural stations.
In the Supplement to the Flora Bathoniensis a station is recorded 
for it as a true native, with the name of Mr. T.
B. Flower as the 
authority.
Several years afterwards that gentleman " ascertained 
this species vyas planted in the locality.
The root had been taken 
from the Prior Park Botanic Garden by one of the students." In 
English Botany this is distinguished into two varieties, genuina 
and Pseudo-Cyparissias ; the latter known by its narrower leaves.
Euphorbia salicifolia, Host.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; George Lawson, in Phytol.
iii.
345.
Ahen.
Cyb. ii.
366.
"Sub-species of E.
Esula"; Eng. bot.
viii.
117.
Euphorbia Cyparissias, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 - 4 5 6 - - - 10 11 12 - 14 15.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
861.
iii.
505.
Cornwall to Fife.
Euphorbia Lathyris, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 11 - 13 - 15.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
364.
iii.
505.
Introduced ; DC.
geog.
bot.
rais.
Becomes a sort of weed, a self-sown biennial, in shrubberies ; but 
is killed by severe winters.
There is weighty authority for holding 
it a native in some counties, notably.
Professor C.
C. Babington 
for Somerset, Mr. Borrer for Sussex, Mess.
Webb and Coleman 
for Herts.
It readily renews itself " on sufferance " in shrub- 
beries and gardens ; and it is thus likely to do so in coppices 
afterwards, of a single seed should once be introduced and grow to 
plant-hood there.
Euphorbia Characias, Linn.
Province - 5.
Malvern, Worcester.
Need wood, Stafford.
Error.
Cyb. ii.
365.
A misnomer, probably of amygdaloides.
Buxus sempervirens, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10.
Always planted ?
Alien?
Cyb. ii.
366.
Surrey, locally established.
Perhaps 
introduced ; A.
DC.
in Geog.
bot.
rais.
686.
70.
URTICACE^.
— 71.
AMENTIFEE^.
659 
Mercurialis (perennis) ovata, E.
B. 3.
Province - S.
Hurstpierpoint, Sussex ; Mr. Mitten.
Syn. 976.
Cyb. ii.
367.
Not known to me.
Mercurialis (annua) ambigua, Linn.
fil.
Provinces - 2 3.
Kent ; E.
C. rep.
1866.
Middlesex ; T.
D. flo.
Syn. 977.
Chiefly along the south coast; E.
B. 3.
70.
Ueticace^.
Vrtica pilulifera, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 11.
Casual in most of them.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
369.
Permanent in province 4 ; E.
B. 3.
Urtica Dodartii, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4.
Isle of Wight, sown ; Phytol.
i. 806.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
370.
A variation of U.
pilulifera.
Parietaria (officinalis) falUtx, Gren.
& Godr.
Provinces - - 3 4 - 6 - 14 15.
P. erecta, Bab. man.
(misnomer).
Syn. 982.
Cyb. ii.
371.
Eng. bot.
viii.
126.
Cannabis sativa, Linn.
Provinces 1 etc.
A waif from bird cages, on rubbish, etc.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
372.
iii.
606.
Pity is it to see a plate of this 
formally given in English Botany, the plant not having any real or 
proper claim to be held British, even by an imperfect state of 
naturalisation ; — why not equally give plates of the bean and pea, 
much more frequently seen as reUcts of culture, or as casuals from 
scattered seeds ?
Ulmus major, Sm.
Provinces 12 3 4.
Corn.
Dor. Sus.
Essex.
Northampton.
Alien ?
Cyb. ii.
374.
Unknown to me.
Dr. Boswell Syme places 
it as a variety of U.
montana, and likely enough I may have noted 
it myself by that specific name.
Ulmus glabra, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10.
As reported by name.
Ambiguity.
Perhaps this is usually a planted tree ; and the name 
may represent glabrous states of suberosa and montana indifferently.
Dr. Boswell Syme unites with it the carpinifolia and striata of 
Lindley's Synopsis, to make up his variety glabra, placed under 
71.
AMENTIFEE.E.
Qv£rcus intermedia, D.
Don.
Provinces .
. .
? According to the varying use of the name.
Ambiguity.
This is usually placed under sessiliflora in books; 
but judging by labelled specimens the short-stalked forms of 
560 71.
AMENTIfEE^.
pedunculata axe also thus named by collectors.
It seems that 
Don's name is applied to any intermediate-looking form, which 
cannot confidently be called either pedunculata or sessiliflora 
specially.
Castanea vulgaris.
Lam.
Provinces 1 to 16 ; but always planted.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
377.
Often damaged by frost in spring.
Betula [alba] ghainosa, Fries.
Betula (alba) pubescens, Wallr.
Provinces all?
Devon !
Hants !
— to Highlands !
Syn. 993.
Cyb. ii.
381.
The lateral lobes of the catkin scales 
are very variable in form and direction ; though made much of in 
specific diagnosis as if uniform.
Betula {alba) verrucosa, Ehrh.
Betula [alba) pendula.
Roth.
Provinces all?
Less frequent than the preceding segregate?
Syn. 993.
Seedlings which spring under old pendulous trees, 
vrith rhomboid glabrous or sub-glabrous leaves, have their own 
leaves cordate-ovate and pubescent; a circumstance which tells 
something against the supposed distinctness of the extreme forms.
Possibly each of them, glutinosa (with pwfcescens) and verrucosa, may 
have a variety pendula ?
Betula intermedia, Thomas.
Province - 15.
Clova; " Prof.
Balfour, Colonel Brown." 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
382.
Flora of Forfarshire, 163.
— (In the two 
earlier editions of the Manual there was an attempt to divide 
Betula nana into two species " probably." But as this was not 
repeated in after editions, it is little worth while here to introduce 
separate paragraphs for those abandoned segregates).
Populus nigra, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16.
[18.
Shedand; Edm. flo.
p. 37.] 
Alien?
Cyb. ii.
385.
This was treated as a native tree in Cybele 
Britannica, because so deemed by several of our provincial botanists.
I have myself never yet seen a locality for it which could be 
declared a satisfactorily natural or unplanted one.
Topulus (tremula) glabra, E.
B. 
Provinces - 15 - 17 18.
Aberdeen.
Sutherland.
Orkney.
Syn. 997.
Eng. bot.
viii.
196.
Probably in other provinces and 
counties besides those quoted.
Very few of my herbarium specimens 
of tremula are in young leaf, and my attention in years past had not 
been directed to this variety in its living state.
I think that it 
occurs in England; though the typical "villosa", with the young 
leaves densely silky, may be the form more frequent.
71.
AMENTIFEE^.
661 
Salia; aurita, Linn.
Provinces all.
Native.
Lat. 50 — 61.
Cornwall, Wight, Kent.
— Orkney, Shetland.
Zones 13 3 4.
Highlands to 700 yards.
Humber to 550 yards.
Census 18 37 73.
Ireland 9.
British type of distribution.
Europe all, except Finmark.
Russia 6 - 4 8 3 1.
West-asia?
Siberia.
— .
N.B. This WiUow was accidentally left out at its proper place 
in the series of native species, at the foot of page 315.
Salices segregates, etc.
Salix is another genus much like Riobus and Bosa, in being 
inconveniently numerous in uncertain species and little-known 
varieties, in individualities about which most botanists must 
" agree to differ." David Don enjoyed telling an anecdote of 
somebody having offended the estimable William Borrer, by a 
remark that " all sensible botanists eschewed Willows, while the 
crazy ones had each their own ideas about the species." And 
perhaps the most sensible among us are those who rest content to 
look at Willows in the wilds, and take least heed of their names 
and arrangements in books.
Unfortunately, this prudent course is 
not the one open to those who profess to describe or to topograph 
all plants british or seemingly british.
Twenty-three Salices 
(reckoning in the omitted aurita) have been treated in the 
Synopsis, as quasi-specific groups or aggregate species ; their 
indicated distribution taking in the subordinate segregates, at least 
to some extent, and thus not always strictly representing that of 
the assumed type form apart.
Except in those cases where 
the supposed typical segregate has itseK acquired a distinctive 
name, one currently in use, it is too often impossible to decide 
positively that the type-form was the one really intended by a 
familiar name ; say, by the names alba, purpurea, triandra,fragilis, 
cinerea, repeiis, nigricans, or phylicifolia.
In finding these names 
connected with general habitats, or even with special localities, 
recorded in books, the question arises and too often must 
remain unanswered, ' whether (say) vitelUna, ramulosa, amyg- 
dalina, Husselliana, aquatica, argentea, Forsteriana, Davalliana, or 
various other secondary segregates were intended, either along with 
the primary segregate or even solely and exclusively of the latter?' 
In here looking to the segregates, apart from each other, not 
united into groups, it becomes necessary to fall back on the 
English Flora of Smith, with its predecessor the Flora Britannica, 
as the real starting ground from which subsequent English 
writers have proceeded, aided, of course by the plates and descrip- 
tions in the original series of English Botany.
(Of that earlier 
edition no copy is before me to refer to while writing.) I cannot 
make out that Hooker, Babington, Bentham, or even Boswell-Syme 
have subsequently written under the advantage of very complete or 
4 c 
562 71.
AMEKTIFEE^.
very clear knowledge of these difficult plants in their living reality 
and wild condition.
At any rate, they have more usually re-said 
than added to previous knowledge.
And I assume that they have 
taken their descriptions mainly from Smith or Borrer, more or less 
assisted by dried specimens ; that is, by a limited supply of 
fragments in the herbarium.
Unisexual trees and shrubs, numerous in species and very 
numerous in varieties, whose flowers precede the leaves, and 
which perhaps often hybridize, and certainly sport much into 
subordinate variations of form and pubescence, would require to 
be illustrated by an extensive series of good specimens in the 
herbarium, in order to yield a sufficiency of materials for their 
technical arrangement and description in books.
The difficulty 
of this is increased by their great liability to the attacks of insects, 
if left undisturbed in the herbarium for any considerable time.
Few botanists are in a position to devote sufficient space to a living 
collection.
Take our own insular Willows at 80 to 100 named 
segregates.
Double that number for the sexes.
Allow the 
inadequate average of half-a-dozen examples to each sex of each 
segregate, to illustrate its sub-variations in form or pubescence ; 
and then a thousand living trees or bushes would not be found 
unnecessarily numerous, as a fairly good living collection.
To 
examine them in their native locahties (and in Osier grounds) from 
the South of England to the Arctic zones of the Highland hills, at 
several different times in the year, and for several years in 
succession, returning even to the very same individual bushes at 
different seasons, is obviously a requisite which can be achieved 
only in very limited degree by any one botanist.
The first of the four describing botanists above mentioned has 
very candidly put on record his own kind of preparedness or 
qualification for the task of describing WOlows.
But for the 
difficulties specially appertaining to this genus, it might reasonably 
have been expected that his Flora Scotica would have been a 
descriptive account of plants actually found in Scotland, and made 
on living examples or herbarium specimens really of Scottish 
growth.
And yet he introduces his account of the Willows of 
Scotland by the frank admission conveyed in these words : — " The 
following specific characters of this most intricate genus are taken 
in every instance, where not otherwise mentioned, from specimens 
that are the best authority for the E.
Bot. species ; that is, from 
individuals gathered in the late Mr. Crowe's garden near Norwich, 
in company with Mr. Crowe himself, or with Sir James Smith.
If 
my characters differ in some measure from those published by Smith, 
it wiU show how variable these plants are, and how careful we 
ought to bo in not multiplying the species unnecessarily." 
Sir James Smith himself had seen Httle of British botany in the 
wilds.
For willows he too trusted much to Mr. Crowe's garden, 
71.
AMENTIFEE-E.
563 
constantly visited; the same bushes seen there doubtless month 
after month and year after year.
He was not too modest to 
explain his own better opportunities in Crowe's garden, or to 
contrast them against the inferior opportunities of Sir WUliam 
Hooker, as these extracts wUl make apparent: — "Full 30 years 
have I laboured at this task, 10 of them under the instructive 
auspices of my late friend Mr. Crowe, ia whose garden every 
Willow that could be got was cultivated ; more especially all that 
could be obtained from any part of Britain, by that unrivalled 
collector Mr. Dickson.
The plants were almost daily visited and 
watched by their possessor, whom no character or variation 
escaped ; seedlings innumerable, springing up all over the ground, 
were never destroyed till their species were determined, and the 
immutability of each verified by our joint inspection." .
..." No 
botanist can be competent to form an opinion about them, unless 
he resides among the wild ones, for several seasons, or continually 
observes them in a garden.
No hasty traveller over a country, no 
collector of dried specimens, or compiler of descriptions, can judge 
of their characters, or essential diflFerences." .
..." I should have 
hoped that my excellent friend Dr. Hooker would have given 
Mr. Crowe and myself credit for some accuracy of observation, and 
not have set almost all our labours at nought, without some 
practical knowledge, at least, of his own." (Eng. Flo.
iv.
164, 
165.) 
Since the decease of Smith and Crowe, probably no English 
botanist has acquired a technical familiarity with the Willows of 
this country at aO.
equal to that of Mr. Borrer, himself one of the 
Smithian-Linnean school.
Following Borrer, although in a much 
more local and limited range of exploration and observation, come 
the Eev. J.
E. Leefe and Mr. James Ward, as Salicetists with 
" some practical knowledge " of their own.
But none of these 
three botanists, Borrer included, has given us a general revision or 
re-£irrangement of the genus Salix, at once descriptive and topo- 
graphical, which can be placed on a par with those of the genus 
Rubus, Rosa, or Hie)-aciwn, by three other "Industrious Bees" 
among our botanists still in living usefulness.
For the purpose here immediately iu view, my own notes on the 
localities of the Willows are sadly deficient.
They were made 
mostly in years long past, and in relation to the aggregate species 
before treated on pages 313 — 318; sparingly extended to any 
reliable acquaintance with the special segregates now to come 
under notice.
Nor wUl the specimens and labels placed in my 
own herbarium sufficiently supply what is wanting.
On turning 
to the Local Floras and other records of localities, in die endeavour 
to trace out the areas or other topographical details of the segre- 
gates, I am still much at fault ; quite convinced that many false 
localities are ou record, through misapplied names or aggregate 
5G4 71.
AMENTIPEEiE.
names used in an uncertain manner, and yet not feeling safely 
prepared to sift out properly tlie true from the fe,lse, the reliable 
from the unreliable records.
The widest contradictions (and therefore errors on one side or 
other) are to be seen between the names given to the same Willow 
by different botanists, not simply among the inexperienced young, 
but even among the most experienced and the special experts.
Thus, by the list of names taken into the ' London Catalogue 
of British Plants,' the nigricans and phylidfolia are two aggregates, 
each including eight or ten subordinate species or segregates.
Surely, the two aggregates ought to be sufficiently distinguishable 
from each other, if their subordinate segregates can be also 
accepted as species !
And yet my own herbarium distinctly answers 
' no ' to the exclamatory query.
Yorkshire specimens, female 
catkins and grown leaves, labelled "Davalliana" by Mr. James 
Ward, are there corrected to "nigricans" by Dr. N.
J. Andersson; 
though the botanists of to-day pretty generally place Smith's 
Davalliana as a segregate oi phylidfolia, not of nigricans.
Again, 
a young botanist (whom I suppose to have been guided in his 
nomenclature by Professor Balfour) sent me Highland Willows 
labelled " Myrsinites var.
arhutifolia ?
" Some time afterwards he 
wrote, " A Salix, which I sent you formerly, labelled ' S.
Myrsinites 
var.
arhutifolia', is stated by Mr. Babington to be ' S.
phylidfolia, 
var.' " Here again the name is re-corrected by Dr. Andersson into 
' nigricans'.
And so far as I may venture to express an opinion, 
I hold the corrections by Dr. Andersson to be right in each 
instance.
It would be easy to cite other such cases ; even some 
instances where Mr. Borrer and Dr. Andersson are equally in 
contradiction with each other.
But two are as good as two score, 
for the purpose immediately in view ; namely, to illustrate the 
uncertainty of names and localities for the species in this trouble- 
some genus ; an uncertainty greatly increased when the segregates 
come to be named and specially localized apart from each other.
In the following account of them it is proposed, first, to take the 
segregates which have been usually assigned with some confidence 
to the aggregates already treated ; and afterwards to notice a series 
of other names which represent something additional, actual or 
supposed, along with errors and ambiguities of various kinds.
The typical forms of the formerly treated aggregates, which bear 
only the same names, are unavoidably passed over here, left as 
represented by the distribution indicated for the aggregate species ; 
their localities having usually been recorded under the name of 
double signification, and therefore as usually of doubtful significa- 
tion.
" Salix fragilis " may or may not mean Sali.v fragilis genuina ; 
"Salix alba" mayor may not mean Salix alba genuina; "Salix 
triandra" may or may not mean Salix triandra genuina; and so 
on, after the manner of distinction used in the nomenclature of 
71.
AMENTIFER.-E.
565 
English Botany, edition third ; — not unusefuUy so used, although 
with the considerable objection against it, that while the other 
segregates can he exactly expressed by their single distinctive 
names, decipiens, vitellina, amygdalina, etc., the Salix genuina 
would he a name by itself non-distinctive.
And it would be found 
exceedingly inconvenient in lists of plants or indices of names, 
always to introduce the aggregate name, in order to make genuina 
intelligible, or to add this latter word, in order to give precision of 
meaning to the aggregate name when intended to be used in the 
limited signification.
In giving the provincial nos.
it must be understood that they are 
here accepted in accordance with the records of localities in the 
principal Floras, general and local, in ' Leefe's Salictum,' or in other 
pubhcatious of some authority ; but without any guaranty on my 
part for their accuracy, except to the extent of omitting several of 
the less reliable records.
Salix {Jragilis) decipiens, Hoffm.
Provinces 1 a 3 4 6 - - 8 - 10 H - - 14.
Syn. 1001.
By records in books, it extends from Cornwall (Jones 
Tour, page 21) to Edinburgh (Hook.
Scot, etc.) But the numerous 
records, many of them not specially for the male plant, are ill 
reconcileable with the following extract : — " Only the male plant of 
it is known in this country, although Smith describes the female.
It is not improbable that it only appears when S.
fragUis has its 
shoots cut annusdly for osiers"; Eng. hot.
viii.
207.
Salix (fragilis) Russelliana, Sm.
Provmces 12 3 4 5 10 11 13 14 ] 5 - - (18).
Syn. 1001.
Devon (Fio. Dev.) to Hebrides (Balf.
& Bab. cat.).
Nearly all the examples sent to me labelled as Russelliana, I think, 
belong truly to fragilis; but see viridis, mentioned some pages 
onward.
Salix (alia) cmrulea, Sm.
Province 1 5---- 10 11- 13.
And elsewhere?
Syn. 1002.
A sub-glabrous state of aWa; limit optional?
Salix (alba) vitellina, Sm.
Province 1 - 3 4 5 6 - - - 10 11 13 - 15 16 17.
Syn. 1002.
Devon (Jones Tour) to Dumbarton (Hook.
Scot.) and 
perhaps Sutherland.
Salix [triandra) Hoffmaniana, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 - - 8.
Not known to me.
Syn. 1004.
Sussex (Borrer) to Leicester (Coleman).
Salix [triandra) amygdalina, Sm.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 10 11.
Scotland ?
Syn. 1004.
Devon (Flora D.) to Durham (James Backhouse, in 
Phytologist, 1069) and Forfar (Gard.
Flora).
S. triandra of Leefe's 
566 71.
AMENTIFEE^.
Salictum, nos.
7, 8, fide Andersson.
S. amygdalina of Winch, in 
Flora of Northumberland and Durhana, is pentandra according to 
the New Flora of those counties.
Salix (purpurea) Woolgariana, Borrer.
Provinces - 3 3.
Lewes, Sussex.
Kingston, Surrey.
Syn. 1005.
About Lewes, where Mr. Woolgar found it, it is 
probably a mere stray from the osier grounds ; but it has the 
appearance of being wild on the sides of the Thames near 
Kingston; Borrer, in Eng. bot.
supp.
8651.
Salix [purpurea) ramulosa, Borrer.
Provinces - - 3 10.
Leefe Sal. nos.
11, 12, 13.
Mr. Leefe cites Helix (Anderson) as a synonym under his no.
11 ; 
and Helix (Auot.) is accepted as synonymous with this in the Flora 
of Middlesex.
See the -willow named, some pages onward.
Salix [purpurea) Lambertiana, Sm.
Provinces - S 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 - - - 14 ?
Forfar ; G.
Don.
Syn. 1005.
Wilts to Edinburgh; Brit.
flo.
ed.
5. 
Salix [rubra) Forbyana, Sm.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 10 11 or 14.
(15, Forfar, planted.) 
Syn. 1006.
Thames to Tweed, by records.
" Chiefly in the east 
of England"; Eng. bot.
viii.
221.
Salix (yiminalis) intrieata, Leefe, nos.
21 and 24.
„ [viminalis) leptostachya, Leefe, no.
23.
Province - - 3.
Audley End, Essex ; Leefe Salictum, 
Syn. 1007.
I do not see how these differ from the ordinary 
viminalis.
To no.
21 of the Salictum Dr. Andersson wrote " Mihi 
S. stipularis Sm. videtur." And Dr. Boswell Syme writes, " Judging 
from the Eev. Mr.
Leefe 's specimens, I am unable to separate his 
varieties intrieata and stipularis"; Eng. bot.
viii.
224.
Salix [Smithiana) rugosa, Sm.
Provinces - 3 3 - 5 6 - 8 - 10.
Sussex to York.
Syn. 1008.
In English Botany, third edition, this is separated 
from Smithiana and acuminata, and is placed as a second variety 
nxiAw ferruginea, "Andei-s." The leaves are there described as 
"silky below", and those of Smithiana as "somewhat satiny"; 
both terms ill applying to a willow in my garden, to which 
Mr. Leefe gave the name of rugosa (correcting my own doubtfully 
given name of acuminata).
It is the holosericea of most (or aU) 
English writers on the willows.
Salix [Smithiana] ferntginea, Anderson.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 10 11 13 - - 15.
Syn. 1008.
From Sussex to Fik, fide Borrer.
Not unfrequent in 
England; Fifeshire, Scotland; Eng. bot.
viii.
33:8.
71.
AMENTIFER^, 667 
Salix [dnerea) glabrescens, Andersson.
Provinces 1 - 3, etc.
N. Devon.
Surrey.
Midx.
Westmoreland ?
Syn. 1010.
This is a state of cinerea with the leaves almost 
glabrous, and somewhat lucid or shining on the upper surface, 
which I have collected in the counties named above ; that from 
Westmoreland shading off towards aquatica.
A Surrey example 
was named as above by Dr. Andersson, and I understood him to 
regard it as specially the acuminata of Hoffman, — of course, not 
that of Smith.
Salix (cinerea) aquatica Sm.
Provinces all?
Authorities wanting for 16 and 17.
Syn. 1010.
By the use of the name, this is distributed from 
Cornwall to Hebrides (Balf.
& Bab.), to Orkney (Neill's Tour), and 
to Shetland (Edm. Flora).
But a change in the application of the 
name appears to have gradually come about among English 
botanists and in our botanical books.
Formerly, the name aquatica 
seems to have had the wider or more general use ; that of cinerea 
being applied more specially.
Of late years, this has been con- 
versed ; cinerea coming into use as the general name, and aquatica 
becoming the more limited or specially applied one.
The form 
which we now call cinerea, as distinguished from aquatica, is that 
which botanists labelled by the latter name earlier in the present 
century.
Of course, there is thus inextricable confusion in the 
recorded habitats.
Moreover, as Dr. BosweU Syme correctly 
states, " The varieties run so into each other, that it is often 
impossible to say to which of the three a form ought to be 
referred"; Eng. bot.
viii.
S32.
Salix [cinerea) oleifolia, Sm.
Provinces 1 S 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 10 11 - - - 15.
Syn.
] 010.
By name the oleifolia is recorded from Devon (Chud- 
leigh Flora) to Perth and Forfar (Gard.
Flora).
David Don gave 
me the name oleifolia for a hedge-row willow in Surrey, to which 
Dr. Andersson wrote the name " cinm-ea var.
rufinervis." 
Salix [caprea) sphacelata, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 10 11 - - - 15.
Syn. 1013.
Sussex; Borrer.
Oxford; Besley cat.
Salop; 
Leighton flo.
Notts ; Jowett in Hewitt flo.
York ; Ward, Leefe 
Sal. no.
66.
Tyne; New flo.
Perth; "Lightf.
Herb." If we 
take the more pointed leaves and their sub-entire margins, as the 
character for sphacelata, and not specially their discoloration at the 
point, this is a frequent willow, perhaps more especially in Scotland, 
where its habitats include the Lowlands and all three Highland 
provinces, and it grows to a tree.
" Specimens of S.
sphacelata 
show it to be only a small state of S.
caprea"; Eng. bot.
viii.
234.
508 71.
AMENTIPEB^.
Salia; [nigricans) genuina, E.
B. 3.
" S.
nigricans, Sm." 
Provinces -- 3 4 5, etc.
Norfolk?
Hereford?
Elsewhere?
Syn. 1013.
Wrongay Fen, Norfolk, and Shobden Court, Here- 
ford, with osier beds in other places, are still repeated in books as 
localities for this willow.
I am not acquainted either with this or 
with cotonifolia, although something has been recorded from Surrey 
and Oxford, under name of " nigricans." Dr. BosweU Syme writes 
of the present, " this is the only form I know of occurring so far 
south." In 1849, Mr. Borrer wrote that he was " quite per- 
suaded" that no form of phylicifolia or nigricans is either native or 
denizen in the first 6 (or 9} provinces of England.
Salix (nigricans) cotonifolia, Sm.
Provinces - - - 4 - - - 8 - ] - - 13 - 15.
Syn. 1013.
4 Crowe?
8 Nott.
Flora.
10 Settle cat.
13, 15 
Hook.
Scot.
etc.
Salix [nigricans) Forsteriana, Sm.
Provinces -111S--1S.
" Frequent in Scotland." 
Syn. 1013.
Dur. North.
Chev.
Cumb.
Perth.
Forfar.
Salix (nigricans) rupestris, Donn.
Provinces - 10 11 --- 15.
York?
Dur. North.
Perth.
Forfar.
Syn. 1013.
Dr. Andersson refers the "rupestris" of Leefe's 
Salictum (nos.
68, 69, 70, 71) to phylicifoUa, not to nigricans.
Salix (nigricans) Andersoniana, Sm.
Provinces - 10 11 18 - 14 15.
Syn. 1013.
York.
North.
Cumb.
Edinb.
Perth.
Forfar.
Salix (nigricans) damascena, Forbes.
Provinces - 10, etc.
Eievaulx, North-east York ; Baker.
Syn. 1013.
" South of Scotland and the Borders." 
Salix (nigricans) petraa, Anderson.
Provinces - 10 15.
York?
Perth.
Forfar.
Syn. 1013.
Dr. Andersson refers Mr. Ward's "petraea" from the 
neighbourhood of Eichmond, Yorkshire, in 1841, to phylicifolia.
Salix (nigricans) hirta, Sm.
Provinces - 10 11 - - - 15.
[4 Norfolk ; Crowe.] 
Syn. 1013.
York.
Durham.
Perth.
Forfar.
Aberdeen?
Salix (nigricans) florihunda, Forbes.
Provinces .
. .
? 
Syn. 1013.
" S.
tenuifolia, Sm. Eng.
Bot. ed.
i. no.
S186 (non 
Brit.
Flo.).
S. bicolor.
Hook.
Brit.
Flo.
(non Ehrh.
neo Sm.)." 
Eeferred to phylicifolia suggestively by Dr. Walker-Arnott in 
British Flora.
Salix (laurina) bicolor, Sm. E.
B. ed.
1, no.
1806.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 6 — 10 11.
Eecords unreliable.
Syn. 1014.
The laurina and bicolor were made synonymous 
71.
amentiperjE.
569 
in the English Flora.
The two names are so treated in the third 
edition of English Botany; rejecting the three other segregates 
assigned to laurina in the London Catalogue of British Plants, 
following Babington's Manual.
After stating localities in Dorset 
(Manselj, Isle of Wight (Bromfield), and York (Ward, in Leefe sal.
no.
43), the Editor of E.
B. adds that " it has been so much con- 
founded with forms of phylicifolia that I cannot give its correct 
distribution in England, and I have no reliable record of it from 
Scotland." Mess.
Baker and Tate indicate " laurina, Sm." as 
found in Durham, Northumberland, and Cheviotland ; but perhaps 
they and Dr. Boswell Syme may intend different things under the 
same name of laurina.
In Norfolk, _/i6i« Crowe in Eng. Flo.
See 
some pages onward for mention of the three other segregates — 
propinqua, tenuior, tenuifolia — placed under laurina in the L.
C- 
Salix (phylicifolia) radicans, Sm.
Provinces - 11 12 13 - 15.
Dur. North.
Cumb.
Dumf.
Perth.
Syn. 1015.
" S.
phylicifolia, Sm. Eng.
Bot. ed.
i. no.
958." 
Salix {phylicifolia) DavaUiana, Sm.
Provinces - 10 16.
York ; Leefe, Ward.
Highlands ; E.
F. 
Syn. 1015.
Gardiner gives two localities in his Flora of Forfar.
Salix (phylieifolia) Weigeliana, Willd.
Borrer.
Provinces - 10 11 12 - - 15.
" S.
Wulfeniana, Sm. non Willd." 
Syn. 1015.
York.
Tyne.
Westmoreland.
Perth.
Forfar.
Salix (phylicifolia) nitens, Anderson, Borrer.
Provinces - 10 II - - - 15.
York; Leefe, Ward.
Tyne; New Flora.
Syn. 1015.
" Brought from Scotland by the late Mr. G.
Anderson." 
Salix (phylicifolia ?) Croweana, Sm.
Provinces - - - 4 [9] 10 11 - - - - 16.
Habitats not reliable.
Syn. 1015.
It is difficult to understand how any form of phylici- 
folia could have been originally intended under the name of 
Croweana, which represented a species placed by Smith between 
rubra and triandra in the Flora Britannica, and there localized 
only in Norfolk.
I have received cinerea from Lancashire labelled 
Croweana.
Salix (phylicifolia) Dicksoniana, Sm.
Province - 15.
Highlands of Scotland ; Dickson, in E.
F. 
Syn. 1015.
" S.
myrtilloides, Sm. Flo.
Brit., not of Linn." 
Salix (phylicifolia) laxiflora, Anderson, Borrer.
Provinces - 10 15.
York.
Perth.
Syn. 1015.
North Yorkshire ; Leefe, Ward.
Killin ; Borrer.
Salix (phylicifolia) tetrapla.
Walker.
Provinces - 10 ---- 15.
York; Ward.
Perth; Borrer.
Syn, 1015.
See under propinqua, some pages onward.
4 D 
570 71.
AMENTIFEE^..
Salix (phylieifolia) Borreriana, Sm.
Provinces - 15 16.
Perth.
Forfar; Gard.
flo.
Inverness.
Syn. 1015.
In Breadalbane and Glen Nevis; Borrer, in E.
F. 
Salix {phylieifolia) phillyreifolia, Borrer.
Province - 15.
Perth.
East-Inverness.
Syn. 1015.
Glen Farfe, near Fort Augustus, Borrer.
Salix (ambigua) major, Bab.
„ [ambigua) spatulata, Willd.
„ (ambigua) undulata, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 3 - ]5.
"Hopton, Suffolk"; for all three.
Syn. 1016.
The first of the three is said to have formerly grown 
in Forfarshire, and to have become lost there subsequently through 
drainage.
The second was reported from Perthshire.
All three 
are unknown to myself.
Salix [repens] depressa, Sibth.
" genuina," E.
B. 3.
Provinces all ?
Cornwall to Shetland, as repens.
Syn. J 017.
But the name "repens" was used promiscuously.
Salia; [repens) fusea, Sm.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - - 9 - 11 - 13 14 15 16 - 18.
Uncertain.
Syn. 1017.
Both fusca and repens have been in use uncertainly 
or promiscuously as the aggregate names for this common willovp ; 
and thus they can now reaUy express a limited or segregate 
application only through some special explanation.
Salix [repens) prostrata, Sm.
Provinces 12 3 4 10 1 1   - 15.
Syn. 1017, Cornwall ; Jones Tour.
Scotland ; Dickson, in E.
F. 
Salix (repens) adscendens, Sm. E.
B. 1962.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - - - 10 11.
Scotland ; G.
Don.
Syn. 1017.
S. foetida, English Flora, iv.
208.
Salix (repens) parvifolia, Sm. E.
B. 1961.
Provinces 1-34 1 1 - - - 15.
Cornwall to Forfar.
Syn. 1017.
Variety of S.
foetida, English Flora, iv.
208.
Salix (repens) incubacea, " Linn." Forster, in E.
F. 
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 15 - 18.
Dor. Ex.
Midx.
Suff.
Forf.
Shetl.
Syn. 1017.
" Whatever this may be, ...
. it has nothing to do 
with mj foetida, prostrata, fusca, or argentea"; Eng. flo.
iv.
213.
Salix [repens) argentea, Sm.
" S.
arenaria, Lightf." 
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 9 10 11 - - 14 15 16 - 18.
Syn. 1017.
Perhaps this name often intends Syme's "genuina." 
Salix [arbuscula) carinata, Sm.
Province - 15.
Breadalbane mountains, Perthshire.
Syn. 1021.
What is Arbuscula of Neill's Tour in Orkney?
71.
AMENTIFER^.
571 
Salix (arbuscula) prunifolia, Sm.
Provinces - 15 16.
Perth.
Forfar.
Argyle.
Orkney; Neill?
Syn. 1021.
Salix Myrsinites of Lightfoot's Flora Scotica.
Salix (arbuscula) venulosa, Sm.
Province - 15.
Breadalbane mountains, Perthshire.
Syn. lOSl. A variety oi prunifolia, Jide Forster in E.
F. 
Salix [arbitscula) vacciniifolia, " Walker," Sm.
Provinces - 13 - 15.
Dumfries.
Perth.
" Plentifully" in S.
Scotl.
Syn. 1021.
Highland mountains, not unfrequent ; Eng. flo.
Salix {Lapponum) arenaria, Sm.
Provinces - [6 - 8 - - 11] - 14 15 16 17.
[18 Orkney?] 
Syn. 1022.
[11 Teesdale moors, fide Winch.
Flora.] 
Salix {Lapponvm) Stuartiana, Sm.
Province - 15.
Breadalbane, Perthshire.
Syn. 1023.
Smith states that " its distinctive characters remained, 
with very little variation," in the garden of Mr. Forster ; but the 
difficulty is to know what its distinctive characters really are.
Salix (Lapponum) glauca, Sm. not of Linn.
Province - 15.
Clova mountains ; on authorities in next line.
Syn. 1022.
" Don, Drummond, Hooker, GreviUe, Burchell "; Flo.
Forf.
Salix (Myrsinites) serrata, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 15 16.
Perth.
Forfar.
Argyle.
Syn. 1025.
" S.
retusa, Dicks.
Trans, of Linn.
Soc." 
Salix (Myrsinites) arbutifolia, Sm.
Province -15.
Perth.
Aberdeen; Dickie Bot. Guide.
Syn. 1025.
Habitats of this are perhaps confused with those of 
the next preceding and next succeeding segregates.
Salix (Myrsinites) procumbens, Forbes.
Provinces - 15 16.
Perth.
Forfar.
Eastemess* Argyle.
Syn. 1 025 (1034).
" I am unable to see any grounds for supposing 
that S.
procumbens is a species distinct from S.
Myrsinites.
The 
length of the catkin, given as one of its characters, is unsatisfactory ; 
even on the same plant I have seen some catkins twice as long as 
others in the same stage of growth, and the length of the style is 
also inconstant " ; Eng. bot.
viii.
352.
Under Myrsinites, in British 
Flora, eighth edition, Dr. Walker Arnott remarks, " The figure in 
E. B.
is from cultivated specimens ; Dr. Stuart's plant from Glen- 
coe, referred to there, belongs to procumbens ; whilst Mr. Dickson's 
was probably the same as our own, and from the Breadalbane 
mountains." 
Salix cuspidata, Schultz.
Province - 5.
Shropshire, in two localities.
[13 Westm.] 
Alien, planted.
Cyb. ii.
388.
iii.
508.
"I believe S.
cuspidata 
573 71.
AMENTIFEB^.
has not been found in Westmoreland.
I originally mistook for it 
some male specimens oi pentandra.
I never saw female specimens 
of cuspidata of British growth, besides those communicated by 
Mr. Leighton.
I have long known the male tree in cultivation"; 
W. Borrer, letter, 1849.
Salix viridis, Fries.
Provinces -- 3 4.
Surrey.
Essex.
Norfolk.
Moray?
Ambiguity.
Dr. Andersson so named examples in my herbarium, 
which had been considered to represent Russelliana ; but one of 
which is more probably alba, misplaced among the fragiles.
It will 
be well for botanists to examine carefully any willows resembling 
fragilis, but distinguished by smaller and more finely serrate 
leaves.
Possibly the explanation of Dr. Andersson applying both 
names lo the nos.
52 and 54 of Leefe's Salictum, may be found in 
some intermingling of the specimens, the leaf-specimens being 
crossed to the wrong nos.
See Botanical Gazette, iii.
60.
Salix undulata, Ehrh.
S. lanceolata, E.
B. 1436.
Provinces 12 3 4 5 10.
[15 Forfar ; Q.
Don.] 
Denizen.
Cyb. ii.
390.
South Hants ; Notcutt's Fareham cat.
Northwards to York or Forfar, by.
records.
This has been con- 
sidered an introduced species ; perhaps because Mr. Borrer reported 
it as a willow of cultivation in Sussex.
But the narrow-leaved 
plant of the Thames side, to which Mr. Baker and others have 
applied the name of undulata or lanceolata (not lanceolata of Fries, 
which Dr. Andersson holds synonymous with acuminata of Smith) 
appears quite as natural there as does the viminalis or the purpurea 
along with which it occurs.
A willow from Claygate, Surrey, dis- 
tributed as " undulata, Jide Andersson," is different from that of 
the Thames side, at any rate by its much wider leaves, and may 
belong to triandra or amygdalina ; possibly "undulata" may have 
been written to it inadvertently, instead of amygdalina.
Salia; contorta, Crowe.
Provinces - 2 3.
Cultivated in Sussex.
Essex; Sal. no.
6. 
Alien?
Appears not to be wild in Britain; E.
B. viii.
216.
Salia; acutifolia, Willd.
S. daphuoides, Vill.
Province - 10.
North-west York ; Ward.
North-east York; Mudd.
Alien ?
Denizen ; Baker N.
Y. p.
280.
Originally reported as 
daphnoides ; why the name acutifolia was soon substituted, I know 
not.
Andersson places acutifolia as a variety of daphnoides, in the 
Prodromus, xvi.
261.
Salix Helix, Linn.
Provinces - 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15 16.
Uncertain.
Ambiguity.
Syn. 1005 e.
"A very puzzling plant." E.
B. viii.
222.
Judging by the specimens thus labelled iu my own herbarium, 
71.
AMENTIFERE.
573 
this associates with purpurea better than with rubra; see those 
species on preceding pages 315 and 316.
I have received leaves of 
alha (rose- willow state) under this name, from a good botanist in 
Norfolk ; and from a well-known Yorkshire botanist, a combination 
(as it seems to my eyes) of the catkins of purpurea with the adult 
leaves of triandra.
And if a like confusion of two kinds, purpurea 
and rubra, has occurred on the plate of English Botany, 1343, we 
may partly account for the uncertainty which apparently belongs 
to the recorded localities for Helix even more than for those of 
most other willows.
Salix Doniana, Sm.
" S.
purpurea var.
sericea, R." 
Province .
. .
? Scotland; G.
Don, in E.
P. Baldovan woods; Flo. F.
Ambiguity.
Hesemhling S.
purpurea ; Brit.
flo.
ed.
8. 
Salix petiolaris.
Smith.
Provinces - 8 - 13 - 15.
Notts; Jowett.
Lanark.
Forfar.
Ambiguity.
Alien ?
In the low parts of Angus-shire, forming a 
fine tree ; Don Ace. Sent from Scotland by the late Mr. Dickson ; 
Eng. Flora, iv.
181.
Possil marsh, north side of the canal ; 
D. Don, in Hook.
Scot.
" It is not now (even in cultivation) in 
Possil marsh, where it was said to have been found by G.
Don"; 
Brit.
flo.
ed.
8. "A native of North America." 
Salix acuminata, Sm.
Provinces 1 9 3 4 5 - 7 8 - 10 11 12 18 14 - 16 - 18.
Uncertain.
Ambiguity.
The name acuminata (Anglorum) was added to that 
of Smithiana in the Synopsis, no.
1008, under a belief that the 
willow which is held to be rugosa, by the Rev. J.
E. Leefe, has 
been repeatedly labelled by collectors as the acuminata of Smith ; 
their localities thus becoming much confused together.
Certainly, 
some years ago, I also thus labelled the Smithiana rugosa, more or 
less doubtfully.
By name (thus uncertain) the records would dis- 
tribute " acuminata " from Devon to Edinburgh (Hook.
Scot.), to 
Islay (Balf.
cat.), and even to Orkney (Neill's Tour).
But the non- 
reliability of records under this name goes beyond Smithiana, for 
the Authors of the New Flora of Northumberland and Durham 
remark, " Judging from his herbarium.
Winch's acuminata is a 
form of caprea." Mr. Borrer wrote, in letter of 1849, "I am not 
sure that I ever saw this except in cultivation ".
Salix dasyclados, Wimmer ?
Province - - 3.
Audley End, Essex ; Leefe Sal. no.
37.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
509.
Bot. Gaz.
iii.
59.
This is named 
" acuminata Sm." on Mr. Leefe's label.
Dr. Andersson noted it 
as "certainly dasyclados of Wimmer", and quite distinct from 
acuminata of Smith, which is lanceolata of Fries.
Dr. Boswell 
Syme meets this by an indirect contradiction, thus ; " The sjieci- 
men in m}' set is rightly named S.
acuminata, Sm., a plant which 
Dr. Andersson at that time evidently misunderstood"; Eng. bot.
574 71.
AMENTIFER^.
viii.
962.
But the question here properly is, whether Dr. Anders- 
son knew the dasyclados of Wimmer, for he had the acuminata 
of Smith then before him.
In the Prodromus, dated 1868, 
Andersson still places the dasyclados under acuminata, as " huic 
sine dubio affinis si non cum ea identica ".
Salix stipularis, Sm.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 - - 10 14 15 16.
Very uncertain.
Ambiguity.
Crowe, in E.
F. Leefe Sal. no.
21, fide Andersson.
" This plant I have never seen alive, and possess no specimen of 
it"; Eng. hot.
viii.
226.
By the records, many of doubtful 
reliability, its area extends from Devon to Islay (Balf.
cat.) and 
Forfar (G.
Don, Gard.
flo.).
Marked as common about the Forth 
counties (which are botanically familiar to Dr. Syme) in the Cata- 
logue of Edinburgh Plants.
And in the Flora Sootica, on authority 
of D.
Don, it is stated to be common in Scotland.
Salix Pontederana, " WiUd." E.
B. 3.
Province - 5.
Shropshire.
Ambiguity.
" No. 36 of Leefe 's Sal. Brit, which is from Shrews- 
bury, collected by the Eev. W.
A. Leighton, is said by Andersson 
to have much in common with S.
Pontederana." .
. .
. " The 
specimen in my set is rightly named S.
ferruginea"; Eng. bot.
viii.
262.
Andersson 's words are "Valde dubia forma.
Multa cum 
Salice Pontederana habet communia; foliarum forma iis Salicis 
holosericeee W.
similis.
Nil certe de hac enuntiare audeo"; Bot.
Gaz. iii.
59.
In conformity (Prodromus, 1868) we find him place 
S. holosericea (of Koch's Synopsis) as a synonym of his Smithiana 
var.
velutina, and ferruginea (of Anderson and Smith) as a sub- 
variety of his own velutina.
" Pontederana " is a name of various 
application by Andersson, to include presumed hybrids between 
purpurea, on one side, with caprea, cwierea, and aurita.
Salix grandi/olia, Ser.
Provinces - 14 15 16.
All of them very doubtful.
Ambiguity.
Dr. Andersson wrote this name at the corner of a 
sheet of five specimens, brought fi'om the counties of Perth and 
West Inverness ; but I cannot certainly say that he intended the 
name to apply to aU of them.
More doubtfully, the same name 
was suggested for a willow picked near Queensferry, Linlithgow- 
shire, in 1831 ; which Mr. Maonab, senior, then named for me (a 
student) aquatica.
I now refer aU six specimens to caprea, but to 
that form of it with pointed and nearly entire leaves, which was 
alluded to under sphacelata, on page 567.
I have not seen the 
catkins ; the leaves differ considerably from those of caprea, as 
usually seen in England.
Salix propinqua, Borrer in E.
B. S.
2729.
Provinces - 10 - - - - 15.
Ambiguity.
So placed here because we have three aggregate 
71.
AMENTIFEEiE.
675 
species to choose among for a name to this segregate.
A form or 
variety of laurina, according to Babington's Manual.
A variety of 
nigricans, according to Hooker and Arnott's British Flora.
A 
variety of phylidfolia, according to Boswell Syme's edition of 
English Botany.
It is placed under the last of these three, rather 
as synonym than variety, by Andersson in DO.
prodromus xvi.
242.
The same position is there assigned to tenuior and tenuifolia ; the 
latter interrogatively, through E.
B. 2186.
Salix tenuior, Borrer.
Province - 10 - - - - 15.
York.
Perth.
Ambiguity.
A variety of laurina, according to Hooker & Arnott, 
and to Babington.
A variety of phylicifolia, accoi'ditig to Anders- 
son, and to Boswell Syme.
Salix tenuifolia, Sm. in P.
B. & E.
F. 
Provinces - - [3] 10 11 12 - 14 15.
Two willows confused.
Ambiguity.
A variety of laurina, according to Hooker & Arnott, 
and to Babington.
A variety of phylicifolia, according to Dr.
Boswell Syme.
" It is now sufficiently understood that S.
tenui- 
folia of Eng. hot.
2180 is not the plant bearing that name in Flora 
Britannica, but S.
bicolor of Hooker's British Flora"; W.
B. in 
Eng. hot.
supp.
2795.
Salix plicata.
Fries, _^ie Anderesoii.
Province - 15.
Perth or Easterness.
Ambiguity.
This name was given by Dr. Andersson to dried 
specimens in my herbarium, taken from a small shrub in the 
garden, which had been brought either from Drumochter Forest 
or from Athole Forest in 1841.
Salix angustifolia, Wulf.
Provinces - 13 - 15.
Dumfries?
Forfar?
Aberdeen?
Ambiguity.
S. Arbuscula, Sm. E.B. 1366, not of continental 
authors ; Brit.
flo.
Of course there is something to answer to this 
specific name, although that something is quite unknown to myself.
A recent record for it is " Shores of Loch Muick, Mr. OroaU"; in 
Dickie's Botanist's Guide, page 151.
Salix rosmarinifolia, Linn.
Provinces - 3 - 4 5 - - - - 10 11.
" Highlands of Scotland." 
Ambiguity.
Sus. Suff.
Monm.
York.
Tyne.
Islay ; Balf.
cat.
Salix Uvida, Wahl.
Province - 13.
At the foot of Hertfell ; Maughan.
Error.
This is now understood to mean Smith's vacciniifolia.
Salix hastata, L.
S. malifolia, E.
B, ed.
1, no.
1617.
Provinces - - 3 4 - 15.
Middlesex.
Norfolk.
Forfar.
Ambiguity.
Error?
Gyb. ii.
897.
iii.
509.
"Mr. Crowe was 
always persuaded that he found this willow wild in some parts of 
Norfolk, from whence he took cuttings for his garden.
It has 
576 72.
CONIFERS.
since been gathered in Scotland, and was perhaps originally sent 
thence by Mr. Dickson, who supplied Mr. Crowe with several new 
Scottish species " ; Eng. flo.
iv.
180.
" It is most improbable that 
this plant, which is truly alpine on the Continent, growing in 
Switzerland only at great elevations, should be even naturalised on 
the sands of Barrie, where Drummond met with it.
The Norfolk 
station is entirely hypothetical, and equally unlikely"; Brit.
flo.
ed.
8, p.
413.
" This is an alpine species, which cannot have been 
native, if indeed it were ever found in any of the localities men- 
tioned"; Eng. hot.
viii.
263.
As to Mid(Uesex, see page 260 of 
the recent Flora of that county, by Trimen & Dyer.
Salix retusa, Linn.
Province - 16.
Ben Lawers ; Dickson, in Linn.
Trans.
Error.
Misnomer.
S. procwnbens " was originally communicated 
to Withering ' by Mr. Griffith, to whom Townson sent roots from 
Scotland under the name of retusa', and first noticed in one of the 
earlier editions of his work ; it is also inserted in Hull's British 
Flora in 1799"; Brit.
flo.
ed.
8. In the English Flora, the Salix 
retusa of Dickson (Trans.
Linn.
Soc. ii.
228) was made synonymous 
with the typical Myrsinites.
Salix serpyllifoUa, Scop.
Var. of S.
retusa, Linn.
Province - 15.
Perthshire, _/i(ie Fries.
Ambiguity.
" Fries states that beautiful specimens of the var.
serpyllifoUa, collected by Mr. Winch in Breadalbane, are preserved 
in Horneman's herbarium.
This must be a mistake ; Mr. Winch's 
retusa is that of Withering, or procumhens of Forbes, and is widely 
different from the true one " ; Brit.
flo.
ed.
8, p.
412.
Salix Grahami, Baker in Jour.
Bet. June, 1867.
Province - 17.
North-west Sutherland ; Macnab, Graham.
Ambiguity.
Edinburgh Botanic Garden ; Macnab !
Professor 
Graham pointed out this willow to me in the Edinburgh Garden, 
in presence of Mr. Macnab, assuring me that it was herbacea when 
brought from Sutherland.
At the time I was a very young 
botanist, and the Professor's assurance, uncontradicted by Macnab, 
impressed me decidedly in distrust of the segregate species of 
willow, then accepted with little hesitation by most of our botanists.
Now, we find Dr. Hooker placing this willow of Graham under 
Myrsinites, in the Student's Flora.
I have it in leaf only.
72.
C0NIFER.E.
Firms pinaster, Ait.
Province - 2.
Bournemouth, South Hants.
Ahen, planted.
" I am indebted to Dr. Falls of Bournemouth, for 
fresh specimens of the plant, which is completely naturalized in 
that neighbourhood"; Eng. bot.
viii.
271.
It would have been 
73.
ORCHID ACE.«E.
577 
well for Dr. Boswell Syme to let his readers know the sense iu 
which he wished them to understand his own use of the term 
' naturalised ' in his edition of English Botany.
(See page 60 of 
this volume, lower half.) I have much regretted to see so many 
plants formally described and figured in that edition, which at best 
required only passing mention in the category of " excluded 
species," if even there.
— [June, 1870.
Opportunely, " The 
Student's Flora of the British Islands," quite a model Flora in 
its completeness and condensation, has been published since the 
preceding remark was penned.
In it I find no mention at all of 
the " naturalised " Pinaster.
But Dr. Hooker has judiciously 
sought to expunge improprieties from our descriptive books, not to 
increase their numbers needlessly.
If the Pinaster, why not also 
the Laburnum, Pseud-acacia, Hippocastanura, and many others 
which spring freely from self-sown seeds, and are more familiar to 
us?j 
73.
OECHIDACEiE.
Epipactis [media) purpwata, Sm.
Province - 5.
Worcestershire; Rev. Dr.
Abbott, in 1805.
Syn. 1039*.
Cyb. ii.
4l7.
A monstrosity, only once found.
The 
Ep. purpurata of Smith was founded upon a single plant, with 
unexpanded flowers, apparently an epiphyte (" parasitical ") mon- 
strosity.
What the variety may be, to which the name has been 
transferred in Babington's Manual, I do not know.
Many dried 
examples from " Reigate " have passed through my hands, none of 
them the same vrith Smith's specimen plant.
Dr. Boswell Syme 
is under some error in recording that the Claygate plants of Ep.
media "are not at all tinged with purple." On a label with a 
specimen dried in 1849, I wrote " whole plant with a lilac-purple 
bloom over the green " ; and, indeed, it was the purple tint whiqh 
first drew my attention to the plant of the Telegraph Wood, Clay- 
gate, as something different fi:om ordinary Ep, latifolia.
Orchis [latifolia) maialis, Reich.
0. latifolia, E.
B. 3.
Provinces all?
" Rather common, and generally distributed." 
Syn. 1052.
Cyb. ii.
427.
Dr. Boswell Syme uses the name 
palmata to include the latifolia and incamata of English botanists.
Until recently the former name intended either or both, by its use 
in England ; and if by change of meaning it is henceforward to be 
limited to the more frequent segregate, left after separation of the 
O. incaitiata therefrom, some joint name for the two may be held, 
desirable.
I keep to latifolia here because it is the aggregate 
name used for both together in the Cybele and in English books 
generally.
0. maialis, Reich, is quoted in English Botany as a 
synonym for our usual segregate, and is taken up distinctively on 
faith here.
4 E 
578 73.
OECHIDACE^.
Orchis (latifoUa) inearnata, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 6.
12 Cumberland ; J.
B. Davies.
Sjn. 1052.
Dors.
Kent.
Sur. Camb.
Shrop.
S. Wales.
Orchis (inearnata) densiflora., Wahl.
Province - - 3.
Barkway Moor, Herts; Newbould in E.
B. 
Syn. 1052.
English Botany, ix.
103.
Orchis odoratissima, Linn.
Gymnadenia odoratissima, R.
Province .
. .
? Has been reported as English, — where ?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. ii.
429.
Bee Phytol.
iii.
262.
Habenaria [bifolia) eu-bifolia, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Cornwall; Briggs.
— Banff; Dickie's Guide.
Syn. 1055.
Cyb. ii.
429.
iii.
512.
The more frequent segregate.
Habenaria (bifolia) chhrantha, Bab.
Provinces 1 to 16.
Cornwall; Briggs.
— Skye; Lawson.
Syn. 1055.
Cyb. ii.
429.
iii.
513.
Dr. Boswell Syme reports 
that intermediate forms are seen on the Rei^te hills, between 
chlorantha and eu-bifolia.
Mr. Bentham, after observing that " the 
extreme forms have been distinguished as species " goes on to 
declare that " every intermediate may be observed between the 
broad and the narrow forms." Since my own attention was 
particularly called thereto, I have not enjoyed an opportunity to 
examine the chlorantha in its wild localities.
Mr. Darwin contends 
that the two are quite distinct from each other ; being fertilised by 
different insects in a different way.
Dr. Hooker, one of the most 
able and most earnest among the supporters of the Darwinian 
theories, nevertheless only ventures so far as to give them the 
dubious grade of " suh-species." Assuming intermediate forms in 
the plants, how are they produced?
It does not appear that 
Mr. Darwin can shew intermediate insects to correspond ; he has 
them for the extremes only.
If the intermediates are half-breeds, 
cross-bred between the two extreme forms or " species," the same 
insect should be on visiting terms with each parent, and the poUen 
of one be capable of fertilising the other parent.
If not half-breeds, 
the machinery of different insects for the two ends of the series 
only, seems an elaborate non-necessity, until insects are found 
specially for " every intermediate." 
Ophrys (aranifera) fucifera, Sm.
Provinces - 2 3.
Dorset.
Wight.
Hants ?
Sussex.
Kent.
Syn. 1061.
Cyb. ii.
434.
iii.
513.
O. aranifera (limited) in 
provinces -34; counties of Kent, Oxford, Suffolk, Cambridge 
and Northampton ; very doubtfully in Somerset, Salop, York.
But it is remarked in English Botany that the two segregates 
" can scarcely be separated." 
74.
miDACE^.
579 
74.
Ieipacej!.
Iris {fmtidissima) citrina, B.
B. 3.
Province - S.
Dorset; Woods.
Wight; Bromfield.
Syn. 1066.
Particulars in Phytol.
iii.
864 & 953.
Iris {pseudacorits) genuinus, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - 16 etc.
East Kent ; E.
B. Fife ; Boswell Syme.
Syn. 1067.
This and the tw9 succeeding segregates of our old 
familiar yellow Flag-Iris are not yet clearly known to me apart 
from each other.
Dr. BosweU Syme, the only English author who 
hitherto has distinguished them, writes that he is " unable to give 
the distribution of the varieties in Britain." See Eng. bot.
ix.
145-6.
Iris (pseudaeorus) acoriformis, "Boreau" E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - 14 - 18.
Probably general.
Surrey !
Syn. 1067.
" The only form I have seen by the Thames and its 
tributaries, and I have specimens of it also from Swanbister, 
Orkney, and Seton, Haddingtonshire " ; Eng. bot.
is.
146.
Iris {pseudaeorus) Bastardi, " Boreau " E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 4 - 13.
Middlesex.
Cambridge.
Ayr.
Syn. 1067.
Appears to be rare; Eng. bot.
is.
146.
Iris tuberosa, Linn.
Province 1.
Cornwall; Mr. Pascoe, etc.
S.Devon; Mr. Flower.
Alien.
Cyb.ii.440.
Mag. nat.
hist.
ix.
305.
Phytol.
ii.
679.
iii.
104.
Iris Xiphioides, Ehrh.
Provinces - 6 - 15.
Glamorgan; Dill.
mat.
Forfar; G.
Don.
AUen. Cyb.
ii.
440.
Reported habitats for some other species are 
mentioned in the Cybele Britannica; namely, for Xiphium, in 
Worcestershire, but an error : for pumUa, in Leicestershire ; for 
germanica, in Staffordshire.
Iris susiana is mentioned in English 
Botany, ix.
155.
Gladiolus communis, Linn.
G. eu-communis, E.
B. 3.
Province - - 3.
Harlow, Essex.
^' D.
F." in Gibson's Flora.
Alien.
Likely enough a stray garden plant, but of course it is 
reported a "naturalized" one.
Crocus sativus, Linn.
Provinces - - 3 4 - - 7 8.
Essex.
Cambridge.
Anglesea ?
Derby ?
Alien, extinct.
Cyb. ii.
443.
Essex formerly, by cultivation.
Crocus vernus, Willd.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 - 7 8 9 10 - 13.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
443.
Said to have become well established in 
Middlesex, Suffolk or Norfolk, and Nottingham.
Crocus biflorus, Mill.
C. reticulatus, Sm.
Province - 4.
Suffolk.
C. minimus, Cyb. ii.
443.
Ali^n.
" NaturaUsed on the site of an old garden in Barton Park, 
580 75.
AMAEYLLIDACE^.
— 76.
LILIACE^.
Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk.
In this station it has maintained its 
ground more than half a century"; Eng. hot.
ix.
150.
Crocus aureus, Sibtb.
Province - 4.
Suffolk.
Casually seen elsewhere.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
443.
"Naturalised in Barton Park, Bury St.
Edmunds, Suffolk ; where it grows in company with Crocus 
biflorus, Ornithogalum nutans, and Muscari racemosum"; Eng.
hot.
ix.
151.
75.
Amaryllidace*.
Narcissus poeticus, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 - - - 9 10 - 13 - 14 15.
Usually planted.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
444.
" Very abundant in a field at Blaber's Hall, 
Warwickshire, from whence I received a large supply of hving 
specimens from the late Eev. W.
S. Bree "; Eng. hot.
ix.
163.
Narcissus biflorus, Curtis.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 - - 14.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
444.
Native ; fide Lees, Bowman.
Narcissus incomparabilis.
Miller.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 6 - - - 10.
Mid. Wore.
Glam.
York.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
446.
iii.
513.
See Eng. Bot.
ix.
160.
Narcissus {p.
n.) concolor, Bromf.
Ajax lobularis, Hawarth 7 
Provinces - 3 - - ^ 6.
Isle of Wight.
Pembroke.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
446.
See English Botany, ix.
158.
Narcissus major, Curt.
Provinces .
. .
? No special notes kept for the provinces.
Ahen.
This is the ' Daffodil ' so frequent in gardens, and escaping 
thence to hedgerows and brook-sides ; situations which lead to its 
being mistaken and mis-reported as the true Pseudo-Na/rcissus.
Some other alien species are mentioned in the Cybele Britannica, 
volume second, page 446 ; namely, minor, in South Wales ; con- 
spicuus, in Surrey; and mosohatus, in Warwickshire, perhaps 
through an error.
Narcissus auranliacus is reported for Somerset, 
by Mr. Thomas Clark in the Phytologist, iv.
646.
And N.
seiratus 
and others are mentioned in the Flora of Middlesex, p.
276.
Galanthus nivalis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Cornwall to Moray.
Alien ?
Cyb. ii.
447 ; where opinions are citecl in favour of 
regarding the Snowdrop as a true native, 
76.
LlLIAOE^.
. 
Lilium Martagon, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5 - - 8 - 10 - - - 14 15.
Hants to Fife.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
449.
Long established in one spot in Surrey 
76.
LILIACE^.
581 
and ia Herts.
Very plentiful in Bourton wood, Gloucestershire ; 
Rev. H.
Roberts msc.
lAlium pyrenaicum, Gouan.
Province - 2.
North Devon ; Mr. George Maw.
Alien.
Cyb. iii.
370.
Phytol.
iv.
717.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
305.
Tulipa sylvesti-is, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 - 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Alien?
Cyb. ii.
449.
Usually originating from gardens.
Allium Ampeloprasum, Linn.
Provinces 1 2.
Som. Dor.
[In 4 - 12 - 15, by misnomers ?] 
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
451.
Relict from culture in province 1.
Allium Babingtonii, Borrer.
Provinces 1 2.
ComwaU; Mr. Borrer.
Dorset; Mr. Mansel.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
451.
Eng. bot.
ix.
205.
Allium carinatum, Linn.
Provinces - 8 - 15.
Notts; Eng. bot.
ix.
227.
Perth; Syme !
Alien ?
The account of the locality in Nottinghamshire, as given 
in English Botany, suggests an inference that the plant is simply 
an introduction there.
The Perthshire locality is by the side of 
the Tay river, below Perth ; a locality to which several foreign 
plants have been introduced, and in which they have become 
established.
Allium ioleraceum) complanatum, " Fries.
Boreau." 
Provmces - [3 4 5] - 10 - [12 - 14] 15.
York.
Forfar.
(Kinc.) 
Syn. 1182.
Cyb. ii.
453.
A. carinatum.
Smith, by error.
Allium (Schcenoprasuin) sibiricum, Linn.
Province 1.
The Lizard Point, West Cornwall.
Syn. 1085.
The formula for Schomoprasum, page 333, will need 
to be altered by omission of the province and county above named, 
when taken to represent the distribution of the type species apart 
from A.
sibiricum.
Allium nigrum, Linn.
Province - - - 4.
Norfolk ; Trimmer flo.
& E.
B. ix.
227.
Alien.
Misnamed Ampeloprasum, in the Flora quoted.
Allium paradoxum, Don.
Province - - - 4.
Linlithgow, planted ?
Edinburgh, unreliable.
Casual or planted.
See Eng. bot.
ix.
227.
Allium roseum, Linn.
A. ambiguum, Sm.
Provinces - - 3 4.
Kent; E.
B. S.
2803.
Suffolk ; Bab. man.
Casual.
Cyb. ii.
455.
Kent 1837—1853 ; extinct in 1866.
Allium triguetrum, Linn.
Province - - 3.
Me of Dogs, Midx.
1852 ; J.
Banker !
Ambiguity.
Not found by any other botanist ; and as the specimens 
582 79.
HYDROCHARIDACE^.
— 80.
ALISMACE^.
oame labelled " Leucojum astivum" some error of locality may 
have occurred, equally as of name.
Omithogalum nutans, Linn.
Provinces 1 - 3 4 5 - 7 8 - 10 11.
Surrey to Durham.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
458.
Omithogalum umbeUatum, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 16 ; excepting 11 IS.
Cornwall to Fife.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
458.
A var.
' angustifolium' in Isle of Wight.
S cilia bifolia, Linn.
Province 1.
" West of England." (Devon, from a garden.) 
Error.
Cyb. ii.
460.
Eng. bot.
ix.
236.
Asphodelus fistulosus, Linn.
Province - 9.
Cheshire ; F.
M. Webb.
Casual.
In a new made road; E.
C. report, 1861.
Asparagus {officinalis) maritimus, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 3.
West Cornwall !
Dorset, 1869 ; Flower msc.
Syn. 1096.
More or less doubtful in provinces 3 4-678.
This 
is the wild form, as distinct from the garden escapes.
Suggested 
to be the A.
prostratus of Du Mortier Flo. Belg.
Polygonatum (officinale) intermedium, Bor.
Province - 3.
Colerne, WUts ; Eng. bot.
ix.
179.
Syn. 1103.
A variety not noticed in Bab. Man.
79.
HlDEOCHAEIDACE^.
Elodea canadensis, Eich.
Anacharis, Bab.
Provinces 1 3 3 4 5 6 - 8 9 10 11 - 13 14 15.
Devon to Perth.
Alien.
Cyb. ii.
474.
iii.
515.
Thoroughly established, and in- 
juriously abundant.
Only the female plant said to be found in 
England.
80.
ALISMAOE.B.
Alistna (Plantago) lanceolatum, E.
B. 3.
(not of With.) 
Provinces .
. .
? Probably 1 to 17, as given for the aggregate.
Syn. 1109.
A slight variety graduating into the type.
The 
" lanceolata " of Withering is described as being " Not more than 
an inch or two in height.
Leaves nearly strap-shaped, without any 
distinct leaf-stalk." The plant of Kew Gardens, distributed as 
" lanceolatum " through the Exchange Club, has a petiole of six 
inches or upwards, and flower-stems (lower portions out away) more 
than a foot high ; it is thus a less limited form than the " species " 
of Withering.
Leaves " cordate at the base " is the exception, 
rather than the rule ; being the character of luxuriant plants.
In 
herbarium examples, generally the leaves are lanceolate-ovate or 
81.
potamaceje'.
583 
ovate-lanceolate ; though this may in some measure be attributed 
to a selection of smaU or weakly examples to fit the paper of an 
herbarium.
Alisma (ranunculoides) repens, Davies.
Provinces - 7 - 9, etc.
Wales and Scotland ; Bab. Man.
Syn. 1110.
I have not kept distinct notes for A.
repens ; the two 
extremes of scapes " erect" and " rooting" are connected by various 
intermediate states, not distinctly meeting either character.
81.
PoTAMAOB^.
Potartiogeton [pectinatus)flabellatus, Bab. man.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 - - 8 9 10 11.
" England.
Ireland." 
Syn. 1119.
Cyb. iii.
10.
" Not uncommon in England." 
Potamogeton (eu-pectinatus) genuinus, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 4 5 13 14 15 - - 18.
And others.
Syn. 1119.
" Frequent in England.
Bare in Scotland." 
Potamogeton {eu-pectinatus) scoparius, " Wallr." E.
B. 3.
Provinces - S 3 - - - 7 - - 10.
"P.
marinus, Huds." 
Syn. 1119, Plentiful in South- England; Syme, in E.
B. 3.
Potamogeton gracilis, Fries.
Province - 11.
Cheviotland; Professor Oliver !
Ambiguity.
Dubious between gracilis and piisillus.
Potamogeton mueronatus, Sohrader.
" P.
compressus, Sm." 
Provinces - - 3 - 5 - - - 9.
In nearly all, by printed records.
Native.
Cyb. iii.
12.
It remains still impossible to give a proper 
account of the area and distribution of Smith's compressus; that 
name having been so variously applied, usually to examples of 
pusillus, occasionally also to those of ohtusijolius.
From Devon to 
Orkney, by the Floras, etc.
Shropshire; J.
E, Bowman !
Surrey; 
Boswell Syme.
Specimens from Stoke Heath, Warrington ; Syme 
in Eng. bot.
ix.
49.
Potamogeton (lucens) acwminatus, Schum.
Provinces 5 - - - 9.
And in several others.
Syn. 1126.
Hereford ; E«v.
W. H.
Purchas !
Warwick; Mr. T.
Kirk !
Cheshire ; Hon. J.
B. L.
Warren !
Having kept no 
separate notes for this variety, I can now venture to cite three 
counties only, as shown by labels in my herbarium ; although 
I have certainly seen the variety in others also.
Potamogeton {lucens) decipiens., Nolte.
Province 1.
Canal at Bath, Somerset; Exchange Club sp.
Syn. 1136.
I possess only the leaves from the E.
C. 
584 81.
POTAMACEiE.
Potamogeton (natans) "proper," Student's Flora.
Provinces - - 3 4 9 - - - 13 14 15 16.
Surrey to Fife, 
Syn. 1132.
Cjb. iii.
20.
This has been represented so often by 
examples of the more frequent P.
polygoni/olitis, labelled or recorded 
.as " natans", that fresh records for it have become very desirable, 
made on re-examination throughout Britain ; all those made before 
1860 being rejected, as well as several of those bearing a later 
date.
Potamogeton (polygonifolius) ericetoruW; E.
B. 3.
Provinces all ?
" Found on almost every heath." 
Syn. 1132 (1133).
This is distinguished in words from the type 
variety genidnus, of Dr. Boswell Syme, chiefly by the absence of 
the pellucid lower leaves ; an accident of place or season.
I think 
that the seeds never germinate, and vegetate so far as to produce 
leaves, unless under water for the time being; and that the 
earliest submerged leaves are always narrow and pellucid.
In the 
coriaceous or floating leaves there is the most completely gradual 
transition from broadly or rouudedly oval, with a cordate base, to 
acutely lanceolate, narrowing insensibly into the foot-stalk.
So 
that, in truth, the three " varieties" are only three selected forms, 
or two extremes and an intermediate, described in English Botany 
apart from their connecting links.
Potamogeton {polygonifolius) pseudo-fluitans, E.
B. 3.
Province - 12.
Buttermere, Cumberland ; Hort!
Oliver!
Syn. 1132 (1133).
Dr. Boswell Syme makes a distinct variety of 
this Buttermere plant.
To my own eyes it appears to be simply a 
rather extreme state of polygonifolius, as elongated by rising 
from deeper or drawn out by growing in running water, such as 
I have seen in various places, from Fleet Pond, Hants, to Braemar, 
Aberdeen, and Loch Erricht, Inverness.
Potamogeton fluitans, Auct.
varr.
Provinces .
. .
? Several, by use of the name.
Ambiguity.
This is a name of various application in our botanical 
books and on labels.
Most usually it has meant either rufescens 
or the pseudo-fluitans (not limited) form above mentioned.
An 
extract from a letter written by Mr. J.
G. Baker, in 1864, will 
afford a striking example of the confusion in applying this name ; 
— " Winch's three stations under 'fluitans ' belong, one each, to 
rufescens, oblongus, a,ni plantagineus." See English Botany, is.
63.
Ruppia (maritima) spiralis, " Hartm." E.
B. 3.
Provinces 12 3 10.
13 Kirkcudbright?
Syn. 1135.
In separating the R.
rostellata, the formula on 
page 346 is left unavailable for R.
maritima (limited) which is the 
less frequent form.
Dr. Boswell Syme writes that spiralis " does 
not appear to occur in Scotland." A specimen is preserved in my 
herbarium, labelled from the county of Kirkcudbright by Professor 
82.
TYPHACEJi:.
585 
Balfour, in which the nuts (rather young) are quite like those 
figured for spiralis in English Botany, 1427 ; but the peduncle is 
short, as in the real rostellata collected in the same county by 
Dr. Syme himself.
Ruppia (maritima) rostellata, " Koch." E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 2 3 4 5 6 - - -- 11 13 14 IS 16 - 18.
Syn. 1135.
Cyb. ii.
23.
Isle of Wight to Orkney; E.
B. ix.
59.
Zannichellia (palustris) eu-palustris, E.
B. 3.
Provinces all ?
" Common in England ".
. .
" extending to Orkney." 
Syn. 1136.
Cyb. ii.
23.
According to the figures (caricatures?) 
of the fruits in English Botany, nos.
1425 and 1426, all the thirty 
specimens of palustris in my herbarium are intermediate forms 
between eupalustris and pedicillata.
Thus, I do not understand 
the distinctions of English Botany, and can still hold only to the 
undivided palvstris, in localising the speoimensi 
Zannichellia (palustris) pedicillatai "Fries." E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 2 3 - 5 - - - - 10 11.
" Frequent in England"; Syme.
Syn. 1136.
This is the pedunculata of several books.
"I have 
seen no Scotch specimens "; Dr. Boswell Syme.
Zannichellia {palustris) polycarpa, Nolte^ 
Provinces 0.
Not found in Britain ; Bab. man.
Error.
Cyb. iii.
24 ; where the error is explained.
E. B.
ix.
57.
Zannichellia dentataj Willd.
Provinces .
. .
? Perhaps none at all.
Ambiguity.
In some of the older books on English plants this 
genus was differently distinguished into two species, under names 
of palvstris and dentata.
See Gray's Arrangement, ii.
82.
Zostera {marina) angustifolia, " Pries." " Reich." E.
B. 3.
Provinces .
. .
? Same as no.
1137 of the Synopsis ?
Syn. 1137.
This " has no tangible characters by which it may be 
separated " from marina, according to Dr. BosweU Syme.
A mistake 
is made sometimeSj by giving this name to young examples of 
Ruppia maritima.
82.
TtpHacb^.
Sparganium {nutans) affine, " Schneiz." E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - - - 7 - - - 11 12 ?
- 15 16 - 18.
Syn. 1144.
Cyb. iii.
31.
From Surrey (rarely) to Shetland.
Sparganium {natans) minimum, "Fries." E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 2 3 4 5 6 - - 9 10 - - 13 14 15 16 17.
Wight to Suth.
Syn. 1144.
Cyb- iii.
31.
Difficult to distinguish from affine.
Typha {latifolia) media^ " DC." E.
B- 3.
Provinces ?
- 3.
Devon ?
Surrey, and likely elsewhere- 
Syn. 1147.
Spikes half-inch apart in the Devon plant.
4 F 
586 84.
JUNCACE.E.
Typha minor, Sen.
Provinces - - 3 - 9 10.
Apparently through misnomers.
Error.
Cyb. iii.
36.
The Liverpool example was angustifoUa.
84.
Juncace.e; 
Juncus nigritellus, D.
Don.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; G.Don.
Ambiguity.
Apparently a small state of lamprocarpus ?
I have 
seen specimens labelled as nigritellus, from Northumberland, 
Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Fife; all of which appeared to 
me simply lamprocarpus.
It has been reported also in the counties 
of Kent and Chester.
Juncus tenuis, Willd.
J. Gesneri, Sm.
Province - 15.
Scotland ; Dickson.
Clova mountains ; G.
Don.
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
47.
Neither authority is reliable ; but^the 
figure of gracilis in English Botany, no.
3174, may pass well 
enough for one of true tenuis.
Juncus (bufonius) fasciculatus, "Koch." E.
B. 3.
Provinces -83-15 18.
And all the rest?
Syn. 1163.
This segregate is said to be connected with " genuinus" 
the type form "by a complete series of intermediate forms." Under 
such circumstances which name, genuinus or fasciculatus, should 
be given to the intermediates ?
— There is yet a third form 
" ranarius" mentioned in English Botany, which "scarcely de- 
serves to be ranked as a variety." And yet, it seems, all three 
are held to be so many distinct species by some botanists on the 
Continent ; thus, properly enough explained in English Botany.
Luzula (pilosa) Borreri, Bromfield.
Provinces 13 3-5.
And probably elsewhere.
Syn. 1170.
Cyb. iii.
54 & 618.
A sterile state oi pilosa?
iMzula (multiflora) sudetioa, DC.
E. B.
3. 
Province - 15.
Glen Callater, Aberdeen; Boswell Syme.
Syn. 1173.
In English Botany, x.
10, this third form is added to 
the other two, which have become sufficiently familiar under the 
names of multiflora and congesta; and both of which probably 
spread alike into all the provinces, though separate notes have not 
been made about their localities, apart from each other.
Luzula nivea, Desv.
Provinces - 5 15.
Salop ; Mr. Maw.
Fife ; Dr. Dewar !
Alien.
Cyb. iii.
59.
Planted at BroomhaU, Fife.
85.
CYPERACE*.
687 
85.
Otperaoe^.
Scirpus (uniglumis) Watsoni, Bab.
Provinces - 9 - 15 16.
Lancashire.
Argyle.
Moray.
Syn. 1193.
Cyb. iii.
76.
Attention was first called to this variety 
solely on account of the nuts (observed on a specimen from Moray) 
being " covered over closely with impressed dots." And as authors 
were then describing uniglumis with "smooth" nuts, I did not 
suppose it to be that quasi-species, then quite unknown to me 
except by book-description.
Dr. Boswell Syme now describes the 
nuts of the latter segregate as being " faintly punctate-striate 
under an ordinary lens"; so that " Watsoni" may be held scarcely 
more than a synonym of uniglumis, not the name of a clearly 
distinguished variety.
[This appears a place not unsuitable for a 
personal explanation, which I have desired to put on record some- 
where.
Early in my botanical life I resolved never either to split 
off a " new British species" or to give a new name to any British 
plant.
The former part of this resolution has been strictly adhered 
to ; and the latter departed from in extremely few instances, where 
the use of a temporary name became needful, as the better alterna- 
tive than that of using one likely to prove erroneous.
I much 
prefer, also, not to see my own surname converted into either 
varietal or specific name for a plant; and thus shall be very 
willing to let " Watsoni " pass out of use in Scirpus, as having now 
become an useless synonym ; — although, under the original circum- 
stances, I cannot say that Professor Babington was wrong in so 
distinguishing the plant.] 
Scirpus parvulus, R.
& S.
Province - 9.
South Hants?
Dorset ; J.
C. Mansel!
Ee-discovered in 1870.
Cyb. iii.
78.
Ireland ; A.
G. More !
Eriophorum alpinum, Linn.
Province - 15.
Erroneously in 7 and perhaps 17.
Extinct?
Cyb. iii.
81.
Forfarshire, formerly; afterwards lost 
through drainage.
A specimen exists in the herbarium of Professor 
Balfour, labelled as Scirpus caspitosus from Sutherland.
It would 
seem to be the most reasonable explanation of this circumstance, 
that the label had accidentally got displaced to the wrong specimen.
I believe myself warranted in making a record that Mr. A.
G. 
More arrived at this opinion after fair investigation.
Eriophorum capitatum, Host.
E. Scheuchzeri, Hoppe.
Province - 15.
Perth; G.Don.
Error.
Cyb. iii.
83.
Eng. bot.
x. 174.
Misnomer?
Eriophorum [angustifolium) minus, Bab.
Provinces 7 12 - - 15 16 17.
And others ?
Syn. 1300.
A weakly state of the species; noticed here because 
588 85.
CYPERACE33.
sometimes mistaken for true gracile.
The opposite state, that of 
vigorous or luxuriant growth, is given as a further variety in 
Enghsh Botany, under name of elatius.
The name oi polystachion, 
as used in the English Flora, may be said to mean the variety 
elatius ; that of gracile being used there for minus.
Car ex Davalliana, Sm.
Province 1.
Lansdown, Bath ; lost there " by drainage." 
Extinct.
Cyb. iii.
87.
[York.
Hadd.
Edin.
Kinc] 
Car ex [ovalis] bracteata, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - - 3 - 5.
Surrey !
Worcester.
Syn. 1211.
Cyb. iii.
96.
C. ovalis, b.
argyroglochin, L.
C. exo.
The true C.
argyrolochin is distinguished essentially by its pale 
and silvery glumes, not by foliaceous bracts, which are present or 
absent in either.
Carex {ehngata) Gehhardi, Schkuhr.
Provinces .
. .
? " Professor Babington includes it in his Manual, 
but gives no station for it, and I have seen no British specimens"; 
Eng. bot.
X. 100.
Carex (remota) tenella, Sm.
(not Schkuhr.) 
Province - 1.5.
Forfar; G.Don. Hants; Boswell Syme?
Syn. 1S14.
Cyb. iii.
98.
Eng. bot.
x. 96.
Carex bryiioides, Linn.
Province - 10.
Studley Wood, Yorkshire ; Bab. man.
ed.
3 to 6.
Error?
Cyb, iii.
94.
If really found, probably planted ; E.
B. 
Carex (muricata) pseudo-divulsa, E.
B. 3.
Provinces 1 - 8.
Somerset.
Kent.
Surrey.
Syn. 1320.
C. virens.
Lam., not of Eeichenbach; E.
B. 
Carex (teretiuscula) EhrJiartiana, Hoppe.
Province - 9.
Manchester.
North Hants?
Surrey?
Syn. 1223.
Cyb. iii.
107.
Near Basingstoke, Hants, and on 
Wimbledon Common, Surrey, I have seen sedges which I hesitated 
to name teretiuscula only because their stems were several together 
in loose tufts ; and thus approximating to the present variety, if 
not absolutely identical.
Carex ustulata, Wahl.
Province - 15.
Perth and Forfar; G.
Don, sole authority.
Error?
Cyb. iii.
129.
Eng. bot.
x. 137.
Carex [vulgaris) uUginosa, E.
B. 3.
Province -- 3.
And elsewhere?
" In muddy places." 
Syn. 1228.
By the character " densely casspitose " in Eng. Bot.
ed.
8, I suppose this to be the same with a form which I dis- 
tributed from North Surrey, in 1846, labelled as "vulgaris, var.
juncea." It was found growing in dense tufts in swampy rather 
than muddy ground.
85.
CYPEBACE.E. 589 
Carex Gihsoni, Bab.
Province - 10.
Yorkshire ; Bab. man.
" Extinct." 
Ambiguity.
Oyb iii.
111.
A variety of C.
vulgaris ; E.
B. 3.
Carex {aquatilis) Watsoni, E.
B. 3.
Provinces - 13 14 IS.
Lanark.
Linlith.
Aberd.
Fife?
Forfar?
Syu. 1230.
I have some hesitation about combining the aquatilis 
of the Clova mountains with the Lowland plants from the Clyde 
and Almond rivers.
Dr. Boott made out other affinities by pencilled 
notes to the specimens in my own herbarium.
On two of them, 
collected in the Clyde district, probably in Lanarkshire, by 
Dr. Hooker, his note runs thus ; " Near Goodenovii, bracts too 
long." On other two, from the Almond, collected by Professor 
J. H.
Balfour in Sept.
1838, his note is " very like stricta (Lam.) 
of America." These last were named " C.
stricta, Good." on the 
labels of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh.
Thus, these sedges 
of the Almond river, near Edinburgh, have been assigned more or 
less uncertainly to three different species, to aquatilis, to stricta of 
Goodenough, and to stricta of Lamarck ; — the latter being the 
virginiana of Smith, and one we might have supposed Dr. Boott 
likely to know.
Carex ccespitosa, " lAnn." "Fries." " C.
Drejeri, Lunge." 
Provinces .
. .
? "Britain; Dr. Greville." 
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
112.
Probably a mistake ; Eng. hot.
x. 175.
Carex (acuta) Moenchiana, Wendl.
Provinces .
. .
? A form of acuta; Student's Flora of B.
B. p.
480.
Syn. 1232.
Not noticed in the third edition of English Botany.
Bat two other suggested varieties of acuta are mentioned there, 
as being " perhaps " the prolixa of Fries and the tricostata of 
Fries.
These two are unknown to me.
The former is stated to 
grow " in the ditch by the side of the Towing path, on the banks 
of the Thames near Richmond." The latter came " from clay-pits 
at North wick, near Worcester, collected by Mr. G.
Maw." 
Carex (saxatili-s) Grahami, Boott.
Province - 15.
Forfar ; W.
Brand !
Perth; E.B.
Syn. 1233.
Cyb. iii.
115.
Eng. bot.
x. 172.— 
Carex saxatilis.
— " I cannot escape the conviction that this totally 
different-looking plant" ...
"is an alpine form of C.
vesicaria, to 
which variety Grahami forms a passage "; The Student's Flora of 
the British Islands, p.
421.
Carex (flava) Oederi, Auct.
" Ehrh." 
Provinces - - 3 4 - - 7 - 9 10 - - - 14 15 - - 18.
From E.
B. 3.
Syn. 1234.
Cyb. iii.
116.
Apparently two different plants have 
been thus named by English botanists.
The more frequent of 
these is a slight variety of flava, closely connected with the type 
by a.
series of intermediate forms.
But another less frequent 
plant may perhaps be held separable from the flava by better and 
590 85.
CYPEEACEiE.
less variable characters.
Still, I cannot assign all the specimens 
in my own herbarium quite confidently between the Oederi and 
lepidocarpa; apparently, they shew localities for the former 
ranging from South Hants to Orkney.
In English Botany, 
X. 159, Dr. Boswell Syme expresses the like uncertainty, but 
adds, " I never found the same difficulty when the plants were 
growing." 
Carex (flava) lepidocarpa, Tausoh.
Provinces all?
But usually under name of Oederi.
Syn. 1234.
See the preceding segregate.
Carex (Julva) genuina, E.
B. 3.
„ „ speirostachya, Sm. E.
B. 3.
Provinces all ?
Not ascertained for either of these apart.
Syn. 1237.
Cyb. iii.
118.
In my own notes of past years the 
names fuha and speirostachya have been used as exchangeable 
synonyms ; for I never understood how to separate the plants 
themselves.
In English Botany, Dr. Boswell Syme expresses the 
like uncertainty, and writes of speirostachya "had Smith not 
described it as a species, I should certainly not have noticed it 
even as a variety." He there adds a third variety, one quite un- 
known to myself, the sterilis, suggested to be a sedge intended by 
" Dr. Boott, in letter quoted in Bromfield's Flo. Vect.
p. 363." 
This may possibly be the txnefulva.
Carex punctata, Gaud.
Provinces 1 - 7.
Cornwall?
Anglesea?
[12 Cumberland.] 
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
191.
See Phytologist iv.
679, as to Cumber- 
land.
As to the locality " near Beaumaris or Bangor," Dr. Amott 
wrote " one of these is erroneous." There might be nothing very 
unexpected, in the finding of this sedge in England and Ireland; 
but the evidence for it appears to me hitherto to have been far 
from satisfactory.
Dr. BosweU Syme had seen no British, Irish, or 
Guernsey specimens, as mentioned in English Botany, x.
131.
Dr. Hooker accepts it for Guernsey and Ireland, — whether on 
testimony or by examined specimens, is not stated in ' The 
Student's Flora.' 
Carex (limosa, L.) vera.
Provinces - ?
- 4 ??
- - 9 10 11 ?
- ?
1-5 16 17.
Syn. 1244.
Cyb. iii.
1S8.
It seems impossible to assign old 
records of localities for " limosa " between this and irrigua.
In 
English Botany, Dr. Syme gives no localities for the present 
segregate distinctly on his own individual knowledge.
In my 
herbarium the specimens of true limosa are from East Suflblk, 
Cheshire, Fife, Forfar, Dumbarton, and Sutherland.
York; 
Baker Bot. Northumberland and Cheviotland ; New flo.
Ee- 
examination must determine which of the two really occurs in 
provinces 2 5 6 - 12 - 14.
80.
GEAMINA.
591 
Car ex {limosa) irrigua, Hoppe.
Provinces - ?
7 - - - 11 ?
18 - 15 16.
Syn. 1244.
Cyb. iii.
128.
The specimens in my herbarium are 
from Denbigh, Northumberland, Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Argyle 
(Ben Ima).
Dr. Syme found it at Glenquay Moss, West Perth, 
and quotes the British Flora for the " Clova Mountains and Hill 
of Knock, Dunfermline." 
Carex (glauca) Micheliana, Sm.
Province - 15.
York; B.
G. Kincardine; Beattie.
Aberdeen.
Syn. 1250.
Cyb. iii.
133.
Smith Correspondence, i.
441—9.
Carex [glauca) stictocarpa, Sm.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire; Don. Ben Lawers, Perth ; Syme.
Syn. 1250.
Cyb. iii.
133.
Not known to me.
Carex angustifolia, Sm.
Province - 15.
Forfar; G.
Don in Eng. flo.
Ambiguity.
" Of this I have seen but one specimen, and that 
none of the best"; Smith in E.
F. iv.
128.
Carex (hirta) ebracteata, E.
B. 3.
Province - - 3.
Between Epsom and Ashtead, Surrey.
Syn. 1257.
The sub-glabrous var.
' hirtifomiis ' in several provinces.
Carex (atnpullacea) involuta, E.
C. report, 1863.
Province - 9.
Hale Moss, Cheshire; S.
H. Bickham !
Syn. 1258.
Said to occur also at Congleton and Oakmere.
Carex [paludosd] Kochiana, Gaud.
Province - 2.
Isle of Wight; More.
Sussex; Mitten.
Syn. 1260.
" Scarcely deserves notice as a variety"; E.
B. 8.
Carex hordeiformis, Wahl.
C. secalina, Sm. in E.
F. 
Province - 15.
Forfar; Thomas Drummond.
Error.
Cyb. iii.
148.
Gard.
Flo. Forf.
217.
Carex laxa, Wahl.
Province - 15.
Clova mountains, Forfar; Don. Ace.
Error.
This name is omitted from the Indices to English Flora 
and English Botany ; my note of it was taken from Don's Account, 
in Headrick's Agricultural Survey of Forfarshire, a work which 
I have not seen for many years past.
86.
Geamina.
Spartina altemiflora, Loisel.
Province - 2.
South Hants.
Imported from America?
Alien ?
Cyb. iii.
145.
Dr. Bromfield in E.
B. S., etc.
Echinochloa Crus-galli, Beauv.
Provinces - 2 3 4 10.
[18.
Orkney ; Barry hist.] 
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
148.
Panicum Crus-galU of Linneus and of 
593 86.
GBAMINA.
most British writers.— (In the Flora of Middlesex, Tritnen and 
Dyer record P.
capillare, only a single plant, and P.
miliaceum, a 
casual.
The latter has heen seen also near Mitcham in Surrey, 
and within the docks at Gloucester.) 
Biqitaria saiiguinaUs, Beauv.
Provinces - 3 4 9 10 11 13 - 15.
Casual.
Oyh. iii.
148.
— (D.
ciliaris is recorded in the Appendix 
to the Flora of Surrey; and the same grass was found hy Dr.
Carrington near Bury in Lancashire, according to the Exchange 
Club report for 1858.) 
Setaria verticillata, Beauv.
Provinces 1-34 10 11.
[5.
Stourbridge; Scott.] 
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
150.
Exchange Club rep.
1858.
Setaria glauca, Beauv.
Provinces 1 - 3.
Somerset.
Surrey.
Middlesex.
Herts.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
150.
— (Setaria italica, another casual, is men- 
tioned in the Flora of Middlesex.) 
Phalaris canariensis, Linn.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Cornwall to Aberdeen, occasionally.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
151.
Scattered by bird-catchers, etc.
Phalaris paradoxa, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 - 10.
Swanage, Dorset, in 1847 and 1851.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
153.
Both this and P.
minor are enumerated 
in the list of foreign plants imported into Surrey among corn for a 
Distillery.
See Appendix to the Flora of Surrey, and the Journal 
of Botany, iv.
150.
It has been seen also near Huddersfield in 
Yorkshire, according to Exchange Club report for 1858.
Phlewn asperum, Jacq.
Provinces 1-345.
No certain locality for it.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
156.
I have specimens of it collected by Mr.
W. Mac Ivor, at " Cobham, Kent"; Dr. Boswell Syme, msc.
The 
Collector named seems to have been singularly fortunate in finding 
plants which nobody else can find, and in places frequented by 
other botanical collectors; see Vella annua, page 482, as another 
instance.
— (Mr. Baker recorded Phleum tenue as a "weed on a bed 
of onions in garden ground at Thiisk "; see E.
O. report for \%%'ji^ 
page \Q.) 
Phleum MichcUi, All.
Province - 15.
Forfarshire ; G.
Don, sole authority 
Error.
Oyb. iii.
157.
" Very summit of the highest mountains." 
Alopeeurm(sfeniculatus?)pronus, Mitten, msc &L C 
Province - S.
Albourne, West Sussex ; Mr Mitten ' ' ' 
Sju. 1279.
This is placed under prateiisis in The Stn,1<.r,f' i:^i 
Mr. Mitten contrasted it only against ae^icull,,^ ^ ^ F^°'^- 
incline to place it notwithstanding the mfrTacute gl'umer ' 
86.
GEAMINA.
593 
Stipa pennata, Liun.
Provinces - - 3 - 10 - 1'^.
Midx.
York.
Westm.
Cumb.
Error.
C^-b.
iii.
183.
See the Flora of Middlesex on the record 
for that county.
The following extract from a letter written by 
Mr. Tatham, in 1845, is suggestive of error somewhere ; — " I have 
wild specimens gathered in Westmoreland by the late J.
Gough, of 
Kendal ; and having these I did not keep, but gave away, the 
specimens I had sent me from Rumbolds Moor, by S.
Gibson; it 
grew near the pathway between Ilkley and Keighley, and I have 
no reason whatever to doubt its correctness." (See under Geranium 
macrorhizum, page 495, as to Samuel Gibson.) 
Agrostis [vulgaris) pumila, Lightf.
Provinces 1 - 8 - - - 7 - 9 10 11 12 - 14 15 16 17 18.
Syn. 1291.
Somerset; Flower.
Middlesex ; T.
& D.
flo.
I have 
myself never met with it in the southern counties.
Agrostis [alba) stoloiiifera, Linn.
Provinces 12 3 4 5-7-910.
18.
Orkney ?
Syn. 1292.
A name of rather loose application.
(Subsequent 
experience has led me to distrust my own notes, made in years 
past, on the localities of canina, vulgaris, and alba, with their 
subordinate varieties ; probably somewhat confused together in at 
least the earlier years of my botanical wanderings.) 
Aira [flexuosa) uliginosa, Weihe.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 15.
Hants !
Surrey !
Norf.
Forf.
Kinc.
Syn. 1302.
[Cheshire ?
Lancashire ?] This appears to be suffi- 
ciently distinguishable from the A.
flexuosa of dry heaths, by site 
and by characters.
Shown by Ur. Trimen to be the variety 
setacea of Hudson's Flora Anglica ; but it seems most unadvisable 
to create confusion in the specific name by which this is now 
known, through substituting a discarded varietal name.
Lagurus ovatus, Linu.
Province - - 3.
Near Saffron Walden, probably sown there.
Extinct Casual?
Cyb. iii.
182.
Gibson's Flora of Essex, p.
367.
Aveua strigosa, Linn.
Provinces all ?
Eare in England, more frequent in Scotland.
Colonist-Casual.
Cyb. iii.
184.
An ancient introduction into 
Prance ; Godron Consid.
Originally from the Caucasian countries ; 
De Cand.
geogr.
hot.
rais.
Avena [pratensis) alpina, Sm.
Province -15.
Forfar; G.
Don. Perth?
York?
Syn. 1809.
Cyb. iii.
185.
The counties to be indicated for this 
segregate may be said to depend on the degree of divergence from 
ordinary pratensis, which is enough to warrant the application of 
Smith's specific name alpina.
I should apply the same name to 
the plants seen above the road on the Perthshire side of the Pass 
4 G 
594 86.
GEAMINA.
of Drumochter (Drum Uachdar ?) as to those seen in Glen Fiadb, 
Forfarshire ; the latter being called alpina, so should be the 
former ; all of them wide away from planiculmis.
Avena planiculmis, Schrader.
Provinces - 15 16.
Forfar, by misnomer.
Arran, by error?
Error.
Cyb. iii.
186.
The garden plant, which I received under 
this name from W.
Borrer, has a tufty and spreading root, cer- 
tainly not a " widely creeping root." As remarked above, it is 
quite unlike the Linnean pratensis or Smithian alpina.
Avena subspicata, Link.
Trisetum subspicatttm.
Provinces .
. .
? "In Alpibus Anglise.
Anders.
69." 
Ambiguity.
" Should be looked for.
I cannot obtain information 
from Sweden"; Bab. man.
ed.
4 to 6.
An error?
Glyceria (fluitans ?) pedicellata, Townsend.
Provinces - 3 - 4 5 - - - - 10 15.
Syn. 1322.
As a variety otplicata in Man. Brit.
Bot.
Schleroohloa dura, Beauv.
Province - 11.
On ballast, Hartlepool, Durham.
Casual.
Professor M.
A. Lawson, in E.
0. rep.
1867.
Poa sudetica, Haenke.
Prov.
- - 3 - 5.
Kew grounds; Dr. Hooker!
Warwick; Mr. Kirk I 
Casual.
Introduced with foreign hay or seeds ?
It is somewhere 
recommended to agriculturists, and perhaps is occasionally sown by 
them.
Poa (pratensis) suhcmrulea, Smith.
Provinces 7 - - 10 - 12 - - 15.
Elsewhere also?
Syn. 1381.
Some other states or varieties of Poa pratensis appear 
in our books, under distinctive names ; but I have not collected 
notes about their localities apart from those of the type.
Poa [nemoralis) Parnellii, Bab. man.
Provinces - 10 11.
York; Baker!
Durham; Hort.
! Gibson!
Syn. 1334.
Cyb. iii.
206.
P. nemoralis, var., in New Flora.
Poa [glauca] Balfourii, Bab. man.
Provinces 7 - - 10 11 - - - 15 16.
Carn.
to Westerness.
Syn. 1334*.
Oyb. iii.
207.
Journal of Botany, iii.
157.
I received 
living plants labelled "Balfourii" and "Parnellii" from Mr.
Borrer's garden for cultivation.
The former, very glaucous, was 
soon lost; while the latter, rather green than glaucous, established 
itself in a weed-like manner, as much at home in the Surrey 
garden as the Poa nemoralis might become.
Poa (glauca) ccBsia, Smith.
Provinces - 15 16.
Perth.
Forfar.
Aberdeen.
Argyle.
Syn. 1334*.
Cyb. iii.
208.
" Poa glauca, Sm." has varied appli- 
cations in botanical books ; for instance, the grass so named in the 
86.
GEAMINA.
595 
' Catalogue of Plants collected in South Kent' cannot have been 
the species of the northern mountains so named.
But, as Sir 
James Smith evidently intended the name to belong to the 
glaucous Poa of the mountains, it is here taken to express the 
aggregate species; Smith's variety ccesia (Eng. Flo.
i. 128) being 
a segregate divergent in one direction, and the Balfourii apparently 
a segregate diverging towards nemoralis in a contrary direction.
But truly, after abstracting these two, it is difficult to say what is 
left of glauca for a typical segregate.
1 understand from Dr. Bos- 
well Syme, that he holds the Poa casia figured in English Botany, 
no.
1719, to be quite distinct from Smith's glauca.
Unfortunately 
for myself, while writing these latter pages of my ' Compendium ' 
I am ahead of the third edition of ' English Botany,' and thus lose 
its great help in doing so.
Possibly what I mean by casia may 
truly be typical glauca in the views of Dr. Syme.
Eragrostis poaoides, Beau v.
Province - 9.
Near Birkenhead, Chester; F.
M. Webb.
Casual.
In a new made road ; E.
C. rep.
1863.
Cynosurus echinatus, Linn.
Provinces 13 3 8 9 10 11 - - 14 - - - 18.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
314.
Sown with seeds of clover, etc.
Festuca ambigua, " Le Gall, in Flore de Morbihan." 
Province - 3.
Isle of Wight ; A.
G. More !
Native.
"Eng. Bot.
Supp.
2970." 
Festuca (ovina) tenuifolia, Sibth.
Provinces 133--6----11 15.
Elsewhere also?
Syn. 1343.
I have not kept special notes for this variety.
Other 
forms of F.
ovina are recorded in books as segregate species or 
varieties.
— (N.B. Since the Synopsis was printed, I have learned 
from Dr. BosweU Syme, that a slightly creeping pratal and pascual 
Festuca, frequent in Surrey and elsewhere, which I have always 
considered to be the duriuscula, is really what various Authors 
intend by the name rubra.
This cannot well have been Smith's 
idea of rubra, which he locates on the mountains and sandy sea- 
coast, not in the low inland fields of southern England.
I doubt 
much whether the creeping rubra (or sabulicpla) of the sea-coast 
has any actual re-appearance on " alpine precipices." See the Flora 
of Middlesex, page 339 ; the F.
duriuscula of that well worked out 
Flora is apparently the same thing with the Surrey grass here 
alluded to, and which I separate alike from inland ovina and from 
coast rubra.) 
Festuca (sylvatica) decidua, Sm.
Province - 15.
Perthshire ; G.
Don. Eng.
bot.
2366.
Syn. 1345.
Reduced to a variety in Eng. flo.
i. 146.
596 86.
GEAMINA, 
Festuca [elatior) aruiuUnacea, Sohreber?
Provinces 12 3.
S. Devon !
Isle of Wight !
Kent ; S^'me !
Syn. 1340.
Cyb. iii.
22'2 and S19.
A large state of F.
elatior?
Festuca [pratensis) loliacea, Huds.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Devon to Perth !
18 Orkney ; Neill Tour.
Syn. 1347.
Cyb. iii.
223.
I can stiU see in this nothing but 
prateipis with the panicle reduced to a raceme or " spioate racerne." 
Impossible as it is to confovind together the two extreme segregates, 
arundinacea and loliacea, yet they appear to be only states of the 
intermediate elatior and pratensis; tvro species which botanists 
cannot always distinguish with certainty, and the names of which 
appear to have been frequently misapplied or interchanged.
Bronius rigidus, Roth.
Province - 15.
Fifeshire; Graham excurs.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
233.
— {B.
maximus, Desf.
casual in Surrey.) 
Sromus tectorum, Linn.
Provinces - 2 3 - 5.
[15.
Forfar; G.
Don.] 
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
232.
Introduced among com and flax seeds, 
also perhaps with other merchandize or ballast.
Bromus [asper) serotinus, " Beneken." 
Provinces - 8 - 10 - 15.
Derbv.
York.
Fife.
Syn. 1349.
Exchange Club report, 1867.
Bromus (secalinus) velutinus, Smith.
Provinces - 2 3.
Sussex !
Surrey ; Syme !
Midx.
flo.
Syn. 1354.
Cyb. iii.
229.
Several mis-records omitted.
Bromus (commutatus) racemosus, Anglor.
Provinces 1 to 16.
By the name, as it is loosely applied in books.
Syn. 1355.
Cyb. iii.
231.
Two grasses have been thus labelled 
by collectors.
Usually racemosus is simply a synonym, intending 
commutatus; the plants so designated being one same species.
The name racemosus has been also given instead to a non- 
pubescent state of mollis.
I do not know that there is any other 
racemosus in England, except as a mere set of words in books, 
which are only supposed to represent something different in living 
nature.
Bromus arvensis, Linn.
Provinces ] 2 3 4 - - - 8 - 10 11 - - - 15.
Excluding commutatus.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
232.
Of late years this has been met with by 
collectors more often than formerly ; being sown among imported 
lucerne or clover seeds.
But formerly specimens of commutatus 
were frequently mis-labelled as arvensis, while this latter was a 
grass known to few.
Bromus patulus, Mart.
& Koch.
Provinces - - 3 - 5 - - - - 10.
Surrey.
Gloucester.
York?
Pasual.
Cyb. iii.
23!J.
Among us, confused with nrroisis .^ 
86.
GEAMINA.
597 
Brom.us squarrosus, Linn.
Provinces 1 2 3 5.
Sora.
Sus. Metrop.
Glouc.
Scotland?
Error.
Cyb. iii.
233.
Eng. flo.
i. 155.
Flo. Metrop.
Ceratochloa unioloides, DC.
Provinces - 5 10.
Warwick ; Cox !
York ; Mudd !
Casual or sown ?
5. Round a partly drained pond in Warwick 
Old Park, in 1869 ; brought to Mrs. Russell.
10.
Baker's Botany 
of North Yorkshire.
Triticum cristatum, Schreber.
Province - 15.
Forfar; G.Don. Lunan Bay, Arbroath ?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
337.
Specimens from Don are in herbaria ?
Triticum hiflorum, " Brig." Mitten.
' 
Province - 15.
Ben Lavpers, Perth ; " Don in Borrer herb." 
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
237.
London Jour.
Bot. viii.
533.
Triticum (repens) littorale, Anglor.
Provinces all?
Scilly Isles to Shetland.
Syn. 1360.
Cyb. iii.
335.
I do not know how to separate this 
from some of the forms named laxuin or acutum by other 
botanists.
Triticum [junceum) verum.
Provinces - 2 3 4 - 6 - 8 9 10 11 16 17.
Syn. 1363.
This is certainly a different grass from T.
acutum 
find T.
pungens ; but I am not able to point out among the 
localities on record for aggregate "junceum" all those in which 
this typical segregate will certainly be found; the provinces 
enumerated above are probably correct.
Triticum (junceum) acutum, DC.
" T.
laxura, Fries." 
Provinces 1 3 3 4 - 6 - 8 - 10 11 13 13 14 16.
Syn. 1362.
Cyb. iii.
236.
See littorale above.
Triticum [junceum) pungens, Pers.
Provinces 12 3 4 10.
Cornwall to York.
Syn. 1363.
Also in Sussex, Kent, Essex, and Cambridge.
Lolium italicum, Braun.
Provinces 1 to 16.
L. " multiflorum," of several localities.
Alien.
Cyb. iii.
238.
Abundantly sown in fields for hay, and 
accidentally sown among other crops.
Half naturalised.
Lolium linicola, Sonder.
Provinces - 2 - 10.
Sussex ; Salter !
York ; Ward.
Casual.
Cyb. iii.
239.
It is an Alien in France, according to 
Dr. Godron ; into which it is frequently brought with flax seeds 
from Riga.
Elymus geniculatus, Curtis.
Province -- 3.
Near Greenwich (or Gravesend) Kent ; Dickson.
Extinct?
Cyb. iii.
240.
Was it ever found really wild either 
598 87.
FILICES.
near Greenwioh or near Gravesend?
— {Elymus crinitus, an intro- 
duced casual, is enumerated in the Appendix to the Flora of 
Surrey.) 
Lepturus incurvatus, Trin.
Province - 15.
Fife, on ballast.
Doubtful elsewhere.
Casual?
Cyb. iii.
346.
L. filiformis is the usual form or species 
in Britain, and has been frequently recorded under the name of 
incurvatus.
I am not prepared either to assert or deny that true 
or typical incurvatus has occurred in this country except as a 
casual introduction on ballast heaps, etc.
Eleusine.
Chloris.
Lappago.
.Mgilops.
Crypsis.
Casuals.
In the Exchange Club Report for 18-58 we are told that 
Eleusine indica was found by Dr. Carrington, near Bury in 
Lancashire.
And in the same report Mess.
Hobkirk and Ingle 
are stated to have found the Chloris compressa and Lappago 
racemosa, with other exotics, near Huddersfield in Yorkshire.
^gilops ovata and Crypsis aculeata are enumerated among the 
various other introduced casuals, in the Appendix to the Flora of 
Surrey.
It seems little worth while more formally to notice these 
rarely seen grasses.
87.
FiLiCES.
Oymnogramme leptophylla, Desv.
Province - 15.
Aberdeen; Miss Veitoh,7?rfe W.
Tanner.
Error.
Cyb. iii.
370.
Phytologist iv.
600 & 716.
Polypodium (vulgare) camhricum, Linn.
Province - 6.
Glamorgan ; Hay's Synopsis.
Syn. 1374.
As being a monstrosity, rather than a variety, this 
should scarcely be admitted here, except on the ground that it is 
so usually noticed in a special manner in fern-books, and has 
formerly passed for a species of itself.
Polypodium vulgare is 
found with the pinnae ranging from quite entire to coarsely 
serrated or even deeply incised ; the canbricum form is a further 
grade of marginal indentation, with the pinnae irregularly or 
laciniately pinnatifid.
It is now a plant cultivated in Ferneries, 
but I am not aware of any certain locality for it wild in England.
Mr. Newman states that he has received it from Ireland.
Cystopteris (fragilis) dentata.
Hook.
Provinces 1 - - - 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 - - 15 16.
As reported.
Syn. 1379.
I do not pretend to distinguish this fern clearly from 
fragilis ; nor can their localities be satisfactorily apportioned 
between them.
C. angustata is even more unsatisfactory.
And 
C. regia seems to be truly but another name for the present 
segregate ; except in so far as it may have been applied to the 
alien G.
alpina.
87.
PILICES.
599 
Cystopteris (fragilis) Dickieana, " Sim.'' Newm.
Province - IS.
Aberdeen; Dickie!
Syn. 1370.
Phytol.
iv.
716.
Bot. Gaz.
ii.
310.
" This fern is 
known to botanists from a single locality only, a sea cave near 
Aberdeen, where it was found by Dr. Dickie; " Newman Hist.
ed.
8, page 94.
The fern itself is rather an aberrant production or 
monstrosity than a varietal segregate, much less a true species.
I should have small confidence indeed in the botanical judgment 
and experience of any one who could suppose it to have tenable 
claim to be held a distinct species.
Mr. Newman's figure, in the 
History, page 93 of edition third, represents a very extreme state 
of it.
(I have seen a corresponding instance, in barren fronds of 
Adiantum-nigrum grown in the corner of a room where the light 
was dim.) Four wild specimens of the fern are placed in my 
herbarium, from the Aberdeen locality, and given to me by 
Professor Dickie himself.
Three of these, which make the nearer 
approximation to Mr. Newman's iigure, are entirely barren.
The 
fourth is fertile or sori-bearing, and is at least half way from that 
figure to the ordinary fragilis as represented in the work of Mr.
Newman ; it might have quite well passed for dentata, apart from 
the dilated barren fronds.
Moreover, my garden-grown examples, 
living and dried, all diverge farther from Newman's figure, than 
do the three barren fronds given to me by Dr. Dickie from the 
wild locality.
If I were to judge exclusively by the fronds of 
Dickieana, whicb hitherto have come under my own inspection, 
I ought to suspect the sori-bearing fragment (represented alongside 
Newman's figure of the barren state) of being purely a fancy- 
sketch, a bit from a barren frond made fertile by the pencil of the 
draughtsman.
Mr. Newman will act wisely if he carefully pre- 
serve the scrap of frond so represented, in evidence of the truth 
of his figure.
Perhaps a similar tuft of barren fronds could be 
produced on a plant grown under cover and in dimmed light ; but 
I should despair of ever re-producing a fertile frond of that dilated 
and overlapping form ; is it not a great rarity ?
Cystopteris alpina, Desv.
Provinces 1-3.
Essex, supposed to have been planted.
Alien.
Cyb. iii.
259.
A letter from Mr. Edward Parfitt, of the 
Exeter Institution, dated in 1869, informed me that C.
alpina 
bad been " discovered by Miss Caroline Johnson, near Diptford, 
Totness." Mr. James Britten kindly gave me a frond, taken 
from a root sold by a Dealer, who had stated that he got it 
in Westmoreland in 1864.
Polystichum (lohat-um) aculeatum, Anglor.
Provinces 1 - 3 - IS.
And doubtless elsewhere.
Syn. 1383.
Cyb. iii.
361 — 3.
Although aculeatum, as English 
botanists usually apply the name, is a more developed form than 
GOO 8r.
piLicEg.
lobatum, it is conveniently treated here as the variety.
Apar£ 
from aculeatum there is now little confusion between lobatum and 
angulare in England ; they are easily distinguished from each 
other, and can scarcely be cpnfused if seen alive, matm-e, and full 
lengths ; though fragments in the dried state, especially from 
immature plants, may be difficult.
P. aculeatum, with a rigid 
and perfectly evergreen frond hke that of lobatum, still makes 
some approximation to amjulare in the cutting or divisions of the 
frond, especially of the pinnules ; and occasionally, when glued to 
paper in the herbarium, some specimens of it are not readily 
distinguished from the latter.
Moreover, the name aculeatum 
is used for Smith's angulare, by Milde and other continental 
botanists, as if the two ferns were absolutely identical ; although 
in England we mean by it a different fern, one more closely aMn 
to lobatum.
The book localities for " aculeatum " are divisible 
among the three ; some few really going to angulare, more of them 
belonging to lobatum.
I have seen no example of true angulare 
from Scotland ; nor any which I should call aculeatum ; but both 
are included in the Clydesdale Flora, by Mr. Hennedy.
A root of 
lobatum, brought from Glen Beg, in the Grampian mountains, ia 
1844, has remained permanently different, by colour and form, as 
well as manner of growth, from the aculeatum of Surrey, growing 
by it in the garden for a quarter of a century ; but 1 deem them 
too gradually united by intermediate forms from various localities, 
to be fairly separable as varietal segregates.
Mr. Briggs sent me 
the aculeatum from Cornwall ; and I have it from Northumber- 
land, sent by the late Mr. Storey.
Briefly, aculeatum is that form 
of lobatum which comes nearest to angulare ; this latter being as 
distinct from lobatum, as an apple-tree is from a pear-tree.
Lastrea (Filix mas) affinis, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces 1 2 3 - - - 7 - - 10 11 12 - - 15.
And others ?
Syn. 1387.
Mr. Newman figures single pinnse of two extreme 
forms, to represent this variety and the other which he calls 
Borreri.
Two extremes serve well to illustrate the range of 
variation ; but Mr. Newman himself admits the occurrence of 
" connecting links " between them.
In truth, anybody may find 
almost any number of such links ; some of them so evenly mid- 
way between the extremes, as to render it optional which varietal 
name to bestow upon them ; — or, more correctly, to render both 
names alike non-applicable to them.
Lastrea {Filix mas) Borreri, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces all ?
See the preceding.
Syn. 1387.
The " FilLv mas " is usuEilly represented by the' 
fronds which in texture and cutting are more or less middle inter- 
mediates between this and the preceding extreme.
87.
fujces.
601 
Lastrea (Filix mas) ahhreviata, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces - 10 11.
Ingleborough Hill, York.
Teesdale, Durham.
Syn. 1387.
This fern is not known to me.
Newman's beautiful 
work, the ' History of British Ferns,' is conveniently referred to 
for the three varieties of Filix mas ; but it should be mentioned 
that he has them under the generic name of Dryopteris, not that 
of Lastrea.
It is curious to note the discrepancies in the generic 
name adopted for this common fern by our three chief living 
Authors of British Floras ; Aspidium, by Bentham, Nephrodium, 
by Hooker, Lastreaj by Babington.
Of course Mr. Newman must 
look about for a different generic name, one not so likely to be 
adopted in books more stricliy botanical.
So again, in their turn, 
for the under-mentioned Lastreas or Aspidiums or Nephrodiums, 
the new name Lophodium is invented.
Great as have been the 
services of Mr. Newman, in elucidating our British Ferns, he has 
gone fer towards outbalancing them, by the great dis-serviee of 
adding a number of new and needless names to our super- 
abundant supply.
Lastrea (cristata) uliginosa, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces - - 3 4 - - - 8 9.
[15.
Kincardine, erroneously.] 
Syn. 1389.
Cyb. iii.
269.
See page 455, for some remarks on 
this fern.
Approximates to spinulosa in its cutting.
Lastrea (dilatata) glandulosa, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces - - 3 - 5.
Essex.
Gloucester.
[10.
York].
Syn. 1391.
This stands between dilatata and spinulosa, not 
satisfactorily assignable to either by the dried specimens alone, 
and I have not seen the plant alive.
As in the case of uliginosa, 
it presents the difficulty of an intermediate form, the dried fronds 
of which might be united with either, or made into a species not 
clearly distinguished from either.
L. dilatata has been sent to me 
labelled " glandulosa " by a good botanist ; I do not knmv that 
any one ever so labelled an example of spinulosa.
Lastrea {dilatata) collina, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces - 10 - 13.
York.
Westmoreland.
Syn. 1391.
A variety known to me by description only.
Lastrea (dilatata) nana, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces - 3 3 - - - 7 8 9 10 - 13 - - 15.
Sj'n.
1391.
This is the Aspididum dumstorum of Smith, as 
explained on page 486.
But the name may he intended also to 
cover a wider range of form than Smith's dumetorum ; for Mr.
Newman states that his nana is found in the woods of Sussex and 
Kent.
Of late years, I have sought and collected fem roots 
numerously in Surrey and the adjacent portions of Sussex and 
Hampshire, but have never met with anything at aU corresponding 
with Newman's figure of nana (originally given for dumetorum) or 
4 H 
602 87.
FILTCES.
with my half dozen fronds of Derbyshire dumetorum, mentioned 
on page 456 of this volume.
Pseudathyrium (alpestre) flexile, Newm.
Hist.
ed.
3, p.
303.
Province - IS.
Mid Perth.
Forfarshire ; Mr. Backhouse !
Syn. 1393.
Rather a puzzling fern.
Mr. Newman has omitted to 
tell us in the work quoted, by what special characters it is to he 
distinguished from P.
alpestre.
His figure appears to represent a 
fern in an abnormal state, a sort of monstrosity, as are so many 
other strange aberrations of ferns now in cultivation.
Of course, 
we accept the figure as the portrait of an individual, selected for 
its least likeness to alpestre.
Let us illustrate this mode of 
making or figuring species, by a fancy counterpart.
If a Zoologist 
should wish to make two species-on-paper out of Cards familiaris, 
he might draw a portrait of a strong and shaggy Newfoundland 
Dog, and then put in contrast a portrait of the slimmest of Italian 
Greyhounds.
No doubt the two figures would make very good 
species-on-paper, if taken by themselves, with all intermediate 
forms left conveniently out of sight and description.
Doubtless, 
a truth-seeker in their localities would easily make out the species 
to which flexile really belongs.
The new generic name Pseu- 
daihyrimn is used in my books because it so aptly expresses the 
affinity of this Polypodium with Athyrium Filixfcemina.
Athyrium {Filix fmmina) rhcBticum, Roth.
Provinces all ?
But authorities not clear.
Syn. 1394.
A characteristic figure of this, the " smaller form " 
of Fihx-fcemina, was given on page 63 of the first edition of 
Newman's History, repeated on page 307 of the third edition.
It 
includes the molls, convexum, and irriguwm, as figured in editions 
second and third.
Judging by the examples in my herbarium, 
supported by more local observation of late years, in Surrey and 
adjacent counties, this is much the commoner form or sub-species.
Athyrium (Filix fmmina) incisum, Newm.
Hist.
Provinces all ?
General ; Newman History.
Syn. 1394.
This is distinguished from the other form or sub- 
species by its larger size, more upright growth, more compound 
frond, thicker and more scaly stipes, pinnae usually commencing 
abruptly far up the stipes, not extended in a gradually decreasing 
size almost to its base, and by the less numerous fronds, which 
are not produced in such continued succession through the 
summer, as on the smaller form.
In the garden, and in the 
wilds where it can grow clear from other herbage, the indicated 
characters are well marked ; but when the rhaticum has to push 
through other herbage, its lower shortened pinnse are few or 
absent.
I incline much to believe in two fairly distinct "sub- 
species," as here explained.
In the other named forms (aU 
87.
FiLiCES.
603 
belonging to rh(Bticum ?) I can see only varieties, variations, 
aberrations.
Athyrium (Filix fmmiyid) ovatum, Newm.
Phytol.
Province - 13.
Keswick, Cumberland.
Extinct there ?
Syn. 1394.
Cyb. iii.
373—4.
Phytol.
iv.
369 & 646.
The 
variety latifolium of Babington and other describers.
Phegopteris plumosa, J.
Smith.
Province - 10.
Yorkshire, a single plant ?
Syn. 1394.
A curious aberration of Filicc fcemina, at first sight 
suggesting the subgenus Allantodea, rather than Athyrium.
Asplenium fontanum, Presl.
Provinces - 3 3 - - - 7 8 - 10 11 13 - - 15.
Ambiguity.
Alien or Errors ?
Cyb. iii.
375 & 520.
Reported 
from the counties of Dorset, Hants, Kent, Surrey, Bucks, Merio- 
neth, Derby, York, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Cumberland, 
and Kincardine.
All or nearly all these dozen counties become 
inadmissible when critically inquired into.
In addition to the 
references given in the Cybele Britannica, two other locahty- 
claims have been put forth in the Manual of British Botany, 
namely " Ashford, Hants," and " Northumberland." Does the 
former of these intend the locality of or near " Ashfield Lodge," as 
reported in the Phytologist for 1853, with Mr. W.
H. Hawker's 
testimony to the fern being " truly a native of the locaUty "?
If 
so, its nativity there is ill sustained by the following extract from 
a letter written by a celebrated Pteridologist, in November, 1853 ; 
namely, " A correspondence with the Rev. W.
Hawker fixes the 
Hants habitat oi fontanum on ' the inside wall of a garden.' " The 
wide habitat of " Northumberland " is not accepted by the Authors 
of the New Flora of Northumberland and Durham, dated in 1868.
It is to be feared that " Asplenium fontanum" ought still to go to 
the category of errors.
Asplenium (Triehomanes) anceps, Lowe.
Provinces - - 3 - 15.
And very likely in others between.
Syn. 1396.
Cyb. iii.
277.
This is a large state, rather than 
a distinctly different variety of Triehomanes.
As found on the 
hedgebanks, in some of the lanes in South-west Surrey, it closely 
resembles the anceps of Madeira and the Azore Isles.
Asplenium (Adiantum nigrum) productum, Lowe.
Provinces - - 3 - ?
Surrey !
Stratford-on-Avou ?
Syn. 1399.
A very elongate form of the species, but traceable 
through transition links into the more usual form.
I have not 
seen English examples so slenderly divided as the aciitum of 
Ireland, figured in Newman's History.
My longest English 
example measures about twenty inches, stipes all included ; its 
lowest pinna exceeding four inches ; all the pinnae being much 
604 88.
LTCOPODIACE^.
produced at their tips.
On placing together a number of speci- 
mens from Spain, Italy, Madeira, Canaries, and Azores, they 
appear entirely to connect the extreme acutum, through Virgilii 
and productuni, with our English Adiantum nigrum; it being 
impossible to find any decided line or place of severance.
Even 
the figure of the Irish acutum, in Nevrman's History, has not 
quite the extreme of fineness or slenderness in subdivision of the 
frond ; a Spanish example, brought from Castille by Mr. John 
Ball, being even more finely divided.
Trichomanes radicans, Sw.
Provinces - 7 - 10 - 16.
10.
Extinct ?
7—16.
Planted ?
Ambiguity.
Cyb. iii.
387.
Carnarvon ; a Guide.
York ; Dr.
Richardson, in Ray's Synopsis.
Arran ; Mr. George Combe.
Argyle ; Mr. Young.
" A very questionable native " ; Clydesdale 
Flora.
Botrychium rutaceum, Swartz.
Newman.
Provinces - 13 - 15.
Westmoreland?
Forfar?
Ambiguity.
Three examples of Botrychium, all irregular in form, 
were found by Mr. Cruickshank, on the sands of Barry, near 
Dundee, in 1839 ; a locality where the Lmnaria is said to be 
frequent.
These were referred by Mr. Newman vpith confidence 
to rutaceum.
Three species of Botrychium have been recorded 
heretofore as British ; appearing in Gray's Arrangement under the 
names of lunatum, rutaceum, and matricari-oides.
The first of 
these three intended Lunaria.
Ray had put together the two last, 
apparently as a second species, found in Westmoreland.
Pro- 
bability leans to the side of B.
rutaceum being actually a British 
fern, but confirmation is needed.
Onoclea sensibilis, Linn.
Provinces - 9 10-13.
Warrington.
North York.
Lake Lane.
Planted Alien.
Phytol.
i. 492.
Alton in Jopling's C.
& F.
88.
Lycopodiace^.
L/ycopodium eomplanatum, Linn.
Provinces - 3 -- 6.
Near Bramshot, Hants ?
Worcestershire?
Error?
Bab. man.
ed.
6, p.
445.
Leefe msc.
Lycopodium helveticum, Linn.
Selaginella helvetica.
Provinces 1 - 3.
Mendip, Somerset.
Middlesex ?
Error.
Cyb. iii.
398.
Phytologist iv.
384.
Correspondence of 
Linneus and other Naturalists ii.
134.
Isoetes ilLacustris) echinospora, Dur.
Provinces   7 15 16.
Carn.
Kinc.
Dumb.
Elsewhere?
Syn. 1418.
Bab. Man.
ed.
v. & vi.
Journal of Botany i.
3. 
90.
EQCiSETACE^a:.
605 
90.
Eqdisetace^.
Equisetum (limosum) fluviatile, Linn, (not of Smitli).
Provinces all ?
But not all actually certified.
Syn. 1425.
Cyb. iii.
307.
The name fluviatile has been used in 
various books for the species subsequently known as Telmateia, 
and quite recently among us re-named maximum.
It has also 
been used for the branched state of E.
limosum, as here intended.
It has likewise been supposed to stand for some third species, 
distinct from both of those here mentioned ; but that third 
species seems to be only a book supposition.
Equisetum trachyodon, A.
Braun.
E. Mackaii, Newm.
Province - 15.
Den of Airly.
Dee river, Aberdeenshire.
Ambiguity.
Phytol.
i. 174 & 376.
No specimens of this plant 
having come under my own inspection, it was left out of the 
Synopsis, in accordance with the rule stated on page 64.
If I 
could have felt satisfied about the reality of the species, from 
reading the book descriptions of it, adherence to the strict rule 
might have been waived in the case of an Equisetum adopted as a 
species equally by Newman and Babington.
Equisetum (yariegatum) Wilsoni, Newm.
Province - 15.
By the Dee, Aberdeen or Kincardine.
Syn. 1428.
" Probably a large form " of E.
variegatum ; Bab.
Man. The E.
arenarium is an opposite form, small and prostrate 
or procumbent.
V. NOTES AND COEEECTIONS.
This volume has been printed in three separated Parts, dated 
in 1868, 1869, 1870 ; the several Parts having been written 
chiefly in the years preceding those dates.
Some additional 
information has been obtained during the years named.
The 
Clydesdale Flora, by Eoger Kennedy, a well written and 
apparently a very reliable work, remained entirely unknown to 
me, while writing the First and Second Parts.
And as my 
information about the botany of the western provinces of Scotland 
was incomplete, mostly old, and not quite reliable in many cases, 
the Clydesdale Flora has been since found a most useful 
acquisition.
The Second Edition, dated in 1869, the one quoted 
from in the following pages, enables me to add provinces 13 or 1 6 
to the areas of various plants, which before had not been ascer- 
tained to occur in the West Lowland or West Highland 
provinces ; two of those in regard to which our floral lists might 
be deemed least completed.
And I have been usefully aided in 
like manner for the same provinces by manuscript notes kindly 
sent by Mr. Gait of Glasgow.
Mr. Archer Briggs, a resident of Plymouth, has kindly com- 
municated various acceptable facts about the plants of the 
Peninsula, and the extension into Cornwall of some species not 
before ascertained for that most westerly county of England.
And 
Mr. A.
G. More has also most obligingly gone over the two Parts, 
in order to test the accuracy of the usual citation of "Wight" 
in the series of southern counties ; pointing out some needed 
corrections, which his own more thorough knowledge of the island 
botany enabled him to make.
V. NOTES AND COEEECTIONS.
607 
Those four sources, with the Annual Reports of the Exchange 
Cluhj and other Contributions to the Journal of Botany, supply 
most of the added facts in the following pages, which lead to 
alterations in the provincial areas, and in the southern or northern 
counties, as before indicated for the plants treated in the 
' Synopsis of Species * on pages 79 — 420.
Eventually, and perhaps already to some extent, there will 
doubtless be most need of corrections in the " Additional List " as 
printed on pages 473 — 605.
Corrections of that List wiU be the 
gradual work of many botanical observers, spread over many years 
to come.
As given on preceding pages, that very miscellaneous 
list will be found an useful summary towards shewing what is 
already known or recorded about the plants and their places, and 
through the references introduced it will usually direct readers to 
other sources for more ample information than could be conveyed 
here in the abbreviated forms used.
I. Clematis Vitalba, Linn.
Localities in East Cornwall are 
reported by Mr. Archer Briggs.
9. Adonis autumnalis, Linn.
I believe this is as wild and as 
well established in the Isle of Wight, as in any part of England ; 
A. G.
More, msc.
II.
Ranunculus trichophylhis, Chaix.
Province 16.
" This is 
the only form of the old B.
aquatilis growing in the Island of 
Cumbrae"; W.
Gait, msc.
Cumbrae, Bute, and Arran ; Clydes- 
dale Flora.
11.
Ranunculus fluitans, Lam. The authority for the specific 
name is misprinted ' Linn.' 
13.
Ranunculus Lenomandi, Sohultz.
Province 16.
Island 
of Cumbrae ; W.
Gait, msc.
14.
Ranunculus Ficaria, Linn.
Province 16.
Cumbrae ; W.
' Gait, msc.
Very common ; Clydesdale Flora.
38.
Nuphar pumila, DC.
"Mr. Wilson informs me that this 
is growing at Oulton.
If so, province 9 must be added.
I have 
a specimen from Shropshire " ; J.
F. Robinson, msc.
But see 
page 478, for doubts about this plant.
58.
Coronopus Buellii, Gaertn.
Province 16.
Cumbrae ; W.
Gait, msc.
608 V.
NOTES AND COEEECTIONS.
75.
Braba aizoides, Linn.
Mr. T.
B. Flower's inquiries 
elicited an assurance that the report of this having been found in 
Somerset is incorrect.
98.
Nasturtium officinale, Brown.
Found in Shetland ; A.
C. 
Christie.
101.
Nasturtium amphibium, Brown.
The county of Lanark 
is very doubtful.
Though recorded by Hopkirk " on the banks of 
the Clyde, frequent," Mr. Kennedy has not been able to find this 
plant there.
Does it really occur in Dumfries-shire, as reported ?
106.
Erysimum cheiranthoides, Linn.
This has been intro- 
duced in the neighbourhood of Frodsham, Cheshire, vrfth agri- 
cultural seeds, and is now well established as a Colonist there, in 
province 9 ; J.
F. Robinson, msc.
120.
Sinapis tenuifolia, Brown.
Isle of Wight, in 1869 ; 
F. Stratton.
Must have been recently introduced, at the building 
of the Forts ; A.
G. More, msc.
125.
Reseda lutea, Linn.
Province 15.
Possibly native in 
the county of Fife.
135.
Viola canina, Bab. Man.
Provinces 13 - - 16.
Cathkin 
hiUs, in Lanarkshire ; Gourook hUls, in Renfrewshire ; W.
Gait, 
msc.
Cumbrae; Ditto.
136.
Viola Curtisii, " Bab. Man." Provinces 13 - - 16.
Ayr- 
shire coast, from Largs to Ardrossan ; Cumbrae ; W.
Gait, msc.
145.
Dianthus prolifer, Linn.
Province [1.
South Devon ; 
Eavenshaw's Flora of Devon.] 
150.
Dianthus deltoides, Linn.
" I should exclude it alto- 
gether from the Isle of Wight list, until it can be shown 
thoroughly established at some distance from cultivation ; until 
then I do not think it deserves even the (Wight)"; A.
G. More, 
msc.
183.
Arenaria trinervia, Linn.
Province 16 to be added.
Common ; Clydesdale Flora.
183.
Holosteum umhellatum, Linn.
[Province 16.] Hills at 
Bowling ; Clydesdale Flora.
This is a record which can hardly 
he accepted, unless on very special testimony to its accuracy ; and 
no sort of remark or explanation is added in the excellent Flora 
quoted.
197.
Radiola millegrana.
Smith.
Province 14 not to be 
excepted.
A locality for the East Lowlands is given in Dr.
Johnston's ' Natural History of the Eastern Borders.' In the 
Flora of Berwick, by the same Author, the locality of Ancroft 
moor, in Oheviotland, is given on page 43 ; a locality and plant 
apparently overlooked by the Authors of the ' New Flora of 
V. NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.
609 
Northumberlaud and Durham.' The plant would seem to be 
very rare in provinces 11 and 14, but not wholly absent from 
either.
210.
Lavatera arhorea, Linn.
Provinces 13 -- (16).
"Con- 
sidered native on Ailsa Craig.
Occurring as an outcast of gardens 
in Cumbrae, Bute, and Arran"; Clydesdale Flora.
ai5.
Hypericum perforatum , TJmn. Province 16.
Cumbrae; 
W, Gait, msc.
Arran ; Clydesdale Flora.
233.
Geranium rotundifolium, Linn.
In East Cornwall ; 
T. R.
Archer Briggs !
240.
Geranium sanguineum, Linn.
The two names " Wight, 
Kent " have been mis-printed by repetition from the preceding 
species ; the southern counties ought to have run " Cornwall, 
Dorset, Essex." 
247.
Rhamnus Frangula, Linn.
Province 17 is indicated ; 
but the northern county " Ross" is omitted from the next line.
255.
Ononis spinosafJAmx. Say "Sussex" instead of "Wight" 
for south range.
" Look to Bromfield's latest remarks, in the 
Phytologist iii.
278, where it is shown that he was only latterly 
acquainted with the right plant.
I could never find spinosa in 
the Isle of Wight, and am even not quite satisfied as to South 
Hants " ; A.
Q. More, msc.
266.
Trifolium ornithopodioides, Linn.
Stated to occur in 
Madeira, but the reference is not at hand.
292.
Arthrolohium ebracteatum, DC.
Correct the reference to 
Phytologist, which should be page 386, not 366.
298.
Vicia angustifolia, Auct.
Province 16 to be added, on 
authority of the Clydesdale Flora.
300.
Vicia lutea, Linn.
Enclose (Wight).
Mr. A.
G. More 
thinks there may have been some mistake about this in the Isle 
of Wight, unless simply as an introduced plant.
310*.
Lathyrus tuberosum, Linn.
Add a reference to the 
Journal of Botany, no.
70, p.
319.
332.
Potentilla procumbens, Anct.
Province 16 to be added, 
on authority of the Clydesdale Flora.
332.
Potmtilla Fragariastrum, Ehrh.
In the Clydesdale 
Flora this is indicated as " very common " ; which may warrant 
the addition of province 16, and thus complete the series.
338.
Rubus saxatilis, Linn.
Province 1.
Devon ; Archer 
Briggs !
The Cornish locality, recorded on the single and somewhat 
unsafe authority of the late Mr. Bree, may now be regarded with 
less distrust.
1 I 
610 V.
NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.
340*.
Eitbus corylifolius, Sm.
" Very common " ; Clydesdale 
Flora.
This may warrant the addition of province 16.
343.
Rosa Sahinl, Woods.
Geneva, France, Belgium ; Journal 
of Botany, viii.
161.
344.
Rosa tnolUssima.
Enclose the [Isle of Wight ; A.
G. 
More].
Mr. More deems the Vectian rose a form of towentosa, 
not rightly placed under this villosa aggregate.
343.
Rosa to7nentosa, Sm. Add the Isle of Wight, in the 
south hne, as above.
Cornwall ; Archer Briggs !
362.
Pyrus communis, Linn.
" This might have ' Wight' men- 
tioned in the southern line.
Though I believe it not aboriginal in 
the Isle; still, it is probably not less wild there than in other 
parts of South England.
By omitting ' Wight' it seems as if the 
plant were not known in the island"; A.
G. More, mso.
364.
Pyrus torminalis, Ehrh.
Province 9.
Delamere Forest, 
truly wild ; J.
F. Eobinson, mso.
371.
Epilobium roseum, Schreb.
Not wild in the Isle of 
Wight.
It occurs in South Hants and Sussex.
374.
Epilobium alpinum, Linn.
Province 12 certainly.
Gathered on Cross-fell, Cumberland, by the Rev. Frederic Addi- 
son ; this hill being politically in the county named, although 
more properly belonging to the chain of hills mostly included in 
province 11.
The base of the flowering stem being absent from 
Mr. Addison's specimen, it is impossible to say confidently to 
which segregate of alpinum the specimen belongs.
374*.
Epilobium alsinifolium, Vill.
Province 18.
Reported 
for Shetland by Mr. A.
C. Christie.
378.
Circaa alpina, Linn.
Supposed to have been really 
found in Warwickshire, but as an escape from the garden of 
Mr. Boultby.
381.
Myriophyllwm spicatum, Linn.
" Carnarvon" is purely a 
mis-print for "Cornwall"; a substitution which escaped detection 
in correcting the proof.
384.
Callitriche platycarpa,.K\itz.
Mentioned in the Journal 
of Botany, v.
348, as C.
stagnalis.
Scop.
436.
Parnassia p)aluslris, Linn.
Dorset is correct ; the plant 
having been found there by Mr. Mansel, in 1868.
449.
Cicuta virpsa, Linn.
The "?" should be affixed to 
" Dorset" also ; the existence of the plant in that county requires 
verification.
Sussex is probably coiTeot ; but OenantJte flurintilis 
has been occasionally mislabelled Cicuta.
V. NOTES AXD CORRECTIONS.
611 
459.
Carum verticillatum, Koch.
A mis-print "]" seems to 
throw doubt on province 16 for this plant.
470.
CEnatitJie Jistulosa, Linn.
Provinces 13 and 16 require 
verification.
Lachenalii, ill understood when the ' Flora Glot- 
tiana' was written, may have then been misnamed ^stotosa.
475.
^thusa Cynapium, Linn.
Province 16 to be added.
Gumbrae ; Clydesdale Mora.
477.
Seseli Libanotis, Koch.
The authority for the name has 
been inadvertently written "Linn." The plant is Athamanta 
Libanotis of Linneus.
511.
LAnnaa borealis, Gronov.
A similar error here.
Ber- 
wickshire; Johnston's Natural History of the Eastern Borders.
537.
Valerianella dentata, Koch.
Province 16 also.
Londes- 
borough's locahty in Arran, road to Loch Ranza, is correct; 
W. Gait, msc.
604.
Carduus pratensis, Huds.
Erase the words " Humber 
between 150 — 400 yards"; they related to lieterophyllm, and were 
accidentally misplaced to pratensis.
612.
Centaurea Cyanits, Linn.
Province (16) to be added.
Gumbrae ; Clydesdale Flora.
This is one of the instances where 
it becomes almost optional whether to designate the plant a 
Colonist, or to regard it as a Casual only, in the northern 
provinces.
630.
Gnaplialium sylvaticum, Linn.
Isle of Wight very un- 
certain.
" I should think rather a mistake of the plant.
I do not 
think it ever was gathered in the Isle of Wight"; A.
G. More.
630*.
Gnaphalium norvegicum, Gunn.
Perth; Eng. Bot.
3. 
641*.
Aster salignus, Willd.
Province 11.
" Aster salicifolius, 
D. I have found this American growing by the Tweed-side 
opposite Fishwick-mains ; and I have been told that it has almost 
naturaUsed itself in Hirsel woods on the Leet"; Johnston's 
Eastern Borders, page 102.
See also page 533 of this volume.
667.
Anthemis nobilis, Linn.
Perhaps ought to be accepted 
as a native in province 16.
Mr. Gait writes, " Formerly of frequent 
occurrence in Gumbrae ; still got though much rarer, having been 
mostly dug up and transplanted into gardens." See also the 
Clydesdale Flora.
694.
Eiica vagans, Linn.
Province [11].
New Flora of 
Northumberland and Durham, page 207.
705.
VacciniumVitis-IdiEa, Lian.
Shetland; A.
Craig Christie.
Not unlikely, but I am unprepared to say what rehance can be 
placed on the additional plants of Shetland reported under that 
gentleman's name, which was otherwise unknown to me.
613 V.
NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.
706.
Vaccinium.
Oxycoccos, Linn.
Isle of Wight.
" Plentiful 
in one locality, where Bromfleld and Salter both gathered it"; 
A. G.
More, msc.
716.
Vinca minor, Linn.
Mr. Kobinson writes, "w-itliout a 
doubt truly wild in Appleton Dingle, Cheshire." 
728.
Polemonmm caruleum, Linn.
Insert (9).
'' I have found 
this in Cheshire, hut must confess it generally looks suspicious"; 
J. F, Kobinson, msc.
768.
Melampyrum cristatum, Linn.
Truly native in provinces 
3 and 4, not a colonist, according to the Eev. W.
W. Newbould.
790.
Orohanche rapum, Thuil.
" I take this to be O.
major of 
Linneus, who states that it is parasitic especially on Leguminosm, 
and quotes for it the Rapum genistm of Lobel"; Student's Flora, 
page 375.
791.
Orohanche " lucorum." Mr. Borrer appears to have been 
correct in referring the Surrey plant, thus named, to elatior, 
instead of to caryophyllacea.
Cyb. Brit.
iii.
475.
807.
Mentha sativa, Linn.
Isle of Wight, in two localities.
" At Yar Bridge it seems quite wUd enough ; and Mr. Hambrough 
considers the other locality satisfactory ; so I believe it may very 
well pass as a native"; A.
G. More, msc.
846.
Scutellaria minor, Linn.
It occurs in the Peninsula of 
India; Dr. Hooker, C.
B. 
854.
Myosotis versicolor, Lehm.
By an unlucky misprint at 
the top of page 380 the specific name palustris has been sub- 
stituted for that of versicolor.
It should be corrected by the pen ; 
the unsightly look being less objectionable than the misleading 
error of press.
868.
Pulmonaria angusiifolia, Linn.
Reported to occur also 
in Somerset, but until specimens can be certified by some critical 
botanist, the province of the Peninsula [1] must remain within the 
distrusted enclosure.
888.
Lysimachia nummularia, Linn.
This is found in Stir- 
lingshire by Mr. Gait, well established or perhaps indigenous.
893.
C'entunculus minimus, Linn.
The county of Aberdeen 
may be substituted for that of Kincardine, in the north limit.
906.
Littorella lacustris, Linn.
Said to occur in Canada.
It 
is curious to see the order Plantaginacem placed between, and thus 
separating, the closely allied Solanacecs and Scrophidariacece, in 
'The Student's Flora.' 
V. NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.
613 
940.
Polygonum Rail, Bab. Province 10 to be inserted.
Found in Yorkshire, in lb67, by Mr. T.
J. Foggitt.
945.
Piumex pratensis, M.
& K.
Province 14 to be added for 
this very unsatisfactory species.
958.
Asarum europaum, Linn.
Bucks and Berks to be added 
as counties for this plant, with Oxford more dubiously.
See 
Journal of Botany, vol.
viii.
pp.
84 & 161.
1011.
Salix aurita, Linn.
Accidentally omitted at the top of 
page 316, this is given on page 561 instead.
1030, b.
Juniperus nana, Willd.
Erase the " 0" after Ireland.
This does occur in several stations in Ireland, and is mentioned 
under vulgaris in the Cybele Hibernica.
1038.
Listera ovata.
Brown.
Isle of Wight, common ; A.
G. 
More, msc.
1041.
CephalantJiera grandiflora.
Bah. It has really occurred 
in the Isle of Wight, and may not be extinct there; A.
G. More, 
msc.
1078.
Fritillaria Meleagris, Linn.
Province 1 should perhaps 
escape from the enclosure.
Mr. Flower writes to me, " This plant 
grows in some plenty in Philips Norton, Somerset, where it has 
been observed ' for ages ' and considered truly wild." 
1089.
Allium oleraceum, Linn.
Isle of Wight; A.
G. More, 
msc.
1087.
Oagea lutea, Kerr.
Sussex ; E.
B. 3.
1088.
Oimithogalum pyrenaicum, Liinu.
Provinces.
Glouces- 
tershire, according to English Botany, third edition.
1094.
Muscari racemosum, MUl. Province (1).
The name is 
included in a list of Somerset plants, compiled by Mr. Flower, in 
1869.
1096.
Asparagus officinalis, Linn.
The wild prostrate form is 
alleged to have been found in Dorset, in 1869.
IIOS.
Polygonatum officinale.
All. Dorset; E.
B. 3.
1126.
Potamogeton lucens, Linn.
Never found by me in the 
Isle of Wight ; and I fear a mistake, as I know the supposed 
locality quite well ; A.
G. More, msc.
1139.
Lemna gibba, Linn.
Province 13 to be added.
Forth 
and Clyde canal ; Clydesdale Flora.
1141*.
Wolffia arhiza, Wimm.
As yet, known only in pro- 
vince 3.
The county of " Hants," in province 2, was an error for 
" Kent," through misreading the name in a letter penned in a 
very small handwriting.
614 V.
NOTES AND COERECTIONS.
1146.
SjMrganium ramosum, Ilads.
Northward to Shetland ; 
A. C.
Christie.
1153.
Juncus glaucus, Sibth.
Province 16 to be added.
Cumbrae and Arran ; Clydesdale Flora.
1158.
Juncus ohtusiflonis, Ehrh.
Northward to Kenfrew, 
according to the Clydesdale Flora.
1159.
Juncus supinus, Moench.
A misprint of " S.E. Low- 
lands?" which intended " S.W. Lowlands?" 
1164.
Juncus castaneus, Linn.
Perhaps the county of Dum- 
barton, not that of Argyle.
See Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
1165.
Juncus trifidus, Linn.
Province 18.
This occurs in 
Shetland, according to Mr. A.
C. Christie.
(See Vaccinium Vitis- 
Idaa on page 611.) 
1174.
Luzula arcuata, Hook.
At 3000 feet in East Inverness, 
according to Dr. White.
1175.
Luzula spicata, DC.
This occurs in Shetland, according 
to Mr. A.
0. Christie.
1181.
Bhyncosporafusca, Sm. Found in Hampshire, mainland, 
according to English Botany, edition third.
1182.
Blysmus compressus, Paiiz.
In Edinburgh and Renfrew, 
according to Eng. Bot.
ed.
3 ; the latter county being to the 
northward of Ayr. B.
rufus is occasionally thus mis-named.
1197.
Scirpus acicularis, Linn.
Province 16 to be added ; 
and perhaps also 18.
Arran j Clydesdale Flora.
Shetland; 
A. Craig Christie.
1204.
Carex dioica, Ijinn.
" Shap wick Moors, Glastonbury"; 
T. B.
Flower, msc.
So far Province 1 is confirmed.
1208.
Carex incurva, Lightf.
Province 11.
The no.
of this 
province is accidentally omitted, although a locality in it "Holy 
Isle " is named in the succeeding line.
1216.
Carex Boenninghauseniana, Willd.
Wight !
Parsonage 
Lynch, the only locality I know for it in the Isle of Wight; 
A. G.
More, sp.
1223*.
Carex paradoxa,'W^di.
Province 4.
County of Nor- 
folk ; Bab. Man.
1280.
Alopecu7-usfulvus, Sm. Province 9.
Chester; C.
Bailey !
N.B. The name of agrestis has been used inadvertently, instead of 
geniculatus, in the last line of page 383.
1286.
Polypogon monspeliensis, Desf.
Isle of Wight ; F.
Stratton.
Must have been recently introduced, at the building of 
the forts ; A.
G. More.
V. NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.
615 
1307.
Avena fatua, Linn.
Province (13).
"Very rare.
. .
. 
Near Uddingston"; Clydesdale Flora.
1311.
Avena flavescens, Lmv. Provinces 13 and 16.
"Very 
rare.
Below Fairlie, on the sandy pastures ; Island of Arran ; 
sometimes introduced with seeds"; Clydesdale Flora.
1341*.
Festuca Pseudo-Myuriis, Soy. Occurs in the Isle of 
Wight, according to Mr. A.
G. More.
1359.
Triticum caninum, Huds.
Enclose [Wight].
I believe 
not growing in the Isle, as neither Dr. Salter nor I could find it ; 
A. G.
More, msc.
1381.
Cystopteris montana, Liink.
In Canada; The Journal 
of Botany, for 1870, page 129.
1384.
Polystichum angulare, Newm.
Provinces 13 and 16, by 
the records.
" Woods at Skelmorlie, very plentiful ; several glens 
below and towards Largs; Cumbrae and Arran"; Clydesdale 
Flora.
1387.
Lastrea Folix-mas, Presl.
This fern is alleged to grow 
in Canada; but it is not admitted by Dr. Gray into the flora of 
the Northern States.
1389.
Lastrea cristata, Presl.
Province 13.
" On the edge 
of a loch beyond Crofthead, parish of Neilston, Eenfrewshire ; first 
discovered by Dr. Walker Arnott and Mr. Clark, Curator of the 
Glasgow Botanic Gardens"; W.
Gait, msc.
and spec.
14lii.
Lyoopodium clavatum, Linn.
On St. Boniface Down, 
in the Isle of Wight ; A.
G. More, msc.
CYBELE BRITANNICA.
Volumes I.
to IV.
1847—1859.
(Price reduced to Bs. each Volume, after 1870.) 
The publication of this present Compendium, as a condensed 
reprint of the first three volumes of the original work, corrected to 
the more advanced knowledge of its subject in 1867 — 1869 (the 
years in v^hioh the three successively printed Parts -were chiefly 
written), must largely supersede the scientific usefulness of the 
original work.
Unless for its fourth volume, the larger edition of 
the Cyhele Britannica can no longer be deemed a work necessary 
to those botanists who concern themselves with the geographical 
or topographical connexions of British Plants.
The time has now 
come when the general tendency to cheapen books can be met 
without injustice to those persons who purchased the four volumes, 
or any of them singly, from the Publishers at their price of ten 
shillings a volume.
The Author has wished to send free copies of the Compendium 
— Parts 1, 3, 3, as printed — to every Possessor of the original 
work.
But it was impossible for him to ascertain exactly the 
names and addresses of all such parties, even of those at home in 
Britain ; while in one instance an application for the Compendium 
came from a purchaser of the Cyhele Britannica in far distant 
China.
He still invites any such Possessor of the original work 
to apply to him for a free copy of the Compendium, as a necessary 
supplement thereto.
After 1870 this Compendium will be ob- 
tainable through booksellers, at the publishing price of ten 
shillings the completed volume.
It will then become optional 
with topographico-botanical writers, either to test their own ob- 
servations by the condensed records given in this work, or to go 
on re-announcing in print what has been already suflSciently 
certified by others or shewn to be certainly erroneous.
INDEX TO NAMES.
N.B. Pages up to 420 will distinguish plants treated in the ' Synopsis of Species.' 
Acantlius 
mollis, 543 
Acer 
campestre, 132 
Pseudo-platanus, 494 
Aceras 
anthropophora, 327 
Achillea 
asplenufoUa, 535 
decolorans, 535 
Millefolium, 237 
nobilis, 535 
Ptarmioa, 236 
serrata, 535 
tanacetifolia, 535 
tomentosa, 535 
Aconitum 
Napellus, 87 
Acorus 
Calamus, 248 
Actaea 
spicata, 87 
Actinocarpus 
Damasonium, 339 
Adiantum 
Oapillus- Veneris, 415 
Adonis 
autumnalis, 80, 607 
Adoxa 
moschatellina, 184 
^gilops 
ovata, 598 
^gopodium 
Podagraria, 188 
^thusa 
Cynapium, 193, 611 
Agrimonia 
Eupatoria, 165 
odorata, 165 
Agrostemma 
Githago, 117 
Agrostis 
alba, 387 
canina, 386 
pumila, 593 
setacea, 386 
stolonifera, 593 
vulgaris, 386 
Aira 
alpina, 389 
csespitosa, 388 
canescens, 390 
caryophyllea, 389 
flexuosa, 389 
prsBCox, 389 
uliginosa, 593 
Ajax 
lobularis, 580 
Ajuga 
alpina, 546 
Cbamsepitys, 272 
genevensis, 546 
pyramidalis, 272 
reptans, 271 
Alchemilla 
alpina, 166 
arvensis, 166 
conjuncta, 510 
men tana, 510 
vulgaris, 166 
4 K 
618 
INDEX.
Alisma 
lanceolatum, 582 
natans, 339 
Plantago, 339 
ranunculoides, 339 
repens, 583 
Allium 
ambiguum, 581 
Ampeloprasum, 681 
arenarium, 332 
Babingtonii, 581 
carinatum (Linn.), 581 
carinatum (Sm.), 681 
complanatum, 581 
nigrum, 581 
oleraceum, 332, 613 
pavadoxum, 581 
roseum, 581 
Schoenoprasum, 333 
Scorodoprasum, 832 
sibiricum, 581 
sphaerooephalum, 332 
triquetrum, 581 
iirsinum, 333 
vineale, 332 
AUosorus 
crispus, 408 
Alnus 
glutinosa, 312 
Alopecurus 
agrestis, 384 
alpinus, 383 
bulbosus, 384 
fulvus, 383, 6J4 
geniculatus, 383 
paludosus, 383 
pratensis, 383 
"pronus, 592 
(Phalaris.) 
Althaea 
hirsuta, 493 
officinalis, 198 
Alyssum 
calyciuum, 482 
incanum, 482 
maritimum, 482 
Amaranthus 
Blitum, 552 
retroflexus, 552 
Ammi 
majus, 519 
Visnaga, 519 
Ammopbila 
arundinaoea, 387 
Anacharis 
Alsinastrum, 582 
Anagallis 
arvensis, 287 
cserulea, 550 
phoenioea, 551 
tenella, 288 
Anchusa 
officinalis, 548 
sempervirens, 282 
Andromeda 
curta, 537 
polifolia, 242 
Anemone 
apennina, 474 
nemorosa, 80 
Pulsatilla, 80 
ranunculoides, 475 
Angelica 
, sylvestris, 195 
Anthemis 
anglica, 535 
arvensis, 236 
Cotula, 236 
maritima, 535 
mixta, 535 
nobilis, 236, 611 
tinctoria, 535 
tomentosa, 535 
valentina, 535 
Antherioum 
(Lloydia.) 
Antboxanthum 
odoratum, 381 
Anthriscus 
Crefolium, 590 
sylvestris, 198 
vulgaris, 198 
Anthyllis 
Dillenii, 407 
INDEX.
619 
vulneraria, 139 
Antirrhinum 
majus, 641 
Orontium, 262 
Apargia 
(Leontodon.) 
Apera 
interrupta, 386 
Spica-venti, 385 
Apium 
graveolens, 187 
Aquilegia 
vulgaris, 86 
Arabis 
cUiata, 483 
hirsuta, 100 
hispida, 483 
petraea, 99 
stricta, 99 
thaliana, 99 
Turrita, 483 
Arbutus 
alpiiia, 342 
Uva-ursi, 24-2 
Archangelica 
officinalis, 520 
Arctium 
Bardaua, 530 
intermedium, 530 
Lappa, 530 
majus, 219 
minus, 219 
nemorosum, 530 
pubens, 530 
tomentosum, 530 
Aremonia 
agrimonioides, 501 
Arenaria 
fastigiata, 491 
Gerardi, 491 
laricifoUa, 491 
leptoclados, 491 
Lloydii, 491 
montana, 491 
norvegica, 120 
rubella, 121 
serpyllifolia, 120 
sphserocarpa, 491 
tenuifolia, 121 
trinervia, 122, 608 
uliginosa, 121 
verna, 121 
Aristolochia 
Olematitis, 557 
Armeria 
duriuscula, 551 
maritima, 289 
planifoUa, 551 
pubescens, 551 
scotica, 551 
Armoracia 
rusticana, 481 
Arnoseris 
pusilla, 218 
Arrhenatherum 
avenaceum, 391 
Artemisia 
Absinthium, 226 
caerulescens, 532 
campestris, 225 
compacta, 532 
gallica, 532 
maritima, 225 
scoparia, 532 
vulgaris, 226 
Arthrolobium 
ebracteatum, 148, 609 
Arum 
italicum, 348 
maculatum, 348 
Arundo 
Calamagrostis, 387 
Epigejos, 388 
Phfagmites, 387 
stricta, 388 
Asarum 
europaeum, 305, 613 
Asparagus 
maritimus, 582 
offlcinaUs, 335, 613 
prostratus, 582, 613 
Asperugo 
procumbens, 282 
Asperula 
6S0 
arvensis, 523 
cynanchica, 905 
odorata, 204 
taurina, 523 
Asphodelus 
fistulosus, 582 
Aspidium 
dumetorum, 456 
(Lastrea.) 
Asplenium 
Adiantum-nigrum, 413 
anceps, 603 
fontanum, 603 
germanicum, 414 
lanceolatum, 413 
marinum, 413 
productum, 603 
Ruta-muraria, 414 
septentrionale, 414 
Trichomanes, 413 
viride, 412 
Aster 
brumalis, 533 
leuoanthemos, 534 
Novi-Belgii, 533 
salicifolius, 533, 611 
salignus, 229, 611 
Tripolium, 229 
Astragalus 
alpinus, 147 
glycyphyllos, 147 
hypoglottis, 147 
Astrantia 
major, 518 
minor, 518 
Athyrium 
convexum, 602 
Filix-foemina, 412 
inoisum, 602 
irriguum, 602 
molle, 602 
ovatum, 603 
rhaeticum, 456, 602 
Atriplex 
angustifolia, 295 
arenaria, 295 
Babingtonii, 295 
deltoidea, S54 
erecta, 296 
glabriuscula, 554 
hastata, 295 
bortensis, 554 
laoiniata, 554 
littoralis, 296 
marina, 555 
microsperma, 554 
nitons, 554 
patula, 554 
pedunculata, 294 
portulacoides, 294 
prostrata, 554, 555 
rosea, 554 
Smithii, 554 
Symei, 554 
Atropa 
Belladonna, 2S2 
Avena 
alpina, 593 
elatior, 391 
fatua, 390, 615 
flavescens, 391, 615 
planiculmis, 594 
pratensis, 390 
pubescens, 390 
strigosa, 593 
subspicata, 594 
Azalea 
(Loiseleuria.) 
Ballota 
fcetida, 546 
nigra, 272 
ruderalis, 546 
Barbarea 
arouata, 483 
intermedia, 484 
praecox, 484 
striata, 484 
vulgaris, 100 
Barkhausia 
fcetida, 217 
setosa, 529 
taraxacifolia, 217 
Bartsia 
alpina, 258 
INDEX.
621 
Odontites, 259 
rotundata, 540 
serotina, 540 
viscosa, 358 
vulgaris, 540 
Bellis 
perennis, 234 
Berberis 
vulgaris, 87 
Berteroa 
incana, 482 
Beta 
maritima, 296 
Betula 
alba, 312 
glutinosa, 560 
intermedia, 560 
nana, 312 
pendula, 860 
pubescens, 560 
verrucosa, 560 
Bidens 
cemua, 224 
tripartita, 224 
Blechnum 
boreale, 415 
Blitum 
virgatum, 552 
Blysmus 
compressus, 358, 614 
rufus, 359 
Borago 
officinalis, 648 
Botrychium 
Lunaria, 416 
matricarioides, 604 
rutaceum, 604 
Brachypodium 
pinnatum, 403 
sylvatioum, 403 
Brassica 
campestris, 103 
Napus, 485 
oleracea, 103 
orientalis, 484 
Eapa, 485 
Briza 
media, 398 
minor, 398 
Bromus 
arvensis, 596 
asper, 401 
commutatus, 403 
erectus, 402 
giganteus, 401 
madritensis, 402 
maximus, 596 
mollis, 403 
patulus, 596 
racemosus, 403, 596 
rigidus, 596 
secalinus, 402 
serotinus, 596 
sq[uarrosus, 596 
sterilis, 402 
tectorum, 596 
velutinus, 596 
Bryonia 
dioica, 175 
Buffonia 
tenuifolia, 490 
Bunias 
orientale, 480 
Bunium 
flexuosum, 189 
Bupleurum 
aristatum, 191 
falcatum, 191 
protractum, 519 
rotundifolium, 191 
tenuissimum, 190 
Butomus 
umbellatus, 340 
Bux.us 
sempervirens, 558 
Cakile 
maritima, 9'^ 
Calamintha 
Acinos, 270 
ascendens, 545 
Briggsii, 545 
Clinopodium, 270 
menthifolia, 545 
623 
INDEX.
Nepeta, 270 
officinalis, 270 
sylvatica, 545 
Calendula 
arvensis, 529 
officinalis, 529 
Callitriohe 
autumnalis, 173 
hamulata, 173 
pedunculata, 173 
platycarpa, 173, 610 
stagnalis, 610 
verna, 173 
Calluna 
atlantica, 536 
glabrata, 537 
inoana, 537 
vulgaris, 241 
Caltha 
Guerangerii, 477 
minor, 477 
palustris, 85 
radicans, 477 
Camelina 
eu-sativa, 482 
fcetida, 482 
sativa, 481 
Campanula 
glomerata, 238 
hederacea, 239 
hybrida, 239 
latifolia, 238 
patula, 237 
persicifolia, 536 
rapunculoides, 238 
Eapunculus, 237 
rotundifolia, 237 
Trachelium, 238 
Cannabis 
sativa, 559 
Capsella 
Bursapastoris, 93 
Cardamine 
amara, 98 
beUidifolia, 483 
eu-hirsuta, 483 
hirsuta, 98 
impatiens, 99 
pratensis, 98 
sylvatica, 483 
Carduus 
aoanthoides, 530 
acaulis, 222 
arvensis, 221 
crispus, 220, 530 
dubius, 531 
eriophorus, 221 
Forsteri, 531 
Gibsoni, 531 
heteropliyllus, 222 
lanceolatus, 221 
litigiosus, 531 
Marianus, 531 
Newbouldi, 531 
nutans, 220 
oleraceus, 581 
palustris, 221 
pratensis, 222, 611 
polyacanthus, 531 
polyantbemos, 531 
setosus, 531 
tenuiflorus, 220 
tuberosus, 531 
Woodwardii, 531 
Carex 
acuta, 371 
alpicola, 366 
alpina, 370 
ampuUacea, 379 
angustifolia, 591 
aquatilis, 371 
arenaria, 368 
argyroglochin, 588 
atrata, 370 
axillaris, 367 
binervis, 373 
Boenninghauseniana, 367, 614 
bracteata, 588 
bryzoides, 588 
csBspitosa, 589 
capillaris, 374 
clandestina, 378 
curta, 366 
Davalliana, 588 
INDEX.
623 
depauperata, 374 
digitata, 378 
dioica, 364, 614 
distans, 373 
divisa, 368 
divulsa, 369 
Drejeri, 589 
ebracteata, 591 
Ehrhartiana, 588 
elongata, 367 
ericetorum, 377 
extensa, 372 
filifomis, 378 
flava, 372 
fulva, 373, 590 
Gebhardi, 588 
Gibsoni, 589 
glauca, 376 
Grahami, 589 
hirta, 378 
hordeiformis, 591 
incurva, 365, 614 
intermedia, 368 
irrigua, 591 
involuta, 591 
juncea, 588 
Koohiana, 691 
Isevigata, 373 
lagopina, 366 
laxa, 591 
lepidocarpa, 590 
leporina, 366 
limosa, 375 
limosa-yera, 590 
Micheliana, 591 
Moenohiana, 589 
montana, 377 
murioata, 368 
GEderi, 589 
ovalis, 366 
pallescens, 372 
paludosa, 379 
panicea, 374 
paniculata, 370 
paradoxa, 369, 614 
pauciflora, 365 
pendula, 376 
pilulifera, 377 
praecox, 376 
pseudo-Cyperus, 376 
pseudo-divulsa, 588 
pulicaiis, 364 
punctata, 590 
rariflora, 375 
remota, 867 
rigida, 371 
riparia, 379 
rupestris, 365 
saxatilis, 372 
seoalina, 591 
speirostachya, 690 
stellulata, 366 
stictocarpa, 591 
stricta, 871, 589 
strigosa, 876 
sylvatica, 375 
tenella, 588 
teretiuscula, 869 
tomentosa, 377 
uliginosa, 588 
ustulata, 588 
vaginata, 374 
Vahlii, 370 
vesicaria, 379 
vulgaris, 870 
vulpina, 369 
Watsoni, 589 
Oarlina 
vulgaris, 223 
Carpinus 
Betulus, 311 
Carum 
Bulbocastanum, 189 
Carui, 519 
verticiUatum, 189, 611 
Castauea 
vulgaris, 560 
Catabrosa 
aquatica, 393 
Oaucalis 
daucoides, 197 
latifolia, 520 
Centaurea 
Calcitrapa, 224 
624 
INDEX.
centaurioides, 552 
Cyanus, 223, 611 
decipiens, 532 
intybacea, 532 
Jaoea, 532 
melitensis, 532 
montana, 532 
nigra, 223 
nigrescens, 532 
Scabiosa, 223 
solstitialis, 832 
Centranthus 
Calcitrapa, 523 
ruber, 523 
Centunculus 
minimus, 288, 612 
Cephalanthera 
ensifolia, 323 
grandiflora, 323, 613 
rubra, 323 
Cerastium 
alpinum, 125 
aquatioum, 124 
arvense, 125 
atrovirens, 492 
compactum, 492 
glomeratum, 124 
holosteoides, 492 
latifolium, 126 
nigrescens, 492 
pedunculatum, 492 
pumilum, 125, 492 
semideoaudrum, ]25 
Smithii, 492 
tetrandrutn, 125 
triviale, 124 
visoosum, 124 
vulgatum, 124 
Ceratoobloa 
unioloides, 597 
Ceratophyllum 
apiculatum, 513 
demersum, 174 
submersum, 174, 513 
Oeterach 
offioinarum, 407 
Chserophyllum 
aromaticum, 520 
aureum, 520 
temulentum, 198 
Cheiranthus 
Cheiri, 485 
Chelidonium 
ma-jus, 90 
Chenopodium 
acutifolium, 552 
album, 293 
ambrosioides, 554 
Bonus-Henricus, 294 
botryoides, 292 
Botrys, 554 
candioans, 853 
cymosum, 552 
floifolium, 293 
glaucum, 294 
hybridum, 293 
intermedium, 552 
multifidum, 554 
murale, 293 
obtusifolium, 582 
olidum, 291 
opulifolium, 553 
paganum, 553 
polyspermum, 292 
pseudo-botryoides, 553 
rubrum, 292 
spicatum, 852 
urbicum, 292 
viride, 553 
virens, 553 
Cherleria 
sedoides, 126 
Chlora 
perfoliata, 249 
Chloris 
compressa, 598 
Chrysantliemum 
Chamomilla, 235 
inodorum, 235 
Leucanthemum, 234 
maritimum, 235 
Parthenium, 234 
segetum, 234 
Tanacetum, 235 
INDEX.
625 
Chrysocoma 
Linosyris, 225 
Chrysosplenium 
alternifolium, 183 
oppositifolium, 183 
Cicendia 
filiformis, 247 
Cichorium 
Intybus, 219 
Cicuta 
virosa, 187, 610 
Cineraria 
campestris, 232 
maritima, 534 
palustris, 232 
Circsea 
alpina, 171, 610 
intermedia, 513 
lutetiana, 171 
Cladium 
Mariscus, 357 
Claytonia 
aisinoides, 514 
perfoliata, 514 
Clematis 
Vitalba, 79, 607 
Cochlearia 
alpina, 481 
anglica, 96 
danica, 96 
groenlandica, 481 
officinalis, 95 
Colchicum 
autumnale, 338 
CoUomia 
grandiflora, 538 
Comarum 
palustre, 160 
Conium 
maculatum, 186 
Convaliaria 
majalis, 336 
(Maianthemum.) 
(Polygonatum.) 
Convolvulus 
arvensis, 250 
sepium, 250 
Soldanella, 250 
Conyza 
(Inula), 233 
CoraUorhiza 
innata, 323 
Coriandrum 
sativum, 620 
Cornus 
sanguinea, 184 
suecica, 185 
CoroniUa 
varia, 499 
Coronopus 
didyma, 92 
Ruellii, 92, 607 
Corrigiola 
littoralis, 175 
Corydalis 
claviculata, 90 
lutea, 479 
solida, 479 
Corylus 
AveUana, 311 
Cotoneaster 
vulgaris, 167 
Cotula 
aurea, 635 
coronopifolia, 535 
Cotyledon 
lutea, 617 
Umbilicus, 180 
Crambe 
maritima, 93 
orientalis, 480 
Cratsegus 
eriocarpa, 510 
monogyna, 510 
Oxyacantha, 167 
Oxyacanthoides, 510 
Crepis 
barbata, 525 
biennis, 212 
paludosa, 212 
pulobra, 525 
succisifolia, 213 
virens, 212 
Critbmum 
4 L 
626 
INDEX.
maritimum, 195 
Crocus 
aureus, 580 
biflorus, 579 
minimus, 579 
nudiflonis, 330 
reticulatus, 579 
sativus, 679 
vernus, 579 
Crucianella 
stylosa, 583 
Crypsis 
aouleata, 598 
Cucubalus 
bacoifer, 489 
Cuscuta 
approximata, 538 
Epilinum, 538 
Epithymum, 251 
europeea, 350 
hassiaoa, 538 
Trifolii, 251 
Cyclamen 
europsBum, 549 
flcariifolium, 549 
hederifolium, 549 
Cynodon 
Daotylon, 380 
Cynoglossum 
montanum, 982 
officinale, 282 
Ompbalodes, 548 
Cynosurus 
cristatus, 398 
echinatus, 595 
Cyperus 
fuscus, 357 
longus, 357 
^ypripedium 
Calceolus, 329 
Cystopteris 
alpina, 599 
angustata, 598 
dentata, 598 
Dickieana, 599 
fragilis, 409 
montana, 409, 615 
regia, 598 
Dactylis 
glomerata, 399 
Dapbne 
Cneorum, 557 
Laureola, 304 
Mezereum, 305 
Datura 
Stramonium, 538 
Tatula, 539 
Daucus 
Oarota, 196 
gingidium, 520 
gummifer, 520 
maritimus, 520 
Delphinium 
Ajacis, 87 
consolida, 477 
Dentaiia 
bulbifera, 98 
Dianthus 
Armeria, 112 
barbatus, 489 
ceesius, 113 
Caryophyllus, 489 
deltoides, 113, 608 
glaucus, 489 
plumarius, 489 
prolifer, 112, 608 
Dielytra 
formosa, 480 
Diervilla 
canadensis, 521 
Digitaria 
ciliaris, 592 
humifusa, 380 
sanguinalis, 592 
Diotis 
maritime, 225 
Diplotaxis 
(Sinapis.) 
Dipsacus 
FuUonum, 524 
pilosus, 206 
sylvestris, 200 
Doronicum 
INDEX.
627 
Pardalianches, S34 
plantagineum, 534 
Draba 
aizoides, 96, 608 
brachycarpa, 481 
incana, 97 
inflata, 481 
muralis, 97 
prsecox, 481 
rupestris, 97 
verna, 97 
Drosera 
anglica, 110 
intermedia, 110 
longifolia, 110 
obovata, 488 
rotundifolia, 110 
Diyas 
octopetala, 137 
Echinochloa 
Crus-gaUi, 591 
Ecbinopbora 
spinosa, 518 
Echinospermum 
deflexum, 548 
Lapptda, 548 
Echium 
italicum, 548 
violaoeum, 549 
vulgare, 283 
Elatine 
hexandra, 112 
Hydropiper, 112 
Eleusine 
indioa, 698 
Elodea 
canadensis, 582 
Elsholtzia 
cristata, 543 
Eljmus 
arenarius, 405 
crinitus, 598 
geniculatus, 597 
Empetram 
nigrum, 305 
Enaithrocarpus 
lyratus, 485 
Epilobium 
alpinum, 170, 610 
anagallidifolium, 512 
alsinifolium, 171, 610 
angustifolium, 168 
brachyoarpum, 512 
eu-tetragonum, 512 
hirsutum, 169 
intermedium, 512 
Lamyi, 512 
lanceolatum, 169 
montanum, 169 
obscurum, 512 
palustre, 170 
parvifiorum, 169 
rivulare, 512 
roseum, 170, 610 
rosmarinifolium, 512 
tetragonum, 170 
virgatum, 512 
Epimedium 
alpinum, 478 
Epipactis 
atrorubens, 322 
latifolia, 321 
media, 322 
ovalis, 322 
palustris, 322 
purpurata, 822, 577 
(Cephalanthera.) 
Epipogium 
aphyllum, 323 
Equisetum 
arenarium, 603 
arvense, 419 
fluviatile, 605 
hyemale, 420 
limosum, 420 
Mackaii, 605 
maximum, 419 
palustre, 420 
sylvaticum, 419 
Telmateia, 419 
trachyodon, 605 
umbrosum, 419 
variegatum, 420.
628 
INDEX.
Wilsoni, 605 
Eragrostis 
poasoides, 595 
Eranthis 
hyemalis, 477 
Erica 
camea, 536 
ciliaris, 340 
cinerea, 841 
mediterranea, 536 
multiflora, 536 
Tetralix, 840 
vagans, 341, 611 
Watsoni, 536 
Erigeron 
acris, 339 
alpinus, 299 
canadensis, 533 
uniflorus, 533 
Erinus 
alpinus, 543 
Eriocaulon 
septangulare, 350 
Eriophorum 
alpinum, 587 
angustifolium, 363 
capitatum, 587 
elatius, 588 
gracUe, 364 
latifolium, 363 
minus, 587 
polystachion, 588 
Scheuchzeri, 587 
vaginatum, 363 
Erodium 
chsBrophyllum, 495 
cicutarium, 132 
littoreum, 495 
maritimum, 132 
moschatum, 133 
Erucastrum 
incanum, 485 
Polliohii, 485 
Ervum 
Ervilla, 500 
monanthos, 500 
(Vicia.) 
Eryngium 
campestre, 186 
maritimum 185 
Erysimum 
AUiaria, 102 
cheiranthoides, 103, 608 
orientale, 484 
virgatum, 484 
Erythrsea 
Centaurium, 248 
latifolia, 248 
littoralis, 248 
pulchella, 248 
Euonymus 
europseus, 136 
Eupatorium 
cannabinum, 324 
Euphorbia 
amygdaloides, 308 
Characias, 558 
coralloides, 558 
Cyparissias, 558 
dulcis, 558 
Esula, 558 
exigua, 308 
Helioscopia, 306 
hiberna, 307 
Lathyris, 558 
Paralias, 307 
Peplis, 306 
Peplus, 308 
pUosa, 307 
platyphyllos, 306 
portlandica, 807 
purpurata, 658 
Pseudo-cyparissias, 558 
salicifolia, 558 
stricta, 306 
Euphrasia 
gracilis, 541 
officinalis, 359 
Fagus 
sylvatica, 311 
Farsetia 
(Alyssum.) 
Fedia 
INDEX.
629 
(Valerianella.) 
Festuca 
ambigua, 595 
arundinacea, 401, 596 
bromoides, 899 
decidua, 593 
duriuscula, 400 
elatior, 401 
loliacea, 401, 596 
ovina, 400 
pratensis, 401 
Pseudo-myurus, 899, 615 
rubra, 400 
sabulicola, 595 
sciuroides, 399 
sylvatica, 400 
tenuifolia, 595 
uniglumis, 399 
Filago 
apiculata, 228 
gaOica, 583 
germanica, 228 
minima, 227 
spatb-ulata, 228 
Foeniculum 
vulgare, 193 
Fragaria 
calyciaa, 501 
elatior, 501 
vesca, 160 
Frankenia 
Iffivis, 111 
pulverulenta, 488 
Fraxinus 
excelsior, 246 
FritiUaria 
Meleagris, 331, 613 
Fumaria 
agraria, 480 
Borasi, 480 
capreolata, 90 
confusa, 480 
media, 480 
micrantha, 91 
muralis, 480 
officinalis, 91 
pallidiflora, 480 
parviflora, 91 
spicata, 480 
Vaillantii, 91 
Gagea 
lutea, 833, 613 
Galanthua 
nivalis, 580 
Galeopsis 
angustifolia, 547 
bifida, 547 
canescens, 547 
intermedia, 547 
Ladanum, 274 
ocbroleuca, 274 
Tetrabit, 274 
versicolor, 275 
Galinsoga 
parviflora, 536 
Galium 
anglicum, 203 
Apariae, 203 
aristatum, 522 
Bakeri, 522 
boreale, 204 
cinereum, 621 
commutatum, 522 
constrictum, 522 
cruciatum, 201 
debile, 522 
elato-verum, 521 
elongatum, 522 
erectum, 202 
insubricum, 522 
MoUugo, 202 
montanum, 522 
nitidulum, 522 
ochroleucum, 523 
palustre, 201 
pusillum, 532 
saccbaratum, 522 
saxatile, 202 
scabrum, 522 
spurium, 522 
sylvestre, 208 
tricorne, 203 
uliginosum, 203 
630 
INDEX.
Vaillantii, 204 
verucosum, 523 
verum, 201 
Witheringii, 531 
Gastridium 
lendigerum, 384 
Genista 
anglioa, 138 
humifusa, 497 
pilosa, 138 
tinotoria, 137 
Gentiana 
acaulis, 637 
Amarella, 347 
campestris, 347 
germanica, 537 
nivalis, 247 
Pneumonantlie, 246 
verna, 346 
Geranium 
angulatum, 495 
columbinutn, 134 
dissectum, 134 
innominatum, 495 
lancastriense, 496 
luoidum, 135 
macrorhizum, 495 
modestum, 496 
molle, 134 
nodosum, 495 
phoeum, 495 
pratense, ].33 
purpureum, 496 
pusillum, 134 
pyrenaicum, 133 
Eobertianum, 135 
rotundifolium, 133, 609 
sanguineum, 135, 609 
striatum, 495 
sylvaticum, 133 
Geum 
intermedium, 157 
rivale, 156 
urbanum, 156 
Gilia 
tricolor, 538 
Gladiolus 
communis, 579 
Ulyricus, 330 
Glaucium 
comiculatum, 479 
luteum, 90 
pliceniceum, 479 
violaceum, 479 
Glaux 
maritima, 388 
Glechoma 
hederacea, 376 
Glyceria 
aquatica, 393 
fluitans, 393 
pedioillata, 594 
plica ta, 394 
(Soblerochloa.) 
Gnaphalium 
dioicum, 226 
hyperboreum, 532 
luteo-album, 533 
margaritaceum, 533 
norvegicum, 227, 611 
pilulare, 533 
supinum, 227 
sylvaticum, 226, 611 
uliginosum, 337 
Goodyera 
repens, 320 
Gymnadenia 
conopsea, 326 
odoratissima, 578 
Gymnogramme 
leptophylla, 698 
Habenaria 
albida, 327 
bifolia, 326 
cblorantba, 578 
eu-bifolia, 578 
viridis, 327 
Hedera 
HeUx, 184 
Helianthemum 
Breweri, 107 
canum, 107 
guttatum, ] 07, 486 
INDEX.
631 
ledifolium, 486 
polifolium, 106 
salicifolium, 486 
surrejanum, 483 
tomentosum, 485 
vineale, 486 
vulgare, 106 
Heleooliaris 
(Scirpus.) 
Helleborus 
foetidus, 86 
viridis, 86 
Helminthia 
echioides, 908 
Helosciadium 
inundatum, 188 
nodiflorum, 188 
repens, 519 
Heracleum 
Sphondylium, 196 
Herminium 
Monorchis, 327 
Hemiaria 
ciliata, 514 
glabra, 76, 514 
Mrsuta, 514 
subciliata, 514 
vulgaris, 176 
Hesperis 
matronalis, 485 
Hieracia 
Baokhousiana, 597-9 
Hieracium 
alpinum, 313 
amplexicaule, 597 
anglicum, 315 
aurantiacum, 535 
Auricula, 535 
Borreri, 597 
boreale, 916 
caesium, 314 
cerinthoides, 537 
chrysantbum, 314 
collinuin, 535 
corymbosum, 916 
orocatum, 915 
denticulatum, 537 
divaricatum, 536 
dovrense, 597 
dubium, 595 
gothicum, 316 
Halleri, 536 
incisum, 536 
iiicum, 315 
Lawsoni, 915 
lingulatum, 313 
maculatum, 536 
roelanocephalum, 528 
murorum, 314 
nigrescens, 914 
nudicaule, 526 
Oreades, 537 
pallescens, 597 
pallidum, 914 
peleterianum, 525 
pictum, 596 
PUosella, 913 
pilosissimum, 525 
plumbeum, 526 
preecox, 536 
prenantboides, 315 
pulmonarium, 314 
rigidum (?), 316 
rupestre, 536 
saxifragum, 537 
Schmidtii, 536 
stoloniferum, 593 
sylvaticum, 914 
strictum, 916 
tridentatum, 316 
villosum, 597 
virescens, 537 
vulgatum, 314 
umbellatum, 916 
Hierocbloe 
borealis, 381 
Hippocrepis 
comosa, 148 
Hippophae 
rhamnoides, 304 
Hippuris 
vulgaris, 173 
Holcus 
lanatus, 391 
632 
INDEX.
mollis, 391 
Holosteum 
umbellatum, 132, 608 
Homogyne 
alpina, 533 
Honckeneja 
peploides, 119 
Hordeum 
maritimum, 406 
murinum, 406 
pratense, 403 
sylvaticum, 405 
Hottonia 
palustris, 386 
Humulus 
Lupulus, 310 
Hutchinsia 
alpina, 481 
petrsea, 94 
Hyacinthus 
non-scriptus, 339 
Hydrocharis 
Morsus-ranse, 838 
Hydrocotyle 
vulgaris, 185 
Hyoscyamus 
albus, 538 
aureus, 538 
niger, 251 
paJlidus, S38 
Hymenophyllum 
Tunbridgense, 415 
Wilsoni, 416 
Hypericum 
Androssemum, 199 
bseticum, 130 
barbatum, 494 
calycinum, 494 
dubium, 129 
elatum, 494 
elodes, 131 
grandifolium, 494 
hiroinum, 494 
hirsutum, 131 
humifusum, 130 
linarifolium, 130 
maculatum, 494 
montanum, 131 
perforatum, 199, 609 
pulcbrum, 131 
quadrangulum, 130 
tetrapterum, 130 
Hypochoeris 
glabra, 209 
Balbisii, 594 
maculata, 909 
radicata, 909 
Hyssopus 
officinalis, 546 
Iberis 
amara, 94 
Ilex 
Aquifolium, 945 
Illecebrum 
verticillatum, 175 
Tmpatiens 
fulva, 496 
Noli-me-tangere, 135 
parviflora, 496 
Inula 
Conyza, 933 
crithmoides, 233 
dysenterica, 933 
Helenium, 333 
Pulicaria, 233 
Iris 
acoriformis, 579 
Bastardi, 579 
citrina, 579 
foetidissima, 339 
germanica, 579 
Pseud-acorus, 330 
pumila, 579 
susiana, 579 
tuberosa, 579 
xiphioides, 579 
Xiphium, 579 
Isatis 
tinctoria, 480 
Isnardia 
palustris, 171 
Isoetes 
echinospora, 604 
lacustris, 418 
INDEX.
633 
Jasione 
montana, 239 
Juncus 
acutifloi-us, 352 
acutus, 352 
balticus, 351 
biglumis, 355 
bufonicus, 35-t 
castaneus, 354, 614 
ccenosus (Gerardi.) 
compressus, 353 
conglomeratus, 350 
diffusus, 351 
efifusus, 351 
fasciculatus, 586 
filiformis, 350 
Gerardi, 353 
glaucus, 351, 6] 4 
lamprocarpus, 352 
maritimus, 352 
nigritellus, 580 
obtusiflorus, 353, 614 
ranarius, 586 
squarrosus, 354 
supinus, 353, 614 
tenuis, 586 
trifidus, 354, 614 
triglumis, 355 
Juniperus 
communis, 319 
nana, 319, 613 
Knautia 
an-ensis, 207 
pubescens (var.), 207 
Knappia 
agrostidea, 384 
Kobresia 
caricina, 364 
Koeleria 
cristata, 392 
Koniga 
maritima, 482 
Lactuca 
muralis, 210 
saligna, 210 
Seariola, 210 
virosa, 210 
Lagurus 
ovatus, 593 
Lamium 
album, 273 
amplexicaule, 273 
decipiens, 547 
Galeobdolon, 272 
incisum, 273 
intei'medium, 273 
laevigatum, 546 
maculatum, 546 
purpureum, 273 
rugosum, 546 
Lampsana 
communis, 218 
Lappago 
racemosa, 598 
Lastrea 
abbreviata, 601 
aemula, 412 
affinis, 600 
Borreri, 600 
coUina, 601 
cristata, 411, 615 
dilatata, 411 
dumetorum, 601 
Filix mas, 410, 615 
foenisecii, 412 
glandulosa, 601 
nana, 601 
Oreopteris, 410 
recurva, 412 
rigida, 411 
spinulosa, 411 
Thelypteris, 410 
uliginosa, 601 
Lathrsea 
squamaria, 266 
Lathyrus 
acutifoUus, 500 
Aphaca, 152 
hirsutus, 152 
latifolius, 500 
maritimus, 164 
Nissolia, 152 
4 M 
634 
INDEX.
palustris, 153 
pratensis, 153 
sylvestris, 153 
tuberosus, 153, 609 
Lavatera 
arborea, 128, 609 
Olbia, 493 
punctata, 493 
Leersia 
oiyzoides, 380 
Lemna 
gibba, 347, 613 
minor, 347 
polyrhiza, 347 
trisulca, 347 
Leontodon 
autumnalis, 209 
hirtus, 208 
hispidus, 208 
pratensis, 524 
Taraxaci, 524 
Leonurus 
Cardiaoa, 546 
Ijepidium 
campestre, 95 
Draba, 481 
hirtum, 481 
latifolium, 94 
ruderale, 95 
sativum, 481 
Smithii, 95 
Lepigonum 
(Spergularia.) 
Lepturus 
filiformis, 406 
incurvatus, 598 
Leucojum 
sestivum, 331 
vernum, 331 
Ligusticum 
scoticum, 194 
Ligustrum 
vulgare, 245 
Lilium 
Martagon, 580 
pyrenaicum, 581 
Limosella 
aquatica, 264 
Linaria 
bipartita, 542 
Cymbalaria, 541 
Elatine, 263 
italica, 541 
minor, 263 
purpurea, 541 
repens, 263 
spartea, 542 
speciosa, 541 
spuria, 262 
supina, 542 
triphylla, 542 
vulgaris, 263 
vulgari-repens, 541 
Linnsea 
borealis, 200, 611 
Linum 
angustifolium, 126 
catharticum, 127 
perenne, 126 
usitatissimum, 493 
Liparis 
Loeselii, 329 
Listera 
cordata, 321 
ovata, 321, 613 
Lithospermum 
a:rvense, 280 
officinale, 280 
purpureo-caeruleum, 280 
Littorella 
lacustris, 291, 612 
Lloydia 
serotina, 335 
Lobelia 
Dortmanna, 240 
urens, 240 
Loiseleuria 
procumbens, 242 
Lolium 
arvense, 405 
italicum, 597 
linicola, 597 
multifiorum, 597 
perenne, 404 
INDEX.
635 
temulentum, 405 
Lonicera 
alpigena, 521 
Caprifolium, 521 
Periclymenum, 200 
Xylosteum, 521 
Lotus 
angustissimus, 146 
corniculatus, 145 
hispidus, 146 
major, 146 
tenuis, 146 
Ludwigia 
palustris, 171 
Lunaria 
biennis, 483 
Luzula 
arcuata, 356, 614 
Borreri, 586 
campestris, 356 
congesta, 586 
Forsteri, 356 
multiflora, 356 
nivea, 586 
pilosa, 355 
spicata, 357, 614 
sudetica, 586 
sylvatica, 355 
Lychnis 
alpina, 115 
dioica, 116 
diurna, 116 
Flos-cuculi, 116 
Githago, 117 
vespertina, 116 
Viscaria, 116 
Lycium 
barbarum, 538 
Lycopodium 
alpinum, 417 
annotinum, 417 
clavatum, 417, 615 
complanatum, 604 
helveticum, 604 
inundatum, 417 
selaginoides, 418 
Selago, 418 
Lycopsis 
arvensis, 281 
Lycopus 
europsBus, 267 
Lysimachia 
ciliata, 550 
nemorum, 287 
nummularia, 287, 612 
punctata, 550 
quadrifolia, 550 
tbyrsiflora, 287 
vulgaris, 286 
Lythrum 
Hyssopifolia, 174 
Salicaria, 174 
Maianthemum 
bifolium, 336 
Malaxis 
paludosa, 329 
Malcolmia 
maritima, 485 
Malva 
Aleea, 493 
borealis, 493 
crispa, 493 
moschata, 127 
nicseensis, 493 
parviflora, 493 
rotundifolia, 127 
sylvestris, 127 
verticillata, 493 
Marrubium 
vulgare, 277 
Matthiola 
incana, 103 
sinuata, 103 
Matricaria 
Chamomilla, 235 
Meconopsis 
cambrica, 89 
Medicago 
apiculata, 497 
dentioulata, 140 
falcata, 139 
lupulina, 139 
maculata, 139 
636 
INDEX, 
minima, 140 
muricata, 498 
sativa, 497 
sylvestris, 497 
Melampyrum 
arvense, 260 
cristatum, 259, 612 
latifolium, 541 
montanum, 541 
pratense, 260 
sylvaticum, 260 
Melica 
nutans, 392 
uniflora, 392 
Melilotus 
arvensis, 498 
caerulea, 498 
messanensis, 498 
officinalis, 140 
parviflora, 498 
sulcata, 498 
vulgaris, 140 
Melissa 
officinalis, 546 
Melittis 
Melissophyllnm, 271 
Mentha 
aquatica, 268 
arvensis, 269 
piperita, 268 
Pulegium, 269 
rotundifolia, 267 
sativa, 268, 612 
sylvestris, 268 
MenthiB 
BakerianEe, 543-4 
Menyanthes 
trifoliata, 249 
Menziesia 
caerulea, 241 
polifolia, 537 
Mercurialis 
ambigua, 559 
annua, 309 
ovata, 559 
perennis, 308 
Mertensia 
maritima, 281 
virginica, 548 
Mespilus 
germanica, 510 
Meum 
athamanticum, 194 
Milium 
effusum, 385 
Mimulus 
luteus, 542 
guttatus, 542 
moschatus, 543 
Mitella 
diphylla, 518 
Moenchia 
erecta, 117 
Moehringia 
trinervia, 123 
Molinia 
caerulea, 393 
Monotropa 
Hypopitys, 245 
Montia 
fontana, 175 
rivularis, 514 
Mulgedium 
alpinum, 212 
Muscari 
racemosum, 384, 613 
Myagrum 
orientale, 483 
paniculatum, 482 
Myosotis 
alpestris, 279 
arvensis, 279 
csespitosa, 278 
oollina, 279 
multiflora, 547 
palustris, 278 
repens, 278 
stricta, 548 
strigulosa, 547 
sylvatica, 279 
versicolor, 280 
Myosurus 
minimus, 81 
]\Iyrica 
IKDEX.
637 
Gale, 319 
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum, 172 
pectinatum, 513 
spicatum, 173, 610 
verticUlatum, 172 
Myrrhis 
odorata, 199 
Narcissus 
aurantiacus, 580 
biflorus, 580 
concolor, 580 
conspicuus, 580 
incomparabilis, 580 
lobularis, 580 
major, 380 
minor, 580 
moschatus, 580 
poeticus, 580 
Pseudo-narcissus, 331 
serratus, 580 
Nardosmia 
fragrans, 533 
Nardus 
stricta, 406 
Narthecium 
ossifragum, 335 
Nasturtium 
ampbibium, 101, 608 
anceps, 484 
officinale, 100, 608 
siifolium, 484 
terrestre, 101 
sylvestre, 101 
Neottia 
Nidus-avis, 321 
Nepeta 
Cataria, 277 
Glechoma, 276 
Neslia 
paniculata, 482 
Nicandra 
physaloides, 539 
Nicotiana 
rustica, 639 
Nuphar 
intermedia, 478 
lutea, 88 
pumila, 88, 607 
Nymphsea 
alba, 88 
Obione 
pedunculata, 294 
portulacoides, 294 
Odontites 
(Bartsia.) 
Oenantbe 
apiifolia, 192 
crocata, 192 
flstulosa, 191, 611 
fluviatilis, 193 
Lacbenalii, 192 
Phellandrium, 193 
pimpineUoides, 192 
sUaifolia, 192 
Oenothera 
biennis, 513 
odorata, 513 
pumila, 513 
Omphalodes 
(Cynoglossum.) 
Onobrychis 
sativa, 149 
Onoclea 
sensibilis, 604 
Ononis 
arvensis, 138 
ramosissima, 497 
reclinata, 497 
spinosa, 138, 609 
Onopordum 
Acanthium, 322 
Ophioglossum 
vulgatum, 416 
Ophrys 
apifera, 328 
arachnites, 328 
aranifera, 328, 578 
fucifera, 328, 578 
muscifera, 328 
Orchis 
Conopsea, 326 
638 
INDEX.
densiflora, S78 
fusca, 325 
hiroina, 335 
incarnata, 578 
latifolia, 336 
maculata, 336 
maialis, 577 
mascula, 324 
militaris, 324 
Morio, 324 
odoratissima, 578 
pyramidalis, 335 
Simia, 325 
ustulata, 324 
Origanum 
megastachyum, 545 
Onites, 545 
virens, 543 
vulgare, 269 
Ornithogalum 
nutans, 582 
pyrenaicum, 333, 613 
umbellatum, 582 
Omithopus 
compressus, 499 
perpusillus, 148 
Orobanohe 
amethystea, 543 
cserulea, 266 
caryophyllea, 264 
elatior, 265, 542 
Epithymum, 266 
hederse, 265 
lucorum, 542, 612 
major, 264 
minor, 265 
picridis, 265 
ramosa, 542 
Eapum, 364, 612 
rubra, 266 
speciosa, 542 
Orobus 
niger, 154 
tenuifolius, 500 
tuberosus, 154 
Osmunda 
regalis, 416 
Oxalis 
Acetosella, 136 
corniculata, 496 
stricta, 496 
Oxyria 
reniformis, 304 
Oxytropis 
campestris, 148 
uralensis, 147 
Pffionia 
corallina, 478 
Panicum 
capillare, 592 
Crus-galli, 591 
mUiaceum, 593 
Papaver 
Argemone, 89 
dubium, 89 
hortense, 479 
hybridum, 88 
Lamottei, 478 
Lecoqii, 478 
officinale, 479 
Rhoeas, 89 
setigerum, 479 
somniferum, 478 
strigosum, 478 
Parietaria 
diffusa (offic), 309 
erecta, 559 
fallax, 559 
officinalis, 309 
Paris 
quadrifolia, 337 
Parnassia 
palustris, 184, 610 
Pastinaca 
sativa, 196 
Pedicularis 
palustris, 260 
sylvatica, 361 
Peplis 
Portula, 174 
Petasites 
albus, 633 
vulgaris, 328 
INDEX.
639 
Petroselinum 
sativum, 518 
segetum, 187 
Peucedanum 
ofiBcinale, 195 
Ostruthium, 520 
palustre, 195 
PluJaris 
arundinacea, 381 
canariensis, 593 
minor, 592 
paradoxa, 592 
Phegopteris 
plumosa, 603 
Phleum 
alpinum, 382 
arenarium, 383 
asperum, 593 
Boehmeri, 382 
commutatum (alp.), 382 
Michelii, 593 
pratense, 382 
tenue, 592 
Physalis 
Alkekengi, 539 
Physospermum 
comubieuse, 186 
Phyteuma 
orbiculare, 239 
spicatum, 536 
Picris 
arvalis, 524 
hieracioides, 208 
stricta, 524 
Pilularia 
globulifera, 418 
PimpineUa 
magna, 190 
Saxifraga, 189 
Pinguicula 
alpina, 283 
longicomis, 549 
lusitanica, 284 
Tulgaris, 283 
Pinus 
Pinaster, 576 
sylvestris, 319 
Plantago 
arenaria, 553 
Coronopus, 291 
hirsuta, 552 
Lagopus, 552 
lanceolata, 290 
major, 290 
maritima, 291 
media, 390 
Psyllium, 553 
TimbaJi, 552 
Poa 
alpina, 396 
annua, 395 
Balfourii, 398, 594 
bulbosa, 396 
csesia, 398, 594 
compressa, 597 
glauca, 594 
laxa, 396 
minor, 396 
montana (var.), 594 
nemoralis, 397 
Parnellii, 594 
pratensis, 397 
sub-ceerulea, 594 
sudetica, 594 
trivialis, 397 
Polemonium 
ceeruleum, 249, 612 
Polycarpon 
tetraphyllum, 176 
Polygala 
calcarea.
111 
ciliata, 488 
depressa, 488 
eu-vulgaris, 488 
oxyptera, 488 
uliginosa.
111 
vulgaris, 111 
Polygonatum 
intermedium, 582 
multiflorum, 337 
ofiBcinale, 337, 613 
verticillatum, 336 
Polygonum 
agrestinum, 555 
640 
INDEX.
amphibium, 298 
arenastrum, 556 
aviculare, 300 
Bistorta, 298 
Convolvulus, 300 
dumetorum, 301 
elatum, 555 
Fagopyrum, 556 
Hydropiper, 299 
lapathifolium, 298 
laxum, 585 
littorale, 55 6 
maritimum, 300 
microspermum, 556 
minus, 299 
mite, 299 
nodosum, 555 
Persicaria, 299 
pseudo-dumetorum, 556 
Raii, 300, 613 
nirivagum, 556 
terrestre, 555 
viviparum, 298 
vulgatum, 555 
Polypodium 
alpestre, 412 
cambricum, 598 
Dryopteris, 408 
Phegopteris, 408 
Eobertianum, 408 
vulgare, 407 
Polypogon 
littoralis, 385 
maritimum, 
monspeliensis, 385, 614 
Polystichum 
aouleatum, 409, 599 
angulare, 410, 615 
lobatum, 409 
Lonchitis, 409 
Populus 
alba, 312 
canescens, 313 
glabra, 560 
nigra, 560 
tremula, 313 
viUosa, 560 
Potamogeton 
acuminatus, 583 
acutifolius, 342 
compressus, 342, 583 
crispus, 343 
decipiens, 583 
densus, 341 
ericetorum, 583 
eu-pectinatus, 583 
filiformis, 341 
flabellatus, 583 
fluitans, 584 
gracilis, 583 
gramineus, 342 
heterophyUus, 344 
lanceolatus, 344 
lucens, 343, 613 
marinus, 583 
mucronatus, 583 
natans, 345, 584 
nitens, 344 
oblongus (polygonifolius), 345, 
584 
obtusifolius, 342 
pectinatus, 341 
perfoliatus, 343 
plantagineus, 345 
polygonifolius, 345 
praelongus, 344 
pseudo-fiuitans, 584 
pusillus, 342 
rufescens, 345 
scoparius, 583 
trichodes, 342 
zosterifolius, 343 
Potentilla 
alba, 501 
alpestris, 159 
anserina, 158 
argentea, 158 
Comaxum, 160 
Fragariastrum, 160, 609 
frutioosa, 157 
birta, 501 
mixta, 501 
nemoralis, 159 
norvegica, 501 
INDEX.
641 
opaca, 501 
procumbens, 159, 609 
reptans, 159 
rupestris, 158 
Tormentilla, 159 
tridentata, 501 
verna, 158 
Poterium 
muricatum, 166 
platylophium, 510 
Sanguisorba, 165 
stenolophium, 510 
Prenanthes 
purpurea, 525 
Primula 
acaulis, 549 
elatior, 285 
farinosa, 285 
intermedia, 549 
ofiicinali-vulgaris, 549 
scotica, S86 
veris, 285 
vulgaris, 285 
Prunella 
vulgaris, 277 
Prunus 
avium, 155 
Cerasus, 155 
communis, 154 
domestioa, 500 
insititia, 155 
Padus, 155 
spinosa, 154 
Pseudathyrium 
alpestre, 412 
flexile, 602 
Pteris 
aquilina, 415 
Pulicaria 
(Inula.) 
Pulmonaria 
angustifolia, 283, 612 
officinalis, 548 
virginica, 548 
Pyrethrum 
(Chrysanthemum.) 
Pyrola 
arenaria, 537 
media, 244 
minor, 244 
rotundifolia, 244 
secunda, 244 
uniflora, 245 
Pyrus 
acerba, 510 
Achras, 510 
Aria, 168 
Aucuparia, 168 
communis, 167, 610 
domestioa, 512 
eu-Aria, 511 
fennica, 511 
hybrida, 511 
intermedia, 511 
Malus, 167 
pinnatifida, 511 
Py raster, 510 
rupicola, 511 
scandica, 511 
torminalis, 168, 610 
Quercus 
intermedia, 559 
pedunculata, 310 
Robur, 310 
sessiliflora, 311 
Badiola 
millegrana, 127, 608 
Eanunoulus 
acris, 83 
alpestris, 477 
aquatilis, 81 
arvensis, 83 
auricomus, 82 
Bachii, 476 
Baudotii, 475 
bulbosus, 83 
circinatus, 81 
confusus, 475 
divergens, 476 
Drouetii, 81, 475 
Ficaria, 82, 607 
Flammula, 82 
4 N 
642 
INDEX.
floribundus, 475 
fluitans, 82, 607 
gramineus, 477 
hederaceus, 83 
heterophyllus, 475 
hirsutus, 83 
incumbens, 476 
Lenormandi, 83, 607 
Lingua, 83 
pantothrix, 475 
parviflorus, 83 
peltatus, 475 
Philonotis, 83 
pseudo-fluitans, 475 
pseudo-reptans, 476 
radians, 475 
rectus, 476 
repens, 83 
reptans, 476 
sceleratus, 83 
Steveni, 477 
trichophyllus, 81, 475, 607 
tripartitus, 82 
vulgatus, 477 
Eaphanus 
maritimus, 105 
Eaphanistrum, 105 
Kapistrum 
orientale, 483 
Reseda 
alba, 485 
fruticulosa, 485 
lutea, 106, 608 
Luteola, 106 
Phyteutna, 485 
Rhamnus 
catharticus, 136 
Frangula, 136, 609 
Rliinanthus 
Crista-galli, 259 
major, 341 
Rhyncospora 
alba, 358 
fusca, 358, 614 
Eibes 
alpiQum, 177 
Bromfleldianum, 514 
Grossularia, 178 
nigrum, 177 
petrasum, 177, 514 
rubrum, 177 
sativum, 514 
spicatum, 515 
sylvestre, 514 
tJva-crispa, 178 
Rosa 
arvensis, 164 
Borreri, 163 
canina, 164 
cinnamomea, 505 
Doniana, 163 
hibemica, 163 
lucida, 505 
micrantha, 163 
mollis, 163 
moUissima, 163, 610 
pimpinellifolia, 163 
pomifera, 505 
rubella, 505 
rubiginosa, 164 
Sabini, 163, 610 
scabriuscula, 163 
sepium, 509 
spinosissima, 163 
systyla, 164 
tomentosa, 163, 610 
villosa, 163 
Wilsoni, 163 
Rosse 
Bakerianse, 505 — 9 
Rubia 
peregrina, 301 
Rubi 
Babingtoniani, 501 — 5 
Rubus 
arcticus, 501 
csesius, 161 
Chamaemorus, 160 
corylifolius, 161, 610 
Idaeus, 161 
frutioosus, 163 
Leesii, 501 
obliquus, 505 
saxatilis, 161, 609 
INDEX.
643 
Rumex 
Acetosa, 303 
Acetosella, 304 
alpinus, 556 
aquaticus, 301 
conglomeratus, 303 
conspersus, 556 
crispus, 301 
Hydrolapathum, 301 
limosus, 557 
maritiinus, 303 
maximus, 556 
nemorosus, 302 
obtusifolius, 302 
palustris, 303 
pratensis, 302, 618 
pulcher, 303 
sanguineus, 556 
scutatus, 557 
viridis, 303, 557 
Ruppia 
maritima, 346 
rostellata, 585 
spiralis, 584 
Ruscus 
aculeatua, 336 
Sagina 
alpina, 490 
apetala, 117 
cUiata, 118 
debUis, 490 
densa, 490 
maritima, 117, 490 
nivalis, 119 
nodosa, 119 
pUifera, 490 
procumbens, 118 
saxatilis, 118 
subulata, 118 
Sagittaria 
sagittifolia, 340 
Salicomia 
herbacea, 397 
procumbens, 555 
radicans, 297 
Salices segregate, 561 
Salix 
acuminata, 315, 573 
acutifolia, 573 
adscendens, 570 
alba, 314 
ambigua, 317 
amb.
major, 570 
amb.
undulata, 570 
amygdabna, 314, 565 
Andersoniana, 568 
angustifolia, 575 
aquatica, 315, 567 
Arbuscula, 317 
arbutifolia, 571 
arenaria, 571 
argentea, 670 
aurita, 561, 613 
bicolor, 568 
Borreriana, 570 
caerulea, 565 
caprea, 316 
carinata, 570 
cinerea, 315 
contorta, 572 
cotonifolia, 568 
Croweana, 569 
cuspidata, 572 
damascena, 568 
daphnoides, 573 
dasyclados, 573 
Davalliana, 569 
decipiens, 565 
depressa, 570 
Dicksoniana, 569 
Doniana, 573 
ferruginea, 566 
floribunda, 568 
Forbyana, 315, 566 
Forsteriana, 568 
fragilis, 313 
fusca, 317, 570 
glabrescens, 567 
glauca, 571 
Grahami, 576 
grandifolia, 574 
hastata, 575 
Helix, 314, 572 
644 
INDEX.
herbacea, 318 
hirta, 568 
HofFmanniana, 865 
holosericea, 674 
incubacea, 570 
intricata, 566 
Lambertiana, 314, 566 
Janata, 318 
lanceolata, 572 
Lapponum, 317 
laurina, 316, 668 
laxiflora, 569 
leptostachya, 566 
livida, 675 
malifolia, 575 
Myrsinites, 310 
nigricans, 316, 668 
nitens, 569 
oleifolia, 315, 667 
parvifolia, 570 
pentandra, 313 
petiolaris, 573 
petrsea, 568 
phillyreifolia, 670 
phylicifolia, 316 
plicata, 317, 676 
pontederana, 674 
procumbens, 318, 571 
propinqua, 574 
prostrata, 317, 570 
prunifolia, 317, 571 
purpurea, 314 
radicans, 569 
ramulosa, 566 
repens, 317 
reticulata, 318 
retusa, 576 
rosmarinifolia, 575 
rubra, 315 
rugosa, 566 
rupestris, 568 
Eusselliana, 313, 565 
serpyllifolia, 576 
serrata, 571 
Smithiana, 315 
spathulata, 670 
sphacelata, 867 
stipularis, 574 
Stuartiana, 571 
tenuifolia, 668, 675 
tenuior, 675 
tetrapla, 569 
triandra, 314 
undulata, 572 
vacciniifolia, 317, 871 
venulosa, 571 
vitninalis, 315 
viridis, 573 
vitellina, 314, 865 
Weigeliana, 569 
Woolgariana, 566 
Wulfeniana, 569 
Salsola 
Kali, 296 
Salvia 
clandestina, 543 
pratensis, 267 
Verbenaca, 267 
Sambucus 
Ebulus, 199 
nigra, 199 
Samolus 
Valerandi, 288 
Sanguisorba 
canadensis, 509 
media, 509 
officinalis, 165 
Sanicula 
europsea, 185 
Saponaria 
hybrida, 489 
officinalis, 113 
Vaccaria, 489 
Sarothamnus 
prostratus, 497 
scoparius, 137 
Saussurea 
alpina, 219 
Saxifraga 
aizoides, 181 
csespitosa, 183 
ceruua, 182 
Cotyledon, 517 
cymbalaria, 617 
INDEX.
645 
decipiens, 183 
denudata, S18 
elongella, 518 
gemmifera, 518 
Geum, 517 
graimlata, 181 
Hirculus, 184 
hirta, 518 
hj'pnoides, 183 
IfBtevirens, 518 
muscoides, 517 
nivalis, 180 
oppositifolia, 181 
pedatifida, 518 
platypetala, 518 
pygmsa, 518 
rivularis, 183 
rotundifolia, 517 
Sibthorpii, 517 
stellaris, 180 
tridactylites, 188 
umbrosa, 517 
Scabiosa 
Columbaria, 207 
succisa, 207 
Scandix 
Pecten, 198 
Scheuchzeria 
palustris, 341 
Schoberia 
fniticosa, 397 
maritima, 397 
Schoenus 
nigricans, 358 
Scilla 
autumnalis, 334 
bifolia, 583 
vema, 334 
Scirpus 
acicularis, 363, 614 
csBspitosus, 363 
carinatus, 359 
fluitans, 363 
glaucus, 359 
Holoschoenus, 360 
lacustris, 359 
maritimus, 361 
multicaulis, 363 
palustris, 361 
parvulus, 587 
pauciflorus, 362 
Savii, 360 
setaceus, 360 
sylvaticus, 361 
triqueter, 360 
uniglumis, 361 
Watsoni, 587 
Soleranthus 
annuus, 176 
perennis, 176 
Sclerochloa 
Borreri, 394 
distans, 394 
dura, 594 
loliacea, 395 
maritima, 394 
procumbens, 395 
rigida, 395 
Scolopendrium 
Yulgare, 414 
Scorpiurus 
subvillosus, 499 
Scrophularia 
aquatica, 361 
Balbisii, 361 
Ehrharti, 361 
nodosa, 261 
Scorodonia, 263 
vemalis, 541 
Scutellaria 
galericulata, 277 
hastifolia, 547 
minor, 277, 613 
Sedum 
acre, 179 
albescens, 516 
album, 515 
anglicum, 179 
anopetalum, 516 
Cepsea, 516 
dasypbyUum, 615 
elegans, 179 
glaucum, 516 
Fabaria, 515 
646 
INDEX.
Forsterianum, 180 
glaucum, 516 
micranthum, 516 
purpurascens, 615 
reflexum, 516 
Ehodiola, 178 
rupestre, 179 
sexangulare, 516 
stellatum, 516 
Telephium, 178 
teretifolium, 516 
villosum, 179 
SelagineHa 
helvetica, 604 
Sempervivum 
teetorum, 516 
Senecio 
aquaticus, 233 
erraticus, 534 
erucifolius, 231 
Jacobsea, 231 
paludosus, 232 
pinnatifidus, 534 
salicetorum, 534 
saracenicus, 534 
squaHdus, 534 
sylvaticus, 230 
viscosus, 231 
vulgaris, 230 
Serratula 
monticola, 530 
tinctoria, 220 
Seseli 
Libanotis, 194, 611 
Sesleria 
ceerulea, 388 
Setaria 
glauca, 592 
italica, 593 
verticiUata, 593 
viridis, 381 
Sherardia 
arvensis, 204 
Sibbaldia 
procumbens, 157 
Sibthorpia 
europsea, 264 
Silaus 
pratensis, 194 
Silene 
acaulis, 115 
alpestris, 490 
anglica, 114 
annulata, 490 
Armaria, 489 
conica, 115 
gallica, 114 
inflata, 113 
italica, 490 
maritima, 114 
noctiflora, 115 
nutans, 114 
Otites, 114 
paradoxa, 489 
patens, 490 
quinquevulnera, 489 
Simethis 
bicolor, 335 
Sinapis 
alba, 104 
arvensis, 104 
Cheiranthus, 485 
incana, 485 
monensis, 122 
muralis, 105 
nigra, 104 
tenuifolia, 104, 608 
Sison 
Amomum, 188 
Sisymbrium 
austriacum, 484 
Irio, 102 
officinale, 101 
pannonicum, 484 
polyceratium, 484 
Sophia, 102 
Sium 
angustifolium, 190 
latifolium, 190 
Smymium 
Olusatrum, 186 
Solanum 
Dulcamara, 252 
marinum, 538 
INDEX.
647 
nigrum, 251 
Solidago 
angustifolia, 534 
cambrica, 534 
lanceolata, 534 
Virgaurea, 230 
Sonchus 
arvensis, 211 
asper, 211 
oloraceus, 211 
palustris, 211 
(Mulgedium) 
Sparganium 
aflfine, 585 
minimum, 585 
natans, 349 
ramosum, 349, 614 
simplex, 349 
Spartina 
altemiflora, 591 
stricta, 380 
Spartium 
(Sarothamnus.) 
Specularia 
(Campanula.) 
Spergula 
arvensis, 119 
nodosa, 119 
pentandra, 490 
pilifera, 490 
saginoides, 118 
subulata, 118 
vulgaris, 490 
Spergularia 
marginata, 490 
marina, 120 
media, 490 
negleota, 490 
rubra, 120 
rupestris, 490 
rupicola, 490 
salina, 490 
Spiraea 
Filipendula, 156 
salicifolia, 500 
Ulmaria, 156 
Spiranthes 
sestivalis, 320 
autumnalis, 320 
Stacbys 
ambigua, 275 
annua, 547 
arvensis, 276 
Betonica, 275 
germanica, 276 
palustris, 275 
sylvatica, 276 
Stapbylea 
pinnatifida, 496 
Statice 
bahusiensis, 289 
binervosa, 289 
caspia, 290 
Dodartii, 551 
intermedia, 551 
Limonium, 289 
occidentalis, 289, 551 
pyramidalis, 551 
rariflora, 299 
— (bahusiensis.) 
reticulata, 290 
— (caspia.) 
serotina, 551 
spathulata, 289 
— (binervosa.) 
tatarica, 551 
Stellaria 
Babingtonii, 492 
Boreana, 491 " 
cerastoides, 124 
glauca, 123 
gramiuea, 123 
Holostea, 123 
media (With.), 122 
negleota, 491 
nemorum, 122 
scapigera, 492 
uliginosa, 123 
umbrosa, 491 
Stipa 
pennata, 593 
Stratiotes 
aloides, 338 
Subularia 
648 
INDEX.
aquatioa, 96 
Suseda 
fruticosa, 297 
maiitima, 297 
Sivertia 
perennis, 537 
Symphoricarpus 
racemosus, 621 
Symphytum 
asperrimum, 54.8 
officinale, 281 
orientale, 548 
patens, 548 
tauricum, 548 
tuberosum, 281 
Tamarix 
anglica, 514 
Tamus 
communis, 337 
Tanacetum 
vulgare, 235 
Taraxacum 
erythrospermum, 529 
laevigatum, 629 
officinale, 218 
palustre, 218 
Taxus 
baccata, 320 
Teesdalia 
nudicaulis, 94 
Teucrium 
Botrys, 546 
Chamsedrys, 546 
regium, 546 
scordioides, 546 
Soordium, 271 
Scored onia, 271 
Thaliotrum 
alpinum, 79 
flavum, 80 
flexuosum, 474 
Kocbii, 474 
majus, 474 
maritimum, 473 
minus, 79 
montanum, 474 
Morisoni, 474 
riparium, 474 
saxatile, 474 
sphserocarpum, 474 
Thesium 
humifusum, 305 
humile, 567 
intermedium, 557 
Thlaspi 
alpestre, 93 
arvense, 93 
occitanum, 480 
perfoliatum, 93 
sylvestre, 480 
virens, 481 
Thrincia 
(Leontodon.) 
Thymus 
Chamasdrys, 645 
eu-Serpyllum, 545 
Serpyllum, 269 
Tiha 
europaea, 128, 493 
grandifolia, 129 
intermedia, 493 
parvifolia, 128 
Tillsea 
muscosa, 178 
Tofieldia 
palustris, 338 
Tordylium 
maximum, 196 
officinale, 520 
Torihs 
Anthriscus, 197 
infesta, 197 
nodosa, 197 
Tragopogon 
grandiflorus, 624 
minor, 524 
porrifolius, 524 
pratensis, 207 
Trichomanes 
radicans, 604 
Trichonema 
Columna3, 330 
Trientalis 
INDEX.
fi49 
europasa, 286 
Trifolium 
agrarium, 499 
arvense, 143 
Bocconi, 143 
elegans, 498 
filiforme, 145 
fragiferum, 144 
glomeratum, 144 
bybridum, 498 
incarnatum, 498 
maritimum, 143 
medium, 142 
minus, 145 
Molinerii, 142 
ochroleucum, 141 
ornithopodiodes, 141, 609 
patens, 498 
pratense, 142 
procumbens, 145 
repens, 141 
resupinatum, 498 
scabrum, 143 
stellatum, 498 
striatum, 143 
strictum, 144 
subterraneum, 141 
suffocatum, 144 
Triglochin 
maritimum, 340 
palustre, 340 
Trigonella 
Fcenum-grsecura, 498 
laoiniata, 498 
ornitbopodioides, 141 
Trinia 
Kitaibelii, 518 
vulgaris, 187 
Triodia 
decumbens, 393 
Trisetum 
subspicatum, 594 
Triticum 
aoutum, 597 
biflorum, 597 
caninum, 404, 615 
cristatum, 597 
junceum, 404, 597 
laxum, 597 
littorale, 597 
pungens, 597 
repens, 404 
Trollius 
europsBus, 86 
Tulipa 
sylvestris, 581 
Turgenia 
latifolia, 520 
Turritis 
glabra, 100 
Tussilago 
alba, 533 
alpina, 533 
Farfara, 229 
fragrans, 533 
Petasites, 228 
Typha 
angustifolia, 350 
latifolia, 349 
media, 585 
minor, 586 
Ulex 
eu-nanus, 497 
europseus, 137 
GalHi, 497 
nanus, 137 
strictus, 497 
Ulmus 
oampestris, 310 
carpinifolia, 559 
glabra, 559 
major, 559 
montana, 310 
stricta, 559 
suberosa, 310 
Urtica 
dioioa, 309 
Dodartii, 559 
pilulifera, 559 
urens, 309 
Utricularia 
intermedia, 285 
minor, 284 
4 o 
650 
neglecta, 549 
vulgaris, 284 
Vaccinium 
macrocarpum, 537 
Myrtillus, 243 
Oxycoccus, 343, 612 
uliginosum, 943 
Vitis-idaja, 243, 611 
Valeriana 
dioica, 205 
Mikanii, 523 
officinalis, 205 
pyrenaioa, 523 
sambuoifolia, 623 
Valerian ella 
Auricula, 206 
carinata, 523 
dentata, 206, 611 
eriocarpa, 523 
mixta, 523 
olitoria, 205 
Vella 
annua, 482 
Verbascum 
Blattaria, 253 
coUinum, 539 
ferrugineum, 539 
Lychnitis, 232 
nigroLychnitis, 540 
nigro-pulverulenta, 539 
nigrum, 253 
phlomoides, 539 
phoeniceum, 539 
pulverulentum, 253 
thapsiforme, 539 
thapsoides, 539 
Thapso-Lychnitis, 539 
Thapso-nigrum, 530 
Thapsus, 252 
virgatum, 253 
Verbena 
officinalis, 266 
Veronica 
agrestis, 257 
Allionii, 540 
alpina, 255 
Anagallis, 250 
arvensis, 254 
Beccabunga, 25(1 
Buxbaumii, 258 
Chamsedrys, 257 
fruticulosa, 540 
grandiflora, 540 
hederifolia, 269 
hirsuta, 540 
humifusa, 255 
hybrida, 540 
montana, 257 
officinalis, 256 
peregrina, 540 
polita, 258 
pubescens, 540 
saxatilis, 255 
scutellata, 256 
serpyllifolia, 265 
spicata, 254, 540 
tripbyllos, 254 
verna, 254 
Viburnum 
Lantana, 200 
Opulus, 200 
Vicia 
angustifolia, 150, 609 
bitbynica, 151 
Bobartii, 499 
Craoca, 149 
gracilis, 152 
hirsuta, 161 
hybrida, 500 
laevigata, 500 
lathyroides, 150 
lutea, 150, 609 
Orobus, 149 
pannonica, 500 
sativa, 150 
sepium, 151 
sylvatica, 149 
tetrasperma, 151 
varia, 499 
villosa, 499 
Villarsia 
nymphfBoides, 249 
Vinca 
INDKX.
651 
major, 537 
minor, 946, 612 
Viola 
avenaria, 487 
arvensis, 109 
biflora, 486 
calcarea, 486 
canina, 1 08, 608 
Curtisii, 109, 608 
epipsila, 486 
flavicornis, 442 
Forsteri, 487 
hamulata, 488 
hirta, 108 
imberbis, 486 
lactea, 108 
lepida, 487 
lutea, 110 
Mackaii, 487 
bdorata, 107, 486 
palustris, 107 
permixta, 486 
Reichenbachiana, 487 
Riviniana, 487 
sepincola, 486 
stagnina, ]09 
stricta, 487 
sylvatica, 108 
Symei, 487 
tricolor, 109 
Viscum 
album, 199 
Wahlenbergia 
(Campanula.) 
Wolffia 
arhiza, 348, 613 
Woodsia 
hyperborea, 407 
ilvensis, 407 
Xantbium 
spinosum, 536 
Strumarium, 536 
Zannichellia 
dentata, 585 
eu-psJustris, 585 
palustris, 346 
pedicellata, 585 
pedunculata, 386 
polycarpa, 685 
Zostera 
angustifolia, 685 
marina, 346 
nana, 346 
E. NEWMAN, PRINTER, 9, DEVONSHIRE STREET, BISHOPSGATK.
Missing Page 
•alUliUiUlliiUlUliUUi 