TOPOGRAPHICAL 
BOTANY 
PART FIRST.
, 
O F TH L 
U N 1 V E: R.5 ITY 
or ILLl NOIS 
W33t 
BIOLOGY 
7 
TOPOGRAPHICAL BOTANY.
BEING 
LOCAL AND PEESONAL RECOEDS 
TOWAEDS SHEWING 
THE DISTRIBUTION OF BRITISH PLANTS 
TRACED THROUGH 
THE 112 COUNTIES AND VICE-COUNTIES 
OF 
ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND.
BY 
HEWETT COTTRELL WATSON.
BANUNCUZiACEJE — CONIFER JE.
PRINTED 
THAMES D IT TON.
FOR PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION 
1873.
ONLY.
LONDON : 
NEWMAN, PRINTEH, DEVONSHIRE STREET, 
BISHOrSGATE.
Bt.OLOGY.
W 33t: 
PREFACE TO PART FIRST.
A DIVISION of this work into two or more Parts lias become 
a matter of necessity or forced convenience, more than one of 
preference.
At the time of writing and printing the Intro- 
\ duction, it was hoped by the wiiter that he would be able to 
i keep ahead of the printer uninterruptedly until the whole series 
\ of Orders should be completed.
Under that expectation a 
sS "First Volume" was there mentioned, with the possibility of 
a " Second " to follow.
But the Dicotyledonous Orders only 
were got tlirough (in the winter of 1872-3) before the diverging 
avocations of summer obliged the Compiler's pen to be set aside 
until a succeeding winter.
^ Practically the choice lay between postponement of the 
whole, or distribution of the completed portion of the volume 
as a Part First; leaving the Monocotyledonous Orders, together 
with the needful personal and local explanations about the 
r authorities cited, to follow as a Part Second.
Should the 
rr* chances of life and health be such as to prevent the appearance 
of that continuation, the want of it may perhaps assist in 
^ shewing that such a work comx)leted might have proved more 
^ useful to botanists of a future generation, than some among 
those of the present generation appear disposed to believe or to 
i acknowledge.
^ But looking forward to a Second Part, intended to include 
^ the comparatively few remaining Orders, there may likely be 
p some spare space therein for additions relating to those Orders 
-J which are treated in this First Part.
If competent botanists 
^ who receive copies of this present Part, will glance through the 
lists, in order to examine those counties with the plants of 
(V which they are best acquainted, and will then communicate 
. any additions or important corrections, these may very likely 
0 be in time for insertion at the end of a Part Second.
Failing 
. space there, it may appear desirable to make a Sujyplementaru 
4 or 'J'hird Part for them.
Indeed, the bringing together most 
^ of what is known, has the incidental advantage of drawing 
iv 
PREFACE.
attention to the unknown or the overlooked details ; which thus 
may sooner become known and noted.
The serial arrangement of the sioecies corresponds with 
that of the 'London Catalogue of British Plants.' The nos.
correspond with those of the ' Catalogue' ; as, also, with those 
prefixed to the names of species in other works by the same 
writer ; subject, however, to some few changes which have 
been gradually and unavoidably made in the numeration, 
during the thirty years which have elapsed since the first 
edition of that Catalogue was written.
The Sixth Edition of 
the Catalogue is the one which will best serve for a systematic 
Index to this present Work.
Notwithstanding some occasional 
changes, chiefly through additions or subdivisions of species, 
it will be found that the approximate uniformity of sequence 
and numbering, which has been adliered to in the same writer's 
several books, will much facilitate references from one to 
another of them.
The small Map, mentioned on page 21, is postponed.
A temporary substitute will be loosely introduced.
If this 
latter should be wanting in any copy of the book sent out, 
an application for it can bo made to the Author.
The number of printed copies of this work is limited to one 
hundred.
With so small an impression the copies can be 
distributed only among those botanists who have rendered 
efficient assistance to the Compiler in bringing together the 
mass of details from which the printed records have been 
selected.
Uncertainty as to their present addresses may lead 
to some of those kind correspondents being seemingly over- 
looked.
Besides those who are deceased, there are others still 
living who have withdrawn from botanical pursuits, and who 
consequently would now care nothing about a book of mere 
details.
The numerous deductions thus to be taken, from the 
full list of past correspondents, wiU perhaps make the hundred 
copies suffice for supplying those among the remainder who 
may desire to possess this work.
Thames Ditton, Kingston, Surrey.
July, 1873.
INTEODUCTOEY EXPLANATIONS.
In former works by the writer of this volume a wish was 
repeatedly expressed, that his records showing distribution of 
plants, might be carried downwards from provinces into the 
more copious details of county habitats ; at the same time, 
indicating also the testimony, in reliance on which the 
distribution of the plants could be so set forth.
The citation of 
such personal testimony would equally corroborate their pro- 
vincial distribution, as previously set forth in the ' Cybele 
Britannica ' and connected works ; in which the counties have 
been usually treated in provincial and sub -provincial groups, 
not singly or further divided into vice-counties, as they are 
now to be taken here.
For example, in here stating personal 
authorities for the counties of (say) Cornwall and Devon and 
Somerset, one or two for each county, three to six such autho- 
rities will thus be adduced for the existence of the plant in the 
province of the Peninsula ; also one or two for the dispersed 
existence of it in each of the three Peninsula sub-provinces.
It is to be understood, indeed, that one chief purpose in 
entering upon the comital details, is that of doing somewhat 
tardy justice to those botanists, whose labelled specimens and 
manuscript notes and local lists have often proved so useful to 
the Author, while writing the ' Cybele Britannica ' and allied 
works.
He has always felt it incumbent upon him, and due 
to those valued correspondents (alas, too many of them now no 
more) that some method should be found for at any rate par- 
tially putting on permanent record his great obligations to them.
To do so, is to pass down to a succeeding generation the clearest 
evidence, not only on which of the botanists of the current 
period the progress of topographical botany has so largely 
B 
2 
INTRODUCTION.
depended, but also on which of them the Author of the ' Cybele 
Britannica ' has found reason to place a preferential reliance, on 
the ground of scientific competence and moral trust ; the latter 
sometimes unfortunately wanting in cases where the former 
might otherwise have sufficed.
Very recently, on page 178 of a ' Supplement to the Com- 
pendium of Cybele Britannica,' an intimation was reluctantly 
given, that the projected work on county distribution might 
likely be relinquished, and for reasons there mentioned.
That 
intimation drew forth from several botanical friends their 
expressions of regret at the probable failure thus to complete 
the contemplated series of books on the geographical and 
topograpical botany of Britain.
It has been forcibly urged 
that a present summary of comital distribution would certainly 
prove serviceable hereafter, and so far as it should reach, even 
although anticipated events might suddenly occur to prevent its 
entire completion.
To this argument must be added the 
further inducement, that even a fragment of the projected 
work, although never completed, would to some extent single 
out and show the names of those botanists, on whose aid antece- 
dent works have so much depended.
Another and larger section of botanical friends, particularly 
among those who take the highest positions of botanical autho- 
rity, very strongly objected against the avowed intention to 
destroy the Author's herbarium of British plants, as mentioned 
in connexion with the probable abandonment of the work on 
county distribution.
The two questions are connected together 
more closely than may be apparent on first thought ; at any 
rate, so connected together in the writer's own ideas and plans.
While a work on county distribution can be proceeded with, so 
long at least the herbarium must be preserved, in order to cite 
from it the personal testimony afforded by its numerous labels.
The reasons for its early destruction, too, maybe said to become 
lessened in proportion to the progress made in recording county 
habitats, because the records themselves will frequently show 
INTRODUCTION.
3 
the -proi^eY present nomenclature of specimens differently labelled 
in the herbarium.
Moreover, in looking regularly through the 
collection for such a purpose, some alterations or explanations 
would probably be made, such as might never be made without 
that sort of compulsory opportunity.
Still, the inclination to 
destroy it remains unchanged ; and the reasons for so doing 
appear valid and cogent.
The existing peculiarities of the collection, which would 
render it liable to be misunderstood or misused, if left without 
counter-check, may be briefly adverted to here, as bearing 
intimately on the object of this volume, and more particularly 
in its citation of personal testimony derived from labelled si^eci- 
mens.
The herbarium has been in course of collection during 
many years ; the time ranging from the student life of the 
collector to old age, say, through the dates of 1830 — 1870 and 
something over.
Gradually, during those two score years and 
upwards, many changes have been made in the nomenclature 
of the plants ; and those name-changes not seldom arising out 
of changed views on the hmits and distinctions of species.
Thus, 
the names entered in the herbarium often will require to be 
construed with strict reference to dates, and by botanists 
sufficiently familiar with the botanical histories of the species 
to w^hich they are applied.
Young botanists are always more 
or less deficient in this requisite ; and the conceited and self- 
confident among them naturally misinterpret their own mental 
vacuities into errors on the part of the labelling herbalist.
In various instances a name formerly used by common con- 
sent, and thus designating a plant for the time being, has been 
subsequently transferred to quite a distinct plant ; another name 
being then bestowed upon the plant formerly so designated.
And as we cannot teach or persuade every botanist forthwith to 
understand and accept the change of nomenclature, there comes 
an intermediate or transition period ; during which the name is 
still used in the earlier sense or application by some botanists, 
while it is applied in the later sense by other botanists.
And thus.
4 
INTRODUCTION.
in a collection gradually accumulating during a series of years, 
and drawn together from many sources, the very same plant will 
appear labelled under different names, or different plants will 
have the same name applied to them.
Such cases as these 
cannot rightly be called blunders in nomenclature either by 
sender or by receiver, although they might readily be supposed 
so on a cursory glance at the labels, without taking special note 
of their dates, with the explanations which the dates ought 
to suggest ; usually w^ould suggest to the experienced botanist, 
who had watched the gradual name-changes through a long 
life -time.
An example may render this more clear.
In the time of 
Hudson and Smith, and even several years later, the name of 
Oenanthe pimpinelloides was in general use to designate the plant 
now better known to most of us by the name of Oenanthe 
Lachenalii ; the former name being now as generally given to 
another plant abundantly different.
Of course, specimens 
labelled pimpinelloides'' in (say) 1820 — 1840 would very 
usually be the same with specimens labelled " " in 
(say) 1850 — 1870 ; while, during the intermediate years 1840 — 
1850 and even later, some botanists would assign the one name, 
some botanists would assign the other name, to specimens of 
the plant in question.
The difference here, although a sort of 
misnomer, would not properly imply error on the part of either 
set of labellers ; it might arise simply from one of them adher- 
ing to the nomenclature of (say) Smith, and the other of them 
adopting the altered nomenclature of (say) Babington.
Another mode in which the right reading of a name turns on 
the date of its use, arises out of the modern tendency to divide 
and subdivide the species accepted as such by our predecessors.
When aggregate species ABC comes to be divided into three 
segregate species A and B and C, the old name which desig- 
nated the aggregate, is too usually retained with a changed and 
restricted meaning to designate A only; other names being 
found for B and C.
Equally in this second class of cases a 
INTRODUCTION.
6 
confusion of nomenclature arises.
The aggregate species ABC 
may chance to be represented in an herbarium by specimens 
of any one, or of two, or of all three segregates ; placed there 
under one and the same name, that is, under the original name 
which subsequently has come to mean A only ; while at a later 
date other specimens of B and of C may have been placed with 
the former, and then labelled under their newer names.
In 
appearance, at some after time, there will be great confusion 
among the plants and names, if examined by succeeding 
botanists unprepared to apply the necessary explanations by 
reference to past dates and name-changings.
An example may again be useful in illustration of this.
At 
past dates, say 1830 — 1840, the name Potamogeton natans may 
have been written, without any real blunder or misnomer, on a 
label attached to a specimen of Potamogeton j^ohjgonifoluis, or on 
another connected with a specimen of Potamogeton plantagineus.
These labels were correct according to the ideas of the species 
formerly accepted, and even still so accepted as lately as the 
date of Bentham's Handbook in 1858.
But at more recent 
dates, say between 1860 — 1870, and tested only by the views 
about these plants subsequently accepted among us, the labels 
might appear to be errors of names ; that is, unless the former 
triple ai)plication of the one name natans were steadily kept in 
recollection.
An herbarium formed during the years 1830 — 1870 
may thus represent any diversities of nomenclature currently 
used in books during the same period, or even long antecedently, 
according to the descriptive books relied on by the labellers.
Besides those two sources of misnomer — or, discords connected 
with dates, rather than real errors of name — there have been 
purposely glued into the herbarium, here referred to, not a few 
actual errors of name on the labels with specimens ; some of 
them very wide errors indeed.
Two useful ends were sought in 
thus preserving specimens sent with wrong names on their 
labels.
First, when the locality has been actually recorded in 
books for the wrong plant, the contradiction between label and 
6 
INTRODUCTION.
specimen will yield the clue to correct the rais -records ; and in 
this way a mislabelled specimen may be found more valuable 
than one rightly labelled.
In other cases, when several labels 
meet together, all alike assigning the same wrong specific or 
varietal name to several specimens of the same species or 
variety, the inference becomes unavoidable and the suspicion 
warranted, that a like misnomer may have occurred in other 
analogous instances, where now only a printed record remains 
to guide our judgment.
Again, let an example or two be given in illustration of such 
wide misnomers.
In the herbarium under consideration there is 
a specimen of Stellaria graminea, sent to the Botanical Society 
of London labelled as Linum catharticum ; and more strangely, 
the label is initialed by the then Curator and Secretary of the 
Society (both deceased) in order to certify the correctness of the 
name.
Of course, this specimen with its label finds place in 
the herbarium simply as an instructive curiosity ; but how easy 
for some self-conceited or malicious detractor to make a parade 
of his own superiority by pretending to correct an obvious 
blunder as if it had been shared in by the owner of the her- 
barium !
A rather curious form of mislabelling arises through some 
similiarity of name in sound or in meaning.
For instance, 
Poterium Sanguisorha mislabelled Sanguisorha ojjicmalis, and 
that done by a very good and well-known botanist.
So, an 
example of Potentilla rupestris until lately might be seen labelled 
as Potentilla alpestris, and localised on the Breadalbane Moun- 
tains ; the specimen and locality attributed to Dr. Greville.
The false locality got into print during the life-time of that 
accurate and very estimable botanist, who disclaimed it alto- 
gether.
The "specimen had come to the Botanical Society of 
London, through the hands of a lady equally a member of the 
Edinburgh Society.
Either by herself, or by the distributor of 
the latter society, a Welsh specimen of Potentilla rupestris had 
been substituted for a Scottish specimen of Potentilla alpestris.
INTRODUCTION.
7 
The lady alluded to certainly distributed numerous specimens of 
other plants which had assuredly never been gathered in the 
localities written on theu' labels, and several of these apparently 
had come to her hands through the Botanical Society of Edin- 
burgh.
Her labels will be ignored in this book.
The special case under allusion, be it kept in recollection, is 
that of an extensive British herbarium, gradually collected 
together during a period of forty years and upwards, and con- 
tributed to by botanists of widely unequal age and botanical 
experience, and whose own labels are usually glued down with 
the specimens.
These are cu'cumstances tending much to in- 
crease the discrepancies of nomenclature, and to endanger 
mistakes in consulting the herbarium.
Unless a posthumous 
inspector of it be duly prepared to examine the specimens and 
labels with constant reference to the received views about 
species and their nomenclature, currently in use at and before 
its many dates, he will himself almost inevitably misread 
differences of name into errors of name.
And further, on 
seeing various specimens preserved there positively under 
erroneous names, — and not aware that in most of such in- 
stances the misnomers were actually the chief inducement to 
preserve the specimens, — he may choose to attribute to ignorance 
on the part of the former owner of the herbarium, what 
would be more truly attributable to the imperfect character of 
his own acquaintance with that owner's motives, or with the 
past history of the species.
A conscientious inspector might 
be unwittingly misled in such instances.
An unscrupulous one 
might very willingly be so, in order to get a plausible oppor- 
tunity for announcing pretended corrections, or for showing off 
his own detective cleverness.
To suggest this latter supposition, 
is expressing a low estimate of the consciences of some of the 
botanists who have most distinguished themselves by raking up 
little things out of old herbaria ; but it is an estimate sadly 
founded on facts, — on acts done and statements printed.
Certain 
botanists, who now seek to make themselves thus conspicuous, 
8 
INTRODUCTION.
appear unable to understand the difference between criticism 
freely expressed and criticism falsely expressed ; perversely sub- 
stituting the latter under pretence ot the former.
Unfortunately, in mounting specimens in the herbarium here 
specially referred to, as they were received from their collectors 
or donors, the importance of glueing down also the actual labels 
which accompanied the specimens, was at first not sufficiently 
recognized ; and thus some of the names (misnomers included) 
are entered there in the receiver's own handwriting while fasten- 
ing down the specimens ; such names not always written within 
inverted commas, although usually thus written to remind that 
the specimens came so named, right or wrong as the case might 
be.
Altogether, a good many explanatory notes and some 
corrections would be required in the herbarium, before its 
present owner could prudently leave it as a posthumous collection 
for other eyes and hands.
To return from a digression, though one more explanatory 
than irrelevant.
Admitted the desirability of making some 
printed record of the local facts shown on the labels of speci- 
mens in the writer's herbarium ; also, in his manuscript notes 
and in local lists furnished to him by other botanists, several of 
them now deceased.
This being admitted, — How can a record 
of presently ascertained plant-distribution, carried into the de- 
tails of counties, be effected within any moderate compass of 
text ?
— or, even be compiled at all, with approximate accuracy 
and completeness, in a short span of time ?
What will be the 
number of pages absolutely necessary for carrying out the 
object ; economy in the money cost, and also in the time of 
writing and printing, both taken into account.
Both must be 
found by the writer himself, seeing that he will not print any 
sale copies of a work so uncertain of reaching a completion ; 
and which, moreover, must unavoidably include a full share of 
the errors and oversights inseparable from a first attempt of its 
kind, and one brought out under very unfavourable conditions 
INTRODUCTION.
9 
of age and leisure.
Doubtless, all botanists of liberal thought 
will look chiefly to what a first such compilation may accom- 
plish under difficult circumstances, not to what it leaves non- 
accompHshed; but Hberahty of thought is far from universal.
In the ' Compendium of Cybele Britannica ' the Index of 
names, specific and varietal, counts up to 2600 ; of which (say) 
100 may be only second names for the same identities.
But 
numerous varietal names of ferns and grasses, of brambles and 
briers, of mints and hawkweeds, and of some smaller genera, 
do not appear in that Index ; so that we should be counting 
considerably under the full figure in taking only 2500 named 
species and varieties for the alleged flora of Britain.
Say, that we should not much exceed the mark by taking it 
at 3000, including aU the named varieties, all the yearly 
increasing casual plants, and aU others improperly reported as 
quasi- wild in Britain.
The number of counties, along with the 
subdivision of the larger counties into vice-counties, amounts to 
112; many of the commoner plants occurring in aU or nearly 
all of these counties.
Perhaps we may fairly take 50 counties 
and vice-counties, something under the half, as an average 
number for each plant.
Multiply the one figure by the other, 
8000 by 50, and the result would appear- in the fearful number 
of 150,000 special items or facts, real or imaginary ; each of 
these items consisting of the name of a county or vice-county, 
along with the name of at least one botanist selected as voucher 
or testifier to the fact.
It is difficult to conceive any method by which these double 
names could be clearly quoted, without allowing on the average 
a half line of text to each pair of them.
Now, 75,000 lines 
printed at the close rate of 40 lines to a page, over and above 
the space needed for plant-names, would require 1875 pages of 
text, without reckoning in the extra pages further required for 
necessary Explanations, Index, &c.
Altogether, a .work so in- 
clusive might run up to four volumes of 500 pages each ; the 
expense of printing which would be much too great for the 
0 
10 
INTRODUCTION.
object sought ; besides the adverse consideration, that it would 
never attain to a completion.
The work cannot be undertaken 
at all, unless under some plan which will reduce this terrible 
length into the compass of a single volume at first, with a pos- 
sible second for plants discarded from the first volume.
Such 
was the division 'of the plants into two categories, in lately 
writing the three successive Parts of the 'Compendium of 
Cybele Britannica ; ' so that the two earlier Parts would have 
formed a completed work of themselves, even although not 
followed by a Third Part, nor this again by a ' Supplement.' 
In yet more lately treating of plant -distribution by secondary 
provinces, or sub -provincial groups of counties, in that ' Sup- 
plement ' to the last-named work, a closer condensation was 
effected in a manner which cannot here be resorted to for the 
counties.
The needed condensation was there effected by 
omitting references to personal or individual authorities, with 
some few occasional exceptions, — by resorting to the nos.
instead of the names of the sub-provinces, — and by so placing 
the little word "to" as to make it represent any continuous 
series of nos.
between the two extremes of 1 and 38.
But in 
this present work the object specially in view, is that of 
recording the names of personal authorities or witnesses ; con- 
nected also with the names of counties and vice -counties, lest 
the longer series of 112 nos., instead of names for the latter, 
should be found to over-tax and confuse memory in their prac- 
tical application.
A reduced selection of the plants to be 
treated, and a reduced selection of the counties to be nominally 
enumerated for them, offer the only available modes for bringing 
the work within the narrowed bulk of a single volume, to which 
any second is unlikely to be added.
A selection of the plants can be made by limiting them 
to the more generally known and accepted species, whether 
aggregates or segregates ; excluding for the present most of the 
varieties, along with the aliens, casuals, errors, etc.
A selection 
of the counties may be made by limiting the enumeration of 
INTRODUCTION.
11 
their names to those of counties from which the plant has been 
reported on fair authority, as being presumably indigenous 
there, denizens and colonists here ranking with truer natives.
Other counties can be sufficiently shown by their nos.
only ; 
that is, those supposed to have been erroneously reported for the 
plant, and those into which it is believed to have been intro- 
duced by human agency alone.
Those in support of which 
the recorded authority appears to be insufficient for scientific 
rehance will be left out or grouped with the former.
Any 
botanist who has glanced at the array of enclosed nos.
in the 
recently printed ' Supplement ' above mentioned, will have seen 
how numerous a portion of the recorded habitats there came 
under one or other of the two categories, — the non-indigenous 
( ) or the supposed errors [ ] .
These prehminary observations on the end sought, and the 
difficulties in attaining it, will facihtate an understanding of the 
methods resorted to for that purpose ; — here resorted to, not 
because they are the best possible, but because they appear to 
be practically best under the circumstances.
Except in the 
cases of the commoner plants, aU the counties will be enu- 
merated by name and no.
under each species treated; that is, 
all which have been found recorded on authority sufficiently 
rehable, and without being too exacting in the test ; a change 
to nos.
only being made for sake of brevity under the conditions 
mentioned above.
It is to be distinctly understood, however, that the enumera- 
tion of counties does not undertake or profess to be absolutely 
exhaustive of aU records of the kind.
On the contrary, it is to 
be understood as including only those which came under the 
compiler's consideration while writing the ' Cybele Britannica ' 
and its Compendium ; with the further addition of others 
directly browjht to his notice on good personal authority at any 
later date.
The name of a personal authority or witness for the county is 
V 
1^ 
INTRODUCTION.
added from one of the three following sources.
First, the 
labels of specimens (sp.) still preserved in the Compiler's 
herbarium, or which have passed through his hands for 
inspection.
In the former of these two cases the specimen 
may have reached the herbarium through intermediate persons, 
the donor and collector not being identical ; and as the space 
at command cannot admit two or three names, sometimes it 
may be the name of donor, sometimes that of collector, which 
is cited ; usually, the latter.
Second, other manuscript (ms.) 
notes of localities communicated by correspondents, on whose 
good faith and prevailing accuracy due reliance can be placed.
These notes have frequently been sent in the form of remarks 
in letters, and some of them afterwards withdrawn or corrected ; 
and it is possible that, in now reverting to them for use here, 
the first remark may turn up again apart from the forgotten 
correction.
Third, local catalogues (cat.) of plants drawn up 
by botanists resident in or visiting the places to which the 
catalogues are made to relate.
These lists have usually been 
made out by marking in a copy of the 'London Catalogue 
of British Plants ' the names of all those actually seen by 
the marker within the area under consideration ; separate 
marks being used to distinguish between the indigenous and 
introduced plants.
No fixed rule can be laid down as to precedence in the 
citations ; perhaps most usually a preference will be given 
to the " sp." But '* cat." may often come more readily to 
hand, and thus be cited instead, without always implying 
that no specimen has been seen from the county.
The printer 
is instructed to leave out the abbreviations (sp.
ms.
cat.) if 
want of space in the half line may render such an omission 
necessary.
Only a single selected authority can be cited 
within the space allotted ; although in many cases there may 
be several manuscript authorities in addition to others already 
in print elsewhere.
Further, the sign of certainty (!) will follow the names of 
INTRODUCTION.
13 
counties in wliicli the plant has been seen by the Compiler 
himself, and some note of the fact kept as an aid to memory.
This abbreviation will double the testifiers to several of the 
counties, and without any real increase of text.
It must 
often be omitted, however, through failure of memory or 
absence of memorandum.
The occasional exchange to italic 
letters will indicate a decided suspicion that the plant is non- 
indigenous in the county so distinguished, neither native nor 
sufficiently established and constant to be properly taken into 
the category of denizen or colonist.
The obelisk sign (f) 
affixed after the name of a botanist, will signify that he men- 
tions or marks the plant as being likely an introduction ; 
but individual botanists apply the mark so unequally or 
dissimilarly, one compared with another, that a free leave of 
choice must be taken here in the addition or omission of it ; 
the more so, because the alternative signs (" f ) are reduced 
to the single one (f ).
The query (?) will indicate more or less 
of doubt or uncertainty.
Printed books will be referred to so seldom and exceptionally 
that it may be taken for a fixed rule (not quite invariably 
adhered to) that only original loersonal authorities will be cited) 
and these shown by manuscripts in the compiler's own 
possession ; and the counties which can be so vouched will 
be seen to be numerous.
Those names of counties which are 
unconnected with the name of some botanist, or by the sign 
of certainty (!) above explained, must be understood to rest 
solely on some such authority announced elsewhere.
Space 
and time sufficing, some explanations concerning those autho- 
rities may possibly be appended after the detail of counties.
Published works of coui'se are open to any else, equally as 
to the compiler of this book ; and those who require their 
personal authorities can consult the local Floras and other 
publications for them, equally as done by the writer of this 
book.
Usually, the personal witnesses, as cited by surnames 
herein, will be amply sufficient to show and prove the true 
14 
INTRODUCTION.
area of distribution apart from undue extension tlirough errors, 
or tlirough reprehensible efforts to represent artificial habitats 
as natural or indigenous ones.
Eeferences to books are advisedly omitted.
The quarter line 
of space, available after the name of county, will commonly 
suffice for the citation of a single surname ; although the same 
short space would prove insufficient for surnames accompanied 
by book references in extenso ; — for instance, such references 
as these : 
Hiern, in Jour.
Bot. vol.
iii.
p. 328.
Hemsley, in Jour.
Bot. vol.
vi.
p. 263.
Forster, in Jour.
Bot. 1867, p.
76 [73] .
Wintle, in Jour.
Bot. 1867, p.
279.
Gibson, in Jour.
Bot. vol.
vi.
p. 319.
Unfortunately, a foolish declaration has been set forth in the 
Journal of Botany (partly under the editorial control of Mr.
J. G.
Baker) that citations of books more abbreviated than 
above shown are insufficient for botanical service.
Thus, in 
the present case, where only a quarter line or less is available, 
the guilt of " insufficiently " quoting must be avoided by the 
counter rule of not quoting journals or other books at all ; 
resting content with those surnames only, which are uncon- 
nected with volumes and pages.
If this present work should attain an enduring completeness, 
some botanists of the future will find out more practically than 
gratefully, through these advised omissions, that abbreviated 
citations of authorities might have usefully subserved one 
purpose, — say, that of simply showing an authority, — although 
not so full or lengthened as to subserve also every other possible 
purpose for which quotations might be made available, if made 
under the condition of unlimited space for them to be printed 
in extenso.
The narrow-mindedness and the short-sightedness 
of the Journal's rule should be disclaimed by Mr. Baker him- 
self; it being a rule well adapted only to those writers who 
seek to expand their owu minimum additions to science into a 
INTRODUCTION.
16 
maximum of printed text ; while it becomes ridiculously inap- 
plicable to those who seek to compress the information they 
include on the opposite principle, on that of making up a 
multum in 2)arvo.
This book is not the Flora of one little county, which has 
to be inflated to a volume of four or five hundi-ed pages, on the 
rake-up and repeat-over-again principle.
On the contrary, its 
leading purpose is to adduce and arrange original personal 
testimony in a very condensed form ; repetitions from books 
being resorted to only where such more dn-ect testimony may 
fail.
If the county so certified afresh had been previously 
recorded on other authority, then the adduced testimony 
becomes so far an added evidence for the correctness of the 
earher record ; with the further advantage of showing the 
persistence of the plant in the same habitat or county.
If not 
previously on printed record, then the habitat so testified is of 
course an addition to accumulated knowledge on the subject.
As to mere priority in seeing a plant in a place, the mind which 
can find importance in a matter so small, must itself be a very 
small mind indeed.
It has happened in various instances, that botanists have 
kindly sent to the compiler local lists or manuscript notes, 
and afterwards have themselves given printed currency to the 
same.
In several of these cases the lists and manuscripts will 
still be used, and be quoted here as if original; although in 
some sense they have ceased to be so, and might now be left 
unquoted.
Thus, Professor Lawson gave the compiler a list of 
plants observed in the Isle of Skye by himself and the Kev.
H. E.
Fox, and afterwards printed the same for general use.
In like manner.
Professor Balfour long ago sui)plied lists of 
plants observed by himself in Isla and Canth-e, which were also 
subsequently printed in a periodical.
And the same is the case 
with a list of plants observed by Professor C.
C. Babington in 
Pembrokeshire.
In such cases as these, it would assuredly be 
most unwise to forego the advantage of citing good personal 
16 
INTRODUCTION.
authorities for the county habitats, and on no better reason 
than the mere fact that they had already appeared in some 
journal or other book ; the addition of which to their names, 
with volume and page also specially shown, would require a full 
half line or upwards, instead of the quarter line or less here 
aciually available.
The individual personal authority being the 
one essential matter, those compiled lists which have been 
founded on the joint testimony of several different botanists, 
whether printed or still in manuscript alone, obviously cannot 
be quoted.
Unfortunately, the compiler has grounds for 
suspecting that the distinction here specified has not been 
always strictly adhered to by the makers of the local lists 
themselves ; who appear in some very few of the lists to have 
entered plants on hearsay testimony, or even on supposition 
only, and yet entered them as if certainly seen.
He has 
absolutely rejected three marked catalogues on their internal 
evidences of this deception or carelessness ; and of course the 
markers were deeply offended.
• If a botanical correspondent should deem his name erro- 
neously quoted for any county and plant, it is requested that 
he will at once point out and correct the error.
This should be 
done, whether the error may have arisen through a mistake by 
the compiler, or through an inadvertence in the original note or 
label or list of plants sent to him.
Failing any indication to 
the contrary, the compiler must himself be held responsible for 
the nomenclature (sp.) of the plants ; the more so, because the 
names on labels have been altered occasionally by his own 
hand ; so that a collector may find himself here credited for 
a species different from the one supposed to have been sent.
Such cases will be the exceptional few; although the writer's 
own experience and opportunities have told him that not any 
botanist, who labels much, will entirely avoid occasional mis- 
takes and inadvertences in writing the names of plants.
In accordance with an intimation given elsewhere (Supp.
Comp, Cyb. Brit.
p. 2) this present compilation also must still 
INTRODUCTION.
17 
be understood to have consulted other books up to 1870 only.
Essentially it is a condensed county- arrangement of the notes 
made use of in writing the ' Compendium of Cybele Britannica ' 
and its more lately printed ' Supplement ' ; although not with- 
out a good many details subsequently added thereto.
In 
particular, manuscript notes, labelled specimens, or other such 
communications considerately sent by correspondents, will be 
entertained and made use of to the latest date practicable, 
under the exigencies of printing, and also while printing under 
the strain of selecting from a vast mass of small details, impos- 
sible to be re-verified seriatim when the condition of time or 
leisure has become so inconveniently restricted.
The manu- 
script for the polypetalous dicotyledons will go to the printing 
office early in February, 1873.
After that time no county can 
be added into the series for any of those plants, because involving 
the need of an extra line if attempted.
Doubtless local botanists will readily detect errors and over- 
sights, if they will take those counties with the botany of which 
they are most familiar, and regularly note whether such counties 
are named or omitted under each plant known to themselves as 
being found there.
They will thus not only detect what may 
be wrong, but will also see what is still wanting formal record 
towards completing the county list.
It is utterly impossible for 
one single botanist to keep up to all that becomes known about 
the plants and places of each and every county.
No Flora of 
a single county has ever been printed, to which a list of 
Additions and Corrections " could not have been made out ; 
and that perhaps even before the Flora was fairly through the 
printing office.
A compiler who takes cognizance of 112 
counties and vice-counties should be allowed the same chances 
for errors and oversights multiplied a hundred-fold, — nay, much 
more, since one botanist may know some one county very well, 
while it is impossible that one single botanist can know a 
hundred counties equally well.
Notwithstanding this obvious truth, however, the writer's 
D 
18 
INTKODUCTION.
intercourse with other botanists has taught him, that there 
are those among them who conceive it a great feat achieved, 
when they have drawn up an approximately complete list of the 
plants to be found in some single county or even in an area much 
less than that of an average county.
Yet these same botanists 
are surprised, or affect to be surprised, on finding that another 
compilation, which includes a hundred such spaces or upwards, 
should ax)pear to be less approximately complete than their 
own small achievements.
They would fail to understand, for 
instance, that in such a compilation as this present one, con- 
cerning itself with all the counties, a hundred oversights or 
omissions would be only the equivalent to a single such defect 
in one of their own county lists ; the difference between the 
respective areas being duly allowed for.
It may be found an 
easy task to bring up the Flora of a single small county to the 
actual date of printing the book ; especially so, if two or three 
compilers should be busy at the same time on the same book.
And yet it is preposterous on that account to expect of a single 
writer, that he should bring up the combined Floras of a hun- 
dred counties equally to a like late date.
Take an example in illustration of this.
A lately published 
Flora of Middlesex, almost the smallest of English counties, 
has five closely printed pages of " Additions and Corrections" 
at the end of it ; all those petty details, it may be supposed, 
first becoming known to the two industrious compilers of that 
work while the book was actually printing, or they would have 
been made on their proper pages, not entered at the end as 
A and C.
The total area of Britain is not much below three 
hundred times the area of that one small county ; — less than 
none at all below, if the spaces covered by streets and gardens 
be allowed for.
At a corresponding ratio of three hundred to 
one, how many pages of Additions and Corrections " ought 
to be allowed to the manuscript notes and other data collected 
for this present compilation ?
Imagine five closely printed pages 
of ' ' Additions and Corrections ' ' multiplied three hundred 
Introduction.
19 
times !
Say, that the five pages include 100 additions or 
corrections.
Multiply these 300 times over.
Kesult : — 30,000 
additions and corrections, a number not likely to be discovered 
while this book is printing !
With regard to the commoner 2:)lants, such as Bellis, Calluna, 
Prunella, Corylus, and numerous others, which almost certainly 
occur m every county, and have been actually reported from 
ninety or a hundred of them.
It cannot be held advisable 
to enumerate the long series of county names and authorities 
for these generally found plants ; thus adding much to the 
bulk of this work, and exceedingly little to its usefulness.
And 
yet it appears undesirable to leave out of notice entirely any of 
those generally distributed plants ; the more so because, so soon 
as this com'se should begin to be acted upon, a real practical 
difficulty would spring up in the question, how or where to 
trace the separating lines between common and not common.
Many of the j)lants which might well be called "common" 
in South Britain become decidedly rare in North Britain ; some 
of them even partially rare in Mid Britain ; and it is for these 
plants that the practical difficulty most comes in the way, 
in any endeavour to reduce the bulk of the took.
An alternative presents itself in treating the common 
plants, such as really do occur plentifully in most or all of the 
counties.
The required space can be lessened by showing the 
counties for which the compiler's notes do not supply any 
direct personal authority, instead of the contrary course.
When a i^lant is already known to occur (say) in 90 or 100 
counties, it will be a shorter plan to enumerate negatively the 
other 10 or 20 counties, instead of the larger number affirma- 
tively.
Each common" plant thus treated will save a full 
page of printed text.
And even this shorter alternative may be 
still again slightly curtailed.
There are nine counties for which 
no lists of the commoner plants have been obtained ; although 
something is known about their rarer plants.
As these counties 
would almost invariably come into the list of blanks, of negative 
20 INTRODUCTION.
citations, it is needless to enumerate tlieir nos.
(say) two 
hundred times over.
They can always be mentally understood 
or implied as additions, without being expressly mentioned.
These nine counties are the following : 
42 Brecon.
74 Wigton.
43 Eadnor.
78 Peebles.
47 Montgomery.
79 Selkirk.
48 Merioneth.
103 Mull.
(All in Wales.) 105 West Boss.
For some other counties the lists of ascertained "common" 
plants are very incomplete, although not wholly blanks ; in 
example, Cardigan, Flint, West Lancashire, Stirling, etc.
To revert to the marked catalogues and other manuscripts.
A list of the exact areas to which they severally relate, with any 
connected local or personal explanations, must be postponed to 
the end of the book.
At present it may suffice to observe, that 
the areas of all of them are of course within the county or vice- 
county for which they will be cited.
Some of them relate to 
the whole county or vice-county, while others are restricted to 
a radius of 3 to 10 miles from some town or other fixed centre.
All the catalogues (cat.) are referred to in connexion with the 
names of the botanists by whom they were marked or made 
out.
Unfortunately, some of the earlier catalogues cannot be 
used here, because they relate to areas which take in whole 
counties now treated as two separated vice-counties ; or, because 
they take a border town as a centre, and thus relate to portions 
of two adjoining counties or vice-counties not discriminated in 
them.
This is a difficulty which arises also in consulting some 
printed Floras, such as those of Tonbridge and Yarmouth, in 
which the advisability of arranging the localities by their counties 
has been overlooked.
For sake of brevity the surnames only of botanists are 
printed, very seldom with any prefix of title or designation.
The quarter line of available space[would necessitate a resort to 
INTEODUCTION.
21 
this abbreviation in many instances ; lience it is made the rule 
for all.
An occasional inconvenience attends the practice, in 
cases of the same sm^name being common to two or more 
botanists.
Generally, when such is the case, the locality will 
indicate the true personal identity.
" Brown cat." for Caith- 
ness always intends Dr. Kobert Brown, of Campster ; while 
"Brown sp." connected with Hertford or adjacent counties will 
signify the late Mr. Isaac Brown, an useful contributor of 
specimens to the defunct Botanical Society of London.
The 
name of " Hooker sp." for any of the counties bordering on the 
Clyde, refers to a collection of plants made there by Dr. J.
D. 
Hooker in his early years, and then given to the present com- 
piler ; while " Hooker sp." elsewhere will usually intend his 
illustrious Father, the late Sir W.
J. Hooker.
" Warren cat." 
under Cheshire will mean the Honorable J.
B. L.
Warren, of 
Tabley ; while " Warren sp." under Cornwall will mean Miss 
Warren, late of Flushing.
So, the distinction between Mr.
J. E.
Bowman and Mr. E.
B. Bowman, two valued corres- 
pondents, is easily made ; the surname of the former being 
connected with Wales and adjacent counties ; that of the latter 
botanist, with the provinces of Humber and Tyne.
Again, " Babington " or "Bab." will intend Prof.
C. C.
Babington ; while " Church.
Bab." or " Ch. Bab." wiU be used 
for the Piev.
Professor Churchill Babington ; whose name, thus 
in full, would be too long for the space at command.
" Mansel- 
Pleydell," " BosweU-Syme,' and other similarly doubled sur- 
names may be cited in full or halved at convenience ; the name 
still referring to one and the same botanist under the alternative 
form.
The small Map prefixed to this volume is reduced by the elastic 
process from the larger one given in preceding works by the 
same writer.
The Nos. prefixed to the names of counties, or 
substituted for them in the case of plants held introduced or to 
be excluded, are the same as shown on the map and used in 
22 
INTKODUCTION.
former works.
The lines of separation, which are taken to 
divide the larger counties into two or (seldom) more vice- 
counties, cannot be sufficiently made out on the small map ; and 
it may be useful to repeat their description from the fourth 
volume of the original ' Cybele Britannica,' where it was adapted 
to the maps of England and Scotland, pubHshed under the 
auspices of the ' Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.' 
" In thus subdividing the counties any natural peculiarities 
were taken, or even well-marked lines traceable on maps, or finda- 
ble on the actual ground ; such as water- sheds, roads, canals, rivers, 
&c.
— West and East Conmall are separated by a line traced along 
the high road from Truro, through St. Columb, to the inland 
extremity of Padstow Creek ; at the two ends of this line, the 
salt-water completing the division.
— South and North Devon are 
separated by an imaginary line, adapted to the water-shed ; 
commencing at the Tamar, about midway between Tavistock 
and Launceston ; passing over the ridge of Dartmoor, and 
joining the western canal at Tiverton.
— South and North 
Somerset are separated by a line along the river Parret, from 
Bridgewater to Ilchester ; and thence curving round to the 
northern extremity of Dorset.
— North and South Wilts are 
separated by a line drawn along the Kennet and Avon canal.
— 
South and North Hants are separated by a line traced along the 
high roads from Winchester westward to Stocktridge, eastward 
to Peter sfield ; and continued thence to the borders of Wilts and 
Sussex.
— West &ndiEast Sussex are separated by a line traced along 
the high road from Brighton to Cuckfield ; thence by Crawley 
to the border of Surrey.
— East and West Kent are separated by 
the river Medway and its tributaries nearly up to Staplehurst ; 
and thence by the high road through Cranbrooke to the border 
of Sussex, near Hawkhurst — South and North Essex are separated 
by the high road from Waltham and Epping to Chelsmford, and 
thence by the Blackwater river to the coast.
— East and West 
Suffolk, and East and West Norfolk, are separated by the mathe- 
matical line of one east longitude, not a good division because 
INTRODUCTION.
23 
traceable on maps only, unseen on tlie ground.
— East and West 
Gloucester are separated by the Thames and Severn Canal, and 
by the river Severn from the pomt of junction up to Tewks- 
\)-axy.
— South and North Lincoln are separated by the Witham 
river, from Boston to Lincoln ; thence by the Foss Dyke to the 
border of Nottingham.
— South and West Lancaster are separated 
by the river Eibble.
That more northerly portion of Lanca- 
shire, which is situate to the north-west of the Bay of More- 
cambe, is taken with the Lake Province, and treated as a part 
of Westmoreland.
" The great county of York is first divided into the two sub- 
provinces of East and West Humber, by the rivers Humber, 
Ouse, and Wiske.
South-east and North-east Yorkshire are 
then separated by the political line which divides the East Biding 
from the rest of the county ; that portion of the East Biding 
situate westward of the Ouse being taken as part of the Mid- west 
vice-county.
South-west and Mid-west Yorkshire are separated by 
the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, and by the river Ane below 
Leeds.
Mid-west and North-west are separated by the political 
boundary between the North and West Bidings ; that boun- 
dary being deflected westward so as to pass over Whernside 
to the south-eastern angle of Westmoreland.
— Cheviotland is cut 
off from the more southern part of Northumberland by the 
river Coquet, and a line continued to Carter Fell from the Linn 
Brid^^e.
That northerly part of Durham which is situate between 
Holy Island and the Tweed, is deemed a portion of Cheviot - 
land; having only a nominal connexion with Durham proper, 
not a geographical one.
In Scotland, the large county of Perth is divided into three 
vice- counties.
East Perth is cut off from Mid Perth by the rivers 
Garry and Tay. Mid Perth is separated from West Perth by a 
line traced over the high ground or water- shed so as to divide 
the tributaries of the Tay from those of the Forth; the little county 
of Clackmannan and a small detached portion of Stirling being 
taken as parts of West Perth.
— South and North Aberdeen are 
24 INTRODUCTION.
separated by lines traced along the water-sheds eastward and 
westward of Inverury.
— The great county of Inverness is first 
divided by the line of water-shed between the eastern and 
western sides of Scotland, continued along Loch Erricht to the 
border of Perthshire.
The easterly portion, -with the addition of 
Nairnshire, forms the large vice-county of Easterness.
That 
portion of Inverness, which cuts Elginshire into two disjoined 
parts, is deemed to be a portion of this latter county.
— The 
remainder of Inverness, the waters of which drain to the western 
coast, along with the detached portion of Argyle which is situate 
to the north-west of Loch Linhe, makes up the vice-county of 
Westerness.
— Main- Argyle and Cantire are separated by the Crinan 
Canal.
The Clgde Isles include Bute and Arran, with Cumbrae 
and other islets adjacent, between Cantire and Ayr. The Ebudes 
are islands belonging by political geography to Argyle and 
Inverness.
Here it is convenient to take them as a group apart, 
subdivisible into three vice-counties.
South Ebudes include Isla 
and Jura, with adjacent islets.
— Mid Ebudes consist of MuU and 
Coll, with their adjacent islets.
— North Ebudes include Skye and 
Kum, also with their adjacent islets.
— East and West Boss are 
separated by a line traced along the water-shed between the 
eastern and western coasts ; East Eoss being considered to 
include those detached portions of Nairn, situate to the west- 
ward of the Murray Firth and Loch Beauly.
The fragmentary 
county of Cromarty may belong to East or West Eoss, according 
to the geographical position of its detached fragments.
— East 
and West Sutherland are also separated by the line of water- 
shed ; this being so traced as to divide the south-eastern 
portion of the county from the western and northern." 
The three groups of North Isles, namely, Hebrides, Orkneys, 
Shetlands, are at once treated as so many sub-provinces and so 
many counties ; and they are numbered accordingly.
The other 
counties of Britain being undivided into vice-counties, their 
boundaries do not requu-c special explanation here.
COUNTY 
DISTRIBUTION.
1 Clematis 
Vitalba.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon soutli !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. soutli.
Soutliby ms.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 I.
Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Sansom sp.
17 Surrey !
Eastmond sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Hall sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Trevelyan sp.
30 Bedford.
Leefe ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Chh Bab. ms.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west !
Rogers sp.
35 Monmouth.
Gibson ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Darby ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen ?
" one plant." 
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Planted or otherwise intro- 
duced in counties 49 50 55 
56 58 59 62 63 64 65 66 
67 69 77 82 83 85 87).
2 Thalictrum 
alpinum.
49 Carnarvon !
Brent sp.
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
Winch, ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon, Eoy, mss.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
GourHc sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Henncdy cat.
04 Ebs. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
06 east.
Stables sp.
08 Sutherland west.
E 
26 
2 THALICTRUM ALPINUM.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[50 57 64] .
3 Thalictrum 
minus.
1 Cornwall west.
Warren sp.
3 Devon south.
Tate sp.
6 Somer.
north.
Flower sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Miss Barnard sp.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Clowes sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
84 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Butler sp.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Whittaker sp.
52 Angiesea.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Kichardson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Clowes sp.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
79 Selkirk.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife !
Brand sp.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
93 north.
94 Banff.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Ebs. south.
Stables sp.
03 mid.
06 Boss east.
J. B." sp.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
Babington ms.
11 Orkney.
Miss Boswell ms.
Including T.
majus, Sm.
[8 24 " flavum," by error] .
4 Thalictrum 
flavum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack ms.f 
6 Somer.
north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Extinct ?
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north!
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Sansom sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 .
west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
4. THAJLICTEUM FLAYUM.
27 
29 Cambridge.
Babiugton cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Tlnvaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kii-k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwjm ms.
44 Carmarthen?
"Once seen." 
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Barely.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Leefe sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Miss Hancock sp.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
98 Argyle.
. 
00 Clyde-isles.
[8 Devon.
109 Caithness.] 
5 Anemone 
Pulsatilla.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordliam sp.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell sp.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
Foster sp.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
55 Eutland.
Berkeley ms.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
[37 E.C.rep.
1862.] 
6 Anemone 
nemorosa.
Counties all, except 51 53 60 
97 102 107 109 to 112.
9 Adonis 
autumnalis.
8 Wilts south.
Miss Bell sp.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 I.
Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north.
Macreiglit sp.
16 Kent west !
Bromfield sp.
(5 6 7 13 14 17 18 19 21 
to 29 33 34 40 55 57 58 
59 62 64 66 68 75 77 
83 ; mostly casual).
10 Myosurus 
minimus.
3 Devon south.
Error ?
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Beli Salter sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Freeman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
28 
10.
MYOSURUS MINIMUS.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
Bellsp.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow 1837.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortliton ?
34 Gloster west ?
36 Hereford ?
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Bowman sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham ?
" extinct." 
67 Nor thumb.
Bowman sp.
11 Ranunculus 
aquatilis.
Counties all, except 60 86 88 
89 97 98 100 101 103 
107 108 112.
The old ag- 
gregate, except as below.
11 Ranunculus 
Drouetii.
" trichophyllus." 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sj), 
4 north.
"Hiern.hb." 
Wilts.
Hiern.
herb." 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
"Borrerlierb." 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bab. herb." 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
"Bab.herb." 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
" Hiern herb." 
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
"Hiern herb." 
50 Denbigh.
' ' Hiern herb.
' ' 
58 Chester.
Hiern herb." 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait sp.
09 Caithness.
N.B. Ill understood, and some 
of the counties perhaps in- 
correctly recorded.
[69 111] .
11 Ranunculus 
circlnatus.
6 Somers.
north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Spicer.
12 north.
13 Sussex east !
Mrs. Jones sp.
14 west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east !
Hind sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Biden sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex 1 
22 Berks.
26.
RANUNCULUS CIRCINATUS.
29 
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington si3.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
32 Nortbton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
41 Glamorgan.
53 Lincoln soutb !
54 nortb !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam s-p.
58 Cbester.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Newbould ms.
65 n.west?
"Ward." 
68 Cbeviotland.
Tate cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgli.
Salter sj), 
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
90 Forfar.
Roy, " occurs." 
[3 Devon.
10 Wiglit] .
11 Ranunculus 
fluitans.
1 Cornwall west ?
3 Devon soutb ?
6 Som. soutb.
Coleman cat.
6 nortb.
Tliwaites cat.
8 Wilts soutb?
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydcll cat.
11 Hants soutb.
12 nortb.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
16 Kent west ?
17 Surrey !
Newbould sp.
18 Essex soutb.
19 Essex nortb.
20 Herts.
21 Middx.
Newbould sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
"Bab. berb." 
28 Norfolk west.
"Bab. berb." 
29 Cambridge.
" Hiern.
berb." 
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites sp.
35 Monmoutb.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purcbas cat.
37 Woster.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
44 Carmartlien.
Motley ms.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby.
"Bab. berb." 
59 Lane, soutb.
"Dugdale." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durbam.
67 Nortbumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cbeviotland.
Tate cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
[10 Wiglit.
85 Fife] .
And 
perbaps in some otlier coun- 
ties tlie "pseudo-fluitans" is 
tlie plant intended.
11 Ranunculus 
tripartitus.
R. intermedius, Hiern.
1 Cornwall west.
Wcstcombc !
9 Dorset.
" Borrer ms." 
11 Hants soutb !
16Keiitwest.
" W.Recvesms." 
17 Surrey !
45 Pembroke.
Bal).
sp.
[83 Edinburgb] .
30 
11.
KANUNCULUS LENORMANDl.
12 Ranunculus 
Lenormandi.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Keys sp.
4 north .
' ' Hiern .
herb .
' ' 
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Withers ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
16 Kent west.
" Bab. herb." 
17 Surrey !
22 Berks !
25 Suffolk east ?
Ske^^per ms.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Babington ms.
41 GlarQorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
"Bab. herb." 
55 Leicester.
Purclias sp.
58 Chester.
Warren s^^.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad sp.
60 west.
"Hiern herb." 
63 York s.
west.
Newb.
ms.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Hort sp.
72 Dumfries.
76 Eenffew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde isles.
Gait ms.
[19 North Essex] .
Distri- 
bution incompletely known.
13 Ranunculus 
hederaceus.
Counties all, except 26 31 51 
53 86 88 89 97 104 108 
111 112.
14 Ranunculus 
Ficaria.
Counties all, except 46 51 53 
60 69 86 88 89 97 98 101 
102 104 107 108 110; in 
all of which it most likely 
does occur.
15 Ranunculus 
Flammula.
Counties all, except 86 100 ; 
in which doubtless it does 
occur, and also in the nine 
vacant counties, named on 
page 20.
15 Ranunculus 
reptans.
85 Kinross.
Boswell Syme sp.
N.B. The " pseudo-reptans " 
has been misreported for 
true reptans in many coun- 
ties.
Specimens sent from 
Coniston (no.
69) by Mr.
A. G.
More, closely resemble 
those from Kinross ; but 
they are too young to show 
the form of the aclienes 
clearly, so that some uncer- 
tainty attaches to them.
16 Ranunculus 
Lingua.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnackcat.
3 Devon south.
"E.
Parfitt." 
4 north ?
5 Somerset south ?
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
16.
RANUNCULUS LINGUA.
31 
12 Hants iiorth.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
19 Essex nortli.
20 Herts.
T. B.
Blow cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Wallis sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
32 Northton.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kii-k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bodenliam sj).
41 Glamorgan.
Gutcli sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Piadnor.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint ?
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln nortli !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby ?
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
61 York 8.
east.
62 n.
cast.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Emblcton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid?
"Loch Earn." 
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
[21 37 49 111].
18 Ranunculus 
auricomus.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon sou'th.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Harris sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bceslcy cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
82 
18.
RANUNCULUS AUEICOMUS.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Eylands sp.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad herb.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Simpson sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirlhig.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worslcy cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dumbarton.
19 Ranunculus 
acris.
Counties all, except the nine 
named on page 20.
20 Ranunculus 
repens.
Counties all, except the nine 
named on page 20.
21 Ranunculus 
bulbosus.
Counties all, except the nine, 
and 53 60 69 84 86 97 
98 101 104 106 107 108 
110 (111) 112.
22 Ranunculus 
hirsutus.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs sp.f 
3 Devon south.
Henfrey sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middx.
Warren sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
22.
RANUNCULUS HIBSUTUS.
83 
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
34 Gloster west.
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias ms.
37 Worcester.
Buckman sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bodenliam sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke ?
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
BoYvman sp.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
69 Lane, south !
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
67 Xorthumb.
" baUast hills." 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Symecat.f 
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Balfour sp.
88 mid.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
98 Argyle.
N.B. Scarcely more than a 
casual plant northward of 
Yorkshire.
23 Ranunculus 
sceleratus.
Counties all, except 46 49 60 
71 73 86 88 89 97 98 
104 107 108 111 112; 
and likely to occur in all of 
these, unless the two last.
24 Ranunculus 
parviflorus.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan sp.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Wallis sp.
20 Herts.
Brown sp.
21 Middx.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp, 
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Douglas sp.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
F 
34 
24.
RANUNCULUS PARVIFLOEUS.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Leefecat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Tudor sp.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke, 
47 Montgom, Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
J. Ball ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eev. J.
Harris sp.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Foggitt sp.
65 n.
west ?
66 Durham.
25 Ranunculus 
arvensis.
1 Cornwall west ?
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13* Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Biden sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middx.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
G. Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bodenham sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Paine sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour ms.f 
83 Edinburgh.
Macnab sp.
[Ill Orkney] .
(85).
26 Caltha 
palustris.
Counties all, except 46 60 86 
26.
CALTHA PALUSTRIS.
35 
98 and the usual nine ; in 
all of wliich it is sure to 
be found if looked for.
C. 
Guerangeri occurs in Surrey, 
Chester, York, and probably 
elsewhere.
27 TroUius 
europaeus.
35 Monmouth.
Conway ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.f 
37 Worcester ?
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Moggridge sp.
43 Kadnor.
Westcombe ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Lees ms.
48 Merioneth.
Poole ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
57 Derby !
58 Chester ?
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Simpson sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Miss Bell sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmorland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kii'kcudb.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
G. Cooper sp.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Symc cat.
86 Stirhng.
87 Perth west.
Symc cat.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
Gibson ms.
90 Forfar !
91 Kinc.
Miss Boswell ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dumbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Skye.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
12 Orkney.
One locality.
[2 East Cornwall] .
29 Helleborus 
viridis.
6 Som. north.
Winch sp.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
11 Kants south.
Borrer ms.
12 north.
Weaver ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Borrer.
f 
15 Kent east, "native." 
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
" native." 
19 north.
Wallis sp.
20 Kerts.
" really wild." 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
' 
34 west.
Babington.
60 Lane.
west, ''native." 
62 York n.
east.
'* native." 
63 s.
west.
Smith sp.
64 m.
west, ''native." 
65 n.
west, "native." 
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
07 Northumb.
"denizen." 
69 West.
" apparently native." 
N.B. The above counties are 
36 
29.
HELLEBORUS VIRIDIS.
selected as being those in 
wHcli the wildness of the 
plant is best attested.
Ee- 
ported also for 1.237 
8 10 21 22 23 24 25 26 
27 28 29 30 32 36 37 
38 39 40 41 45 50 56 
57 68 70 75 81 83 85 
91 92 ; in all with distrust 
of its true nativity, or on 
unsafe authority only), 
30 Helleboms 
fcetidus.
11 Hants south, "wild." 
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
''A true 
19 north, native." 
33 Gloster east, ''native." 
36 Hereford.
'* native." 
62 York n.
east.
" denizen." 
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
N.B. Less decidedly certified 
as a native plant, than is 
the other species.
(Reported 
in 2 3 6 7 8 9 10 16 
20 22 to 30 32 34 37 
38 39 40 41 50 52 55 
57 61 63 68 69 70 75 
77 80 82 83 85 92 ; in 
most of these counties it is 
given simply as an escape 
from cultivation, or with the 
evident object of swelling 
out the length of local lists).
31 Aquilegia 
vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north 1 Wakefield sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.f 
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Spicer ms.
13 Sussex west, "manyloc." 
14 east.
Coleman cat.f 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Holman sp.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Eeeve sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Pamplin ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester ?
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
native." 
67 Northumb.
" native." 
31.
AQUILEGIA VULGAPJ3.
37 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
" wild." 
(Also in 18 19 [21] 25 26 
54 55 68 71 75 77 83 
84 85 86 87 90 91 92 
95 96 102 109).
33 Aconitum 
Napellus.
6 Som. south.
Crotch s^d.
9 Dorset.
Bower to Crotch sp.
35 Monmouth, wild; Hort.
36 Heref.
indigenous ; Newm.
50 Denb.
wild ; Bowman.
(Reported also in 1 3 4 10 
12 17 19 20 21 23 24 
27 28 33 37 38 39 40 
41 55 61 62 64 65 67 
76 77 81 83 85 86 105).
34 Actsea 
spicata.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Denny sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmor.
Dr. Lees 1870.
[18 61 66 70 85] .
35 Berberis 
vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Bath flo.
f 
7 Wilts north.
" indigenous." 
8 south.
Flower cat.'' 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More supp.'^^ 
12 Hants north.
Bromf.
t 
13 or 14 Sussex.
Hemsley.f 
16 Kent west.
" not wild." 
17 Surrey, casual in hedges.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 Essex north.
Gibson flo.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Midx.
Reynolds sp.
22 Berks.
Walker flo.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Skepper flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Trim.
flo.
28 west.
Trim.
flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.
30 Bedford.
Fordham sp.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Bath flo.- 
35 Monmouth.
Gissing.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo." 
37 Woster.
Lees hot.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
^' reaUy wild." 
40 Salop.
Leigiiton cat.
50 Denbigh.
Boy^man cat.f 
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Kirby flo.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Lpool.
flo.* 
59 Lane, south.
Dick, flo.* 
61 York s.
east, authority ?
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.f 
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
68 Cheviot, "denizen." 
69 Westmor.
Balfour.
70 Cumber.
Baker ms.* 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Botany_ of Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale flo.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.* 
I 83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
38 
35.
BEEBEEIS VULGARIS.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
flo.
Lawson.f 
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
88 mid.
Arnott.
89 east, "not wild." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.^^^ 
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.''' 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.-'-' 
00 Clyde isles.
Kennedy cat.f 
01 Cantu^e.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
N.B. A departure from the 
usual method is made in 
this case of the Berbery, so 
difficult to decide on its in- 
digenous claims.
Authorities 
are cited throughout, either 
manuscript or printed.
The 
sign * indicates that the 
cited authority treats the 
shrub as certainly intro- 
duced ; the sign + indicates 
less positive decision against 
nativity.
36 Nymphaea 
alba.
1 Cornw.
west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
6 Somerset north ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south!
Adams sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Harris.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts ?
37 Worcester.
" very rare." 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
42 Brecon.
Lees ms.
43 Kadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.f 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
67 Northumb.
Oliver si?.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Montgomery ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson ms.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Brand sp.
99 Dumbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
36.
NYMPH.EA ALBA.
89 
08 Suth.
west !
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
" one locality." 
(Also reported as introduced 
or uncertainly wild in 3 7 
8 10 18 19 34 35 65 68 
81 109).
37 Nuphar 
lutea.
1 Corn, west ?
Gibson ms.
3 Devon soutli.
6 Som. north!
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.f 
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Angiesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg c^t.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Hugh Balf.
sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
Syme.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
99 Dumbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
N.B. A variation, with few 
rays to the stigma is 
confused with N.
pumila.
It occurs either in 32 or 
56, and in either 67 or 68 ; 
40 
37.
NUPH-VR LUTE A.
possibly also in.
40 and 58.
38 Nympheea 
pumila.
40 Salop?
E. C.
rep.
1858.^ 
58 Chester ?
Eobinson ire.
86 Stirling.
Clyde flo.
87 Pertli west.
Christie sp.
91 Kincar.
Dickie hot.
g. 
92 Aber.
south.
D. b.
g. 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
" White." 
98 Argyle.
Borrer," etc.
[9 29 32 56 67 or 68 77] .
39 Papaver 
hybridum.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Mrs Jones sp.
15 Kent east.
Cooper sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 v/est.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Lees, 1843.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman sp.
51 Flint ?
55 Leicester.
" Miss Adams !" 
59 Lane, south.
Ex. club.
sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
(61 62 63 68, extinct ?) 
40 Papaver 
Argemone.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
t 
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Martin sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Miss Twining sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Gr. Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.' Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
40.
PAPAYEK AKGEMONE.
41 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carniartlien.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 CarnarYon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Homtt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
f 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
AVard cat.
66 Diu'ham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
71 1.
Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.f 
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Maclagan sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
89 Perth east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south ?
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
10 Hebrides.
41 Papaver 
dubium.
Counties all, except 35 46 51 
60 70 71 73 86 97 98 
99 104 108 109 ; in all of 
which it is very likely to 
occur.
The counties for the 
two segregates cannot be 
satisfactorily made out.
42 Papaver 
Rhoeas.
Counties all, except 46 49 60 
70 71 72 73 86 88 89 
95.
In 92 93 94 it is 
marked by Professor Dickie 
as a i3lant probably intro- 
duced ; and beyond 94 
(Banff) there is no autho- 
rity except for 109 111 112, 
into which this common 
southern poppy is probably 
carried with agricultural 
seeds.
44 Meconopsis 
cambrica.
2 Cornwall east.
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.f 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Moggridge sp.
43 Radnor.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch.
50 Denbigh ?
64 Yorkm.w. Tatham, wild." 
(9 21 59 60 61 62 63 
65 69 70 72 75 83 85 
90 92 95).
This poppy 
readily establishes itself as 
a weed about houses and 
gardens ; and hence it has 
42 
44.
MECONOPSIS C AMERICA.
become seemingly wild in 
several counties ; possibly 
it may be really wild in 
Westmoreland 69.
45 Chelidonium 
majus.
Counties 1 to 96, with very few 
exceptions, have all been 
reported for this plant, but 
usually as one at best doubt- 
fully indigenous.
46 Glaucium 
luteum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west!
Warner sp.
14 east ?
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
34 Gloster west.
Cooper sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway ms.f 
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
81 Berw.
Hugh Balfour sp.
82 Haddington.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
12 Shetland.
One locality.
(21 37 66 67 80 95).
48 Corydalis 
claviculata.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex west.
Baker ms.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Berkeley ms.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Freeman sp.
19 north.
22 Berks.
26 Suff.
west.
Coleman ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway sp.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester ?
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
42 Brecon.
48.
CORYDALIS CLAVICULATA.
43 
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Bo^Tnan ms.
50 Denbigh.
51 Fhnt.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby !
Bowman ms.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
61 York s.
east.
Carpenter sp.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward ms.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman s]).
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
72 Dumf.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenf.
Montgomery cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
[21 Middlesex, extinct, if 
ever found] .
50 Fumaria 
capreolata.
Counties all, except 6 14 16 
26 30 32 51 53 60 71 
89 97 98 99 104 106 107 
109 112.
N.B. This is the aggregate 
species, long treated as a 
single integrate species in 
our botanical books ; more 
recently divided into four 
segregates, which are yet 
very imperfectly distin- 
guished by collectors ; their 
reported counties, cited 
underneath, are to be re- 
ceived with caution.
Fumaria 
pallid iflora.
1 Corn.
west.
" Once seen." 
3 Devon south.
Babington.
4 north.
Babington.
5 Som. south.
Syme.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell.
10 Wight.
" Hambrough." 
21 Middlesex.
34 Gloster west ?
40 Salop.
Babington.
41 Glamorgan.
Babington.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
66 Durham.
New flo N.D.
70 Cumberland.
Baker.
08 Sutherland !
Fumaria 
Borsei.
5 Som. south ?
10 Wight ?
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
40 Salop.
Babington.
45 Pembroke.
Babington.
rUMAKIA BOR^I.
58 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
''Norman." 
67 Northumberland.
Baker.
69 Westmoreand.
" Bab." 
70 Cumberland.
Baker.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy.
82 Kaddington.
Syme.
85 Fife.
Bos well Syme.
11 Orkney.
Boswell Syme.
N.B. Kabitats confused with 
those of " i3allidiflora." 
Fumaria 
confusa.
" agraria." 
1 Corn.
west.
Babington.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Babington.
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydell.
10 Wight.
More.
"Bab. herb." 
17 Surrey !
Syme.
45 Pembroke.
Babington.
46 Cardigan.
Babington.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington.
62 Anglesea.
Babington.
58 Chester.
Eng. bot.
ed.
3. 
69 Lane, south.
62 York.
n. east.
Bakerf 
63 s.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
Babington.
Fumaria 
muralis.
3 Devon south.
Tate 1871.
5 Som. south.
Syme.
10 Wight.
More.
E.B.3.
11 Kants south !
17 Surrey.
Babington.
21 Middlesex.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.
34 Gloster west.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
40 Salop.
Babington.
50 Denbigh.
Babington.
58 Chester.
63 York s.
west.
Newb.
Bab.
64 m.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
86 Stirling.
N.B. Kabitats inextricably con- 
fused in books with those of 
"confusa." For this and 
the preceding three segre- 
gates the few botanists cited 
are to be understood as those 
who have either collected 
the plant or only so named 
the specimens collected by 
others; the " sp." being 
omitted by the compiler, as 
not caring to certify their 
names on dried specimens 
only ; his own notes of past 
years recognizing only the 
aggregate " capreolata." 
51 Fumaria 
officinalis.
Counties all, except 49 51 53 
98 101 102 104 107 110; 
in all of which it likely 
occurs, at least as a colonist.
52 Fumaria 
micrantha.
8 Wilts south.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
13 Sussex west !
4 east.
"Mitten." 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
" alien." 
20 Kerts.
21 Middlesex.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. sp.f 
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms, 
62, FUMAKIA 
84 Gloster west.
Withers ms.
36 Hereford.
''E.
Davies !
" 
40 Salop.
Babington sp.
55 Leicester.
56 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
82 Haddington.
Syme ms.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linhthgow.
Syme E .
B .
3 .
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
95 Elgm.
" Dr. Innes." 
[10 Wight.
112 Shetland.] 
53 Fumaria 
parviflora.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Miss Barnard sp.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
33 or 34 Gloster.
E.C.rep.l864.
62 York n.
east.
Bean sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edmburgh.
87 Perth west.
[Very uncertain in 3 4 9 90 
95 96 109 112; errors in 
some, casual in others ?] .
54 Fumaria 
Vaillantii.
15 Kent east.
Henslow.
16 west.
Syme.
17 Surrey !
Syme.
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Webb flora.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould.
31 Hunts.
Newbould, " rare." 
MICRANTHA.
45 
62 York n.
east.
Vetch-field." 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
[Eeported also in 3 12 26 
33 or 34 83 112; either in- 
troduced or errors ?] .
55 Cakile 
maritima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Twining sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south 
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 !
n. east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr. Hooker sp.
46 05, CAKILE MARITIMA, 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
56 Crambe 
maritima.
2 Corn.
east.
Watt in B.
G. 
3 Devon south.
G. Lloyd sp.
4 north.
Eavenshaw.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.f 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Salmon.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
19 Essex north.
Extinct ?
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Smith in B.
G. 
41 Glamorgan.
B. G.
Dill.
Mat.
45 Pembroke.
Turton in B.
G. 
49 Carnarvon.
Christy.
Winch.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.
54 Line, north.
Banks in B.
G. 
71 York s.
east.
Baines flo.
62 n.
west.
Brunton.
69 Lake Lane.
Alton; B.
G. 
70 Cumb.
Eobson.
B. G.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"rare." 
73 Kircud.
G. N.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Bot.
of Ayrshire.
81 Berw.
A. Carr, 1830." 
84 Linlithgow !
Balf.
flo.
85 Fife.
Balf.
flo.
edinb.
00 Clyde ?
Landsborough." 
01 Canth-e.
Balfour sp.
02 Isla.
Balfour cat.
N.B. This plant apparently is 
decreasing on our coasts ; 
several of its localities rest- 
ing only on old records.
57 Coronopus 
didyma.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Clark sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
t 
11 Hants south.
Macreight sp.f 
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Salmon ms.
17 SiLvrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennems.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
39 Stafford.
Church.
Bab.sp.f 
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
49 Carnarvon.
56 Notts.
Carrington sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.f 
59 Lane, south.
Dickenson sp.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
75 Ayr. Landsborough ms.
85 Fife.
N.B. This is an opposite ex- 
57.
CORONOPUS- DIDYMA.
47 
ample to the preceding 
(Crambe) ; being one of a 
plant spreading into new 
localities, and these wide 
apart.
Best established in 
the Peninsula and South 
Wales.
Supposed to have 
come originally from Ame- 
rica.
58 Coronopus 
Ruellii.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.t 
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Twynam sp.
85 Fife.
Extinct in 1869." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie ms.f 
93 north.
Eoy ms.
f 
94 Banff.
''Mr. Wilson." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait ms.
06 Boss cast.
Authority ?
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
48 
58.
COKONOPUS EUELLII.
N.B. The scarcity of this wee 
in Scotland has led to ih 
full enumeration of its ascei 
tained counties.
60.
Thlaspi 
arvense.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
11 Hants south ?
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.f 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
War dale sp.
29 Cambridge ?
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
51 Flint.
Miss Attwood ms.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
d 55 Leicester, 
e 56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.f 
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
78 Peebles.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Macnab sp.
85 Fife !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
06 Boss east !
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
N.B. Seldom persistent ; often 
as a casual only.
61 Thlaspi 
perfoliatum.
23 Oxford.
Extinct.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice sp.
[22 38 64 70] .
62 Thlaspi 
alpestre.
41 Glamorgan.
62.
THLASPI ALPESTEE.
49 
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Sansom sp.
67 Derby !
64 York m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Dui'bam.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
[3 Devon.
23 Oxford] .
N.B. Three segregates thus : 
T. sylvestre 66 67 90.
virens 57.
occitanum49 50 64 65 66.
63 Capsella 
Bursa.
All the counties, except 46 97 
108 and the other nine ; 
doubtless really to be found 
in all.
64 Hutchinsia 
petraea.
6 Som. north.
Christy sp.
16 Ke7it icest.
Sansom sp.
84 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
36 Hereford.
Watkins sp.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman sp.
67 Derby.
Bickham sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
65 Teesdalia 
nudicaulis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
9 Dorset.
Man sel-Pley dell sp.
11 Hants south !
12 Hants north !
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth !
Price sp.
49 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Leefe ms.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
78 Peebles.
80 Pioxburgh.
Macnab sp.
81 Berwick ?
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
H 
50 
G5.
TEESDALIA NUDICAULIS.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
[85] .
66 Iberis 
amara.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Collins ms.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Manselcat.f 
12 Hants north.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
Henslow sp.
23 Oxford.
Godley sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Cooper sp.
29 Camb.
Coleman sp.
30 Bedford.
Brown sp.
(10 19 38 39 52 57 62 
64 65 67 69 77 80 81 
83 84 85 ; mostly garden 
escapes, and perhaps some 
of them not rightly assigned 
to I.
amara).
67 Lepidium 
latifolium.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
15 Kent.
east.
Berkeley ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suff.
east.
Notcutt sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
37 Worcester ?
41 Glamorgan ?
50 Denbigh.
t 
51 Flint.
H. Crewe sp.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.f 
58 Chester.
Webb sp.
60 Lane.
west.
62 York n.
east.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
" denizen." 
(3 13 17 55 64 77 80 81 
82 85 107; apparently in- 
troduced, and only casual 
in some of these counties, as 
Leicester and Lanark).
69 Lepidium 
Smithii.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Taylor sp.
17 Surrey !
Twining sp.
18 Essex south ?
Moxon ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort ms.
36 Hereford.
Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Eussell sp.
49 Carnarvon !
Babington ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
69.
LEPIDIUM SMITHII.
51 
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Ottley sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
Webb ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kii'kcud.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Macnab sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Gourlie sp.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Hugh Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp, 
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie fio.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
N.B. Localities for this occa- 
sionally confused.
70 Lepidium 
campestre.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
BeU Salter sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.t 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.f 
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Ku-k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s, east.
UNlVtKSlTY OF lUINOU 
LIBKARY 
52 
70.
LEPIDIUM CAMPESTRE.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries?
73 Kii'kcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linhthgow !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
71 Lepidmm 
ruderale.
1 Cornwall.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.f 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
15 Kent east.
16 west!
"G.E. Smith." 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
21 Midx.
Lawrence sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow !" 
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
37 Worcester.
41 Glamorgan.
Atwood ms.t 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.t 
45 Pembroke.
58 Chester, "casual." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.f 
66 Durham.
Storey sp.f 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.f 
80 Eoxburgh.
" casual." 
85 Fife.
Syme sp.+ 
N.B. A casual or ballast plant 
in several of its localities.
72 Cochlearia 
officinalis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Keys sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Dr. Tate." 
11 Hants south!
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Taylor sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
57 Derby !
alpina ?
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west, alpina ?
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
72.
COCHLEAEIA OFFICINALIS.
53 
71 Man. Forbes sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kii'kcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfi-ew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde -isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantu'e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
68 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
N.B. Said by Mr. Borrer not 
to be found on the coast of 
Sussex.
In the inland locali- 
ties in 38 50 55 56 80 it 
may be an introduced plant.
72 Cochlearia 
alpina.
" groenlandica." 
49 Carnarvon !
Babington ms.
64 York m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
72 Cochlearia 
danica.
1 Corn.
west.
Greenwood sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Kants south !
Macreight sp.
Sussex.
" on the coast." 
15 Kent west.
Smith cat.
19 Essex north.
25 Suffolk east.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
40 Salop ?
Leighton walls." 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Kogers sp.
46 Cardigan.
Purclias sp.
49 Carnarvon !
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Sansom sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
66 Durham.
67 Nortliumb.
Storev sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Chambers sp.
71 Man. Webb ms.
1867.
76 Pienfrcw.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick?
64 
72.
COCHLEARIA DANICA.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
OC Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland ?
alpina ?
N.B. The localities for this 
and the two preceding are 
rather confused together, 
through difficulties in dis- 
tinguishing three species.
72 Cochlearia 
anglica.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 " north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
21 Midx.
''Warren, 1869." 
25 Suff.
east.
Coleman ms.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Stephens sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
52 Anglesea.
57 Derby?
B. G.
error?
58 Chester.
Lewis sp.
69 Lane, south.
60 west !
66 Durham ?
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland?
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland ?
73 Kirkcudbright ?
74 Wigton ?
77 Lanark ?
83 Edinburgh?
95 Elgin ?
99 Dunbarton ?
03 Ebudes mid ?
N.B. An ill-understood spe- 
cies ; forms of C.
officinalis 
being confused with it.
74 Subularia 
aquatica.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
87 Perth west.
Brand sp.
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Hooker sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Eoy ms.
1870.
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
[40 59 72 85].
75 Draba 
aizoides.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge.
[5.
"Mr. Talbot, an error "] .
76 Draba 
rupestris.
88 Mid Perth !
96 Easterness.
''Cairngorm." 
98 Argyle ?
or Dunbarton ?
76.
DKABA RUPESTEIS.
55 
08 Suth.
west.
''Mr.Macnab." 
[11 90 94 111].
77 Draba 
incana.
39 Stafford?
Derby only?
49 Carnarvon.
57 Derby.
Wardale sp.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
88 Mid Perth !
90 Forfar!
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Cairngorm.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Stables sp.
07 Suth.
east.
08 west !
09 Caithness.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[11 South Hants] .
78 Draba 
muralis.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
30 Bedford ?
39 Stafford.
47 Montgomery.
Bowm.
sp.
67 Derby.
Bowman sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
(1 21 34 62 77 83 90 
100).
79 Draba 
verna.
Counties all, except 14 35 46 
51 60 86 97 98 101 102 
104 107 110 112 ; no 
doubt simply overlooked in 
most of these counties ; and 
whether the typical form 
occurs in all of the others 
is not ascertained.
79 Draba 
brachycarpa.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Gifibrd sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight.
More sp.
17 Surrey!
58 Chester.
New Lpl. flo.
62 N.E. York.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
69 AVestm.
E. Hodgson, sp.
85 Fife.
Thirsk Eeport, 1868.
N.B. Doubtless it will be found 
in most other counties ; but 
intermediate forms occur ; 
one such from Orkney, not 
easy to name positively.
79 Draba 
inflata.
88 Mid Perth.
Syme sp.
N.B. The Breadalbane hills, 
Perthshu-e, seem still to 
remain the only certain 
habitat for this apparently 
distinct species.
Something 
approximating to it has oc- 
curred in the Isle of Wight, 
Warwickshire, and North- 
east Yorkshire ; but in each 
case referred to brachycarpa.
83 Dentaria 
bulbifera.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east?
i 17 Surrey.
66 8B.
DENTARIA 
20 Herts.
21 Midx.
H. Kingsley sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
39 Stafford.
75 Ayr. James AVilson sp.
84 Cardamine 
amara.
7 Wilts north.
8 south?
9 Dorset.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Midx.
Harris sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. ms.f 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
34 west?
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
50 Denbigh.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester!
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
BULBIFERA.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland!
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh!
Balfour sp.
85 Fife, C.
Syme sp.
86 Sthling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
[2 East Cornwall?
4 North 
Devon ?
These must be 
held uncertain till verified ; 
although there would seem 
nothing unlikely in the 
habitats] .
85 Cardamine 
pratensis.
Counties all, except 46 97 107, 
and the usual nine ; but 
doubtless actually growing 
in these counties also.
86 Cardamine 
hirsuta.
Counties all, except 31 45 51 
53 54 80 86 97 98 107 
8G.
CARDAMINE HIRSUTA.
67 
108 109, in all of which it 
may be expected to occur.
The C.
eu-hirsiita, as distin- 
guished from C.
sylvatica, 
may be as generally distri- 
buted, although hitherto re- 
ported separately in scarcely 
half of the counties, from 
Cornwall to Moray, perhaps 
to Orkney and Shetland.
86 Cardamine.
sylvatica.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Goulding sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 "Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cal.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east ?
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east ?
80 Bedford ?
83 Gloster east ?
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Babington ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey ms.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid ?
89 east !
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
95 Elgin.
Dr. Innes." 
96 Easterness ?
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantu-e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
10 Hebrides.
N.B. The ?
affixed to the 
names of counties indicates 
that C.
hirsuta " has been 
described as growing by 
ditches or wet places ; thus 
leading to a supposition that 
C. sylvatica may be intended 
or included.
87 Cardamine 
impatiens.
2 Corn, east ?
" Crouch." 
3 Devon south.
"Roberts" sp.
I 
68 
87.
CAKDAMINE IMPATIENS.
4 Devon north ?
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
13 Sussex west.
Extinct ?
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
34 Gloster west.
Watkins sp.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman sp.
67 Derby !
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
62 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr ?
N.B. The C.
sylvatica has 
been frequently misreported 
as if C.
impatiens ; thus, 
throwing much doubt on 
several of the counties ; 
among which those enume- 
rated below are mostly 
errors thus occasioned : — 
[7 21 55 68 59 61 62 
70 77 83 97 111 ; also 2 
and 4 ?] 
88 Arabis 
thaliana.
Counties all, except 1 32 35 
46 46 49 51 53 54 60 
69 72 73 86 97 98 101 
102 107 108 110 112.
There can be little doubt 
that it could be found in all 
of these counties, if sought 
early in the season, before 
it becomes hidden by more 
robust plants.
And bota- 
nists accustomed to name it 
Sisymbrium tlialianum may 
omit to mark it under 
Arabis in a printed cata- 
logue.
89 Arabis 
petrsea.
48 Merioneth ?
' ' Lhwyd.
' ' 
49 Carnarvon.
Bab. sp.
70 Cumberland?
"Wood." 
88 Perth mid.
Light scot.
91 Kincardine, ''bed of Dee." 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
96 Easterness.
"Cairngorm." 
03 Mull.
" Maughan." 
04 Skye.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
10 Hebrides.
" Harris." 
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
South Wales.
Bab. man.
[3 40 57 62 65].
90 Arabis 
stricta.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
[70 Cumberland] .
91 Arabis 
ciliata 
var.
hispida.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. man.
N.B. The remarks on this 
plant in the third edition of 
' English Botany ' would 
suggest that it may occur 
in other counties, but over- 
looked as a form of Arabis 
liirsuta.
G. Don reported 
an "Arabis ciliata" from 
the hills of Forfarshire.
92 Arabis 
hirsuta.
1 Corn.
west, "north coast." 
2 east, "north coast." 
3 Devon south!
Hore sp.
02.
ARABIS HIRSUTA.
59 
6 Som. nortli !
Butler sp.
7 Wilts nortli.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell s^).
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex w.
"on the downs." 
14 e.
" on the downs." 
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey!
E. Wood ms.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton?
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Babington ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
42 Brecon.
" E.
Forster ms." 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea !
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Bowman ms.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
cast.
Baker cat.
63 York s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Diu'ham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland!
72 Dumfries.
Hutton sp.
75 Ayr.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh!
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Ed. cat.
"v.c." 
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stuiing.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Sutli.
west, "garden wall." 
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
94 Turritis 
glabra.
6 Som. nortli?
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset?
12 Hants north.
Pampliii ms.
16 Kent west.
Sandys sp.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennc sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
60 
94.
TURKITI3 GLABRA.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Gloster...?
Wintle ms.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Leefe sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigiiton cat.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Cliurcli Bab. sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Nortliumb.
70 Cumb.
Dickenson sp.
77 Lanark.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
Error?
99 Dunbarton.
N.B. Doubtfully native in its 
few Scottish counties.
95 Barbarea 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 49 51 53 
60 86 89 97 98 101 to 
112.
Li North Britain it is 
rare and doubtfully indigen- 
ous ; beyond the line of the 
Caledonial canal, it is absent 
from all the lists except 
that for Caithness.
See the 
* Comp.
Cyb. Brit.' for the 
distribution of its segre- 
gates.
98 Nasturtium 
officinale.
Counties all, except 46 49 60 
86 97 98 107 109 110; 
in all of which it may be 
held very likely to occur, as 
well as in the usual nine 
blanks also.
99 Nasturtium 
terrestre.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north!
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
99.
NASTURTIUM TERRESTRE.
Gl 
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Cli. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Ohver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Pienfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfoiu' sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
98 Ai'gyle ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
[92 South Aberdeen ?] 
100 Nasturtium 
sylvestre.
? Cornwall '?
Pascoe.
8 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
? Som. Collins ms.
Soutliby.
9 Dorset ?
Salter.
14 Sussex cast.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
I 24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
! 25 Suffolk east, 
j 27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
! 28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Butler sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 
west.
Simpson sp.
61 York 
s. east.
62 
n. east.
63 
s. west.
64 
m. west.
Lees cat.
65 
n. west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 North.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries ?
I 81 Berwick.
I 83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.f Balf.
sp.
89 Perth east.
Syme sp.
" var : 
siliquis brevioribus." 
[70 Cumberland ?] 
101 Nasturtium 
amphibium.
Armoracia 
amphibia.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
62 
101.
NASTURTIUM AMPHIBIUM.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortliton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
53 Lincoln south !
64 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west ?
65 n.
west, "frequent." 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
[3 72 77 83 85 94].
102 Sisymbrium 
officinale.
Counties all, except 97 104 1 
108 112 and the usual 
nine ; in all of which it may 
be expected, unless 112 
Shetland should be a real 
exception.
103 Sisymbrium 
Irio.
N.B. So uncertam in its ap- 
pearance, this may class 
more appropriately with the 
casuals than with the true 
constituents of our perma- 
nent flora.
104 Sisymbrium 
Sophia.
2 Cornwall east ?
3 Devon south ?
6 Som. north.
Withers, 1850.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 Sussex west?
"Sussex";B.
14 east ?
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Midx.
casual only ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford, extinct ?
25 Suff.
east.
Purclias ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper, sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bid well sp.
104.
SISYMBKIUM SOPHIA.
63 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
60 Denbigh.
Bomnan cat.
51 Fhnt !
52 Anglesea.
58 Lmcoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Hancock sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
77 Lanark ?
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine !
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
06 Boss.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
N.B. Somewhat irregular in 
its appearance in recorded 
localities ; ranging in places 
from a casual to a fanly in- 
digenous plant.
106 Erysimum 
cheiranthoides.
2 Corn.
cast.
Cunnack cat.
I I 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f i 
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
i 
8 soutli.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.f | 
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east 
15 Kent east.
Bossey sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Kev. E.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
B. 
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Wilmott ms." 
38 Warwick.
Mrs. Eussell.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
N.B. If not an aboriginal 
native of England, it has 
become so well established 
and so frequent in some of 
the southern counties as to 
stand intermediately be- 
tween the colonists and 
natives.
In Mid and North 
Britain, on the contrary, it 
seems to be scarcely better 
than a casual.
(50 53 55 
to 59 62 63 65 66 07 
71 81 84 85 95 103).
107 Erysimum 
AUiaria.
Counties all, except 46 51 53 
60 72 86 88 97 98 101 
to 105 107 to 112.
A 
64 
107.
EKYSIMUM ALLIAKIA.
recognized native from 
the south coast to the 
borders of the Grampian 
mountains.
Northward of 
latitude 56-57, west and 
east, some of the local lists 
mark it as a plant probably 
introduced.
It is one among 
many other such examples, 
of a species abundant in 
England, and shading off to 
the category of a " rare 
plant" in North Britain.
It is to be regretted that 
our technical arrangements 
should place this plant 
under a genus, to the other 
species of which it is so dis- 
similar.
110" Matthiola 
incana.
10 "Wight.
Bromfield sp.
14 Sussex east.
" Extinct." 
45 Pembroke.
Error ?
N.B. In Mr. A.
G. More's 
catalogue of Vectian plants 
this is marked as one uncer- 
tainly indigenous ; and his 
judgment on conflicting 
views about nativity is less 
one-sided than that of Dr.
Bromfield constantly showed 
itself to be.
Ill Matthiola 
sinuata.
4 Devon north.
Maw sp.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Baker sp.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
N.B. This appears to have 
been found at remote dates 
} in Cornwall, Dorset, and 
Sussex ; has it been seen in 
those counties within the 
past half century ?
113 Brassica 
oleracea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Henfrey sp.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.f 
15 Kent east !
41 Glamorgan ?
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth ?
49 Carnarvon.
N.B. If this cabbage were not 
so liable to distrust in most 
of its alleged localities, as a 
probable escape from culti- 
vation, it might perhaps be 
accepted as native on the 
cliffs of Kent, the Peninsula, 
and South Wales.
Dr. Tate 
wrote in 1871 " truly na- 
tive " in South Devon.
(18 
27 62 66 67 69 75 81 83 
85 86 100).
114 Brassica 
campestris.
Rapa.
Napus.
The exact application of these 
names is still so unsettled, 
and the records of localities 
so confused through mis- 
nomers and uncertainties as 
to the real wildness of the 
things intended by the 
variously applied names, 
that no real usefulness could 
arise from a merely con- 
densed enumeration of re- 
114.
BKASSICA CAIMPESTKIS.
65 
ported counties.
The plant 
now so j)lentiful along the 
Thames is apparently a wild 
state of the Turnip, whether 
named Puipa or campcstris.
To record it as Napus was 
at first simply a misnomer 
thi'ough not seeing the j)lant 
at a sufficiently early stage 
of its growth.
Uninquking 
repetitions of error cannot 
amend or confirm the origi- 
nal error itself.
116 Sinapis 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 4G 97 and 
the usual nine ; in all of 
which it might be assumed 
to occur.
117 Sinapis 
alba.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennc cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
I 28 west, 
j 29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.f 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
68 Clieviotland.
" colonist." 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick, "common." 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
8Q castif 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.f 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.f 
01 Cantu'c.
Balfour cat.
02 Ebudes south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.f 
10 Hebrides.
66 
118.
SIN APIS NIGRA.
118 Sinapis 
nigra.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
^ Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Fox sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Smith cat.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purclias ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoii cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould ms.f 
32 Northton.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
f 
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglcsea.
53 Lincoln south !
f 
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
[72 77 81 83 85 95].
120 Sinapis 
tenuifolia.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel ms.f 
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex west !
15 Kent east !
Beesley sp.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Hurst ms.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford, extinct ?
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford ?
40 Salop.
Shawe sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merion.
Mrs. Kussell sp.
49 Carnarvon!
68 Chester !
Bowman sp.
I 62 York n.
ep.st.
Baker cat.f 
120.
SINAPIS TENUIFOLIA.
67 
63 York s.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey s^.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland.
[10 77 81 85] .
121 Sinapis 
muralis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
introduced." 
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Butler sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.f 
41 Glamorgan.
Purchas sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
"Webb cat.f 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.f 
66Durh.
Hortsp.f "ballast." 
67 Xorthumb.
Storey sp.f 
70 CumherUmd.
85 Fife.
Brand.
f ]3alf.
cat.f 
N.B. The habitats of this and 
the preceding species are 
confused in our recorded j 
localities for the two plants.
\ 
122 Sinapis 
monensis.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester !
Fordliam sp.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
69 Westmoreland?
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
72 Dumfries.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Prof.
Balfour sp.
76 Kenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hooker sp.
01 Cantu-e.
(2 17 21 60 66 82 90 
104, casual or doubtful ; in- 
cluding S.
Cheiranthus).
123 Raphanus 
Raphanistrum.
Counties all, except 5 15 46 
51 60 86 97 99 104 107 
109 ; likely to occur in all.
124 Raphanus 
maritimus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Payne sp.
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 AVight !
More cat.
14 Sussex east.
Trevelyan ms.
15 Kent east?
25 Suffolk east ?
27 Norfolk east ?
45 Pembroke.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
61 York K.
east ?
60 Durham, ''ballast hills." 
70 Cumberland.
" Jknson." 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray sp.
G8 
124.
RAPHANUS MARITIMUS.
74 Wigton.
Macnab sj).
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
98 Argyle.
Goiirlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
91 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
[112 Bressa; Edm. flo.] .
125 Reseda 
Luteola.
Counties all, except 51 73 86 
88 93 97 to 100 102 to 
105 107 to 112.
Du- 
biously indigenous in Moray 
and westward of the Cale- 
donian Canal.
126 Reseda 
lutea.
1 Corn., west ?
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north !
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Martin sp.
14 _ east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 w«st !
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south 
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Sutfolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west, Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop, one locality.
41 Glamorgan.
Collins ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam sp.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.f 
(51 75 77 81 82 83 84 
85 89 90 92 95 96).
Dr. Boswell Syme holds it 
''apparently truly native" 
in Fife.
Almost all other 
botanists of Scotland, whose 
opinion can be of any au- 
thority in the matter, mark 
it as an introduced plant in 
the Scottish counties, as 
also in the most northerly 
counties of England.
128 Helianthemum 
vulgare.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
128.
HELL\NTHEMUM VULGARE.
G9 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east ?
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east?
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
63 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lane, south.
Chadwick sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 York s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Koxbui'gh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Sthiing.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardhie.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff'.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
129 Helianthemum 
polifolium.
3 Devon south.
G. Lloyd sp.
5 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
[34 Glouc.
37 Wore] .
130 Helianthemum 
canum.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Hooker sp.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
69 AVestmoreland !
70 Cumberland ?
[1 34 39].
70 
131.
HELIANTHEMUM BREWERI.
131 Helianthemum 
Breweri.
52 Anglesea.
Ball sp.
132 Viola 
palustris.
Counties all, except 5 12 19 
20 24 26 29 31 32 33 
34 46 51 54 60 80 86 
99 ; in most of wliicli doubt- 
less it is to be found if 
sought.
133 Viola 
odorata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.-'' 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
f 
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.!
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Newman ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
Henslow ms.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow ms.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
J. Hooker ms.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babmgton cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
53 Lincoln south !
f 
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat." 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Nortliumb.
New flora." 
68 Cheviotland.
New flora." 
69 Westmoreland !
f 
70 Cumber.
Baker cat.
j 
71 Man. Forbes cat.f 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick.
Border flora." 
82 Haddmgton.
Balf.
flo.
83 Edmburgh Balf.
cat.f 
85 Fife.
Syme." Balf.
flo.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
Gard.
flora.
f 
[111 Orkney ; Lowe's list] .
N.B. In the above enumeration 
of counties some variation 
has been made from the 
usual plan.
All the coun- 
ties are enumerated by 
133.
VIOLA ODOKATA.
71 
name, although the Violet 
may have been reported m 
them simply as an intro- 
duced plant.
The is here 
brought into use to distin- 
guish counties in which the 
violet is considered to be 
certainly or very probably 
introduced.
The f indi- 
cates a less positive opinion 
against its nativity.
Seen 
by myself in many counties, 
Surrey and North Lincoln 
are the only two in which I 
could look upon it as truly 
native.
134 Viola 
hirta.
1 Corn.
west.
Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
MaAv cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Sui-rey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Hanbury sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
L eight on cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea !
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortliumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
72 Dumfries, "frequent." 
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Brand sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Symc cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Symc sp." 
[58 Chester ; Dick.
Lp. flo] .
135 Viola 
sylvatica.
V. canina, Sm.
Counties all, except 51 60 and 
the usual nine ; in all of 
72 135.
VIOLA 
which doubtless it occurs.
This distribution may be 
taken to represent that of 
the more usual segregate, 
Eiviniana.
135 Viola 
Reichenbachiana.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Somerset...
? 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
13 Sussex west.
Syme ms.
17 Surrey!
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtonsp.
33 Gloster east.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
58 Chester !
Eobinson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
N.B. Probably will be found 
in many other counties.
135 Viola 
arenaria.
66 Durham.
69 Westm.
Backhouse ms.
135 Viola 
canina, Bab.
V. flavicornis, Sm.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Parfitt sp.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
SYLVATICA.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
sp.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Stevens s^d.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Hurst ms.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
"Borrer." 
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Douglas sp.
31 Hunts !
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
" arenaria." 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
52 Anglesea.
Babington.
53 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
58 Chester !
Brent sp.
59 Lane, south.
Sansom sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Oliver sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
135.
VIOLA CANINA.
73 
76 Eenfrew.
Gait ms.
77 Lanark.
Gait ms.
78 Peebles.
Mauglian sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Tyacke sp.
84 Linlitligow.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stii-Kng. Gait ms.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
00 Clyde -isles.
Hennedy cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
N.B. This violet and the 
* sylvatica ' have been so 
much confused together 
under the common name of 
' canina,' that the exact 
severance of their localities, 
as recorded in books, is now 
impossible.
Perhaps the 
present species will be found 
as widely diffused as is the 
' sylvatica,' although cer- 
tainly less frequent.
Often 
confused with the distinct 
'lactea,' through looking to 
the shape of leaf, instead 
of the flowers.
135 Viola 
lactea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
11 Hants south !
14 Sussex east.
Carr sp.
16 Kent west.
More sp.
22 Berks !
[8 9 10 27 29 31 50 58 
78, all or mostly errors; no 
specimens have been seen 
by me from any of these 
counties] .
135 Viola 
stagnina.
29 Cambridge.
Hen slow sp.
31 Hunts.
"Babington." 
53 Lincoln.
Nicholson sp.
[1 2 63 ; confused with 
' lactea ' in these counties] .
136 Viola 
tricolor, 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 97 107 
and the usual nine, under 
one or other of the two 
names.
V. arvensis is re- 
ported from 1 to 112 inclu- 
sively, but with several of 
the intervening counties 
still in blank.
The plant of 
arable- lands has flowers 
ranging from the apetalous 
state to that with large 
party-coloured petals full 
twice the length of the 
calyx ; and this so gradu- 
ally that any hard line of 
distinction becomes impos- 
sible.
The plant of untilled 
lands, with yellow or party- 
coloured flowers and sub- 
perennial root, might pos- 
sibly be kept apart as " eu- 
tricolor." But that is not 
the distinction made by 
botanists in their applica- 
tions of the two names ; so 
that " eu-tricolor " of some 
collectors is "arvensis" of 
other botanists, and vice 
versa.
136 (137) Viola 
Curtisii.
1 Cornwall west ?
4 Devon north !
Maw sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
L 
74 
136 (137) VIOLA CURTISII.
52 Anglesea.
Babington ms.
58 Chester !
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
75 Ayr. Gait ms.
1870.
00 Cumbrae.
Gait ms.
136 (137) Viola 
lutea.
1 Cornwall west ?
3 Devon south ?
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Miss Bell sp.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam ms.
40 Salop.
Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Turner ms.
43 Kadnor.
Atwood ms.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Attwood ^p.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh!
61 Flint.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south ?
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Leefe sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
80 Boxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme eat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Tyacke sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Islay.
Balfour cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
10 Hebrides.
138 Drosera 
rotundifolia.
Counties all, except 7 33 34 
46 49 51 60 84 86 107; 
in some of these doubtless 
seen by myself in years 
long past.
139 Drosera 
intermedia.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.
4 north?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Kants south!
Notcutt eat.
12 north !
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey !
ElHs ms.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
139.
DKOSEEA INTERMEDIA.
75 
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
34 Gloster west.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
62 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Henfrey sp.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
" sp." Baker.
69 Westmoreland !
Ball sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 DumMes. Gray sp.
73 Kirkcudbright?
75 Wigton?
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
99 Dunbarton.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
[21 61 63 64 65 67 68 76 
85 92 100 111 112; pos- 
sibly two or three of these 
may be correct, and two or 
three of the named counties 
be erroneous.
Much con- 
fusion between the plants 
through use of the name 
* longifolia ' for either] .
140 Drosera 
anglica.
8 Devon south.
lUisscll ms.
5 Som. south.
Parfitt ms.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell ins.
11 Hants south?
" Curtis," etc.
Sussex ?
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Mar sham sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
40 Salop.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
58 Chester.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane, south.
Leyland sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray sp.
75 Ayr. Hooker sp.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Extinct ?
85 Fife.
Prof.
Balfour ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Ai-gyle.
Hooker s^d.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
"T.
Bell" sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid!
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Graham sp.
08 west !
Greville sp.
09 Caithness.
Macnab sp.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland?
"longifolia." 
[1 6 etc.
not sufficiently 
testihed] .
141 Polygala 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 46 51 60 
76 
141.
POL YG ALA VULGARIS.
86 98 99 and the usual I 
nine ; either " vulgaris "or 
" depressa " doubtless is to 
be found in all the counties.
141 Polygala 
eu-vulgaris.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
10 Wight !
13 Sussex west !
16 Kent west!
17 Surrey!
21 Middlesex?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
29 Cambridge!
Harris sp.
52 Angiesea !
59 Lane, south ?
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
12 Shetland?
Tate cat.
N.B. This segregate will 
likely be found in many 
other counties ; but few col- 
lectors really distinguish it 
from 'depressa;' and the 
' oxyptera ' comes in be- 
tween them even more 
dubiously.
141 Polygala 
oxyptera.
1 Cornwall.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
3 Devon south.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
29 Cambridge.
Syme,"ciliata." 
41 Glamorgan.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Fisher sp.
65 York n.
west ?
Ward cat.
67 Northumberland.
71 Man ?
141 Polygala 
depreBsa.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
11 Hants south !
12 north.
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suff.
west.
" ciliata var." 
28 Norfolk west.
Notcutt sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh!
85 Fife.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
12 Shetland.
^ Tate sp.
N.B. Counties far from being 
fully ascertained ; this is 
likely the most frequent 
of the three segregates.
141 Polygala 
calcarea.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
16 Kent west.
Christy sp.
17 Surrey!
Symc sp.
22 Berks.
Syme sp.
141.
POLYGALA CALCAKEA.
77 
23 Oxford.
Dutliie sp.
33 Gloster east.
Stephens sp.
44 Carinartlien ?
Motley ms.
[1 Scilly Isles ?
A single 
specimen found there by 
Mr. Townsend] .
141 Polygala 
austriaca.
uliginosa.
15 East Kent.
Duthie sp.
65 N.W. York.
Backhouse !
142 Frankenia 
laevis.
10 Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Macreight sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east!
Wardale sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Warner sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge?
66 Durham, "ballast hills." 
(1 Cornwall ; x^lantcd).
143 Elatine 
hexandra.
1 Corn.
west.
Crotch sp.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey!
Salmon sj).
22 Berks.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
40 Salop.
Hind sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Hort sp.
52 Angle sea.
Babington sp.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
58 Chester.
Hardy sp.
87 Perth west.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south?
Callater?
01 Clyde-isles.
144 Elatine 
hydropiper.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
37 Worcester.
Irvine sp.
52 Angiesea.
Hooker sp.
145 Dianthus 
prolifer.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Stratton sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
22 Berks.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
[3 21 37 ; and perhaps ex- 
tinct in some of the other 
counties] .
146 Dianthus 
Armeria.
1 Cornwall west.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
8 Wilts south.
Miss Bell ms.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
Extinct?
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
IG west.
Denncs ms.
17 Surrey!
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Ikicks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock ms.
2G wxst.
27 Norfolk east.
Bloxam ms.
28 west.
30 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
78 
146.
DIANTHUS ARMERIA.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
"Miss Potts." 
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Ibbotson." 
63 s.
west.
Newb.
ms.
66 Durham.
70 Cumberland.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat."' 
89 Perth east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar.
N.B. Remarkably uncertain 
or temporary in its locali- 
ties ; perhaps scarcely better 
than a casual in some of the 
counties named above] .
149 iDianthus 
caesius.
6 North Somerset.
Christy sp.
(23 83).
[32 34 53 69] .
150 Dianthus 
deltoides.
3 Devon south.
Poole ms.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent east ?
17 Surrey.
Twining sp.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
I 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
H.E. Smith sp." 
59 Lane, south.
Webb.
cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Spruce sp.
64 m.
west ?
Biden sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
" Mr. Dunlop." 
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh!
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Mrs. Dickson.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
(10) [36 70 95 101 106 
112] .
151 Saponaria 
officinalis.
N.B. On record for nearly 
all the counties of England, 
and for several in Wales 
and Scotland; but almost 
invariably reported by re- 
liable collectors as an intro- 
duced plant.
152 Silene 
inflata.
Counties all, except 46 49 86 
88 97 98 99 101 104 107 
108 110 [111] 112.
Caith- 
ness, possibly introduced ; 
Brown cat.
153.
SILENE MAEITIMA.
79 
153 Silene 
maritima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Twining sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suff.
east.
Notcutt sp.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
" 2800 feet." 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
62 Anglesea !
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
GO Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Bailey sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 A}T.
Duncan cat.
76 Ptcnfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow I Balfour cat.
85 Fife, byme cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east !
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. The technical distinctions 
between this plant and the 
preceding are very slight, 
yet seeming constant, and 
under varied conditions of 
garden culture during several 
successive descents.
154 Silene 
Otites.
20 Suff.
west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.
[46 62].
(66).
155 Silene 
anglica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
Somerset.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Miss Twining sp.
10 Wiglit.
More cat.
80 
155.
SILENE ANGLICA.
11 Hants south !
.12 north!
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
14 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
EUis ms.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
' 45 Pembroke.
Mrs. Kussell sp.
48 Merioneth.
42 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Foggitt sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat." 
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
96 Easterncss.
Stables cat.
(66 67 " ballast hills ").
156 Silene 
nutans.
3 Devon south.
8 Wilts south ?
10 Wight.
More sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
39 Stafford?
.o;...
.- 
40 Salop?
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Bowman ms.
56 Notts.
Eddison sp.
57 Derby !
Ch. Bab.
sp.
85 Fife.
Maughan sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Mrs. Dickson.
(20 55 70).
[2 6 11 17 
32 64 111].
156 Silene 
italica.
16 West Kent.
Syme sp.
29 Cambridge.
Barton sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Evans sp.
157 Silene 
noctiflora.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Brown sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
BeU sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Britten cat.
157.
SILENE 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviotland.
" colonist." 
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
(3 10 14 17 21 39 55 59 
61 81 83; some of these 
counties perhaps through 
misnomers).
158 Silene 
conica.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
26 Suff.
east.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock ms.f 
28 west.
Wardale sp.
82 Haddington.
Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
Reid sp.
Croall sp.
(22 67 95).
[37 39].
159 Silene 
acaulis.
49 Carnarvon !
Leefe sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
89 east.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
03 Eb. mid.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss west.
Graham sp.
NOCTIFLORA.
81 
08 Sutherland west ?
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
160 Lychnis 
alpina.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
90 Forfar.
J. Macnab sp.
161 Lychnis 
Viscaria.
43 Eadnor.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Gourlie sp.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
162 Lychnis 
Flos-cuculi.
Counties all, except 46 49 51 
97 ; in all of which doubt- 
less it does occur.
163 Lychnis 
diurna.
Counties all, except 31 86 97 
98 107 109.
Possibly it 
may be absent from 31, 
Huntingdon.
Just within 
the county of Cambridge ; 
Prof.
Babington ms.
164 Lychnis 
vespertina.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 cast.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
82 
164.
LYCHNIS VESPERTINA.
8 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east!
Coleman cat.
't- 
is Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford!
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
51 Flint 1 
52 Angiesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
i 73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
i 75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
1 76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh!
Balfour cat.
i 85 Fife.
Syme cat.
i 66 Stnling!
I 87 Perth west !
; 89 east !
90 Forfar.
' 91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
I 93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Bank.
06 Boss east!!
165 Lychnis 
Githago.
Counties all, except 45 46 49 
51 60 69 86 88 97 98 
104 107 108 109t 110 
112f.
166 Moenchia 
erecta.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Stephens sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston v.
sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
166.
MOENCHIA EKECTA.
88 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Sansom sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Radnor.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon!
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
63 York s.
west.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
167 Sagina 
apetala.
Counties all, except 35 48 60 
69 70 72 73 86 87 88 
[97] 98 99 102 107.
It 
is now impossible to ai)por- 
tion the recorded counties 
precisely among the tliree 
segregates treated under- 
neath.
S. maritima luis 
been longer known, and 
thus more often recorded 
distinctly ; though several 
of its alleged localities may 
be held to require verifi- 
cation.
S. ciliata is per- 
haps more frequent than S.
apetala (seg.) and extends 
farther northward.
167 Sagina 
maritima.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suff.
east.
Coleman ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
41 Glamorgan.
Withers sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Hunt sp.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Bowman s}).
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
Fisher sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Benfrew.
Hennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
H8 1^'jdinburgh !
J^alfour s]).
84 
167.
SAGINA MARITIMA.
84 Linlithgow.
Macnab sp.
85 Fife.
Syme, "genuina." 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 Ross east.
Campbell sp.
08 Suth.
west ?
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[81 Berw.
97 Ben Nevis] .
167 Sagina 
apetala !
1 Cornwall west.
3 Devon south.
6 Somerset north !
10 I.
of Wight !
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
34 Gloster west !
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
47 Montgomery.
64 Lincoln north !
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
81 Berwick.
Eng. bot.
cd.
3. 
N.B. Very doubtful farther 
north, as yet.
The example 
from Montgomery was sent 
to the Exchange Club 
labelled as " Arenaria tenui- 
folia ;" and there are grounds 
for suspecting that S.
ciliata 
also has been occasionally 
so misreported.
168 Sagina 
ciliata.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Barnard sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks!
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Newbouldms.
27 Norf.
east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
Newbould ms.
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
47 Montgom.
Warren sp.
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
77 Lanark ?
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
91 Kincardine.
Boy ms.
168.
SAGINA CILIATA.
85 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Eoy, sent to me." 
168 Sagina 
procumbens.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine.
169 Sagina 
saxatilis.
Spergula 
saginoides.
88 Perth mid!
Ball sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
08 Suth.
west.
Stables sp.
[36 75 111].
169 Sagina 
subulata.
Spergula 
subulata.
1 Corn.
west.
Gibson ms.
2 -east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
RusscU sp.
12 north !
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east ?
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks !
24 Bucks?
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
32 Northton ?
39 Stafford.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea !
58 Chester.
Webb sp.
61 York s.
east?
62 n.
east.
67 Northumberland ?
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
69 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Syme sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
170 Sagina 
nivalis.
88 Mid Perth.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton ?
or Argyle ?
[90 Man. ed 3.
104 Brit, 
flo.
ed.
8] .
171 Sagina 
nodosa.
Spergula 
nodosa.
1 Corn, west I Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat ?
" 
3 Devon south ?
4 north !
Maw cat.
171.
SAGINA NODOSA.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Preston v.
sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east ?
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 York m.
west.
Twining sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
66 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku-kcudb right.
Gray cat.
75 Ayi-.
Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat'.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east !
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
Gillies herb.
11 Orkney.
Tate sp.
12 Shetland.
N.B. This would appear to 
rank among the " common 
plants ' ' by its wide and 
nearly general distribution ; 
but its localities are rather 
dotted over the island, than 
really continuous like those 
of the Daisy and other more 
truly common species.
172.
SPERGULA ARVENSIS.
87 
172 Spergula 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 35 49 60 
and the usual nine ; no doubt 
to be found in all these dozen 
seeming vacancies.
173 Honkeneja 
peploides.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Gissing sp.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Hall sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south!
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
cast.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbriglit.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantu'e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
174 Spergularia 
marina.
Lepigonum 
marinum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Stephens sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Syme sp.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
16 west!
18 Essex south 
19 north.
88 
174.
SPERGULARIA MARINA.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lmcoln south !
Butler sp.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n..east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
174 Spergularia 
marginata.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Stephens sp.
10 Wight.
More.
13 Sussex west !
52 Anglesea.
Davies.
58 Chester.
Webb.
59 Lane, south !
67 Northumberland.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
N.B. Probably found in most 
of the counties indicated 
above for the aggregate 
"marina." I am not able 
clearly to distinguish this 
segregate and the next, al- 
though the extreme ex- 
amples do appear so dif- 
ferent".
174 Spergularia 
neglecta.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north ?
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
13 Sussex west !
, 
15 Kent east!
18 Essex south ?
19 north.
Varenne ms.
28 Norf.
west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.
37 Worcester.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
51 Flint!
174.
SPERGULAEIA NEGLECTA.
89 
62 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
58 Chester.
Hunt.
"Warren.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west ?
61 York s.
east ?
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
66 Durham.
Norman ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
85 Syme cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme E.B. ed.
3. 
174 Spergularia 
rupestris.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Maw sp.
9 Dorset.
Boswell-Syme ms.
10 Wight !
More cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Hunt sp.
52 Anglesea.
Wmdsor sp.
58 Chester.
Webb sp.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis sp.
71 Man. Webb ms.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
N.B. Very little differing from 
some states of ''neglecta," 
and perhaps only the same 
thing more advanced in 
age, having survived many 
seasons.
175 Spergularia 
rubra.
Counties all, except 26 35 47 
51 60 70 73 75 80 86 89 
97 98 101 to 105 107 to 
112.
177 Arenaria 
norvegica.
112 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[Ill Murchison and Peach] .
178 Arenaria 
serpyllifolia.
Counties all, except 35 49 72 
86 88 89 97 98 99 104 
107 109 112; in most of 
these it will be found either 
native or colonist.
The 
counties for ' ' leptoclados ' ' 
are not here attempted 
apart, because several of the 
specimens which I have seen 
so labelled were simply slen- 
der states of serpyllifolia.
I have seen the true plant in 
6 10 17 21 and likely in 
other counties, on walls and 
by roadsides, not in corn- 
fields.
179 Arenaria 
tenuifolia.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
11 Hants south.
More ms.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Smith sp.
16 Kent west.
Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordliam sp.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suff.
west.
Duthie sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward ms.
28 we^t.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortliton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
N 
90 
179.
ABENAKIA TENUIFOLIA.
62 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
[1 2 3 9 37 39 40 59 83 
35 ; an old or poor au- 
thority] .
180 Arenaria 
verna.
1 Corn, west!
Bennett sp.
6 Som. north.
Stephens sp.
39 Stafford.
42 Brecon ?
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester ?
60 Lane.
west.
63 York s.
west?
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright?
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
88 Perth mid.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
[32 36 56 77 90; errors 
or insufficiently vouched] .
181 Arenaria 
rubella.
88 Mid Perth !
Hooker sp.
08 West Suth.
Graham exc.
" On one cliff on Ben Hope, 
Sutherland." 
181 Arenaria 
uliginosa.
Spergula 
stricta.
66 Durham.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
182 Arenaria 
trinervia.
Counties all, except 46 49 51 
60 71 75 80 86 88 89 
97 98 101 to 105 107 to 
112 ; in many of which it is 
likely to occur.
184 Stellaria 
nemorum.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
40 Salop ?
41 Glamorgan?
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
51 Flint?
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey ms.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife ?
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme eat.
88 mid !
Campbell sp.
184.
STELLAEIA NEMOEUM.
91 
90 Forfar.
Eoy sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie ms.
94 Banff.
Grant Duff." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dimbarton.
Hooker sp.
[2 Bot. Soc.
Ed. 3 Flo. Dev.
37 Lees.
38Bree.
50 Faun.
Grust.
Authorities not satis- 
factory for a plant whicli lias 
been confused by collectors 
witb Cerastium aquaticum 
and with nemoral varieties 
of Stellaria media.
The ?
follows the names of other 
counties, for which the au- 
thority may be rather better, 
although still scarcely suffi- 
cient.
185 Stellaria 
media.
Counties all, except 46 and the 
usual nine ; in all of which 
no doubt it occurs.
186 Stellaria 
Holostea.
Counties all, except 51 60 86 
89 97 98 102 104 107 110 
112 ; likely to occur in all 
of these, unless 110 and 
112 be real exceptions.
187 Stellaria 
glauca.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
"Newnham." 
13 Sussex west.
Borrcr cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bccsley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Hort sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
50 Denbigh.
Gordon ms.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Gordon ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
[1 2 3 5 or 6 7 14 16 
35 37 39, insufficiently 
vouched.
Both S.
uliginosa 
and Holostea have been mis- 
reported as S.
glauca, partly 
perhaps through their glau- 
cous-green hue] .
188 Stellaria 
graminea.
Counties all, except 49 97 98 
102 107 110 and the usual 
nine ; likely to occur in all.
92 
189.
STELLARIA ULIGINOSA.
189 Stellaria 
uliginosa.
Counties all, except 31 32 34 
35 49 51 53 60 73 80 
84 86 98 101 ; simply 
overlooked in these ?
190 Stellaria 
cerastoides.
Cerastium 
trigynum.
88 Perth mid.
92 Aber.
south!
Brand sp.
94 Banff?
" H.
C. Watson." 
96 Easterness.
Grordon sp.
97 Westerness !
Koy sp.
191 Cerastium 
aquaticum.
2 Cornwall east ?
3 Devon- south !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight More cat.
12 Hants north!
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Mrs. Atkins sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts!
Newbould cat.
32 Northton I Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Eussell sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint!
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester Bowman ms.
59 Lane, south?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
(66 80).
[77 80 90 111].
192 Cerastium 
glomeratum.
Counties all, except 32 46 51 
60 86 97 98 107; in all 
these it is sure to occur.
193 Cerastium 
triviale.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine.
194 Cerastium 
semid ecandrum.
1 Cornwall west ?
2 east?
3 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
194.
CERASTIUM 
SEMIDECANDRUM.
03 
10 Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Syme ms.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
38 War^vick.
Kii-k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam sp.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 8.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
sp.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
CroaU sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
[Ill Clouston.
112 Ed- 
monston] .
194 Cerastium 
tetrandrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Babington ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Lingwood sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
39 Stafford?
"Mr. Spark." 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
94 
194.
CERASTiUM TETKANDRUM.
49 Carnarvon!
52 Anglesea.
Wincli ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam nis.
58 Chester !
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Wood sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Hort sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland?
M. G.
71 Man. Carrington sp.
75 Ayr. Gourhe sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Kaddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh!
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme sp.
86 Stu:hng.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat, 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
10 Kebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Much confused with 
'semidecandrum;' and some 
localities of * tctrandrum ' 
probably still assigned to 
the other species, or vice 
versa.
194 Cerastium 
pumilum.
" glutinosum." 
1 Corn.
west.
C. C.B." 1839.
3 Devon south.
*' Town send." 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
17 Surrey.
" Dickson, 1778." 
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
52 Anglesea?
C. humile?
N.B. Specimens picked on 
Molesey Hurst, Surrey, and 
labelled ' ' tetrandrum " by 
myself, were named gluti- 
nosum " by Mr. Lloyd of 
Nantes.
The counties of 
Durham and Fife have been 
reported, but through mis- 
nomers.
The botanists of 
Cornwall and Devon do not 
appear to have seen this 
plant there.
[66 85] .
195 Cerastium 
arvense.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
12 Kants north.
14 Sussex east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Kerts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Fordham sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Kunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortliton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas "v.
s." 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop?
" Mr. Spare." 
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
195.
CERASTIUM AEYENSE.
95 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Kiugsley sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Mr. Dunlop." 
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
93 north.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
[3 9 111 ; the name ap- 
pears to mislead some col- 
lectors, who thus label C.
vulgatum, or report " C.
arvense " from " corn- 
fields." 
196 Cerastium 
alpinum.
49 Carnarvon.
Ball sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Gutch sp.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
97 Westcrness.
Boy sp.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
197 Cerastium 
latifolium.
49 Carnarvon.
Sandys sp.
86 Sth-ling.
88 Perth mid !
H. Balf.
sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
94 Banff.
Barry sp.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
12 Shetland.
C. nigrescens.
[86 98 Lightf.
Ill Neill].
198 Cherleria 
sedoides.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
98 Argyle.
04 Eb. north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
12 Shetland?
200 Linum 
perenne.
19 Essex north.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
32 Northton?
55 Rutland.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
N.B. Linum angustifolium 
has repeatedly been misre- 
portcd as L.
perenne ; and 
more strangely L.
usitatis- 
simumalso.
Probably it was 
one or other of these in the 
following counties [3 4 0 
96 
200.
LINUM PERENNE.
9 11 14 15 18 20 40 
83].
201 Linum 
angustifolium.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east !
West sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Ess6x south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
22 Berks?
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Barnard ms.
28 west.
Babingtonsp.
33 Gloster east ?
36 Hereford.
39 Stafford?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south !
71 Man.
[62].
(66).
202 Linum 
catharticum.
Counties all, except 86 98 and 
the usual nine ; doubtless 
to be found in all of them.
203 Radiola 
millegrana.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Somerset.
Southby cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Coleman ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct?
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Withers sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Kussell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington ms.
50 Denbigh?
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Sansom sp.
59 Ijanc.
south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
68 Cheviotland.
203.
EADIOLA 
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Carnegie sp.
88 Perth mid.
Brand sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Croall sp.
98 Arg;)ie.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantu-e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
05 Ross west.
06 east !
Gordon cat.
Sutherland.
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
204 Malva 
moschata.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Kants south !
Notcutt sp.
12 north !
Twining sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
IVnLLEGKANA.
97 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north !
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
w^cst.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Emblcton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
o 
98 204.
MALVA 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
(89 90 91 92 95 96 109).
205 Malva 
sylvestris.
Counties all, except 46 49 73 
86 88 93 94 97 98 101 
104 107 to 112.
Bare in 
North Britain ; and deemed 
not indigenous in Aberdeen 
or Moray.
206 Malva 
rotundifolia.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
MOSCHATA.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint!
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Britten cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
206.
MALTA ROTUNDIFOLIA.
99 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
soutli.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
208 Althaea 
officinalis.
1 Corn.
west.
Extinct ?
2 east?
"Couch." 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight !
Miss Tmning sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
14 Sussex east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east!
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
40 Salop.
Brooks in Shrop.
flo.
41 Glamorgan.
Brent sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
54 Line, north !
Howitt sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Knkcudbright.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
f 
(59 68).
[21 64 86 99].
210 Lavatera 
arborea.
1 Cornwall west !
Curnow sp.
2 cast.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Gibson ms.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Introduced?
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
75 Ayr. Ailsa Craig, &c.
(10 13 14 67 82 85 100).
[9 11 18 27, on old records 
only] .
211 Tilia 
parvifolia.
3 Devon south.
Flower sp.
6 Som. north !
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Benthall sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Sandys sp.
35 Monmouth.
Gibson ms.
36 Hereford.
Babington ms.
37 Worcester.
Butler sp.
39 Stafford.
Babington ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees ms.
42 Brecon.
Native ; Lees.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. ms.
62 York n.
east.
" native." 
70 Cumberland !
(1 16 17 21 23 24 26 29 
33 38 50 53 or 54 55 56 
58 59 64 66 69 75 77 
82 83 ; more or less uncer- 
tainly indigenous, or insuffi- 
ciently vouched in all of 
these counties).
213 Tilia 
grandifolia.
36 Hereford.
Babington ms.
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
N.B. Those arc the only two 
counties known to me, as 
resting on good testimony in 
support of the true nativity 
of tins Lime.
It is recorded 
100 213.
TILIA ( 
for many other counties, f 
from West Cornwall to ' 
Moray, usually with indica- 
tions in distrust of it being 
really an indigenous tree.
In Surrey its leaves are 
more damaged by spring 
frosts than are those of the 
T. intermedia.
It has been 
confused with this latter ; 
from which it is readily dis- 
tinguished if seen in fruit.
214 Hypericum 
Androssemiim.
Androsgemum 
officinale.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north!
Eastmondsp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
1 0 Wight .
More cat .
. .
. sp .
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Carr sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
ElHs sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Varenne ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east?
"Wigg." 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
32 Northton.
33 Glostcr east ?
GBANDIFOLIA.
I 34 Gloster west.
Tliwaites sp.
1 35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Prentice ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Kobinson ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Gibson ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Angiesea.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 • m.
west.
Tathamcat.f 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Otley sp.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
06 Boss.
Gordon ms.
East ?
(56 68 81 83 85 87).
215 Hypericum 
perforatum.
Counties all, except 32 46 49 
215.
HYPERICUM PEKFOEATUM.
101 
53 71 86 87 95 97 98 99 
101 to 105 107 108 110' 
[111].
112 Shetland?
216 Hypericum 
quadrangulum.
tetrapterum.
Counties all, except 35 44 46 
72 84 86 89 97 98 107 to 
112, with the usual nine in 
addition.
Probably occurs 
in all up to 100 or 106.
216 Hypericum 
dubium.
maculatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Gibson ms.
2 east.
Hore sp.
3 Devon south.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Babington ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Badnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Babmgton sp.
48 Merioneth.
Eussell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Fisher sp.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatha^m cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmor.
Miss Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
67 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife ?
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
98 Argyle.
00 Ai-ran.
G. Macnab sp.
[10 21 73].
(109).
217 Hypericum 
bseticum.
undulatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
218 Hypericum 
humifusum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
102 
218.
HYPERICUM HUMIFUSUM.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26   west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salox).
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
74 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Macnab sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff'.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
219 Hypericum 
linariifolium.
4 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
220 Hypericum 
pulchrum.
Counties all, except 31 51 86 
and the usual nine ; possibly 
absent from no.
31.
221.
HYPERICUM HIRSUTUM.
103 
221 Hypericum 
hirsutum.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
60 Lane, west !
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Clieviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberl.
Kobinson sp.
73 Knkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. James Wilson sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme.
cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid!
E. Twining sp.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kmcardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Mr. Martin." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss e.
" Kev. G.
Wilson." 
[58 72].
222 Hypericum 
montanum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
20 Herts.
" once found." 
104 
222.
HYPERICUM MONTANUM.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Harris sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Miss E.
Jones sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr.
223 Hypericum 
elodes.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bromfield sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
22 Berks!
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Paget sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Wilmott.', 
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
Poole ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester ?
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Otley sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
11 Orkney?
Neill, &c.
[21 29; extinct].
225 Acer 
campestre.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
225.
ACER CAMPESTRE.
105 
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Yarenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Radnor.
Miss Atwood ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
61 York s.
east.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
(1 2 58 68 70 71 76 77 
81 83 84 85 89 90 98 
100 ; given as a native of 
83 84 85, in the Flora of 
Edinburgh).
226 Acer 
Pseudo-platanus.
N.B. Given as native of Had- 
dington, Edinburgh, and 
Fife, in the Flora of Edin- 
burgh ; also the same in the 
old Flora of Northumber- 
land and Durham.
In the 
New Flora of N.
and D.
it 
is named as an "alien"; 
and such is its proper cha- 
racter in the counties of the 
Forth.
As an alien, it is 
reported for most of the 
counties, from Cornwall to 
Caithness.
227 Erodium 
maritimum.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south?
14 Sussex east.
Extinct ?
15 Kent cast.
Extinct?
17 Surrey.
W. Beeves ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Winch sp.
36 Hereford.
Purclias sp.
p 
106 
227.
ERODIUM MARITIMUM.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babingtoii cat.
46 Cardigan.
Sandys sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea !
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester ?
Extinct ?.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
(66 ballast hnis.") 
228 Erodium 
cicutarium.
Counties all, except 14 32 69 
72 80 87 88 89 97 98 
104 108 [111] 112.
229 Erodium 
moschatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Gibson sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
52 Anglesea ?
N.B. Eeported from numerous 
other counties, but almost 
certainly mis-reported or 
not indigenous in them.
230 Geranium 
sylvaticum.
28 Norfolk west '?
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
57 Derby.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west..
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
I 80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
[1 25 27 28 55 111 ; 
erroneous or insufficiently 
vouched.
231 Geranium 
pratenss.
2 Corn, east?
231.
GERANIUM PEATEXSE.
107 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
^6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
28 Norf.
west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Bahington cat.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster sp.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii-k cat.
89 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 FHnt.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
67 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad lib.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.west.
Ward cat.
,^ 
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.' 
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
232 Geranium 
pyrenaicum.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
French sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south ?
12 north ?
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.f 
17 Surrey !
Occasional.
f 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Mrs. KusBell sp.
23 Oxford.
108 
232.
GEKANIUM PYKENAICUM.
2-4 Bucks.
Mrs. James sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
26 west.
Henslow ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Colemau ms.
80 Bedford.
32 Nortliton.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen?
50 Denbigh.
Gibson ms.
53 Lmcoln south !
Bloxam ms.
57 Derby?
61 York s.
east.
62 u.
east.
" native." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west, "native." 
65 n.
west, "native." 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Alien.
85 Fife.
89 Perth east!
Escape?
95 Elgin.
" Keported." 
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
N.B. The above is to be taken 
as a full enumeration of 
counties, without separating 
the erroneous and those in 
which this Geranium is pro- 
bably ali^n.
In the ' Botany 
of North Yorkshire ' it is 
given as truly "native;" 
tacitly so taken in some few 
other counties also.
233 Geranium 
rotundifolium.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south!
Hore sp.
6 Som. north!
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Boswell Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bloxam sp.
25 Suffolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.f 
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
32 Northton.
34 Gloster west !
Stephens sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
(58 66 67 70 82 83).
[36 37 40 41 50 57 63 
64 ; insufficiently certified ; 
mostly erroneous ?] .
234 Geranium 
pusillum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Colemau cat.
234.
GEKANIUJI PUSILLUM.
109 
21 Middlesex!
22 Berks!
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kii'k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
L eight on cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
61 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lmcoln north !
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
we^it.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Dm-ham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey s}).
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
"Benson." 
77 Lanark.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
BaHour cat.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
94 Banff.
"Bare." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
N.B. Not rare in England ; 
rare or overlooked in Scot- 
land.
235 Geranium 
molle.
Counties all, except 46 97 98 
and the usual nine.
236 Geranium 
dissectum.
Counties all, exce^Dt 35 46 86 
97 98 104 108 110 111 
112.
237 Geranium 
columbinum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north.
I 13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
; 15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west!
I 17 Surrey !
I 18 Essex south.
! 19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
! 21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east?
" v.
r." 
27 Norfolk cast.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortliton.
Berkeley ms.
; 33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
110 
237.
GERANIUM COLUMBINUM.
34 Gloster west!
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
60 Denbigh.
Leefe sp.
51 Flint.
52 Angiesea.
54 Lincoln north !
56 Notts.
57 Derby!
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 • west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
' ' Eobinson !
' ' 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
One locality.
81 Berwick.
One locality.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
(29).
[77 99].
238 Geranium 
lucidum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north 1 Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.f 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Twining sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortliton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Butler sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Angiesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Ch. Babington sp.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Dugdale sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
238, GERANIUM LUCIDUM.
Ill 
64 York m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman s-p.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku-kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Dimcan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
E.B.S. cat.
6. 
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linhthgow.
E.B.S. cat.
6. 
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.i 
93 north.
Dickie flo.
96 Easterness.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
[Ill Orkney; Lowe's list] .
239 Geranium 
Robertianum.
Counties all, except 97 98 
110 112, with the usual 
nine.
240 Geranium 
sanguineum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Abraham ms.
6 Som. north.
Young sp.
19 Essex north.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
I 
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper ms.
28 Norfolk west ?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Radnor.
Purchas ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south ?
54 north.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Warren flo.
59 Lane, south.
Extinct?
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
112 
240.
GERANIUM SANGUINEUM.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
241 Impatiens 
fulva.
8 Wilts.
" quite naturalised." 
Sussex.
Miss Carr sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
21 Middx.
Twining sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten ms.
N.B. From America, but tho- 
roughly established ; per- 
haps more so than the Noli- 
me-tangere, although this 
latter has been supposed in- 
digenous in Wales and North 
England.
243 Oxalis 
Acetosella.
Counties all, except 31 4C 51 
53 60 112; it may be 
really absent from the first 
and last of these counties.
245 Euonymus 
europaeus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex w^est.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Yarenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton!
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop !
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.f 
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby!
58 Chester.
Windsor sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker " sp." 
63 s.
west.
Lees sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudb.
" certainly wild." 
245, EUONYMUS EUROP.EUS.
113 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinb.
" apparently ^ild." 
(69 77 84 95 109).
246 Rhamnus 
catharticus.
3 Devon south.
Error ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Fordham sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Newb.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesca.
53 Lincoln south !
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Homtt cat.
58 Chester.
Eobinson." 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Still there ?
69 Westmoreland !
72 Dumfries?
(94 " Dr. Todd." 100 Prof.
Balfour sp.) 
247 Rhammis 
Frangula.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Kev. E.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.t 
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk cast.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
Q 
114 
247.
RHAMNUS FRANGULA.
34 Gloster west.
Tliwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 "Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman sp.
53 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Holland." 
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland!
Baker cat.
75 Ayr.
93 Aber.
nor.
likely native." 
95 Elgin.
" Dr. Innes." 
06 Boss east.
Planted ?
07 Suth.
east.
Planted ?
248 Sparticum 
scoparium.
Counties all, except 46 51 110 
(111) 112 ; apparently in- 
digenous northward to Suth- 
erland and Caithness ; and 
doubtless to be found in 
every county south from 
those two.
249 Ulex 
europgeus.
Counties all, except 46 and 
eight of the usual nine.
To 
the North Isles it has likely 
been introduced by sowings 
of seed ; as is also the case 
with many other of its lo- 
calities in North Britain* 
especially those in the North 
Highlands.
250 Ulex 
"nanus." 
All the English counties, ex- 
cept 19 23 30 31 43 44 
45 47 48 51 53 54 60 61 
71.
In Scotland, recorded 
for 74 75 ; [also in 81 83 
85 90 95] .
This area in- 
cludes the two segregates, 
which of late have been 
recorded apart as under.
250 Ulex 
eu-nanus.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Stratton sp.
12 Hants north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west !
Baker cat.
14 east.
Carr sp.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
34 Gloster west ?
[63 64 66; doubtful].
250 Ulex 
Gallii.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
6 Som. south.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
11 Hants south.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
29 Cambridge ?
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
250.
ULEX GALLII.
115 
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purclias sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Newman ms.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Newman sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Atwood sp.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
^59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Ohver sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberl.
Addison sp.
71 Man.
''Babington." 
74 Wigton.
Balfom- sp.
75 Ayr. Arnott ms.
Gallow^ay.
Lloyd sp.
(92 a solitary plant ").
251 Genista 
tinctoria.
1 Corn, west !
v. humifusa.
8 Devon south ?
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydcll cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bellms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west, 
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland 1 
116 
251.
GENISTA TINCTOKIA.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
83 Edinburgh ?
Drumshorland Moor.
G. sp.
252 Genista 
pilosa.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
14 Sussex east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
26 Suff.
west.
Bloomfield ms.
37 Worcester.
Extinct.
45 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
[39 48 69; errors?] 
253 Genista 
anglica.
Counties all, except 5 or 6 26 
31 33 51 54 60 71 75 
76 84 98 to 105 107 to 112.
254 Ononis 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 31 46 49 
51 53 86 97 101 104 107 
109 to 112, with the usual 
nine.
255 Ononis 
spinosa.
campestris.
antiquomm.
1 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
8 Devon south.
Torquay flo.
4 north.
Eav. flo.
5 Som. south.
J. Poole ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromf.
''error." 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
herb.
12 north.
And. flo.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 Sussex east.
Tonb.
flo.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
Tonb.
flo.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
W. &C.
flo.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten flo.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten v.
sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Henslow.
27 Norf.
west.
Munford.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutcli add.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood ms.
51 Flint?
Wats.
mem.
53 Line, south?
Wats.
mem.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Moore ms.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Moore ms.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo, 
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland.
Alton.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"v.r." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
255.
ONONIS SPINOSA.
117 
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayi'.
Goldie to Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Hadd.
Edin.
Bot. cat.
''5." 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour flo.
85 Fife ?
Edin.
Bot. cat.
5." 
90 Forfar?
Gard.
flo.
99 Dunbarton ?
Hooker sp.
N.B. The habitats of this 
species and the preceding 
Ononis are inextricably con- 
fused in books ; nor can I 
trust my own notes and lists 
of years past with any con- 
fidence of the names having 
been then rightly applied.
The fragments sent to me 
as sjnnosa, being branchlets 
without roots or pods, are 
unsatisfactory.
Under these 
uncertainties all the coun- 
ties from my compiled notes 
are given above, in con- 
nexion with the authorities 
for them.
257 Anthyllis 
vulneraria.
Counties all, except 18 31 32 
44 51 53 75 86 97 98 
107, with the usual nine.
This can scarcely be classed 
among the " common " 
plants, although it is here 
indicated as occurring in 92 
counties, and these includ- 
ing the northern and south- 
ern extremes of Britain.
257 Anthyllis 
Dillenii.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east ?
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
52 Anglesea.
Crotch sp.
258 Medicago 
sylvestris.
26 Suff.
west.
Babington sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
28 west.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
259 Medicago 
falcata.
25 Sufi', east ?
26 west.
Bunburj^ sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Gibson ms.
29 Cambridge.
Hort s-p.
[3 6 9 13 15 17 (19) 20 
39 41 62 (66 67); all 
these either erroneous or in- 
sufficiently vouched, or non- 
indigenous habitats] .
260 Medicago 
lupulina.
Counties all, except 35 72 73 
88 97 101 104 107 to 110 
(111) 112, with the usual 
nine ; doubtless occurring in 
all up to 100 or higher.
261 Medicago 
maculata.
1 Corn, west!
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Eogcrs sp.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss BeU sp.
13 Sussex west !
14 east.
Hill cat.
15 Kent cast I Smith cat.
16 west !
118 
261.
MEDICAGO MACULATA.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
21 Middlesex !
Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh?
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east, "native." 
66 Durham.
Lees ms.f 
67 Northumb.
" native." 
(58 59 63 68 80 85).
262 Medicago 
denticulata.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 'east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyan sp.
14 east.
Maw sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
25 Suff.
east.
Babington sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
62 York n.
east.
(21 36 37 58 59 63 64 66 
80 85 92 ; alien or casual 
in these counties, and per- 
haps the same in at least 
some of those named above).
263 Medicago 
minima.
15 Kent east.
Brent sp.
16 west.
Smith ms.
17 Surrey.
Twining sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suff.
east.
Notcutt sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
[3 6 41].
(66).
264 Melilotus 
officinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south!
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hill cat.
15 Kent east!
Smith cat.
16 west.
Dennes ms.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Bid well sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
264.
MELILOTUS OFFICINALIS.
119 
32 Nortliton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii'k cat.
39 Stafford!
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.f 
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.f 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviotland.
" colonist." 
70 Cumberland?
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Litroduced ?
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
(90 91 92 95 109 ; intro- 
duced in these, and likely to 
some of the other counties 
also).
265 Melilotus 
vulgaris, 
leucantha.
N.B. Few botanists indeed 
report this as a truly indi- 
genous plant; and usually 
it is treated only as an alien 
or casual.
My notes for its 
counties are thus : — (3 5 or 
6 9 10 11 13 15 17 18 
19 20 21 23 24 26 27 
28 33 34 36 38 41 44 58 
59 62 64 65 66 67 68 
71 75 81 82 83 85 87 
90 95).
266 Trigonella 
ornithopodioides.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Holman sp.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
Bean sp.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
76 Kenfrew.
83 Edinburgh.
Twynam sp.
85 Fife.
[7 23 50 (62) 64 70 90; 
authorities insufficient] .
267 Trifolium 
repens.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine.
120 
268.
TRIFOLIUM 
SUBTERRANEUM.
268 Trifolium 
subterraneum.
1 Cornwall west.
Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
a Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west..
Macnab sp.
17 Surrey !
EUis ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
don.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east ?
[58].
(66 75).
269 Trifolium 
ochroleucum.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell.sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
(64 66).
[3 9 11 16 17 
21 37 39 53 59; insuffi- 
ciently vouched ; mostly 
errors ?] 
270 Trifolium 
Molinerii.
1 Cornwall west.
Hore sp.
271 Trifolium 
pratense.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine, doubtless through 
lack of records.
272 Trifolium 
medium.
Counties all, except 12 32 35 
46 51 53 54 71 75 80 97 
98 107 to 110, with the 
other usual nine.
Much 
less frequent than iwatense ; 
indeed, it might almost 
unite with the "not com- 
mon " plants.
274 Trifolium 
maritimum.
2 Cornwall east ?
3 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Clark sp.
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
9 Dorset.
Bay sp.
Payne sp.
11 Hants south.
Streathamsp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
25 Suff.
east?
Error for 27?
274.
TRIFOLIUM MARITIMUM.
121 
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
34 Grloster west.
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas s^.
41 Glamorgan.
PleydeU, 1865.
48 Merioneth ?
70 Cumberland ?
(66 67; on baUast).
275 Trifolium 
arvense.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eavenshaw.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites s^).
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyan sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bcesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Ku-k cat.
39 Stafford!
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Macnab cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Balfour sp.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west !
88 mid?
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Diclde cat.
93 north.
DicMe i\o.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterncss.
Stables cat.
u 
122 
275.
TEIFOLIUM ARVEN3E.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hemiedy cat.
I 
02 Eb. south .
Balfour cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
276 Trifolium 
scabrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 eas'^.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
14 Sussex east.
Hill cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex east.
19 west.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas sp.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.t 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Lloyd sp.
"extinct." 
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Gardiner sp.
[21 50 58; these three 
need verification] .
T. stri- 
atum is mislabled scabrum 
occasionally.
277 Trifolium 
striatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
E. Burton sp 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Purchas " !
" 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Carrington sp.
57 Derby.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
58 Chester.
Webb sp.
' 
277.
TRIFOLIUM STRIATUM.
123 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durliam.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
70 Cumberland.
" Chambers." 
71 Man. Forbes to Brand sx^.
75 Ayi'.
Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddmgton.
83 Edmburgh !
Maughan sp.
84 LinHthgow.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling !
87 Perth west!
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Gardiner sp.
(Ill NeiU's Tour).
277 Trifolium 
Bocconi.
1 Corn.
Hore sp.
Johns sp.
278 Trifolium 
glomeratum.
1 Com. west.
Scilly list.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
[41 44 50 55; errors?].
(66; on ballast hills).
278 Trifolium 
strictum.
1 Corn.
Johns sp.
Pascoe sp.
52 Anglesea ?
Very doubtful.
279 Trifolium 
suffocatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east?
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
6 Som. north.
Extinct?
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
E. Burton sp.
14 Sussex east ?
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
G. Fitt sp.
28 west.
52 Anglesea !
Tudor sp.
[18 ''L'vine." Error].
280 Trifolium 
fragiferum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Miss Twining sp.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west!
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hill cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beeslcy ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
124 
280.
TRIFOLIUM FRAGIFERUM.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Hunts!
Newbould cat.
32 Nortbtoii!
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Lees sp.
48 Merioneth.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Angle sea.
53 Lincoln south!
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
58 Chester !
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sj).
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west ?
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.f 
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Twyman sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
281 Trifolium 
procumbens.
Counties all, except 35 49 51 
61 73 97 98 99 104 107 
to 112.
(Ill Orkney; 
Neill's Tour).
282 Trifolium 
minus.
Counties all, except 32 35 49 
50 57 71 72 73 80 90 95 
96 97 103 to 112 ; in some 
of these counties probably 
it has been recorded under 
name of Jiliforme.
Likely to 
be found in every county up 
to 109, if not farther.
282 Trifolium 
filiforme.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Dyer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
282.
TRIFOLIUM FILIFORME.
125 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babmgton cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
50 Denbigh.
52 Angle sea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Ho"v\itt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Hort sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
[70 71 77 82 to 85 90 to 
96 106 ; it is the T.
minus in 
most of these counties ; per- 
haps so, in all of them, as 
well as in some of those 
enumerated by name ; so 
frequent has been the error 
of applying the name fili- 
forme to examples of the 
species minus.
I dare not 
trust to my own notes of 
past dates] .
283 Lotus 
comiculatus.
Counties all, except 49 and the 
usual nine ; in all of which 
it will surely be found, if 
sought.
283 Lotus 
tenuis.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Banking sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
Anderson ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland !
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson sp.
126 
284.
LOTUS MAJOR.
284 Lotus 
major.
Counties all, except 30 46 49 
51 86 95 96 97 103 to 112.
285 Lotus 
angustissimus.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Banker sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer.
[6 B.
G. 25 Suff.
flo.] 
285 Lotus 
hispidus.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Hore sp.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Hore ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
286 Astragalus 
glycyphyllus.
6 Som. north.
Mr. Clark." 
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell, certain.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Susse-x west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Dennes ms.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat, 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
Mersey ?
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Gray cat.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife !
Lawson ms.
89 Perth east.
Campbell sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
93 Aber.
north.
Gordon sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
[1 3 77 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
287 Astragalus 
hypoglottis..
8 Wilts south.
Flower sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
23 Oxford.
26 Suff.
west.
Bnnbury sp.
28 Norfolk west.
287.
ASTRAGALUS 
S HYPOGLOTTIS.
127 
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ras.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
53 Lincoln south.
55 Leicester.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
66 Durliam.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
67 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Scott sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Bo swell Syme sp.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
07 Sutherland.
Gordon ms.
[10 18 70].
288 Astragalus 
alpinus.
90 Forfar !
92 Aberdeen south !
289 Oxytropis 
uralensis.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife !
90 Forfar.
98 Argyle.
06 Ross east.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness.
R. Dick, sp." 
290 Oxytropis 
campestris.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
291 Ornithopus 
perpusillus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan sp.
6 north.
Rogers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
-9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babingtonms.
27 Norf.
cast.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Himts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
Lcos sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lcighton cat.
128 
291.
ORNITHOPUS PERPUSILLUS.
41 Glamorgan.
Atwood ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Extinct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
90 Forfar ?
Don only?
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
99 Dunbarton.
292 Arthrolobium 
ebracteatum.
1 Scilly islands.
Casual ?
(63 S.W. York ; casual).
293 Hippocrepis 
comosa.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south?
" Ford woods." 
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
I 
7 Wilts north.
Miss Bell sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
12 Hants north.
Bell ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hill cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
26 west.
Bunbury s-p.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
'-Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bloxam." 
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
49 Carnarvon.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby!
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr.
91 Kincardine.
Miss Boswell, 
" apparently quite wild." 
294 Onobrychis 
sativa.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Alexander ms.
294.
ONOBRYCHIS SATIVA.
129 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromfield- 
12 north.
Bromfield.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Babingtonms.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.f 
40 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.f 
Lincoln.
(3 10 13 14 16 27 34 55 
56 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 
70 83 95 ; in aU of these 
counties, as well as in some 
of those quoted above by 
name, the Saintfoin is re- 
garded as an introduced 
plant ; at any rate, is so re- 
garded by some botanists).
295 Vicia 
Orobus.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
83 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Cannarthen.
Lees sp.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merion.
" Miss Holland sp." 
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumber.
Heysham sp.
71 Man.
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
78 Peebles.
G. Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Little sp.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
04 Ebudes north.
Bum." 
[37 38 65 66 92].
296 Vicia 
sylvatica.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north!
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Pleydell ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
130 296.
viciA 
57 Derby !
"Mr. Astley." 
58 Chester.
61 York s.
east.
62 11.
east.
Bloxam ms.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nor thumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh!
BaKour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south !
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
[1 13 25 29 48].
297 Vicia 
Cracca.
Counties all, except 46 and the 
usual nine, where doubtless 
it does occur.
298 Vicia 
" sativa." 
SYLVATICA.
Counties all, with few excep- 
tions ; but apparently a con- 
fused mingling of the sown 
"Tare" with the truly 
"Wild vetch." 
298 Vicia 
angustifolia.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan sp.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
Trevelyan sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks!
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east Purchas ms.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
Leefe sp.
298.
VICIA ANGUSTIFOLIA.
131 
49 Carnarvou !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
62 Anglesea.
63 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
66 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 "Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick ?
82 Kaddington ?
83 Edinburgh!
84 Linhthgow.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
N.B. Licluding Bohartii as only 
a weakly state, not a real 
variety.
299 Vicia 
lathyroides.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Ellis ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
30 Bedford.
Brown sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Bean sp.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington ?
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
Kerr sp.
91 Kincardine ?
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
[1 2 3 9 18 29 33 40 
61 62 63; insufficiently 
vouched] .
Not readily to 
be distinguished from the 
dwarfed states of V.
anrjusti- 
folia or Bubaytii, and thus 
some of the counties named 
132 
299.
YICIA LATHYROIDES.
above may also be erroneous.
300 Vicia 
lutea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
18 Sussex west.
Christy sp.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
75 Ayr.
''P.
Maclagan sp." 
83 Edinburgh !
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
85 Fife !
Nicholson sp.
88 Perth mid ?
90 Forfar.
91 Kincarduie.
Croall sp.
301 Vicia 
sepium.
Counties all, except 31 85 46 
75 86 98 107 112.
302 Vicia 
bithynica.
1 Cornwall west ?
2 Devon south !
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Eussell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
18 Sussex west.
Extinct.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west.
Bromf.
ms.
18 Essex south.
Salmon sp.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
84 Gloster west.
87 Worcester.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh.
Price sp.
61 Flint.
62 York n.
east.
Native ?
[10 11] .
(66 ballast hills).
303 Vicia 
hirsuta.
Counties all, except 85 46 51 
54 69 86 97 98 106 107 
108 110 [111] 112.
304 Vicia 
tetrasperma.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Miss Gilford sp.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortliton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
G. Beece sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
304.
VICIA TETRASPERMA.
133 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
58 Lincohi south.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
88 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Balf.
sp.
Exurs.t 
90 Forfar.
" G.
Macnab." 
[Ill Orkney ; Lowe's list] .
304 Vicia 
gracilis.
6 Som. north?
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Norman sp.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
casual ?
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
38 Warwick.
" Cheshire." 
[3 Flower, "Parker"].
305 Lathyrus 
Aphaca.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wnts north.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
''Bromf.-hb." 
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
Kent...?
North Kent." 
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Fordliam sp.
21 Middlesex ?
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock ms.
26 west.
Bromf.
sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babmgton cat.
38 Gloster east.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
Maw sp.
88 Warwick.
Lincoln.
" Carrington." 
(57 59 62 64 66 67 75 
88 88 or 89 ; casual in 
most of these counties ; 
erroneously recorded in two 
or three of them ?) 
306 Lathyrus 
Nissolia.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.f 
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Trcvelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
134 
306.
LATHYRUS NISSOLIA.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Downs sp.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Bromf.
ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten ''v.
sp." 
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Bloxam ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
Lincoln.
" Carrington." 
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Davidson sp.
[36 50 56 61 81; errors?] 
(67 70 75 90; casual?) 
307 Lathy rus 
hirsutus.
17 Surrey.
W. Bennett sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne sp.
[6 57 61].
(6 66).
308 Lathyrus 
pratensis.
Counties all, except 96 107 
with the usual nine ; likely 
to occur in every county.
309 Lathyrus 
palustris.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt.
17 Surrey?
Extinct.
22 Berks.
Britten "v.
sp." 
25 Suff.
east.
Woodward sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Christy sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
53 Line, south ?
54 north.
Thompson ms.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
York...
? Tatham sp.
74 Wigton ?
Galloway." 
[22 37 55 57 59].
310 Lathyrus 
sylvestris.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Christy sp.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Linnell sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.t 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Miss Bell sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten "v.
sp." 
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
310.
LATHYRUS SYLVESTRIS.
135 
31 Hunts.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii'k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Lees sp.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh !
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
00 Clyde-isles.
Landsborough.
03 Mull.
Syme, "certainly 
(62 63 64 66).
wild." 
[7 8 21 58 91 ; insuffi- 
ciently vouched.
Perhaps 
not truly wild in some of 
the other counties] .
311 Lathyrus 
maritimus.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
14 Sussex east.
15 Kent east !
25 Suffolk east.
54 Lincoln north.
70 Cumberland ?
90 Forfar.
12 Shetland.
Edmonston sp.
[1 10 111 ; dubious] .
312 Orobus 
tuberosus.
Counties all, except 25 27 28 
29 31 46 51 54 60 75 86 
97 98 99 107 110.
313 Orobus 
niger.
68 Cheviot.' Tate sen.
ms.
89 Perth east.
Anderson sp.
90 Forfar.
96 Easterness.
N.B. Picported also from seve- 
ral other counties — Devon, 
Orkney, &c.
— through mis- 
naming the other species for 
this one.
Perhaps intro- 
duced to all the four coun- 
ties named above.
314 Prunus 
spinosa.
Counties all, except 75 89 97 
98 104 107 109 to 112 
with the usual nine.
314 Prunus 
insititia.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.f 
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenno cat.
136 
314.
PRUNUS INSITITIA.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.f 
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
, 
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
| 
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.t 
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
(80 81 83 85 88 90 91 
106).
This is treated as a 
native both in the Clydes- 
dale and the Edinburgh 
Floras ; but as the P.
domes- 
tica is equally so given in 
the Flora of Edinburgh, not 
much weight can be attached 
to that evidence.
Even in 
England many of its re- 
ported localities are artifi- 
cial, having originated 
through planting; and the 
line of distinction between 
this and P.
spinosa is uncer- 
tainly traced.
Thus, the 
above enumeration of coun- 
ties is to be received with 
some distrust.
315 Prunus 
Padus.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick, "introduced." 
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillw.
ms.
42 Brecon.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Leefe ms.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
55 Leicester.
Coleman.
f 
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester!
Warren cat.f 
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
315.
PRUNUS PADUS.
137 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncau cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddiugtou.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson cat.f 
86 Stu:ling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Roy ms.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Cli. Bab.
ms.
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caithness.
BrowTi cat.
N.B. Localities are also on 
record for this tree in several 
counties of the four first 
l^rovinces, from Cornwall to 
Norfolk.
AVith few excep- 
tions it is indicated only as 
an introduced or planted 
tree in those counties.
I 
have received the American 
P. se rot in a, labelled as wild 
Padiis, from two of the 
southern counties.
316 Prunus 
avium.
Counties all, except 13 31 34 
41 46 53 60 84 86 89 93 
97 98 99 101 103 to 108 
110 to 112.
Two practical 
difficulties arise in attempts 
to trace the distrilnition of 
this tree.
Fu*st, in many 
books and lists the name 
Cerasiis is used indiscrimi- !
nately for either or both the | 
species.
Second, the widest 
diversities of opinion occur 
as to the indigenous or in- 
troduced character of each 
species.
For the counties 
of South Britain the Avium 
is usually treated as native.
For those of North Britain 
it is usually noted as pro- 
bably introduced.
For the 
counties of Mid Britain, 
there is an approximate 
balance of opinions ; some 
for, some against nativity.
No doubt the seeds are 
still carried in the crops of 
birds, from gardens to wilds ; 
but whether the origin has 
been really from gardens, at 
first, or from wilds to gar- 
dens, cannot be satisfactorily 
decided now.
316 Prunus 
Cerasus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.f 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.f 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell.
Borrer.
10 Wight !
.Salter sp.
More.f 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Planted?
17 Surrey !
Linncll sp.
19 Essex north.
Varennc cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.f 
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
28 Norf.
west.
Notcutt ms.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct?
30 Bedford.
36 Hereford.
Purclias.
I 
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
40 Salop.
Lcigliton cat.
! 45 Pembroke, liabington cat.
I 46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
138 
316.
PEUNUS CERA3US.
60 Denbigh ?
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sx3.
58 Chester !
Bkd-sown ?
64 York m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
N.B. A selection from the 
counties on record for 
Frunus Cerasus ; being those 
in which the Cerasus austera 
or true fruticose Cherry ap- 
pears to have been intended.
For myself, though inclined 
to accept this as an indi- 
genous shrub, I do so with 
no positiveness.
(1 2 4 27 
68 70 83 87 91 92 94).
317 Spiraea 
Ulmaria.
Counties all, except 46 86 98 
107, with the usual nine ; 
doubtless it does occur in 
all of them.
318 Spiraea 
Filipendula.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
8 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babmgton cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts?
"Aikm." 
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
''Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop?
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Clieviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
Finder ms.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
(77 91 106).
320 (323) Dryas 
octopetala.
39 Stafford.
49 Carnarvon.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
820.
DRYAS OCTOPETALA.
139 
69 Westm.
Backhouse, 1869.
88 Perth mid !
Hooker sp.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
98 Ai'gyle.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
04 Eb. north.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
[66 109 ; errors of place ?] 
321 Geum 
urbanum.
Counties all, except 71 97 102 
104 107 108 110 111 112.
321-2.
Geum 
intermedium.
8 Devon south ?
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
Spicer sp.
19 Essex north.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
76 Renfrew.
Hcnnedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hcnnedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 E dinburgh !
Syme sp .
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stu-ling.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
N.B. A most puzzling plant ; 
some examples more like 
rivale, others more like 
nrhanum.
322 Geum 
rivale.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglcsea.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
uo 
322.
GEUM EI VALE.
56 Notts.
57 Derby!
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Koxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid!
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Mrs. Atkins sp.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
Sutherland.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
324 Sibbaldia 
procumbens.
73 Dumfries ?
78 Peebles.
86 Stirling.
Kooker sp.
88 Perth mid!
89 east !
90 Forfar!
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south 1 Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
12 Shetland.
Konas Hill." 
[3 Dartmoor] .
325 Potentilla 
fruticosa.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmor.
Backhouse ms.
70 Cumberland.
(23 63 77 83).
326 Potentilla 
rupestris.
47 Montgom.
Bowman sp.
[83 see page 6] .
327 Potentilla 
anserina.
Counties all, except 46 97 and 
the usual nine.
328 Potentilla 
argentea.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.f 
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
328.
POTENTILLA ARGENTEA.
141 
7 Wilts nortli.
Flower cat.
8 south.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Harris sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suff.
east.
Miss Bell sp.
26 west.
Cooper sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Gibson ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Brown sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwdck.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop !
Leighton cat.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
55 Leicester.
Cli. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Extinct ?
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland ?
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
329 Potentilla 
verna.
6 Som. north ?
Thwaites cat.
26 Suff.
west ?
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
34 Gloster west !
French sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
57 Derby !
Kirk sp.
63 York s.
west, Lees cat.
64 m.
west ?
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
1870.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
[3 25 40 60 62; insuffi- 
ciently vouched] .
330 Potentilla 
alpestris.
46 Cardigan ?
Eng. flo.
47 Montgomery.
Lees ms.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreld.
Bowman sp.
70 Cumberland !
88 Perth mid !
Sadler sp.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Abcr.
south !
Dickie ms.
N.B. Difficult to trace an exact 
line of distinction between 
this and P.
vcrna.
[42 67] .
331 Potentilla 
reptans.
Counties all, excoi)t 46 72 76 
84 86 87 88 93 95 to 100 
102 to 112.
This common 
142 
331.
POTENTILLA REPTANS.
plant of England becomes 
infrequent in Scotland, and 
appears to be quite absent 
to the north-west of the 
Caledonian Canal.
332 Potentilla 
Tormentilla.
Counties all, except 46 51 60 
73, with the usual nine ; but 
doubtless actually to be 
found in every one of the 
112 counties.
332 Potentilla 
procumbens.
nemoralis.
Cornwall.
3 Devon south.
Somerset.
Southby ms.
9 Dorset.- Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
95 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bromwich sp.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas cat.
I 
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
New flo.
N. D.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kh'kcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick ?
85 Fife ?
91 Kincardine ?
94 Banff ?
00 Clyde-isles.
06 Boss east ?
12 Shetland ?
Misnomer ?
N.B. Small trust can be given 
to the distribution as here 
set forth.
Too likely, this 
intermediate plant has been 
much confused with the 
Tormentilla, on the one side, 
and the P.
vcptans, on the 
other side.
All my own 
notes of past years are re- 
jected, as I would now cer- 
tify the plant in Surrey and 
Berks only, although believ- 
ing that it has been ^ seen 
equally in several other 
counties.
333 Potentilla 
Fragariastrum.
Counties all, except 35 46 51 
53 60 80 97 101 to 105 
107 to 112.
Orkney ?
33-1.
COMARUM PALUSTRE.
143 
334 Comarum 
palustre.
1 Corn.
west.
Ciinnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs, " v.
r." 
3 Devon soutli.
Abraham ms.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
19 Essex, north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Brown sx3.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Ku-k cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
43 Radnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Gutch sp.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Gibson ms.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Howitt ms.
65 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester !
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
7 6 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Hadduigton.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
" Miss Boswcll." 
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Treated as a "not com- 
mon " plant on account of 
its infrcquency in the south- 
ern counties.
144 
335.
FRAG ARIA VESCA.
335 Fragaria 
vesca.
Comities all, except 41 51 53 
60 86 98 107 110.
337 Rubus 
Chamaemorus.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
D. Turner ms.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Church.
Bab. ms.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sjd.
65 n.
west.
Ward ms.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Bigge sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
77 Lanark.
78 Peebles.
Balfour ms.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan ms.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east.
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie ms.
93 north.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
05 Boss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Sutherland west !
338 Rubus 
saxatilis.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop ?
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
v.r." 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy ca,t.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantirc.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss cast.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
339.
EUDUS ID.EUS.
145 
339 Rubus 
Idaeus.
Counties all, except 1 11 16 
31 41 45 49 51 60 86 
110 112; likely to be found 
in most of these also, more 
or less wild.
No doubt that 
many of its localities origi- 
nate by seeds carried from 
gardens ; but the slirub it- 
self is native probably 
throughout Britain, unless 
the extreme north, especially 
the North Isles, ought to be 
excepted.
340 Rubi 
fruticosi.
See Comp.
Cyb. Brit, pages 
501 — 5 and Supplement to 
same, page 38 ; but espe- 
cially Bab. Brit.
Eubi, for 
the counties.
341 Rosa 
spinosissima.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
16 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
Castle sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
21 Middlesex !
Twining sp.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Camhrhhjc.
Bal)ington flo.f 
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kkk cat.
39 Stafford!
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutcli sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eev. J.
Poole ms.
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" v.
c." 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie ms.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastcrncss.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hcnnedy cat.
u 
146 
341.
ROSA SPINOSISSIMA.
01 Cantire.
BaKour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Koss west.
Cb. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Sutb.
east !
08 west !
Cb. Bab.
ms.
09 Caithness !
[Ill Orkney.
Lowe's list] .
342 Rosa 
hibernica.
17 Surrey ?
One bush.
58 Chester.
Webb sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Baker mon.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Borrer sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Baker mon.
343 Rosa 
Sabini, etc.
3 Devon south.
E. Parfittms.
4 north.
Maw cat.
10 Wight.
Baker Monograph.
Sussex.
Borrer.
Monog.
17 Surrey.
Brit.
Flo.
21 Middlesex.
Twining sp.
32 Northton.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster east.
Notcutt sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk.
Bree.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Hooker sp.
51 Flint.
Fisher sp.
52 Anglesea.
Lees in Phytol.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Webb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Lecfe sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.j 
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington.
Balf.
flo.
83 Edinburgh.
Balf.
flo.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
Monog.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
"Eev. J.
Keith." 
97 Westerness.
"Dr. Walker." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
''Dr. Walker." 
09 Caithness.
Monog.
11 Orkney.
344 Rosa 
mollissima.
48 Merioneth.
"Borrer." 
49 Carnarvon.
"Wilson." 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby.
" Purchas." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Hailstone sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
" Kobertson." 
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
98 Argyle.
" Hailstone." 
09 Caithness.
"Dick." 
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N.B. Under the names of vil- 
losa, mollis or mollissima this 
Kosa is reported from 60 or 
70 counties ; but it has been 
so frequently confused with 
tomentosa on the one side, 
and even with Sahini or 
344.
ROSA MOLLISSIMA.
147 
gracilis " on the otlierside, 
tlirough so called scahri- 
iiscula, — that uo reliance 
can be given to book records 
in general.
I have certainly 
seen it in several counties 
of North England and Scot- 
land ; although I dare not 
now trust to my old notes, 
and my s^Decimens of roses 
were destroyed by accidental 
fire, while in the house of 
Mr. Baker.
The counties 
named above must be taken 
as a very incomplete selec- 
tion.
Mr. Baker names 
Merioneth as the most 
southern county from which 
specimens have been seen 
by himself.
Book records, 
probably erroneous, w^ould 
place it as far southw^ard as 
Cornwall, Isle of Wight, and 
Sm-rey.
345 Rosa 
tomentosa.
Counties all, except 4 8 12 15 
24 31 32 43 46 51 53 54 
60 72 to 74 78 79 80 86 
88 89 95 96 97 102 103 
105 106 107 109.
In some 
of these counties it has very 
likely been seen and mis- 
taken for * moUissima ' ; in 
others, the converse may 
have occun-ed, through mis- 
nomers of the latter as if 
the present species.
Mr.
Baker has seen it from Corn- 
wall and Caithness ; and it 
is enumerated in the lists for 
Hebrides, Orkney, Shetland.
346 Rosa 
" sepium, Thuil." 
17 Surrey.
Baker sp.
N.B. Kosa Jundzilliana, placed 
under no.
346 in the London 
Catalogue, has been subse- 
quently united wdth ' tomen- 
tosa,' by Mr. Baker.
This 
seems near E.
micrantha.
347 Rosa 
pulverulenta.
6 Som. north.
" Woods." 
38 Warwick.
W. T.
Bree." 
63 York s.
west.
S. King." 
65 n.west.
''Ward." 
66 Durham.
"Eobertson." 
68 Cheviotland.
Baker.
N.B. The counties and authori- 
ties are taken from Baker's 
Monograph.
I do not under- 
stand the species.
348 Rosa 
Borreri, etc.
N.B. Now referred to canina in 
Baker's Monograph.
See 
Comp.
Cyb. Brit, page 507.
349 Rosa 
micrantha.
1 Corn, west, 
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Stephens sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Baker mon.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varcnne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Castles ms.
22 Berks.
148 
349.
KOSA MICRANTHA.
23 Oxford.
Borrer." 
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
Coleman ms.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
84 west.
Thwaites sp.
33 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Purclias ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
" Wilson." 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
68 Chester.
"Webb " in Mon.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 " n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
"A.
M. Norman." 
68 Cheviotland.
' ' Chrisp.
' ' 
350 Rosa 
mbiginosa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Baker "wild." 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.l 
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Linnell sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennc cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk cast.
Purchas cat.
| 
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
co.
50 Denbigh ?
Faun.
Grust.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Fisher ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.f 
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.t 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
New flo.f 
67 Northumb.
New flo.!
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.f 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.f 
(72 73 76 77 81 to 85 
86 89 90 92 94 95 96 99 
100 101).
[4 North Devon] .
N.B. The counties of England 
are given above as found on 
record for the " Sweet-brier." 
Those of Scotland are all 
enclosed ( ) with the sign of 
distrusted nativity ; so few 
botanists there regarding it 
as a native shrub.
The 
Flora of Edinburgh and 
even that of Clydesdale are 
exceptions, admitting it un- 
questioned.
I have never 
seen it quite satisfactorily 
indigenous in England, of 
350.
KOSA RUBIGINOSA.
149 
late years; and at earlier 
dates I confused together 
this and micrantha ; indeed, 
I can hardly say now that 
ruhiginosa is not truly a gar- 
den variety of micrantha.
351 Rosa 
canina, etc.
Counties all, except 97 102 
104 109 110, with the other 
nine as usual.
Not certain 
for Shetland.
352 Rosa 
systyla.
3 Devon south.
Baker mon.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wnts north.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
Baker mon.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
gallicoidcs." 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
59 Lane, south.
Wehl) cat.
G8 Cheviotland.
New flo.
70 Cumber.
Th. Benson." 
[1 4 29 50 02 77 84 8G 
90 96 97 99 ; msufQciently 
vouched] .
An incongruous 
cluster of forms, more or 
less intermediate between 
canina and arvensis ; both of 
which, I fully believe, are 
taxed to aid in making up 
the cluster named si/styla or 
stylosa.
At first, I had here 
simply interposed one Dog- 
rose between the spinosissima 
and arvensis, in sheer despair 
about the possibility of enu- 
merating the counties under 
the several species with any 
approach to accuracy.
And 
I am now far from satisfied 
with what is done above.
353 Rosa 
arvensis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west!
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Bcesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk cast.
Stock cat.
150 
353.
KOSA ARVENSIS.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Nortlitou.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bromwicli sp.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
61 Flint!
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Binder ms.
70 Cumberland.
Edmonds sp.
(Scotland 76 77 80 82 83 
85 90 91 ; treated by Pro- 
fessor Hennedy as an intro- 
duced rose in the western 
lowland counties ; and the 
same by Dr. Boswell Symc, 
in the eastern highland 
counties.
The Flora of 
Edinbui-gli gives it unques- 
tioned as a native).
354 Agrimonia 
Eupatoria.
Counties all, except 46 49 84 
86 88 89 97 98 101 103 to 
107 110 111 112.
354.
Agrimonia 
odorata.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north.
Mathews.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
14 east.
Borrer ms.
16 Kent west.
More s^.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
34 Gloster west.
Purchas ms.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Purchas sp.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
55 Leicester.
Purchas s^).
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland ?
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumber.
"W.Robinson" sp.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley sp.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
1872.
N.B. Miss Worsley observed 
this plant in a cottage gar- 
den near St. Fillans, not 
far from the only spot in 
which she found the plant 
quasi-wild.
Is it truly wild 
in Arran ?
355.
SANGUISORBA OFFICIN.\LIS.
151 
355 Sanguisorba 
officinalis.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Parfitt ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west?
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Gibson ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
51 Fhnt.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
68 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Brand sp.
73 Kh'kcudbright.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Johnston ms.
81 Berwick.
90 Forfar, "naturalised." 
355 Poterium 
Sanguisorba.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Keys sp.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west I Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east!
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey I 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
152 
355.
POTEEIUM SANGUISORBA.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii'k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leiglitou ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester ?
59 Lane, south ?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sj).
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
67 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland!
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
89 Perth east !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin?
Mr. Martin." 
(82 85).
[72 77].
Some 
of these recorded habitats 
perhaps belong to the alien 
P. muricatum, introduced 
through foreign seeds or 
ballast, and not easily dis- 
tinguished while without 
fruit.
356 Alchemilla 
vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
28 Norfolk west?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Warner sp.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortliunib.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
356.
ALCHEMILLA VULGARIS.
153 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kii'kcudbriglit.
Gray cat.
75 A}T.
Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme cat.
86 Stu-ling !
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness!
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
07 Sutherland east !
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
(10 " one planted root.") 
357 Alchemilla 
alpina.
65 York n.
west.
Tatliam sp.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland !
86 Stii'hng.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.f 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
98 Ai'gyle !
Montgomery ms.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
Campbell sp.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[Dartmoor, Devon ; Eaven- 
shaw flo.
dev] .
358 Alchemilla 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 51 60 
86 89 97 98 108 110.
360 Crataegus 
Oxyacantha.
Counties all, except 46 107 
111 ; often in planted hedge- 
rows only ; and few bota- 
nists regard it as being more 
wild in North Britain than 
a casual straggler, probably 
brought from the hedgerows 
by birds.
Different as the 
oxyacantlioides and monogyna 
or eriocarpa appear in tlieu' 
extreme forms, I find many 
intermediates in Surrey, 
through cross-combinations 
of their technical characters.
361 Cotoneaster 
vulgaris.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman sp.
X 
154 362.
PYRus 
362 Pyrus 
communis.
N.B. Almost invariably the 
botanists who have sent 
specimens of this tree, or 
marked the name in then- 
local lists, have done so 
with indications of distrust 
as to its genuine indigenous- 
ness.
In the Flora of Edin- 
burgh, indeed, it is given as 
a true native ; but perhaps 
the proper reading of that 
entry is, that the Flora itself 
cannot be safely relied upon 
to answer questions about 
nativity.
363 Pyrus 
Malus.
Counties all, except 35 46 49 
82 85 to 99 102 to 112.
(1 54 60 69 72 81 88 90 
94 95).
100 Hennedy cat.
101 Balfour cat.
Including 
the casual [mitis) derived 
from garden apples along 
with the true Crab (austera) 
less seldom met with ; the 
localities of the two being 
inextricably confused to- 
gether by their recorders.
364 Pyrus 
torminalis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydcll cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
COMMUNIS.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Barham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west ?
29 Cambridge ?
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites cat, 
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh ?
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
" truly wild." 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland?
N.B. Surrey and West Kent 
are the only counties in 
which this tree has been 
seen by myself as an appa- 
rent native ; and there it 
may be truly so.
Perhaps 
the P.
scandica or Mougcotii 
may sometimes be misnamed 
torminalis, 
365 Pyrus Aria.
rupicola.
365.
PYRUS ARIA.
155 
Devon.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Atwood sp.
7 Wnts north ?
Eng. Bot.
3. 
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Mrs. Atkins sp.
17 Surrey!
Sjme sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Native ?
22 Berks.
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
30 Bedford ?
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
47 Montgomery.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
67 Derby I Whittaker sp.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
69 Westmoreland !
83 Edinburgh.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
92 Aber.
south.
Baker sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Stables sp.
(19 25 26 27 58 59 62 67 
70 75 77 81 85 90 94 95 
98 103 104 ; introduced or 
less certainly indigenous).
The next species or segre- 
gates, especially the " Mou- 
geotii?" of Devon, has been 
usually recorded under the 
name of " Aria." 
365 Pyrus scandica.
Mougeotii P 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
6 north !
Flower sp.
10 Wight?
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
50 Denbigh.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.f 
85 Kinross.
Syme sp.
1870.
00 Arran.
Syme sp.
Duthie.
N.B. Examples of ordinary 
Aria have been labelled and 
distributed for scandica; and 
there is otherwise much con- 
fusion between this and the 
preceding species, as well as 
between this and the next 
following one.
365 Pyrus fennica 
pinnatifida.
12 Hants north.
Borrer sp.
13 Sussex west.
Atkins sp.
16 Kent west.
J. Macnab sp.
34 Gloster west.
Sandys sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
64 York m.
west.
Lees cat."""' 
90 Forfar.
Watson sp.''' 
99 Dimbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Arran.
Syme sp.
Duthie.
N.B. Two forms or segregates 
are included under Smith's 
pinnatifida.
Both are sus- 
pected to be hybrids ; the 
one, between Ancuparia and 
scandica, which is found very 
sparingly in Arran ; the 
other, between Aucuparia 
and Aria, observed in North 
Hants by Mr. Borrer, among 
156 
365.
PYKUS FENNICA.
abundance of the two sup- !
posed parents.
Both segre- { 
gates occur in plantations, j 
366 Pyrus 
Aucuparia.
Counties all, except 15 31 32 
51 54 60 84 86 98 109 
with the usual nine.
(Be- 
sides those counties, it is 
indicated as only a doubted 
native in 1 7 8 18 19 23 
to 28 or 29, and less du- 
biously so in 46 59 72 85).
In my own notes I find it 
entered without marks of 
doubt for counties 6 12 16 
17 22 39 49 50 59 69 70 
83 87 88 89 90 92 96 97 
106 107 108.
367 Epilobium 
angustifolium.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west!
Bromf.
sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.f 
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Introduced ?
22 Berks!
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk cast.
Stock sp.
28 Norfolk west.
30 Bedford, "rare." 
33 Grloster east.
Dyer sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.f 
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Lincoln.
Britten Ire.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Winch sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.j 
80 Koxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f 
86 Sthling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Graham sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south I Dickie cat.
367.
EPILOBIUM ANGUSTIFOLIUM.
157 
93 Aber.
uortli.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
Cli. Bab.
ms.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
N.B. Beckoned up by the 
number of its counties, this 
might appear to rank among 
common plants ; but being 
quite a local plant in several 
counties, and perhaps too 
uncertainly native in others 
named above, its counties 
have been cited in detail.
368 Epilobium 
hirsutum.
Counties all, except 46 49 53 
71 86 88 92 (93) 94 95 
(96) 97 to 108 (109) 110 
[111] 112.
Less numerous 
than the j)receding, as to its 
counties, but too abundant 
in England to be placed 
among the non-common 
plants.
369 Epilobium 
parviflorum.
Counties all, except 49 61 72 
73 84 86 88 89 97 98 106 
to 109 111 112.
370 Epilobium 
montanum.
Counties all, except 46 and 
the usual nine ; in all of 
which doubtless it may be 
found.
371 Epilobium 
lanceolatum.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
12 Hants north.
Baker sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.f 
17 Surrey!
Clearly indigenous.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
371 Epilobium 
roseum.
1 Corn.
west.
Briggs, 1871.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
11 Hants south !
More ms.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Elhs sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
B entail sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford !
41 Glamorgan.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Windsor sp.
60 west !
62 York n.
east.
Baker s\).
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
(8 10 66).
[82 85 90 95 ; 
insufficiently vouched] .
158 
EPILOBIUM PALUSTEE.
372 Epilobium 
palustre.
Counties all, except 31 32 34 
41 46 54 72 86 98.
373 Epilobium 
tetragonum.
Counties all, except 49 51 54 
70 80 84 86 97 98 106 
to 108 112.
The aggregate, 
that is, including both the 
subjoined segregates.
373 Epilobium 
eu-tetragonum.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
10 Wight !
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex.
29 Cambridge.
34 Gloster west.
Flower sp.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Khk sp.
55 Leicester ?
83 Edinburgh?
89 Mid Perth ?
N.B. Less frequent, and per- 
haps much less widely dis- 
tributed than is the Ep.
obscurum.
The absolute 
distinctness of the two 
seems questionable, because 
intermediate forms occur, 
which are not confidently 
assignable to one of the se- 
gregates only.
373 Epilobium 
obscurum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 cast.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
29 Cambridge.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kh'k sp.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aberdeen south !
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
Ill or 112 Jide Britten.
No doubt also in many other 
counties.
I think to have 
seen it in Sutherland.
374.
EPILOBIUM ALPINUM.
159 
374 Epilobium 
alpinum.
G6 Durham.
Trevetyan sp.
68 Clie-sdotland.
Tate sp.
70 Cumber.
Addison sp.
1867.
85 Fife ?
86 Stii'ling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
Brand ms.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson sp.
05 Ross west.
06 east.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
N.B. I do not know how to 
distinguish the atiagaUidi- 
foliuni" from the plant 
which stands in my notes 
as aJpinum.
It may be on 
this account that I scarcely 
know where to di'aw the 
line between this present 
and the next species.
[49 56 64 ; errors] .
374 Epilobium 
alsinifolium.
44 Carmarthen ?
49 Carnarvon !
Bowman ms.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviot.
W. H.
Brown sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Hooker sp.
89 Perth east !
90 Forfar !
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
Church Bab. sp.
04 Eb. north.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
12 Shetland.
N.B. Approximates to alpinum 
on one side, towards the 
mountain states of ohscurum 
on the other side ; thus in- 
troducing some degree of 
uncertainty into the reports 
of its localities.
376 Isnardia 
palustris.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Hooker sp.
[70 Cumberland] .
377 Circsea 
lutetiana.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varcnnc cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
160 
377.
CIRC^A LUTETIANA.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
2-i Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babingtonms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
S. Foster sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortbton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tbwaites cat.
35 Monmoutb.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Sbawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Twining sp.
50 Denbigli !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln nortb.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt ms.
58 Cbester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, soutb.
Webb cat.
60 west!
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
66 n.
west.
Paine sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortbumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Clieviot.
Emblcton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.f 
72 L)umfrics.
Gordon ms.
r 
73 Kirkcudbrigbt.
Gray cat.
75 AjT.
Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar?
G. Don." 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
96 Easterness ?
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantu'e.
Balfour cat.
08 Suth.
east ?
09 Caithness.
N.B. Treated as a non-com- 
mon plant on account of its 
rarity in North Britain, with 
a comparatively sparse dis- 
tribution elsewhere ; al- 
though it may actually 
occur in every county of 
South and Mid Britain.
377-8 Circsea 
intermedia.
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
38 ]Vaywick.
Cox sp.
alpina I 
39 Stafford.
50 Denbigh.
Sandys sp.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester.
G. E.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south ?
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham?
Storey." Error?
69 Westmoreland.
Watson sp.
70 Cumberland.
Crotch sp.
77 Lanark.
Mrs. Russell sp.
83 Edinburgh?
Brand sp.
377.
CIRCiEA 
88 Perth mid.
Watson si3.
89 east.
Gardiner s-p.
90 Forfar?
Don only?
95 Elgin.
Gordonsp.
"Moray." 
99 Dunbar ton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire ?
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08Suth.
west?
C. alpina?
N.B. A most troublesome 
plant.
In citing the speci- 
mens from my herbarium I 
follow Dr. Ascherson, of 
Berlin, who appeared to 
know the intermedia better 
than I can make it out ; my 
own view still inclining to a 
behef that approximating 
forms of lutetiana and of 
alpina equally get assigned 
to the intermedia.
For ex- 
amx)le, I refer my own West- 
moreland specimens confi- 
dently to alpina, and Mr.
Hunt's Cheshire (Cotterill 
Wood) examples less confi- 
dently to lutetiana; that is, 
assuming two species only.
378 Circaea 
alpina.
38 Waru:ick.
Introduced.
69 Westmoreland 1 
70 Cumberland !
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east ?
90 Forfar.
Gard.
flo.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie Guide.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie Bot. Guide.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterncss.
Htables cat.
97 Westerness.
intermedia?
98 Argyle.
intermedia?
INTERMEDIA.
161 
99 Dunbarton.
Clyde flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
Light, scot.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
[6 25 35 39 43 44 47 48 
50 55 57 58 59 63 64 
67 68 75 77 82 83 85 
111; insufficiently vouched; 
partly erroneous, although 
perhaps not wholly so ; and 
some of the counties named 
are at best uncertain] .
379 Hippuris 
vulgaris.
1 Cornwall west ?
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east !
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts 1 Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Berkeley ms.
33 Glostcr east.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
162 
379.
HIPPURIS VULGARIS.
87 Worcester.
Biickman sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
62 Anglesea.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterncss.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
Gibson ms.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
380 Myriophyllum 
, verticillatum.
1 Corn, west ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset?
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Wallis sp.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford ?
40 Salop.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Bloxam ms.
61 York s.
east.
380.
MYRIOPHYLLUM VERTICILLATUM.
163 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
BowTaan sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberl.
Baker cat.
1871.
[45 50 95 111, insuffi- 
ciently vouched, and the 
two latter certainly errors ; 
and in some of the other 
counties perhaps the plant 
thus named was truly 
alterniflorum] .
381 Myriophyllum 
" spicatum." 
Counties all, except 2 5 46 49 
51 53 61 71 86 93 97 98 
99 101 104 107 [112] .
This is the recorded distri- 
bution of sjncatiim more or 
less confused with alterni- 
florum.
This latter is a se- 
gregate of recent date ; the 
older records apparently 
assigning some of its loca- 
lities to spicatum, and others 
of them to verticillatum ; a 
confusion still occasionally 
made down to present time.
381 Myriophyllum 
spicatum !
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east!
17 Surrey !
Coleman cat.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumber.
Baker cat.
1871.
76 Kenfrew.
Clydesdale flo.
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale flo.
83 Edinburgh !
Graham sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
10 Hebrides.
Balf.
Bab. flo.
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
N.B. The others are too un- 
certain and reckoned under 
the aggregate "spicatum." 
382 Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Ray sp.
20 Herts ?
21 Middlesex.
164 
382.
LIYEIOPHYLLUM ALTERNIFLORUM.
22 Berks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
Ley s^.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
4C Salop.
Bidwell sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
AVebb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
89 Perth east.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
96 Easterness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
383 Callitriche 
verna.
Counties all, except 47 86 93 
106 107, with the usual 
nine.
Such is the recorded 
distribution of C.
verm a ; but 
no doubt more or less in- 
cluding the two other very 
unsatisfactory species treat- 
ed underneath as nos.
384 
and 385.
384 Callitriche 
platycarpa.
Counties all, from 1 to 112 ; 
but with many exceptions 
to the records through bota- 
nists not generally distin- 
guishing this from the pre- 
ceding.
My list of counties 
affords no sufficient autho- 
rities for the following : — 2 
4 6 8 14 16 25 26 30 32 
35 37 39 41 42 43 47 48 
50 51 53 54 56 57 60 61 
71 72 73 75 78 79 84 86 
88 90 93 95 97 103 105 
to 109 111 ; in some of 
these counties very likely 
seen by myself without spe- 
cial notes being kept.
385 Callitriche 
hamulata.
pedunculata.
truncata, etc.
Counties all, from 1 to 112 ; 
but with still more nume- 
rous exceptions.
Several 
segregates are included, very 
dubiously distinct, and va- 
riously named at different 
dates.
The plant varies 
much according to its situa- 
tions, in deep water, in 
shallow water, in still or 
running water, or in places 
alternately covered with 
water or left bare.
The va- 
riations so induced are de- 
scribed as different species ; 
their localities inextricably 
confused in book records.
386 Callitriche 
autumnalis.
3 Devon south.
" Parlitt sp." 
58 Chester.
"Warren." 
386.
CALLITEICHE AUTUMNALIS.
165 
62 Anglesea.
Babington sp.
64 York m.
west.
Lees cat.
67 Northumb.
Tliornliill sp.
68 Cheviotlaud.
New flo.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
91 Kinc.
Dickie sp.
Syme sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
"Loch of Glum ; Arnott." 
"Loch Clunie;" Stables, &c.
[9 12 15 17 19 21 25 30 
36 37 38 39 41 46 52 55 
56 59 62 65 70 82 108 
112; all msufficiently vouch- 
ed, and most of them errors 
through mistaking some 
form of no.
385 for the pre- 
sent clearly distinct plant] .
388 Ceratophyllum 
aquaticum.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east?
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex!
Sansom sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
I 29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
j 31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
I 33 Gloster east.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
50 Denbigh?
Faun.
Grust.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Arnott sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour sp.
S.E.Highlands?
90 Forfar.
389 Lythrum 
Hyssopifolia.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
29 Cambridge.
Hooker sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
[1 3 70].
(10 15 17 21 
22 23 26 30 31 37 39 44 
55 56 57 59 64 80; casual 
or erroneously reported).; 
390 Lythrum 
Salicaria.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset, ricydcll cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
I 11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
166 
390.
LYTHRUM SALICAEIA.
12 Hants north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
64 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
GO west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.west.
Tatham cat.
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
and cat.t 
87 Perth west.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Canthe.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
N.B. Although plentiful in 
England, this is too local 
in Scotland to come under 
the " common plants." 
391 Peplis 
Portula.
Counties all, except 6 32 33 
35 49 51 54 60 68 71 73 
80 82 84 86 89 97 98 104 
107 110 112, with the 
usual nine ; likely to be 
found in all of these, unless 
in the two or four highest 
numbered.
393 Bryonia 
dioica.
3 Devon south.
Planted?
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north !
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat, 
393.
BRYONIA DIOICA.
167 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks!
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Sir J.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell s]).
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester !
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Gordon ms.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
Church.
Bab. ms.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
Warren cat.
I 
69 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 York n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Ward sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Chrisp ms.
75 Ayr.
394 Montia 
fontana.
Counties all, except 31 51 80 
82 84 86 98 107, with the 
usual nine ; doubtless to be 
found in every county.
395 Illecebrum 
verticillatum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south?
4 north ?
396 Corrigiola 
littoralis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
397 Hemiaria 
vulgaris.
1 Corn, west !
Pascoe sp.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
26 west.
Skepper ms.
27 Norf.
west.
War dale sp.
29 Cambridge.
53 Line, south ?
[6 11 21 41 56 59 81 88 
or 89 ; insufficiently vouch- 
ed, and mostly errors] .
398 Polycarpon 
tetraphyllum.
1 Corn, west !
Cannack cat.
2 east?
3 Devon south.
Bromf.
ms.
9 Dorset.
Borrer ms.
(21 41 61 80 ; introduced 
into these counties, if not 
simx^ly errors in 41 61).
168 
399.
SCLERANTHUS AKNUUS.
399 Scleranthus 
annuus.
Counties all, except 5 31 35 
41 45 51 54 60 69 97 98 
104 110 111 112 ; perhaps 
really absent from the three 
or four last numbered coun- 
ties.
400 Scleranthus 
perennis.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norf.
east ?
28 west.
War dale sp.
43 Kadnor.
Purchas sp.
[5 or 6 15 17 32 39 48 
58 90 ; all or mostly errors] .
401 Ribes 
nigrum.
N.B. Scarcely any botanists, 
whose opinions can be held 
of any weight in the ques- 
tion of indigenousness, omit 
the mark, or other indica- 
tion of uncertain nativity, 
in connexion with the name 
of this shrub.
404 Ribes 
rubrum.
N.B. This is nearly as much 
questioned as the preceding, 
although on the whole less 
positively rejected as a na- 
tive shrub.
Possibly it may 
be indigenous in the j)ro- 
vinces of Humber, Tync, 
Lakes, East and West High- 
lands; although chiefly in 
form oi petrmmi or sjncatinn, 
if not exclusively so.
404 Ribes 
petreeum.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.t 
88 mid !
90 Forfar ?
93 Aber.
north ?
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Gordon sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
" s]3icatum." 
N.B. Passes into the syivestre 
variety of rubrum by inter- 
mediate degrees of pubes- 
cence, etc.
See Comx^.
Cyb.
Brit, page 514.
405 Ribes 
alpinum.
34 Gloster west.
Waring, B.
G. 
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.''' 
38 Warwick.
With.
arr.
39 Stafford.
Garner, ''wild." - 
41 Glamorgan ?
44 Carmarthen.
Milne.
f 
49 Carnarvon.
Davies.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Welch Bot.
55 Leicester.
Coleman flo.''' 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Purchas ms.t 
58 Chester.
Bradbury.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.'^'' 
61 York s.
east.
'' recorded." 
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Dill, E.
S. 
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west, "native." 
66 Durham.
New flo.f 
67 Northumberland.
New flo.f 
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.f 
69 Westmoreld.
Annals of K.
70 Cumberland.
Jos. Eobson.
76 Benfrew.
Clydesdale flo.f 
405.
RI3S3 ALPINUM, 169 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.* 
83 Edinbui'gh.
Balf.
flo.- 
84 Linlithgow.
Balf.
flo.- 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie G.* 
N.B. This shrub has been 
often planted in the gardens 
and shrubberies of North 
England, probably on ac- 
count of its early leafing 
and flowering, unshowy as 
its flowers are.
Nowhere 
seen by myself in a truly 
wild state.
In citing the 
reported counties here book 
records have been resorted 
to, with the double series of 
marks, to indicate greater 
(") or less (f) suspicion 
against the true nativity of 
the shrub.
406 Ribes 
Grossularia.
N.B. When we attempt to trace 
the distribution of this slu'ub 
through Britain, county by 
county, the adverse opinions 
against its real nativity 
greatly predominate over 
the very few given in sup- 
port.
What can be said in 
favour of its nativity, may 
be seen on pages 377 to 382 
of Phytologist, volume thu'd ; 
and those who admire a ram- 
bling and illogical style of 
wi'iting may there find a 
striking example of the late 
Dr. Bromfield's capacity for 
wordiness of that kind.
Re- 
corded in eighty counties ; 
chiefly, if not solely, the off- 
spring or descendants from | 
seeds conveyed out of gar- 
dens.
407 Tillaea 
muscosa.
2 Corn, east?
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
25 Suff.
east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Hooker sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
[22 Berks ; Brit, contrib.] .
408 Sedum 
Rhodiola.
42 Brecon, — or Glamorgan?
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
64 York m.
west?
error loci?
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid!
90 Forfar!
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
sea-coast." 
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west!
Ch. Bab.
ms.
11 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
170 409.
SEDUM 
409 Sedum 
Telephium.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Edmonds sp.
6 Somerset.
Southby ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
"Pulteney." 
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
10 west !
17 Surrey !
Indigenous ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
An escape ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
30 Bedford.
32 Nortliton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
1 
TELEPmUM.
52 Angle sea.
57 Derby !
Norman sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.f 
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Miss Twining sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson ms.f 
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
88 mid.
Miss Worsley.f 
89 east!!
(90 92 95 96 111 112; 
introduced to these counties ; 
likely so to several of those 
enumerated by name).
It 
appeared to me truly native 
on the coast rocks near the 
Land's End, Cornwall.
It 
may be so in Surrey ; though 
I feel undecided about that 
county as well as all the 
rest distinguished by the 
sign " !" 
410 Sedum 
villosum.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
07 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
410.
SEDUM VILLOSUM.
171 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.' 
81 Bermck.
83 Edinburgh !
G. Macnab sp.
84 Linhthgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stii'ling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Ai'gyle.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[59 " James Roscoe." 
412 Sedum 
anglicum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Salmon ms.
14 east.
Maw sp.
15 Kent east.
French sp.
19 Essex north ?
" Irvine." 
25 Suff.
east.
Varennc sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
43 Radnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Twining sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
"Mudd sp." 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Crotch sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
85 Fife !
May Isle.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle !
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
BaKour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
[28 92; both errors?] 
414 Sedum 
acre.
Counties all, except 14 31 46 
88 97 104 107 112; likely 
to occur in these also, un- 
less the last of them.
415 Sedum 
reflexum.
N.B. This cannot be treated 
as a true native.
It is re- 
ported from over sixty coun- 
ties, usually as an escaj)e 
from gardens.
Two gar- 
den species pass under this 
172 415.
SEDUM REFLEXUM.
name ; one of which is also 
occasionally mistaken for ru- 
pestre, when found in a quasi- 
wild state.
In turn, the 
truly wild S.
rupestre is made 
up out of two other species ; 
one of these other two being- 
much confused with S.
Fors- 
terianum.
Herbarium spe- 
cimens of the five jDlants, 
thus confused together, are 
seldom in a state to yield 
much aid in diagnosis.
The 
book characters, especially 
those of the two treated 
underneath, are misleading 
through describers mistaking 
mere states of growth or 
luxuriance for specific cha- 
racters, ex.
gr.
"leaves in 
rose -like tufts." 
416 Sedum 
rupestre.
" elegans." 
4 Devon north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
34 Gloster west.
Borrer ms.
85 Monmouth.
Purchas ms.
40 Salop.
43 Kadnor.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
Miss Atwood.
47 Montgomery.
Newman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Newman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Rev. J.
Harris.
(3 27 32 38 GG G7 G8 G9 
74).
[36 57 52].
416 Sedum 
Forsterianum.
aureum, Wirtgen ?
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
40 Salop.
Lcigliton cat.
co.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Kadnor.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam ms, 
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
[3 5 6 32 35; very un- 
certain ; nor can much trust 
be given to the counties as- 
signed b}^ name above either 
to this species or to the pre- 
ceding] .
418 Cotyledon 
Umbilicus.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
32 Northton.
Extinct?
34 Gloster west !
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
AVatkins sj).
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Moiitgom.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Stables sp.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
418.
COTYLEDON UMBILICUS.
173 
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
57 Derby.
Church .
Bab. sp.
58 Chester !
AVarren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland s}).!
65 n.
west?
"Miss Otter." 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kh-kcudbright.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
98 Ai'gyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Stables sp.
422 Saxifraga 
stellaris.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
51 Fhnt.
64 York m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Pinder ms.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Emblcton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
78 Peebles.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid!
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Boswcll ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
96 Easterncss !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness I 
98 Argyle.
Montgomery ms.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
423 Saxifraga 
nivalis.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
69 Westmoreland, very rare.
70 Cumberland, very rare.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
Gourlie sp.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
H. M.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
''Voirlick." 
03 Eb. mid?
04 north.
Lawson cat.
[48 50 ; misnomers] .
424 Saxifraga 
Hirculus.
58 Chester.
Extinct.
65 York n.
west.
Oliver sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker ms.
77 Lanark.
Campbell sp.
81 Berwick.
Johnston sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme "v.
s." 
[Aberdeen?
" James Kae."] 
425 Saxifraga 
aizoides.
64 Y^ork m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Binder ms.
06 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nortliumborld.
Winch sp.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland !
174 
425.
SAXIFEAGA AIZOIDES.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
75 Ayr. Landsborougli ms.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
86 Stii-ling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar!
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Canthe.
Balfom- sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss- east !
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Syme sp.
08 west !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
11 Orkney.
Neill.
Syme ms.
[57 58; errors?].
426 Saxifraga 
oppositifolia.
42 Brecon.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
64 York m.
west.
Kylands sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark.
Planted?
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid!
89 east I 
90 Forfar!
G. Macnab sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
On sea clih's.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
01 Canthe.
Balfour sp.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
12 Shetland.
427 Saxifraga 
granulata.
Somerset ?
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Dyer ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lcigliton cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
427.
SAXIFRAGA GRANULATA, 
175 
59 Lane, soutli.
Scholes sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Nortliuuib.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Grray cat.
73 Ku-kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stu-ling.
Gourlie sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Gordon ms.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Miss Boswell.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
(71 111).
428 Saxifraga 
cernua.
88 Mid Perth !
429 Saxifraga 
rivularis.
88 Mid Perth.
90 Forfar ?
? 
92 South Aberdeen.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness !
430 Saxifraga 
tridactylites.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north!
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 AVight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper cat.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
Price sp.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
176 
430.
SAXIFKAGA TRIDACTYLITES.
62 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.west.
Bowman sjd.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 CheviotlancL Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
82 Haddington.
Christy sp.
83 Edmburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife".
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
96 Easterness.
" Dr. Hope." 
06 Boss east.
"Mr. Brichan." 
07 Suth.
east.
" Dr. Gordon." 
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
431 Saxifraga 
hypnoid.es.
6 Som. north.
Clark ms.
36 Hereford.
Gissing ms.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Kadnor.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Streeten sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid!
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
04 Eb. north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
08 Suth.
west !
11 Orkney?
[3].
(9 38).
432 Saxifraga 
caespitosa.
94 Banff.
Dr. M.
Barry sp.
97 Westerness.
" J.
Woods." 
[49 57 69 70 90 92] .
434 Chrysosplenium 
oppositifolium.
Counties all, except 29 31 51 
53 54 60 74 86 98 107 
110 112 ; likely to be found 
in all, unless the two first 
and two last should be real 
exceptions.
Far from com- 
mon in the south-eastern 
counties of England.
435 Chrysosplenium 
alternifolium.
435.
CHKYSOSPLENIUM ALTERNIFOLIUM.
177 
4 Devon north.
**Wainwriglit." 
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
Ellis sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Kingsley sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
Hurst ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
60 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
61 FHnt.
65 Leicester.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt sp.
68 Chester.
69 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Henncdy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Johnston ms.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
[16 error of species?].
[24 " error of county."] .
436 Parnassia 
palustris.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell " v.
sp." 
11 Hants south.
17 Surrey.
Eev. E.
Wood ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Pamplin ms.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
2 A 
178 
436.
PARNASSIA PALUSTKIS.
67 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat, 
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberld.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid!
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness!
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[6 7 8 10 ; insufficiently 
vouched, by Sole, etc.] 
437 Adoxa 
Moschatellina.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortliton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
3G Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
437.
ADOXA MOSCHATELLINA.
179 
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Hovitt cat.
58 Chester!
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
86 Stirlmg.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
*'Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Stables sp.
438 Hedera 
Helix.
Counties all, except 80 89 97 
98 107 110, with the usual 
nine ; likely to occur in all, 
unless 110 be a real excep- 
tion.
439 Cornus 
sanguinea.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortliton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster cast.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
180 439.
coBNUS 
45 Pembroke?
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
62 Angle sea.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
I 
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Wild ?
(67 68 77 81 82 83 84 
85 88 95 102; perhaps also 
not truly wild in 58 59 60).
440 Cornus 
suecica.
62 York n.
east.
J. Bean sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
88 Perth mid!
Hooker sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness!
97 Westerness!
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon sp.
07 Sutherland east.
08 west !
[83 Edinburgh.
By a trick ?] 
441 Hydrocotyle 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 32 46 49 
51 54 60 80 86 89 97 98 
107 108 ; probably grows 
in all of these counties.
SANGUINEA.
442 Sanicula 
europsea.
Counties all, except 51 60 71 
72 86 89 97 98 101 102 
107 111 112.
444 Eryngium 
maritimum.
1 Corn, west !
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Clark sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
54 Line, north !
Thompson ms.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
Extinct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
73 Kirkcudb.
Gordon ms.
75 Ayr. Hooker sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Extinct?
444.
ERYNGIUM 
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine ?
93 Aber.
north.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantii'e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfoiu- cat.
03 mid.
12 Shetl.
? 2 loc.
in Edm. flo.
445 Eryngium 
campestre.
8 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
1847.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield 1856.
32 Northton.
Notcutt 1843.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.f 1843.
67 l^orthumb.
" baUast hills." 
[1 35 36 or 37 60].
446 Conium 
maculatum.
Counties all, except 35 46 49 
51 61 88 89 97 98 103 
to 107 112.
Dubiously in- 
digenous northward of the 
Grampians.
108 West Sutherland !
109 Caithness !
110 Hebrides ; Balf.
Bab. cat.
111 Orkney; Neill Tour.
447 Physospermum 
cornubiense.
1 Corn, west ?
2 east !
Bree ms.
8 Devon south.
Banker sp.
448 Smyrnium 
Olusatrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
1 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Swete flo.
MAEITIMUM.
181 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
f Bromf.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.f 
14 east.
Hall ms.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.''' 
16 west.
Pamplin ms.f 
17 Surrey.
Brewer flo.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
W. C.
flo.- 
21 Middlesex.
T. D.
flo.- 
22 Berks.
Britten Contrib.
23 Oxford.
Sibthorpe flo.
24 Bucks, "reported." 
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
H. S.
flo.
27 Norf.
east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. flo.- 
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Glosterwest.
Thwaites cat.f 
37 Worcester.
Lees M.
flo.
39 Stafford.
Garner flo.f 
40 Salop.
Leighton flo.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Leefe ms.f 
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Davies flo.
55 Leicester.
Coleman flo.* 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
58 Chester.
Liverpool new flo.
61 York s.
east.
" denizen." 
62 n.
east, ''denizen." 
63 s.
west, ''denizen." 
64 m.
west, "denizen." 
66 Durham, "denizen." 
67 Northumb.
"denizen." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Benfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
" Parsons.
Bay." 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
B. & S.
flo.
182 
448.
SMYRNIUM OLUSATRUM.
85 Fife.
Hooker flo.
scot.
86 Stirling, An escape.
91 Kincardine, ''introduced." 
92 Aber.
south, "introduced." 
93 north, "introduced." 
99 Dunbarton.
Clydes.
flo.
0(J Clyde-isles.
Landsborough.
N.B. Finding myself unable 
to indicate the counties 
in which this plant is in- 
digenous, if truly indige- 
nous anywhere, I resort to 
the plan of citing authorities, 
with the addition of the two 
signs \) to show their 
greater or less distrust of 
nativity.
I have seen the 
plant in about a score of 
counties; its inland localities 
always near old dwellings.
Possibly wild on coast cliffs.
449 Cicuta 
virosa.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Marshall ms.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
30 Bedford.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Prior ms.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bowman sp.
53 Lincoln south.
56 Notts.
Extinct ?
68 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Windsor sp.
62 York n.
east.
65 n.
west.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray.
Lloyd.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
[8 9 13 to 17 21 24 61 
63 64 67 70 92 111; 
these are on old authority, 
or insufficient through the 
plant having been confused 
with Oenanthe Jiuviatilis, and 
perhaps also with 0.
crocata 
and Phellandriimi.] 
450 Apium 
graveolens.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north 1 Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11' Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
25 Suff.
east.
Cooper sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester '?
perhaps wild.
89 Stafford ?
perhaps wild.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
450..
APIUM GRA^^OLENS.
183 
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
54 north !
Howitt ms.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviotl.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
(7 8 20 22 23 26 30 31 
33 36 40 55 56 63 64 
83 85 87 92 95 ; aU in- 
land localities for this much 
cultivated littoral plant 
must be regarded with sus- 
picion, unless certified on 
the safest authority).
452 Petroselinum 
segetum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Goulding sp.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Hort sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Eev. E.H. Fox sp.
10 Wight !
Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrcr cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
Farre sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Yarenne ms.
19 north.
Gribson sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
"Warren, 1869." 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester ?
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
Dr. Walker "] .
[103 
453 
Trinia 
vulgaris.
3 Devon south.
Woodward sp.
6 Som. north.
Crotch sp.
M-84 Gloster west.
Eussell sp.
[36 49 70 ; errors] .
454 Helosciadium 
nodiflorum.
Counties all, except 49 71 72 
75 86 to 98 103 to 112.
I Too plentiful in England to 
render the citation of coun- 
I ties and authorities needful.
And yet very local in North 
Britain ; being limited appa- 
rently to its most southern 
counties, Fifeshire and 
184 
454.
HELOSCIADIUM NODIFLORUM.
South-west Highlands.
He- 
losciadium repens is recorded 
in many counties, from Corn- 
wall to Fife ; but usually it 
is only a small state of nodi- 
fiorum which is so named.
See Comp.
Cyb. Brit, page 
519.
455 Helosciadium 
inundatum.
Counties all, except 5 6 32 
33 35 41 49 51 60 71 72 
84 86 88 97 99 104 107 
108 110 112; in most of 
these it may have been over- 
looked.
106 Gordon cat.
109 Brown cat.
Ill Neill's 
Tour ; a record which should 
be confirmed.
456 Sison 
Amomum.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
BeU sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bowman ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Gordon ms.
52 Angle sea.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
(66 [67] 81).
457 .ffigopodium 
Podagraria.
Counties all, except 45 49 51 
52 60 69 71 97 106 107 
108 110 112; with the 
usual nine.
In many of the 
other counties it is indicated 
as appearing to be uncer- 
tainly indigenous ; more es- 
pecially so in those of North 
Britain.
459 Carum 
verticillatum.
2 Corn.
east.
W. Wise sp.
459.
CARUM VERTICILLATUM.
185 
3 Devon south ?
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmartlien.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
70 Cumberland.
Heysliam ms.
71 Isle of Man.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kii'kcudbrigbt.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
98 Ai'gyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
G. E.
Hunt sp.
01 Cantii'e.
Balfour cat.
460 Carum 
Bulbocastanum.
20 Herts.
Fordliam sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
30 Bedford.
Coleman ms.
[7 Wilts flo.
21 Flo. brit.] 
461 Bunium 
flexuosum.
Counties all, except 45 46 49 51 
58 80 86 97 98 101 107 110, 
with the usual nine ; probably 
in all of these, unless 110.
462 Pimpinella 
Saxifraga.
Counties all, except 60 71 97 98 
99 103 to 107 109 to 112.
463 Pimpinella 
magna.
1 Corn.
west.
" Oliver,"' 1869.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
7 "Wilts north.
Prior ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset?
11 Hants south.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Sandys sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
28 Norfolk west.
BeU sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton Anderson ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
54 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Bickham sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Leefe sp.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
464 Slum 
latifolium.
3 Devon south.
Tatems.
1871.
2 B 
186 
464 SIUM LATIFOLIUM.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Morems.
1868.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Fox sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop?
"W.
P. Brookes." 
62 Anglesea.
64 Line, north !
Howitt sp.
66 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
Extinct.
68 Cheviotland.
76 Ayr. Duncan cat.
82 Haddington '?
" Campbell." 
86 Stirling.
Mauglian sp.
[2 7 9 38 41 65 64 69 70 ; 
insufficiently vouched] .
465 Slum 
angustifolium.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south ?
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
51 Flint !
62 Anglesea.
53 Line, south!
64 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west!
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 B.
west.
Lees cat.
64 ni.
west.
Tatham cat.
465.
SIUM ANGUSTIFOLIUM.
187 
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Dui'liam.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberlaud.
68 Cheviot.
Erableton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries ?
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
1870.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
Kerr to Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Eoy he.
1872.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
[Ill Neill, " common "] .
466 Bupleurum 
tenuissimum.
3 Devon south.
Eev. W.
Hore.
5 Som. north.
9 Dorset.
Rev. H.
E. Fox sp.
10 Wight.
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Farre sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norf.
east.
Henslow sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts ?
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
54 Lincoln north.
58 Chester.
Miss Grundy." 
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
66 Durham.
(17 Surrey, once seen).
467 Bupleurum 
aristatum.
3 Devon south.
Henslow sp.
14 Sussex east.
Bab. man.
ed.
5. 
N.B. Destroyed on the Flag- 
staff Hill, but still found at 
Daddy's Hole, South Devon ; 
Rev. T.
F. Ravenshaw, 1871.
468 Bupleurum 
falcatum.
17 Surrey.
Brewer flo.
18 Essex south.
Christy sp.
[58 Chester ; error.] 
469 Bupleurum 
rotundifolium.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
A. Prior sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Extinct ?
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.+ 
14 east ?
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp^ 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
. 
26 west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Fordliam sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
3G Hereford ?
188 
469.
BUPLEURUM 
EOTUNDIFOLIUM.
37 Worcester.
38 War^dck.
Bree ms.
53 Lincoln south.
65 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
56 Notts.
One locality.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west ?
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.f 
(59 on ' ' railway banks ' ' ; and 
scarcely better than a casual 
in some other counties ?) 
470 Oenanthe 
fistulosa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Barham sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley flo.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford, 
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
" Lake district recorded." 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kii'kcudb.
Lloyd ms.
75 Ayr.
81 Berwick.
[76 85 90 99 ; not verified 
of late, and perhaps Lache- 
nalii was the species intended 
in those counties.] 
471 Oenanthe 
pimpinelloides.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
5 Som. south ?
Coleman cat.
6 north ?
Newb.
1852 
9 Dorset.
Mrs. Wyndham sp.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt ms.
13 Sussex west.
Gibson sp.
471.
OENANTHE 
PIMPINELLOIDES.
189 
14 Sussex east !
Hall cat.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
33 Gloster east.
Biickman sp.
34 west.
Lees sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
N.B. By name this is recorded 
for many other counties, but 
the species really intended 
was Lachenalii.
471 Oenanthe 
Lachenalii.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Christy sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Bromfield sp.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Mill sp.
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Fordliam sp.
21 Middlesex !
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman sp.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Mitchell sp.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west !
Eylands sp.
61 York s.
east.
Syme sp.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
0. Moore sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Heysham sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid ?— [17 22] .
N.B. Old records for so-called 
pimpinelloides'' have been 
taken as truly intending the 
species now understood to be 
Lacliciialii.
472 Oenanthe 
silaifolia.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
13 Sussex west.
"Winchherb." 
14 east.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Mill sp.
Salmon sp.
22 Berks!
Newb.
Dyer." 
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east ?
28 west ?
29 Cambridge.
Lemann sp.
190 
472.
OENANTHE SILAIFOLIA.
30 Bedford.
Sm. Herb.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
N.B. In several other counties, 
from Devon to Northumber- 
land, on faith of records or 
manuscript reports ; but this 
species having been much 
confused with Lachenalii and 
even Jistulosa, a selection 
only of the least unlikely or 
best certified counties is made 
above.
473 Oenanthe 
crocata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
4 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
^ 
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north I 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Miss Bell sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat* 
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shaw sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Dr. Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
63 Lincoln south !
54 north !
58 Chester!
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.' 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotl.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. James Macnab ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Syme sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west !
89 east !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbar ton I Hooker sp.
473.
OENANTHE CROCATA.
191 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Stables sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
474 Oenanthe 
Phellandrium.
3 Devon south ?
6 Som. south.
CoUins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Anderson ms.
33 Gloster.
36 Hereford.
Shawc sp.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
Bickham sp.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
70 Cumberland ?
' ' Winch .
' ' 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
[9 97 99 ; misnomers ?
] 
474 Oenanthe 
fluviatilis.
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
7 Wnts north.
Flower ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Borrer ms.
12 north.
Bromf.
ms.
15 Kent east.
" Borrer." 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Godley sp.' 
22 Berks.
Bos well Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
Rev. H.
E. Fox sp.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
34 Gloster west.
Purchas ms.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
475 .ffithusa 
Cynapium.
Counties all, except 46 49 71 
73 84 86 88 89 96 to 99 101 
to 110 (111) 112.
Common 
192 
475.
^THUSA CYNAPIUM.
in England.
Bare in North 
Britain ; and regarded as an 
introduced weed there by- 
Professor Dickie and the 
Eev. Dr.
Gordon.
476 Foeniculum 
vulgare.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.f 
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.t 
10 Wight.
More cat.- Bromf.f 
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.f 
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.t 
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
18 Essex south, "indigenous." 
19 • north.
Gibson flo.
25 Suff.
east.
Miss BeU ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Welsh Bot.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.f 
58 Chester.
Liverpool flo.''= 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.'" 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.-'- 
66 Durham, "ballast hills." 
67 Northumb.
" ballast hills." 
71 Man. Forbes cat.t 
83 Edinburgh.
Balf.
flo.* 
[90 Forfar.
Don in G.
flo.] 
N.B. Rejecting at once the 
many inland counties, in 
which this much cultivated 
herb has been reported, it is 
here traced along the coast 
counties only, with the two 
signs (t *) to shew the 
opinions on its nativity or 
other such indications afford- 
ed by the authorities quoted.
477 Seseli, or 
Athamanta 
Libanotis.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman sp.
20 Herts.
Fordliam sp.
29 Cambridge.
Bromfield sp.
[24 Bucks ; Huds.] .
478 Ligusticum 
scoticum.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
75 Ayr. Veronge sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Stables sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Canth'e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
09 Caithness.
Gordon ms.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
478 Silaus 
pratensis.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
Bromfield sp.
479.
SILAUS PEATENSIS.
193 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Boner cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Harris sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh!
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
480 Meum 
athamanticum.
48 Merioneth.
Price sp.
59 Lane, south.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Error ?
65 n.
west.
Pinder ms.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Pinder ms.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Khkcudbright.
Gordon ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton.
[3 Devon; "Bartlett"].
481 Crithmum 
maritimum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
2 c 
194 
481.
CEITHMUM MABITIMUM.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
co.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Hardy sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.
69 Westmorld.
Gibson ms.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
73 Kh'kcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ajv. Duncan cat.
[27 59 83 or 85 ; extinct or 
erroneously recorded ; the 
name of ' samphhe ' is occa- 
sionally given to the Sali- 
cornia] .
482 Angelica 
sylvestris.
Counties all, except 49 71 86 
98 107, with the usual nine ; 
but doubtless it does occur 
in every county.
483 Peucedanum 
officinale.
15 Kent east.
Cowcll sp.
19 Essex north.
Greenwood sp.
[13 27 56 ; errors arising 
from the Oenanthe Lachenalii 
being thus misnamed ?] 
484 Peucedannm 
palustre.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
18 Essex south?
J. Bay." 
25 Suff.
east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Winter sp.
29 Cambridge.
J. Bay sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
53 Line, south.
56 Notts?
Onelocahty.
63 York s.
west.
0. A.
Moore sp.
[36 59 61 69 76 83] .
486 Pastinaca 
sativa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
14 east !
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purclias ms.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
486.
PASTINACA SATIVA.
195 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.f 
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Warreu flo.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.f 
63 s.west.
Lees cat.
t 
64 m.
west, "native." 
65 n.
west, "native." 
66 Durham, "prob.
indigen." 
(54 62 67 68 75 100 ; dubi- 
ously indigenous also in 
Wales, Cornwall and else- 
where).
487 Heracleum 
Sphondylium.
Counties all, exce])t 46 49 98.
488 Tordylium 
maximTim.
21 Middlesex.
Castle sp.
23 Oxford.
Extinct everywhere?
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
" v.
s." 
[33 Buckman, B.
G. C] .
489 Daucus 
Carota.
Counties all, except 86 to 89 
94 97 98 99 107 111 ; and 
marked as uncertainly na- 
tive in the catalogues for 
Elgin, Nairn, and Caithness.
Abundant in Shetland, ac- 
cording to Edmonston's 
Flora.
490 Daucus 
maritimus.
gummifer.
1 Com. west !
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Banker sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset, "variety of D.
C." 
10 Wight ?
Bromfield ms.
14 Sussex east.
Bromfield.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.
[58 59 66 (80) 98 104 ; certain 
in the Peninsula, scarcely so 
elsewhere ; but Withering's 
plant appears to be simply a 
maritime form of Carota] .
491 Caucalis 
daucoides.
6 Som. north.
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
16 Kent west.
Bossy sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
28 Norfolk west, "rare." 
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
30 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam sp.
62 York n.
east.
" colonist." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Hebblethwate.
65 n.
west, "colonist." 
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
(37 or 38 casual, extinct ?) 
492 Caucalis 
latifolia.
5 Som. south.
Qucckctt sp.
6 north.
Collins ms.
492.
CAUCALIS LATIFOLIA.
196 
20 Herts.
Single locality.
29 Camb.
" Lemann 183B." 
30 Bedford.
Two localities.
34 Gloster.
Flower sp.f 1870.
44 Carmarthen.
Three spns.
I 
(11 19 39 or 57, casual and ; 
extinct, if not erroneous).
Scarcely better than a casual 
in any county.
493 Torilis 
Anthriscus.
Counties all, except 71 97 
106 to 112, with the usual 
nine.
494 Torilis 
infesta.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Luxford sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Tyler sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
75 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
[75 83 98 ; possibly seen as 
casuals iu these three coun- 
ties ; more likely erroneous] .
495 Torilis 
nodosa.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west 1 Borrer cat.
co.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
495.
TOEILIS NODOSA.
197 
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias ms.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Boswcll Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
''Mr. Croall." 
94 Banff.
''Mr. Bissett!" 
496 Scandix 
Pecten Veneris.
Counties all, except 49 51 60 
69 71 72 73 86 87 88 97 to 
105 107 108 110 (111) 112.
Introduced in Moray ; Coll.
Mor.
497 Anthriscus 
vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.f 
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.f 
14 east.
Bor. cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Holman sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
\ 23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
198 
497.
ANTHEISCUS VULGAEIS.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Che\^ot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.t 
77 Lanark.
"Veryrare"; C.flo.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
frequent." 
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
07 Sutli.
east !
Introduced ?
[112 "abundant"; Ed. flo.].
498 Anthriscus 
sylvestris.
Counties all, except 35 46 71 
72 73 80 97 106 109 ; doubt- 
less to be found in all.
500 Chaerophyllum 
temulentum.
Counties all, except 46 96 97 
101 to 105 107 108 110 111 
112.
106 Gordon, Boss cat.
109 Brown, Caithness cat.
i 
501 Myrrhis 
odorata.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
37 Worcester.
Ballard.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
James Carter.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
46 Cardigan.
Eng. Flora.
48 Merioneth.
" John Jones." 
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Griffith in B.
G. 
52 Anglesea.
Welch Bot.
55 Leicester.
Coleman list.'"' 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
1 loc.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren flo.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
61 York s.
east.
Authority ?
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.!
D. Turner.
70 Cumberland !
Baker, f 
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"scarce." 
72 Dumfries.
Dr. Burgess.
f 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Border flo.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
flo.
Syme sp.t 
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.- 
89 east." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
501.
MYRRHIS ODORATA.
199 
91 Kinc.
Mrs Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.'" 
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
':^' 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.''' 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat." 
99 Dunbarton.
Glot.
flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
Balf.
Bab. cat.
N.B. Finding it impossible 
clearly to distinguish the 
counties in which this plant 
should be deemed truly in- 
digenous, from those in 
which it occurs under more 
doubtful conditions, recourse 
is again made to the plan of 
enumerating all the recorded 
counties shewn by my notes ; 
those of the first four pro- 
vinces excepted.
The two 
signs of doubted nativity 
(t are used to indicate 
less or more suspicion against 
nativity, on the part of the 
authorities so quoted.
Mr.
Baker, in the ' Botany of 
North Yorkshu'e ' and in the 
* New Flora of Northumber- 
land and Durham ' gives 
the plant positively as a 
"native" in those counties.
Balfour and Sadler, in the 
* Flora of Edinburgh,' treat 
it as an unquestioned native 
of the Forth counties.
In 
the ' Clydesdale Flora ' Pro- 
fessor Kennedy indh-ectly 
suggests some apparent sus- 
picion to the contrary, by 
the words "near villages" 
and " formerly cultivated ; " 
two remarks suggestive of 
some uncertainty.
503 Viscum 
album.
3 Devon south.
Planted ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west 
17 Sim-ey.
Winch ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Cooper sp.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Woodward ms.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Christy sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
G. Macnab sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
Lcigliton cat.
50 Denbigh.
.Bowman sp.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts, "frequent." 
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Warren flo ?
64 York m.
west.
(1 2 8 10 [52] 59 61 62 63 
63 66 67 68 89 90).
504 Sambucus 
nigra.
200 
504.
SAMBUCUS NIGKA.
Counties all, except 46 84 89 
97 98 99 (106) 107 108 (109) 
110 (111) 112.
Catalogued 
as if indigenous in the West 
Highlands, by Professors 
Lawson, BaKoui-, and Hen- 
nedy.
In the East High- 
lands it is noted only as an 
introduced shrub by Dr.
Boswell Sj^me, Prof.
Dickie, 
and the Kev. Dr.
Gordon.
505 Sambucus 
Ebulus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.f 
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenno cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
" common." 
31 Hunts.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Koberts ms.
34 west.
Tliwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Sliawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford!
Ch. Bab.
ms.+ 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Pamplin ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east, "indigenous." 
63 s.
west.
Leylandms.f 
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.west.
" mdigen." 
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland, "den." 
68 Cheviotland.
"denizen.".
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.'-' 
85 Fife.
Lloyd sp.
Ed. flo.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Symo cat.f 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie Guide.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
(95 96 106 Gordon-).
[1] .
I have not seen this even 
quasi-wild except in one 
spot in Fife ; and there I sup- 
posed it an introduced plant 
originally.
Held native by 
many botanists.
506.
VIBUKNUM OPULUS.
201 
506 Viburnum 
Opulus.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Huid cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kurk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lcighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
[ 51 FHnt. Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.f 
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Knkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
70 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Ed. flo.f 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.f 
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f Ed. flo.f 
87 Perth west.
Edinb.
flo.f 
88 mid!
90 Forfar.
probably planted." 
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south, "reported." 
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness!
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.f 
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
N. B.
Frequent in England.
Eare in North Britain, if not 
BO throughout Scotland; and 
usually reported as uncer- 
2d 
202 
506.
\1BUENUM OPULUS.
tainly indigenous there.
507 Viburnum 
Lantana.
1 Corn, west ?
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
Briggs ms.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Loefe sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newhould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.f 
41 Glamorgan ?
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts, "rare." 
63 York s.
west.
(62 64 66 67 68 75 76 77 81 
83 90.
Dunglass Glen).
508 Lonicera 
Periclymenum.
Counties all, except 41 86 98 107, 
with the usual nine others.
511 Linnaea 
borealis.
67 Northumb.
Introduced ?
81 Berwick.
83 Edinbiu-gh.
Graham sp.
88 Perth mid!
89 east ?
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
"Lord Cawdor." 
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
512 Rubia 
peregrina.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight I More cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms, 
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Stables sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Stables sp.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesca !
Ilobinson cat.
[22 29 70 102] , 
513.
GALIUM VERUM.
203 
513 Galium 
verum.
Counties aU, excei^t 47 98, witli 
tlie usual nine otliers ; 
doubtless occurs in every 
county.
514 Galium 
cruciatum.
Counties aU, except 2 46 52 
92 96 to 98 101 to 109 
111 112.
Very dubious 
from 92 to 95.
Mr. Eoy 
found Asperula taurina in 
tlie Banffshire locality (93) 
reported for this plant, and 
there as an escape from the 
Manse garden.
Balfour and 
Babington report it seen by 
themselves in the Hebrides, 
a habitat far to the north- 
west of any other reliable 
one.
515 Galium 
palustre.
Counties all, except 46 49 and 
the nine others ; doubtless 
to be found lq all.
Galium 
elongatum reported in 1 3 10 
17 18 19 21 22 29 38 56 
58 59 02 66 67 68.
G. 
Witherimjii reported in forty 
counties.
516 Galium 
uliginosum.
1 Com. west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke ?
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
cast.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Emblcton cat.
69 Westmoreland I 
204 516.
GALIUM ULIGINOSUM.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kmcardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
N.B. Perhaps this is occasion- 
ally' confused with G.
pahis- 
tre.
Edmonston gives it as 
"frequent" in Shetland, 
and it is given also in Lowe's 
list for Orkney ; these habi- 
tats need to be verified by 
safer botanists.
I have not 
seen specimens from North 
Britain ; but the species is 
amply certified there.
517 Galium 
saxatile.
Counties all, except 31 46 00 
80.
Possibly no 31, Hunt- 
ingdon, may be a true ex- 
ception.
518 Galium 
erectum.
9 Dorset.
Man scl-Pley dell sp.
12 Hants north ?
13 Sussex west.
Christy sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent cast.
Trcvclyan sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Neville sp.
23 Oxford.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
D. Turner ms.
38 Warwick.
Kkk sp.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Kussell ms.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
[2 3 6 7 8 10 28 32 34 
37 39 55 61 64 81 83 90 
106 ; insufficiently vouched] .
Some of those counties pos- 
sibly correct ; but it is a 
difficult species, and one not 
clearly understood by my- 
self.
519 Galium 
MoUugo.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south I Notcutt cat.
12 north!
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east!
Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varonno sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bccslcy cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk cast.
Purchas ms.
619.
GALIUM MOLLUQO.
^05 
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Nortliton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmoutli.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
61 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
63 Lincoln south !
64 north !
65 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Bickham sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Dui'ham.
67 Northumb.
Bowman cat.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Ilennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
87 Perth west I 
89 cast !
(90 91 92 94 95, as a dis- 
trusted native.) 
520 Galium 
sylvestre.
6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
1868.
34 Gloster west.
Borrer ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
39 Stafford.
57 Derby !
Purchas sp.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Foggitt sp." 
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
78 Peebles.
*'Blackie." 
80 Roxburgh.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar !
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
[1 or 2 30 37 50 59; coun- 
ties insufficiently vouched] .
521 Galium 
anglicum.
6 Som. north ?
14 Sussex east ?
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin.
19 Essex north.
Varenno ms.
20 Herts.
Blowms.
Webbsupp.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Babington sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Gibson sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
[21 33 38 39 44 58 61 
80 ; records insufficiently 
vouched] .
522 Galium 
tricorne.
Som. Colhns ms.
Poole ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
206 
522.
GALIUM TRICOKNE.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More Ccat.
11 Hants soutli ?
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Brown sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northtou.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
41 Glamorgan ?
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts ?
•* G.
saccharatum." 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 B.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
(2 3).
[67 70; errors?].
523 Galium 
Aparine.
Counties all, except 46, with 
the usual nine others.
Pos- 
sibly a colonist only in some 
of the more northern coun- 
ties.
524 Galium 
Vaillantii.
18 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
[29 34 misreported.
G. 
spurium m 30 62 65 70 
90, by misnomers.] 
525 Galium 
boreale.
42 Brecon.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Bowman sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Beevor sp.
* 
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Boswell Syme sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery ms.
77 Lanark.
Gourlie sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Worsley ms.
89 east !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south J Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastcrness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
99 Dunbartou.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
''G.
C. Smith." 
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suih.
west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
525.
GALIUM BORE ALE.
207 
11 Orkney ?
Lowe's list.
12 Shetland?
Edmon.
flo.
(36 Hereford; Purclias ^o^) 
[62 N.
E. York; "Teesdale"] .
526 Sherardia 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 86 89 
97 98 104 107 108 110 
111 112, with the usual nine 
added.
527 Asperula 
odorata.
Counties all, except 13 31 46 
60 71 72 86 88 89 97 98 
107 or 108 110 111, with 
the usual nine.
A single 
locahty in the Flora of 
Shetland.
Marked in Dr.
Brown's Hst for Caithness.
Noted as seen by myseK in 
Sutherland, in 1832, but the 
exact locality is now for- 
gotten.
528 Asperula 
cynanchica.
Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east!
HaU cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat, 
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Gribson ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
S. Foster sp.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Christy sp.
37 Worcester ?
41 Grlamorgan.
Bowman ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
55 Leicester ?
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
69 Westm.
Martindale ms.
531 Valeriana 
dioica.
Cornwall.
Pascoe ms.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower ms.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
Bromfieldms.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beeslcy cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
208 
531.
VALERIANA DIOICA.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad herb.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotl.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson cat.
[2 77 99; insufficiently 
vouched] .
532 Valeriana 
officinalis.
Counties all, except 46 53 60 
86 108 112.
This may be 
taken to represent the com- 
mon form or sambucifoUa.
The other form, the Mikanii 
of English Botany, edition 
third, is very sparingly on 
record hitherto.
534 Valerianella 
olitoria.
Counties all, except 31 45 46 
51 53 69 73 86 88 89 95 
97 98 101 to 105 107 (108) 
110.
536 Valerianella 
Auricula.
1 Corn.
west.
Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Borrer ms.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Gibson ms.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
ms.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex north.
20 Herts.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
62 York n.
east.
Foggitt sp.
63 s.w.
"G.E.Smith." 
85 Fife.
Macauley sp.
537 Valerianella 
dentata.
1 Corn, west !
2 cast.
Pascoo cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
537.
VALEKIANELLA DENTATA.
209 
4 Devon north !
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Macr eight sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Trevelyan sj).
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bellms.
29 Cambridge.
Bahington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt sp.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 AVorcester.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafi'ord.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lcighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
liobinson cat.
53 Lincoln soutJi !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sj).
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65- n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmorland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark ?
Patrick flo.
80 Koxburgli.
Duncan cat.
82 Haddington.
G. Macnab sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife !
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait ms.
539 Dipsacus 
sylvestris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cannack cat.
2 • east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west I Borrer cat.
14 cast.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
2 E 
210 
639.
DIP3ACUS SYLVESTRIS.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 MidcQesex !
Hmd cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Glostcr east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
01 York s.
east.
02 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
05 n.
west.
Leefe sj).
66 Durliam.
Storey sii.
67 Nortlmmb.
"native." 
68 Cheviot.
Embletou cat.
I 
69 Westmoreland.
75 Aji\ Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark ?
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife !
G. Macnab sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
(81 86 87 89 90 95 ; record- 
ed as an introduced plant in 
these six counties ; perhaps 
it should be held the same 
in some of the other counties 
of Scotland).
540 Dipsaciis 
pilosus.
5 Som. south.
Poole ms.
north.
Russell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell, "certain." 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bromf.
ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Fordham sp.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Glostcr cast.
Prentice ms.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Poole ms.
640.
DIPSACUS PIL03US.
211 
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii-k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
61 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
65 Leicester.
66 Notts.
67 Derby !
Cliiircli.
Bab. ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
(66 83 85).
541 Scabiosa 
succisa.
Counties all, except 86 98 with 
the other nine.
542 Scabiosa 
columbaria.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrcr cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennc ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
''Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lane, south.
Chadwicke sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
212 
542.
SCABIOSA COLUMBAKIA.
92 Aber.
south ?
Dickie ms.
543 Knautia 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 86 88 
94 (95) 97 98 101 to 105 
107 109 110 (111) 112.
An 
uncommon plant in North 
Britain.
I saw it in 96 106 
108, but distrusted its nati- 
vity there.
Dr. Patrick Neill 
is my sole authority for 111.
544 Tragopogon 
pratensis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Banker sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 ' north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11.
Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 cast.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennc cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk cast.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 P>edford.
31 Hunts.
Ncwbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop !
Leighton sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
At wood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Bobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby !
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hcnnedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
544.
TEAGOPOGON PKATENSIS.
08 Suth.
west !
Introduced ?
09 Caithness.
546 Helminthia 
echioides.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
Twining sp.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenn^ cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Twining sp.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
86 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Brce ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
81 Berwick.
Cleghorn sp.
82 Haddington.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
(83 85; introduced).
547 Picris 
hieracioides.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
214 547.
picRis 
26 Suffolk west.
Bell sp.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Sbawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick ?
Authority ?
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat .
49 Salop.
Leigiiton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh ?
Faun.
Grust.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
(67 68).
[77 Hook.
Scot.] .
548 Leontodon 
hirtus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
13riggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west!
Borrer cat.
HIERACIOIDES.
14 Sussex east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex!
Hmd cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
BeU sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
cast.
62 n.
east.
Bean sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
70 Cumb.
*' Thomas Benson." 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
548.
LEONTODON HIETUS.
215 
83 Edinburgh.
Balf.
flo.
[77 88].
(92 Dickie!).
Tliis plant well illustrates 
the practical difficulty in 
tracing a line of severance 
between "common" and 
" not common " plants.
Its 
abundance in South Eng- 
land would place it in the 
list of common plants for 
the fii'st forty or sixty coun- 
ties ; yet it is quite rare or 
local in Scotland, if genu- 
inely wild anywhere in that 
northern half of Britain.
549 Leontodon 
hispidus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrcr cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 ]3ucky.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk cast.
Stock cat.
2G west.
27 Norfolli cast.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Nor thumb.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Borrcr ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Ptcnfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
00 Forfar.
91 Kincardhic.
Dickson cat.
216 
549.
LEONTODON HISPIDUS.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north ?
Lawson cat.
[Ill ; a misnomer] .
550 Leontodon 
autumnalis.
Coanties all, except 35 49 71 
72 73 84 86 98.
Doubtless 
it occurs in every county.
L. pratensis and Taraxaci 
are included herewith, as 
being only trifling varieties.
551 Hypochoeris 
glabra.
3 Devon south.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
" Mr. Frampton." 
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north !
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
16 Kent west.
G. E.
Smith.
17 Surrey !
20 Herts.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
56 Notts ?
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
75 Ayr.
87 Perth west.
Tate ms.
90 Eorfar ?
91 Kincardine.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterncss.
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
[61 62].
(66).
552 Hypochoeris 
maculata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
19 Essex north.
Gibson ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Extinct.
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
32 Northton ?
Berkeley ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Fielding ms.
69 Westmorl.
Windsor sp.
[4 9 26 28 33 64 70 90; 
maculate varieties of Hiera- 
cium have been repeatedly 
mistaken for this plant] .
553 Hypochoeris 
radicata.
Counties all, except 60 80 98 
112, with the usual nine.
554 Lactuca 
virosa.
Cornwall.
* ' reported.
' ' 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sj).
6 Som. north.
Partittms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Warren ms.
14 east.
Bor. cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sj).
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 lUicks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
554.
LACTUCA VIROSA* 
217 
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Russell ii.b.g.
36 Hereford.
"WHinott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii'k cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop ?
Bad authority.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Caruarvon.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker s^i.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
86 Stirhng !
G. Macnab sp.
89 Perth east !
[11 34 50 111; all errors?] 
555 Lactuca 
Scariola.
16 Kent west ?
" E.
Forster." 
17 Surrey.
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
37 Worcester.
Westcombe sp.
[13 21 25 26 57; errors?].
556 Lactuca 
saligna.
14 Sussex east.
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east.
F. Brent sp.
16 west !
French sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
25 Suffolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct?
[9 36 37 55 56; not verified 
of late years] .
557 Lactuca 
muralis.
Cornwall.
" G.
S. Gibson." 
3 Devon south ?
4 north.
Gibson ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Miss Bell ms."^ 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
BeU sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lcighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
]3abington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
2 F 
218 
557.
LACTUCA MUKALIS.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
(83 95 104 ; introduced).
558 Sonchus 
palustris.
16 Kent west.
Kippist sp.
18 Essex south.
Newman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
[3 9 11 or 12 17 20 23 
39 40 55 56 69 75 83; 
all these are probably erro- 
neous ; possibly extinct in 
21, which may have been 
correct.
559 Sonchus 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 86 97 
98 104 107 or 108 110.
560 Sonchus 
asper.
Counties all, except 23 30 35 
46 50 52 56 57 61 71 to 75 
80 84 86 88 89 92 to 98 
106 107 108 111; very 
likely to occur in all of these 
counties, but was long passed 
by as a form of oleraceus.
561 Sonchus 
oleraceus.
Counties all, except 73 97 98 
110, with the usual nine; 
very likely to occur in all.
562 Mulgedium 
alpinum.
90 Forfar!
Brand sp.
92 Ab. south.
H. M.
Balfour sp.
[67 75 ; some error ?] 
563 Crepis 
virens.
Counties all, except 72 73 80 
97 107 108 109 111 112.
564 Crepis 
biennis.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton !
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
(2 3 7 10 14 21).
[5 9 
17 28 39 44 49 56 57 61 
64 66 67 69 82; counties 
insufficiently vouched, and 
perhai3s mostly erroneous ; 
this name having been for- 
merly misapplied to tho 
Barkliausia taraxacifolia.] 
566 Crepis 
succisifolia.
666.
CEEPis 
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Babingtou ms.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinbiu-gh.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine ?
92 Aber.
south.
Koy,to370 yds.
94 Banff.
Eoy ms., 265 yds.
99 Dunbarton.
[85 Inverkeithing ?] 
567 Crepis 
paludosa.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford?
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
Anderson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
65 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Kev. A.
Ley sp.
68 Chester.
69 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Pienfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Boxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
SUCCISIFOLIA.
219 
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff*.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east?
''Ben Clibrick." 
08 west?
"Ben Clibrick." 
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
[3 4 28 ; erroneous ?] 
568 Hieracium 
Pilosella.
Counties all, except 98 112, 
with most of the^usual nine.
569 Hieracium 
coUinum.
79 Selkirk.
''Prof.
Balfour." 
570 Hieracium 
alpinum.
49 Carnarvon.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar!
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
96 Easterness !
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
220 
570.
HIEEACIUM ALPINUM.
05 Eoss west.
08 Sutli.
west !
571 Hieracium 
pulmonarium.
65 York n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.- Baker cat.
85 Fife ?
88 Perth mid.
Syme sp.
89 east.
Mackay, 1800.
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness !
Smith herb.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
N.B. This may be understood 
to include the 7ngrescens and 
chrysantlium of Mr. Back- 
house's Monograph.
572 Hieracium 
murorum.
Counties all, except 1 2 9 10 
11 15 16 18 19 23 26 (29) 
31 41 44 49 51 53 54 56 
60 61 71 72 73 97 98 102, 
with the usual nine added.
As thus taken, it must be 
understood to include the 
murorum and caesium of the 
Monograph ; two alleged 
species which I am unable 
to distinguish with any cer- 
tainty.
573 Hieracium 
sylvaticum.
Counties all, except 2 16 25 
26 30 31 45 51 60 71 72 
84 86 93 111, with most of 
the usual nine.
As thus 
taken it must be understood 
to include vuUjatum of the 
Monograph, more or less 
mixed up with tridentatum, 
and perhaps also with some 
other species of the Mono- 
graph.
574 Hieracium 
maculatum.
N.B. I am not aware of any 
really indigenous locality for 
this plant, after separating 
from Smith's species the 
stained-leaved variations of 
' murorum ' and of other 
species similarly marked.
575 Hieracium 
pallidum.
3 Devon south ?
Dartmoor !
5 Som. south ?
Gifford sp.
36 Hereford ?
Purchas sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon ?
50 Denbigh !
Bowman sp.
57 Derby.
Kirk sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Clieviotland.
Brown sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
83 Edinburgh !
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
96 Easterness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
06 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Oliver sp.
08 west ?
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N. B.
This name is one of 
recent introduction into our 
675.
HIEKACIUM PALLIDUM.
221 
descriptive Floras.
Smith 
probably would have divided 
the specimens between his 
murorum and Laivsoni.
576 Hieracium 
anglicum.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
^ Ohver sp.
81 Berwick ?
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh ?
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness.
Winch herb.
98 Argyle.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
08 Suth.
west !
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney?
Syme sp.?
N.B. This includes the Lausoni 
and ceriiithoides of the older 
botanists ; and it has occa- 
sionally been reported under 
name of villosum.
577 Hieracium 
iricum.
65 York n.
west.
Gibson sp.
66 Durham.
Babington sp.
72 Dumfries.
92 Abcrd.
south !
Croall sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
578 Hieracium 
Borreri.
79 Selkirk?
" Dickson>" 
99 Dunbarton.
Borrer ms.
N.B. Still remains a dubious 
plant ; see Cyb. Brit.
vol.
3, 
page 859.
The name denti- 
cidatiun has been variously 
applied, perhaps most fre- 
quently to examples of 
strictum.
Mr. Backhouse 
referred dried specimens of 
this plant to jn-enantlioides, 
with which I cannot concur, 
after cultivating both of them 
during many years.
579 Hieracium 
prenanthoides.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber south !
Balfour sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
[69 70 77 104 ; uncertain] .
580 Hieracium 
crocatum.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Gibson sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumljcrland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
87 Perth west.
Balfour sp.
222 
580.
HIEEACIUM CROCATUM.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Kerr sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
96 Easterness ?
Gordon sp.
? 
98 Argyle ?
Lyon sp.
? 
[10 48 112; erroneous].
581 Hieracium 
strictum.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
85 Fife.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
87 Perth west.
Balfour sp.
88 mid.
Balfour sp.
90 Forfar.
Kerr sp.
96 Easterness.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
98 Argyle.
Lyon sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08 Suth.
west !
N.B. I do not clearly know this 
species, and trust chiefly to 
Mr. Backhouse for the 
names of my specimens 
cited above.
It seems nearly 
allied to crocatinn, formerly 
called inuloides.
582 Hieracium 
tridentatum.
4 Devon north !
9 Dorset.
Pleydcll cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north !
Baker cat.
13 Bussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west !
Atkins sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
38 War^vick.
Bloxam sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Wood sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
I 64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
I 65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland?
70 Cumberland ?
N.B. This includes the so-called 
gothicum and rigidwn of the 
southern counties, but is 
different from the rigidum 
of Backhouse, no.
31.
583 Hieracium 
corymbosum.
65 Yorkn.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Gibson sp.
67 Northumberl.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Koxburgh.
Johnston sp.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
96 Easterness.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
N.B. This is the rigidum of 
Backhouse's Monograph, 
perhaps partly confused with 
strictum ; certainly I do fail 
in assigning some of the 
dried specimens between 
these two.
584 Hieracium 
umbellatum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw ms.
584.
HIERACIUM UMBELLATUM.
223 
5 Soin.
soutli.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts nortli.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
lo Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget s]).
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bellms.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
34 Gloster west.
Wilmott sp.
35 Monmouth.
Bladon s]).
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purclias ms.
49 Carnarvon.
liobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
51 Flint, liobinson cat.
52 Anglcsca.
liobinson cat.
63 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmorel.
Oliver ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gordon ms.
73 Kirkcudb.
Balfour sp.
[77 81 83 88 90 91 100 
101 102 108 109; all un- 
certain, though possibly some 
of them correct] .
584 Hieracium 
boreale.
Counties all, except 2 26 31 
54 60 71 72 75 82 85 86 
88 89 93 95 to 98 105 to 
112.
Frequent in England ; 
much less so in Scotland.
Seldom confused with any 
other species, but a Surrey 
example of tridentatuvi was 
named boreale by Dr. C.
H. 
Schultz ; although other ex- 
amples of each species were 
rightly named by him.
Said 
to be misnamed vmheUatiim 
by some of the Edinburgh 
botanists.
llicracia Backhousiaiia.
N.B. A second series of the 
species in this perplexing 
(jcnus is here subjoined, 
adapted to their greater 
segregation in the Mono- 
(/raj)h by Mr. Backhouse.
Of course, almost all old 
records, and others however 
224 
HIERACIA BACKHOUSIANA.
recent wliicli relate to tlie 
more aggregate sj)ecies, are 
omitted in the enumerations 
of counties for tlie special 
segregates of the Monograph.
Some years ago, Mr. Back- 
house kindly looked over the 
specimens in my herbarium, 
and adapted then nomen- 
clature to his standard work ; 
so that they are quoted un- 
derneath with a trust which 
is seldom extended to manu- 
script notes (apart from ac- 
tual specimens) made either 
by myself or by correspond- 
ents, in this genus.
3 Hieracium 
melanocephalum.
90 Forfal\ 
92 Aber.
south !
Backhouse sp.
96 Easterness?
on ' Braeriach.' 
N.B. For explanation of the 
changed specific name see 
Comp.
Cyb. Brit, page 528.
4 Hieracium 
holosericeum.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
97 Westerness !
5 Hieracium 
eximium.
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
94 Banff.
97 Westerness !
6 Hieracium 
calenduliflorum.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
7 Hieracium 
gracilentum.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Backhouse sp.
98 Argyle.
J. Eoy ke 1871.
8 Hieracium 
globosum.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
94 Banff.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
9 Hieracium 
nigrescens.
88 Perth mid.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
96 Easterness.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness.
10 Hieracium 
lingulatum.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
97 Westerness !
11 Hieracium 
senescens.
85 Fife.
Balf.
& Sad. flo.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
99 Dunbarton.
12 Hieracium 
chrysanthum.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
90 Forfar !
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Croall sp.
96 Easterness.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness !
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
13 Hieracium 
anglicum.
HIEEACIA BACKHOUSIANA.
225 
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Bowman !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
83 Edinburgh ?
85 Fife.
Balf.
& Sad. flo.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
(query).
N.B. H.
cerinthoides,of Monog.
15 Hieracium 
pallidum.
N.B. See no.
575, on page 220.
16 Hieracium 
lasiophyllum.
86 Hereford ?
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
68 Cheviotland.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
12 Shetland ?
17 Hieracium 
Gibsoni.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
18 Hieracium 
argenteum.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
68 Che\dotland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine ?
92 Aber.
south !
Backhouse sp.
10 Hebrides.
19 Hieracium 
nitidum.
92 Aber.
south !
Backhouse sp.
96 Easterness.
20 Hieracium 
aggregatum.
90 Forfar.
J. Eoy Ire 1872.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
21 Hieracium 
murorum.
7 "Wilts north.
Preston ms.
17 Surrey !
33 Gloster east.
Stephens sp.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
57 Derby.
Buckland sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
70 Cumberland !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
N.B. See no.
572, page 220, 
for numerous other counties 
which are less certain.
22 Hieracium 
caesium.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. flo.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
w. Backhouse sp.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south !
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
11 Orkney.
Boswell Syme sp.
N.B. This recent species had 
been assigned by English 
botanists usually to murorum, 
occasionally to Lan soni ; and 
more lately it has been con- 
2 o 
226 
HIERACIA BACKHOUSIAXA.
fused with iKillidum.
Doubt- 
less to be found iu many 
other counties besides those 
here given.
" Mountain dis- 
tricts, not unfrequent"; 
Back.
mon.
23 Hieracium 
flocculosum.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse mon.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
96 Easterness ?
" Braeriach." 
24 Hieracium 
vulgatum.
7 "Wilts north.
Preston ms.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Gibson flo.
20 Herts.
Walhs sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cont.
49 Carnarvon.
Backhouse mon.
62 York n.
east.
Baker S23.
63 s.
west.
Lees ms.
64 m.
w. Backhouse sp.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
83 Edmburgh.
B. S.
flo.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme.
87 Perth west I 
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
N.B. The 'sylvaticum' of 
Smith and other botanists 
doubtless included several 
of the Backhousean species 
along with vulgatum; thus, 
the two names cannot be 
taken as exactly synonyms.
The segregate vulgatum is 
perhaps the most generally 
distributed species in Bri- 
tain, Pilosella excepted, al- 
though the horeale and iim- 
bellatum may be the more 
common English plants.
25 Hieracium 
gothicum.
48 Merioneth.
Back.
mon.
49 Carnarvon.
Back.
mon.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Clieviotland.
New flo.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
CroaU sp.
26 Hieracium 
tridentatum.
4 Devon north !
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
Mrs. Atkms sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
29 Cambridge ?
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Dr. Wood sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
Now flo.
HIERACIA BACKHOUSIANA.
227 
27 Hieracium 
prenanthoides.
64 York m.
west.
Tatliam S23.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Balfoui- sp.
28 Hieracium 
strictum.
65 York n.west.
J.W.Watson.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
85 Fife.
Bosw^ell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid.
Balfour sp.
90 Forfar.
A. Kerr sp.
98 Argyle.
Lyon sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08 Suth.
west !
29 Hieracium 
umbellatum.
N.B. See no.
584, page 222.
30 Hieracium 
crocatum.
62 York n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
87 Perth west ?
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
31 Hieracium 
rigidum.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Gibson sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
j. 68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
' 77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
I 80 Koxburgh.
Johnston sp.
I 87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
I 88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
96 Easterness.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
32 Hieracium 
corymbosum.
92 Aber.
south.
Back.
mon.
N.B. This is now held to be 
the same with the preceding 
rigidum ; the name of which 
ought thus to replace this 
name in the ' London Cata- 
logue.' Unluckily there is 
a double or alternative use 
of that name rigidum.
By 
the Hartmanns, father and 
son, and by Dr. Schultz it 
was applied to the species 
which we now call tridenta- 
tum, after Fries.
Taking the series of five 
names — crocatum, strictum,, 
rigidum, gotliicwn, tridenta- 
tiim.
— I still experience much 
difficulty in clearly assigning 
herbarium specimens to their 
several names ; after dis- 
carding the two names 
corymbosum and denticulatum, 
representing plants now di- 
vided among the other five 
names.
Indeed, in this and 
other genera, many of my 
own herbarium specimens 
were preserved there just 
because they were imper- 
fect or otherwise abnormal 
examples ; their nomencla- 
ture thus left uncertain.
228 
585.
BARKHAUSIA F(ETIDA.
33 Hieracium 
boreale.
N.B. The counties for this 
species may be taken as 
before indicated on page 223.
585 Barkhausia 
fcBtida.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.f 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west !
Macnab sp.
17 Sui-rey ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson sp.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
28 Norfolk west.
Bab. sp.
29 Cambridge.
[21 36 ; both errors ?] 
586 Barkhausia 
taraxacifolia.
3 Devon south.
16 Kent west!
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
49 Carnarvon.
" J.
Eoberts !
" 
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
f 
[14 69].
(66 67).
588 Taraxacum 
officinale.
Counties all, except 41 74, with 
the usual nine.
588 T.
officinale 
var.
erythrospermum.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
13 Sussex west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex !
26 Suffolk west.
Bab. cat.
29 Cambridge.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
N.B. Probably common ; hi- 
therto sparingly on record.
588 T.
officinale 
var.
palustre.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
Somerset.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wgt.
*'udum, not palustre." 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex w^est.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey ?
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
26 Suffolk west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Stevens sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall sp.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Angiesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
588.
TAEAXACUM PALUSTEE.
229 
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxbui'gh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh!
85 Fife !
Syme cat.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
93 north.
94 BanjBf.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde -isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
''Wilson." 
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Kebrides ?
12 Shetland.
" abundant." 
N.B. These two segregates may 
be taken to represent the 
two extremes of the aggre- 
gate Taraxaciun officinale.
Two other forms pass under 
name of Iccvifjatum ; the one, 
connecting enjthrospermum 
with the type ; the other 
(uduvi ?
) coming between 
the type form and ludustre.
589 Arnoseris 
pusilla.
9 Dorset.
Pleydcll cat.
11 Hants south.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Lincoln.
Britten he.
55 Leicester.
66 Durham, ''introduced." 
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.f 
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
N.B. Keported in some other 
counties, which require veri- 
fication.
Uncertain in its 
localities from year to year.
590 Lampsana 
communis.
Counties all, except 46 97 112 ; 
may be really absent from 
the last of these, Shetland.
591 Cichorium 
Intybus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Kants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
10 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Kcrts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
230 
591.
CICHOEIUM INTYBUS.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 War\\ick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
64 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
f 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
colonist." 
66 Durham.
*' colonist." 
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.f 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.f v.
r." 
(58 59 75 77 80 to 85 89 
90 92 93 95 96 99 109).
592 Arctium 
Lappa, etc.
Counties all, except 46 97 98.
Being unable to distinguish 
the four or five segregates, 
into which the Lappa and 
Bardana are now divided, I 
give underneath the two 
which only are sufficiently 
known to myself.
Perhaps 
the Bardana really repre- 
sented a third species.
592 Arctium 
majus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Parfitt ms.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
10 Wight.
More ms.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
17 Surrey!
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Kirk ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
[66 82 84 85 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
592 Arctium 
minus.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Babing.
ms.
7 Wilts north.
Babing.
ms.
592.
ARCTIUM MINUS.
231 
8 Wilts soiitli.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More ms.
12 Hants north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
17 Surrey !
Syme ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Camhridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
65 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
57 Derby.
Kirk ms.
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr.
" Ailsa craig." 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
593 Saussurea 
alpina.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp 
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
87 Perth w^est.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
05 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
10 Hebrides.
1 locality.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[59 Hall, in B.
G.] 
594 Serratula 
tinctoria.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent west.
E. Twining sp.
17 Surrey !
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beeslcy cat.
Suffolk ?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
232 
* 594.
SEEKATULA TINCTORIA.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Harris sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
Lincoln.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Smith sp.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver ms.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Symc sp.
[77 111 ; both errors ?] 
595 Carduus 
nutans.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
1 1 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west ?
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Notcutt cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hants !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Gordon ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
595.
CASDUUS NUTANS 
233 
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Oliver sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.+ 
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
BalfoiU' cat.
83 Edinburgh.
91 Kincard.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
N.B. Is it truly indigenous in 
Scotland?
[111].
596 Carduus 
crispus.
Counties all, except 4 35 71 
72 73 75 80 88 89 93 94 
96 97 98 100 to 112.
Bare, 
and perhaps not truly indi- 
genous in North Britain ; so 
that it might be included 
among the less common 
plants.
Until lately it was 
usually named acanthoides in 
our Floras, etc.
597 Carduus 
tenuiflorus.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
At wood ms.
7 Wilts north ?
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sus. west !
Smith cat.
co.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark ?
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Graham sp.
85 Fife.
E. Young sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
"Mr. Chiystall." 
95 Elgin ?
2 II 
234 597.
cAEDUus 
00 Clyde-isles ?
599 Carduus 
lanceolatus.
Counties all, except 46 73 98.
No doubt it occurs in every 
county.
600 Carduus 
eriophorus.
6 Som. north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south ?
19 • north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Lloyd sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
I 
45 Pembroke.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
i 
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
TENUIFLORUS.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester ?
60 Lane, west ?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.west.
56 Durham.
New flo.
[1 2 3 13 14 (67) 70 (77) 
84 85 (87) 98 99; requiring 
verification] .
601 Carduus 
palustris.
Counties all, except 46 86 98 
104 108.
Doubtless to be 
found in every county.
602 Carduus 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 and the 
usual nine.
Doubtless it 
occurs in every county.
604 Carduus 
pratensis.
3 Devon south.
Gibson ms.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
Collins.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
sp.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Brewer sp.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Mrs. Eussell sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
604.
CARDUUS PEA.TENSIS.
235 
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
39 Stafford.
BidweU sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
42 Brecon.
E. Forster ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
N. Wales.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
55 Leicester.
66 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
[66 67 75 100 102].
605 Carduus 
tuberosus.
8 Wilts south, now " scarce." 
[7 41 C.
Woodwardi] .
606 Carduus 
acaulis.
8 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Poole ms.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Bell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey 1 Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Morley sp.
34 west !
Atwood sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
" Eobinson." 
63 York s.
west.
Gissing flo.
[67 70 ; probably errors] .
607 Carduus 
heterophyllus.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
57 Derby !
Bowman ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
A. Sibbald sp.
238 
607.
CARDUUS HETEROPHYLLUS.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Koxburgli.
Duncan cat.' 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirhng.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
E. Twining ms.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
94 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Koss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east.
08 west.
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
[17 21 22 27 55; errors, per- 
haps through the mistake of 
giving this name to luxuriant 
examples of C.
prat ends.] 
608 Onopordum 
Acanthium.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Extinct?
11 Hants south !
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.* 
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.* 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.f 
39 Stafford.
Garner n.
h. 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
t 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgom.
Bowman ms.+ 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.f 
50 Denbigh ?
Lincoln.
" Carrington." 
54 Leicester.
Coleman flo.* 
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
69 Lane, south !
Tudor ms.* 
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y.* 
66 Durham.
New flo.* 
71 Man. Forbes cat.
''v.
r." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
" from gardens." 
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick, "introduced." 
608.
OXOPORDUM ACANTHIUM.
237 
82 Haddington !
Mauglian s-p.
83 Edinburgh, "introduced." 
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour.- 
(112 Shetland Floral).
N.B. The localities for this 
plant seem to be temporary 
at best ; and often it occurs 
only as a casual, lasting 
very few years.
609 Carlina 
vulgaris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.j 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamx^lin ms.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varennc ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purclias ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
86 Hereford.
Shawc sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
88 Warwick.
39 Stafford!
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north!
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby!
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Bloxam ms.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
93 Aber.
n. "found in 1872." 
95 Elgin.
"Dr. Junes"; Gord.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
Atkin sp.
N.B. Occasionally misnamed 
Cardans acaulis ; thus leading 
to false records for that 
plant.
611 Centaurea 
nigra.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine.
Earc and per- 
238 
611.
CENTAUREA NIGRA.
haps an introduction by man 
in the three groups of North 
Isles.
The radiate variety 
occurs in many counties, 
from Cornwall to Banff, but 
is most frequent in the 
south-western counties of 
England.
612 Centaurea 
Cyanus.
Counties all, except 35 44 45 
64 70 to 73 86 to 89 97 
98 99 101 102 104 108 
110 (111 112) with the 
other nine.
613 Centaurea 
Scabiosa.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
2 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bab. cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
*'Mr. Astley." 
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
80 Roxburgh.
Rev. J.
Baird." 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie 1843.
613.
CENTAUREA SCABIOSA.
239 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
08 Suth.
west.
" near Farr ?
" 
N.B. My notes shew this i)lant 
recorded only in one -fourth 
of the Scottish counties, and 
dubiously indigenous in some 
of those.
Thus am I induced 
to place it among the less 
common, although so fre- 
quent in England.
615 Centaurea 
Calcitrapa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Pamplin ms.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
41 Glamorgan.
Pleydell ms.
(18 19 20 66 67).
[10 21 
62, extinct or erroneous ; 
perhaps the hke in some 
other counties] .
617 Bidens 
cemua.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south !
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south?
Soutlibycat.co.
6 north?
near Bath." 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick !
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat .
49 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west, "rarely." 
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69 Westmoreland.
240 
617.
BIDENS CERNUA.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
. 
99 Dunbarton.
00 Glyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
618 Bidens 
tripartita.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk cast.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Gordon sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Kinross; Syme ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
95 Elgin, "found in 1869." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
619.
EUPATORIUM CANNABINUM.
241 
619 Eupatorium 
cannabinum.
Counties all, except 46 60 84 
86 88 89 93 94 97 101 
107 109 to 112.
Not a 
common plant in Scotland.
620 Chrysocoma 
Linosyris.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
6 Som. north.
Christy sp.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
(9 13 ; casual here).
621 Diotis 
maritima.
1 Cornwall west.
8 Devon south.
9 Dorset.
10 Isle of Wight.
15 Kent east.
19 Essex north.
25 Suffolk east.
62 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
N.B. This has been recorded 
from the eight counties enu- 
merated.
It has become ex- 
tinct in most of them.
"Oc- 
casionally at Pakefield and 
Southwold ;" Flora of Suffolk.
623 Artemisia 
campestris.
26 Suffolk west.
Wardale sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Salmon sp.
29 Cambridge ?
(66 85).
[8 9 62] .
624 Artemisia 
maritima.
2 Corn.
east, "reported." 
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 Som. north.
Colhns ms.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Warren ms.
14 east.
Banking sp.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
Winch ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenue ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Cooper sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
Hall sp.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Norman sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
" three loc." 
93Ab.north.
" added in 1871." 
625 Artemisia 
Absinthium.
1 Corn, west 1 Cuunack cat.
f 
2 I 
242 
625.
AETEMISIA ABSINTHIUM.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
I 
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north ?
Flower cat.
8 south ?
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plevdell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sus. west ?
Borrer cat.
co.
14 east ?
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Sm-rey.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.f 
21 Middlesex.
Pamplin ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Brec ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Gordon ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Kobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south!
Introduced?
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.f 
62 York n.
east.
" denizen." 
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.f 
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.f 
65 n.west.
"denizen." 
66 Durham, "denizen." 
67 Northumberland, "den." 
68 Cheviotland.
" denizen." 
71 Man. Forbes cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Lawson ms.f 
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
"A.
Croall." 
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.f 
12 Shetland.
Edm. flo.
N.B. This may be a native 
plant along the coast, and 
even some distance inland 
in the maritime counties ; 
but all the truly inland 
localities are to be distrusted 
as really indigenous ones.
621 Artemisia 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 32 46 86 
97 107.
Doubtless it is to 
be found in every county.
Shetland " common." 
627 Gnaphalium 
dioicum.
1 Corn, west !
Hore ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham s^j.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
32 Northton.
39 Stafford.
627.
GNAPHALIUM DIOICUM.
243 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmartlien.
45 Pembroke.
Piirclias ms.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
58 Line, south.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 m.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Macnab ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Balfour sp.
82 Kaddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
86 Stii'ling.
Kooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 cast !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Kooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Stables sp.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Ross west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Kebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
630 Gnaphalium 
sylvaticum.
Counties all, except 2 4 5 6 
10 26 31 34 44 45 54 60 
72 86 101 110; probably 
to be found in most of 
these, if not in all.
680 Gnaphalium 
norvegicum.
Perth.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
22 Ab. south.
Backhouse sp.
631 Gnaphalium 
supinum.
86 Stirling.
Kooker sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
244 
631.
GNAPHALIUM SUPINUM.
99 Dunbarton.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Sntli.
west !
Graham sp.
[Ill Orkney; Olouston] 
632 Gnaphalium 
uliginosum.
Counties all, except 46 86 89 
97 98 106 107 108 110.
634 Filago 
minima.
Counties all, except 31 33 35 
41 46 54 57 60 69 71 72 
73 84 86 89 97 98 102 
104 108 to 112, with the 
usual nine others.
Likely 
to be often overlooked ; thus 
increasing the number of 
counties hitherto left non- 
recorded.
635 Filago 
germanica.
Counties all, except 46 60 69 
72 84 86 88 89 93 97 98 
99 102 104 107 to 112; 
thus seemingly on record 
for eleven only of the 28 
counties of North Britain.
635 Filago 
apicnlata.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
17 Surrey !
Dr. Mateer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
26 Suff.
west.
Babington sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west." 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newb.
oral.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
37 Worcester.
63 York s.
west.
Smith sp.
635 Filago 
spathulata.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell.
10 Wight !
More sp.
12 Hants north.
Spicer ms.
13 Sussex west.
14 east !
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
N.B. This and the preceding 
are recent segregates ; their 
counties imperfectly on re- 
cord.
636 Petasites 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 10 41 46 
71 86 to 89 97 to 99 104 to 
108 [109 110 111 112].
Widely distributed, but 
scarcely a common plant.
It has been recorded from 
Isla (Balfour) and Skye 
(Lawson).
Also from the 
Hebrides (Balf.
Bab.), from 
Orkney (Lowe), and from 
Shetland (Edmonston) ; in 
each of which there are 
grounds to infer that the 
Tiissila<jo was mistaken for 
the Petasites.
637 Tussilago 
Farfara.
Counties all, except 46 and the 
other nine.
Nominally also 
637.
TUSSILAGO FAEFAEA.
unrecorded for tlie Hebrides, 
in Balfour and Babington's 
list ; on which omission see 
the preceding species.
638 Erigeron 
alpinus.
88 Perth mid.
Maughan sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
639 Erigeron 
acris.
Cornwall.
Pascoe v.
s. sp." 
4 Devon north ?
" Stewart." 
5 Som. south.
Alexander ms.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Mrs. Tickner sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Introduced ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster cast.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
245 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
BagnaU ms.
40 Salop.
Shawe sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat, 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
(80 Eoxburgh ; Berw.
Proc.) 
641 Aster 
Tripolium.
Counties all the maritime ones, 
except 35 53 74 86 88 89 
92 (extinct) 93 94 96 103 
105 108 111 112.
Eecord- 
ed in 63 other maritime 
counties.
642 Solidago 
Virgaurea.
Counties all, expect 26 31 44 
53 or 54 60 86 93 98.
643 Senecio 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 97, with 
246 
643.
SENECIO VULGAEIS.
tlie other nine usual ex- 
ceptions.
644 Senecio 
sylvaticus.
Counties all, except 31 35 57 
60 84 86 93 98 108 110 
112, with the other nine.
645 Senecio 
viscosus.
14 Sussex east.
Carr sp.f 
25 Suffolk east.
Varenne sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bab. sp.
63 York s.
west.
Lees cat.
66 Durham.
Kev. J.
Bigge sp.
67 Northmnb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Kichardson sp.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
73 Kirkcudb.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme ms.
87 Perth west.
Edin.
flo.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
N.B. This has been reported 
for numerous other counties ; 
but the mistake of giving 
the name of this species to 
examples of 8.
sylvaticus has 
been so frequent that I hesi- 
tate to enumerate any of the 
following counties as cer- 
tain ; namely, 1 3 6 7 8 
16 17 18 19 (21) 23 26 
27 28 29 32 33 37 39 41 
48 57 58 59 62 64 76 80 
82 91 92 111 ; some of 
these may be correct.
647 Senecio 
erucifolius.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 cast.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglcsea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
647.
SENECIO 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south.
Webb.
cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland ?
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale flo.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
N.B. Common in South Bri- 
tain ; perhaps the same in 
England generally ; very 
rare in Scotland.
648 Senecio 
Jacobaea.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine.
648 Senecio 
aquaticus.
Counties all, except 35 86 93 
97.
649 Senecio 
paludosus.
26 Suffolk west.
" Hemsted." 
Norfolk.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
29 Cambridge.
Marshall sp.
53 Line, south.
*' Banks." 
[58 Chester, an error] .
651 Cineraria 
palustris.
25 Suffolk cast.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Marshall sp.
29 Cambridge.
Marshall ms.
31 Hunts.
Woodward in B.
G. 
ERUCIFOLIUS.
247 
53 Line, south.
''Banks." 
[1 or 2 39 41 48 59 or 60 
69 ; all errors ?] Extinct 
in 29 and 31.
652 Cineraria 
campestris.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Southby sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Duthie sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten "v.
sp." 
26 Suffolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Hen slow sp.
30 Bedford.
Brown sp.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
52 Anglesea.
John Ball sp.
[70 Kobson in Pliytol.
v. 5] .
655 Inula 
Helenium.
N.B. This conspicuous plant 
is recorded in more than 
sixty counties ; although 
most frequently with some 
intimations of distrust in its 
real nativity.
Many years 
ago (when less experienced) 
I deemed it wild on rough 
lands in West Cornwall ; but 
in the Isle of Wight, and in 
Surrey, and even so far 
north as Ross, it seemed to 
be obviously an introduced 
plant.
The witnesses for its 
true nativity are few ; the 
most positive being in gene- 
248 
655.
INULA HELENIUM.
ral tlie least reliable of au- 
thorities on sucli a question, 
for instance, Dr. Bromfield.
There are some real ex- 
ceptions, however, for Mr.
Baker declares it native in 
North Yorkshire ; and Mr.
Mansel-Pleydell thinks that 
such may be the case in 
Dorset.
It has certainly 
been introduced into most 
of its counties ; i30ssibly not 
so into all of them ; but I 
find their due allotment im- 
practicable.
656 Inula 
Conyza.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Yarenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Harris sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Grloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
BagnaU ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby!
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
69 Westmoreland !
(66 67, on ballast).
[89] .
657 Inula 
crithmoides.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
8 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Rev. H.
E. Fox sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Gibson sp.
15 Kent east.
French sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Syme sp.
34 Gloster west.
Cooper sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen ?
" One i^lant." 
45 Pembroke.
Stables sp.
657.
INULA 
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
62 Anglesea.
Bowman sp.
73 Kii-kcudbright.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
[10 25 27 ; extinct or errors] .
658 Inula 
dysenterica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west !
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
CKITHMOIDES.
249 
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
58 Line, south.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
74 Wigton.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
" Landsb." 
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
659 Inula 
Pulicaria.
8 Wilts south.
BeU sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
ms.
12 north!
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Coleman ms.
2k 
250 659.
INULA PULICARIA.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
Gibson ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east?
" Crabbe." 
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford, "rarely." 
37 Worcester.
More ms.
38 Warwick.
Extinct?
55 Leicester ?
[Somerset.
York] .
660 Bellis 
perennis.
Counties all, except the usual 
nine^ 
661 Chrysanthemum 
segetum.
Counties all, except 31 86 98 
and the nine others.
662 Chrysanthemum 
Leucanthemum.
Counties all, except 46 97 107 
110 and the nine others ; 
doubtless to be found in 
every county.
663 Pyre thrum, or 
Chrysanthemum 
Parthenium.
Counties all, except 32 46 49 
51 54 60 71 to 75 88 93 
97 98 101 to 105 107 108 
110 to 112.
Almost always 
now recorded as a more 
or less distrusted native ; 
especially so in the more 
northern counties.
664 Chrysanthemum 
Tanacetum.
T. vulgare.
Counties all, except 46 (51) 
54 60 69 84 97 98 99, 
with the usual nine others.
Native and frequent in 
South Britain.
It is so 
designated in the ' Botany 
of North Yorkshire ' and 
in the ' New Flora of 
Northumberland and Dur- 
ham.' Unquestioned also 
in the Floras of the Clyde 
and Forth ; but at best it 
is one of the doubtfully 
indigenous plants in Scot- 
land.
665 Pyrethrum, or 
Chrysanthemum 
inodorum.
Counties all, except 46 80 86 
98; doubtless does occur 
in these four, and in the 
other nine also.
The 
Pyrethrum maritimum is 
usually, if not always, repre- 
sented by a maritime state 
of inodorum.
666 Matricaria, or 
Chrysanthemum 
Chamomilla.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Twining sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight ?
More excl.
Hst.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
666.
MATRICAKIA CHAMOMILLA.
251 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
B agnail ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 FHnt !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.f 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
70 Cumberland.
(75 77 83 85 91 97).
[10 
110 111].
Liable to a 
confusion with Anthemis 
Cotula.
667 Anthemis 
nobilis.
1 Corn, west!
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan ?
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
plentifully." 
52 Anglesea.
" not rare." 
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
" Wilson." 
62 York n.
cast.
Baker cat.
252 
667.
ANTHEMIS NOBILIS.
66 Durham.
New flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait ms.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour s^d.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
(51 81 109 111).
668 Anthemis 
arvensis.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west.
Baker ms.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Syme sp.
24 Bucks.
More ms.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Mann sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Glostcr east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Lcighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Bidwell sp.
58 Chester.
Gordon sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
" Cruickshank." 
92 Aber.
south.
Boy ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.f 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
N.B. Apparently there is fre- 
quent confusion between 
this j^lant and Cotula ; for 
instance, specimens of the 
latter came to my hands 
labelled as arvensis from 
Worcestershire and Middle- 
sex.
669 Anthemis 
Cotula.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat* 
6 north I 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
669.
ANTHEMIS COTULA.
253 
12 Hants north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex!
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge'.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Dugdale sp.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland, "reported." 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.t 
80 Roxburgh.
82 Haddington.
Macnab sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Gilbert Macnab sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
[90 111 112].
It would 
seem an error to include 
this abundant weed of Eng- 
land among the plants ' ' not 
common," if we failed to 
notice its rarity in Scotland ; 
where, indeed, it is rather a 
casual than a true colonist.
670 Achillea 
Ptarmica.
Counties all, except 5 15 46 
86 98 100, with the usual 
nine.
Not very common ; 
though likely to occur in 
every county.
671 Achillea 
Millefolium.
Counties all, excepting only 
the usual nine.
One of the 
most common and most 
widely diffused of our native 
plants.
675 Campanula 
rotundifolia.
Counties all, except 5 31 111, 
with the usual nine.
Ap- 
parently absent from Ork- 
ney ; and recorded in the 
Shetland Flora for a single 
locality only.
676 Campanula 
patula.
254 
676.
CAMPANULA PATULA.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Miss Bell sp.
9 Dorset ?
11 Hants south?
" Kobinson." 
12 north.
Salmon sp.
13 Sussex west.
Smith ms.
16 Kent west ?
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watldns sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kkk cat.
89 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan ?
42 Brecon.
Gibson ms.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
Berkeley ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham ?
69 Westmoreland ?
(3 18 19 20 24 27 29; 
introduced, or partly er- 
rors ?) 
677 Campanula 
Rapunculus.
N.B. The only locality in which 
I have seen this plant, is 
the long-recorded one of 
E slier and Hersliam ; around 
these two villages the plant 
is to be seen yearly in 
several spots, varying in 
place and quantity from 
year to year.
Perhaps not 
well established in any 
other county, although re- 
ported for the following : — 
(1 5 12 13 16 to 22 24 
25 27 28 29 32 36 37 38 
39 49 50 52 56 61 62 63 
66 85).
678 Campanula 
latifolia.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
25 Suffolk east?
Stock cat.
27 Norfolk east ?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Koberts ms.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Babington ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Butler sp.
40 Salop.
43 Kadnor.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Church.
Bab. sp.
56 Notts.
r^-^op^ 
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Montgomery ms.
76 Kcnfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
678.
CAMPANULA LATIFOLIA.
255 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stii-ling.
Gourlie sp.
87 Perth west.
S}Tne cat.
88 mid.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
89 east.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.f 
[1 or 2 8 11 21 23; mostly 
errors through giving this 
name to Trachelium] .
679 Campanula 
rapunculoides.
N.B. This is an alien, by nearly 
general assent, but it seems 
to have become fau'ly well 
estabhshed in some coun- 
ties ; in others it is met 
with simply as a casual 
escape from gardens, in 
which it readily becomes 
a troublesome weed.
My 
collected notes show locah- 
ties reported in these coun- 
ties :— (9 11 17 21 23 30 
33 34 37 38 55 56 58 62 
63 64 67 82 83 85 89 90 
92).
680 Campanula 
Trachelium.
2 Corn.
cast.
Briggs cat.''' 
3 Devon south.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Sansom sp.
17 Surrey !
ElHs sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Miss Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Gibson ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
Spruce." 
69 Westmorel.
Gibson ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh ?
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Robertson sp.
(68 86).
[99 error for 86] .
256 
681.
CAMPANULA GLOMERATA.
681 Campanula 
glomerata.
6 Som. north !
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight !
Miss Bell sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
co.
14 east.
Hall cat.
16 Kent west.
Dennes sp.
17 Surrey !
John Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris herb.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper ms.
28 Norf.
west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
S. Foster sp.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
53 Lincoln south !
Bloxam ms.
64 north.
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Ley sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincard.
Mrs. Dickson cat.
683 Campanula 
hederacea.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Clark ms.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
EUis ms.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
16 Kent west.
Tonb.
flo.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
Freeman sp.
22 Berks.
" Bagley woods." 
33 Gloster east.
Koberts ms.
34 west.
Purclias ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Woodward ms.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Gordon sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh ?
Faun.
Grust.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
61 m.
west ?
71 Man. Jowett sp.
75 Ayr. Landsborough bot.
683.
CAMPANULA HEDERACEA.
257 
76 Renfrew.
Hook.
Scot.
98 Argyle.
Clydesdale flo.
684 Campanula 
hybrida.
1 Corn.
west.
Warren ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south ?
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Casual ?
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
BeU sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster cast.
Prentice cat.
84 west ?
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.f 
38 Warwick.
Leefe sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
55 Leicester.
67 Derby.
61 York s.
cast.
62 York n.
east.
Ibbotson." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
(58 85, casual ; and scarcely 
a true colonist in some 
other of the more northerly 
counties).
685 Phyteuma 
orbiculare.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell, ''certain." 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Crotch sp.
14 east !
Hall cat.
Kent.
''Beacon Hill." 
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
[21 63; require verifica- 
tion] .
686 Phyteuma 
spicatum.
14 Sussex east.
Miss Hall ms.
"Abounds in woods far 
from any habitation " ; Miss 
Hall.
(38 88).
687 Jasione 
montana.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions, especially northward ; 
namely, 6 16 31 33 34 
54 60 61 68 80 to 90 92 
93 94 96 to 99 103 to 110.
Eeportcd from Orkney, and 
alleged to be " common " in 
Shetland.
688 Lobelia 
urens.
3 Devon south.
Gutch sp.
2 L 
258 
688.
LOBELIA URENS.
(Kent, one plant ; Eev. J.
Dix).
Mr. T.
B. Flower 
found it still growing near 
Axminster, in South Devon, 
in 1872.
689 Lobelia 
Dortmanna.
49 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
41 Glamorgan.
"Dillwyn." 
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Harris sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Kobinson cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker sp.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
86 Stu-ling.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Ai'gyle.
Trevelyan ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
GO Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Ross west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
690 Erica 
Tetralix.
Counties all, except 26 32 33 
46 54 60, with seven of the 
usual nine.
Is it actually 
absent from 26 32 33 ?
691 Erica 
ciliaris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
[12 17; through some error, 
probably, although speci- 
mens are shewn thus loca- 
lized by their labels] .
692 Erica 
cinerea.
Counties all, except 30 31 32 
33 54 60 61 ; and it may 
be really absent from some 
of the four first.
694 Erica 
vagans.
Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
(3).
[34 37 41 56 57 67 
75; misreported or planted] .
695 Calluna 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 54 60 71 ; 
doubtless to be seen in all 
these four and the nine 
others.
696 Menziesia 
cserulea.
88 Perth mid.
Brand sp.
Still there in 1866; Mr.
Frederic Naylor.
698 Azalea 
procumbens.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
Sadler sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon sp.
698.
AZALEA 
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Gutch sp.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
11 Orkney.
" Miss Boswell." 
12 Shetland.
Hewitson sp.
[3.
C. E.
Moore, M.D.] .
[85.
J. Anderson, D.D.] .
699 Andromeda 
polifolia.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
28 Norfolk west.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
Lees sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Bobinson cat.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
0. Moore sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Balfour sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
87 Perth west.
Bushnan sp.
[3 24.
Hants ; Eng. Bot.
ed.
3 ; this name probably a 
misprint for Hunts] .
700 Arbutus 
alpina.
PROCUMBENS.
259 
88 Perth mid ?
90 Forfar.
Brand.
92 Aber.
south.
96 Easterness.
97 Westernsss !
06 Boss east.
Gordon sp.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[70 103 104 105; errors 
through mistaking the other 
species for this one ; but 105 
seems likely to be correct] .
701 Arbutus 
Uva-ursi.
57 Derby ?
58 Chester ?
62 York n.
east ?
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberl.
Winch sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
78 Peebles.
81 Berwick.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley cat.
89 east !
Wight sp.
90 Forfar !
G. Macnab sp.
91 Kiuc.
Mrs. Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Stables sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Henncdy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness 1 Brown cat.
260 
701.
ARBUTUS UVA-UESI.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
703 Vaccinium 
Myrtillus.
Counties all, except 7 16 19 
24 25 26 28 29 31 32 33 
46 53 54 60 98; in some 
of these it appears to be 
really wanting, ex.
gr, in 
Suffolk and Cambridge.
704 Vaccinium 
uliginosum.
66 Durham.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
67 Nor thumb.
Ohver sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
Hooker sp.
05 Koss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
: [49 50 65 ; unsatisfactory] .
705 Vaccinium 
Vitis-Idaea.
3 Devon south.
"Duller." 
18 Essex south.
Extinct.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford !
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon 1 Babington ms.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Eobertson sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stuiing.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff*.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Koss east.
Stables ms.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west I 
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
[6 15 ; errors or extinct] .
706 Vaccinium 
Oxycoccos.
706.
VACCINIUM OXYCOCCOS.
261 
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan ms.
6 north.
CoUins ms.
10 Wight.
More ms.
1869.
12 Hants -north.
PamxDlm ms.
13 Sussex west.
BorrermB.Gr.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
" French." 
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
" now lost." 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
37 Worcester ?
Extmct ?
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford !
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Khkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hcnnedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Sthling.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
90 Forfar!
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
John Roy ms.
96 Easterness.
Coll.
Mor.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
G. Smith." 
[4 ; perhaps by misnomer] .
707 Pyrola 
rotundifolia.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Extinct.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
59 Lane, south.
Hardy sp.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
78 Peebles ?
"Blackie." 
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
89 Perth east.
Lyon sp.
90 Forfar!
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
[3 13 or 14 23 33 or 34 37 
63 69 70 73 75 77 81 83 
87 88 96 111 112; in most 
of these counties, if not in 
all of them, the media or 
minor has been mistaken for 
the present rarer species] .
708 Pyrola 
media.
13 Sussex ...
? Borrcr ms.
37 Worcester.
Prentice sp.
262 
708.
PYEOLA MEDIA.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
59 Lane, south.
Leyland sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
65 n.
west.
60 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton ms.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kh'kcudbright.
Grant sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark ?
Hooker sp.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Eussell sp.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
*'sp.
seen." 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
03 Eb. mid.
Gordon sp.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
12 Shetland.
Edmon.
flo.
[20 23 24 60 ; likely errors 
for P.
minor] .
709 Pyrola 
minor.
8 Devon south ?
11 Hants south.
15 Kent east.
" Mr. Beeves." 
17 Surrey !
Elhs sp.
20 Herts.
22 Berks 1 
23 Oxford.
Sandys sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
30 Bedford.
Gloster ...
? Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
Prentice sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
J. Hooker ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
" W.
Morris." 
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
Whalley sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Trevelyan sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Ottley hb.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Gordon sp.
04 north.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
N.B. Occasionally misreported 
as media or rotundiJ'oUa.
710.
PYROLA SECUNDA.
263 
710 Pyrola 
secunda.
65 York n.
west.
Finder sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
70 Cumberland !
Bab. s-p.
72 Dumfries.
"Walker." 
88 Perth mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Ai-gyle.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
[13 64 67 75 76 77] .
711 Pyrola 
uniflora.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
Aberdeen.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
" MacgiUivray." 
06 Pioss east.
Gordon sp.
07 Suth.
east.
10 Hebrides ?
[69 75 90; errors?].
Possibly 88 89 may be one 
locahty, in 88 only.
712 Monotropa 
Hypopitys.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Dutton sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
12 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Eeynolds sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick ?
39 Stafford ?
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
Lincoln .
. .
? 
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
King sp.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
46 m.
w. " Cramound." 
65 n.
w. Hebbletliwaite.
69 Westmoreland.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie ms.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
[41 67 ; bad authority] .
713 Ilex 
Aquifolium.
Counties all, except 31 32 53 
60 86 88 89 93 98 99 
106 107 109 (110) 111 112.
In several of the Highland 
counties it is reported to bo 
doubtfully indigenous ; also 
in Haddington and Edin- 
burgli.
My own notes of 
1832 mark it as if seen wild 
in 97 and 108.
264 
714.
LIGUSTRUM VULGARE.
714 Ligustrum 
vulgare.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east!
Coleman cat.
t 
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19   north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hmd cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Glostcr east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
I 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
" sea-coast." 
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
not wild.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.t 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey ms.t 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
not wild.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.f 
73 Kh'kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
(81 83 85 87 91 92 94 95 
100 101 102; expressly re- 
ported as non-indigenous in 
these counties ; the rest will 
stand on the authorities 
cited).
Certainly indigenous 
in the chalk districts ; per- 
hajis so on other calcareous 
ground, and on coast cliffs.
715 Fraxinus 
excelsior.
Counties all, except 93 104 
107 108 111 112.
(85 87 
90 91 92 94 95 101 102 
109 110 ; reported uncer- 
tainly indigenous in these 
counties).
716.
VINCA MINOR.
260 
716 Vinca 
minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Thwaites cat.''' 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.''' 
8 south.
Flower cat.'-' 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.t 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16r west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Indigenous ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.t 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Baxter, ''wild." 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.f 
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. cat.f 
80 Bedford.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites." 
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
87 Worcester, ''wild." 
88 Warwick.
Kii'k cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
45 Pembroke, "wild ?" 
47 Montg.
" certainly wild." 
49 Carnarvon, liobinson cat.
f 
52 Anglcsca.
Piobinson cat.
f 
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
f 
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Eobinson ms.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.f 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.f 
65 n.
west.
" alien." 
66 Durham.
" alien." 
67 Northumb.
"alien." 
68 Cheviot, "alien." 
70 Cumberland ?
71 Man.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
co.* 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick, "naturalised." 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.'" Lawson.* 
90 Forfar, "naturalised." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.''' 
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.-" 
N.B. I have never seen the 
Periwinkle in a certainly 
native state ; although seen 
quasi-wild in many counties.
Iq the above full enumera- 
tion of counties both the 
alternative signs are used, 
as applied by the botanists 
quoted, or as suggested by 
their remarks.
718 Gentiana 
verna.
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland ?
[24 61 ; by misnomers] .
719 Gentiana 
Pneumonanthe.
2 M 
266 
719.
GENTIANA 
PNEUMONANTHE.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
Flower sp.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Miss Beck sp.
59 Lane, south.
Phillips sp.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Kingsley sp.
65 n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
720 Gentiana 
nivalis.
88 Perth mid.
Gourlie sp.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
[97 Boue, in N.B.G.].
721 Gentiana 
Amarella.
1 Corn, west ?
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Sawbridgc sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Warren ms.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Wing sp.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts !
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
721.
GENTIANA AMARELLA.
267 
65 York n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Dui'ham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 "Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
J.B.Balf.
ms.
90 Forfar.
CroaU sp.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
05 Ross west.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Miss Boswell." 
12 Shetland.
721 Gentiana 
germanica.
t-^^ Hants.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
17 Surrey.
Essex.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
45 Pembroke.
York.
N.B. The above counties are 
on record for this large- 
flowered variety ; how far 
correct , and how many others 
ought to be added, my notes 
do not show.
The station for 
Hants is **Watership chalk- 
pit;" the specimen received 
from the Botanical Society 
of London.
722 Gentiana 
campestris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoc sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north ?
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Very rare.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
''Baxter, 1819." 
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Atwood ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Henncdy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
268 
722.
GENTIAN A CAilPESTRIS.
80 Eoxbiirgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sj).
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 E b .
south .
B alf o ur cat .
03 mid.
Burnett sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east !
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[4 12 13 14 16 21 24 33 
36 37 ; old authorities, not 
verified ; but some of these 
counties may have been cor- 
rectly reported] .
It is the 
rarity, and often uncertainty, 
of this plant in South Bri- 
tain, which cause it to be 
included among the not 
common" plants ; although 
frequent or even common in 
North Britain.
723 Cicendia 
filiformis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
Harris sp.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
724 Erythrsea 
Centaurium.
Counties all, except 86 88 89 
91 93 94 97 104 107 108 
109 111.
Bare in Shetland.
724 Erythraea 
littoralis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cati 
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
10 Wight.
Error.
14 Sussex east.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Whittaker sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south !
Ejdands sj).
67 Northumberland ?
68 Clieviotland.
AVinch sp.
69 Westm.
Carrington sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
91 Kincardine.
93 Aber.
north ?
94 Banff".
95 Elgin.
96 Easterness.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
724.
ERYTHFwEA LITT0EALI3.
269 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
N.B. A dwarfed state of the 
Centaurium is mistaken for 
this segregate, which in- 
cludes two sub-forms besides.
I have several specimens of 
the plant usually labelled 
littoralis" in Moray, 95 
96, but do not feel quite 
satisfied that they are not 
simply small states of Cen- 
taurium.
The enumeration 
of counties must be accept- 
ed with caution ; especially 
those left in blank for per- 
sonal authorities.
724 Erythraea 
pulchella.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
CoUins ms.
9 Dorset.
Fox sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
Ward sp.
11 Hants south.
Smith Corr.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Banking sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
i 
30 Bedford.
| 
87 Worcester.
| 
41 Glamorgan.
Henfrey sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman sp.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
60 west.
Fielding sp.
61 York s.
east.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
724 Erythraea 
latifolia, Sm.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
[1 2 3 4 9 10 13 14 45 
46 48 52 58 66 67 70 97 
103 ; errors through the 
mistake of transferring the 
name of Smith's plant to 
broad-leaved forms of Cen- 
taurium,, not otherwise dif- 
ferent] .
The true plant of 
Smith, the segregate with 
small very crowded flowers, 
I still look upon as simply 
an abnormal or irregular 
growth of Centaurium, which 
may chance to occur in other 
places besides the Lanca- 
shire coast.
725 Chlora 
perfoliata.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 cast.
Bromf.
sj).
^70 
725.
CHLORA PEEF0LL\TA.
15 Kent east !
Trevelyan sp.
16 west !
Dennes sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
T. B.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Ch. Bab.
sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
[67 70 ; verification needed] .
726 Villarsia 
nymphseoides.
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
sp.
17 Surrey !
Looks native in 
21 Middlesex !
the Thames.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Fox sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
(10 18 20 33 37 38 39 56 
58 62 67 69 70 77 81 89; 
probably or certainly intro- 
duced into all of these coun- 
ties ; insufficiently vouched 
in some few of them).
727 Menyanthes 
trifoliata.
Counties all, except 5 31 34 
46 53 86 97 99 107 ; pos- 
sibly may be absent from 
some two or three of these 
counties.
728 Polemonium 
cseruleum.
39 Stafford.
57 Derby !
Christy sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
69 Westm.
Baker bot.
n. y.
N. B.
Clearly native in the 
limestone tracks of North 
England.
Long a favourite 
plant in cottage gardens ; 
and springing freely from its 
scattered seeds, it gives loose 
writers the chance to swell 
their local lists by enume- 
rating it, and often as if a ' 
truly wild plant.
I do not 
know that the following 
enumeration will include 
only such records, nor whe- 
ther (if so) it will fully ex- 
728.
POLEMONIUM CiERULEUM.
271 
liaust the series of records 
of the kind :— (1 3 6 7 8 
17 20 21 22 23 32 33 34 
35 36 38 39 40 49 50 55 
58 62 63 65 66 70 71 72 
73 75 77 81 82 83 84 85 
87 90 92 94 100 102 109).
729 Convolvulus 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 60 69 
72 73 (75 77) 80 84 87 88 
89 93 94 (95 96) 97 98 
99 (100) 101 to 112.
Abun- 
dant in South Britain.
Kare 
and dubiously indigenous in 
North Britain.
730 Convolvulus 
sepium.
Counties all, except 46 80 84 
to 98 103 to 112.
Kecord- 
ed as an introduced plant 
in the following additional 
counties : — (81 85 87 88 
89 90 95 109).
Thus, al- 
most general through Eng- 
land ; and recorded as a 
native northward to the 
Forth and Clyde, and to 
the south-west extremity of 
North Britain.
731 Convolvulus 
Soldanella.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Sussex.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutch sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Darby ms.
' 
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
52 Anglesea.
Kobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
71 Man. Forbes to Brand sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr ...
? to Twynam sp.
82 Haddington ?
90 Forfar.
''A.
Croall." 
97 Westerness ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Islay.
Balfour cat.
732 Cuscuta 
europaea.
3 Dev. south.
Tate ms.
1871.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Bab. ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Unwin sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
S. Lucas sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bcesley cat.
272 
732.
CUSCUTA EUEOPiEA.
24 Bucks.
Britten'cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west ?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Grloster east.
Wintle ms.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
58 Chester ?
[21 28 39 62 64 72 77 83 
90 92; mostly errors?].
The name europaa appears 
to have been occasionally 
misapplied to examples of 
the other species ; and thus 
only recent reports, by really 
competent botanists, can be 
satisfactorily relied upon in 
the case of this present 
species.
734 Cuscuta 
Epithymum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Freeman sp.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
45 Pembroke.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
68 Cheviotland.
73 Kii'kcudbright ?
75 kjY.
Duncan cat.
83 Edmburgh ?
[77 ''on flax."].
735 Cuscuta 
Trifolii.
Keported for many counties, 
from South Devon to Perth ; 
whether always re -intro- 
duced among the seeds of 
clover, or sometimes latent 
in the ground, it may be 
difficult to decide confidently.
I have seen it on Chcnopo- 
(Hum nrhicum or intermedium 
in a farm-yard in Surrey.
736 Hyoscyamus 
niger.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
736.
HYOSCYAMUS NIGER.
273 
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Nortliton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.t 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Piobinson cat.
t 
60 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
Ptobinson cat.
I 
54 Lincoln north I Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Diu'ham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew ?
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
& Sad. flo.
89 Perth east.
" W.
Gorrie." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
(Introduced ; Dickie Bot. G.
Not a native in the northern 
counties ; J.
Eoy ms.).
737 Solanum 
nigrum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
4 north !
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.f 
15 Kent cast !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
2 N 
274 
737.
SOLANUM NIGKUM.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purclias ms.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tbwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salo}).
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Penibroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
AVebb cat.
GO west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east, "colonist." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west, "colonist." 
66 Durham, "colonist." 
67 Northumb.
"ballast hills." 
68 Cheviotland.
"colonist." 
74 Wigton.
]3alfour sp.
(75 80 81 83 85 98 100 ; 
introduced).
738 Solanum 
Dulcamara.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northwards; namely, 
46 84 86 88 (91 to 94) 
97 98 99 101 104 107 to 
112, with the usual nine 
others.
Prof.
Dickie holds 
it an introduced plant in 
counties 91 to 94.
Treated 
as a native in the Flora of 
Moray ; and equally so in 
the Floras of Clyde and 
Forth.
739 Atropa 
Belladonna.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Christy ms.
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Varenne ms.
36 Hereford.
" native "; Bab.
60 Lane.
west.
Fielding ms.
62 York n.
east.
" native." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baines sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham, "denizen." 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
68 Cheviotland.
"denizen." 
69 Westmorel.
Simpson sp.
(2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 [10] 18 
19 27 28 87 38 39 40 41 
45 50 55 56 57 70 72 75 
76 77 81 83 85 86 87 90 
95 [98] 103 ; ill vouched in 
739, ATROPA 
these counties, or reported 
there as an uncertain native).
This plant possibly may be 
indigenous in some of the 
chalk or limestone districts.
The roots are long-lasting, 
and the seedling plants 
spring up freely in gardens ; 
peculiarities which tend to 
estabhsh the plant in locali- 
ties to which it may have 
been originally carried by 
human hands.
The localities 
on record for it afford not a 
few instances in illustration 
of the delusive manner in 
which superficial botanists 
have endeavoured to palm 
off the artificial as if genu- 
inely indigenous localities.
740 Verbascum 
Thapsus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.f 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.f 
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Becsley cat.
BELLADONNA, 275 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat, 
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.f 
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.f 
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham, "native." 
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"v.
r." 
73 Khkcud.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat, 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
276 
740.
VERBASCUM THAPSUS.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.''~ Lawson.
86 Stuiing.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat."^' 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat." 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat."'' 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat." 
741 Verbascum 
Lychnitis.
5 Som. south.
Bab. in Gaz.
6 north.
Bath flo.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
20 Herts.
Webb flo.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
(1 3 4 5 7 10 21 24 25 
26 27 29 33 37 39 40 56 
65 85 86 88 99; partly 
misnomers of the species, 
partly counties into which 
it has been introduced).
742 Verbascum 
pulverulentum.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Bromfield si3.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west Bell sp.
[3 10 12 17 56 63 94; 
introduced or erroneous] .
743 Verbascum 
nigrum.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. south.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
PampUn ms.
. 
13 Sussex west !
Baker ms.
14 east.
16 Kent west !
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey !
EUis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Cooper ms.
26 west.
Miss Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bowman ms.
(62 65 66 67 68 81 82 83 
85).
746 Veronica 
spicata.
26 Suffolk west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
[1 3 4 18 33 41 70 111; 
misnomers?
34 49 51 69; 
the other segregate only ?J .
746.
VERONICA HYBEIDA.
277 
746 Veronica 
hybrida.
6 Som. north.
Error ?
34 Gloster west !
Tliwaites sp.
43 Kadnor.
Purclias 1852.
47 Montgom.
Bowman sj?.
48 Merioneth.
Butler s]^.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
51 FHnt.
69 Westm.
Eev. G.
Pinder ms.
747 Veronica 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 97 109, 
with the other nine ; doubt- 
less to be found in every 
county.
748 Veronica 
verna.
25 Suff.
east.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Salmon sp.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
[14 Bot. Gaz.
i. 307] .
[50 Faunula Grustensis] .
749 Veronica 
triphyllos.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Wardale sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
63Yorks.
w. ''G.E.Smith." 
64 m.
w. Thompson sp.
[38 Midland Flora] .
750 Veronica 
serpyllifolia.
Counties all, except 107, with 
the usual nine ; doubtless to 
be found in every county.
750 Veronica 
humifusa.
49 Carnarvon ?
50 Denbigh.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland ?
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
08 Suth.
west.
751 Veronica 
alpina.
86 Sthling.
" Ben Lomond." 
88 Perth mid.
" Ben Lawers." 
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
"Ben Avon." 
96 Easterness.
" Badenoch." 
97 Westerness !
752 Veronica 
saxatilis.
88 Perth mid !
Maughan sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
97 Westerness ?
" Nevis." 
98 Argyle ?
Dr. Walker.
08 Suth.
west ?
753 Veronica 
scutellata.
Counties all, except 6 32 34 
46 53 54 60 72 84 86 88 
97 99 102 110; likely to 
occur in most of these.
754 Veronica 
Anagallis.
Counties all, except 46 60 71 
84 86 88 89 94 97 98 99 
104; likely to occur in seve- 
ral of these counties.
Some 
confusion between this and 
the preceding species in the 
Shetland lists ; do both 
occur there ?
278 
755.
VERONICA BECCABUNGA.
755 Veronica 
Beccabunga.
Counties all, except 86 97 98 
108, with the other nine ; 
and most likely it may be 
found in every county.
See 
the preceding.
756 Veronica 
officinalis.
Counties all, except 35 46 60 
107, with the other nine ; 
doubtless it grows in every 
county.
757 Veronica 
montana.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 AVight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk cast.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Purchas cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Church.
Bab. sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Ku-k cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland'!
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
86 Stirling.
90 Forfar.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton ?
757.
VEKONICA MONTANA.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
758 Veronica 
Chamsedrys.
Counties all, except 46 110, 
with the other nine.
Pro- 
bably in every county, al- 
though it may be that 110, 
Hebrides, is a real exception 
to comital generality.
759 Veronica 
hederifolia.
Counties all, except 46 53 60 
69 71 86 98 100 102 104 
107 to 110, with the other 
nine ; most likely in all these 
counties.
760 Veronica 
agrestis.
Counties all, except 41 46 84 
97 104 107 108, with the 
usual nine ; likely to be found 
in every county.
761 Veronica 
polita.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrcr cat.
14 cast !
Warren ms.
15 Kent east !
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Kobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Emblcton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
280 
761.
VEEONICA POLITA.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
01 Canthe.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
N.B. This would rank more 
properly among the " Com- 
mon plants," unless its ap- 
parently few counties of 
North Britain should turn 
out to indicate many actual 
blanks in its areal distribu- 
tion.
It is little more than 
forty years since the j^olita 
became separated from the 
agrestis in our local lists ; 
and thus is the former less 
frequently reported under its 
distinctive name.
762 Veronica 
Buxbaumii.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Berkeley ms.
17 Surrey !
Well established.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenno cat.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Boswell Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
Borrer ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Coleman sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west.
Purchas ms.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam s]3.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham, ''colonist." 
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
N.B. A colonist in Britain, 
during the present (middle) 
half - century, say, 1825 — 
1873 ; and already met with 
as frequently, and as well 
established in tillage fields, 
as are several others which 
have been reckoned British 
I)lants for a whole century 
or two.
Of course, always 
762.
\'ERONICA BUXBAUMIl.
281 
reported as an introduced 
plant.
763 Bartsia 
alpina.
64 York mid.
Tatliam sp.
65 north.
66 Durham.
Trevelyan sp.
69 Westmoreland.
88 Perth mid.
Gourlie sp.
97 Westerness ?
Eoss ...
? 
764 Bartsia 
viscosa.
1 Corn, west !
Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.f 
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Bean sp.
60 west.
Fielding ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.f 
98 Argyle, 
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
765 Bartsia 
Odontites.
Counties all, except 46 86 98 
107 112.
Perhaps really 
absent from Shetland, no.
112.
766 Euphrasia 
officinalis.
Counties all, except 46 86 98.
No doubt it occurs in every 
county.
767 Rhinanthus 
Crista-galli.
Counties all, except 46 53 73 
86 98 107 109.
767 Rhinanthus 
C.-g.
major.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Balfour cat.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
12 Shetland ?
[Cornwall ?
Gloster ?] .
768 Melampyrum 
cristatum.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
26 Suffolk west.
Bell sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Payne sp.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
32 Nortliton.
Henslow sp.
[24 37 40 63 ; these four 
counties requne verifica- 
tion] .
769 Melampyrum 
arvense.
10 Wight.
More sp.
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
2 o 
282 
769.
MELAMPYRUM ARVENSB.
20 Herts.
One locality in flo.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper flo.'-^^ 
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Munford flo.* 
[9 33 38 58 ; four counties 
needing verification] .
770 Melampyrum 
pratense.
Counties all, except 31 46 53 
56 60 71 98 107 112.
771 Melampyrum 
sylvaticum.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
"Woods." 
70 Cumberland.
"Woods." 
73 Kirkcudb.
G. Lloyd ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Roxburgh.
" A.
Jerdon." 
81 Berwick.
88 Perth mid !
Stables sp.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Gordon sp.
94 Banff.
J. Roy ms.
95 Elgin ?
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Syme !
06 Ross east.
09 Caithness.
[3 6 34 35 36 38 40 48 
49 50 57 58 62 83 111 ; 
these counties have been 
recorded on authority that 
is insufiicient, taking into 
account the frequent mis- 
take of giving the name 
sylvaticum to examples of 
pratense] .
772 Pedicularis 
palustris.
Counties all, except 6 53 60 
86 99, and usual nine.
773 Pedicularis 
sylvatica.
Counties all, except 31 60 86.
774 Scrophularia 
nodosa.
Counties all, except 46 86 97 
107 108 111 112.
775 Scrophularia 
Balbisii.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs sp.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
775.
SCROPHULAKIA BALBISH.
283 
84 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat 
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carraarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman sp.
61 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, soutb !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviotl.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland ?
81 Berwick.
One locality.
83 Edinburgh ?
[76 77 84 85 87 111 ; re- 
quire verification ; perhaps 
in all these counties the 
Ehrharti was the plant seen, 
excepting Orkney likely al- 
together erroneous.
775 Scrophularia 
Ehrharti.
14 Sussex east.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
88 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Babington ms.
60 Lane.
w. ?
" near Preston." 
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
70 Cumberland ?
76 Eenfrew ?
77 Lanark.
Hennedy ms.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Brand sp.
[1 or 2 22 24 ; dubious] .
776 Scrophularia 
Scorodonia.
1 Corn, west !
Greenwood sp.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
Hore sp.
[20 " Gough's Camden"].
778 Digitalis 
purpurea.
Counties all, except 29 81 82 
33 53 60 107 112; appa- 
rently quite absent from some 
few of these counties, notably 
Cambridge.
780 Antirrhinum 
Orontium.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Miss Bell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
ms.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent cast.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
284 
780.
ANTIRRHINUM ORONTIUM.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
BeU sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Anderson ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.t 
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh ?
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
62 York n.
east.
70 Cumberland.
(65 66 67).
782 Linaria 
spuria.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Hall sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hmd cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Coleman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Allen sp." 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick ?
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Ku'by flo.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
[62 63].
(66 67).
783 Linaria 
Elatine.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.f 
4 north I Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
783.
LINAEIA ELATINE.
280 
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Eussell sp.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.f 
(58 59 66 67).
784 Linaria 
repens.
1 Corn, west !
Warren sp.
3 Devon south.
Stewart Ho.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Borrcr ms.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
1872.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Ayres sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten ms.
1873.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
41 Glamorgan.
Collins ms.
42 Brecon.
W. Darby ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Babington sp.
62 York n.
east.
" denizen." 
69 Westmorel.
Borrer ms.
(13 44 57 58 65 67 75 83 
87 or 88 90 92 ; on ballast, 
planted, or otherwise intro- 
duced).
785 Linaria 
vulgaris.
Counties all, but with many ex- 
ceptions northward; namely, 
46 86 87 89 (91 92) 93 94 
96 97 101 to 112).
Eecord- 
ed as "frequent" in Forfar 
and Moray.
Professor Dickie 
and Mr. Eoy concur in deem- 
ing it an introduced plant in 
the intervening counties of 
Kincardine and Aberdeen.
787 Linaria 
minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrcr cat.
286 
787.
LINARIA MINOR.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Syme ms.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Church.
Bab. sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
63 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
colonist." 
75 Ayr. Lands, hot.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Border flo.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
(85.
Naturalised on gravel 
walks in Kinross ; Dr.
Walker Arnot sp.).
Profes- 
sor De Candolle deem^ this 
to be altogether an alien 
species, introduced into Eng- 
land.
Its tendency to grow 
by road- sides and on unculti- 
vated wastes induced me in 
Cybele Britannica to accept 
it as a native plant.
Abun- 
dant on the chalk in Surrey.
788 Limosella 
aquatica.
Cornwall ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
6 north ?
Wilts.
Southby cat.
co.
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Newbould sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Gibson ms.
29 Cambridge.
"Henslow." 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
An error ?
34 Gloster west ?
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
51 Elint.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Hardy sp.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east ?
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
788.
LIMOSfiLLA AQUATICA.
^87 
66 Durham.
Lawson sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
82 Haddington.
Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
" Common." 
91 Kincardine.
*' One locality." 
N.B. Seen about 1500 feet near 
Malham Tarn, Yorkshire, by 
Dr. F.
A. Lees.
789 Sibthorpia 
europsea.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
sp.
41 Glamorg.
Anna Thomas sp.
44 Carmarthen.
[21 63 69 70 ; errors pro- 
bably ; and said to have be- 
come extinct in 14 Sussex] .
790 Orobanche 
major 
" rapum." 
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent east.
Hind sp.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Misnomer ?
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
68 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Bigge sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kircudbright.
Gray cat.
[Fife.
Perth?
Ebudes] .
791 Orobanche 
caryophyllacea.
15 Kent east.
Henfrey sp.
26 Suff.
west ?
H. & S.
flo.
[3 South Devon ; an error] .
288 
792.
OROBANCHE ELATIOH.
792 Orobanche 
elatior.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Miss Bell ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Miss Bell sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west ?
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
[Cornwall, Devon, Denbigh, 
Lincoln, and Argyle might 
be added to the above list of 
counties ; but the authorities 
for them are insufficient.
And several of those enume- 
rated may also prove to be 
erroneous] .
793 Orobanche 
minor.
Counties 1 to 15 17 to 29 33 to 
36 41 42 44 45 49 50 55 
59 61 62 64 65 68.
These 
nos.
include the counties on 
record for '^wmior" in the 
wider application of the 
name, that is, to include 
also Hedercc, Ficridis, and 
Eryngii or aniethystea.
793 Orobanche 
eu-minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Miss Bell sp.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
18 Essex south.
E. Twining sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Miss Bell sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
42 Brecon.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
Chrisp sp.
N.B. The above selection of 
counties takes in those spe- 
cially reported for eu-minor, 
along with some others re- 
ported for minor as growing 
on "clover" or ''crepis." 
It will thrive on other plants 
quite well ; for instance on 
the Scarlet Geranium and 
Campanula Vidalii.
793 Orobanche 
Eryngii.
1 Corn.
west.
" Mennell." 
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Bab. man.
14 Sussex east.
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
N.B. Imperfectly understood 
by myself ; so that I cannot 
cither confirm or contradict 
the nomenclature of the 
*' sps." Mr. Borrer doubted 
793.
OKOBANCHE ERYNGII.
289 
the correctness of tlie name 
" ametliystea " apiDlied to the 
plants of Cornwall ; but it is 
retained in Eng. Bot.
edition 
thu'd.
793 Orobanche 
Picridis.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
N.B. This also is imperfectly 
understood by myself.
An 
Orobanche which I find in 
Surrey, growing on Picris 
and Crepis, appears to me 
the same as the Orobanche 
minor often found on clover 
in the same county.
793 Orobanche 
Hederge.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Borrer ms.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Rylands sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
55 Leicester ?
794 Orobanche 
rubra.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
16 Kent west.
"A.
Carr !
" 
41 Glamorgan.
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
85 Fife.
Syme Cat.
98 Argyle.
Gourlie sp.
08 Eb. mid !
04 north.
05 Boss west.
Bowman ms.
795 Orobanche 
cgerulea.
1 Corn west.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
12 Hants north ?
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
22 Berks ?
Hurst ms.
27 Norfolk east.
35 Monmouth.
41 Glamorgan ?
Misnomer ?
797 Lathraea 
squamaria.
1 Corn.
west.
8 Devon south.
Abraham ms.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Christy ms.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Roberts ms.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
County?
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
2p 
290 
797.
LATHE.EA SQUAMAKIA.
50 Denbigli !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland, 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Hind sp.
70 Cumberland.
73 Knkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Kenfrew.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
86 Stirhng.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
97 Westerness.
798 Verbena 
officinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.f 
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north!
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 cast.
Coleman cat.f 
15 Kent cast !
Smith cat.
I 16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Gordon ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
'69 Westmoreland.
70 Camb.
" Mr. Benson." 
798.
YEEBENA OFFICINALIS.
291 
85 Fife.
^'Dr. Parsons." 
799 Salvia 
Verbenaca.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Crotch sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Taylor sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
G. Lawson ms.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
800 Salvia 
pratensis.
16 Kent west.
Sansom sp.
23 Oxford.
Fox. sp.
Linton sp.
(10 17 26 ; casually).
[13 14 21 22 27 80 32 34 37 
40 41 52 57 62 ; perhaps all 
of these w^ere erroneous, 
through misnomers of the 
preceding species] .
801 Lycopus 
europaeus.
Counties all, except 72 81 82 
88 88 89 90 92 93 94 99 104 
107 to 112, with eight of the 
usual nine.
Thus my records 
for it fail in five Welsh coun- 
ties and twenty-two Scottish 
counties, while they give 
authorities for it in all the 
counties of England.
802 Mentha 
rotundifolia.
292 
802.
MENTHA EOTUNDIFOLlA.
1 Corn, west !
Cunuack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Bath flo.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell "v.
sp." 
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.f 
16 Kent west.
Forster, b.
g. 
17 SuiTey. Salmon flo.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
W.flo.- 
21 Middlesex?
"church-yards." 
24 Bucks.
Eayer, in b.g.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Trim.
flo.
28 west.
Trim.
flo.
29 Cambridge ?
Eelhan flo.
32 Northton.
Anderson ms.
34 Gloster west.
Hort sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Maw sp.
P. flo.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton flo.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn mat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.f 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
56 Notts.
Hewitt flo.
57 Derby ?
Wood in Pliytol.
62 York n.
east ?
Eobson, b.
g. 
63 s.west.
"Inchbald." 
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham, ''native?" 
67 Northumb.
" native ?
" 
68 Cheviot, "native?" 
70 Cumberl.
Dickinson ms.f 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat." 
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.f 
90 Forfar.
Gard.
flo.
extinct.
00 Clyde-isles.
Misnomer.
N.B. The round-leaved forms 
of sylvestris are sometimes 
confused with this plant ; 
and perhaps the same holds 
true with the crisj^a form of 
viridis.
Clearly indigenous in 
the south-western counties.
802 Mentha 
alopecuroides.
Kent ...
? Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
Essex...
? Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
Norf.
...
? Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
86 Stirlmg.
Duthie sp.
88 Perth mid.
Bab. ed.
6. 
00 Arran.
Bab. Man.
ed.
6. 
N.B. Perhaps an escape from 
cultivation.
And further a 
troublesome plant from the 
topographical view, through 
being so intermediate be- 
tween rotundifolia and sylves- 
tris, that its afiinity to either 
is viewed differently by our 
best describers.
803 Mentha 
sylvestris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
east.
3 Devon south ?
4 north.
6 Som. north.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight ?
" to be excluded." 
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
803.
MENTHA SYLVESTKlS.
293 
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.f 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
34 Gloster west.
Watkins sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Knight sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Radnor.
47 Montgomery.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman sp.
51 Fhnt.
54 Line, north.
65 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
66 n.
west.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
"J.
B." sp.f 
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton.
[88 100 M.
alopecuroides] .
This is often seen near old 
mansions and farm houses, 
apparently the relict of for- 
mer culture.
I have seen it 
quasi-wild in several coun- 
ties, from Devon and Surrey 
to Derby and Lincoln ; but 
always in situations where 
its true nativity was doubt- 
ful at best.
804 Mentha 
viridis.
N.B. Well established in many 
places, especially in moun- 
tain dales and glens.
Thus, 
in Scotland, large patches of 
it mark the sites where cot- 
tages formerly stood, but 
have been destroyed in the 
process of re-converting the 
land into wastes for game.
Mr. Baker designates it a 
" denizen" in the provinces 
of Humber and Tyne ; Dr.
Lees and Mr. Tatliam deem 
it truly wild in West York- 
shire.
805 Mentha 
piperita.
1 Corn, west !
Watson sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Banker sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell v.
sp." 
10 Wight.
" to be excluded." 
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
294 
805.
MENTHA PIPERITA.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 Gloster west.
Ley sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Bennett sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgom.
Bowman cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.''' 
59 Lane, south.
Heys sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Baker ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
N.B. Certainly not indigenous 
in several of the counties 
here enumerated.
Two forms 
are distinguished in English 
Botany, edition third, offici- 
nalis imdivulgaris ; the former 
being the spiked variety cul- 
tivated for use, and occa- 
sionally found established 
near gardens, &c.
This 
doubleness of form, and 
local uncertainties of nati- 
vity, throw distrust on se- 
veral of the counties here 
enumerated.
The subcapi- 
tate form from Thirsk vul- 
garis'' appears to my own 
eyes extremely near the Kew 
Garden plant which is dis- 
tributed as citrata by Mr.
Baker ; and the same with 
the specimens above indi- 
cated from West Cornwall 
and South Devon.
806 Mentha 
aquatica.
Counties all, except 72 73 86 
87 97 99 107 108 110 
112, and usual nine.
807 Mentha 
sativa.
Counties all, except 8 25 31 
32 46 51 60 61 71 86 88 
89 90 92 93 94 96 to 99 
103 to 112, with the usual 
nine.
As thus topographed, 
it must be understood to 
include the miscellaneous 
segregates grouped under 
the aggregate name sativa 
in the 'London Catalogue 
of British Plants,' edition of 
1867.
Their recorded lo- 
calities cannot be segre- 
gately assigned with any 
confidence or completeness.
808 Mentha 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 31 46 53 
60 71 72 73 96 97 104 
107 108 110 112 ; in near- 
ly all of these it may be 
expected to occur, though 
110 and 112, Hebrides and 
Shetland, may perhaps be 
808.
MENTHA AKVENSIS.
295 
real exceptions to a county 
generality.
106 Gordon cat.
109 Erown cat.
Ill Syme 
cat.
809 Mentha 
Pulegium.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
Somerset.
Southby cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Many localities.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Dennes ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
81 Hunts.
82 Northton.
83 Gloster east.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Extinct ?
41 Glamorgan.
51 Flint.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
liobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby ?
58 Chester.
Bowman sp.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
" scarce." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
One locality.
(83 85 109 ; and perhaps 
only a garden escape in some 
other of the counties named).
810 Thymus 
Serpyllum.
Counties all, except 31 60, 
with the usual nine others.
811 Origanum 
vulgare.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
J.E. Gray sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Mrs. Tickner sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beeslcy cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk cast.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
29G 
811.
ORIGANUM VULGARE.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purclias sp.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwicli." 
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Borrer sp.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
frequent." 
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Maughan sp.
85 Fife.
Bos well Syme sp.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
812 Calamintha 
Acinos.
2 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris herb.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Lees sp.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
812.
CALAMINTHA ACINOS.
297 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Bowman sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Prof.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
*'Dunlop." 
81 Berwick.
One locality.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.f 
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
90 Forfar.
G. Macnab sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
813 Calamintha 
Nepeta.
16 Kent west !
Sandys sp.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
23 Oxford.
Dr. Bidwell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babmgton cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
N.B. The menthifolia form of 
Calamintha officinalis has 
been so frequently mistaken 
for Nepeta that I can cite 
here none of the recorded 
counties besides the two 
certified by Professor Ba- 
bington and those from 
which I have actually re- 
ceived specimens of the true 
plant.
The other recorded 
counties are 1 2 3 4 6 7 
8 9 14 15 17 18 22 24 25 
26 27 28 33 37 40 41 50 
54 55 56 57 62 64 65 66 
67 71 ; some of these likely 
to be correct, the majority 
as likely to be erroneous.
814 Calamintha 
officinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Hort sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Atkins sp.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris herb.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
j 25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
1 26 west.
2 Q 
298 
814.
CALAMINTHA OFFICINALIS.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Sbawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Extinct ?
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Fisher sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham ?
" Extinct." 
69 Westmoreland.
Ohver sp.
70 Cumberland ?
(68 87) or [68 87] .
814 Calamintha 
sylvatica.
4 Devon south.
Townsendms.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
N.B. This is the C.
officinalis 
of various continental bota- 
nists ; that to which we give 
the same name, being the 
menthifolia or ascendens, one 
or both.
See the note under 
813 Cal. Nepeta.
815 Calamintha 
Clinopodium.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Ranking sp.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
S7 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
815.
CALAMINTHA CLINOPODIUM.
299 
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr ?
" near Busby." 
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linhthgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme ms.
1870.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
" Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
J. Roy ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
N.B. This frequent English 
plant is unreported for 25 
of the Scottish counties, 
more than one-half, accord- 
ing to my collected notes.
817 Melittis 
Melissophyllum.
1 Corn.
west.
Warren sp.
2 east.
Pascoe ms.
8 Devon south !
Goulding sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromfieldms.
13 Sussex west.
Christy sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
[8 9 17 33 37 41 45 55; 
possibly two or three of 
these counties are correct, 
although all need verifica- 
tion] .
818 Teucrium 
Scorodonia.
Counties all, except 31 32 44 
53 54 60 98 107 109 112.
819 TeTicrium 
Scordium.
4 Devon north.
Russell sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
54 Line, north.
65 York n.
west.
Bowman sp.
820 Teucrium 
Botrys.
17 Surrey.
Gibson, Ingall sps.
Native in Surrey ; Borrer.
822 Ajuga 
reptans.
Counties all, except 46 60 86 
97 98 101 107 108 110.
823 Ajuga 
pyramidalis.
69 Westm.
Backhouse ms.
96 Easterness ?
97 Westerness ?
"Dr. Hope." 
98 Argyle.
'* Carmichael." 
06 Ross east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
800 828.
AjuGA 
09 Caithness.
Syme !
10 Hebrides.
Bowman ms.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
[49 Carnarvon ?] 
824 Ajuga 
Chamsepitys.
12 Hants north.
Pamphn ms.
16 Kent west.
Pahner sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
WalUs sp.
Blowms.
29 Cambridge.
Fordham sp.
80 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
82 Northton ?
[7 10 14 33 or 34 45 47 ; 
insufficiently vouched, and 
perhaps mostly errors] .
825 Ballota 
nigra.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east 1 Smith cat.
16 west 1 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks I Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
PYRAMIDALIS.
26 Suffolk west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton I Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat, 
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford I Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint 1 Brand sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumber.
T. Benson." 
75 Ayr. Landsborough Bot.
76 Kenfrew ?
Glott.
flo.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
825.
BALLOTA NIGRA.
301 
85 Fife ?
B. & S.
flo.
92 Abe?-, south.
Dickie cat.f 
95 Elgin.
"Dr. lunes." 
N.B. TMs vulgar weed of 
Soutli Britain becomes rare 
in Scotland, and scarcely 
occurs in North Britain un- 
less as an introduced casual.
825 Ballot a 
ruderalis.
23 Oxford.
Newbould sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
[10 21 27 29 36 40 ; all pro- 
bably misnomers] .
(Casual 
in 33 or 34).
Intermediate 
forms in Middlesex (Kev.
James Harris) and Hants 
(J.
C. Mansel-PleydeU, Esq.), 
but nearer to fcetida, of the 
two.
827 Lamium 
Galeobdolon.
1 Corn.
west.
''H.
S. herb." 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
E. Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
70 Cumberland.
(82 83 85).
[98].
828 Lamium 
album.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northward, namely, 46 
52 60 69 71 88 91 to 94 
(95 96) 97 to 112.
Lowe 
reports it in 111 Orkney.
802 880.
LAMiuM 
830 Lamium 
amplexicaule.
Counties all, except 35 41 44 
46 50 54 60 69 70 73 86 
89 97 98 99 102 104 112 ; 
no doubt simply overlooked 
in nearly all of these.
But 
for some of the northern 
counties the intermedium and 
amplexicaule may not have 
been clearly kept apart.
830 Lamium 
intermedium.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Gourlie sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Tyacke sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
not native." 
93 north.
Syme ms.
95 Elgin.
98 Argyle.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[10 40 49 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
831 Lamium 
purpureum.
Counties all, except 35 88 97 
107.
Doubtless it occurs in 
every county.
831 Lamium 
incisum.
1 Corn.
west.
" Hore." 
AMPLEXICAULE.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.t 
5 Som. south.
W. H." 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Flower flo.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Sandys sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
Webb flo.
21 Middlesex.
T. & D.
flo.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
''Baxter." 
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
Bromfield ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn mat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Tenby flo.
49 Carnarvon !
Kobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Supplement.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Supplement.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumberland.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"common." 
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
831.
LAMIUM INCISUM.
803 
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
83 Edinburgli !
Balfour sp.
84 Linlithgow.
B. & S.
flo.
85 Fife.
Dewar, Syme sps.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff, "frequent." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
10 Hebrides.
B. & B.
cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. The above enumeration 
of counties is to be received 
with some distrust.
The 
leaves of purpureum vary 
much in outline and cutting, 
occasionally simulating those 
oiincisumYexy closely ; while 
in turn this latter is occa- 
sionally confused with am- 
plexicaule and even interme- 
dium.
832 Galeopsis 
Ladanum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cut.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Flint.
Miss Atwood ms.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Boswell Syme ms.
82 Haddington.
Carnegie sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie ms.f 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.f 
304 
882.
GALEOPSIS LADANUM.
04 Eb. north ?
Lawson cat.
[Ill Orkney; Lowe's list] .
833 Galeopsis 
ochroleuca.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Crotch sp.
y6 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland ms.f 
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
[38 59 64 ; counties re- 
quiring verification] .
834 Galeopsis 
Tetrahit.
Counties all, except 35 60 73 
107.
No doubt it is to be 
found in every county.
835 Galeopsis 
versicolor.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey !f 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.t 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.f 
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Kippist sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.f 
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.f 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south I Kippist ms.
54 north I Howitt ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
' Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stu:ling.
87 Perth west.
Brand sp.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Gordon ms.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
05 Ross west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
836.
BETONICA OFFICINALIS.
805 
836 Betonica 
oflacinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Khkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Renfrew ?
" reported." 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.+ 
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
" Sibbald." 
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
89 Perth east.
Stables sp.
04 Eb. north ?
Lawson cat.
N. B.
It will be observed that 
my compiled notes give only 
ten counties of Scotland, as 
habitats for this common 
plant of England ; and two 
or three out of the ten seem 
to need verification.
It is 
one, among many other simi- 
lar examples, showing how 
much the general vegetation 
changes in a northerly 
course, through the thmning 
out and gradual disappear- 
ance of plants plentiful and 
806 
836.
BETONICA OFFICINALIS.
conspicuously characteristic 
in South Britain.
A comital 
enumeration brings out that 
striking fact much more 
clearly than a provincial 
arrangement under eighteen 
divisions only.
The county 
series of this plant is here 
shown to be continuous for 
England proper, apart from 
Wales.
837 Stachys 
palustris.
Counties all, except 35 46 86 
98 107 108.
837 Stachys 
ambigua.
1 Corn, west !
Curnow sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Syme sp.
Pleydell.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
32 Northton !
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
48 Merioneth.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Windsor sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Eeported also in 6 10 
20 21 23 27 28 29 33 35 
39 40 41 45 50 55 58 62 
71 73 76 77 81 82 83 92 
96 98 100 101 104 105 ; 
but the mistake of applying 
the name ambigua to ex- 
amples of imlustris with 
shortly stalked leaves, having 
been so frequent, it seems 
safer to look upon all the 
counties represented by those 
numbers as requiring con- 
firmation.
838 Stachys 
sylvatica.
Counties all, except 46 72 97 
98 107.
839 Stachys 
germanica.
12 Hants north.
Spicer sp.
16 Kent west, ^yme sp.
23 Oxford.
Fox sp.
1872.
[lor 2 3 (15) 22 27 or 28 
30 53 54 57 62; all need- 
ing verification, and per- 
haps mostly erroneous] .
840 Stachys 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 30 31 53 
54 60 72 73 86 88 97 98 
99 107 109 110 (111) 112.
841 Glechoma 
hederacea.
Counties all, except 46 86 87 
89 99 104 107 108 (109) 
110 (111) 112.
842 Nepeta 
Cataria.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Error ?
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
842.
NEPETA CATARIA.
307 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey ^!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Verdun ms.
c 22 Berks.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
23 Oxford.
Rev. E.
Fox sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north !
An escape ?
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
An escape ?
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
(77 81 87 107 112; most 
likely introduced).
843 Marrubium 
vulgare.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.* 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.* 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.f 
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.* 
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.t 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.* 
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Henslow ms.* 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
''Wilmott*." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
308 
843.
MARRUBIUM VULGARE.
54 Line, north.
I 
65 Leicester.
| 
58 Chester.
Warren cat.* 
59 Lane, south.
Webb eat.* 
62 York n.
east.
native." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
" native." 
65 n.
west.
Ward eat.
t 
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Northumb.
''native." 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate eat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.f 
75 Ayr. Landsborough bot.* 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.* 
95 Elgin.
Gordon eat.* 
N.B. The enumeration of coun- 
ties is here given in full, 
without an attempt, vain as 
it would prove, to eliminate 
those in which the plant has 
been seen only as a casual 
or as an established escape.
The alternative signs are 
resorted to, for indicating 
intimations of less (f) or 
more (*) distrust.
Though 
seen by myself in many 
counties, from Devon to 
Edinburgh, I have doubts 
as to its real wildness in 
any of them ; possibly the 
Isle of Wight ought to be 
made an exce^otion, for the 
Horehound looks native on 
the chalk there.
In Surrey, 
seen near houses and on 
village ' greens.' 
844 Prunella 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 98, with 
the other nine ; but doubt- 
less plentiful in every county.
845 Scutellaria 
galericulata.
Counties all, except 5 35 44 
46 53 60 82 85 87 88 89 
92 96 107 108 109 111 
112.
110 Isle of Harris; 
Balfour and Babington.
846 Scutellaria 
minor.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack eat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs eat.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Trevelyan s\).
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bromfield sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Notcutt ms.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton eat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
846.
SCUTELLARIA MINOR.
309 
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
68 Chester.
Merrick sp.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
71 Man.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
" Miss Baird." 
77 Lanark.
Error ?
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
847 Myosotis 
palustris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plcydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babingtonms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
B agnail ms.
38 Warwick Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudln-iglit.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
810 
847.
MYOSOTIS PALUSTRIS.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Bos well Syme sp.
87 Perth west ?
89 east !
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
" strigulosa." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[93 94 95 96 106 to 112; 
in most of these northern 
counties, if not in all of 
them, the repens has been 
recorded under the name 
of palustris.
Dr. Boswell 
Syme's specimens, from 
Edinburgh and Fife, are 
named strijidosa by himself ; 
they diverge slightly from 
the type, as seen in the 
south of England, in form 
of calyx as well as in their 
appressed pubescence.
It is 
the former confusion between 
repens and palustris, which 
induces me to detail their 
counties here ; the latter is 
a rare plant in North Britain, 
where the former prevails] .
848 Myosotis 
repens.
1 Corn, west ?
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east ?
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west ?
27 Norfolk east ?
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Radnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgom.
C. E.
Parker." 
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts ?
58 Chester.
' Warren ms.' 
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
648.
MYOSOTIS REPENS.
311 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
07 or 108 Sutherland.
N. flo.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
849 Myosotis 
csespitosa.
Counties all, exce^Dt 30 31 46 
62 56 60 72 73 80 86 93 
95 96 98 ; in some of these 
counties hkely not distin- 
guished from palustris, with 
which it was combined or 
confused a half century ago.
850 Myosotis 
alpestris.
65 York n.
west.
Backhouse sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker ms.
88 Mid Perth!
Hugh Balfour sp.
851 Myosotis 
sylvatica.
12 Hants north.
Borrer ms.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
62 Anglesea.
65 Leicester.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
[3 5 or 6 8 17 21 29 37 77 
92 ; these counties require 
verification] .
852 Myosotis 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 73 97 107 
with the usual nine others ; 
doubtless to be found in 
every county.
853 Myosotis 
coUina.
Counties all, except 14 23 30 
32 35 46 51 60 61 69 70 
72 73 80 86 to 89 96 to 112.
109 Caithness?
112 Shet- 
land?
Imperfectly recorded, 
through being so lately dis- 
tinguished from arvensis and 
versicolor ; to one or other of 
which this frequent species 
must have been referred 
formerly, up to 1830.
854 Myosotis 
versicolor.
Counties all, except 30 31 41 
46 53 60 69 80 86 97 98 
99 104 107 108 110, with 
the other nine ; likely to 
occur in all of them, unless 
812 
864.
MYOSOTIS VERSICOLOR.
the Shetland species should 
prove to be collina only, 
without versicolor also.
855 Lithospermum 
ofl&cinale.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Babingtonms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Frascr cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
" Oliver." 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.f 
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !t Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
88 mid.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
" occurs." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Boss east.
Stables sp.
856 Lithospermum 
arvense.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northward, namely, 
41 46 51 60 71 72 73 87 
88 89 97 to 105 107 108 
109 111 112, with the 
usual nine.
Hebrides ; Bal- 
four and Babington.
857.
LITHOSPERMUM 
PURPURO-C.ERULEUM.
313 
857 Lithospermum 
purpuro-caeruleum.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Duthie sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
26 Suffolk west.
" Bergholt." 
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
50 Denbigh.
Whittaker sp.
[34 36 70] .
(62 85).
858 Mertensia 
maritima.
46 Cardigan ?
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
52 Anglesea ?
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westm.
Miss Hodgson sp.
70 Cumberl.
Kingsley sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. James Wilson sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
81 Berwick.
Johnston ms.
85 Fife.
Gr. Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantu'e.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
06 Ross east.
Syme sp.
08 Sutherland west.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
GiUies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
Cornwall, Devon and Hants 
have also been reported for 
this plant.
859 Symphytum 
officinale.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Henry Bull sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
2 s 
314 
859.
SYMPHYTUM OFFICINALE.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
61 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
64 Lincoln north.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.f 
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.f 
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.f 
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south, "introduced." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
860 Symphytum 
tuberosum.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster ms.
39 Stafford.
48 Merioneth.
Pamplin ms.
64 Line, north.
61 York s.
east.
0. A.
Moore.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
99 Dunbarton ?
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
(1 13 17 19 20 24 55).
[25 27 29 34 66].
Diffi- 
cult to distinguish the three 
categories of habitat in the 
case of this plant, — indige- 
nous, or introduced, or erro- 
neous ; perhaps the county 
of Bedford, long accepted in 
botanical books, ought to be 
transferred from the first to 
the second, if all the other 
south-eastern counties are 
rightly referred to second 
and third.
" I have always had doubts 
as to its being really indige- 
nous" (in 91 92).
"It used 
to be grown frequently in 
cottage gardens." John Roy 
ms.
862 Lycopsis 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 6 11 81 
35 46 60 69 72 86 97 98 
99.
By reason of the fre- 
quent occurrence of this 
plant on waste ground and 
road-sides, and in other 
situations not closely con- 
nected with agriculture, it 
was designated "native" in 
Cybele Britannica.
Profes- 
862.
LYCOPSIS ARVENSIS.
816 
sor De Candolle, however, 
holds it introduced into this 
island from southern Eu- 
rope (Geog.
Bot. p.
679) and 
perhaps rightly so.
864 Anchusa 
sempervirens.
Counties numerous by the re- 
cords, from Cornwall to 
Caithness ; but usually re- 
ported as uncertainly native 
or certainly introduced.
Few 
botanists, whose opinion is 
worth anything in answer 
to such a question, declare 
it an indigenous plant.
865 Asperugo 
procumbens.
16 Kent west.
E. Edwards.
18 Essex s.
" Mr. Quekett !
" 
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
40 Salop.
" Dr. J.
Babington." 
49 Carnarvon.
" Griffith." 
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.f 
82 Haddington.
Maughan sp.f 
85 Fife.
W. Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
95 Elgin.
" Brodie herb." 
06 Ross east.
Syme sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Borrer 1808.
[6 8 9 14 26 29 37 ; coun- 
ties requmng verification] .
Scarcely a true native in 
Britain ; rather, a fugitive 
casual ?
(20 Herts).
866 Cynoglossum 
officinale.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Warren ms.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
! 41 Glamorgan.
I 44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
; 45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
! 49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
1 50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
T. G.
Rylands sp.
316 
866.
CYNOGLOSSUM OFFICINALE.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west, "rare." 
64 m.
west, ''rare." 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
"indig." 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Alien ?
(75 77 93 94 96 106).
[Ill ; by Lowe's list] .
867 Cynoglossum 
sylvaticum.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middx.
Extinct, or error ?
23 Oxford.
27 Norfolk east.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
34 west.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
40 Salop.
" Miss MacGhie." 
[14].
(89 90).
And pro- 
bably some of the counties 
named should be added to 
one or other of these cate- 
gories.
868 Pulmonaria 
angustifolia.
6 Som. n.
? " Stephens hb." 
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
(17).
[25 51 63].
868 Pulmonaria 
officinalis.
Not indigenous ; but reported 
in about three dozen coun- 
ties, and usually as an ad- 
mitted introduction.
869 Echium 
vulgar e.
Counties all, except 31 46 60 
69 71 72 73 88 89 97 98 
99 101 102 104 107 108 
111 112.
In the Floras of 
Clydesdale and Moray it is 
treated as questionably indi- 
genous ; and Mr. Roy doubts 
it being truly native in Aber- 
deen or Kincardine.
Not- 
withstanding its frequency 
in England, it thus comes 
almost into the category 
of "not common" plants, 
through being local in Scot- 
land, and dubiously indige- 
nous in North Britain.
872 Pinguicula 
vulgaris.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Somerset.
Southby cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Pamplin ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
872.
PINGUICULA VULGARIS.
317 
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sj).
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 AVorcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
62 Anglesea.
64 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
66 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
" Mr. Astley." 
69 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortliumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sj).
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
I5alfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson cat.
86 Stirling !
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
' 
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east !
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orknev.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N. B.
This enumeration of 
counties would make the 
Pinguimila a commoner plant 
than the Echium ; and the 
more so because human 
agency has tended to lessen 
the localities for the former, 
while it has increased those 
for the latter plant.
Of 
course it is the frequency of 
this plant in Scotland, which 
balances against its rarity 
in South England.
873 Pinguicula 
alpina.
04 Skye.
" James Mackay." 
06 Ross east.
Stables sp.
[Ill Orkney; Lowe's hst ; 
not confirmed, and perhaps 
lusitanicd] .
818 
874.
PINGUICULA LUSITANICA.
874 Pinguicula 
lusitanica.
•1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Eussell sp.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Crotch sp.
6 north ?
8 Wilts south ?
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight.
Bromfield.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
71 Man. Forbes to Brand sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
96 Easterness.
Coll.
Mor.
97 Westerness.
Lloyd sp.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 .
north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Campbell sp.
08 west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
875 Utricularia 
vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt ms.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent cast !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bloxam ms.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
''Bentall." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark ?
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
875.
UTRICULARIA VULGARIS.
819 
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincard.
Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Miss Boswell." 
12 Shetland, "scarce." 
N.B. The above enumeration 
will include neglecta also ; 
the counties for it not being 
yet separable from those 
which possess the more usual 
form of vulgaris only.
876 Utricularia 
intermedia.
9 Dorset.
Borrer ms.
11 Hants south.
"Borrer." 
28 Norfolk west.
Trimmer flo.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69 Westmoreland.
" Hort." 
70 Cumberland.
Winch, con.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
90 Forfar.
Maughan sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south.
North, flo.
98 Argyle.
Wmch add." 
05 Ross west.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Graham ex.
08 west.
Excurs.
1827.
[Devon, Somerset, Bucks, 
Gloucester, Elgin have also 
been recorded].
I do not 
clearly understand this spe- 
cies.
It seems to me that 
Mr. Win tie's Gloucester- 
shire specimen, through Ex- 
change Club, belongs to 
minor, though distributed as 
intermedia.
877 Utricularia 
minor.
2 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
. 
6 Som. north.
Withers ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
21 Middlesex.
Extmct ?
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Prentice sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Gloucester ?
Wintle sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robmson cat.
54 Line, north.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Harrison sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Thornhill sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Dalzell sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Lyon sp.
83 Edinburgh.
320 
877.
UTRICULARIA MINOR.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Brichan sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
''Kepack." Ch. Bab.
sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham exc.
10 Hebrides.
" N.
Uist." 
[8 and 56 ; needing con- 
firmation, and some others 
also] .
878 Primula 
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 41 46 58 
60 86 107 ; doubtless to be 
found in every county.
879 Primula 
elatior !
19 Essex north.
Doubleday sp.
26 Suffolk west.
J. Eay sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
880 Primula 
veris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Knk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam cat.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
880.
PRIMULA VERIS.
821 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. J.
P. Duncan cat.
80 Koxb.
James Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linhthgow.
85 Fife !
G. Lawson ms.
88 Perth mid ?
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.f 
(76 77 87 95 96 100 111 ; 
mentioned as an introduced 
plant in these counties.) 
Certainly a rare plant in 
Scotland ; but it ajDpeared 
to me to be genuinely indi- 
genous in Fife, Aberdeen, 
Sutherland, and perhaps 
Caithness.
881 Primula 
farinosa.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson ms.
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west ?
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Nor thumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
78 Peebles.
G. Macnab sp.
[2 16 26 51 83; misre- 
portcd counties] .
882 Primula 
scotica.
94 Banff ?
08 Suth.
west !
Oliver sp.
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
884 Trientalis 
europaea.
62 York n.
east.
Mudd sp.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west ?
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
A. Hutton." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
"Mr. Soubki." 
79 Selkirk.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
G. Macnab sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
89 east.
90 Forfar !
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
06 Boss east.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney?
12 Shetland.
Hewitson sp.
885 Hottonia 
palustris.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
2t 
822 
885.
HOTTONIA PALUSTKIS.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
.18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Gloster.
Lees sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bowman sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.f 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Storey sp.
63 6.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Syme sp.
1844.
69 Westmoreland.
[90 Forfar ; not reliable] .
886 Lysimachia 
vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
''Davis" sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
886.
LYSIMAOHIA VULGARIS.
823 
61 Flint.
Robinson cat.
63 Line, south 1 
64 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
67 Derby.
J. Whittaker.
68 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Barker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Fairlamb I " 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray eat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
Extirpated ?
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.f 
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
& cat.f 
86 Stirling.
Mr. Learmouth." 
87 Perth west.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
99 Dunbarton !
Maughan sp.
03 Eb. mid.
887 Lysimachia 
thyrsiflora.
66 Notts.
Berkeley ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker hot.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Gourhesp.
H. cat.f 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
86 Stir hug.
Christie sp.
89 Perth east.
Hay, exe.
club.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
99 Dunbarton ?
(67 planted by Sole, and 
perhaps extinct).
[20 62 68 
61 63 64 70 91 92 ; insuf- 
ficiently vouched, and mostly 
errors] .
888 Lysimachia 
nummularia.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman eat.
15 Kent east.
Smith eat.
16 west !
Trevelyan sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman eat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind eat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt eat.
33 Gloster east.
Morley sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas eat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
824 
888.
LYSIMACHIA NUMMULARIA.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Buckland sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham, ''native." 
67 Northumb.
Extmct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
86 Stirling.
W. Gait sp.
(10 80 81 83 85 90 100 ; 
Uncertainly indigenous in 
Scotland, and also in Eng- 
land beyond York and Dur- 
ham.
By the Border Flora 
and the Edinburgh Flora it 
is an introduced plant in the 
East Lowlands).
889 Lysimachia 
nemorum.
Counties all, except 31 46 63 
72 86 98 107 110 111 112.
A frequent plant, but not 
quite a common one.
Per- 
haps to be found in every 
county from Cornwall to 
Caithness, unless that of 
Huntingdon should be a real 
exception ; and it is said to 
be rare or very local in Bed- 
ford and Cambridge.
890 Anagallis 
arvensis.
Counties all, except 46 60 86 
88 89 93 97 98 102 to 112.
Scarcely entitled to a higher 
predial grade in North Bri- 
tain than that of a casual 
colonist.
Anagallis ccerulea 
has the Hke character for 
Britain generally ; see Comp.
Cyb. Brit.
p. 650.
891 Anagallis 
tenella.
Counties all, except 16 21 23 
34 80 86 to 90 97 99 104 
to 108 ; some of which may 
be real exceptions to a comi- 
tal generality.
892 Centunculus 
minimus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Smith cat.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
23 Oxf. Warren !
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
80 Hereford.
892.
CENTUNCULUS MINIMUS.
825 
87 Worcester.
41 Glamorgan.
Henfrey ms.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
62 Anglesea.
Bowman sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Twining sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Jowett to Howitt sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
76 Eenfrew.
77 Lanark ?
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
85 Kinross.
Balfour ms.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
893 Samolus 
Valerandi.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Salmon in flo.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
S. Lucas sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich," 
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
826 
898.
9AM0LUS VALERANDI.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick, 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
894 Glaux 
maritima.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 16 21 58 74 77 88 
89 103 105 107; in most 
of these it likely occurs.
895 Armeria 
maritima.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 21 35 48 53 74 77 89 
105 107 ; likely to occur in 
nearly all of these counties.
Inland on mountains.
897 Statice 
Limonium.
Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith sp.
16 west !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
28 Norfolk west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west ?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat, 
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Butler sp.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
T. B.
Hall sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver ms.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
85 Fife.
"J.
W. Brown." 
[112 Shetland Flora].
898 Statice 
Bahusiensis.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
Holman sp.
15 Kent east.
Brent sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
68 Cheviotl.
" Maclagan !
" 
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberl.
Heysham sp.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudb.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
74 Wigton.
Gourlie sp.
[3 4 Rav. Flora of Devon] .
899 Statice 
binervosa.
899.
STATICE BINERVOSA.
827 
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Hore sp.
3 Devon south.
Hooker sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Somerset north.
9 Dorset.
Boswell Syme sp.
14 Sussex east.
Norman sp.
15 Kent east !
Trevelyan sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Ball sp.
45 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman sp.
54 Linc.north.
H.E. Smith." 
58 Chester.
Warren sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
70 Cumberland.
Brady sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
[10 13 ; counties needing 
confimation] .
900 Statice 
caspia.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
53 Line, south ?
54 north.
"Banks herb." 
[6 15 70 ; misnomers] .
901 Plantago 
major.
Counties all, except only the 
nine named on page 20.
902 Plantago 
media.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
4 north.
5 Som. soutli.
Coleman cat.
6 nortli !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
18 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Tliwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint!
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester I 
328 
902.
PLANTAGO MEDIA.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
60 west I 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n, west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Nornian cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumber.
W.Eobinsonsp." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Babington cat.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south ?
93 north.
Dickie flo.
(77 112).
[111].
Is it truly 
wild in any county of North 
Britain ?
903 Plant ago 
lanceolata.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine, as named on 
page 20.
904 Plantago 
maritima.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 16 21 73 74 89.
It 
occurs also in some few of 
the exclusively inland coun- 
ties, for example in Mid- west 
and North-west York.
905 Plantago 
Coronopus.
Counties all, except 31 32 33 
53 64 65 73 77 80 86 88 
89 97 104, with the usual 
nine, in addition.
906 Littorella 
lacustris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4   north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
29 Cambridge ?
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick.
Dr. Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Radnor.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
906.
LITTORELLA LAOUSTRIS.
829 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Curaberland !
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
P. Gray ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid I Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Miss Boswell ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Stables sm.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
908 Chenopodium 
olidum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
sp.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennecat.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suff.
east.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.f 
64 York m.
west.
" colonist." 
66 Durham, "colonist." 
67 Northumb.
colonist." 
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
85 Fife ?
(59 60 62 63 ; natu- 
ralised" or casual).
909 Chenopodium 
polyspermum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.j 
3 Devon south.
Tate sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north ?
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
A. Carr sp.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
2 u 
830 
909.
CHENOPODIUM POLYSPERMUM.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purclias ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Russell ms.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
62 York n.
east.
65 n.
west.
(59 66).
[61 64 90; report- 
ed, but need confirmation] .
910 Chenopodium 
urbicum.
intermedium.
1 Corn, west !
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
6 north ?
8 Wilts north ?
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
A. Carr si).
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennc sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Pamplin ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
" colonist." 
65 n.
west, "colonist." 
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviotland.
"colonist." 
(81 83).
[8 9 50 92] .
" It 
is to be feared that very 
little reliance ought to be 
placed on recorded habitats 
for this plant ; states of 
rnbrum being mistaken for 
it.
Lideed, few botanists 
appear able to name the 
(Jlienopodia correctly.
911 Chenopodium 
rubrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Gibson sp.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Tate sp.
4 north.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
911.
CHENOPODIUM KUBRUM.
331 
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Vareuue s-p.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex !
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Syme sp.
28 west.
Syme sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Ku-k cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon, Robinson cat.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Cli. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Montgomery cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
An error ?
911 Chenopodium 
botryoides.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south ?
Gibson flo.
19 north ?
Gibson flo.
25 Suffolk east.
Eng. flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
[2 13 or 14 17 21 28 49 
67 85 ; in all these counties 
it is probable that jjseudo- 
hotryoides, the dwarf variety 
of Ch. ruhrum, has been mis- 
taken for true botryoides] .
912 Chenopodium 
murale.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Christy sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Christy sp.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk cast.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
832 
912.
CHENOPODIUM MURALE.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
At wood sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
- ' 
67 Northumberland.
[7 50 68 71 77 80 90; in- 
sufficiently vouched, and 
perhaps all erroneous] .
913 Chenopodium 
hybridum.
5 Soin.
south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
16 Kent west !
Dr. Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford ?
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
Westcombe sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
59 Lane, south ?
[6], (66 67 83).
914 Chenopodium 
album.
Counties all, except 5 46 57 
73 86 97 98 104 108.
915 Chenopodium 
ficifolium.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
^ 
17 Surrey !
Christy sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
62 York n.
east.
[8 9 11 34 40 55; re- 
quiring verification] .
(66 
67 ; on baUast hills).
The 
jmganum or virescens form of 
album is occasionally mis- 
taken for this species.
I 
have seen it only in and 
from localities in the Thames 
province.
916 Chenopodium 
glaucum.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
17 Surrey !
Only once seen.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Syme sp.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutch cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker bot.
66 Durham.
Ward sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
& ms.f 
N.B. Very scarce, and uncer- 
916.
CHENOPODIUM GLAUCUM.
833 
tain in its localities.
917 Chenopodium 
Bonus-Henricus.
Counties all, exceiDt 32 46 53 
60 73 88 89 97 98 99 101 
to 105 107 108 110 111 
112.
The indigenous-ness 
of this plant is looked upon 
with doubt ; more especially 
so in Scotland, where few 
writers declare it truly 
native.
918 Obione 
portulacoides.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Bell Salter sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
16 west I 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Woodward sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
64 Line, north I Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
[83 89 ; extinct or errors ?] .
919 Obione 
pedunculata.
15 Kent east!
Syme sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
53 Line, south.
Banks in B.
G. 
(44 66 ; on ballast).
920 Atriplex 
laciniata.
arenaria.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight !
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Christy sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Extinct ?
28 west.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Howitt ms.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Bloxam ma.
60 west.
Syme sj).
62 York n.
east.
13aker ms.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Chcviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
334 
920.
ATKIPLEX LACINIATA.
75 Ayr.
76 Kenfrew.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
01 Cantire.
02 Eb. south.
06 Eoss east ?
08 Sutherland west !
[83 85 90 92 95 96 111; 
need verification, as perhaps 
also some of the counties 
named] .
N.B. Dr. Ascherson has shown 
that our plant is really the 
Atriplex laciniata of Linneus 
(" Spec, plant, ed.
1, p.
1053, 
no.
5, exclud.
syn.
flo.
suec") 
and thus improperly re- 
named by Joseph Woods.
921 Atriplex 
Babingtonii.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Parfitt sp.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex west.
Warren ms.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex?
Hind cat.
f 
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
At wood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Hunt sp.
52 Anglesea ?
54 Line, north !
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Gourlie sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantu'e.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
[21 37 106 ; need confirma- 
tion] .
922 Atriplex 
hastata.
patula, Sm.
Counties all,- except 46 71 73 
84 88 97 101 106 107 110, 
with the usual nine others.
922 Atriplex 
deltoidea.
922.
ATRIPLEX DELTOIDEA.
885 
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Mrs. Jones si3.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
28 Norf.
west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
35 Monmouth.
F. Hort ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
72 Dumfries.
80 Eoxburgh.
" introduced." 
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
04 Eb. north ?
12 Shetland.
Error ?
N.B. I do not see how this 
differs essentially from has- 
tata.
923 Atriplex 
angustifolia.
"patula," L.
Counties all, but with many 
exceptions at present ; pro- 
bably tlirough the species 
being imperfectly known.
The counties for which I 
lack authorities, in addition 
to the Uiual nine others, 
are 4 35 86 37 44 46 49 
61 71 72 73 75 80 84 86 
87 88 92 to 98 106 to 109.
923 Atriplex 
erecta.
2 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer sp.
22 Berks !
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
61 York s.
east.
Moore ms.
flo.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
836 
928.
ATRIPLKX ERECTA.
10 Hebrides.
"N.
Uist." 
N.B. This common species has 
been much misunderstood, 
and confusion has arisen 
from a supposition that the 
name was apphcable ex- 
clusively to an extremely 
luxuriant state, and not to 
the normal plant as seen in 
corn-fields.
In general ap- 
pearance the normal state 
stands between angustifolia 
and hastata, weakly examples 
difficult to distinguish from 
the former.
924 Atriplex 
littoralis.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Syme sp.
15 Kent east !
Jacob sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purclias ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Twynam sp.
83 Edinburgh ?
84 Linhthgow !
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
[1 (92) 106 108; require 
confirmation.
To 92 the 
plant is stated to have been 
introduced, and subsequent- 
ly to have become extinct 
there] .
924 Atriplex 
marina.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt sp.
15 Kent east !
Hind sp.
16 west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
T. B.
Hall sp.
21 Middx.
Extinct or error.
54 Line, north !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
925 Beta 
maritima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Fordham sp.
14 east.
Ranking sp.
15 Kent east !
Twining sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge ?
925.
BETA MAEITIMA.
337 
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babmgton cat.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Butler sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.f 
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.''' 
71 Man. Jowett to Howitt sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.f 
83 Edinburgh.
Macnab sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
11 Orkney ?
NeHl Tour.
12 Shetland?
NeHl Tour.
[56 Notts] .
926 Salsola 
Kali.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Piobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman ms.
61 Flmt.
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesea !
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.f 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumf.
Miss Twining sp.
75 Ayr. Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Mr. Peach." 
927 Suseda 
maritima.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Butler sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Warren ms.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
2x 
338 
927.
SU^DA MARITIMA.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west !
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow !
Macnab sp.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[In the Floras of Berwick, 
but the localities are on the 
English side only] .
928 Suaeda 
fruticosa.
9 Dorset.
Bromfield sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
41 Glamorgan ?
[1 3 6 70] .
(62 67).
929 Salicornia 
herbacea.
Counties all the maritime ones, 
except 21 35 53 61 69 71 
73 74 77 81 88 89 94 97 
103 105 107 108 109; 
doubtless it does occur m 
most of these counties.
930 Salicornia 
radicans.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight.
Syme sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
[6 41 90].
931 Polygonum 
Bistorta.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Gutch sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.t 
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
981.
POLYGONUM BISTORTA.
339 
17 Surrey.
French, Dyke sps.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kh-k cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Pembroke.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
61 Fhnt.
Robinson cat.
62 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
64 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
66 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt sp.
68 Chester !
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67^ Northumberland.
68 Choviotland.
Embloton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.f 
(1 2 3 4 10 85 90 to 96 98 
100 102 104 106 109 111; 
probably introduced to all 
these counties, although re- 
ported as if a native in some 
of them).
932 Polygonum 
viviparum.
49 Carnarvon.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Binder sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
85 Fife !
Dewar sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar!
CroaU sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 North.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff', ''frequent." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
' 98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
I 04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon ms.
I 08 Suth.
west 1 Johnston ms.
I 11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
I 12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
340 
932.
POLYGONUM VIVIPARUM.
[37 53 54 62; erroneous, 
and perhaps also some of 
the counties not verified 
recently on safe authority] .
933 Polygonum 
amphibium.
Counties all, except 46 72 84 
86 104 108, with the other 
nine.
934 Polygonum 
lapathifolium.
Counties all, except 5 46 60 
72 84 86 89 93 94 96 97 
99 104 107 108 (109) 110 
111 112.
934 Polygonum 
"laxum" and 
" nodosum." 
N.B. The distribution of these 
segregates cannot be given 
apart from that of hquitki- 
folium.
I do not myself 
clearly understand them, 
either as distinct from that 
species or from each other.
935 Polygonum 
Persicaria.
Counties all, except 46 86 89 
98 107 108; doubtless it 
occurs in every county.
936 Polygonum 
mite.
Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
Supp.
flo.
vect.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer 1867.
28 Norfolk west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
58 Chester.
Ex. club 1859.
62 York n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
[10 11 12 22 37 41 47 70; 
insufficiently vouched, but 
otherwise not unlikely ex- 
cept the last; an ill-under- 
stood species, quite distinct 
from mimis, with which it 
has been confused, but very 
near to Persicaria] .
937 Polygonum 
Hydropiper.
Counties all, except 31 46 53 
54 86 89 93 98 106 to 110 
[111 112].
938 Polygonum 
minus.
Cornwall ?
Somerset.
Southby cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfieldsp.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east ?
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Baker sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Pamplin ms.
22 Berks.
Britten "v.
sp." 
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
26 west ?
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge ?
''Kay." 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton !
37 Worcester ?
"Dr. Stokes." 
938.
POLYGONUM MINUS.
841 
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan ?
46 Cardigan.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
"Pulteney." 
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Bowman s]).
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Diu'ham.
Norman cat.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Balfour sp.
73 Eirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Dr. Ross." 
N.B. Several of the counties 
here enumerated rest on un- 
safe testimony or on old and 
unconfirmed authority.
[90 
Forfar ; G.
Don] .
939 Polygonum 
aviculare.
Counties all, except 35 93 97, 
with the usual nine ; no 
doubt it is to be found in 
every county.
The various 
segregates are so imperfectly 
distinguished as yet, and 
then- localities so seldom re- 
corded apart, that I do not 
here attempt to cite their 
counties.
940 Polygonum 
Rail.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Flower sp.
4 north.
Somerset.
''Borrer.'' 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
I 11 Hants south.
Borrer ms.
I Sussex.
Borrer ms.
i 41 Glamorgan.
Flower sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis sp.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberl.
Addison sp.
71 Man.
" Edward Forbes." 
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Stewart Murray sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
82 Haddington.
Syme sj).
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
[112 "common"; Edm.
flo.].
940 Polygonum 
maritimum.
11 Hants south.
Borrer sp.
[1 14 28 46 49 75 99 ; all 
errors probably through mis- 
taking the Rail for this 
present species ; which is, 
indeed, scarcely a native, 
although it did exist some 
few years on the coast of 
Hants ; — picked there by 
Mr. Borrer in 1847] .
941 Polygonum 
Convolvulus.
Counties all, except 46 60 86 
97 98 104 107 (111) 112.
Professor Do Candollc re- 
342 
941.
POLYGONUM CONVOLVULUS.
gards this as an Asiatic 
plant, introduced into Bri- 
tain by human agency.
If 
SO, it is a remarkable in- 
stance of complete naturali- 
sation through the greater 
part of the island, although 
in the more northerly coun- 
ties of North Britain it might 
quite suitably be classed as 
a colonist only, or even as a 
casual in the North Isles.
942 Polygonum 
dumetorum.
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
6 Som. north.
Babington sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
12 Hants north.
Bromf.
sp.
14 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts, Coleman sp.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
[68 Cheviotland, an error] .
943 Rumex 
Hydrolapathum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Miss Hancock sp.
69 Westmore.
Oliver sp.
75 Ayr. Walker- Arnott ms.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
(77).
[90 93 99].
Perth; 
but I do not know within 
which of its vice-counties.
944.
KUMEX CRISPUS.
343 
944 Rumex 
crispus.
Counties all, except 61 73 97 
98 107.
944 Rumex 
aquaticus.
domesticus.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durliam.
Babington sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Clieviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland ?
75 Ayr.
''Mr. Goldie." 
76 Kenfrew.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfoui' sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
87 Perth west !
Syme sp.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
99 Dunbarton ?
04 Eb. north.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
[2 3 27 31 33 37 40; 
probably intending Hydro- 
hipathum] .
944 Rumex 
conspersus.
85 Kinross.
Walker-Arnott sp.
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
N.B. Prof.
Areschoug named 
the Scottish plant "con- 
spersus," on seeing the 
specimens in my herbarium ; 
so that its identity with the 
Swedish plant so named 
may be fully acquiesced in.
i 
945 Rumex 
pratensis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
8 Wilts south.
Warren ms.
9 Dorset.
Borrer ms.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer sp.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Hort ms.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Bab. ms.
45 Pembroke.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Newbould ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
344 
945.
RUMEX PRATENSIS.
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
N.B. To my eyes this appears 
to be a miscellaneous medley 
of specimens more or less 
intermediate between crisjms 
and obtusifoUiis, and on that 
account not confidently 
assignable to either.
In the 
citation of " sp." I do not 
guarantee the name in any 
other sense.
Professor 
Areschoug considered Dr.
Boswell Syme's examples 
from Fife to be rightly thus 
named.
647 Rumex 
obtusifolius.
Counties all, except 35 37 71 
72 73 97.
947 Rumex 
sylvestris.
17 Surrey, 1872.
Hon. J.
B. L.
"Warren, sp., who states this 
to be the B.
obtusifolius of 
Fries ; not identical with 
the Dock so named in Eng- 
land as the species intended 
by Linneus.
The present 
one may have been passed 
by as our obtusifolius, or 
even possibly as the next.
948 Rumex 
nemorosus.
sanguineus, Sm.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northwards ; namely, 
24 32 4G 49 51 54 GO 71 
72 73 86 89 (90) 92 or 93 
94 96 97 98 103 to 112.
Perhaps confused occasion- 
ally with the next, or 
neglected like other unin- 
teresting Docks." 
948 Rumex 
conglomeratus.
acutus, Sm.
Counties all, except 30 46 69 
71 72 73 75 86 88 89 94 
to 98 101 102 106 to 110 
[111 112].
Add to these 
the usual nine.
949 Rumex 
pulcher.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Poole ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
949.
EUMEX PULCHEE.
845 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
56 Notts.
G-.
Howitt sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
(67 "baUast liiUs ")• 
[36 37 75 77 ; requii'ing con- 
firmation ; but the first two are 
likely enough to be correct] .
950 Rumex 
maritimus.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east ?
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton ?
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kh'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
53 Lincoln south !
64 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby ?
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
(66 67 68, on ballast, etc.) 
[3 4 23 24 41 51 72 85 
92 94 111; insufficiently 
vouched, and the higher 
nos.
probably erroneous] .
950 Rumex 
palustris.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
9 Dorset.
Bloxam ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
16 Kent west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Wing sp.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Syme sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick ?
39 Stafford ?
58 Chester ?
Bowman ms.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
(66 67 on ballast hills).
[1 3 55 68 75 82 90 ; coun- 
ties requu'ing verification, 
and the same may be true 
for some of the others here 
cited interrogatively] .
951 Rumex 
Acetosa.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine blanks.
952 Rumex 
Acetosella.
Counties all, except only the 
usual nine blanks.
953 Oxyria 
reniformis.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Bowman ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
2 Y 
346 953.
oxYRU 
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
71 Kincardine.
Syme cat.t 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
[34 64 or 65j .
954 Hippophae 
rhamnoides.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfieldms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
62 York n.
east.
Mudd sp.
(3 18 68 82 83 84 85 101 
102 ; probably planted in 
all of these counties.
955 Daphne 
Laureola.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
t 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
RENIFORMIS.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Wallis sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
J. Hooker ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Howitt ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea ?
One locality.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab ms.
58 Chester?
"J.
B. Wood." 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
65 Durham.
Bowman sp.
(1 2 21 50 59 68 69 75 
77 81 83 85 91 ; recorded 
as uncertainly indigenous 
or certainly introduced in 
these counties).
956 Daphne 
Mezereum.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
956.
DAPHNE MEZEREUM.
347 
66 Durham.
Norman sp.
(3 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 17 
19 20 22 26 27 28 38 or 
34 36 37 38 39 40 57 63 
69 75 83 ; probably an alien 
in all of these counties ; and 
not clearly indigenous in 
those named).
Mr. Borrer 
held it " native " in Sussex ; 
and Dr. Bromfield declares 
it to be so in Hampshu-e.
Mr. Baker gives it the grade 
of "denizen" in Yorkshire 
and Durham.
It is sown by 
robins, which feed on its 
berries in the gardens.
957 Thesium 
humifusum.
Cornwall ...
? Butler sp.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Southby sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
12 north.
Macreight sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Warren ms.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Miss Twining sp.
83 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
958 Asarum 
europseum.
8 Wilts south.
Flower sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten " V.
spec." 
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
(3 20 22 23 36 55 68 69 
70 75 83 84 85 ; not indi- 
genous in these reported 
counties ; and perhaps not 
so in any of the other five 
specially named).
960 Empetmm 
nigrum.
3 Dev. south, "found in 1866." 
5 Som. south.
Withers sp.
13 Sussex west.
Extinct.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford !
Howitt sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Barham sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr.
76 licnfrew.
Hennedy cat.
348 
960.
EMPETRUM NIGRUM.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Koxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 to 112.
All North Britain, 
and so plentifully that it 
appears quite unnecessary 
to cite the names of coun- 
ties, with their personal 
authorities in detail.
[21] .
961 Euphorbia 
Peplis.
1 Corn, west !
Seen in 1831.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
962 Euphorbia 
Helioscopea.
Counties all, except 46 60 86 
89 97 98 107.
963 Euphorbia 
platyphylla.
2 Corn.
east.
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bromf.
sp.
15 Kent cast.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.+ 
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
32 Northton !
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west !
37 Worcester ?
(25 or 26 62 63 64 67 68).
963 Euphorbia 
stricta.
34 Gloster west.
" Hort." 
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
[6 12 ; misnomers, perhaps 
through confusion with E.
stricta of Smith, which was 
a small state of platyphylla] .
964 Euphorbia 
hiberna.
4 Devon north !
Eussell sp.
[15 21 59].
(62).
965 Euphorbia 
pilosa.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
14 Sussex east, "wild." 
* 969 Euphorbia 
Paralias.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex west.
Smith ms.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
969.
EUPHOEBIA PAR.\LIAS.
849 
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
"Eussell sp.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bidwell sp.
51 Fhnt.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea ?
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south !
Scholes sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Miss Beevor sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
(85 BaKour ms.''-).
970 Euphorbia 
portlandica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
8 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon ?
52 Anglesea.
Harris sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Scholes sp.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Jowett to Howitt sp.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
[13 15].
(84 85).
971 Euphorbia 
exigua.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 cast.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
13riggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Khk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
850 
971.
EUPHORBIA EXIGUA.
59 Lane, south.
Webb eat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
72 Dumfries ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
89 east.
" Gorrie." 
90 Forfar, "frequent." 
94 Banff.
"Mr. Bisset." 
00 Clyde-isles.
A common plant in Eng- 
land, but scarce in Scotland.
972 Euphorbia 
Peplus.
Counties all, with many seem- 
ing exceptions northward ; 
namely, 72 78 86 88 89 
91 97 98 101 102 106 107 
108 110 111 112.
974 Euphorbia 
amygdaloides.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
18 Sussex west f Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Miss Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
82 Northton.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west !
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
88 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
89 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ball sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
"Deering." 
57 Derby.
Eev. A.
Bloxam ms.
64 York m.
west.
Moore ms.
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
68 Cheviotland.
Bigge sp.
976 Mercurialis 
perennis.
Counties all, except 81 46 53 
60 71 97 107 109 110 112.
Ill Orkney; Miss Boswell.
977.
MEKCURIALIS ANNUA.
351 
977 Mercurialis 
annua.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north !
Henslow sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.f 
10 Wight.
More sp.f 
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Warren ms.
14 east !
Fordham sp.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris sp.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Varenne sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.t 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Robmson cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Robinson cat.
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
I 
66 Durham, ^'colonist." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.f 
(70 75 83 85 87 ; a casual 
introduction in these coun- 
ties, as well as in some of 
the English counties enume- 
rated ; while in some others 
of the latter it is an abun- 
dant and troublesome weed.
978 Urtica 
urens.
Counties all, except 35 73 97 
98 104 108.
979 Urtica 
dioica.
Counties all, except 97 107 
and the usual nine others ; 
no doubt it occurs in all of 
them.
980 Parietaria 
officinalis.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northwards, namely, 
71 72 73 80 84 86 88 89 
(91 to 96) 97 98 99 (100) 
101 to 105 (106) 107 to 112.
983 Humulus 
Lupulus.
1 Corn, west !
f Cunnack.''' 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.t 
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent cast !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
S52 
983.
HUMULUS LUPULUS.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purclias cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
t Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford!
Fraser cat.f 
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Miss Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
f Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
t 
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
f Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.f 
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham, "not native." 
67 Northumb.
Storey cat."'^' 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.^'^ 
69 Westmoreland !
f 
70 Cumberland !
f Baker.- 
71 Man. Forbes cat.f "rare." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat."^' 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.f 
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.- 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.''' 
83 Edinburgh !
f Balf.
cat.- 
85 Fife.
Lawson cat.f Balf.* 
92 Aber south !
- 
95 Elgin.
CoU.
Mor.* 
N.B. The Hop is generally re- 
ported as a truly indigenous 
plant in South England ; 
but becoming much doubted, 
or quite discarded as such, 
in the northern counties.
984 Ulmus 
montana.
Counties all, except 11 14 15 
31 32 41 45 46 49 51 53 
54 71 73 80 84 93 94 97 
107 109 111 112.
And in 
several of the other counties 
it is reported as being un- 
certainly native or certainly 
alien.
985 Ulmus 
suberosa.
N.B. It is found utterly impos- 
sible to say in which of the 
counties this much planted 
tree is indigenous, and in 
which of them it is simply 
an introduction.
The name 
campestris, so frequent in 
books, has sometimes in- 
tended montana, but perhaps 
more frequently this other 
species.
U. "suberosa" is 
reported in counties 1 to 6 
9 to 13 17 to 22 24 29 31 
34 36 to 40 44 45 49 to 52 
54 55 56 58 59 61 to 68 
70 72 76 77 81 83 87 91.
U. "campestris" is reported 
in counties 2 to 9 11 12 
985.
ULMUS SUBEEOSA.
353 
14 15 17 to 20 22 23 25 
to 30 32 33 34 36 to 40 
44 60 52 55 to 59 61 to 
65 68.
[77 80 81 83 90].
988 Quercus 
Robur.
Counties all, except 46 60 71 
75 86 107 109 to 112, with 
the usual nine others.
This 
includes the two segregates 
taken together under the 
one name made more or 
less common to both.
They 
are again enumerated in 
detail below, as I find them 
severally reported.
But the 
record isjmisleading numeri- 
cally, because ''peduncu- 
lata" is less frequently dis- 
tinguished by name, as a 
segi'egate from Robur, than 
is the sessiliflora" ; this 
latter being really less fre- 
quent than the former.
988 Quercus 
pedunculata.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. north !
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker^cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh I f Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f 
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
89 east !
f 
98 Argyle.
Clyde flo.
99 Dunbarton.
Clyde flo.
988 Quercus 
sessiliflora.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
17 Surrey !
f 
2 z 
354 988.
QUEECus sessiliflora.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.f 
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.f 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Kennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick, 
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f 
87 Perth west ?
88 mid.
99 Dunbarton.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
N.B. For neither segregate is 
it possible clearly to dis- 
tinguish the counties in 
which it is indigenous, from 
those in which it exists only 
as a planted tree or as the 
offspring from planted trees.
True sessiliflora is better dis- 
tinguished by its leaves, 
than by its sessile fruit ; 
the acorns of pedunculata 
being not seldom subsessile ; 
through which occasional 
misnomers occur.
989 Fagus 
sylvatica.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.* 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.* 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.f 
8 south.
Flower cat.f 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
Bromf.f 
11 Hants south !
Bromfield.
12 north.
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Floral Guide.
16 west.
Tonbridge flo.
17 Surrey !
Brewer in flo.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.f 
19 north.
Varenne cat.f 
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Sibthorpe flo.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Skepper flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.f 
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
32 Nortliton.
Notcutt cat.
989.
FAGUS SYLVATICA.
355 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaitescat.'"' 
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.f 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
f 
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.f 
40 Salop.
Leigliton flo.f 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.f 
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.f 
61 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Da\T[es flo.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat."' 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.f 
56 Notts.
Howittflo.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
" recorded." 
62 n.
east.
Baker bot.f 
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker bot.f 
65 n.
west.
Baker bot.f 
66 Durham, ''not indigenous." 
67 Northumb.
New flo." 
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.- 
(Scotland 72 73 75 76 77 
80 to 85 87 90 91 92 94 
95 96 98 100 101 102 
104 106 ; planted, not indi- 
genous).
N.B. The alternative signs 
f ) are resorted to in this 
case of the Beech, because 
the reported English coun- 
ties are enumerated in detail ; 
to assist in showing where the 
Beech is apparently non- 
indigenous.
Those counties 
in which it yet occurs truly 
spontaneous can scarcely be 
eliminated from the rest.
990 Carpinus 
Betulus.
6 Som. north !
f 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.f 
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.f 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.f 
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Banking sp.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.f 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.f 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
35 Monmouth.
F. Hort.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.f 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.f 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.f 
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.f 
40 Salop ?
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.f 
52 Anglesea.
Davies flo.
(2 3 55 56 58 59 62 to 
70 72 76 77 81 83 85 87 
90 91 92 95; recorded, 
but usually as an alien).
990 Corylus 
Avellana.
Counties all, except 46 86 98 
107 (110) 112, with the 
other nine.
Shetland is 
apparently a real exception 
to comital generality.
And 
in the Hebrides the Hazel 
has perhaps been introduced 
again, after having become 
extinct there.
356 992.
ALNus 
992 Alnus 
glutinosa.
Counties all, except 71 (109 
110) 111 112.
To these 
should be temporarily added 
46 and eight of the usual 
nine ; in all of which it will 
doubtless be found.
993 Betula 
alba.
Counties all, except 15 31 45 
46 (51) 71 86 93 98 110 
112.
(1 18 19 29 ; recorded 
as an introduced tree).
993 Betula 
verrucosa, 
pendula.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Dev.on south.
Briggs ms.
12 Hants north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex.
36 Hereford.
Eev. A.
Ley ms.
58 Chester.
Warren ms.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f 
N.B. Seldom recorded unless 
under the aggregate name 
of ''alba"; the only name 
entered in my own notes 
until a recent date.
It 
may prove to be the more 
common of the two segre- 
gates, and to be tacitly 
taken as the type of alba.
993 Betula 
glutinosa.
pubescens.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
GLUTINOSA.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.' 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Hunt sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Kenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west !
89 east !
92 Aber.
south !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
North Highlands ; Bab.
994 Betula 
nana.
68 Cheviotland.
77 Lanark ?
78 Peebles.
81 Berwick?
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin ?
Sir W.
Hooker sp.
96 Eastcrness.
Eutherford sp.
994.
BETULA NANA.
357 
97 Westerness !
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver s^.
995 Populus 
alba.
N.B. My notes show habitats 
for this Po^jlar in upwards 
of sixty counties, from Corn- 
wall to Cantire and Elgin.
For the majority of those 
counties it is marked as a 
tree likely or certainly intro- 
duced.
It is given as an 
unquestioned native in the 
Floras of Surrey, Essex, 
Herts, Suffolk, Norfolk, 
Cambridge, etc.
In the 
Floras of Tyne and North 
Yorkshire it is reduced to 
the grade of " denizen." 
And if I rightly know the 
distinction between alba and 
canescens, I should now deem 
the latter native, and the 
former planted, as seen in 
Surrey and elsewhere.
996 Populus 
canescens.
Cornwall.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
Symc " sp." 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat." 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 .
west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
Babmgton cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.* 
51 Flint.
Kobinson cat.f 
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.f 
66 Durham, ''denizen." 
67 Northumberland.
" den." 
68 Cheviotland.
"den." 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.* 
Berwick, "planted." 
997 Populus 
tremula.
Counties all, except 5 11 15 
32 34 35 46 53 54 60 72 
73 82 84 86 98 102 109 
112.
Likely enough it « 
occurs in nearly all of these 
counties.
It is marked as 
an uncertain native in the 
lists for (1 2 3 4 76 91).
998 Populus 
nigra.
N.B. This name is enume- 
rated in nearly three score 
local Floras'and Catalogues ; 
but is branded as non-indi- 
genous, with some few ex- 
ceptions.
It is allowed as 
indigenous in the Flora of 
Cambridge, which will be 
my excuse for noticing it at 
all in a series disregarding 
the non-indigenous.
358 999.
sALix pentandea.
999 Salix 
pentandra.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford, "abundant." 
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.f 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Nor thumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
''rare." 
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Bell sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.f 
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
lOKebrides.
Planted?
(2 3 9 13 14 17 19 20 21 
23 25 36; apparently planted 
in these counties ; very rare 
and uncertain in some of 
them).
Rare and (as I now 
think) always planted in 
Surrey.
1001 Salix 
fragilis, etc.
Counties all, except 4 15 24 
25 31 32 35 45 46 51 57 
60 69 71 72 73 85 88 89 
93 94 97 98 99 103 to 112.
Planted in Ross and Keb- 
rides, and perhaps not any- 
where truly indigenous in 
Scotland.
1002 Salix 
alba, etc.
Counties all, except 4 15 35 
41 46 49 51 57 60 61 71 
73 82 84 88 89 94 96 97 
103 to 112.
Planted in 
Sutherland and Kebrides, 
and the same in many of 
the other counties which 
have been reported for it.
Lideed, I have never seen 
the White Willow certainly 
native.
1003 Salix 
triandra, etc.
Counties all the English, except 
1 4 5 6 12 31 33 45 46 
49 51 53 54 57 58 60 61 
71.
In Scotland, reported 
for 83 87 90 91, and likely 
not indigenous in these 
four.
1005 Salix 
purpurea, etc.
1005.
SALIX PURPUKEA, ETC.
859 
Counties all, except 1 2 4 5 6 
10 11 16 22 31 35 41 to 
51 53 54 57 69 70 71 73 
74 75 82 85 86 89 94 to 
99 103 to 112.
But in 
several of them it cannot be 
declared ' ' truly indigenous.
' ' 
1006 Salix 
rubra, etc.
Counties all the English, except 
1 to 7 9 10 12 to 15 20 27 
31 33 34 35 37 38 39 41 
to 51 53 54 55 57 58 60 
61 63 69 71.
In Scotland, 
Forhyana is recorded for 81 
and 90 ; and ruhra for 83 and 
90, on most unsafe authority.
1007 Salix 
viminalis.
Counties all, except 4 8 15 31 
41 45 46 53 57 60 61 71 
72 82 86 88 89 94 96 97 
99 103 to 112.
Planted at 
Roddal, in Hebrides ?
1008 Salix 
Smithiana.
acuminata.
Counties all the English, except 
1 4 6 7 8 23 24 25 30 31 
35 46 49 50 51 53 57 60 
61 63 71.
In Scotland, 
Smithiana (or ferruqinea) is 
reported for 81 83 84 85 
90 101 102 ; and acuminata 
for 76 77 81 83 102 111.
But truly little or no trust 
can be given to these nume- 
rals either way.
The reported 
locahties of the two species 
(if species at all) are inex- 
tricably confused.
Further, 
it is impossible at present 
to eliminate correctly the 
native from the planted 
habitats of this or of any of 
the preceding species of the 
genus.
1010 Salix 
cinerea, etc.
Counties aU, except 8 24 26 
30 31 35 50 57 61 72 73 
86 97 98 103 to 109.
Likely 
occurs in every county.
1011 Salix 
aurita.
Counties aU, except 4 12 15 
28 31 32 35 45 51 54 57 
60 61 71 73 82 98 99 106.
Probably it occurs in most 
of these counties, if not in 
aU of them ; equally so, with 
respect to the usual nine 
other counties, which are 
to be understood exceptions 
here as well as for each of 
the preceding species.
1012 Salix 
caprea.
Counties all, except 1 35 41 
45 46 51 53 57 60 71 72 
73 86 94 98 101 103 to 
112.
Doubtless it occurs in 
all of these counties up to 
no.
100, and perhaps truly 
indigenous in all of them.
1013 Salix 
nigricans.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nor thumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton ?
360 
1013.
SALIX NIGKICANS.
81 Berwick ?
83 Edinbm'gli ?
88 Perth raid !
Syme sp.
89 east !
Gardiner sp.
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
[3 14 17 23 28 36 56 59] .
1014 Salix 
laurina.
65 York n.
west.
Leefe no.
73.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westm.
Winch sp.tenuifoHa.
88 Perth mid.
''Borrer." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
[9 10 20 27 or 28 44] .
I do 
not- understand this Willow 
myself, and give its counties 
as they are found reported.
1015 Salix 
phylicifolia.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
" Dugdale !
" 
64 York.
m. west ?
65 n.
w^est.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark.
83 Edinburgh.
88 Perth mid !
Gardiner sp.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
97 Wcsterness !
98 Argyle !
11 Orlmcy.
Syme ms.
[1 14 17 28].
1016 Salix 
ambigua.
N.B. This is a Willow which I 
do not understand at all 
clearly.
Belying on leaf- 
specimens named by Dr.- 
Boswell Syme, I believe to 
have seen it on the heaths 
of Surrey and Berkshhe 
and in the East Highlands.
There are records for " am- 
hi(/ua" in 3 13 or 14 18 19 
25 67 88 90 96 or 97 103 
107 109 111.
1017 Salix 
repens, etc.
Counties all, except 4 5 7 16 
26 32 35 36 46 51 53 54 
57 60 71 72 80 82 84 86 
98 99 106; likely to be 
found in all or nearly all of 
these counties.
1021 Salix 
arbuscula, etc.
72 Dumfries.
" Maughan." 
88 Perth mid !
Balfour sp.
90 Forfar?
G. Don." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie g.
98 Argyle.
"Dr. Stuart." 
Ill Orkney?
Nefll Tour.
1022 Salix 
Lapponum.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
86 Stirling.
Prof.
Balfour.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Clegliorn sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Macnab sp.
96 Easterness !
97 Wcsterness !
05 Boss west.
Campbell sp.
08 Sutli.
west.
Graham sp.
11 Orkney ?
NeHl Tour.
1022.
SALIX LAPPONUM.
861 
[45 56 66 ; misnomers ?] .
1023 Salix 
lanata.
88 Perth mid.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
1025 Salix 
Myrsinites.
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
Gordon ms.
98 Argyle.
Brit.
flo.
ed.
4. 
06 Boss east ?
" reported." 
08 Suth.
west ?
" reported." 
[55 65 ; errors] .
1026 Salix 
reticulata.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Pollexfen sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham exc.
[49 64 69 70; errors].
1027 Salix 
herbacea.
42 Brecon.
49 Carnarvon.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
86 Sthiing.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
Church.
Bab. ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Syme sp.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1028 Myrica 
Gale.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
Somerset.
Trevelyan ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat, 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex ?
Ever found ?
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
31 Hunts.
Extinct.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
3 a 
862 
1028.
MYRICA GALE.
68 York s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
67 Nortliumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
G. Lloyd ms.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayi*.
Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
G. Macnab sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon *cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east !
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness !
Brown cat.
1029 Pinus 
sylvestris.
88 Mid Perth !
92 South Aberdeen !
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
05 West Ross.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
08 West Sutherland.
Lightf.
N.B. The Pine formerly grew 
throughout Britain, as is 
shown by its remains still 
found plentifully in peat 
moors and elsewhere.
Some 
natural forests of it still 
exist in the counties enume- 
rated above ; possibly in some 
few others also.
Thousands 
of seedling fir-trees spring 
up yearly on the heaths of 
Surrey, and counties adja- 
cent ; which grow up to be 
timber trees where allowed 
to remain ; but apparently 
all these can trace back their 
origin to planted trees only, 
or to other immediate off- 
spring of planted trees ; so 
that, they cannot be ac- 
cepted now as purely native 
trees, however thoroughly 
naturalised again.
1030 Juniperus 
communis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight ?
"one bush only." 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Mrs. Tickner sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.f 
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
I 26 west.
1030.
JU^^IPERUS COMMUNIS, 
868 
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northampton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Bowman ms.
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sj).
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku'kcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
86 Sth-Hng.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
CroaU sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie fio.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Ross east !
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Neill tour.
12 Shetland.
Edmon.
flo.
(27 39 55).
[52].
Mr.
Cunnack's Juniper ("var.
prostrata '') from the Lizard, 
Cornwall, is a dwarf form 
much like 7iana, the next 
species or segregate.
1030 Junipems 
nana.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west !
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
N.B. It is difficult to trace any 
absolute line of separation 
between the Dwarf and the 
Common Juniper, much dis- 
similar as their general as- 
pect certainly is while we 
are contrasting the extreme 
forms only.
[65 7G ; re- 
quiring verification] .
1031 Taxus 
baccata.
6 Som. north !
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 ]3ucks.
Britten cat.
364 
1081.
TAXUS BACCATA.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh !
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.f 
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.f 
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
98 Argyle.
Lightf.
scot.
(1 3 4 10 11 18 19 21 27 
29 38 55 58 59 61 63 77 
81 83 85 90 91 92 95 96; 
more or less uncertainly in- 
digenous ; perhaps intro- 
duced to most of these 
counties).
Notice.
The Monocotyledonous Orders are unavoidably postponed to a 
Second Part, as explained in the Preface to this one.
This severance 
of the series into two separately printed portions, with a possibihty 
that the second portion may never be written, renders it desirable to 
add a separate Index to the genera treated in this present Part ; 
although, in case the two Parts should ever be bound together as 
one volume, the separating Index will appear to be awkwardly 
interposed.
INDEX TO GENERA.
865 
Index to the Genera 
Included in the ItteSecoxYLEDONOus Orders.
Acer, 104.
Achillea, 253.
Aconitum, 37.
Actaea, 37.
Adonis, 27.
Adoxa, 178.
iEgopodium, 184.
.^thusa, 191.
Agrunonia, 150.
Ajuga, 299.
Alchemilla, 152.
Alnus, 356.
Althaea, 99.
Anagallis, 324.
Anchusa, 315.
Andromeda, 259.
Androsaemum, 100.
Anemone, 27.
Angelica, 194.
Anthemis, 251.
AntiiThinum, 283.
Anthriscus, 197.
Anthylhs, 116.
Apium, 182.
Aquilegia, 36.
Arabis, 58.
Arbutus, 259.
Arctium, 230.
Arenaria, 89.
Armeria, 326.
Armoracia, 61.
Amoseris, 229.
Artemisia, 241.
Arthrolobium, 128.
Asarum, 347.
Asperugo, 315.
Asperula, 207.
Aster, 245.
Astragalus, 126.
Athamanta, 192.
Atriplex, 333.
Atropa, 274.
Azalea, 258.
Ballota, 300.
Barbarea, 60.
Barkhausia, 228.
Bartsia, 281.
Belhs, 250.
Berberis, 37.
Beta, 336.
Betonica, 305.
Betula, 356.
Bidens, 239.
Brassica, 64.
Bryonia, 166.
Bunium, 185.
Bupleurum, 187.
Cakile, 45.
Calamintlia, 296.
Calhtriche, 164.
Calluna, 258.
Caltha, 34.
Campanula, 253.
Capsella, 49.
Cardamine, 56.
Carduus, 232.
Carlina, 237.
Carpinus, 355.
Carum, 184.
Caucalis, 195.
Centaurea, 237.
Contunculus, 324.
Cerastium, 92.
Ceratophyllum, 165.
Chaerophyllum, 198.
Chelidonium, 42.
Chenopodium, 329.
Cherleria, 95.
Chlora, 269.
Chrysanthemum, 250.
Chrysocoma, 241.
Chrysosplenium, 176.
Cicendia, 268.
Cichorium, 229.
Cicuta, 182.
Cineraria, 247.
Circaea, 159.
Clematis, 25.
Clinopodium, 298.
Cochlearia, 52.
Comarum, 143.
Conium, 181.
Convolvulus, 271.
Cornus, 179.
Coronopus, 46.
Corrigiola, 167.
Corydalis, 42.
Corylus, 355.
Cotoneaster, 153.
Cotyledon, 172.
Crambe, 46.
Crataegus, 153.
Crepis, 218.
Critlmium, 193.
Cuscuta, 271.
Cynoglossum, 315.
Daphne, 346.
Daucus, 195.
Delphinium, 
Dentaria, 55.
Dianthus, 77.
DigitaUs, 283.
Diotis, 241.
Dipsacus, 209.
Draba, 54.
Drosera, 74.
Dryas, 138.
366 
INDEX TO GENERA.
Echium, 316.
Elatine, 77.
Empetrum, 347.
Epilobium, 156.
Erica, 258.
Erigeron, 245.
Erodium, 105.
Eiyngium, 180.
Erysimum, 63.
Erythrsea, 268.
Euonymus, 112.
Eupatorium, 241.
Euphorbia, 348.
Euphrasia, 281.
Fagus, 354.
Filago, 244.
Fceniculum, 192.
Fragaria, 144.
Frankenia, 77.
Fraxinus, 264.
Fumaria, 43.
Galeopsis, 303.
Gahum, .203.
Genista, 115.
Gentiana, 265.
Geranium, 106.
Geum, 139.
Glaucium, 42.
Glaux, 326.
Glechoma, 306.
Gnaphahum, 242.
Hedera, 179.
Helianthemum, 68.
Helleborus, 35.
Hehninthia, 213.
Helosciadium, 183.
Heracleum, 195.
Herniaria, 167.
Hieracium, 219.
Hippocrepis, 128.
Hippophae, 346.
Hippuris, 161.
Honckeneja, 87.
Hottonia, 321.
Humulus, 351.
Hutchinsia, 49.
Hydrocotyle, 180.
Hyoscyamus, 272.
Hypericum, 100.
Hypochceris, 210.
Iberis, 50.
Ilex, 263.
lUecebrum, 167.
Impatiens, 112.
Inula, 247.
Isnardia, 159.
Jasione, 257.
Juniperus, 362.
Knautia, 212.
Lactuca, 216.
Lamium, 301.
Lampsana, 329.
Lathraea, 289.
Lathyrus, 133.
Lavatera, 99.
Leontodon, 214.
Lepidium, 50.
Lepigonum, 87.
Ligusticum, 192.
Ligustrum, 264.
Limosella, 286.
Linaria, 284.
Linnaea, 202.
Linum, 95.
Lithospermum, 312.
Littorella, 328.
Lobelia, 257.
Lonicera, 202.
Lotus, 125.
Lychnis, 81.
Lycopsis, 314.
Lycopus, 291.
Lysimachia, 322.
Ly thrum, 165.
Malva, 97.
Marrubium, 307.
Matricaria, 250.
Matthiola, 64.
Meconopsis, 41.
Medicago, 117.
Melampyrum, 281.
Melilotus, 118.
Melittis, 299.
Mentha, 291.
Menyanthes, 270.
Menziesia, 258.
Mercurialis, 350.
Mertensia, 313.
Meum, 193.
Moencliia, 82.
Monotropa, 263.
Montia, 167.
Mulgedium, 218.
Myosotis, 309.
Myosurus, 27.
Myrica, 361.
Myriophyllum, 162.
Myrrhis, 198.
Nasturtium, 60.
Nepeta, 306.
Nuphar, 39.
Nymphaea, 38.
Obione, 333.
CEnanthe, 188.
Onobrychis, 128.
Ononis, 116.
Onopordima, 236.
Origanum, 295.
Ornithopus, 127.
Orobanche, 287.
Orobus, 135.
Oxahs, 112.
Oxyria, 345.
Oxytropis, 127.
Papaver, 40.
Parietaria, 351.
Parnassia, 177.
Pastinaca, 194.
Pedicularis, 282.
Pephs, 166.
Petasites, 244.
Petroselinum, 183.
Peucedanum, 194.
Physospermum, 181.
Phyteuma, 257.
Picris, 213.
Pimpinella, 185.
Pinguicula, 316.
Pinus, 362.
Plantago, 327.
Polemonium, 270.
Polycarpon, 167.
Polygala, 75.
Polygonum, 338.
Populus, 357.
INDEX TO GENEKA.
Potentilla, 140.
Poterimn, 151.
Primula, 320.
PmneUa, 308.
Pmniis, 135.
Pulicaria, 249.
Pulmonaria, 316.
Pyrethnim, 250.
Pyrola, 261.
Pjrms, 154.
Quercus, 353.
Radiola, 96.
Ranunculus, 28.
Raphanus, 67.
Reseda, 68.
Rhamnus, 113.
Rhinanthus, 281.
Ribes, 168.
Rosa, 145.
Rubia, 202.
Rubus, 144.
Rumex, 342.
Sagina, 83.
SaHcornia, 338.
SaHx, 358 to 361.
Salsola, 337.
Salvia, 291.
Sambucus, 199.
Samolus, 325.
Sanguisorba, 151.
Sanicula, 180.
Saponaria, 78.
Sarothamnus, 114, 
Saussurea, 231.
Saxifraga, 173.
Scabiosa, 211.
Scandix, 197.
Sclerantlius, 168.
Scrophularia, 282.
Scutellaria, 308.
Sedum, 169.
Senecio, 245.
Serratula, 231.
Seseli, 192.
Sherardia, 207.
Sibbaldia, 140.
Sibthoi-pia, 287.
SUaus, 192.
Silene, 78.
Sinapis, 65.
Sison, 184.
Sisymbrium, 62.
Slum, 185.
Smyrnium, 181.
Solanum, 273.
Solidago, 245.
Sonchus, 218.
Spartium, 114.
Spergula, 85, 87.
Spergularia, 87.
SpirsBa, 138.
Stacliys, 306.
Statice, 326.
Stellaria, 90.
Suaeda, 337.
Subularia, 54.
Symphytum, 313.
Tanacetum, 250.
Taraxacmn, 228.
Taxus, 363.
Teesdalia, 49.
Teucriimi, 299.
ThaUctrum, 25.
Thesium, 347.
Thlaspi, 48.
Thymus, 295.
TiUa, 99.
Tillaea, 169.
Tordyliimi, 195.
Torilis, 196.
Tragopogon, 212.
Trientahs, 321.
TrifoUum, 119.
Trigonella, 119.
Trinia, 183.
Trollius, 35.
Tm-ritis, 59.
Tussilago, 244.
Ulex, 114.
Ulmus, 352.
Urtica, 351.
Utricularia, 318.
Vaccinium, 260.
Valeriana, 207.
Valerianella, 208.
Verbascum, 275.
Verbena, 290.
Veronica, 276.
Viburnum, 201.
Vicia, 129.
Vniarsia, 270.
Vinca, 265.
Viola, 70.
Viscum, 199.
fill!
T UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS-URBANA 
581.942W33T C001 V001 
TOPOGRAPHICAL BOTANY 
3 0112 009943603 