^^^^^^^^gieis^!^> 
New York 
State College of Agriculture 
At Cornell University 
Ithaca, N.
Y. / 
Library 
Cornell University Library 
QK 306.W34 
Topogra 
III 
>hical botanyibelng local and per 
3 1924 000 407 506 
Cornell University 
Library 
The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library.
There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text.
http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924000407506 
TOPOGRAPHICAL BOTANY.
LONDON : 
PKINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN AND CO., 
HATTON GARDEN, E.C.
TOPOGRAPHICAL BOTANY: 
LOCAL AND PEESONAL EECOBDS 
TOWARDS SHEWINO 
THE DISTEIBUTION OF BRITISH PLANTS 
\ 
TRACED THROUGH THE 
112 COUNTIES AND VICE-COUNTIES 
or 
ENGLAND, WALES, AND SCOTLAND.
BY 
HEWETT COTTEELL WATSON.
COEEECTED AND ENLAEGED.
LONDON: 
BEENAED QUAEITCH, 15 PICCADILLY.
1883.
PREFACE 
TO THE SECOND EDITION.
It was Mr. Watson's intention to publish a second 
edition of this work, and to entirely recast it and re-write 
the introductory and explanatory portions.
This he did 
not live to accomplish, but he made preparation for it by 
keeping an interleaved- copy of the first, edition always at 
hand and entering in it regularly all the records of the 
occurrence of plants in additional vice-counties that came 
to his notice.
The few additions which we have made on 
our own responsibility may be distinguished by having the 
name of the personal authority placed within parentheses.
Out of the nine vice-counties, for which in 1873 there were 
no lists for even the commonest plants, only two now 
remain totally unreported upon, so that in this edition all 
the vice-counties are dealt with in the same manner.
His 
notes for the remodelled, introductory, and explanatory 
chapters are too incomplete to be used, so that we have 
reprinted those of the first edition, with only a few trifling 
alterations that were rendered needful by changed circum- 
stances.
His" British Herbarium has now been brought to 
Kew, his European collection presented to Owen's College, 
Manchester, and his small general herbarium, formed in 
his student days, sent to Baron Ferdinand von Mueller 
at Melbourne.
J. G.
BAKEB.
W. W.
NEWBOULD.
Kew, May, 1883.
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
Memoir of the Author ......
ix 
Inteoduction ........
xxiii 
List of Pbovincbs, Sub-provinces, and Vice-counties xlvi 
County Distribution ......
1 
Explanation of the Catalogues ....
585 
General List op Correspondents, with other Personal 
Authorities cited ......
570 
Notes on the Authorities cited ....
585 
Index to the Genera, and also to the Species of the 
large Genera .......
607 
MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.
Eepkinted from the 'Joubnal op Botany' fob September, 1881.
We have this month to mourn the loss of our veteran 
English botanical geographer, Hewitt Cottbell Watson, who 
died at his residence at Thames Ditton, near Kingston, on 
Wednesday, the 27th of July, in the seventy-eighth year of his 
age.
Shortly before Christmas he had an accident whilst work- 
ing in his garden ; he stepped backward against a heap of soil 
and rubbish which he did not notice, and injured his foot and 
leg, which was lame before.
Acute inflammation set in, which 
resulted in gangrene, and he had been confined to his bedroom 
ever since Christmas ; and, although until the last fortnight he 
had been able to dress and lie on the sofa during the day, at 
times he suffered great pain, and his strength became gradually 
exhausted.
He was' bom in the month of May, 1804, at Firbeck, a 
village on the Yorkshire side of the boundary between that 
county and Nottinghamshire, not far from Worksop.
When he 
was six years old the family removed to Congleton, in Cheshire.
His father was Holland Watson, a country gentleman of anti- 
quarian tastes and a magistrate for the counties both of Cheehire 
and Lancashire.
On his mother's side he was descended from 
the Lords Folliott, of Ballyshannon.
But, although upon both 
sides he could trace back his descent for many generations 
through ancestors of good social position, he was from a very 
early period of his life an uncompromising democrat, not merely , 
passively and theoretically, but taking a lively active interest in 
political affairs.
In Mid- Surrey, where he lived for the last 
b 
X MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOE.
forty years of his life, he was one of the most active supporters 
of the liberal side in an overwhelmingly tory constituency ; and 
one of his last acts was to undertake a canvass from house to 
house of his parish at the election of last year.
In matters 
theological his views — which were much less common forty years 
ago than they are now — were of the advanced broad school.
The society in which he moved was principally composed of men 
of very different opinions ; and, as he delighted to speak out his 
mind freely, he was constantly drawn into animated arguments 
on social and political questions, in which, with his ready 
sarcasm and great command of illustrative recollections and 
anecdotes, no one was better qualified to hold his own against 
all comers.
When he was a child.
Dr. Stanley, afterwards Bishop of 
Norwich, was the rector of the neighbouring parish of Alderley, 
and Mr. Watson always considered that it was from him that 
his love for Botany got its first encouragement.
" During my 
school-days," he wrote, " a boyish fancy for plants and flori- 
culture, which I had early inherited, attracted the favourable 
notice of Dr. Stanley, whose opportune instruction and en- 
couragement gave a scientific direction to the taste, and rendered 
it the solace and relief of the child during a period of protracted 
bodUy suffering.
The direction once given was never wholly 
lost, though discouraged in my own home and the means of im- 
provement withheld under mistaken views." The late Dean 
Stanley was one of his schoolfellows, and as he was a frail 
delicate child, Mr. Watson, who was ten years older, often gave 
him cakes and interfered for his protection.
At first he was intended for the army, but at an early age 
an accident from a cricket bat, which ruined in permanence the 
joint of one of his knees, put a stop to this.
His father wished 
him to be a lawyer, but, although he followed up for some time 
the necessary studies, the idea was never congenial to his own 
mind.
When he was about twenty-two, the bequest of a small 
estate in Derbyshire from a member of his mother's family 
MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOE.
XI 
placed him in what for a man of his simple habits were inde- 
pendent circumstances.
Upon this he removed to Edinburgh, 
where he stayed for several years, attending the ordinary classes 
of the medical curriculum, and giving special attention to Botany 
and Physiology.
Just as he was going up for his examination 
his health broke down, and he was not able to go up for his 
degree ; and, as he did not wish to practice, he never took it.
After travelling about for some time he purchased, about 1835, a 
small house (which he afterwards enlarged) with a pleasant 
garden and orchard attached to it, a short distance south of the 
village of Thames Ditton, a stone's-throw from the point where 
the branch to Hampton Court leaves the main London and South 
Western line ; and here he lived for the remainder of his life.
He never married, but was fortunate in that the same house- 
keeper who came to him when he first settled down in a house of 
his own remained with him for the whole forty-six years, and 
nursed him through his last tedious illness.
During his Edinburgh studentship he took great interest in 
the lectures of Professor Graham, whom he accompanied in an 
excursion into Sutherlandshire.
Amongst his Edinburgh eon- 
temporaries who took special interest in Botany were Dr. Balfour, 
Dr. Greville, Dr. Patrick Neill, Bir Walter Trevelyan, and Mr.
Embleton ; and in those early days when he first settled down 
definitely into botanical work no one did more to help and 
encourage him than Sir William Hooker, to whom Dr. Graham 
gave him an introduction, who was then in full tide of his pro- 
fessional career at Glasgow.
He accompanied Sir William and 
his class upon several of their Highland excursions, and dedi- 
cated to him ' The New Botanist's Guide,' which he published in 
1835.
The following is what George Combe wrote of Mr. Watson 
in 1846, when he was a candidate for one of the Professorships 
in the four Queen's Colleges, then just established in Ireland : — 
" Mr. H.
C. Watson became known to me nearly twenty years 
ago, when he studied in this city, and my acquaintance with 
XU MEMOIB OF THE AUTHOB.
him lias been continued to the present time.
As a student he 
was characterised by steady application, great aptitude in 
acquiring knowledge, and a comprehensive power of appreciating 
its relations.
He devoted his attention to the various branches 
of science usually included in the curriculum for a medical 
degree, and was elected by his fellow- students President of the 
Eoyal Medical Society of Edinburgh, in which office he dis- 
tinguished himself by superior abilities and attainments.
Judging 
from his writings, conversation, and correspondence, I have no 
hesitation in saying that his intellect is acute, exact, profound, 
comprehensive, and logical in no ordinary degree.
He combines 
the powers of accurate observation, analysis, and induction, with 
the power of clear expression ; and his manner of communi- 
cating the great and valuable store of scientific information 
which he possesses is at once lucid and logical.
I have con- 
sidered his personal friendship as a source of pleasure and 
advantage ever since I knew him, and shall consider any College 
or University fortunate that shall enrol him amongst its pro- 
fessors in the branch of science to which he has devoted his chief 
attention — Botany.
' ' 
The following is Sir J.
D. Hooker's testimonial of the same 
date : — " Mr. H.
C. Watson has been personally known to me 
for nearly fourteen years as a zealous and excellent botanist, 
from whose writings and experience I have derived great in- 
struction.
His knowledge of plants is very extensive, and of 
European, especially British, species, complete, and acquired by 
actual investigation.
In the departments of physiological, 
structural, and systematic Botany he is well grounded ; and his 
numerous works on that of Geographical Botany are pronounced - 
by all to be of the highest order.
Mr. Watson's education, 
general information, and gentlemanly manners, together with 
his desire of, and facility in, imparting information are so 
obvious, that his society was greatly desired both by the pro- 
fessors and students in Botany in Edinburgh and Glasgow, 
during the many seasons when as a distinguished student of 
MEMOIR OF THIS AUTHOB.
Xlll 
Dr. Graham he devoted himself to the study of the geographical 
distribution of the British Flora." 
As a writer on the geographical distribution of the British 
plants his books extend over more than forty years, beginning 
with 1832, when he was twenty-eight years old,, and ending with 
1874.
Prom jBrst to last, so far as Botany was concerned, he 
concentrated his attention upon this special field, and worked at 
it with unremitting diligence and patience.
The paragraph 
from Herschell which he chose as a motto for the ' Cybele ' 
indicates with characteristic clearness the spirit in which he 
worked : — " There is scarcely any well-informed person who, if 
he has but the will, has not also the power to add something 
essential to the general stock of knowledge, if he will only 
observe regularly and methodically some particular class of facts 
which may most excite his attention or which his situation may 
best enable him to study with effect.',' And, although as a 
general proposition one may reasonably demiir to it as an over- 
statement, there can be no question that in his own particular 
case it was carried into effect with signal completeness.
When 
he took up the subject in 1832, the principal notion in registering 
plant-stations was to guide collectors to the places where they 
could gather the species.
"When he published the last volume of 
' Topographical Botany ' in 1874, the distribution of all British 
plants from all possible ^joints of view was so tlioroughly searched 
out and placed on record that all that remains for his successors 
is to fill in a few small points of detail.
His first work, 'Out- 
lines of the Distribution of British Plants belonging to the 
division Yasculares,' is a small octavo of 334 pages, which was 
printed in Edinburgh in 1832 for private distribution.
Under 
the title of ' Eemarks on the Distribution of British Plants, 
chiefly in connection with Latitude, Elevation, and Climate,' 
what may be considered as another edition of the same work 
was published in London by Longmans in 1835.
It was trans- 
lated into German by Beilschmidt in 1837, and acknowledged by 
the German botanists by a diploma of membership from the 
XIV MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.
Imperial L.-C.
Academy ' Naturae Curiosorum,' of which Nees 
von Esenbeck was at that time the president.
In the same year 
(1885) Mr. Watson published the first volume of the 'New 
Botanist's Guide,' and the second followed' in 1837.
This is 
planned upon the lines of the ' Botanist's Guide ' of Turner and 
Dilwyn, and enumerates the special localities of the rare plants 
of England and Scotland, taking them county by county.
In 
1843 he issued the first part of a much more elaborate work on 
the pkn of the outlines.
This was only carried out through the 
series of plants, following the Candollean sequence of orders, as 
far down as Papaveracea ; when, the plan being found to be too 
cumbrous, the work was not carried on.
The first volume of his 
magnum opios, ' Oybele Britannica,' appeared in 1847, and it was 
followed by volume ii.
in 1849, volume iii.
in 1852, and volume 
iv.
in 1859.
It was his own original idea to apply the term 
Cybele to a systematic treatise on the geography of the plants of 
any particular country, applying it as a parallel to the term 
Flora, which has been used for a long time for a systeniatie 
description of the orders, genera, and species of any given tract.
It is in the ' Cybele ' that we have his plans for registering the 
details of plant-distribution brought out and used in their full 
development.
These of course are so familiar to most of those 
who will read this notice that it seems almost a work of super- 
erogation to explain them.
To each individual species he applies, 
as it were, four different measuring scales, each adapted to 
register its distribution from a diflereiit point of view.
To record 
its range of station he uses a series of adjectival terms, such as 
agrestal, paludal, glareal, sylvestral, &c.
To register the hori- 
zontal distribution of the species he divides Britain into eighteen 
provinces, founded as far as possible on river-drainage.
York- 
shire is the only county that claims a province to itself.
The 
Peninsula province includes the three counties of Cornwall 
Devonshire, and Somerset, and so on through the series.
He 
traces the distribution of the species through these eighteen 
provinces by giving under each name a line of figures showing 
MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.
XV 
in  which province that particular species grows.
For fuller 
detail, to be used in local work, these provinces were afterwards 
subdivided into 38 subprovinces and 112 counties or vice- 
counties.
The vertical range of the species he registers by 
means of two regions of chmate and altitude, each divided into 
three zones.
The Agrarian region includes that part of Britain 
in which it is possible, so far as climate is concerned, to cultivate 
the cereal grasses and potatoes.
It of course includes the whole 
area of the island at sea-level from north to south ; and the 
hills up to about 600 yards in the North of England, and 400 
yards in the North of Scotland.
All above this is mountain, 
heather, and rock, with a temperature like that of the low levels 
in Arctic latitudes.
This upper region he called the Arctic 
region, and the zones Superarctic, Midarctic, and Inferarctic, 
Superagrarian, Midagrarian and Inferagrarian.
The Lifer- 
agrarian zone, for instance, includes all the low-level country 
south of the estuaries of the Humber and the Mersey.
He 
estimated that average annual temperature sinks at the rate 
of one degree Fahrenheit for every hundred yards of elevation, 
and that in Britain the range of mean annual temperature is 
from 52° to 34°, which makes a zone to be equal on an average 
to three degrees of Fahrenheit's scale.
Then he deals with each 
species from a historical point of view, classifying them into 
Natives, Colonists, Denizens, and Aliens, according to whether 
they appear to have come into the country without man's help, 
or to have been introduced by human agency, acting directly or 
indhectly.
And finally he separates out the species into their 
types of distribution, British, English, Atlantic, Germanic, 
Scotch, or Highland, according to whether they preponderate in 
some particular part of the island or are dispersed, broadly 
speaking, through the whole of it.
In a ' Supplement of the 
Cybele,' which came out in 1860, the horizontal range of the 
species is traced out through the thirty-eight subprovinces.
In 
the three volumes of the ' Compendium ' (1868-1870) a mass of 
additional information obtained after the publication of the 
XVI MEMOIK OP THE AUTHOE.
' Oybele ' is incorporated, and the distribution of the species 
beyond the bounds of Britain worked out.
And finally, m 
' Topographical Botany,' 2 volumes, 1873-1874, the horizontal 
distribution of the species is traced through the 112 vice- 
counties.
Altogether the earlier small octavos run on to about 
sixteen hundred pages, and the later volumes of larger size to 
four thousand pages ; these were printed entirely at his own 
expense and in most cases never offered for sale at all, but given 
away to the public scientific Hbraries and those correspondents 
who had helped him by sending catalogues or specimens, or who 
were known to him as being interested in the subject.
Cautious and unspeculative as he was to an extreme degree in 
his theoretical conclusions in scientific matters, there was one 
point bearing upon the evolution theory which attracted his 
attention from an early date, and on which he strongly advocated 
the views which are now generally current long before Darwin 
made them popular.
At a time when all our leading systematists 
were dealing with species as if they possessed a clearly-marked 
and definitely separable individuality, their uncertainty and 
their inequality formed one of his favourite theses.
An article 
on the subject, which he wrote in the ' Phytologist ' for 1845, 
will be found reprinted in ' Cybele,' vol.
iv., p.
59, and a fuU 
statement of his views on this subject in ' Cybele,' vol.
iv., 
pp.
35 to 52.
At one time he was a copious contributor to the 
periodical journals which take Botany as a subject partially or 
wholly.
His principal papers are to be found in Loudon's 
' Magazine of Natural History,' in Sir WiUiam Hooker's 'London 
Journal of Botany,' in the old series of the ' Phytologist,' which 
dates from 1841 to 1854, and in the earlier volumes of this 
Journal.
In the 'Phytologist' he wrote not unfrequently 
reviews and anonymous notices, but in his case anonymity is a 
very thin veil.
His last word in print was the letter to Mr.
Newbould on the subject of the authorship of third edition 
of ' English Botany,' which appeared at page 80 of this Journal 
for March of the present year.
MBMOIB OP THE AUTHOB.
He was the mainstay of the London Botanical Society, as 
Dr. J.
B. Gray and Mr. Gr.
B. Dennes have borne testimony in 
print.
He did not join for some time after its commencement, 
but for seyeral years he was the only good critical botanist 
amongst the resident London members, and all the parcels were 
sent down to Thames Ditton for him to supervise.
When 
Dr. Boswell undertook the curatorship, this of course was no 
longer necessary.
The ' London Catalogue of British Plants ' is 
now in its seventh edition.
The earlier editions were, I believe, 
almost entirely drawn up by Mr. Watson, whilst in the later 
ones he had Dr. Boswell's aid.
The only excursion beyond the 
bounds of Britain which he ever undertook was a trip to the 
Azores in the summer.
of 1842.
From their position far out in 
the Atlantic, about midway between Europe and America, the 
flora and fauna of these islands possess a peculiar interest.
A 
surveying expedition was planned by the English Government, 
and the war steamer Styx detailed for the service, and notice 
was given to Sir Wm. Hooker that a botanist would be allowed 
a place on board if he would himself defray all the necessary 
expenses incident on his explorations.
Sir William communi- 
cated with Mr. Watson, and he undertook the post on these 
conditions.
Though much hampered in carrying out his plans 
by the martinet ways of the captain, and being able to visit only 
four out of the nine larger islands, he made a collection of 338 
out of a total flora of under 500 species, about one hundred 
of which were not known in the group before, several of them 
being new to science.
Through this visit he introduced into 
cultivation several of the more interesting endemic Azoric 
plants, such as Campanuli Vidalii and Myosotis azorica.
When 
in 1870 Mr. Godman planned a complete natural history of th^ 
Archipelago, Mr. Watson wrote for him the botanical part of the 
work, which is not only valuable as a scientific production, but 
is in style eminently characteristic of its author.
During his early years, long before railway times, he made 
many excursions in different parts of Britain, especially for the 
XVlll MEMOIR OP THE AUTHOR.
purpose of tracing out the vertical range of plants in the moun- 
tainous districts, a suhject to which very little attention had 
been previously paid.
A great part of what is given in the 
' Oybele ' under this head is the result of his own field-work.
For the last thirty years of his life he travelled very little, and 
for many years before his death never spent a night away from 
his own house.
For many years he sent regularly to the 
Botanical Society and Exchange Club a large supply of the rarer 
plants that came within the range of his daily excursions, 
selected and dried with characteristic care.
His own British 
herbarium is a large one, and possesses a special relation to the 
' Cybele,' as he laid in the specimens mainly to exhibit not so 
much the characters as the geographical range of the species.
When ' Topographical Botany ' was finished, he entertained at 
one time the notion of making a ' Nunc dimittis ' bonfire of his 
herbarium, but we all of us, from Sir Joseph Hooker and 
M. Alphonse DeCandoUe downward, protested energetically 
against the carrying out of the idea, and it was finally settled 
that on his death it should be offered to Kew. One of the 
special instructions which he has given to me, as his executor, 
is that upon his death all his botanical manuscripts were to be 
burnt.
At one time he gathered together and cultivated a large 
number of the rarer and more critical British plants, and to the 
end his garden was to him a great source of pleasitre and 
interest.
A biographical notice would certainly be very incom- 
plete which did not take count of his merits as a writer of letters.
His letters were always thought out carefully, and so full of 
matter so pithily expressed that, as one who is peculiarly well 
qualified to judge remarked at his funeral, a selection from them 
would be worth publishing on literary grounds alone.
Next to Botany, the subject that most engaged his attention 
was Phrenology.
"While studying at Edinburgh he made the 
acquaintance of George Combe (whose estimate of his character 
and capabilities I have already cited), and, through him, of his 
brother Andrew and Dr. Spurzheim.
This is not the place to 
MEMOIK OF THE AUTHOR.
XIX 
attempt an appreciation of his work in this field, and I am not 
in the least qualified to deal with the subject.
He always main- 
tained that Phrenology rested on a sound scientific basis.
His 
two phrenological works are ' Statistics of Phrenology, being an 
account of the progress and present state of that science in the 
British Isles,' published in 1836, and a controversial pamphlet 
in reply to an attack by Mr. Scott on Combe's ' Constitution of 
Man.' He edited the 'Phrenological Journal' from 1830 to 
1840, and wrote various articles in it at other times.
His reason 
for giving up the editorship, as stated in ' Men of the Time,' is 
so characteristic that I cannot forbear citing it.
" For some years he edited the ' Phrenological Journal,' but 
eventually withdrew from it, on finding that grave offence was 
given to more zealous advocates of that study, through his too 
freely pointing out the imperfect character of its evidences and 
definitions, and the ne«d of more exact investigations." 
In early life he devoted a good deal of attention to Entomology, 
and made a collection of upwards of a thousand British and 
eight hundred exotic species of insects.
As he gradually settled 
down to Geographical Botany, he gave up insect collecting, and 
in 1834 sent the collection to Sir J.
D. Hooker, who was thirteen 
or fourteen years his junior.
It is interesting to notice that our 
leading botanists of the present time.
Sir Joseph Hooker, Pro- 
fessor Babington, Dr. Boswell, and Mr. Watson, were all ardent 
entomologists before they finally settled down to Botany.
He was a man of great individuaUty and of many-sided 
character, and I have often been amused to note how differently 
different people estimated him, according to the parts of his dis- 
position with which they had been brought in contact.
From a 
scientific point of view, he finished the task which in early hfe 
he set himself to accomplish with admirable perspicacity and 
completeness.
When M.
Alphonse DeCandoUe lately made out 
a list of botanical epochs, he counted the publication of the 
' Cybele ' as one of them.
But in some ways it was not the best 
part of his disposition that his published writings show.
With 
XX MEMOIK OF THE AUTflOB.
him botanical geography is not simply a gathering together 
of statistics, and a working out of impersonal theoretical con- 
clusions.
His fondness for character-analysis led him so readily 
from plants to people that he did not always remember how it 
might pain a man to see his little weakness and shortcomings 
pilloried in print.
He loved an argument like a man who can 
ride well loves a gallop on a spirited horse.
He was accurate 
and clear-headed to a wonderful degree ; he had a splendid 
memory, he was unimaginative, and never worked in a hurry; 
and all this made him impatient of other people's bungling and 
blundering.
He was a pioneer, and in making a firm macadam- 
ised road he had much rubbish to shovel away.
He was a man 
of warm temper and strong prejudices ; and if he once got a 
notion that a man was radically careless or conceited, he did not 
spare to slash at him in print whenever his name turned u|p.
One of his pet prejudices was an objection to new names for 
plants, and the name-givers were a favourite target for his 
arrows.
And thus it comes that those old papers in the ' Phy- 
tologist ' and the tail-paragraphs in the geographical books are 
often full of lively personal interest.
" Ah !
" he said more than 
once during the latter years of his life, 'as we talked over these 
things on the quiet Sunday afternoons, "they read too bitter.
You don't know what it is to have a large organ of destruotive- 
ness." 
But this same slashing critic was in some ways almost mor- 
bidly self-distrustful and considerate of other people's feelings.
Although he wrote so much, he never seemed to like that his 
books should be sold ; and so several of them never found their 
way into the hands of the booksellers at all, but he gave all the 
copies away, and never recouped himself one penny of the cost 
of paper, print, and binding.
He had a scruple against ever 
inviting any one to pay him a visit, lest they should be bored ; 
and sometimes when a botanist of a younger generation, who 
was all the while looking up to him as a great master in science, 
would venture to call uninvited, he would, after devoting several 
MEMOIE OF THE AUTHOR.
XXI 
hours of his time to instructing' and entertaining him, thank 
him on parting for the visit, in a way to which it was very 
difficult on the spur of the moment to make any suitable 
response, because it was so unexpected.
The encouragement 
and help which he gave to many young beginners in Botany is 
remembered by them with feelings of gratitude and affection.
On this point I can myself insist with emphasis, for when I left 
school and became immersed in business engagements, and was 
surrounded by friends and relations who knew and cared nothing 
about Botany, I should probably have drifted away from it 
altogether if I had not made his acquaintance.
In answering 
letters, in helping his correspondents to name critical plants and 
fill up gaps in their herbaria, in referring back to his notes and 
catalogues (as he was asked to do so often in his latter years), to 
explain the details on the faith of which he had stated some 
record in general terms, his patience and assiduity were un- 
bounded, and no one but those who lived with him knew what a 
large proportion of his time was often occupied in this way.
In 
helping by money to the full extent of' his pecuniary means, and 
by judicious counsel, such of his friends and acquaintance as 
fell into illness and misfortune, his liberality was very great.
Such traits as these can, from the nature of the case, live only 
in the memory of one here and another there who knew him by 
personal contact.
His funeral took place at the rustic clmrch of the village with 
which he has been so long identified, on the afternoon of Wed- 
nesday, August 3rd.
The closed shutters of the village shops 
testified to the respect in which he.
was held by neighbours, and, 
in addition to his relatives, the following botanists resident in 
London and the neighbourhood were present: — Sir J.
D. 
Hooker, the Hon. J.
L. Warren, the Eev. W.
W. Newbould, 
Prof.
Lawson, Messrs.
Baker, Blow, Boulger, Britten, Dyer, 
H. Groves, and B.
D. Jackson.
J. G.
BAKEE.
PS.
— Copies of the excellent photograph which accompanied 
the foregoing Memoir when it appeared in the ' Journal of 
Botany ' may be obtained from Messrs.
Maull & Fox, Piccadilly, 
London.
— J.
G. B.
INTEODUCTORY EXPLANATIONS.
In former works by the writer of this volume a wish was 
repeatedly expressed, that his records shewing distribution of 
plants, might be carried downwards from provinces into the 
more copious details of county habitats ; at the same time, 
indicating also the personal testimony, in reliance on which the 
distribution of the plants could be so set forth.
The citation of 
such personal testimony would equally corroborate their pro- 
vincial distribution, as previously set forth in the ' Cybele 
Britannica ' and connected works ; in which the counties have 
been usually treated in provincial and sub-provincial groups, 
not singly or further divided into vice-counties, as they are 
now to be taken here.
For example, in here stating personal 
authorities for the counties of (say) Cornwall and Devon and 
Somerset, one or two for each county, three to six such autho- 
rities will thus be adduced for the existence of the plant in the 
province of the Peninsula ; also one or two for the dispersed 
existence of it in each of the three Peninsula sub-provinces.
It is to be understood, indeed, that one chief purpose in 
entering upon the comital details, is that of doing somewhat 
tardy justice to those botanists whose labelled specimens and 
manuscript notes and local lists have often proved so useful to 
the Author, while writing the ' Cybele Britannica ' and allied 
works.
He has always felt it incumbent upon him, and due 
to those valued correspondents (alas, too many of them now no 
more) that some method should be found for at any rate par- 
tially putting on permanent record his great obligations to them.
To do so, is to pass down to a succeeding generation the clearest 
evidence, not only on which of the botanists of the current 
period the -progress of topographical botany has so largely 
XXIV INTRODUCTION.
depended, but also on which of them the Author of the ' Cybele 
Britannica ' has found reason to place a preferential reliance, on 
the ground of scientific competence and moral trust ; the latter 
sometimes unfortunately wanting in cases where the former 
might otherwise have sufficed.
On page 178 of a ' Supplement to the Compendium of Cybele 
Britannica,' an intimation was reluctantly given, that the 
projected work on county distribution might likely be relin- 
quished, and for reasons there mentioned.
That intimation 
drew forth from several botanical friends their expressions of 
regrets at the probable failure thus to complete the contemplated 
series of books on the geographical and topographical botany 
of Britain.
It has been forcibly purged that a present summary 
of comital distribution would certainly prove serviceable here- 
after, and so far as it should reach, even although anticipated 
events might suddenly occur to prevent its entire completion.
To this argument must be added the further inducement, that 
even a fragment of the projected work, although never com- 
pleted, would to some extent single out and show the names 
of those botanists, on whose aid antecedent works have so much 
depended.
Another and larger section of botanical riends, particularly 
among those who take the highest positions of botanical autho- 
rity, very strongly objected against the avowed intention to 
destroy the Author's herbarium of British plants, as mentioned 
in connexion with the probable abandonment of the work on 
county distribution.
The two questions are connected together 
more closely than may be apparent on first thought ; at any 
rate, so connected together in the writer's own ideas and plans.
While a work on county distribution can be proceeded with, so 
long at least the herbarium must be preserved, in order to cite 
from it the personal testimony afforded by its numerous labels.
The reasons for its early destruction, too, may be said to become 
lessened in proportion to the progress made in recording county 
habitats, because the records themselves will frequently show 
INTEODUCTION.
XXV 
the proper present nomenclature of specimens differently labelled 
in the herbarium.
Moveover, in looking regularly through the 
collection for such a purpose, some alterations or explanations 
would probably be made, such as might never be made without 
that sort of compulsory opportunity.
Still, the inclination to 
destroy it remains unchanged ; and the reasons for so doing 
appear valid and cogent.* 
The existing peculiarities of the collection, which would 
render it liable to be misunderstood or misused, if left without 
counter-check, may be briefly adverted to here, as bearing 
intimately on the object of this volume, and more particularly 
in its citation of personal testimony derived from labelled speci- 
mens.
The herbarium has been in course, of collection during 
many years; the time ranging: from the student life of the 
collector to old age, say, through -the dates of 1830 — 1880 and 
something over.
Gradually, during those two score years and 
upwards, many changes have been made in the nomenclature 
of the plants ; and those name-changes not seldom arising out 
of changed views on the limits and distinctions of species.
Thus, 
the names entered in the herbarium often will require to be 
construed with strict reference to dates, and by botanists 
sufficiently familiar with the botanical histories of the species 
to which they are applied.
Young botanists are always more 
or less deficient in this requisite ; and the conceited and self- 
confident among them naturally misinterpret their own mental 
vacuities into errors on the part of the labelling herbalist.
In various instances a name formerly used by common con- 
sent, and thus designating a plant for the time being, has been 
subseqixently transferred to quite a distinct plant ; another name 
being then bestowed upon the plant formerly so designated.
And as we cannot teach or persuade every botanist forthwith to 
understand and accept the change of nomenclature, there comes 
* Several years after this was written, Mr. Watson presented his Herbarium 
to the National Collection at Eew, and after his death it was removed there, 
and is now kept in the same room as that of Mr. Borrer.
INTEODUCTION.
an intermediate or transition period ; during which the name is 
still used in the earlier sense or application by some botanists, 
while it is apphed in the later sense by other botanists.
And thus, 
in a collection gradually accumulating during a series of years, 
' and drawn together from many sources, the very same plant wUl 
appear labelled under different names, or different plants will 
have the same name applied to them.
Such cases as these 
cannot rightly be called blunders in nomenclature either by 
sender or by receiver, although they might readily be supposed 
so on a cursory glance at the labels, without taking special note 
of their dates, -with the explanations which the dates ought 
to suggest ; usually would suggest to the experienced botanist, 
who had watched the gradual name-changes through a long 
life-time.
An example may render this more clear.
In the time ot 
Hudson and Smith, and even several years later, the name of 
Oenanthe pimpinelloides was in general use to designate the plant 
now better known to most of us by the name of Oenanthe 
Lachenalii; the former name being now as generally given to 
another plant abundantly different.
Of course, specimens 
labelled " pimpineUoides " in (say) 1820 — 1840 would very 
usually be the same with specimens labelled "Lachenalii" in 
(say) 1850 — 1870 ; whUe, during the intermediate years 1840 — 
1850 and even later, some botanists would assign the one name, 
some botanists would assign the other name, to specimens of 
the plant in question.
The difference here, although a sort of 
misnomer, would not properly imply error on the part of either 
set of labellers ; it might arise simply from one of them adher- 
ing to the nomenclature of (say) Smith, and the other of them 
adopting the altered nomenclature of (say) Babington.
Another mode in which the right reading of a name turns on 
the date of its use, arises out of the modern tendency to divide 
and subdivide the species accepted as such by our predecessors.
When aggregate species ABC comes to be divided into three 
segregate species A and B and C, the old name which desio-- 
INTRODUCTION.
XXVU 
nated the aggregate, is too usually retained with a changed and 
restricted meaning to designate A only ; other names being 
found for B and G.
Equally in this second class of cases a 
confusion of nomenclature arises.
The aggregate species ABC 
may chance to be represented in an herbarium by specimens 
of any one, or of two, or of all three segregates ; placed there 
under one and the same name, that is, under the original name 
which subsequently has come to mean A only ; while at a later 
date other specimens of B and may have been placed^ with 
the former, and then labelled under their newer names.
In 
appearance, at some after time, there will be great confusion 
among the plants and names, if examined by succeeding 
botanists unprepared to apply the necessary explanations by 
reference to past dates and name-changings.
An example may again be useful in illustration of this.
At 
past dates, say 1830 — 1840, the name Potamogeton natam may 
have been written, without any real blunder or misnomer, on a 
label attached to a specimen of Potamogeton polygonifolius, or on 
another connected with a specimen of Potamogeton plantagineus.
These labels were correct according to the ideas of the species 
formerly accepted, and even stiU so accepted as lately as the 
date of Bentham's Handbook in 1858.
But at more recent 
dates, say between 1860—1870, and tested only by the views 
about these plants subsequently accepted among Us, the labels 
might appear to be errors of names ; that is, unless the former 
triple application of the one name natans were steadily kept in 
recollection.
A herbarium formed during the years 1830 — 1870 
may thus represent any diversities of nomenclature currently 
used in books during the same period, or even long antecedently, 
according to the descriptive books relied on by the labellers.
Besides those two sources of misnomer — or, discords connected 
with dates, rather than real errors of name— there have been 
purposely glued into the herbarium, here referred to, not a few 
actual errors of name on the labels with specimens ; some of 
them very wide errors indeed, Two useful ends were sought in 
xxviii iNTi?EODUCTioM.
thus preserving specimens sent with wrong names on their 
labels.
First, when the locality has been actually recorded in 
books for the wrong plant, the contradiction between label and 
specimen will yield the clue to correct the mis-records ; and in 
this way a mislabelled specimen may be found more valuable 
than one rightly labelled.
In other oases, when several labels 
•meet together, all alike assigning the same wrong specific or 
varietal name to several specimens of the same species or 
variety, the inference becomes unavoidable and the suspicion 
warranted, that a like misnomer may have occurred in other 
analogous instances, where now only a printed record remains 
to guide our judgment.
Again, let an example or two be given in illustration of such 
wide misnomers.
In the herbarium under consideration there is 
a specimen of Stellaria graminea, sent to the Botanical Society 
of London labelled as Linum catharticum ; and more strangely, 
the label is initialed by the then Curator and Secretary of the 
Society (both deceased) in order to certify the correctness of the 
name.
Of course, this specimen with its label finds place in 
the herbarium simply as an instructive curiosity ; but how easy 
for some self-conceited or malicious detractor to make a parade 
of his own superiority by pretending to correct an obvious 
blunder as if it had been shared in by the owner of the 
herbarium !
A rather curious form of mislabelling arises through some 
similarity of name in sound or in meaning.
For instance, 
Poterium Sanguisorba mislabelled Sanguisorba officinalis, and 
that done by a very good and well-known botanist.
So, an 
example of Potentilla rupestris until lately might be seen labelled 
as Potentilla alpestris, and localised on the Breadalbane Moun- 
tains; the specimen and locality attributed to Dr. Greville.
The false locality got into print during the life-time of that 
accurate and very estimable botanist, ,who disclaimed it alto- 
gether.
The specimen had come to the Botanical Society of 
London, through the hands of a lady equally a member of the 
JNiRODUOTION.
XXIX 
Edinburgh Society.
Either by herself, or by the distributor of 
the latter society, a Welsh specimen of Potentilla rupestris had 
been substituted for a Scottish specimen of Potentilla alpestris.
The lady alluded to certainly distributed numerous specimens 
of other plants which had assuredly never been gathered in the 
localities written on their labels, and several of these apparently 
had come to her hands through the Botanical Society of 
Edinburgh.
Her labels will be ignored in this book.
The special case under allusion, be it kept in recollection, is 
that of an extensive British herbarium, -gradually collected 
together during a period of forty years and upwards, and 
contributed to by botanists of widely unequal age and botanical 
experience, and whose own labels are usually glued down with 
the specimens.
These are circumstances tending much to 
increase the discrepancies of nomenclature, and to endanger 
mistakes in consulting the herbarium.
Unless a posthumous 
inspector of it be duly prepared to examine the specimens and 
labels with constant reference to the received views about 
species and their nomenclature, currently in use at and before 
its many dates, he will himself almost inevitably misread 
differences of name into errors of name.
And further, on 
seeing various specimens preserved there positively under 
erroneous names, — and not aware that in most of such 
instances the misnomers were actually the chief inducement to 
preserve the specimens, — he may choose to attribute to igno- 
rance on the part of the former owner of the herbarium, what 
would be more truly attributable to the imperfect character of 
his own acquaintance with that owner's motives, or.
with the 
past history of the species.
A conscientious inspector might 
be unwittingly misled in such instances.
An unscrupulous one 
might very willingly be so, in order to get a plausible oppor- 
tunity for announcing pretended corrections, or for showing off 
his own detective cleverness.
To suggest this latter supposition, 
is expressing a low estimate of the consciences of some of the 
botanists who have most distinguished themselves by raking up 
XXX INTRODUCTION.
little things out of old herbaria; but it is an estimate sadly 
founded on facts, — on acts done and statements printed.
Certain 
botanists, who now seek to make themselves thus conspicuous, 
appear unable to understand the difference between criticism 
freely expressed, and criticism falsely expressed ; perversely 
substituting the latter under pretence of the former.
Unfortunately, in mounting specimens in the herbarium here 
specially referred to, as they were received from their collectors 
or donors, the importance of glueing down also the actual labels 
which accompained the specimens, was at first not sufficiently 
recognized ; and thus some of the names (misnomers included) 
are entered there in the receiver's own handwriting while 
fastening down the specimens ; such names not always written 
within inverted commas, although usually thus written to 
remind that the specimens came so named, right or wrong as 
the case might be.
Altogether, a good many explanatory notes 
and some corrections would be required in the herbarium before 
its present owner could prudently leave it as a posthumous 
collection for other eyes and hands.
To return from a digression, though one more explanatory 
than irrelevant.
Admitted the desirability of making some 
printed record of the local facts shown on the labels of speci- 
mens in the writer's herbarium ; also, in his manuscript notes 
and in local lists furnished to him by other botanists, several of 
them now deceased.
This being admitted, — How can a record 
of presently ascertained plant-distribution, carried into the 
details of counties, be effected within any moderate compass of 
text ?— or, even be compelled at all, with approximate accuracy 
and completeness, in a short span of time ?
What will be the 
-number of pages absolutely necessary for carrying out the 
object; economy in the money cost, and also in the time of 
writing and printing, both taken into account.
Botk must be 
found by the writer himself, seeing that he will not print any 
sale copies of a work so uncertain of reaching a completion • 
INTKODUCTION.
XXXI 
and which, moreover, must unavoidably include a full share of 
the errors and oversights inseparable from a first attempt of its 
kind, and one brought out under very unfavourable conditions 
of age and leisure.
Doubtless, all botanists of liberal thought 
will look chiefly to what a first such compilation may accomplish 
under difiicult circumstances, not to what it leaves non-accom- 
plished ; but liberality of thought is far from universal.
In the ' Compendium of Cybele Britannica ' the Index of 
names, specific and varietal, counts up to 2600 ; of which (say) 
100 may be only second names for the same identities.
But 
numerous varietal names of ferns and grasses, of brambles and 
briers, of mints and hawkweeds, and of some smaller genera, 
do not appear in that Index ; so that we should be counting 
considerably under the full figure in taking only 2500 named 
species and varieties for the alleged fiora of Britain.
Say, that we should not much exceed the mark by taking it 
at 3000, including all the named varieties, all the yearly 
increasing casual plants, and all others improperly reported as 
quasi-wild in Britain.
The number of counties, along with the 
subdivision of the larger counties into vice-counties, amounts to 
112 ; many of the commoner plants occurring in aU or nearly 
all of these counties.
Perhaps we may fairly take 50 counties 
and vice-counties, something under the half, as an average 
number for each plant.
Multiply the one figure by the other, 
3000 by 50, and the result would appear in the fearful number 
of 150,000 special items or facts, real or imaginary; each of 
these items consisting of the name of a county or vice-county, 
along with the name pf at least one botanist selected as voucher 
or testifier to the fact.
It is difficult to conceive any method by which these double 
names could be clearly quoted, without allowing on the average 
a half line of text to each pair of them.
Now, 75,000 lines 
printed at the close rate of' 40 lines to a page, over and above 
the space needed for plant-names, would require 1875 pages of 
text, without reckoning in the extra pages further required for 
INTEODUCTION.
necessary Explanations, Index, &c.
Altogether, a work so 
inclusive might run up to four volumes of 500 pages each ; the 
expense of printing which would-be much too great for the 
object sought ; besides the adverse consideration, that it would 
never attain to a completion.
The work cannot be undertaken 
at all, unless under some plan which will reduce' this terrible 
length into the compass of a single volume at first, with a pos- 
sible second for plants discarded from the first volume.
Such 
was the division of the plants into two categories, in lately 
wnting the three successive Parts of the ' Compendium of 
Cybele Britannica ; ' so that the two earlier Parts would have 
formed a completed work of themselves, even although not 
followed by a Third Part, nor this again by a ' Supplement.' 
In yet more lately treating of plant-distribution by secondary 
provinces, or sub-provincial groups of counties, in that ' Sup- 
plement ' to the last-named work, a closer condensation was 
efi'eoted in a manner which cannot here be resorted to for the 
counties.
The needed condensation was there effected by 
omitting references to personal or individual authorities, with 
some few occasional exceptions, — by resorting to the nos.
instead of the names of the sub-provinces, — and by so placing 
the little word "to" as to make it represent any continuous 
series of nos.
between the two extremes of 1 and 38.
But in 
this present work the object specially in view, is that of 
recording the names of personal authorities or witnesses ; con- 
nected also with the names of counties and vice-counties, lest 
the longer series of 112 nos., instead of names for the latter, 
should be found to over-tax and confuse memory in their 
practical application.
A reduced selection of the plants to be 
treated, and a reduced selection of the counties to be nominally 
enumerated for them, offer the only available modes for bringing 
the work within the narrowed bulk of a single volume, to which 
any second is unlikely to be added.
A selection of the plants can be made by limiting them 
to the more generally known and accepted species, whether 
INTBODUOTION.
aggregates or segregates ; excluding for the present most of the 
varieties, along with the aliens, casuals, errors, &o.
A selection 
of the counties may be made Tdj limiting the enumeration, of 
their names to those of counties from which the plant has been 
reported on fair authority, as being presumably indigenous 
there, denizens and colonists here ranking with truer natives.
Other counties can be sufficiently shown by their nos.
only; 
that is, those supposed to have been erroneously reported for the 
plant, and those into which it is believed to have been intro- 
duced by human agency alone.
Those in support of which 
the recorded authority appears to be insufficient for scientific 
reliance will be left out or grouped with the former.
Any 
botanist who has glanced at the array of enclosed nos.
in the 
recently printed ' Supplement ' above mentioned, will have seen 
how numerous a portion of the recorded habitats there came 
under one or other of the two categories, — the non-indigenous 
( ) or the supposed errors [ ] .
These preliihinary observations on the end sought, and the 
difficidties in attaining it, will facilitate an understanding of the 
methods resorted to for that purpose ; — here resorted to, not 
because they are the best possible, but because they appear to 
be practically best under the circumstances.
Except in the 
cases of the commoner plants, all the counties wiU be enu- 
merated by name and no.
under each species treated; that is, 
all which have been found recorded on authority sufficiently 
reliable, and without being too exacting in the test ; a change 
to nos.
only being made for sake of brevity under the conditions 
mentioned above.
It is to be distinctly understood, however, that the enumera- 
tion of counties does not undertake or profess to be absolutely 
exhaustive of all records of the kind.
On the contrary, it is to 
be understood as including only those which came under the 
compiler's consideration while writing the ' Cybele Britannica ' 
and its Compendium ; with the further addition of others 
e 
XXXIV INTRODUCTION.
directly brought to Ms notice on good personal authority at any- 
later date.
The name of a personal authority or witness for the county is 
added from one of the three following sources.
First, the 
labels of specimens (sp.) still preserved in the Compiler's 
herbarium, or which have passed through his hands for 
inspection.
In the former of these two cases the specimen 
may have reached the herbarium through intermediate persons, 
the donor and collector not being identical ; and as the space 
at command cannot admit two or three names, sometimes it 
may be the name of donor, sometimes that of collector, which 
is cited; usually the latter.
Second, other manuscript (ms.) 
notes of localities communicated by correspondents, on whose 
good faith and prevailing accuracy due reliance can be placed.
These notes have frequently been sent in the form of remarks 
in letters, and some of them afterwards withrawn or corrected; 
and it is possible that, in now reverting to them for use here, 
the first remark may turn up again apart from the forgotten 
correction.
Third, local catalogues (cat.) of plants drawn up 
by botanists resident in or visiting the places to which the 
catalogues are made to relate.
These lists have usually been 
made out by marking in a copy of the ' London Catalogue 
of British Plants ' the names of all those actually seen by 
the marker within the area under consideration ; separate 
marks being used to distinguish between the indigenous and 
introduced plants.
No fixed rule can be laid down as to precedence in the 
citations ; perhaps most usually a preference will be given 
to the " sp." But "cat." may often come more readily to 
hand, and thus be cited instead, without always implying 
that no specimen has been seen from the county.
The printer 
is instructed to leave out the abbreviations (sp.
ms.
oat.) if 
want of space in the half line may render such an omission 
necessary.
Only a single selected authority can be cited 
within the space allotted; although in many cases there may 
INTRODUCTION.
XXXV 
be several manuscript authorities in addition to others already 
in print elsewhere.
Further, the sign of certainty (!) will follow the names of 
counties in which the plant has been seen by the Compiler 
himself, and some note of the fact kept as an aid to memory.
This abbreviation will double the testifiers to several of the 
counties, and without any real increase of text.
It must 
often be omitted, however, through failure of memory or 
absence of memorandum.
The occasional exchange to italic 
letters will indicate a decided suspicion that the plant is non- 
indigenous in the county so distinguished, neither native nor- 
sufficiently established and constant to be properly taken into 
the category of denizen or colonist.
The obelisk sign (t) 
affixed after the name of a botanist, will signify that he men- 
tions or marks the plant as being likely an introduction ; 
but individual botanists apply the mark so unequally or 
dissimilarly, one compared with another, that a free leave of 
choice must be taken here in the addition or omission of it ; 
the more so, because the alternative signs (* t) are reduced 
to the single one (t).
The query (?) will indicate more or less 
of doubt or uncertainty.
Printed books will be referred to so seldom and exceptionally 
that it may be taken for a fixed rule (not quite invariably 
• adhered to) that only original personal authorities wUl be cited, 
and these shewn by manuscripts in the compiler's own 
possession ; and the counties which can be so vouched wiU 
be seen to be numerous.
Those names of counties which are 
unconnected with the name of some botanist, or by the sign 
of certainty (!) above explained, must be understood to rest 
solely on some such authority announced elsewhere.
Space 
and time sufficing, some explanations concerning those autho- 
rities may possibly be appended after the detail of counties.
Published works of course are open to any else, equally as 
to the compiler of this book; and those who require their 
personal authorities can consult the local Floras and other 
XXXVl lNTllOD0Cl!lON.
publications for them, equally as done by the writer of this 
book.
Usually, the personal witnesses, as cited by surnames 
herein, will be amply sufficient to shew and prove the true 
area of distribution apart from undue extension through errors, 
or through reprehensible efforts to represent artificial habitats 
as natural or indigenous ones.
Eeferences to books are advisedly omitted.
The quarter line 
of space, available after the name of county, will commonly 
suffice for the citation of a single surname ; although the same 
short space would prove insufficient for surnames accompanied 
by book references in extenso : — for instance, such references 
as these : 
Hiern, in Jour.
Bot. vol.
iii.
p. 328.
Hemsley, in Jour.
Bot. vol.
vii.
p. 263.
Forster, in Jour.
Bot. 1867, p.
76 [73] .
Wintle, in Jour.
Bot. 1867, p.
279.
Gibson, in Jour.
Bot. vol.
vi.
p. 319.
Unfortunately, a foolish declaration has been set forth in the 
Journal of Botany (partly under the editorial control of Mr.
J. G.
Baker) that citations of books more abbreviated than 
above shewn are insufficient for botanical service.
Thus, in 
the present case, where only a quarter line or less is available, 
the guilt of "insufficiently"' quoting must be avoided by the 
counter rule of not quoting journals or other books at all ; ' 
resting content wi.th those surnames only, which are uncon- 
nected with volumes and pages.
If this present work should attain an enduring completeness, 
some botanists of the future will find out more practically than 
gratefully, through these advised omissions, that abbreviated 
citations of authorities might have usefully subserved one 
purpose, — say, that of simply showing an authority, — although 
not so full or lengthened as to subserve also every other possible 
purpose for which quotations might be made available, if made 
under the condition of unhmited space for them to be printed 
in extenso.
The narrow-mindedness and the shoit-sightedness 
INTKODUOTION.
XXXVll 
of the Journal's rule should be disclaimed by Mr. Baker him- 
self; it being a rule well adapted only to those writers who 
seek to expand their own minimum additions to science into a 
maximum of printed text ; while it becomes ridiculously inap- 
plicable to those who seek to compress the information they 
include on the opposite principle, on that of making up a 
multum in parvo.
This book is not the Flora of one little county, which has 
to be inflated to a volume of four or five hundred pages, on the 
rake-up and repeat-over-again principle.
On the contrary, its 
leading purpose is to adduce and arrange original personal 
testimony in a very condensed form ; repetitions from books 
being resorted to only where such more direct testimony may 
fail.
If the county so certified afresh had been previously 
recorded on other authority, then the adduced testimony 
becomes so far an added evidence for the correctness of the 
earlier record ; with the further advantage of shewing the 
persistence of the plant in the same habitat or county.
If not 
previously on printed record, then the habitat so testified is of 
course an addition to accumulated knowledge on the subject.
As to mere priority in seeing a plant in a place, the mind which 
can find importance in a matter so small, must itself be a very 
small mind indeed.
It has happened in various instances, that botanists have 
kindly sent to the compiler local lists or manuscript notes, 
and afterwards have themselves given printed currency to the 
same.
In several of these cases the lists and manuscripts will 
still be used, and be quoted here as if original; although in 
some sense they have ceased to be so, and might now be left 
unquoted.
Thus, Professor Lawson gave the compiler a list of 
plants observed in the Isle of Skye by himself and the Eev.
H. E.
Pox, and afterwards printed the same for general use.
In like manner.
Professor Balfour long ago supplied lists of 
plants observed by himself in Isla and Cantire, which were also 
subsequently printed in a periodical.
And the same is the case 
XXXViii INTKODUCTION.
with a list of plants observed by Professor C.
C, Babington in 
Pembrokeshire.
In such cases as these, it would assuredly be 
most unwise to forego the advantage of citing good personal 
authorities for the county habitats, and on no better reason 
than the mere fact that they had already appeared in some 
journal or other book; the addition of which to their names, 
with volume and page also specially shewn, would require a full 
half line or upwards, instead of the quarter line or less here 
actually available.
The individual personal authority being the 
one essential matter, those compiled lists which have been 
founded on the joint testimony of several different botanists, 
whether .printed or still in manuscript alone, obviously cannot 
be quoted.
Unfortunately, the compiler has grounds for 
suspecting that the distinction here specified has not been 
always strictly adhered to by the makers of the local lists 
themselves ; who appear in some very few of the lists to have 
entered plants on hearsay testimony, or even on supposition 
only, and yet entered them as if certainly seen.
He has 
absolutely rejected three marked catalogues on their internal 
evidences of this deception or carelessness; and of course the 
markers were deeply offended.
If a botanical correspondent should deem his name erro- 
neously quoted for any county and plant, it is requested that 
he will at once point out and correct the error.
This should be 
done, whether the error rhay have arisen through a mistake by 
the compiler, or through an inadvertence in the original note or 
label or list of plants sent to him.
Failing any indication to 
the contrary, the compiler must himself be held responsible for 
the nomenclature (sp.) of the plants; the more so, because the 
names on labels have been altered occasionally by his own 
hand ; so that a collector may find himself here credited for 
a species different from the one supposed to have been sent.
Such cases will be the exceptional few ; although the writer's 
own experience and opportunities have told him that not any 
botanist, who labels much, will entirely avoid occasional mis- 
takes and inadvertences in writmg the names of plants.
INTRODUCTION.
XXXIX 
Doubtless local botanists will readily detect errors and over- 
sights, if they will take those counties with the botany of which 
they are most familiar, and regularly note whether such counties 
are named or omitted under each plant known to themselves as 
being found there.
They will thus not only detect what may 
be wrong, but will also see what is still wanting formal record 
towards completing the county list.
It is utterly impossible for 
one single botanist to keep up to all that becomes known about 
the plants and places of each and every county.
No Flora of 
a single county has ever been printed, to which a list of 
"Additions and Corrections'' could not have been made out; 
and that perhaps even before the Flora was fairly through the 
printing office.
A compiler who takes cognizance of 112 
counties and vice-counties should be allowed the same chances 
for errors and oversights multiplied a hundred-fold,— nay, much 
more, since one botanist may know some one county very well, 
while it is impossible that one single botanist can know a 
hundred counties equally well.
Notwithstanding this obvious truth, however, the writer's 
intercourse with other botanists has taught him, that there 
are those among them who conceive it a great feat achieved, 
when they have drawn up an approximately complete list of the 
plants to be found in some single county or even in an area much 
less than that of an average county.
Yet these same botanists 
are surprised, or affect to be surprised, on finding that another 
compilation, which includes a hundred such spaces or upwards, 
should appear to be less approximately complete than their 
own small achievements.
They would fail to understand, for 
instance, that in such a compilatioil as this present one, con- 
cerning itself with all the counties, a hundred oversights or 
omissions would be only the equivalent to a single such defect 
in one of their own county lists ; the difference between the 
respective areas being duly allowed for.
It may be found an 
easy task to bring up the Flora of a single small county to the 
actual date of printing the book ; especially so, if two or three 
Xl INTKODUCTION.
compilers should be busy at the same time on the same book.
And yet it is preposterous on that account to expect of a single 
writer, that he should bring 'up the combined Floras of a 
hundred counties equally to a like late date.
Take an example in illustration of this.
The Flora of Middle- 
sex, almost the smallest of English counties, has five closely 
printed pages of " Additions and Corrections " at the end of it : 
all those petty details, it may be supposed, first becoming known 
to the two industrious compilers of that work while the book was 
actually printing, or they would have been made on their proper 
pages, not entered at the end as A and 0.
The total area 
of Britain is not much below three hundred times the area 
of that one small county ; — less than none at all below, if the 
spaces covered by streets and gardens be allowed for.
At a 
corrresponding ratio of three hundred to one, how many pages 
of "Additions and Corrections" ought to be allowed to the 
manuscript notes and other data collected for this present com- 
pilation ?
Imagine five closely printed pages of " Additions and 
Corrections " multiplied three hundred times !
Say, that the 
five pages include 100 additions or corrections.
Multiply these 
300 times over.
Eesult : — 30,000 additions and corrections, a 
number not likely to be discovered while this book.
is printing.
With regard to the commoner plants, such as Bellis, Calluna, 
Prunella, Corylus, and numerous others, which almost certainly 
occur in every county, and have been actually reported from 
ninety or a hundred of them.
It cannot be held advisable 
to enumerate the long series of county names and authorities 
for these generally found plants; thus adding much to the 
bulk of this work, and exceedingly little to its usefulness.
And 
yet it appears undesirable to leave out of notice entirely any of 
those generally distributed plants ; the more so because, so soon 
as this course should begin to be acted upon, a real practical 
difficulty would spring up in the question, how or where to 
trace the separating lines between common and not common.
Many of the plants which might well be called "common" 
INTRODUCTION.
xli 
in South Britain become decidedly rare iu North Britain : some 
of them even partially rare in Mid Britain ; and it is for these 
plants that the practical difficulty most comes in the way, 
in any endeavour to reduce the bulk of the book.
An alternative presents itself in treating the common 
plants, such as really do occur plentifully in most or all of the 
counties.
The required space can be lessened by shewing the 
counties for which the compiler's notes do not supply any 
direct personal authority, instead of the contrary course.
When a plant is already known to occur (say) in 90 or 100 
counties, it will be a shorter plan to enumerate negatively the 
other 19 or 20 counties, instead of the larger number affirma- 
tively.
Bach "common" plant thus treated will save a full 
page of printed text.
For two of the vice-counties, 74 Wigton and 78 Peebles, we 
have still no records for the commonest species.
For some 
other counties the lists of ascertained "common" plants are 
very incomplete, although not wholly blanks; in example, 
Cardigan, Flint, West Lancashire, Stirling, etc.
To revert to the marked catalogues and other manuscripts.
A list of the exact area to which they severally relate, with any 
connected local or personal explanations, must be postponed to 
the end of the book.
At present it may suffice to observe, that 
the areas of all of them are of course within the county or vice- 
county for which they will be cited.
Some of them relate to 
the whole county or vice-county, while others are restricted to 
a radius of 3 to 10 miles from some town or other fixed centre.
All the catalogues (cat.) are referred to in connexion with the 
names of the botanists by whom they were marked or made 
out.
Unfortunately, some of the earlier catalogues cannot be 
used here, because they relate to areas which take in whole 
counties now treated as two separated vice-counties ; or, because 
they take a border town as a centre, and thus relate to portions 
of two adjoining counties or vice-counties not discriminated in 
/ 
xlii INTEODUOTION.
them.
This is a difficulty which arises also in consulting some 
printed Floras, such as those of Tonbridge and Yarmouth, in 
which the advisability of arranging the localities by their counties 
has been overlooked.
For sake of brevity the surnames only of botanists are 
printed, very seldom with any prefix of title or designation.
The quarter line of available space would necessitate a resort to 
this abbreviation in many instances ; hence it is made the rule 
for all.
An occasional inconvenience attends the practice, in 
cases of the same surname being common to two or more 
botanists.
Generally, when such is the case, the locality wUl 
indicate the true personal identity.
The Nos. prefixed to the names of counties, or substituted 
for them in the case of plants held introduced or to be excluded, 
are the same as shown on the map.
The lines of separation, 
which are taken to divide the larger counties into two or 
(seldom) more vice-counties, cannot be sufficiently made out on 
the small map ; and it may be useful to repeat their description 
from the fourth volume of the original ' Cybele Britannica,' 
where it was adapted to the maps of England and Scotland, 
published under the auspices of the ' Society for the Diffusion 
of Useful Knowledge.' 
" In thus subdividing the counties any natural peculiarities 
were taken, or even well-marked lines traceable on maps, or 
fiudable on the actual ground; such as water-sheds, roads, 
canals, rivers, &o.
— West and East Cornwall are separated by a 
line traced along the high road from Truro, through St. Columb, 
to the inland extremity of Padstow Creek; at the two ends 
of this line, the salt-water completing the' division.
— South and 
North Devon are separated by an imaginary line, adapted to the 
water-shed ; commencing at the Tamar, about midway between 
Tavistock and Launceston ; passing over the ridge of Dartmoor, 
and joining the western canal at Tiverton.
— South and Xorth 
Somerset are separated by a line along the river Parret, from 
INTBODUCTION.
xllli 
Bridgewater to Ilchester ; and thence curving round to the 
northern extremity of Dorset.
— Noi-th and South Wilts are 
separated by a line drawn along the Kennet and Avon canal.
— 
South and North Rants are separated by a line traced along the 
high roads from Winchester westward to Stockbridge, eastward 
to Petersfield ; and continued thence to the borders of Wilts and 
Sussex.
— West and East Sussex are separated by a line traced 
along the high road from Brighton to Cuckfield; thence by 
Crawley to the border of Surrey.
— East and West Kent are 
separated by the river Medway and its tributaries nearly up to 
Staplehurst ; and thence by the high road through Cranbrooke 
to the border of Susses, near Hawkhurst.
— South and North 
Essex are separated by the high road from Waltham and Epping 
to Chelmsford, and thence by the Blackwater river to the coast.
— East and West Suffolk, and East and West Norfolk, are sepa- 
rated by the mathematical line of one east longitude, not a good 
division because traceable on maps only, unseen on the ground.
— East and West Gloucester are separated by the Thames and 
Severn Canal, and by the river Severn from the point of junction 
up to Tewksbury.
— South and North Lincoln are separated by 
the Witham river, from Boston to Lincoln ; thence by the Foss 
Dyke to the border of Nottingham.
— South and West Lancaster 
are separated by the river Eibble.
That more northerly portion 
of Lancashire which is situate to the north-west of the Bay 
of Morecambe, is taken with the Lake Province, and treated as 
a part of Westmoreland.
" The great county of York is first divided into the two sub- 
provinces of East and West Humber, by the rivers Humber, 
Ouse, and Wiske.
South-east and North-east Yorkshire are 
then separated by the political line which divides the East 
Eiding from the rest of the county ; that portion of the Bast 
Biding situate westward of the Ouse being taken as part of the 
Mid-west vice-county.
South-west and Mid-west Yorkshire are 
separated by the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, and by the river 
Aire below Leeds.
Mid-west and North-west are separated by 
xliv 
INTBODUCTION.
the political boundary between the North and West Ridings ; 
that boundary being deflected westward so as to pass over 
Whernside to the south-eastern angle of Westmoreland.
— 
Gheviotland is cut off from the more southern part of North- 
umberland by the river Coquet, and a line continued to Carter 
Fell from the Linn Bridge.
That northerly part of Durham 
which is situate between Holy Island and the Tweed, is deemed 
a portion of Cheviotland ; having only a nominal connection 
with Durham proper, not a geographical one.
" In Scotland, the large county of Perth is divided into three 
vice-counties.
East Perth is cut off from Mid Perth by the 
rivers Garry and Tay. Mid Perth is separated from West Perth 
by a line traced over the high ground or water-shed so as to 
divide the tributaries of the Tay from those of the Forth ; the 
little county of Clackmannan and a small detached portion 
of Stirling being taken as parts of West Perth.
— South and 
North Aberdeen are separated by hnes traced along the water- 
sheds eastward and westward of Inverury.
— The great county 
of Inverness is first divided by the line of water-shed between 
the eastern and western sides of Scotland, continued along Loch 
Erricht to the border of Perthshire.
The easterly portion, with 
the addition of Nairnshire forms the larg« vice-county of Easter- 
ness.
That portion of Inverness which cuts Elginshire into two 
disjoined parts, is deemed to be a portion of this latter county.
— The remainder of Inverness, the waters of which drain to the 
western coast, along with the detached portion of Argyle which 
is situate to the north-west of Loch Linhe, makes up the vice- 
county of Westemess.—Main-Argyle and Oantire are separated by 
the Crinan Canal.
The Clyde Isles include Bute and Arran, 
with Cumbrae and other islets adjacent, between Cantire and 
Ayr. The Ebudes are islands belonging by political geography 
to Argyle and Inverness.
Here it is convenient to take them as 
a group apart, subdivisible into three vice-counties.
South 
Ebudes include Isla and Jura, with adjacent islets.— Mirf Elmdes 
consist of Mull and CoU, with their adjacent islets.— AV«/t 
INTBODUCTION.
xlv 
Ebiules include Hyke and Bum, also with their adjacent islets.
— 
East and West Ross are separated by a line traced along the 
water-shed between the eastern and western coasts ; East Boss 
being considered to include those detached portions of Nairn, 
situate to the westward of the Murray Firth and Loch Beauly.
The fragmentary county of Cromarty may belong to East or 
West Boss, according to the geographical position of its 
detached fragments.
— FJast and West Sutherland are also sepa- 
rated by the line of water-shed ; this being so traced as to 
divide the south-eastern portion of the county from the western 
and northern." 
The three groups of North Isles, namely, Hebrides, Orkneys, 
Shetlands, are at once treated as so many sub-isrovinces and so 
many counties ; and they are numbered accordingly.
The other 
counties of Britain being undivided into vice-counties, their 
boundaries do not require special explanation here.
LIST OF PEOVINCPJS, SUB-PE0VINCE8, AND 
VICE-COUNTIES.
I Peninsula province.
I South Peninsula subprovince.
1 West Cornwall.
2 East Cornwall.
II Mid Peninsula province.
3 South Devon.
4 North Devon.
III North Peninsula subprovince.
5 South Somerset.
6 North Somerset.
II Channel province.
IV West Channel subprovince.
7 North Wilts.
8 South Wilts.
9 Dorset.
V Mid Channel subprovince.
, 
10 Isle of Wight.
11 South Hants.
12 North Hants.
VI East Channel subprovince.
13 West Sussex.
14 East Sussex.
III Thames province.
VII South Thames subprovince.
15 East Kent.
16 West Kent.
17 Surrey.
VIII North Thames subprovince.
18 South Essex.
19 North Essex.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
IX West Thames subprovince.
22 Berks.
"^B Oxford.
-'^u.gks.
IV Ouse j' jice.
X Sout"iri)use subprovince.
25 East Suffolk.
26 West Suffolk.
XI North Ouse subprovince 
27 East Norfolk.
28 West NorfoUi.
XII West Ouse subprovince.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
82 Northampton.
V Severn province.
XIII South Severn subprovince.
33 East Gloucester.
34 West Gloucester.
35 Monmouth.
XIV Mid Severn subprovince.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
XV North Severn subprovince.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
VI South Wales province.
XVI South-east Wales subprov.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Radnor.
XVII South-west Wales subprov.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Vn North Wales province, 
xviii North Wales subprovince.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
51 FUnt.
52 Anglesea.
Vni Trent proviaee.
XIX East Trent subprovince.
LIST OF PEOVINOES, ETC.
xlvii 
53 South Lincoln.
54 North Lincoln.
XX West Trent subprovince.
55 Leicester with Eutland.
56 Nottingham.
57 Derby.
IX Mersey province.
XXI Mersey subprovince.
58 Chester.
59 South Lancaster.
60 West Lancaster.
X Humber province.
XXII East Humber subprovince.
61 South-east Yorkshire.
62 North-east Yorkshire.
xxiii West Humber subprovince.
63 South-west Yorkshire.
64 Mid-west Yorkshire.
65 North-west Yorkshire.
XI Tyne provinge.
xxrv Tyne subprovince.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland (south).
68 Cheviotland, or North- 
umberland north.
XII Lakes province, 
xxv Lakes subprovince.
69 Westmoreland with North 
Lancashire.
70 Cumberland.
71 Isle of Man.
XIII West Lowlands province.
XXVI South-west Lowlands subprov.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
XXVII North- westLowlands subprov.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
77 Lanark.
XIV East Lowlands province.
XXVIII East Lowlands subprovince.
78 Peebles.
79 SeUdrk.
80 Boxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
XV East Highlands province.
XXIX S.-east Highlands subprov.
85 Fife with Kinross.
86 StirUng.
87 West Perth with Clack- 
mannan.
88 Mid Perth.
89 East Perth.
XXX Mid-east Highlands subprov.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 South Aberdeen.
93 North Aberdeen.
XXXI N.-east Highlands subprov.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
96 Easterness.
(E.Invern.) 
XVI West Highlands province.
XXXII Inner W.
Highlands subprov.
97 Westerness.
(W.Invern.) 
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
100 Clyde-isles.
101 Cantire.
XXXIII Outer W.Highlands subprov.
102 South Ebudes.
103 Mid Ebudes.
104 North Ebudes.
XVII North Highlands province.
XXXIV Lower N.Highlands subprov.
105 West Boss.
106 East Boss.
"XXXV Upper N.Highlands subprov.
107 East Sutherland.
108 West Sutherland.
109 Caithness.
XVIII North-isles province.
XXXVI North-west isles subprov.
110 Hebrides.
XXXVII Lower North-isles subprov.
111 Orkney.
XXXVIII Upper North-isles subprov.
112 Shetland.
COUNTY DISTRIBUTION.
1 Clematis Vitalba.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnaek cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
i north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Southbyms.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 I.
Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns oat.
12 north!
Pamplinms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.
14 east.
Eastb.
flo, 
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Sansom sp.
17 Surrey 1 Bastmond sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
HaU sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
BeU sp.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
Trimmer.
29 Cambridge.
Trevelyan sp.
30 Bedford.
Leefe ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Chi. Bab.
ms.
38 Gloster east Buckman sp.
34 west !
Eogers sp.
35 Monmouth.
Gibson ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
39 Stafford.
Garner flo.
40 Salop.
Darby ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen ?
"Oneplant." 
46 Pembroke.
C. C.
Bab. cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey reo.
(49 55 56 58 59 62 63 64 
65 66 67 69 77 82 83 85 
87 ; likely introduced into all 
these counties ; and in some 
of them recorded deceptively 
as if native).
2 Thalictrum alpinnm.
49 Carnarvon !
Brent sp.
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
Winch ms.
69 Westmoreland.
J. Woods.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Lightf.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Peith west.
P. M.
Webb rec.
88 Perth mid!
Balfour.
89 east !
90 Forfar 1 Gardiner.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon, Eoy, mss.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle !
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss rec.
04 n.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
Graham.
06 east.
Stables sp.
2 THALICTBUM ALPINUM.
08 Sutherland west.
Graham.
10 Hebrides.
Bab.
& Balfour.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[50 57 64] .
3 Thaliotrum minus (inclu- 
ding majus and saxatile).
Aggregate.
1 Cornwall w.
Miss Warren sp.
3 Devon south.
Tate sp.
6 Somer.
north.
Flowers sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Miss Barnard sp.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Clowes sp.
28 west.
Trimmer.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
R. H.
Webb herb.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
Syme herb.
41 Glamorgan.
DUlwyn.
42 Brecon.
Dillwyn.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Butler sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Whittaker sp.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J.E.Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
Hall sp.
60 west 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.west.
F.A.Leesreo.
66 Durham.
R. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Richardson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Clowes sp.
70 Cumberland !
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Horn rec.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Syme herb.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow 
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
T. Drummond.
88 mid !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
93 north.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
Ross rec.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Ebs. south.
Stables sp.
03 mid.
Ross cat.
06 Ross east.
"J.
B." sp.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caith.
! Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
Babington ms.
11 Orkney.
Miss BosweU ms.
[8 25 " flavum," by error] .
3*Thalictrum maritimum.
(dime?!se, Dum.) Segregate.
28 Norfolk west.
Trimmer.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
(Binton sp.) 
62 York n.
east.
Baker rec.
66 Dui-ham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
69 Westmorel.
Miss Hodgson.
77 Lanark.
Horn rec.
82 Haddington.
Syme herb.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme herb.
85 Fife.
Syme herb.
90 Forfar.
Syme herb.
8*THALICTEUM MAEITIMUM.
3 
91 Kincardine.
Syme herb.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme herb.
93 north.
(Nicolson) 
98 Argyle.
Eoss rec.
06 Ross east.
08 Sutherland west.
02 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. Distinctive distribution im- 
perfectly on record.
3*Thalictrum montanum.
Segregate.
6 Somer.
north.
Syme herb.
20 Herts.
Crespigny rec.
26 Suffolk west.
Ar. Bennett.
49 Carnar.
Butler fide Syme.
51 Flint.
Whittaker fide Syme.
57 Derby.
Syme herb.
64 York mid-w.
F. A.
Lees cat.
69 "Westmoreland.
Ley.
73 Kiroud.
G.N.Lloyd" wajMs." 
85 Fife.
Syme herb.
98 Argyle.
Eoss.
N.B. This montanum and the 
preceding maritimum may be 
regarded as being segregates 
of minus in a limited sense, 
exclusive of flexuoswn, sax- 
atile, majw, and Kochii; but 
doubtless the first of these 
names has been so applied 
of late by some botanists, 
as to include plants which 
would be assigned to mon- 
tanum by other botanists.
Both will be found to occur 
in several more counties 
than are yet on record for 
them, clearly apart from 
minus, &c.
3*Thalietrum majus (inclu- 
ding flexuosum, Kochii, and 
sdxatile).
Segregate.
1 Cornwall west, Syme herb.
8 Devon south.
Tate.
6 Som. north.
Flower, Baker.
29 Cambridge.
Babington.
48 Merioneth.
^ Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler.
51 Flint.
Whittaker.
64 York mid-w.
Cheesman rec.
65 n.
w. Baker.
Lees rec.
66 Durham.
Baker.
68 Oheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Syme sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
77 Lanark.
Horn.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Syme herb.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Drummond.
88 mid.
(Woods sp.) 
89 east.
(Drummond sp.) 
02 Ebudes south.
03 mid.
[8 24 doubtless misnomers ; the 
name of majus having been 
formerly used for Jlavitm] .
4 Thalictrum flavum.
1 Gm-n west.
Cunnack ms.i- 
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Extinct ?
] 1 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north!
Townsendcat.
13 Sussex west.
Hemsley.
14 east.
Roper ms.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Beeby sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Sansom sp.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
4 THAIilCTKUM FLAVHM.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west 
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
Druce rec.
88 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn ms.
44 Carmarthen ?
"Once seen." 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Barely.
58 Line.
s. Fowler & Lees rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west.
Hiern ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Leefe sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Miss Hancock sp.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumbrlnd.
(G.E. Smith sp.) 
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
80 Argyle.
90 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[3 Devon south : but not 
found recently.
109 Caith- 
ness a misnomer of T.
mari- 
timum.'] 
5 Anemone Pulsatilla.
19 Essex n.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell sp.
28 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
E. Foster sp.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
83 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
84 w.
Eev.H.C.Eeader.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Eutland.
Berkeley ms.
63 York s.
west.
P. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
[37 E.
C. rep.
1863.] 
6 Anemone nemorosa.
Counties all, except 74 97 102 
107 109 to 112.
9 Adonis autumnalis.
8 Wilts south.
Miss Bell sp.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north.
Macreight sp.
16 Kent west !
Bromfield sp.
N.B. This plant was formerly 
in frequent cultivation as a 
garden annual, and in many 
of its recorded counties it is 
simply a casual astray.
Ap- 
parently it has become most 
9 ADONIS AUTUMNALIS 
nearly a colonist in the two 
or three provinces named 
above.
[Eecorded also for 25 
26 27 28 29 33 34 40 55 57 
58 59 62 68 66 68 75 77 80 
83 ; perhaps the greater 
part of these records really 
illustrating the proneness of 
botanists to swell out then- 
local lists on the slightest 
possible pretence.] 
10 Myosurus minimus.
3 Devon south.
Error ?
7 WUts north.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight.
Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south ?
12 north ?
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
Freeman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell sp, 
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow 1887.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton ?
34 Gloster west ?
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J.E. Bowman sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham?
"Extinct." 
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
N.B. An inconspicuous plant, 
often of uncertain perma- 
nence through agricultural 
operations ; thus it may be- 
come seemingly extinct, yet 
again be found in the same 
place at some after date.
[New records desirable for 
3 11 12 32 34 36 49 51 66, 
as shown above.] 
11 Ranunculus aquatilis.
Aggregate.
Counties all, excepting perhaps 
42 48 74 88 89 97 98 101 103 
105 107 108 112 ; and very 
likely to occur in all of these, 
unless the last, 112 Shetland, 
be an exception to its comi- 
tal generality.
ll*Ranunculus heterophyl- 
lus, Bab. Segregate.
In books this name has been so 
much used for any segregate 
of aquatilis with floating 
leaves, that it has become 
impossible in most cases to 
know which of the recent 
segregates is intended by the 
name.
Apparently the fol- 
lowing counties are recorded 
for the segregate hetero- 
phyllus as understood by 
ll*EANUNCtrLUS HETEEOPHYIiLUS.
Professor Babington and 
those who use his Manual, 
and separated from the re- 
cords of diversifolius as noted ; 
1 3 5 or 6 9 10 13 17 19 
20 22 24 26 27 28 29 33 or 
34 36 38 39 49 55 57 58 59 
60 61 62 63 64 66 67 68 69 
85.
No guarantee is here 
given for the accuracy of any 
of these counties excepting 
17 Surrey.
ll*Ranunculus peltatus (in- 
cluding floribundus & trun- 
catm.) 
2 Corn.
east.
Wise sp.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
7 Wilts north.
Marlb.
flo.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
11 Hants south.
Dyer & Trimen.
12 north.
Townsend cat.
13 Sussex west.
Hemsley.
14 east.
Hemsley.
1(5 Kent west.
Hiern.
17 Surrey.
Hiern.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 n.
Varenne.
Gibson.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Trimen & Dyer.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Babington herb.
26 west.
Babington herb.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington herb.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Hiern.
33 Gloster east.
Hiern.
34 west.
Hort sp.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon.
60 Denbigh.
Hiern.
53 Lincoln south.
64 north.
58 Chester.
Bailey.
69 Lane, south.
F. M.
Webb.
60 west.
Hiern.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Hiern.
67 Northumberland.
Baker.
68 Cheviot.
Tate.
69 Westmoreland.
Hodgson.
70 Cumberland.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme sp, 
87 Perth west.
Bab. herb.
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
The distribution given for the 
very aggregate aquatilis 
likely represents that of pel- 
tatus with its subsegregates, 
much more nearly than the 
skeleton area given above, 
as taken from the records 
made expressly for peltatus, 
truncatus, jioribund/us, &c.
ll*Ranunc.
diversifolius 
(including radians and God- 
ronii.) 
20 Herts.
Blow rec.
21 Middlesex.
Blow rec.
29 Cambridge.
Hiern herb.
38 Warwick.
Hiern herb.
39 Stafford.
Hiern herb.
58 Chester.
Hiern herb.
60 Lancaster west.
Hiern ms.
11*RANUNCULUS DIVERSIFOLIUS.
63 York south west.
Carr.
rec.
64 mid w.
Webster rec.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
N.B. The above show the few 
counties found on record for 
Godronii or radians uncon- 
fused with heterophyllus of 
"Pries" or Bab. Man.
ll^Ranunc.
trichophyllus.
3 Devon south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsend cat.
18 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 east.
Eoper rec.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
Gibson.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Pryor ms.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Babington.
26 west.
Babington.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Babington.
29 Camb.
Hiern & Babington.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Duthie sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
54 Lincoln north.
Lees rec.
58 Cheshire.
Hunt sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees.
64 m.
west.
Lees.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
69 Westmor.
Hodgson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec, 
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait.
06 Eoss east.
(G.
C. Druce.) 
09 Caithness.
(Grant.) 
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
This and Drouetti were treated 
as a combined unit in 'Topo- 
graphical Botany,' by reason 
of the great difficulty expe   
rienced in attempting to 
assign the counties rightly 
in several instances ; and it 
may still be held uncertain 
how far the county numbers 
are correctly shown above.
It is questionable whether 
there is any absolute dis- 
tinctiveness between these 
two and heterophyllus in its 
limited sense.
ll*Ranunculus Drouetii.
2 Cornw.
east.
Tellam rec.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Hiern.
7 Wilts north.
Hiern.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsend cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Arnold sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west.
H. Groves rec.
17 Surrey.
Hiern.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Pryor ms.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Hiern.
26 Suffolk west.
Hiern.
28 Norfolk west.
Babington.
29 Cambridge, Hiern.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
Hiern.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk.
39 Stafford.
Hiern.
50 Denbigh.
Hiern.
54 Lincoln north.
Blow rec.
58 Chester.
8 
11*BANUNCULUS DEOUBTn.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb ms.
60 west.
63 York s.
west.
Carr.
rec.
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
65 n.
west.
Baker ms.
66 Durham.
Baker & Tate.
67 Northumb.
Baker & Tate.
68 Cheviot.
Baker & Tate.
69 Westmoreland.
Melville.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
11 Orkney.
Fortesoue fide Syme.
ll*Ranunoulus penicillatus, 
Dum.
[R.
pseudo-fluitaiis, 
Bab.) 
5 or 6 Wilts.
Hiern.
17 Surrey.
Hiern.
20 Herts.
Crespigny rec.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall rec.
56 Notts.
Hiern.
57 Derby.
Hiern.
ll*Ranunculus Baudotii (in- 
cluding confusus.) 
1 Cornwall west.
Tellam rec.
2 east.
Tellam rec.
3 Devon south.
Eogers rec.
4 north.
Hiern.
5 Som. south.
Blow rec.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
Hiern.
11 Hants south.
Hiern.
13 Sussex west.
Hiern.
14 east.
3ailey rec.
15 Kent east.
Hiern.
16 west.
Groves rec.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Hiern.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Hiern.
35 Monmouth.
50 Denbigh.
Hiern.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 n.Fowler&Blowreo.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Hiern.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
76 Eenfrew.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
99 Dunbarton.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
N.B. The varieties, as placed 
under this name in the 
London Catalogue, are taken 
into account in giving these 
county number?.
The con- 
fusus has been recorded by 
its name, rightly or wrongly 
applied, in counties 14 5 6 
7 911 13 18 19 27 28 45 60 
62 66 76 82 83 84.
Baudotii 
also has been specially re- 
corded for aU of these except 
perhaps 6 7 27 45 60.
[Con- 
firmation needed in 29 77 
80 81.] 
ll*Banunculus circinatus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
6 Somers.
north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydeil cat.
11 Hants south.
Spicer.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Mrs. Jones sp.
16 Kent east !
Hind sp.
16 west.
Crespigny sp.
17 Surrey !
Biden sp.
18 Essex south.
11*RANUNCULU8 CIRCINATUS.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bitcks.
Britten ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock.
26 west.
Blomf.
ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
E. C.
Douglas sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutoh cat.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south I 
64 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
68 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.west.
Newbould ms.
64 .
m. w.
F. A.
Lees rec.
65 n.
west?
"Ward." 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Salter sp.
85 Fife.
I. Balfour ms.
86 Stirhng.
Hunt.
90 Forfar.
Eoy, " occurs." 
[10 Flora Vectensis.
Said 
to have been a misnomer.
Additional authorities de- 
sirable for 49 65.] 
ll'-Ranunculus fluitans.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnack.
3 Devon south.
Eossall.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Baker cat.
16 west ?
17 Surrey !
Newbould sp.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts ?
21 Middx.
Newbould sp.
22 Berks.
Arthur Bennett sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
"Bab. herb." 
28 Norfolk west.
"Bab. herb." 
29 Cambridge.
"Hiern.
herb." 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkias sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby.
"Bab. herb." 
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb ms.
59 Lane, south.
"Dugdale." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
68 s.
west.
Carr rec.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
Hodgson rec.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
10 
11*BANDNCULUS FLUITANS.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
[85 Fife ?
Dubious also in 
8 16 20, and certaialy an 
error in 10.] 
Il*Ran. intermedius, Hiern 
(including tripartitus.) 
1 Cornwall west.
Westcombe !
2 east.
Tellam rec.
9 Dorset.
"Borrer ms." 
11 Hants south !
14 Sussex east.
Eoper rec.
16 Kent west.
"W.Eeevesms." 
17 Surrey!
45 Pembroke.
Bab. sp.
[83 Edinburgh.] 
12 Ranunc.
Lenormandi.
Segregate.
1 Cornwall west.
Eogers ms.
2 east.
Briggs.
cat.
3 Devon south.
Keys sp, 
4 n.
"Hiern.
Herb." 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Withers ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south!
Towns, cat.
12 north!
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
(Howse sp.) 
16 Kent west.
"Bab. herb." 
17 Surrey!
22 Berks!
25 Suffolk east ?
Bkepper ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
34 Gloster west.
Ley cat.
36 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Babington ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardingan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
"Bab. herb." 
61 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
66 Leicester.
Purchas sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
69 Lane, south.
Goodlad sp, 
60 west.
"Hiern herb." 
68 York s.
west.
Newb.
ms.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
F. A.
Lees ms.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland !
Hort sp.
72 Dumfries.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde isles.
Gait ms.
N.B. This is still noted as a 
segregate, because not dis- 
tinguished apart from heder- 
aceus or aquatilis, even so 
lately as the first edition of 
the ' Manual of British Bo- 
tany" in 1843.
A plant in 
this position will be on im- 
perfect record still; omitted 
from local floras and lists of 
earlier dates, and occasion- 
ally remaining unnoticed 
at later dates.
A like ex- 
planation, without being 
again repeated, will apply 
to some other segregates now 
usually noticed and recorded 
as ver-species.
There are, 
however, some local con- 
fusions between this species 
and intei-medius ; the two not 
always distinguished in a 
dried state.
[19 25 51.] 
13 Ranunc, hederaceus.
13 EANUNCULUS HEDEEACEUS.
11 
Counties all, except 26 31 42 
46 48 74 78 97 98 104 105 
108 111 112.
Perhaps really 
absent from the last two, 
Orkney and Shetland.
14 Ranunculus Ficaria.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 97 
98 101 102 104 107 108 
110 ; in all of which it most 
likely does occur.
15 Ranunculus Flammula.
Counties all, except 42 74, in 
which doubtless it does 
occur.
15 Ranunculus reptans.
85 Kinross.
Boswell Syme sp.
Loch Leven, in the little county 
of Kinross, still remains the 
only certain locality.
The 
margin of Coniston Water, 
in Lake Lancashire, is less 
sure.
Inmany other counties 
a procumbent or prostrate 
state of Flammula has been 
misreported under the name 
of reptans.
16 Ranunculus Lingua.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Wise sp.
3 Devon south.
"E.
Parfitt." 
4 north?
5 Somerset south ?
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Hussey rec.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
11 Hants south.
Pamplinms.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Eoper ms.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
T. B.
Blow cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Blomf.
cat.
26 west.
Wallis sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees), 
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bodenham sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutch sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merionth.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line.
s. Fowler & Lees rec.
54 north !
65 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby ?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp, 
12 
16 RANUNCULUS LINGUA.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray oat.
73 Kirkcudbright ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
"Loch Earn." 
90 Forfar.
Oroall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
98 north.
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
[21 37 49 111.] 
18 Ranunculus auricomus.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Harris sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Jones oat.
47 Montgomery.
Melville cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50Denbighl J.
E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
E. Brown ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincolns.
Fowler & Lees rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
Ey lands sp.
59 Lano.
south.
Goodlad herb.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n, east.
Baker oat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Simpson sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat., 
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy oat.
77 Lanark Hooker sp.
18 RANUNCULUS AUEICOMUS.
13 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
82 Haddington Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Croallrec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dumbarton.
19 Ranunculus acris.
Counties all, except 74 78.
20 Ranunculus repens.
Counties all, except 74 78.
21 Ranunculus bulbosus.
Counties all, except 42 53 74 
84 97 98 101 103 104 105 
106 107 108 110 (111) 112.
22 Ranunculus hirsutus.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs sp.+ 
3 Devon south.
Henfrey sp.
4 north.
Kogers rec.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.Warren sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites eat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purohas ms.
37 Worcester.
Buckman sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bodenham sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley eat.
45 Pembroke?
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgom.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
E. Brown ms.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
60 Lane.
west.
Boswell ms.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
66 Durham.
Lees ms.
67 Northumb.
"ballast hills." 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
14 
22 RANUNCULUS HIBSUTUS.
70 Cumberland.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston.
rec.
83 Edinburgh.
84 TiinUthgow.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme cat.t 
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Balfour sp.
88 mid.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
98 Argyle.
N.B. Scarcely more than a 
casual plant northward of 
Yorkshire.
23 Ranunculus sceleratus.
All the counties on record with 
exceptions rather numerous 
in Scotland, viz., 42 43 47 
48 60 71 73 74 78 79 88 89 
97 98 104 105 107 108 111 
112.
24 Ranunc.
parviflorus.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north I Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan sp.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Arnold sp.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Wallis sp.
20 Herts.
Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
H. W.
Trott sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman, ms, 
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Douglas sp.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northampton.
Druce ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Leefe sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Tudor sp.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgom.
J.E.Bowmanms.
49 Carnarvon !
J. Ball ms.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eev. J.
Harris sp.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
69 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Foggitt sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees ms.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
69 Westmor.
Miss Barnard.
25 Ranunculus arvensis.
1 Cornwall west ?
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
5 Som. south, Coleman cat.
26 RANUNCULUS AKVENSIS.
15 
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent 6.
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
Biden sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middx.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
G. Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bodenham sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
47 Montgom.
J.E. Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
51 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Paine sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
R.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker ms.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.f 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour ms.f 
83 Edinburgh.
Macnab sp.
(109 Caithness.
Nicolson.) 
[Ill Orkney.] (85.) 
26 Caltha palustris.
Counties all, except 42 74 98 ; 
in all of which it is sure to 
be found if looked for.
C. 
Guerangeri occurs in 3 17 
23 36 88 58 62, and pro- 
bably elsewhere.
27 TroUius europseus.
35 Monmouth.
Conway ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.t 
37 Worcester?
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Moggridge sp.
43 Radnor.
Westcombe ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgom.
F. A.
Lees ms.
48 Merioneth.
Poole ms.
49 Carnarv !
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
57 Derby !
58 Chester ?
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n, east.
Baker cat.
16 
27 TKOLLIUS EUROPaiUS.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.] 
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Simpson sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northamb.
Miss Bell sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp, 
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray eat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
G. Cooper sp.
78 Peebles.
Dyer.
79 Selkii-k.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirhng.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat 
88 mid !
89 east !
Gibson ms.
90 PorfarJ 
91 Kinc.
Miss Boswell ms.
92 Aber.
south I Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dumbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
(Mull.) Boss rec.
04 Skye.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west!
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
11 Shetland.
One locality.
[2 East Cornwall.] 
29 Helleborus viridis.
2 Cornwall east.* 
8 Devon south.* 
6 Som. north.
Winch sp.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
11 Hants south.
Borrer ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Borrer.
+ 
15 Kent east, "native." 
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
" native.'' 
19 north.
Wallis sp.
20 Herts.
" really wild." 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
38 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west.
Babington.
86 Hereford.
Ley sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.* 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.* 
60 Lane.
west.
" native." 
62 York n.
east.
" native." 
63 s.
w. G.
E.Smith sp.
64 m.
west.
" native." 
65 n.
west, "native." 
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
69 West.
" apparently native." 
74 Wigton.
(Macnab sp.) 
N.B. The above counties are 
selected as being those in 
which the wildness of the 
plant is best attested.
Ee- 
ported also for 1 7 8 10 21 
22 28 24 25 26 27 28 29 80 
32 87 88 89 40 41 45 49 50 
51 56 57 68 70 75 81 83 85 
91 92 ; in all with distrust 
of its true nativity, or on 
unsafe authority only.
30 Helleborus fcstidus.
11 Hants south.
" wild." 
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
16 Kent west.
Arthur Bennett.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
30 HELLBBOBUS FCETIDUS.
17 
18 Essexsouth.
"atruenative." 
19 north.
33 Gloster east.
" native." 
36 Hereford, "native." 
62 York n.
east.
" denizen." 
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham, " denizen." 
67 Northumb.
"denizen." 
N.B. Less decidedly certified 
as a native plant, than is 
the other species.
(Eeported 
in 2 3 6 7 8 9 10 16 20 
22 to 30 32 34 37 38 39 
40 41 50 52 55 57 61 63 
68 69 70 75 77 80 81 82 
83 85 92 ; in most of these 
counties it is given simply as 
an escape from cultivation, 
or with the evident object of 
swelling out the length of 
local lists.) 
31 Aquilegla vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north!
Wakefield sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
t 
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8   north.
Mower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat, 
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Spicer ms.
13 Sussex west.
" many loc." 
14 east.
Coleman cat.!
15 Kent east.
G. B.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Holman sp.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Eeeve sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Kadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Pamplin ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh !
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
E. Brown ms.
52 Anglesea.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester ?
60 Lane, west.* Hiern ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham, "native." 
67 Northumb.
"native." 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
" wild." 
(Also in 18 19 [21] 25 26 
48 54 55 68 71 75 77 
79 83 84 85 86 87 90 
91 92 95 26 102 109.) 
33 Aconitum Napellus.
5 Som. south.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Bower to Crotch sp.
35 Monmouth, wild ; Hort.
36 Heref.
indigenous ; Newm.
50 Denb.
wild; J.
E.Bowman.
18 
8B AOONITllM NAPHhtXlsi.
(Eeported also in 1 3 4 10 
12 17 19 20 21 23 24 
27 28 33 37 38 39 40 
41 47 49 51 55 61 62 
64 65 67 76 77 81 83 
85 86 105 109.) 
34 Actsea spicata.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Denny sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.w. E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmor.
Dr. Lees 1870.
[18 61 66 70 85.] 
35 Berberis vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnackcat.t 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat, 
4 north.
Maw cat.!
5 Som. south.
Parson rec.
6 north.
Bath flo.f 
7 Wilts north.
" indigenous." 
8 south.
Flower cat.* 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More supp.* 
12 Hants north.
Bromf.t 
13 or 14 Sussex.
Hemsley.f 
16 Kent west.
" not wild." 
17 Surrey.
Casual in hedges.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Gibson flo.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Midx.
Eeynolds sp.
22 Berks.
Walker flo.
23 Oxford.
Beesley.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Skepper flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Trim.
flo.
28 west.
Trim.
flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.
30 Bedford.
Pordham sp.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Bath flo.* 
85 Monmouth.
Gissing.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.* 
37 Worcester.
Lees hot.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
"reaUywild." 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman oat.t 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Kirby flo.
66 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Liverpool flo.* 
59 Lane, south.
Dick, flo.* 
61 York s.
east.
Authority ?
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.t 
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
" denizen.'' 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
68 Cheviot.
" denizen." 
69 Westmor.
Balfour.
70 Cumber.
Baker ms.* 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Botany of Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale flo.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan oat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.* 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfoui' cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
flo.
Lawson.t 
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.+ 
88 mid.
Amott.
89 east.
" not wild." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.* 
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.* 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.* 
00 Clyde isles.
Hennedy cat.t 
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
35 BBEBEEIS VULGARIS.
19 
09 Caithness.
R. Brown cat.
N.B. A departure from the 
usual method is made in 
this case of the Berbery, so 
difficult to decide on its in- 
digenous claims.
Authorities 
are cited throughout, either 
manuscript or printed.
The 
sign * indicates that the cited 
authority treats the shrub 
as certainly introduced ; the 
sign t indicates less positive 
decision against nativity.
36 Nymphsea alba.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
6 Somerset north ?
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
11 Hants south !
Adams sp.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Eent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex s.
(E.
Forster sp.) 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Harris.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts ?
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
37 Worcester.
" Very rare." 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
42 Brecon.
P. A.
Lees ms.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.t 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
60 west !
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 B.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Montgomery ms.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherst.
rec.+ 
83 Edinbugh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec* 
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Brand sp.
99 Dumbarton.
00 Clyde isles.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 Mull.
Ross cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
20 
86 NYMPH^A AliBA.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
" one locality." 
(Also reported as introduced 
or uncertainly wild in 3 7 
8 10 18 19 34 35 65 68 
81 109.) 
37 Nuphar lutea.
1 Oornw.
west." Cunnack ms.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north !
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Blomfield.
15 Kent east !
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat, 
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock eat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 North ton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat, 
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
F. M.Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton rec.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nrthmb.
E. B.
Bowman cat.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkeud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Hugh Balf.
sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
Syme.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
88 Perth east.
Dyer.
90 Forfar.
Sturroek.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.j 
99 Dumbarton!
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
87 NUPHMS LUTEA.
21 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour oat.
03 mid.
Mull.
Eoss rec.
37*Nupliar intermedia.
67 Northumb.
Trevelyan sp.
88 Perth east.
Dyer.
38 Nuphar pumila.
40 Salop.
W. Jones.
86 Stirling.
Clyde flo.
87 Perth west.
Christie sp.
88 Perth mid.
Drummond-Hay.
91 Kincar.
Dickie hot.
g. 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie hot.
g. 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
"White." 
98 Argyle.
"Borrer," etc.
[9 29 32 56 58 67 77.] 
39 Papaver hybridum.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw. oat.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south ?
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east.
Cooper sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
G. C.
Babmgton.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Norfchton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
E. Lees, 1843.
36 Hereford.
" WUmott." 
37 Worcester.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
51 Flint ?
55 Leicester.
"MissAdams!" 
59 Lane, south.
Ex. club sp.
63 York s.
west.
F. A.
Lees.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
(61 62 68, extinct?) 
40 Papaver Argemone.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Martin sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east!
J.L.Warren.
15 Kent east !
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Miss Twining sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock cat.
28 Norf.
west.
G. Cooper sp.
22 
40 PAPAVBR ABGEMONB.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillliouse.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
63 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
P. M.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
68 s.
west.
P. A.
Lees cat.
I- 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
71 I.
Man. Porbes cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Dyer.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
89 Perth east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Basterness !
Stables cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce cat.) 
06 east.
Gordon cat.
10 Hebrides.
41 Papaver dubium.
Counties all, except 35 43 46 70 
71 73 74 78 97 98 99 103 
104 105 108; in all of which 
it is very likely to occur.
The counties for the two se- 
gregates cannot be satisfac- 
torily made out.
41*Papaver Lecoquii.
Segr.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
1(1 Kent west rec.
17 Surrey.
Groves rec.
20 Herts.
E. A.
Pryor.
24 Bucks rec.
26 Suffolk west.
Blomfieldcat.
27 Norf.
east.
C.C. Babington.
29 Cambridge.
C.C. Babington.
30 Bedford.
Blow rec.
32 Northampton.
Druce.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
62 York n.
east.
Poggitt rec.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
85 Fife ?
Syme.
05 Eoss west.
Druce rec.
42 Papaver Rhoeas.
Counties all, except 43 46 70 
71 72 78 74 78 79 88 89 95.
In 92 98 94 it is marked by 
Professor Dickie as a plant 
probably introduced ; and 
42 PAPAVEE BHOEAS.
23 
beyond 94 (Banff) there is 
no authority except for 103 
105 109 111 112, into which 
this common southern poppy 
is probably carried with agri- 
cultural seeds.
44 Meconopsis cambrica.
2 Cornwall east.
3 Devon south.
4 north!
Maw cat.
t 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ley.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Moggridge sp.
43 Eadnor.
47 Montgomery, Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch.
50 Denbigh ?
64 York m.
w. Tatham," wild." 
(9 21 59 60 61 62 63 65 69 
70 72 75 83 85 90 92 95).
This poppy readily estab- 
lishes itself as a weed about 
houses and gardens ; and 
hence it has become seem- 
ingly wild in several coun- 
ties ; possibly it may be 
really wild in Westmoreland.
45 Chelidonium majus.
Counties 1 to 96, with very few 
exceptions, have all been 
reported for this plant, but 
usually as one at best doubt- 
fully indigenous.
46 Glaucium luteum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 Devon north !
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
1 1 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Warner sp.
14 e.
J. L.Warren cat.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
34 Gloster west.
Cooper sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway ms.+ 
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
H. L.
Jones rec.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester!
J.L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
(Hobkirk.) 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
Balfom- sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
81 Berw.
Hugh Balfour sp.
82 Haddington.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
24 
46 GLA.UCIUM LTJTBUM.
12 Shetland.
One locality.
(21 37 66 67 80 95.) 
48 Corydalis olaviculata.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe oat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
Ar. Bennett.
13 Sussex west.
Baker ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Berkeley ms.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Freeman sp.
19 north.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Druce reo.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
30 Bedford.
Druce rec.
35 Monmouth.
Conway sp.
36 Hereford.
"WUmott." 
37 Worcester ?
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
42 Brecon.
43 Kadnor.
E. H.
Jones rec.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
MelviUe cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten cat.
49 Carnarv.
J. E .
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
54 Linen.
F. A.
Lees & Fowler.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby !
J. E.
Bowman ms.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
Linton rec.
61 York s.
east.
Carpenter sp.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
65 n.
west.
Ward ms.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
72 Dumf.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenf, Montgomery cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linhthgow.
(Shuttle worth.) 
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce.) 
06 east.
Gordon cat.
[21 Middlesex extinct, if ever 
found.
26.J 
50 Fumaria eapreolata.
Counties all, except 6 16 26 30 
50 FUMAEIA CAPBEOLATA.
25 
82 42 43 53 71 74 78 89 
97 98 99 103 104 105 106 
107 109 112.
20 uncertain.
N.B. This is the aggregate 
species, long treated as a 
single integrate species in 
our botanical books ; more 
recently divided into four 
segregates, which are yet 
very imperfectly distin- 
guished by collectors ; their 
reported counties, cited 
underneath, are to be re- 
ceived with caution.
50*rimi.
pallidiflora.
Segr.
1 Corn.
west.
" Once seen." 
3 Devon south.
Babington.
4 north.
Babington.
5 Som. south.
Syme.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell.
10 Wight.
' ' Hambrough .
' ' 
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
19 Essex north.
Groves rec.
21 Middlesex.
34 Gloster west ?
38 Warwick.
(Bromwich.) 
40 Salop.
Babington.
41 Glamorgan.
Babington.
45 Pembroke.
(Trimen.) 
49 Carnarvon.
Babington.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Carr rec.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
66 Durham.
New flo.
N.D.
70 Cumberland.
Baker.
79 Selkirk.* Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxburgh.
08 Sutherland!
50*Fum. Borsei.
Segregate.
2 Cornwall east.
4 Devon north.
Hiern.
5 Som. south ?
10 Wight ?
11 Hants south.
Blow rec.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey.
Arthur Bennett.
20 Herts ?
E. A.
Pryor.
21 Middlesex.
25 Suffolk e.
Ch. Bab.
rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
40 Salop.
Babington.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
58 Chester.
E. Brown.
69 Lane, south.
E. Brown.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
"Norman." 
67 Northumberland.
Baker.
69 Westmoreland.
"Bab." 
70 Cumberland.
Baker.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
82 Haddington.
Syme.
86 Fife.
Boswell Syme.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
11 Orkney.
Boswell Syme.
[24 46 63 63.] 
N.B. Habitats confused with 
those of "pallidiflora." 
50*P.
confusa {"ayraria.") 
Segregate.
1 Corn.
west.
Babington.
2 east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
4 north.
Babington.
5 Somerset south.
Flower rec.
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydell.
30 Wight.
More.
"Bab. herb." 
26 
50*FUMABIA CONPOSA.
11 Hants south.
Trimen.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
Syme.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
38 Warwick.
(Bloxam.) 
45 Pembroke.
Babington.
46 Cardigan.
Babington.
•48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington.
52 Anglesea.
Babington.
58 Chester.
Eng. bot.
ed.
3. 
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
+ 
63 s.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
Babington.
85 Fife.
Syme.
87 Perth west.
Drummond.
50*Funiaria muralis.
Segr.
3 Devon south.
Tate, 1871.
5 Som. south.
Syme.
lOWiglit.
More.
E.B. 3.
11 Hants south !
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey.
Babington.
21 Middlesex.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.
34 Gloster west.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
40 Salop.
Babington.
50 Denbigh.
Babington.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis rec.
63 York s.
west.
Newb.
Bab.
64 m.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
86 Stirling.
N.B. Habitats inextricably con- 
fused in books with those of 
' ' confusa." For this and the 
preceding three segregates 
the few botanists cited are 
to be understood as those 
who have either collected 
the plant or only so named 
the specimens collected by 
others; the " sp." being 
omitted by the compiler, as 
not caring to certify their 
names on dried specimens 
only ; his own notes of past 
years recognizing only the 
aggregate " capreolata." 
51 Fumaria officinalis.
Counties all, except 42 47 48 
74 98 101 102 104 105 
107 110 ; in all of which it 
likely occurs, at least as a 
colonist.
52 Fumaria micrantha.
[F.
densiflora.) 
8 Wilts south.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
Pryor.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
14 east.
"Mitten." 
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
1 9 E ssex north .
' ' alien .
' ' 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
(Newbould.) 
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. sp.f 
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
34 Gloster west.
Withers ms.
36 Hereford.
" E.
Davies !
" 
40 Salop.
Babington sp.
65 Leicester.
56 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec* 
68 Cheviotlaud.
Tate sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
82 Haddington.
Syme ms.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
52 FUMABIA MICBANTHA.
27 
84 Linlithgow.
Syme E.
B. 3.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
95 Elgin.
"Dr. Innes." 
[10 Wight.
112 Shetland.] 
53 Fumaria parviflora.
12 Hants north.
Townsend.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Miss Barnard sp.
24 Bucks.
E. A.
Pryor.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
30 Bedford.
Blow rec.
33 or 34 Gloster.
E.G. rep.
1864 
62 York n.
east.
Bean sp.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec* 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west.
[Very uncertain in 3 4 9 90 
95 96 109 112 ; errors in 
some, casual in others ?] .
54 Fumaria Vaillantii.
15 Kent east.
Henslow.
16 west.
Syme.
17 Surrey !
Syme.
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
E. H.
Webb flora.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. sp.
30 Bedford.
Blow.
53 Lincoln s.
Streatfield rec.
62 York n.
east.
"Vetch-field." 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
[Eeported also in 3 12 26 
31 33 or 34 83 112; either 
introduced or errors ?] .
55 Cakile maritima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pasooe cat.
3 Devon south.
Twining sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13, Sussex west.
J. L.
Wari'en.
14 east.
Dyer.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
27 Norf.
east.
C. C.
Babington.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Gardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr. Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
86 Fife.
Syme sp.
28 
55 CAKILE MAEITIMA.
90 Forfar.
91 Kino.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon eat.
96 Basterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
' Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
56 Crambe maritima.
2 Corn.
east.
Watt in B.
G. 
3 Devon south.
G. Lloyd sp.
4 north.
Eavenshaw.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Salmon.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
19 Essex north.
Extinct ?
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Smith in B.
G. 
41 Glamorgan.
B. G.
Dill.
Mat.
45 Pembroke.
Turton in B.
G. 
49 Carnarvon.
Christy.
Winch.
52 Anglesea.
J. E.Bowmanms.
54 Line, north.
Banks in B.
G. 
61 York s.
east.
Baines flo.
62 n.
east.
Brunton.
69 Lake Lane.
Alton.
B. G.
70 Cumb.
Eobson.
B. G.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" rare." 
73 Kirkcud.
G. N.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Bot.
of Ayrshire.
81 Berw.
"A.
Carr, 1830." 
84 Linlithgow !
Balf.
flo.
85 Fife.
Balf.
flo.
edinb.
00 Clyde ?
" Landsborough." 
01 Cantire.
Balfoixr sp.
02 Isla.
Balfour oat.
N.B. This plant apparently is 
decreasing on our coasts ; 
several of its localities rest- 
ing only on old records.
57 Coronopus didyma.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.t 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
MelvUl.
6 north.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Clark, jun., sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.+ 
11 Hants south.
Macreight sp.t 
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Salmon ms.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.+ 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
31 Hunts.
(Job Watson.t) 
84 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees.) 
39 Stafford.
Church.
Bab. sp.f 
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
49 Carnarvon.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts.
Carrington sp.
58 Chester.
Warren cat.!
59 Lane, south.
Dickinson sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Parsons.* 
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
57 CORONOPUS DIDYMA.
29 
68 Cheviotland.
75 Ayr. Landsborough ms.
85 Fife.
N.B. This is an opposite ex- 
ample to the preceding 
(Cram be) ; being one of a 
plant spreading into new 
localities, and these wide 
apart.
Best established in 
the Peninsula and South 
"Wales.
Supposed to have 
come originally from Ame- 
rica.
58 Coronopus Buellii.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Eoper.
15 Kent east!
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
31 Hunts I Newbould eat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Grloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
(B.D.Jackson..) 
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.+ 
67 Northumberland 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Twynam sp.
85 Fife.
" Extinct in 1869." 
92 Aber.
south.- Dickie ms.f 
93 north.
Eoy ms.f 
30 
58 COKONOPUS KUELLII.
94 Banff.
" Mr. Wilson." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait ms.
06 Eoss east.
Authority ?
09 Caithness.* E.
Brown cat.
N.B. The scarcity of this weed 
in Scotland has led to the 
full enumeration of its ascer- 
tained counties.
60 Thlaspi arvense.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.+ 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge ?
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Miss Attwood ms.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.i 
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
'67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
76 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.t 
78 Peebles.
Grieve.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Macnab sp.
85 Fife !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess !
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
06 Eoss east !
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
N.B. Seldom persistent ; often 
as a casual only.
61 THLASPI PBKFOLIATDM.
31 
61 Thlaspi perfoliatum.
23 Oxford.
Extinct.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice sp.
37 Wor.
(E.Lees.) "oneplace." 
[22 38 64 70] .
62 Thlaspi alpestre.
6 Som. north.
(E.P.Murray.) 
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
60 Denbigh.
Sansom sp.
57 Derby !
64 York m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
[3 Devon.
23 Oxford.] 
N.B. Three segregates thus : 
T. sylvesfre 66 67 90.
T. virens 57.
T. occitanum 6 49 50 6465 66.
63 Capsella Bursa.
All the counties, except 42 74 
97 108; doubtless really to 
be found in all.
64 Hutchinsia petrsea.
6 Som. north.
Christy sp.
16 Kent west.
Sansom sp.
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
36 Hereford.
Watkins sp.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
Flower sp.' 
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh !
J. E.
Bowman sp.
57 Derby.
Bickham sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
72 Dumfr.
(Eev. Mr.
Liddell.) 
65 Teesdalia nudicaulis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Jeffrey.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
(J.
Beesley.) 
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
47 Montgomery.
F. A.
Lees.
48 Merioneth !
Price sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
32 
65 TEESDALIA NUDICAULIS.
59 Lane, soutli.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Clieviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Leefe ms.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
76 Ayr. Duncsin cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
78 Peebles.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
G. Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 " north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
66 Iberis amara.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Collins ms.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Mansell cat.f 
12 Hants north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
Pordham sp.
22 Berks.
Henslow sp.
23 Oxford.
Godley sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Cooper sp.
29 Camb.
Colenian sp.
30 Bedford.
I. Brown sp.
(10 19 30 38 89 49 51 52 
57 62 64 65 67 69 77 79 
80 81 83 84 85; mostly 
garden escapes, and perhaps 
some of them not rightly 
assigned to /.
amara).
67 Lepidium latifolium.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
15 Kent east.
Berkeley ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suff.
east.
Notcutt sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
37 Worcester ?
41 Glamorgan ?
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
H. Crewe sp.
52 Angl.
J. E.Bowman ms.+ 
58 Chester.
Bailey.
60 Lane.
west.
62 York n.
east.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
" denizen." 
(3 13 17 55 64 77 80 81 
82 85 107 ; apparently in- 
troduced, and only casual 
in some of these counties, as 
Leicester and Lanark), 
69 Lepidium Smithii.
1 Corn west !
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs.
cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More oat.f 
11 Hants south!
Bromf.
sp.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Taylor sp.
16 Kent west.
Groves rec.
69 LEPIDIUM SMITmi.
83 
17 Surrey!
Twining sp.
18 Essex south ?
Moxon ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
82 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
85 Monmouth.
Hort ms.
36 Hereford.
" Willmott." 
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Bre.
(E.
For ster.)"hir turn." 
48 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Russell sp.
49 Carnarvon !
Babington ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees rec.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumkerland.
Ottley sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
Webb ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Macnab sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
Syme sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
88 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Hugh Bulfour sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
69 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss cat.
N.B. LocaUties for this occa- 
sionally confused.
70 Lepidimn campestre.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
34 
70 LEPIDIUM CAMPESTEE.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.t 
30 Bedford.
Abbot.
Extinct ?, 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.t 
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Hewitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey.
70 Cumberland.
Addison.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries ?
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.t 
71 Lepidmm ruderale.
1 Cornwall.
^ 
2 east.* Briggs.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.t 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex w.* J.L. Warrenrec.
15 Kent east.
16 west!
"G.E.Smith." 
17 Surrey.* 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.* Blow rec.
21 Midx.
Lawrence sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
"Henslow!" 
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
87 Worcester.
41 Glamorgan.
Atwood ms.t 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.t 
45 Pembroke.
71 LEPIDIUM RUDBBALE.
35 
49 Carnarvon.
(J.
E. Griffith.) 
58 Chester.
" casual." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.f 
66 Durham.
Storey sp.f 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.f 
80 Eoxburgh.
" casual." 
83 Edinb.
D. Douglas sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.f 
N.B. A casual or ballast plant 
in several of its localities.
72 Cochlearia officinalis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Keys sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
"Dr. Tate." 
11 Hants south !
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Taylor sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
84 Gloster west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
E. Brown.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
57 Derby !
alpina ?
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n, east.
Baker cat.
63 York s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 York m.
west, alpina ?
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westm.
Bailey rec.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.* Parquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy eat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce.) 
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
N.B. Said by Mr. Borrer not 
to be found on the coast of 
Sussex.
In the inland locali- 
ties in 38 55 56 79 80 it 
may be an introduced plant.
36 
72*COCHLEARIA ALPINA.
72*Cochlearia alpina.
[C.
" yroenlandica.") 
48 Merioneth.
Lees rec.
49 Carnarvon !
Babington ms.
64 York m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgli.
Brotherstonrec.
87 Perth west.
F. M.Webb rec.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
Grieve ms.
98 Argyle !
05 Boss west.
(Druce.) 
09 Caithness.
Dick.
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[9 or 10 45 50 71] .
72*Oochlearia danica.
1 Corn.
west.
Greenwood sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north!
Maw sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat, 
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Macreightsp.
13 Sussexw.
J. L.Warren cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
19 Essex north.
25 Suffolk east.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Eogers sp.
46 Cardigan.
Pnrchas.
49 Carnarvon !
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Sansom sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Chambers sp.
71 Man. F.M. Webb ms.
1867.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy eat.
81 Berwick ?- 
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie eat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland ?
alpina 1 
N.B. The localities for this 
and the two preceding are 
rather confused together, 
through di£6.culties ia dis- 
tinguishing three species.
72*Cochlearia anglica.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south.
Noteutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Newbould.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 w.
(Arthur Bennett.) 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
72*COCHLEABIA ANGLIOA.
87 
21 Midx.
" Warren, 1869." 
25 Suff.
eaBt. Coleman ms.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Stephens sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
64 north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
Lewis sp.
59 Lane, south.
60 west !
66 Durham ?
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland ?
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey.
70 Cumberland.
Foggitt.
73 Kirkcudbright ?
74 Wigton ?
77 Lanark ?
83 Edinburgh ?
95 Elgin ?
99 Dunbarton ?
08 Ebudes mid?
N.B. An ill-understood spe- 
cies; forms of C.
officinalis 
being confused with it.
[57] .
74 Subularia aquatioa.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman oat.
52 Anglesea.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
87 Perth west.
Brand sp.
88 .
mid.
(Pagan.)' 
89 Perth east.
Syme.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine, Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south I Hooker sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Eoy ms.
1870.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss oat.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
[40 59 72 85] .
75 Draba aizoides.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge.
[5.
"Mr. Talbot, an error"].
76 Draba rupestris.
88 Mid Perth !
96 Easterness.
" Cairngorm." 
98 Argyle ?
or Dunbarton ?
08 Suth.
west.
"Mr. Macnab." 
[11 64 90 94 111] .
77 Draba incana.
39 Stafford ?
Derby only ?
49 Carnarvon.
57 Derby.
Wardale sp.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
88 Mid Perth 1 
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Cairngorm.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Stables sp.
07 Suth.
east.
88 
77 DBABA INOANA.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Dick.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[11 South Hants] .
78 Drataa muralis.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
39 Stafford.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowm.
sp.
48 Merioneth.
Miss Barnard.
57 Derby.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
(1 21 30 34 62 77 80 83 
90 100).
79 Draba vema.
Counties all, except 35 42 46 
60 74 97 98 101 102 103 
104 105 107 110 112; no 
doubt simply overlooked in 
most of these counties ; and 
whether the typical form 
occurs in all of the others 
is not ascertained.
79*D.
braohycarpa.
Segr.
2 Corn.
east.
Bfiggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight.
More sp.
14 Sussex east.
Roper.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Briggs sp.
20 Herts.
E. A.
Pryor.
23 Oxford.
Dyer.
King sp.
38 Warwick.
54 Lino, north.
Lees rec.
57 Derby.
C. Bailey sp.
58 Chester.
New Lpl. flo.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Carr rec.
64 m.
w. T.J.Poggittsp.
65 n.
west.
F.A.Leessp.
66 Durham.
Lees rec.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
69 Westm.
E. Hodgson, sp.
85 Fife.
Thirsk Report, 1868.
N .B .
Doubtless it will be found 
in most other counties ; but 
intermediate forms occur ; 
one such from Orkney, not 
easy to name positively.' 
79*Draba inflata.
Segr.
88 Mid. Perth.
Syme sp.
N.B. The Breadalbane hills, 
Perthshire, seem still to 
remain the only certain 
habitat for this apparently 
distinct species.
Something 
approximating to it has oc- 
curred in the Isle of Wight, 
Warwickshire, and North- 
east Yorkshire ; but in each 
case referred to trachycarpa.
83 Deutaria bulbifera.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
21 Midx.
H. Kingsley sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
39 Stafford.
75 Ayr. James Wilson sp.
84 Cardamine amara.
7 Wilts north.
Flower.
8 south ?
9 Dorset.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat, 
84 CARD AMINE AMABA.
39 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman oat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Midx.
Harris sp.
22 Berks.
Britten eat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Camb.
Bab. ms.
Fryer.
81 Hunts.
Newbould catT 
32 Northton.
83 Gloster east 
84 west ?
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
Howitt.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 ' n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland!
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour sp.
85 Fife, C.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
BaKour.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie oat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
96 Eastemess.
Falconer.
99 Dumbarton?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
[2 East Cornwall?
4 North 
Devon ?
These must be 
held uncertain till verified ; 
although there would seem 
nothing unlikely in the 
habitats] .
85 Cardamine pratensis.- 
Counties all, except 74 97 107 ; 
but doubtless actually grow- 
ing in these counties also.
86 Cardamine hirsuta.
Counties all, except 42 45 48 
53 74 97 98 103 105 107 
108, in all of which it may be 
expected to occur.
The C.
eu-hirsuta, as distinguished 
from C.
sylvatica, may be as 
generally distributed, al- 
though hitherto reported 
separately in scarcely half of 
the counties, from Cornwall 
to Orkney and Shetland.
40 
86 OAEDAMINE SYLVATICA.
86 Cardamine sylvatica.
((7.
flexiwsa, With.) 
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south !
Goulding sp.
4 north.
Dyer.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
. 11 Hants south !
Townsend.
12 north !
Baker cat.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks I 
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east ?
30 Bedford ?
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Babington ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery, Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
(B.D. Jackson.) 
53 Line, south.
E.N. Brown.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
F. M.Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey ms.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eiohardson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Br other ston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid ?
89 east !
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
Syme oat.
95 Elgin.
"Dr. Innes." 
96 Easterness ?
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druoe.) 
09 Caithness.
Grant oat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
H. Johnston.
N.B. The ?
affixed to the 
names of counties indicates 
that " G.
hirsuta " has been 
described as growing by 
ditches or wet places; thus 
leading to a supposition that 
G. sylvatica may be intended 
or included.
87 CAKDAMINE IMPATIBNS.
41 
87 Cardamine impatiens.
2 Corn, east ?
" Crouch." 
3 Devon south .
' ' Eoberts " sp .
4 Devon north ?
6 Som. north.
Thwaites oat.
13 Sussex west.
Beeby, 
16 Kent west.
Beeby.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
34 Gloster west.
Watkins sp.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
39 Stafford.
(Dr. Eraser.) 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
47 Montgy.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman sp.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
57 Derby !
Painter.
60 Lane.
west.
Melvill.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 , n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr?
N.B. The C.
sylvatica has 
been frequently misreported 
as if C.
impatiens, thus 
throwing much doubt on 
several of the counties ; 
among which those enume- 
rated below are mostly 
errors thus occasioned : — 
[7 21 55 58 59 61 62 
70 77 83 97 111 ; also 2 
and 4 ?] 
88 Arabis thaliana.
Counties all, except 1 35 42 
45 46 48 53 72 73 74 
97 98 101 102 103 105 
107 108 110 112.
There 
can be little doubt that it 
could be found in all of 
these counties, if sought 
early in the season, before 
it becomes hidden by more 
robust plants.
And bota- 
nists accustomed to name it 
Sisymbrium thalianum may 
omit to mark it under Arabis 
in a printed catalogue.
89 Arabis petraea.
48 Merioneth ?
' ' Lhwy d.
' ' 
49 Carnarvon.
Bab. sp.
70 Cumberland ?
"Wood." 
88 Perth mid.
Light, scot.
91 Kincardine, "bed of Dee." 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
96 Easterness.
"Cairngorm." 
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
08 Mull.
"Maughan." 
04 Skye.
Lawson cat..
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
10 Hebrides.
" Harris." 
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
South Wales.
Bab. man.
[3 40 57 62 65].
90 Arabis stricta, 
() Som. north.
Thwaites oat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
[70 Cumberland] .
91 Arabis ciliata.
var.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. man.
N.B. The remarks on this 
plant in the third edition of 
' English Botany ' would 
suggest that it may occur 
in other counties, but over- 
looked as a form of Arabis 
hirsuta.
G. Don reported 
an "Arabis ciliata" from 
G 
42 
91 AKABtS CILIaSA.
the hills of Forfarshire.
92 Arabis hirsuta.
1 Corn.
west, "north coast." 
2 east.
3 Devon south !
Hore sp.
5 Som. south.
P.A.Leesrec.
6 north !
Butler sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey I E.
Wood nas.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks, Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
81 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton.
83 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Babington ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
(Bagnall.) 
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
F. A.
Lees sp.
42 Brecon.
" E.
Forsterms." 
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
MelYiU cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmaums.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam sp.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
J. E.
Bowman ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Hutton sp.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy eat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Ed. cat.
" v.c." 
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stu-ling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
92 ARABIS HIRSUTA.
43 
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caithness.
[20].
"garden wall." 
E. Brown cat.
94 Turritis glabra.
[Arabis perfoliata).
6 Som. north ?
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
^12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
16 Kent west.
Sandys sp.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
33 or 34 Gloster .
. .
? Wintle ms.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Leefe sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
70 Cumb.
Dickenson sp.
77 Lanark.* 
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherstonrec.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
Error ?
99 Dunbarton.* 
N.B. Doubtfully native in its 
few Scottish counties.
[9] .
95 Barbarea vulgaris.
Countifes all, except 48 53 60 
74 89 97 98 101 to 112.
In North Britain it is rare 
and doubtfully indigenous ; 
beyond the line of the Cale- 
donian canal it is absent 
from all the lists except 
those for West Boss and 
Caithness.
See the ' Comp.
Cyb. Brit.' for the distribu- 
tion of its segregates.
96 Barbarea stricta.
Segr.
17 Surrey.
Baker sp.
21 Middlesex.
(Baker.) 
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Lees rec.
58 Chester.
Webb & Newbould.
62 York n.
east.
(Baker.) 
86 Stirling.* Horn rec.
98 Nasturtium oflScinale.
Counties all, except 42 74 
97 98 105 109 110; in 
all of which it may be held 
very likely to occur.
99 Nasturtium terrestre.
{N.
palustre).
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.t 
5 Som. south.
Melvill.
6 ' north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
- Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, eat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east!
J.L.Warren.
44 
99 NASTUETIUM TEKEESTKE.
16 Keat west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Ndrf.
east.
28 west.
Notoutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley re'c.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley eat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
-51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
58 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Denny ms.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northmb.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
89 east.
Syme.
90, Forfar.
98 Argyle ?
99 Dumbarton.
J. J.
Foggitt.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[92 South Aberdeen ?] 
100 Nasturtium sylvestre.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
6 Som. south.
Melvill.
9 Dorset ?
Salter.
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
J. L.
Warren.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Skepper cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
88 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
100 NASTURTIUM SYLVESTBE.
45 
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
38 Warwick ?
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Butler sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
GO west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 North.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Foggitt.
72 Dumfries ?
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.f Balf.
sp.
89 Perth east.
Syme sp.
"var: 
siliquis brevioribus." 
[1 or 2 6 70].
101 Nasturtium amphitaium 
[Armoracia amphibia).
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E. Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind eat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock oat.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse eat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Noteutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Parsons.
65 n.
west, "frequent."- 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
[8 72 77 83 85 87 94] .
102 Sisymbrium officinale.
Counties all, except 74 97 
104 105 108 112; in 
all of which it may be 
expected, unless 112 Shet- 
land should be a real ex- 
ception.
46 
103 SISYMBRIUM lEIO.
103 Sisymbrium Irio.
N.B. So uncertain in its ap- 
pearance, this may class 
more appropriately with the 
casuals than with the true 
constituents of our perma- 
nent flora.
104 Sisymbrium Sophia.
2 Cornwall east ?
3 Devon south ?
6 Som. north.
Withers, 1850.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
13 Sussex west?
"Sussex";B.
14 east.-j- J.L.Warren.
15 Kent east.
G.E.Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Midx.
casual only ?
22 Berks.
28 Oxford, extinct ?
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Blow rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat, 
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J.L.Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb.
cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Hancock sp.
67 Northmb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
77 Lanark ?
80 Eoxburghf Br other ston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
86 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables oat.
06 Boss.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.* 
N.B. Somewhat irregular in 
its appearance in recorded 
localities ; ranging in places 
from a casual to a fairly in- 
digenous plant.
106 Erys.
cheiranthoides.
2 Corn.
east.
Cunnaek oat.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.-f 
5 Som. south.
Melvill.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.t 
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
106 EKYSIMIMUM CHEIRANTHOIDES.
47 
15 Kent east.
Bossey sp.
16 west !
1 7 Surrey !
Rev. E .
Wood ms .
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Pordham sp.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.* Druce rec.
33 Grloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
86 Hereford.
" Wilmott ms." 
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees.) 
38 Warwick.
Mrs. Russell.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
N.B. If not an aboriginal 
native of England, it has 
become so well established 
and so frequent in some of 
the southern counties as to 
stand intermediately be- 
tween the colonists and 
natives.
In Mid and North 
Britain, on the contrary, it 
seems to be scarcely better 
than a casual.
(49 50 53 
54 55 to 60 62 63 65 66 
67 71 80 81 84 85 95 103).
107 Erysimum AUiaria.
Counties all, except 42 60 72 
74 78 97 98 101 to 105 
107 to 112.
A recognised 
native from the south coast 
to the borders of the Gram- 
pian mountains.
Northward 
of latitude 56-57, west and 
east, some of the local lists 
mark it as a plant probably 
introduced .
It is one among 
many other such examples, 
of a species abundant in 
England, and shading off to 
the category of a "rare 
plant" in North Britain.
It is to be regretted that 
our technical arrangements 
should place this plant 
under a genus, to the other 
species of which it is so dis- 
similar.
110 Matthiola incana.
10 Wight.
Bromfleld sp.
14 Sussex east.
"Extinct." 
45 Pembroke.
Error ?
N.B. In Mr. A.
G. More's 
catalogue of Vectian plants 
this is marked as one uncer- 
tainly indigenous ; and his 
judgment on conflicting 
views about nativity is less 
one-sided than that of Dr.
Bromfield constantly showed 
itself to be.
111 Matthiola sinuata.
4 Devon north.
Maw sp.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Baker sp.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
N.B. This appears to have 
been found at remote dates 
in Cornwall, Dorset, and 
48 
111 MATTHIOLA SINUATA, 
Sussex ; has it been seen in 
those counties within the 
past half century ?
113 Brassica oleracea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Henfrey sp.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.+ 
15 Kent east!
41 Glamorgan ?
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth ?
49 Carnarvon.
N.B. If this cabbage were not 
so liable to distrust in most 
of its alleged localities, as a 
probable escape from culti- 
vation, it might perhaps be 
accepted as native on the 
cliffs of Kent, the Peninsula, 
and South Wales.
Dr. Tate 
wrote in 1871, " truly na- 
tive" in South Devon.
(18 
27 62 66 67 69 75 81 83 
85 86 100).
114 Brassica campestris.
B. Rapa.
B. Napus.
The exact application of these 
names is BtUl so unsettled, 
and the records of localities 
so confused through mis- 
nomers and uncertainties as 
to the real wildness of the 
things intended by the 
variously applied names, 
that no real usefulness could 
arise from a merely con- 
densed enumeration of re- 
ported counties.
The plant 
now so plentiful along the 
Thames is apparently a wild 
state of the Turnip, whether 
named Eapa or campestris.
To record it as Napm was 
at first simply a misnomer 
through not seeing the plant 
at a sufficiently early stage 
of its growth.
Uninquiring 
repetitions of error cannot 
amend or confirm the origi- 
nal error itself.
116 Sinapis arvensis.
Counties all, except 74 97 ; in 
all of which it might be 
assumed to occur.
117 Sinapis alba.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.t 
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
G. E.-Smith cat.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper-cat.
117 SINAPIS ALBA.
49 
27 Norfolk e.
C. C.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton !
Notoutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Radnor.
B. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Ley. rec.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.f F.
M. Webb.
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
t 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham, "colonist." 
67 Northumb.
"colonist." 
68 Cheviot, "colonist." 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
" common." 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
I.B.Balfour ms.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east!+ 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Ebudes south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
(Druce cat.) 
06 east.
Gordon cat.f 
10 Hebrides.
118 Sinapis nigra.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south !
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Fox sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
G.E.Smithcat.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23'Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Shepherd cat.
27 Norf.
east.
0. C.
Babmgton.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould ms.+ 
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.+ 
50 
118 SINAPIS NIGKA.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
48 Merioneth.
(W.W. Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
(Painter.) 
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
(Parsons rec).
52 Anglesea.
63 Lincoln south !
f 
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
"colonist." 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
[72 77 81 83 85 95] .
120 Sinapis tenuifolia.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
6 Som. north.
Crotch sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.t 
11 Hants south.
Towns, eat.
' 13 Sussex west !
15 Kent east !
Beesley sp.
16 west.
Syme.
17 Surrey !
Newman.
18 Essex south ?
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Yarenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Newman.
22 Berks.
Hurst, ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfleld cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
82 Northton.
Druce rec.
88 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford, extinct ?
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees.) 
38 Warwick.
89 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Shawe sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Flower sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bailey rec.
48 Merioneth.
Mrs. EusseU sp.
49 Carnarvon !
51 Flint.
(Parsons rec).
58 Chester !
Bowman sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.t 
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
' 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland.
[10 14 75 77 81 85] .
121 Sinapis muralis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
8 Devon south.
Thwaites cat.
4 north!
Eogersreo.t 
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight, "introduced." 
11 Hants south.
E. A.
Pryor.
18 Sussex west.
E. A.
Pryor.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.* , E.
A. Pryor.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
121 SINAPIS MURALIS.
51 
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Butler sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
oo.t 
41 Glamorgan.
Purohas sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.t 
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M.Webb cat.
t 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.t 
63 s.
west.+ 
66 Durh..Hort sp.-t "ballast." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.f 
70 Cumberland.
80 Roxburgh.
Brother ston.
85 Fife.
Brand, i- Balf.
cat.+ 
[76 86] .
N.B. The habitats of this 
aud the preceding species 
are confused in our re- 
corded localities for the two 
plants.
122 Sinapis monensis.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
68 Chester!
Fordham sp.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Ayr. Prof.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hooker sp.
01 Can tire.
(2 11 17 21 87 60 64 66 82 
90 104, casual or doubtful ; 
including 8.
Ghdranthus).
123 Raph.
Raphanistrum.
Counties all, except 42 46 47 
60 74 86 97 99104 105 107; 
likely to occur in all.
124 Raphanus maritimus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Payne sp.
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight.
More cat.
14 Sussex east.
Trevelyan ms.
15 Kent east.
Hiern.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembr.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east ?
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
70 Cumberland.
"Benson." 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray sp.
74 Wigton.
Macnab sp.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
98 Argyle.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
BaKour cat.
[26 27 112 Bressa; Edm.
fio.].
125 Reseda Luteola.
Counties all, except 73 74 78 
93 97 to 100 102 to 106 
107 to 112.
Dubiously in- 
digenous in Moray and west- 
ward of the Caledonian 
Canal.
[112.] 
126 Reseda lutea.
52 
126 RESEDA LUTEA.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack 
2 east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north !
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Martin sp.
14 east !
Eoper.
15 Kent east!
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey I Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
.Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop, one locality.
41 Glamorgan.
CoUins ms.
42 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
(E.
Straker).
58 Line, south !
Bloxam sp.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
Hunt.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
(49 51 59 75 77 81 to 85 
89 90 92 95 96).
Dr. Bos- 
well Syme holds it " appa- 
rently truly native" in Fife, 
and Dr. F.
B. White in East 
Perth.
Almost all other 
botanists of Scotland, whose 
opinion can be of any au- 
thority in the matter, mark 
it as an introduced plant in 
the Scottish counties, as also 
in the most northerly coun- 
ties of England.
128 Helianthemum vulgare.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
F. A.
Lees.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Roper.
15 Kent east.
Gf. E.
Smith cat.
16 westl 
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
' 
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
128 HELIANTHEMTJM VBLGAEE.
53 
28 Norf.
west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 North ton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
88 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Bab. cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgom.
J.E.Bowmanms.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lane, south.
Chadwiok sp.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey oat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
69 Westmoreland!
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Grieve.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme oat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
00 Clyde isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
129 Helianth.
polifolium.
3 Devon south.
G. Lloyd sp.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
[34 Glouc.
37 Wore] .
130 Helianth.
canum.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Hooker sp.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
64 Yorkm.west.
F.A.Leesrec.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland ?
[1 34 39].
131 Helianth.
Breweri.
52 Anglesea.
Ball sp.
132 Viola palustris.
Counties all, except 19 20 24 26 
29 31 32 33 42 74 99 ; in 
most of which doubtless it 
is to be found if sought.
54 
183 VIOLA ODOKATA.
133 Viola odorata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok oat.t 
2 east.
Briggs oat.* 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
* 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Play dell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Notcuttcat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E. Smithcat.f 
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Newman ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
Henslow ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow ms.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
J. Hooker ms.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carn.
Eobin.
cat.
not wild.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobin.
cat.
not wild.
53 Lincoln south !
t 
54 north !
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.* 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.f 
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham, "native." 
67 Northumb.
New flora.* 
68 Cheviotland.
New flora.* 
69 Westmoreland !
t 
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.t 
71 Man. Forbes cat.t 
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.t 
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston.t 
81 Berwick.
Border flora.* 
82 Haddington.
Balf.
flo.
88 Edinburgh !
* BaK.
oat.t 
85 Fife.
Syme.* Balf.
flo.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gard.
flora, t 
[111 Orkney ; Lowe's list] .
N.B. In the above enumera- 
tion of counties some varia- 
tion has been made from 
the usual plan.
All the 
counties are enumerated by 
name, although the Violet 
may have been reported in 
them 'simply as an intro- 
duced plant.
The * is here 
brought into use to distin- 
guish counties in which the 
133 VIOLA ODOBATA.
55 
Violet is considered to be 
certainly or very probably 
introduced.
The f indi- 
cates a less positive opinion 
against its nativity.
Seen 
by myself in many counties.
Surrey and North Lincoln 
are the only two in which I 
could look upon it as truly 
native.
134 Viola hirta.
1 Corn.
west.
Miss Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat, 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Hanbury sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notoutt oat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat, 
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgom.
J.E.Bowmanms.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea !
53 Line, south!
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
J. E.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland I 
72 Dumfries, "frequent." 
80 Eoxburgh.
Brother ston ree.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Brand sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Syme cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme " sp." 
[58 Chester; Dick.
Lp. flo.] .
134*Viola permixta, Jord.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
11 Hants south.
Groves ree.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper, 
56 
134*VIOLA PEEMIXTA.
17 Surrey.
H. Groves rec.
19 Essex.
Blow rec.
20 Herts.
Blow rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
135 Viola sylvatica.
(y.
canina, Sm.) 
Counties all, except 74; in all 
which doubtless it occurs.
This distribution may be 
taken to represent that of 
the more usual segregate, 
Riviiimna.
135*V.
Reichenbaohiana.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Somerset...
? 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Syme ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne.
20 Hertford.
Blow.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
(Druce rec).
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
30 Bedford.
Blow rec.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
Eobinson sp.
60 Lane.
w. (F.
A. Lees rec).
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
F.A.Leesrec.
64 m.
west.
Foggitt rec.
66 Durham.
N.B. Probably will be found 
in many other counties.
135* Viola arenaria.
66 Durham.
69 Westm.
Backhouse ms.
135*Viola oanina, Bab.
(F.
flavicomis, Sm.) 
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Parfitt sp.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 "Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south!
Bromf.
sp.
12 north!
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Stevens sp.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Hurst ms.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
"Borrer." 
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Douglas sp.
135*VIOLA CANINA.
67 
31 Hunts I 
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford, Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan, "armaria." 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Pm-chas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
52 Anglesea.
Babington.
53 Lincoln south !
north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
58 Chester.
Brent sp.
59 Lane, south.
Sansom sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland!
Oliver sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Gait ms.
77 Lanark.
Gait ms.
78 Peebles.
Maughan sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Tyacke sp.
84 Linhthgow.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
Gait ms.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
N.B. This violet and the ' syl- 
vatica' have been so much 
confused together under the 
common name of ' canina,' 
that the exact severance of 
their localities, as recorded 
in books, is now impossible.
Perhaps the present species 
will be found as widely dif- 
fused as is the ' sylvatica,' 
although certainly less fre- 
quent.
Often confused with 
the distinct 'lactea,' through 
looking to the shape of leaf, 
instead of the flowers.
135 Viola lactea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs.
sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south !
Bennett sp.
12 north.
J.L.Warren.
14 Sussex east.
Carr sp.
16 Kent west.
More sp.
22 Berks 1 
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
(B.
Lees).
63 York s.
west.
Parsons rec.
[8 9 10 27 29 31 50 58 
78, all or mostly errors ; no 
specimens have been seen 
by me from any of these 
counties.] 
135 Viola stagnina.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow sp.
31 Hunts.
" Babington.-" 
53 Lincoln.
Nicholson sp.
[1 2 63 ; confused with 
' lactea ' in these counties.] 
136 Viola tricolor.
V. arvensis.
Counties all except 42 74 97 
I 
58 
136 VIOLA TRICOLOB.
105 107, under one or other 
of the two ng,mes.
F. ar- 
vensis is reported from 1 to 
112 inclusively, but with 
several of the intervening 
counties still in blank.
The 
plant of arable lands has 
flowers ranging from the 
apetalous state to that with 
large party-coloured petals 
full twice the length of the 
calyx ; and this so gradually 
that any hard line of dis- 
dinction becomes impossible.
The plant of untiUed lands, 
with yellow or party-coloured 
flowers and sub-perennial 
root, might possibly be kept 
apart as " eu-tricolor." But 
that is not the distinction 
made by botanists in their 
applications of the two 
names ; so that "eu-tricolor" 
of some collectors is " ar- 
vensis " of other botanists, 
and vice versa.
136 (137) Viola Curtisii.
1 Cornwall west ?
Ealfs sp.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north !
Maw sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat 
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
52 Anglesea.
Babington ms.
68 Chester !
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Melville.
75 Ayr. Gait ms.
1870.
00 Cumbrae.
Gait ms.
00 Arran.
Horn rec.
136 (137) Viola lutea.
3 Devon south?
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
36 Hereford.
Miss Bell sp.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam ms.
40 Salop.
B. Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
D. Turner ms.
43 Eadnor.
Atwood ms.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh!
51 Flint.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south ?
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Leefe sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland I 
70 Cumberland.
Baker oat.
71 Man.
62 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
76 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Grieve.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddinton.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Tyacke sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Miller cat 
89 east !
186 (137) VIOLA LDTEA.
59 
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie eat.
94 Banff.
96 Easterueas !
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Islay.
Balfour cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
10 Hebrides.
138 Drosera rotundifolia.
Counties all, except 7 33 84 74 
84 103 107; in some of 
these doubtless seen by my- 
self in years long past.
Ex- 
tinct in 32.
138*Drosera obovata.
92 Aberdeen south.
03 Ebudes mid.
139 Drosera intermedia.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
8 WUts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey!
Ellis ms.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Bree sp.
84 Gloster west.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Henfrey sp.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
n. east "sp." Baker.
west.
Parsons rec.
65 n.
w. Webster rec.
69 Westmoreland !
Ball sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray sp.
73 Kirkcudbright?
74 Wigton ?
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
99 Dunbarton.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
[21 61 63 64 65 67 68 76 
85 92 100 111 112; pos- 
sibly two or three_ of these 
may be correct, and two or 
three of the named counties 
be erroneous.
Much con- 
fusion between the plants 
through use of the name 
' longifolia ' for either.] 
140 Drosera anglica.
3 Devon south.
Eussell ms.
5 Som. south.
Parfitt ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
60 
140 BBOSERA ANGLICA.
11 Hants south?
" Curtis," etc.
Sussex ?
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norf.
east.
Marsham sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane, south.
Leyland sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat 
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
67 Northmb.
E.B. Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray sp.
76 Ayr. Hooker sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Extinct ?
85 Fife.
Prof.
Balfour ms.
88 Perth mid.
F. M.
Webb rec.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
" T.
Bell " sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid !
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
07 Suth.
eath.
Greham sp.
08 west !
Greville sp.
09 Caithness.
Maonab sp.
10 Hebribes.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland ?
" longifoUa." 
[1 6 etc.
not sufficiently 
testified,] 
141 Polygala vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 74 79 
86 98 99 ; either " vul- 
garis " or '' depressa" doubt- 
less is to be found in all the 
counties.
141*Polygala eu-vulgaris.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
4 north.
Eogers rec.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers rec.
10 Wight !
12 Hants north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
14 e.
J. L.
Warren cat.
15 Kent east.
A. Bennett.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
20 Hertford.
Blow rec.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford HiUhouse cat.
40 Salop.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
Mott.
59 Lane, south ?
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
63 s.
west.
P. A.
Lees rec.
64 m.west.
F.A. Lees rec.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
E. B.jBowmansp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland I Baker cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Horn rec.
141*P0LYGALA EU-VDLGAKIS.
61 
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
F. B.
White.
12 Shetland ?
Tate cat.
N.B. This segregate will likely 
be found in many other 
counties ; but few collectors 
really distinguish it from 
' depressa ; ' and the ' oxyp- 
tera ' comes in between them 
even more dubiously.
141*Polygala oxyptera.
1 Corn.
west.
Oh. Bab.
ms.
2 east.
Tellam rec.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north.
Eogers rec.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
12 Hants north.
Townsend cat.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Duthie.
29 Cambridge.
Syme, " ciliata." 
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
50 Denbigh.
Miss Jones.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Fisher sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
63 s.
west.
F.A,Leesreo.
64 m.
west.
Foggitt rec.
65 n.
west ?
Ward cat.
67 Northumberland.
71 Man ?
88 Perth mid.
Miller.
141*Polygala depressa.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
11 Hants south !
12 north.
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west.
Groves rec.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Hertford.
Blow rec.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suff.
west, "ciliata var." 
27 Norfolk east.^ Trimen.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
30 Bedford.
Druce rec.
32 Northton.
Druce.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
39 Stafford.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Mott.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south F.M.Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker.
78 Peebles.
Grieve.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh!
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie.
88 Perth mid.
F. M.
Webb rec.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
00 Clyde-isles.
Baker.
62 
141*P0LY(}AI-A DEPBESSA.
09 Caithness.
Brown eat.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Counties far from being 
fuUy ascertained ; this is 
likely the most frequent 
of the three segregates.
141 Folygala calcarea.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU oat.
11 Hants south.
Stratton sp.
12 Hants north.
Townsendcat.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west.
Christy sp.
17 Surrey!
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
Duthie sp.
33 Gloster east.
Stephens sp.
44 Carmarthen ?
Motley ms.
141 Folygala austriaca.
P uliginosa.
15 East Kent.
Duthie sp.
65 N.
W. York.
Backhouse !
142 Frankenia Isevis.
10 Wight!
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Maoreight sp.
13 Sussex west.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east.
Roper.
15 Kent east !
Wardale sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Warner sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge ?
66 Dui-lmm.
" ballast hills." 
(1 Cornwall ; planted).
143 Elatine hexandra.
1 Corn.
west.
Crotch sp.
12 Hantsnorth.
J.L.Warren sp.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
22 Berks.
87 Wore.
(E .Lees), oneloeality.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
40 Salop.
Hind sp.
48 Merioneth.
Matthews.
49 Carnarvon.
Hort sp.
52 Anglesea.
Babington sp.
55 Leicester ?
Ch. Bab.
ms.
58 Chester.
Hardy sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme.
89 east.
Syme.
91 Kineardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south ?
CoUater ?
01 Clyde-isles.
144 Elatine hydropiper.
17 Surrey.
Salnjion sp.
37 Worcester.
Irvine sp.
52 Anglesea.
Hooker sp.
145 Dianthus prolifer.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Stratton sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
22 Berks.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
[1 or 2 3 21 37 ; and per- 
haps extinct in some of the 
other counties.] 
146 Dianthus Armeria.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Rogers.
4 north.
8 Wilts south.
Miss Bellms.
146 DIANTHUS ARMEEIA.
63 
9 Dorset.
10 "Wight.
Extinct?
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Dennes ms.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Bloxam ms.
28 Norfolk west.
36 Hereford.
ShaWe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmar.
Mrs. Oakeshott rec.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
"Miss Potts." 
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
" Ibbotson." 
63 s.
west.
Newb.
ms.
65 Durham.
70 Cumberland.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.* 
89 Perth east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar.
[N.B. Eemarkably uncertain 
or temporary in its locali- 
ties ; perhaps scarcely better 
than a casual in some of the 
counties named above.
80.] 
149 Dianthus csesius.
6 North Somerset.
Christy sp.
(23 37 83).
[11 32 34 53 
69].
150 Dianthus deltoides.
3 Devon south.
Poole ms.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent east?
17 Surrey.
Twining sp.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.+ 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east ?
•26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmar.
Mrs.Oakeshottrec.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnar.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
" H.
E. Smith sp." 
59 Lane.
s. E.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Spruce sp.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees.
64 m.
west.
Biden sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
" Mr. Dunlop." 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan oat.
81 Berwick.
64 
150 DIANTHUS DELTOIDES.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Mrs. Dickson.
96 Eastemess.
Stables sp.
(10) [36 52 70 95 101 106 
112].
151 Saponaria officinalis.
N.B. On record for nearly 
all the counties of England, 
and for several in Wales 
and Scotland ; but almost 
invariably reported by re- 
liable collectors as an intro- 
duced plant.
152 Silene inflata.
Counties aU, except 42 74 
97 98 99 101 103 104 107 
108 110 [111] 112.
Caith- 
ness, possibly introduced ; 
E. Brown cat.
153 Silene maritima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 northi CoUins ms.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Hall.
15 Kent east.
Twining sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
" 2800 feet.'' 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
J. B.Bowman cat, 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
54 Line, north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat, 
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Nor thumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Bailey sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
158 SILENE MAKITIMA.
65 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour oat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east !
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. The technical distinctions 
between this plant and the 
preceding are very slight, 
yet seeming constant, and 
under varied conditions of 
garden culture during several 
successive descents.
154 Silene Otites.
26 Suff.
west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.
[46 62 65] .
(66).
155 Silene anglica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eogers.
Somerset.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Miss Twining sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Elhs ms.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex?
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
86 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb.
cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Foggitt sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
F. A.
Lees.+ 
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.* 
88 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
88 Perth.
mid.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.+ 
96 Eastemess.
Stables cat.
(67 " baUast hills ").
156 Silene nutans.
3 Devon south.
8 Wilts south ?
10 Wight.
More sp.
66 
156 SILENE NUTANS.
15 Kent east.
G. E .
Smith cat.
39 Stafford?
40 Salop?
49 Carnar.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowmanms.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
56 Notts.
Eddison sp.
57 Derby !
Ch. Bab.
sp.
64 York mid west.
85 Fife.
Maughan sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Mrs Dickson.
(20 55 70).
[2 6 11 17 
32 111]-.
156 Silene italica.
16 West Kent.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Dr. Bossey.* 
29 Cambridge.
Ba,rto-n sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Evans sp.
157 Silene noctiflora.
2 Corn.
west.
Briggs.f 
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.t 
7 Wilts north.
Preston sp.t 
14 Sussex e.
Mrs.Oakeshott.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey, Wintle.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
I. Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer.
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton.
54 Lincoln north.
Britten cat.
55 Leicester.
Mott.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church Bab. sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Boyrman sp.
67 Northumb.
"colonist." 
68 Cheviotland.
"colonist." 
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
(10 14 17 21 39 55 59 
61 81 83 ; some of these 
counties perhaps through 
misnomers).
158 Silene conica.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren sp.+ 
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
Crespigny rec.
16 west.
26 Suff.
west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
82 Haddington 
Bunbury sp.
Stock ms.
Wardale sp.
Maonab sp.
90 Forfar.
Eeid sp.
Croall sp.
(22 67 95).
[37 39] .
159 Silene acaulis.
49 Carnarvon !
Leefe sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid I 
98 east.
90 Forfar 1 
159 SILENE ACAULIS, 
67 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
96 Basterness.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
03 Ed. mid.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
Graham sp.
08 Sutherland west.
Ley.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
160 Lychnis alpina.
69 Lake Lane.
E. Potter rec.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
90 Forfar.
J. Macnab sp.
161 Lychnis Viscaria.
43 Eadnor.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgom.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Gourlie sp.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
(17*).
162 Lychnis Flos-ouculi.
Counties all, except 42 74 98 ; 
in all of which doubtless 
it does occur.
168 Lychnis diurna.
Counties all, except 31 74 97 
107.
Possibly it may be 
absent from 31 Hunting- 
don.
Just within the county 
of Cambridge ; Prof.
Babing- 
ton ms.
164 Lychnis vespertina.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunack cat- 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Tliwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east!
Coleman cat.
t 
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
25 Suff east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
68 
164 LYCHNIS VESPEKTINA.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley oat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51FUnt!
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north!
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
60 York west.
Linton cat.
61 s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling !
87 Perth west!
88 mid.
Miller eat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east It 
09 Caithness, Grant cat.
11 Orkney.
Fortescue.
165 Lychnis Githago.
Counties all, except 42 45 46 
47 48 60 74 78 79 88 97 
98 104 105 107 108 110 
112t.
166 Moenchia erecta.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack eat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Stevens sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston v.
sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsendcat.
13 Sussex west.
Bon-er cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey I Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Sansom sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock oat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
82 North ton.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
166 MOENOHIA EBECTA, 
69 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
47 Montg.
J.E.Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Auglesea !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt eat.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
P.M. Webb cat.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.west.
P.A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
167 Sagina apetala.
(Aggr), 
Counties all, except 35 48 70 
72 73 74 78 79 86 87 [97] 
98 99 102 103 105 107.
It 
is now impossible to appor- 
tion the recorded counties 
precisely among the three 
segregates treated under- 
neath.
S. maritima has 
been longer known, and 
thus more often recorded 
distinctly ; though several 
of its alleged localities may 
be held to require verifi- 
cation.
8. ciliata is per- 
haps more frequent than S.
apetala (seg.) and extends 
farther northward.
167 Sagina maritima.
1 Com. west.
Cunnaok eat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 8om.
south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight more cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
14 east.
Boper cat.
15 Kent east.
Ar. Bennett.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
41 Glamorgan.
Withers sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Hunt sp.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
(A.
Carr).
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
Fisher sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nor thumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes eat.
75 Ayr.
. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
. Hennedy eat.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Maenab sp.
85 Fife.
Syme, " genuina." 
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White.) 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Campbell sp.
70 
167 SAGINA MAKITIMA.
08 Suth.
west ?
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[11 Berw.
97 Ben Nevis] .
167 Sagina apetala.
(Segr.) 
1 Cornwall west.
Briggs.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
4 north.
Eogers.
6 Somerst north !
8 Wilts south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell.
10 I.
"of Wight !
11 Hants south !
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
(Druce) rec.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Ar. Bennett.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
E. A.
Pryor.
81 Hunts.
Marshall.
32 Northton.
Druce.
34 Gloster west !
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler.
54 north !
58 Chester.
Bailey.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
81 Berwick.
Bng. hot.
ed.
3. 
82 Haddington.
Craig Christie.
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
N.B. Very doubtful farther 
north, as yet.
The example 
from Montgomery was sent 
to the Exchange Club 
labelled as " Arenaria tenui- 
^ folia ; " and there are grounds 
for suspecting that 8.
ciliata 
also has been occasionally 
so misreported.
168 Sagina ciliata.
(S.egr).
1 Corn.
west.
Briggs ms.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Eogers rec.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north ?
8 Wilts south.
Eogefs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsendcat.
12 north ?
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren cat.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
16 west.
H. Groves reo.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Barnard sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 SufCollv east.
168 SAGINA CILUTA.
71 
26 Suffolk west.
Newbould ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
Newbould ms.
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
31 Hunts.
Druce rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
47 Montgomery.
Warren sp.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
54 Line, north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Mott.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J.L.Warren.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
77 Lanark ?
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Craig Christie.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie.
88 Perth mid.
Syme.
89 east.
(P.B.White).
91 Kincardine.
Eoy ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Eoy, "sent to me." 
168 Sagina procumbens.
Counties all, except 74.
169 Sagina saxatilis.
i^Spergula saginoides.) 
88 Perth mid !
Ball sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
08 Suth.
west.
Stables sp.
36 75 111].
169 Sagina subulata.
[Spergida subulata.) 
1 Corn.
west.
G. S.Gibsonms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell .cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Eussell sp.
12 north !
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east?
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
21 Middlesex?
22 Berks !
24 Bucks ?
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
32 Northton ?
39 Stafford.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
61 York s.
east ?
62 u.
east.
67 Northumberland ?
88 Cheviot.
Kichardson sp.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooper sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Craig Christie sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
Miller.
72 
169 SAGINA SUBULATA.
89 Perth east !
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine .Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables oat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Syme sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
170 Sagina nivalis.
88 Perth Mid. Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton ?
or Argyle ?
[90 Man. ed.
3. 104 Brit.
flo.
ed.
8] .
171 Sagina nodosa.
[Spergula nodosa.) 
1 Com. west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat ?
3 Devon south ?
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Preston v.
sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townseud cat.
12 north.
Townsendcat.
13 Sussex west.
Eoper.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
G. E .
Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Crespigny sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
38 Gloster east ?
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Britten.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.i 
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Fleming sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan can.
171 SAGINA NODOSA.
73 
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson oat.
80 Eoxbnrgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east !
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. This would appear to 
rank among the " common 
plants" by its wide and 
nearly general distribution ; 
but its localities are rather 
dotted over the island, than 
really continuous like those 
of the Daisy and other more 
truly common species.
172 Spergula arvensis.
Counties all, except, 35 42 74; 
no doubt to be found in all 
these seeming vacancies.
173 Honkeneja peploides.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Gissing sp.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Warren cat.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent east!
G.E.Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
Ar. Bennett.
19 north.
Hall sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
E. Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. B .
Bowman ms.
61 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south!
P.M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
L 
74 
173 HONKENEJA PEPLOIDES.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
soutli.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat 
03 Ebrides.
Eoss rec.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme eat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
174 Spergularia marina.
(Aggregate).
[Lepigonum marinum).
1 Corn, west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Stephens sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Syme sp.
14 east !
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
16 west I 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
34 Gloster west I Thwaites cat.
47 Worcester.
Dr. Fraser.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
Butler sp.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
Hunt sp.
59 Lane.
south!
P.M.Webbcat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
^torey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
89 east.
P. B.
White.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
-00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
174*SPBBGULAEIA MAEGINATA.
174*Spergularia marginata.
(Segregate).
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eogers rec.
6 Som. north.
Stevens sp.
10 Wight.
More.
11 Hants south.
Townsend ms.
13 Sussex west !
14 east.
Ar. Bennett.
15 Kent east.
28 Norfolk west.
Blow rec.
44 Carmarthen.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey.
49 Carnarvon.
Bailey.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea.
Davies.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
65 Durham.
Baker.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Baker.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey rec.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Ebrides mid.
Eoss rec.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. Probably found in most 
of the counties indicated 
above for the aggregate 
"marina." I am not able 
clearly to distinguish this 
segregate and the next al- 
though the extreme ex- 
amples do appear so dif- 
ferent.
174 Sperg.
negleeta.
(Seg).
(S.
media).
1 Corn.
west.
A. W.
Bennett.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Melvill.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
18 Sussex west !
14 .
east.
E. A.
Pryor.
15 Kent east !
16 Hants south.
Townsend.
18 Essex south ?
19 north.
Varenne ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Ar. Bennett.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.
87 Worcester.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
58 Lincoln south !
54 north !
58 Chester.
Hunt.
J.L.Warren.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
60 west?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
68 s.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
74 Wigton.
Horn rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
99 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme E.B. ed.
8. 
174 Sperg.
rupestris.
(Seg.) 
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Maw sp.
76 
174 SPEKOTILAEIA EUPES,TEIS.
9 Dorset.
Boswell-Syme ms.
10 "Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones reo.
45 Pembroke.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Hunt sp.
52 Anglesea.
Windsor sp.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis sp.
71 Man. Webb ms.
73 Kirkeud.
Craig Christie.
74 Wigton.
Horn.
rec.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
N.B. Very Uttle differing from 
some states of " neglecta," 
and perhaps only the same 
thing more advanced in 
age, having survived many 
seasons.
175 Spergularia rubra.
Counties all, except 35 42 43 
47 73 74 75 78 79 86 89 
97 98 101 to 105 107 to 
112.
177 Arenaria norvegioa.
112 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[Ill Murchison and Peach] .
178 Arenaria serpyllifolia.
Counties all, except 35 48 72 
74 78 97 98 99 104 107 109 
112 ; in most of these it 
will be found either native 
or colonist.
The counties 
for " leptoclados " are not 
here attempted apart, be- 
cause several of the speci- 
which I have seen so labelled 
were simply slender states of 
serpyllifolia.
I have seen the 
true plant in 6 10 17 21 and 
likely in other counties, on 
walls and by roadsides, not 
in cornfields.
179 Arenaria tenuifolia.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Eogers.
11 Hants south.
More ms.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
G. E.Smith sp.
16 Kent west.
Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Duthie sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby.
Whitehead sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
(Baker).
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
[1 2 8 9 39 40 59 83 
85 ; an old or poor au- 
thority] .
180 Arenaria verna.
1 Corn.
west.
Ar. Bennett sp.
180 ABENAEIA VEBNA.
77 
6 Som. north.
Stephens sp.
39 Stafford.
42 Brecon ?
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman eat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
57 Derby !
Howitt oat.
58 Chester?
60 Lane.
west.
63 York s.
west ?
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright ?
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
88 Perth mid.
92 Aber south.
98 north.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
[82 36 56 77 90; errors 
or insufficiently vouched] .
181 Arenaria rubella.
88 Mid Perth !
Hooker sp.
08 West Suth.
Graham exc.
" on one cliff on Ben Hope, 
Sutherland." 
181 Arenaria uliginosa.
[Spergula stricta).
66 Durham.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
182 Arenaria trinervia.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
75 78 97 98 101 to 105 
107 108 109 to 112; in 
inany of which it is likely to 
occur.
184 Stellaria nemorum.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
40 Salop ?
41 Glamorgan ?
46 Cardigan.
Ley rec.
47 Montgomery.
Mellvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedycat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgli.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife ?
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Campbell sp.
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Eoy sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie ms.
94 Banff.
" Grant Duff." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
[2Bot. Soc.
Ed. 3Flo. Dev, 
78 
184 STELLAEIA NEMOEUM.
37 Lees.
38 Bree.
50 Faun.
Grust.
Authorities not satis- 
factory for a plant which- has 
heen confused by collectors 
with Cerastiuni aquaticum 
and with nemoral varieties 
of Stellaria wedia.
The ?
follows the names of other 
counties, for which the au- 
thority may be rather better, 
although still scarcely suffi- 
cient.
185 Stellaria media.
Counties all, except 74.
185''=Stellaria •umbrosa.
3 Devon south.
Towns, sp.
6 Som. north.
9 Dorset.
(Newbould.) 
15 or 16 Kent.
Edwards sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne.
85 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Ley sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall rec.
58 Chester.
P. M.
Webb sp.
62 York n.
west.
Webster.
64 mid west.
P. A.
Lees.
85 Pife.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
P. B.
White.
89 east.
(P.
B. White.) 
185 Stellaria Holostea.
Counties all, except 74 97 98 
102 104 107 110 112; likely 
to occur in all of these, 
unless 110 and 112 be real 
exceptions.
187 Stellaria glauoa.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat, 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
"Newnham." 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Hort sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notoutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
40 Salop.
Bidewell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Gordon ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line.
s. Powler & Lees rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Gordon ms.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Cheeseman.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
P. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.west.
P.A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward eat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
187 STELLAEIA GLAUOA.
79 
85 Fife.
[1 2 3 5 or 6 7 14 16 
35 87 39, insufficiently 
vouched.
3oth S.
uliginosa 
and Holostea have been mis- 
reported as S.
glaiica, partly 
perhaps through their glau- 
cous-green hue] .
188 Stellaria graminea.
Counties all, except 74 97 98 
102 105 107 110; likely to 
occur in all.
189 Stellaria uliginosa.
Counties all, except 31 34 42 
51 73 74 84 98 101 ; sim- 
ply overlooked in these ?
190 Stellaria cerastoides.
[Cerastium trigynum.) 
88 Perth mid.
92 Aber.
south.
Brand sp.
96 Easterness.
Gordon sp.
97 WesternesS"!
Eoy sp.
[94].
191 Cerastium aquaticum.
2 Cornwall east ?
3 Devon south !
5 8om.
south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Turquand rec.
12 north !
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J.L. Warrenrec.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Mrs. Atkins sp.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HUlhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 North ton.
Notoutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Eussell sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnallms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinsoncat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.west.
F.A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
(66 80).
[77 80 90 111] .
192 Cerastium glomeratum.
Counties all, except 74 97 98 
107 ; in aU these it is sure 
to occur.
80 
193 CBEASTIUM TEIVIALE.
193 Cerastium triviale.
Counties all, except 43 74.
194 Cerast.semidecandrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs sp.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Syme ms.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
J. Brown sp.
21 Middlesex I 
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam sp.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south Bloxam sp.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
sp.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
CroaU sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[Ill Clouston.
112 Ed- 
monston] .
194 Cerastium tetrandrmn.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
194 CERA3TIUM TETKANDEUM.
81 
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Babington ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Lingwood sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Ar. Bennett.
19 north.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
39 Stafford?
" Mr. Spark." 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones oat.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon !
52 Anglesea.
Winch ms.
54 Line, north.
P. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester!
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Wood sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Hort sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland?
M. G.
71 Man. Carrington sp.
75 Ayr. Gourlie sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid.
(P.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Grant cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Much confused with 
' semidecandrwm ; ' and some 
localities of ' tetrandrum ' 
probably still assigned to 
the other species, or vice 
versa, ?
194 Cerastium pumilnm.
" glutinosum." 
1 Corn.
west.
"C.C.B."1839.
3 Devon south.
Townsend sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
17 Surrey.
"Dickson, 1778." 
33 Gloster east.
Duthie sp.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
52 Anglesea ?
N.B. Specimens picked on 
Molesey Hurst, Surrey, and 
labelled " tetrandrum " by 
myself, were named "gluti- 
nosum " by Mr. Lloyd of 
Nantes.
The counties of 
Durham and Fife have been 
reported, but through mis- 
nomers.
The botanists of 
Cornwall do not appear to 
have seen this plant there.
[30 66 85] .
82 
195 OBKASTIUM ARVBNSE.
195 Cerastium arvense.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell rec.
11 Hants south.
Stratton.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east.
G.B. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman eat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Fordham sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Pnrchas "v.
s." 
87 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Huish rec.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Hewitt cat.
58 Chester.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
P. A.
Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Kingsley sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland, 
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton cat.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
" Mr. Dunlop." 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.B.White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
93 north.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
[3 9 111 ; the name ap- 
pears to mislead some col- 
lectors, who thus label G.
vulgatum, or report " C.
arvense" from "cornfields." 
196 Cerastium alpiuum.
49 Carnarvon.
Ball sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Gutch sp.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
89 east.
(F.B.White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
96 Easterness.
Ley rec.
97 Westerness.
Eoy sp.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson oat.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
197 Cerastium latifolium.
49 Carnarvon.
Sandys sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Ley rec.
88 mid !
H. Balf.
sp.
l97 CEBASTlliM LATIFOLiUIrf.
83 
90 Forfar.
Mennell.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
94 Banff.
Barry sp.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
12 Shetland.
C. nigrescens.
[86 98 Lightf.
Ill Neill] , 
198 Cherleria sedoides.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
04 Eb. north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Eoss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
12 Shetland ?
200 Linum perenne.
19 Essex north.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
32 Northton ?
55 Eutland.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
N.B. Linum angiistifolium has 
repeatedly been misreported 
as L.
perenne; and more 
strangely L.
mitatissimum 
also.
Probably it was one 
or other of these in the fol- 
lowing counties [3469 
11 14 15 18 20 40 83].
201 Linum angustifolium.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east !
West sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
22 Berks ?
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Barnard ms.
28 west.
Babington sp.
33 Gloster east ?
36 Hereford.
39 Stafford ?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.f 
51 Flint.
Francis Bacon.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
71 Man.
[62].
(66).
202 Linum catharticum.
Counties all, except 42 74 78; 
doubtless to be found in all 
of them.
203 Radiola millegrana.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
84 
203 KADIOLA MILLEGBANA.
4 Devon north.
Somerset.
Southby cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Townsend.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
Coleman ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Withers sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Eussell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington ms< 
50 Denbigh ?
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Fowler reo.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
F. A.
Lees rec.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westm.
Miss Barnard.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. G.
Maonab sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Carnegie sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
88 Perth mid.
Brand sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Croall sp.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
1 05 Eoss west.
Eoss cat.
06 east !
Gordon cat.
I Sutherland.
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
204 Malva xaoschata.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
6 north !
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
9 Dorset 
10 Wight.
Maw cat.
Coleman cat.
Thwaites cat.
Flower cat.
Flower cat.
Pleydell cat.
More cat.
11 Hants south 1 Notcutt sp.
304 MALVA MOSCHATA.
85 
12 Hants n.
! Miss Twining sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 , east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north !
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster sp.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Miss Huish rec.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Phnt !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 Perth mid.
Miller.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
(90 91 92 95 96 109).
205 Malva sylvestris.
Counties all, except 73 74 78 
79 93 94 97 98 101 103 
104 105 107 to 112.
Eare 
in North Britain ; and 
deemed not indigenous in 
Aberdeen or Moray.
206 Malva rotundifolia.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
20 6 MALVA BOTtlNblPOLtA.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
, Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley reo.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon !
60 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint I 
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north!
Britten cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Hewitt cat.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
207 Althsea hirsuta.
6 Somerset north.
16 Kent west.
Baker.
208 Althsea officinalis.
1 Corn.
west.
Extinct ?
2 east?
"Couch." 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.j 
6 Som. north.
CoUins ms.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU ms.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
14 Sussex east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east !
G.E. Smith oat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
208 ALTH^A OFFICINALIS.
87 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
40 Salop.
Brooks in Shrop.
flo.
41 Grlamorgan.
Brent sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 Line, north !
Howitt sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.f 
(58 59 68).
[21 49 64 
86 99].
210 Lavatera arborea.
1 Cornwall west !
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon s.
G. S.
Gibson ms.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarth.
H. L.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Introduced ?
52 Anglesea.
J. E.
Bowm.
ms.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
75 Ayr. Ailsa Craig, &c.
(10 13 14 67 82 85 100).
[9 11 18 27, on old records 
only] .
210 Lavatera sylvestris.
01 Scilly Isles.
Curn., Ealfssp.
211 Tilia parvifolia.
3 Devon south.
Flower sp.
6 Somerset north !
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Benthall sp.
32 North ton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Sandys sp.
35 Monmouth.
Gibson ms.
36 Hereford.
Babington ms.
37 Worcester.
Butler sp.
39 Stafford.
Babington ms.
41 Glamorgan.
E. Lees ms.
42 Brecon.
Native; E.
Lees.
67 Derby.
Church.
Bab. ms.
62 York n.
east, "native." 
70 Cumberland !
(1 16 17 21 23 24 26 29 
83 38 49 50 51 53 or 54 
55 56 58 59 64 66 69 
75 77 82 83 88; more or 
less uncertainly indigenous, 
or insufficiently vouched in 
all of these counties).
213 Tilia grandifolia.
36 Hereford.
Babington ms.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat, 
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
N.B. These are the only three 
counties known to me, as 
resting on good authority in 
support of the true nativity 
of this Lime.
It is recorded 
for many other counties, 
from West Cornwall to 
Moray, usually with indica- 
tions in distrust of it being 
really an indigenous tree.
In Surrey its leaves are 
much more damaged by 
spring frosts than are those 
of the T.
intermedia.
It has 
been confused with this 
latter ; from which it is 
readily distinguished if seen 
in fruit.
214 Hyper.
Androssemum.
[AndroscBmum officinale] .
88 
214 HYPERICUM ANDROSjEMUM.
1 Corn.
west.
Cuunack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 n.
! Eastmond sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
...sp.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Carr sp.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Varenne ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east ?
" Wigg." 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
82 Northton.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Prentice ms.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
co.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Eobinson ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon 1 Gibson ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms, 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester !
59 Lane.
south.
F.M.Webbcat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.f 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Otley sp.
71 Man. Jowett sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour oat.
08 mid.
Eoss rec.
04 north.
06 Eoss.
Gordon ms.
East ?
(56 68 81 88 85 87).
215 Hyperic.
perforatum.
Counties all, except 42 53 71 
87 96 97 98 99 101 to 105 
107 108 110 [111].
112 
Shetland ?
216 H.
quadrangulum, 
{H.
tetraptet-um).
Counties all, except 85 42 44 
72 74 78 84 97 98 105 107 
to 112.
Probably occurs in 
all up to 100 or 106.
216 Hypericum dubium.
[H.
maculatum).
216 HYPEKICDM DUBIUM.
89 
1 Corn, w.
G. S.
Gibson ms.
2 east.
Here sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
4 north !
6 Somerset north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north!
Towns, eat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
19 Essex n.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Pryor.
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Babington ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Kadnor.
Ley rec.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Babington sp.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill oat.
48 Merioneth.
Eussell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Fisher sp.
61 Flint.
52 Angle sea.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 u.
east.
Baker cat.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
R. B.
Bowman sp.
67 North.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmor.
Miss Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife ?
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
K. M.
Balf.
sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
98 Argyle.
00 Arran.
G. Macnab sp.
[10 21 73].
(109).
217 Hypericum taBeticum.
(H.
undulatum.) 
1 Com. west.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Dev. south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
T. Wainwright.
218 Hyperic.
humifusum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
90 
218 HYPEKtOUM HUMIFUSUM.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman oat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
IC west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt eat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites oat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones oat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley oat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton eat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan eat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy eat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brother ston reo.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Macnab sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
08 mid.
Eoss oat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
oat.
219 Hyperic.
linariifolium.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east ?
3 Devon s.
Goulding sp.
220 Hypericum pulohrum.
Counties all, except 81 42 74 ; 
possibly absent from no.
31.
221 
HYPERICUM HIESUTUM.
91 
221 Hypericum hirsutum.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north.
5 Som, south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse oat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
47 Montgomery.
Melville cat.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves.) 
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Parsons rec.
53 Lincoln south Fowler rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt oat.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
60 Lane, west !
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberl.
Eobinson sp.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. James Wilson sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh!
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Symecat.
86 Stirlmg.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid!
E. Twining sp.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
" Mr. Martin." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy eat.
06 Eoss e.
" Eev. G.
Wilson." 
[58 72] .
222 Hyperic.
montanum.
1 Corn.
west.
92 
222 HYPEEICUM MONTANUM.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.
6 Som. north I Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants s.
H. & J.
Groves sp.
12 n.
Townsend oat.
13 Sussex west.
Eev. H.E.Fox.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
20 Herts ?
" once found." 
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Harris sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
88 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
87 Worcester.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Miss E.
Jones sp.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carn.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr.
223 Hypericum elodes, 
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south I Briggs oat.
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Bloomfield sp.
15 Kent east.
J. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey I Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
" Willmott." 
88 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Radnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. C.
Jones.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Pools ms.
49 Carn.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51' Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester ?
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Waorren cat.
59 Lano.
south.
Tudor ms.
61 York s.
east.
223 HYPERICUM ELODES.
93 
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Carr rec.
64 m.west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Otley sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
73 Kirkcudbright, Gray sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
11 Orkney ?
Neill, &c.
[21 29 ; extinct] .
225 Acer campestre.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south 1 Notoutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat, 
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge, ifeabington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
Miss Atwood ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Ar. Bennett).
47 Montgomery.
Melville cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson eat.
50 Denbigh I Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Hewitt cat.
58 Chester.
P. M.
Webb.* 
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.f 
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Britten.
(1 2 68 70 71 76 77 78 80 
81 83 84 85 89 90 98 100 
109; given as a native of 83 
84 85, in the Flora of Edin- 
burgh).
226 Acer Pseudo-platanus.
N.B. Given as native of Had- 
dington, Edinburgh, and 
Fife, in the Flora of Edin- 
burgh ; also the same in the 
94 
226 AOEK PSEUDO-PLA.TANUS.
old Flora of Northumber- 
land and Durham.
In the 
New Flora of N.
and D.
it 
is named as an "alien"; 
and such is its proper cha- 
racter in the counties of the 
Forth.
As an alien, it is 
reported for most of the 
counties, from Cornwall to 
Caithness.
227 Erodium maritimum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south ?
14 Sussex east.
Extinct ?
15 Kent east.
Extinct ?
17 Surrey.
W. Beeves ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
84 Gloster west.
Winch sp.
36 Hereford.
Purohas sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Sandys sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea !
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester ?
Extinct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
(66 " baUast hills.") 
228 Erodium cicutarium.
Counties aU, except 42 43 47 
69 72 74 78 79 87 97 98 
104 105 108 [111] 112.
229 Erodium moschatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Gibson sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat, 
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
52 Anglesea ?
N.B. Eeported from numerous 
other counties, but almost 
certainly mis-reported or 
not indigenous in them.
(14 20 30 32 49 80).
230 Geranium sylvaticum.
28 Norfolk west ?
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
57 Derby.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland 1 Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland I 
230 GEKANIUM SYLVATICUM.
95 
72 Dumfries.
Gray ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 LinlithgQ-w.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Parquharson cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Grieve cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Sutherland west.
Ley.
09 Caithness.
Grant cat.
[1 25 27 28 55 111; 
erroneous or insufficiently 
vouched.] 
231 Geranium pratense.
2 Corn, east ?
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend ms.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Mrs. Lilly.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
28 Norf.
west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 North ton.
Notcutt eat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan ?
42 Brecon.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam eat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.west.
Tathamcat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland 1 
96 
231 GEEANIUM PRATENSB.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Miller oat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Ebudes south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss rec.
232 Geranium pyrenaicum.
2 Com. east.
Briggs sp.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.+ 
6 Som. north.
French sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south ?
12 north ?
.13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.f 
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
Occasional.!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
23 Oxford.
H. W.
Trott sp.
24 Bucks.
Mrs. James sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
26 west.
Henslow ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen ?
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
Gibson ms.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Lees rec* 
57 Derby.
Bailey rec.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
" native." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
" native." 
65 n.
west.
" native." 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
Alien.
85 Fife.
Miss Lonsdale.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east !
Escape ?
95 Elgin.
" Eeported." 
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
N.B. The above is to be taken 
as a full enumeration of 
counties, without separating 
the erroneous and those in 
which this Geranium is pro- 
bably alien.
In the ' Botany 
of North Yorkshire' it is 
232 GERANIUM PYEENAICUM.
97 
given as truly "native;" 
tacitly so taken in some few 
other counties also.
233 Geran.
rotundifolium.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south!
Hore sp.
6 Som. north !
Eussell sp.
7 WUts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Boswell Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Bloxam sp.
25 Suffolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington ms.f 
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
32 Northton.
Druce ms.
34 Gloster west !
Stephens sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
(58 66 67 70 82 83).
[20 36 40 41 50 57 63 
64 ; insufficiently certified ; 
mostly erroneous ?] 
234 Geranium pusillum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
63 s.west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp, 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
98 
234 GERANIUM PUSILLTJM.
70 Cumberland.
" Benson." 
77 Lanark.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh I Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
94 Banif.
" Bare." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
03 Ebrides mid.
Boss cat.
N.B. Not rare in England ; 
rare or overlooked in Scot- 
land.
235 Geranium moUe.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
98.
236 Geranium dissectum.
Counties all, except 35 42 74 
97 98 104 105 108 110 
112.
237 Geran.
cohimbinum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsendms.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E.Smith cat.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey 1 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
" v.
r." 
26 west.
Bloomfieldms.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
80 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmoutji.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh.
Leefe sp.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland !
237 GERANIUM OOIiUMBINUM.
99 
70 Cumberland.
" Robinson!
" 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Roxburgh.
One locality.
81 Berwick.
One locality.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
88 Perth mid.
Miller.
90 Forfar.
(29).
[77 99].
238 Geranium lucidum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs eat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.t 
15 Kent east.
G. E Smith oat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Twining sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Miss Huish rec.
43 Radnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Butler sp.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon !
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Howitt.sp.
57 Derby.
Ch. Babington sp.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. R.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
86 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
100 
238 GERANIUM LUCIDUM.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.+ 
93 north.
Dickie flo.
96 Easterness !
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
[60 111 Orkney; Lowe's 
Ust] .
239 Geran.
Robertianum.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
99 110 112.
240 Geran.
sanguineum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Abraham ms.
6 Som. north.
Young sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
19 Essex north.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper ms.
28 Norfolk west ?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester., Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Eadnor.
Purchas ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgom.
J.E. Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south ?
54 north.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Warren flo.
59 Lane, south.
Extinct ?
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
88 Perth mid.
89 east (F.
B. Wliite.) 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Bbudes mid.
Eoss cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
(24).
241 Impatiens fulva.
8 Wilts.
" quite naturalised." 
Sussex.
Miss Carr sp.
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
21 Middx.
Twining sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten ms.
N.B. From America, but tho- 
roughly established ; per- 
haps more so than the Noli- 
me-tangere, although this 
latter has been supposed in- 
digenous in Wales and North 
England.
242 IMPATIENS NOLI-MB-TANGEBE.
101 
242 Im. Noli-me tangere, L.
6 Som. north.
Flower cat.* 
9 Dorset.
Salter cat.
t 
17 Surrey.* 
21 Middlesex.* 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.f 
39 Stafford.
Garner.* 
48 Mar. J.E.Bowman, "wild." 
49 Carnarvon.
Newbould.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.f 
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.+ 
58 Chester.
Warren.* 
59 Lane, south.
Woods.
61 York s.
east.
Sup. Fl.
York.* 
62 n.
east.
Baker.* 
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.* 
64 m.
west.
Lees cat.* 
67 Northumb.
New Flo. N.D.* 
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.* 
69 Westmor.
Borrer.
wild.
70 Cumberland.
Borrer ms.* 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.* 
80 Eoxburgh.
Murray.* 
83 Edinburgh.
Flo. of Edinb.* 
90 Forfar.
Groall.* 
[8 29 47] .
Note'.
If the Noli-me-tangere 
be really native here, it 
must be so very locally; say 
in North Wales and West- 
moreland.
243 Oxalis Acetosella.
Counties all, except 31 42 53 
74 112 ; it may be really 
absent from the first and 
last of these counties.
245 Euonymus europseus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 .
north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
8 north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More eat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock oat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
28 west..
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
86 Hereford.
.Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop !
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Eadnor.
• E.
H. Jones.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgom.
J.E.Bowmanms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms.
f 
52 Anglesea.
63 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
102 
245 EUONYMUS EUHOPaiUS.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
Windsor sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Bailey rec.
62 York n.
east.
Baker " sp." 
63 s.
west.
P. A.
Lees sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudb.
" certainly wUd." 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinb.
"apparently wild." 
(69 77 84 65 109).
246 Bhamnus catharticus.
3 Devon south.
Error ?
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Groves sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
28 Norf.
west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambribge.
Fordham sp.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Newb.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
" Eobinson." 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Still there ?
69 Westmoreland !
72 Dumfries ?
(94 " Dr. Todd." 100 Prof.
Balfour sp.) 
247 Rhamnus Frangula.
1 Com. west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Baker oat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer oat.
247 RHAMNUS FRANGULA.
108 
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Kev. E.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.j 
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. B.
Bowman sp, 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
Fowler.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
"Holland." 
59 Lane, south !
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr.
93 Aber.
nor.
" likely native." 
95 Elgin.
" Dr. Innes." 
06 Boss east.
Planted ?
07 Suth.
east.
Planted ?
248 Spartium scopariiun.
Counties all, except 74 110 
(111) 112 ; apparently in- 
digenous northward to Suth- 
erland and Caithness ; and 
doubtless to be found in 
every county south .
from 
those two.
249 Ulex europseus.
Counties all, except 42 74 103 
105.
To the North Isles it 
has likely been introduced 
by sowings of seed ; as is 
also the case with many 
other of its localities in 
North Britain, especially 
those in the North High- 
lands.
250 Ulex "nanus." 
All the English counties, ex- 
cept 19 23 30 31 43 44 
45 47 48 51 53 54 60 61.
In Scotland, recorded for 73 
74 75; [also in 81 83 85 90 
95] .
This area includes 
the two segregates, which 
of late have been recorded 
apart as under.
250 Ulex eu-nanus.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsendms.
12 north!
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west 1 Baker cat.
14 east.
Carr sp.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
104 
250 ULEX EU-NANUS.
16 Kent west.
Groves rec.
17 Surrey !
20 Herts.
E. A.
Pryor.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks 1 
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
34 Gloster west ?
39 Stafford.
F. A.
Lees rec.
48 Merioneth.
(Eeeves).
[27 63 64 66 ; doubtful] .
250 Ulex Gallii.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
6 Som. south.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Bailey rec.
29 Cambridge ?
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
35 Monmouth.
86 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Newman ms.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor, Newman sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Atwood sp.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
55 Leicester.
Mott.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester !
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 Yorkm.west.
A.F.Leescat.
65 n.
west.
67 Nor thumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
71 Man.
" Babington." 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Hennedy.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Arnott ms.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
Galloway.
Lloyd sp.
(92 " a solitary plant." 100).
251 Genista tinctoria.
1 Corn, west!
v. humifusa.
3 Devon south ?
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
251 GENISTA TlNCTOEtA.
105 
28 Norfolk west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood ms.
46 Cardigan.
Attwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
E. Brown ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Liac.
south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brother ston rec.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
83 Edinburgh ?
252 Genista pilosa.
1 Cornwall west !
Cunnack sp.
14 Sussex east.
Wallis sp.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
26 Suff.
west.
Bloomfield ms.
37 Worcester.
Extinct.
45 Pembroke.
E. Lees sp.
[39 48 69; errors?] 
253 Genista anglica.
Counties all, except 5 or 6 31 
33 42 47 48 60 71 74 75 
76 78 84 98 to 105 107 
to 112.
32 extinct ?
254 Ononis arvensis.
Counties all, except 31 42 47 
53 74 97 101 103 104 105 
107 109 to 112.
255 Ononis spinosa.
(0.
campestris).
[0.
antiquorum).
1 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Torquay flo.
4 north.
Eav. flo.
6 Som. south.
J. Poole ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
herb.
12 north.
Clarke.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Tonb.
flo.
15 Kent east !
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Tonb.
flo.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
W & C.
flo.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
p 
106 
255 ONONIS SPINOSA.
22 Berks.
Britten flo.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten v.
sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Henslow.
27 Norfolk east.
Munford.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias flo.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Gulch add.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
(Eeeves).
51 Flint ?
Wats.
mem.
53 Line, south ?
Wats.
mem.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
south.
F.M.Webbcat.
61 York s.
east.
Moore ms.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Moore ms.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durhaln.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland.
Alton.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" v.r." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Goldie to Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Hadd.
Edin.
Bot. cat.
"5." 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour flo.
85 Fife ?
Edin.
Bot. cat.
" 5." 
90 Forfar ?
Gard.
flo.
99 Dunbarton ?
Hooker sp.
[10].
N.B. The habitats of this 
species and the preceding 
Unonis are inextricably con- 
fused in books ; nor can I 
trust my own notes and lists 
of years past with any con- 
fidence of the names having 
been then rightly applied.
The fragments sent to me 
as spinosa, being branchlets 
without roots or pods, are 
unsatisfactory.
Under these 
uncertainties all the counties 
from my compiled notes are 
given above, in connexion 
with the authorities for them.
256 Ononis reclinata.
3 Devon s.
J. H.
EossaU rec.
74 Wigton.
Graham.* 
257 Anthyllis vulneraria.
Counties all, except 18 42 43 
53 74 75 78 86 97 98 105 
107.
This can scarcely be 
classed among the " com- 
mon" plants although it is 
here indicated as occurring 
in 92 counties, and these 
including the northern and 
southern extremes of Britain.
257 Anthyllis Dillenii.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnacksp.
, 
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Wainwright.
14 Sussex east.
J. L.
Warren.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
257 ANTHYLLIS DILLENH.
107 
52 Anglesea.
Crotcli sp.
[69 112].
258 Medicago sylvestris.
26 Suff.
west.
Babington sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Eng. Bot.
3.' 
28 west.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
29 Cambridge.
Hort.
sp.
259 Medicago falcata.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Kirk sp.
28 west.
G. S.
Gibson ms.
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
[3 6 9 13 15 17 (19) 20 
39 41 62 (66 67 70); all 
these either erroneous or in- 
sufficiently vouched, or non- 
indigenous habitats] .
260 Medicago lupulina.
Counties all, except 35 42 48 
72 73 74 88 97 101 103 
104 107 108 110(111) 112; 
doubtless occurring in all up 
to 100 or higher.
261 Medicago maculata, 
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Eogers sp.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Bell sp.
11 Hants south.
E. A.
Pryor.
13 Sussex w.!
J. L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
21 Middlesex !
Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hemsted.
32 Northton.
Druce.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh ?
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Fowler reo.
t 
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
62 York n.
east.
" native." 
66 Durham.
F. A.
Lees ms.t 
67 Northumb.
"native." 
(59 68 68 78 80 85 87).
262 Medicago deuticnlata.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
8 Wilts south 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyan sp.
14 east.
Maw sp.
15 Kent east.
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
25 Suff.
east.
Babington sp.
27 Norfolk east.
108 
263 MBDICAGO DENTICULATA.
28 Norfolk west.
62 York n.
east.
(17 20 21 36 37 58 59 68 
64 66 78 80 85 92; alien 
or casual in these counties, 
and perhaps the same in at 
least some of those named 
above).
263 Medicago minima.
15 Kent east.
Brent sp.
16 west.
G.E.Smith ms.
17 Surrey.
Twining sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
26 Suff.
east.
Notcutt sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
[3 6 41].
(66).
264 Melilotus officinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.+ 
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Dennes ms.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Bidwell sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26   west.
Skepper eat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler rec.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.f 
64 m.w. F.
A. Lees cat.t 
65 n.
west.
Ward eat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
"colonist." 
68 Cheviotland.
" colonist." 
69 Westmoreland.
Gough.
70 Cumberland ?
77 Lanark.
Kennedy eat.f 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
264 MELILOTUS OFFICINALIS.
109 
85 Fife !
Introduced ?
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.f 
(80 86 88 90 91 92 95 
109 ; introduced in these, 
and likely to some of the 
other counties also).
264*Melilotus arvensis.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More.
16 Kent west.
Syme.
18 Essex north.
G. S.
Gibson.
19 south.
Syme.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
J.L.Warren.
26 Suffolk west.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
CO.
Babington.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
41 Glamorgan.
Jos. Woods.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren.
59 Lane, south.
H. S.
Fisher.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
76 Eenfrew.
86 Fife.
Syme.
265 Melilotus vulgaris.
(JVf. leueantha).
N.B. Few botanists indeed 
report this as a truly indi- 
genous plant; and usually 
it is treated only as an alien 
or casual.
My notes for its 
counties are thus : — (3 5 or 
6 9 10 11 13 14 15 17 
18 19 20 21 23 24 26 27 
28 32 33 34 36 38 39 41 
44 58 59 62 63 64 65 66 
67 68 71 75 80 81 82 83 
85 87 90 95).
266 Trigonella 
ornithopodioides.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Holman sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
] 9 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
26 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
Eraser sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
Bean sp.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
76 Eenfrew.
83 Edinburgh.
Twyman sp.
86 Fife.
[7 23 50 (62) 64 70 90; 
authorities insufficient] .
267 Trifolium repens.
Counties all, except 42 74.
268 Trifol.
subterraneum.
1 Cornwall west.
Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
110 
268 TEIFOLIUM SUBTBBEANBUM.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend cat.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Macnab sp.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north !
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
don.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
84 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
88 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
E. Brown.
(62 66 75).
269 Trifol.
ochroleucum.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
(53 64 66).
[3 9 11 16 
17 21 87 39 49 51 59; in- 
sufficiently vouched ; mostly 
errors ?] 
270 Trifolium Molinerii.
1 Cornwall west.
Hore sp.
271 Trifolium pratense.
Counties all, except only 74, 
doubtless through lack of 
records.
272 Trifolium medium.
Counties all, except 12 35 42 
47 48 71 74 75 97 98 105 
107 to 110.
Much less fre- 
quent than pratense; indeed 
it might almost unite with 
the "not common" plants.
274 Trifolium maritimum.
1 Cornwall west.
Cunnaek.
2 east ?
3 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Clark sp.
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
9 Dorset.
Eay sp.
Payne sp.
10 Wight.
Groves rec.
11 Hants south.
Streatfleld sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Pleydell, 1865.
48 Merioneth ?
54 Lincoln north.
(Searle).
274 TEIFOLIUM MAKITIMUM.
Ill 
70 Cumberland ?
(66 67 ; on ballast).
[25] .
275 Trifolium arvense.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eavenshaw.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyan sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
F.M.Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 Yorks.
s. east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Lake Lane.
F. A.
Lees rec.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Macnab cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kircudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Henuedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkird.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west !
88 mid ?
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie fio.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
112 
275 TEiFOLiiTM aevense;.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
276 Trifolium scabrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex east.
19 west.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Duthie sp.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowman ms.
54 Line, north.
Eowler rec.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.t 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Lloyd sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Gardiner sp.
[21 50 58 ; these three 
need verification] .
T. stri- 
atum is mislabled scabrum 
occasionally.
277 Trifolium striatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eogers rec.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
E. Burton sp.
12 north.
E. A.
Pry or.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Purchas " !
" 
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Groves.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
BeU sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
277 TRIFOLIUM STRIATUM.
113 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Brown rec.
54 north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Carrington sp.
57 Derby.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Lake Lane.
Bailey rec.
70 Cumberland.
" Chambers." 
71 Man. Forbes to Brand, sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Maughan sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling !
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Gardiner sp.
? 
(Ill NeiU's Tour).
277 Trifolium Bocconi.
1 Corn.
Hore sp.
Johns sp.
278 Trifolium glomeratum.
1 Corn.
west.
Scilly list.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Trimmer.
[41 44 49 50 55 ; errors ?] 
(66; on ballast hills).
278 Trifolium striatum.
1 Corn.
Johns sp.
Pasooe sp.
52 Anglesea ?
Very doubtful.
279 Trifolium suffocatum.
1 Com. west, Cunnaok cat.
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
6 Som. north.
Extinct ?
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
E. Burton sp.
13 Sussex west.
(Reeves.) 
14 east.
Borrer.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
G. Fitt sp.
28 west.
52 Anglesea !
Tudor sp.
[18 "Irvine." 51 Error] .
280 Trifolium fragiferum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw cat.
114 
280 TRIFOLIOM FRAGIFEBUM.
5 8om.
soutli.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
Miss Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
15 Kent e!
G. E.
Smith cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmotith.
Ley rec.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
P. A.
Lees sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinsou cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
61 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
58 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
58 Chester !
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
60 west.
S3Tne.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Parsons rec.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.+ 
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Twynam sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
281 Trifolium procumbens.
Counties all, except 42 47 61 
73 74 78 97 98 99 104 
107 to 112.
(Ill Orkney; 
Neill's Tour).
282 Trifolium minus.
Counties all, except 32 35 49 
50 57 71 72 73 74 90 95 
96 97 103 105 to 108 110 
112 ; in some of these coun- 
ties probably it has been 
recorded under name of 
filiforme.
Likely to be found 
in every county up to 109, 
if not farther (111).
282 Trifolium filiforme.
1 Corn.
west.
Cuunack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
282 TEIPOLIUM FILIFOKME.
115 
6 Som. north.
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eopcr.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Dyer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock oat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill sp.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt eat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.
39 Lanes.
F.M.Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 York n.
east.
Nicolson sp.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Hort sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Dyer sp.
[70 71 77 82 to 85 90 to 
96 106 ; it is the T.
minus 
in most of these counties ; 
perhaps so, in all of them, 
as well as in some of those 
enumerated by name ; so 
frequent has been the error 
of applying the name fiH- 
forme to examples of the 
species minus.
I dare not 
trust to my own notes of 
past dates] .
283 Lotus comiculatus.
Counties all, except 42 49 74 ; 
in all of which it will surely 
be found, if sought.
283 Lotus tenuis.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Groves rec.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Banking sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
116 
283 LOTDS TENUIS.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Blow rec.
32 Northton.
Anderson ms.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
87 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
44 Carmarthen.
f 
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
F. A.
Lees rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Foggitt rec.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westm.
F. A.
Lees rec.
70 Cumberland 1 
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston reef 
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
91 Kino.
Mrs. Dickson sp.
284 Lotus major.
Counties all, except 42 74 95 
96 97 104 to 112.
285 Lotus angustissimus.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Banker sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer.
16 Kent west.
Newbould sp.
[6 B.
G. 25 Suff.
flo.] 
285 Lotus hispidus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Hore sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
4 north.
Hore ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
«4-4Je- 
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
•' J>£.' 
286 Astragalus 
glycyphyllus.
6 Som. north.
" Mr. Clark." 
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell, certain.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west!
Dennes ms.
^ ^>C' 
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
286 ASTRAGALUS GLYCYPHYLLUS.
117 
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
64 north.
Fowler reo.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
Mersey ?
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife !
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
Duthie oat.
89 Perth east.
Campbell sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
93 Aber.
north.
Gordon sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.t 
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
[1 3 77 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
287 Astragalus hypoglottis.
8 Wilts south.
Flower sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druoe rec.
33 Gloster east.
Roberts ms.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
^ "vC' 
53 Lincoln south.
64 north.
Fowler rec.
66 Leicester.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum.
R.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Scott sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
86 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
07 Sutherland.
Gordon ms.
[10 18 70].
288 Astragalus alpinus.
90 'Forfar I 
92 Aberdeen south !
289 Oxytropis uralensis.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife !
90 Forfar.
98 Argyle.
06 Boss east.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness.
" R.
Dick, sp." 
118 
290 OXYTKOPIS CAMPESTBIS.
290 Oxytropis campestris.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
291 Ornithopus perpusillus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan sp.
6 north.
Eogers sp.
7 "Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 White !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
1 5 Kent east.
G. E .
Smith cat .
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babingtonms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
Hilllrouse cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Atwood ms.
43 Radnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
t 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas oat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley oat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denb !
J. E.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
68 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Extinct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kircudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. G.
Maonab sp.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme oat.
88 mid.
90 Forfar ?
Don only ?
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
99 Dunbarton.
292 Arthrolobium 
ebracteatum.
1 Scilly islands.
Native.
(63 S.
W.York; casual).
293 HIPPOCKEPIS OOMOSA.
119 
293 Hippocrepis comosa.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
Miss Bell sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pryor.
12" north.
Bell ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Northtou.
Ley rec.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
84 west !
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
"Bloxam." 
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
49 Carnarvon.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n, west.
Ward sp.
69 Westmoreland.
(Bailey.) 
75 Ayr.
91 Kincardine.
Miss Boswell, 
" apparently quite wild." 
294 Onobrychis sativa.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Alexander ms.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.
12 north.
Bromfield.
14 Sussex e.
J. L.
Warren cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
ElUs sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west".
Babingtonms.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington' oat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.+ 
40 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.+ 
Lincoln.
(3 10 13 14 16 27 34 
54 55 56 61 62 63 64 
65 66 67 70 83 95 ; in 
all of these counties, as well 
as in some of those quoted 
above by name, the Saint- 
foin is regarded as an in- 
troduced plant ; at any rate, 
is so regarded by some 
botanists).
295 Vicia Orobus.
120 
295 VICIA OBOBUS.
3 Devon south.
Eossall rec.
4 u.HusbandParfittsp.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
11 Hants south.
Groves.
33 Grloster east.
Eoberts ms.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Lees sp.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Marion.
" Miss Holland sp." 
49 Carnar.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumber.
Heysham sp.
71 Man.
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
78 Peebles.
G. Macnab sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Waugh rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Little sp.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid.
F. B.
White.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
04 Ebudes north.
" Eum." 
[37 38 65 66 92].
296 Vicia sylvatica.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north.
Borrer.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
Pleydell ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby!
"Mr. Astley." 
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bloxam ms.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark.
Hooper sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east 1 
90 Forfar !
91 Kiuc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
296 VICIA SYLVATIOA.
121 
92 Aber.
south !
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
[1 13 25 29 48].
297 Vicia Cracca.
Counties all, except 74, where 
doubtless it does occur.
298 Vicia "sativa." 
Counties all, with few excep- 
tions ; but apparently a con- 
fused mingling of the sown 
" Tare " with the truly 
" Wild vetch." 
298 Vicia angustifolia.
(F.
Bobartii).
1 Com. west.
(Beeby).
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Trevelyan sp.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Baker oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west.
Trevelyan sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varemie cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks 1 
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Leefe sp.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
Hunt sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
122 
298 VIOlA ANGUSTIFOLIA.
80 Koxburgh.
81 Berwick ?
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh !
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White) 
89 east.
(F.
B. White) 
90 Forfar.' 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Diclde cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
N.B. Including -Boirtrtn as only 
a weakly state, not a real 
variety.
299 Vicia lathyroides.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
10 White.
More cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
EUis ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
30 Bedford.
I. Brown sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp 
45 Pembroke.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Streatfield rec.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Sansom sp.
59 Lane, south.
Bean sp.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. G.
Macnab sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
KeiT sp.
91 Kincardine ?
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie oat.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables eat.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
[1 2 3 9 18 29 33 40 
61 62 63; insufficiently 
vouched] .
Not readily to 
be distinguished from the 
dwarfed states of V.angusti- 
fulia or Bobartii, and thus 
some of the counties named 
above may also be erroneous.
300 Vicia lutea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
CoUins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 Sussex west.
Christy sp.
15 Kent east.
Jeffrey.
19 Essex north.
Briggs sp.
300 VICIA LUTBA.
123 
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
75 Ayr.
" P.
Maclagan sp." 
83 Edinburgh !
I. B.
Balf.
ms.
85 Fife !
Nicholson sp.
88 Perth mid ?
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
Probably extinct in 68.
301 Vicia sepium.
Counties all, except 35 46 74 
75 98 105 107 112.
302 Vicia bithynica.
1 Cornwall west ?
2 Devon south !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Eussell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 Sussex west.
Extinct.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west.
Bromf.
ms.
18 Essex south.
Salmon sp.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
34 Gloster west.
(Ley sp.) 
37 Worcester.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh.
Price sp.
51 Flint.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
[10 11] .
(66 ballast hills).
303 Vicia hirsuta.
Counties all, except 35 42 69 
74 97 98 105 106 107 108 
110 [111] 112.
304 Vicia tetrasperma.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 Devon north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Miss Gififord sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent east.
G.E.Smithcat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
G. Eeece sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
47 Montgomery.
F. A.
Lees rec.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
124 
304 VICIA TETEASPEBMA.
63 Lincoln south.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Balf.
sp.
Exurs.t 
90 Forfar.
" G.
Macnab." 
[103 111 Orlmey; Lowe's 
list] .
304 Vicia gracilis.
3 Devon south.
Eogers rec.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Norman sp.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
casual ?
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
83 Gloster east.
Flower sp.
37 Worcester.
Fraser rec.
38 Warwick.
" Cheshire." 
305 Lathyrus Aphaca.
8 Devon south.
Eogers sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
"Bromf.hb." 
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Syme.
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex ?
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock ms.
26 west.
Bromf.
sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
Maw sp.
38 Warwick.
Lincoln.
" Carrington." 
(57 69 62 64 66 67 75 
83 88 or 89 ; casual ia 
most of these counties; 
erroneously' recorded in two 
or three of them ?) 
306 Lathyrus Nissolia.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.t 
2 east.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
4 north ?
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
306 LATHYEUS NISSOLIA.
125 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
Downs sp.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Bromf.
ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten " v.
sp." 
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west; 
27 Norfolk east.
Bloxam ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge ?
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
Lincoln.
" Carrington." 
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Davidson sp.
58 Cheshire.
P. M.
Webb.
[36 50 56 61 81 ; errors ?] 
(67 70 75 90 ; casual ?) 
307 Lathyrus hirsutus.
17 Surrey.
W. Bennett sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne sp.
[6 57 61] .
(6 16 66 75).
308 Lathyrus pratensis.
Counties all, except 74 96 
105 107; likely to occur in 
every county.
309 Lathyrus palustris.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt.
17 Surrey ?
Extinct.
22 Berks.
Britten " v.
sp." 
25 Suff.
east.
Woodward sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Christy sp.
28 west.
Bray.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
53 Line, south ?
54 north.
Thompson ms.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
74 Wigton ?
' ' Galloway.
' ' 
[22 37 55 57 59].
310 Lathyrus sylvestris.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon soiith.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Christy sp.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, eat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Linnell sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.f 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Miss Bell sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten " v.
sp." 
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
126 
310 LATHYEUS SYLVESTBIS.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat 
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Bailey.
46 Cardigan.
Lees sp.
47 Montgom.
J.E. Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
(C.
Bailey).
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh !
62 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
00 Clyde-isles.
Landsborough, 
02 Ebrides south.
Grieve cat.
03 Mull.
Syme, " certainly 
(62 63 64 66 88).
wild." 
[7 8 21 58 91 ; insuffi- 
ciently vouched.
Perhaps 
not truly wild in some of 
the other counties] .
311 Lathyrus maritimus.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
13 Sussex west.
Helger.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
25 Suffolk east.
Hardwicke sp.
54 Lincoln north.
70 Cumberland.
Edmonds.
90 Forfar.
12 Shetland.
Edmonston sp.
[1 10 111; dubious].
312 Orobns tuberosus.
Counties all, except 25 27 28 
29 31 82 46 54 74 75 86 
97 98 99 105 107 110.
313 Orobus niger.
68 Cheviot.
Tate sen.
ms.
89 Perth east.
Anderson sp.
90 Forfar.
96 Easterness.
N.B. Eeported also from seve- 
ral other counties — Devon, 
Orkney, &c.
— through mis- 
naming the other species for 
this one.
Perhaps intro- 
duced to all the four coun- 
ties named above.
314 Prunus spinosa.
Counties all, except 42 74 75 
89 97 98 104 105 107 109 
to 112.
314 Prunus insititia.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaek cat.f 
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.f 
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
314 PKUNUS INSITITIA.
127 
13 Sussex west.
BoiTer cat.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
17 Surrey I 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
I 
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.t 
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south, 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy oat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
(80 81 83 85 88 89 90 91 
106).
This is treated as a 
native both in the Clydes- 
dale and the Edinburgh 
Floras ; but as the P.
domes- 
tica is equally so given in 
the Flora of Edinburgh, not 
much weight can be attached 
to that evidence.
Even in 
England many of its re- 
ported localities are artifi- 
cial, having originated 
through planting; and the 
line of distinction between 
this and P.
spinosa is uncer- 
tainly traced.
Thus, the 
above enumeration of coun- 
ties is to be received with 
some distrust.
315 Frunus Padus.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick, "introduced." 
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
DiUw. ms.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Leefe ms.
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
54 Lincoln north.
Parsons reo.
55 Leicester.
Coleman.
t 
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
t 
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
Linton oat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
128 
315 PBUNUS PADUS.
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson cat.f 
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Eoy ms.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
07 Suth.
east.
(Grant).
08 west.
09 Caithness.
E. Brown cat.
N.B. Localities are also on 
record for this tree in several 
counties of the four first 
provinces, from Cornwall to 
Norfolk.
With few except- 
tions it is indicated only as 
an introduced or planted 
tree in those counties.
I 
have received the American 
P. serotina, labelled as wild 
Padus, from two of the 
southern counties.
(10 11 
17 19 20).
[2 7].
316 Prunus avium.
Counties all, except 13 31 34 
41 42 48 53 60 74 78 84 
89 93 97 98 99 101 104 to 
108 110 to 112.
Two 
practical difficulties arise in 
attempts to trace the dis- 
tribution of this tree.
First, 
in many books and lists the 
name Cerasus is used indis- 
criminately for either or both 
the species.
Second, the 
widest diversities of opinion 
occur as to- the indigenous 
or introduced character of 
each species.
For the coun- 
ties of South Britain the 
Avium is usually treated as 
native.
For those of North 
Britain it is usually noted as 
probably introduced.
For 
the counties of Mid Britain 
there is an approximate 
balance of opinions ; some 
for, some against nativity.
No doubt the seeds are 
still carried in the crops of 
birds, from gardens to wilds ; 
but whether the origin has 
been really from gardens, at 
first, or from wilds to gar- 
dens, cannot be satisfactorily 
decided now.
316 Prunus Cerasus.
1 Corn.
east.
Briggs.t 
2 west.
Briggs.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.t 
4 north.
Briggs.
+ 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.f 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell.
Borrer.
10 Wight 1 Salter sp.
More.t 
316 PEUNUS CEEASUS.
129 
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Crespigny sp.
17 Surrey !
Linnell sp.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.t 
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt ms.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct?
30 Bedford.
Hillbouse cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.f 
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester !
Bird-sown ?
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
N.B. A selection from the 
counties on record for Primus 
Cerasus ; being those in which 
the Cerasus austera or true 
fruticose Cherry appears to 
have been intended.
For 
myself, though inclined to 
accept this as an indigenous 
shrub, I do so with no posi- 
tiveness.
(1 2 4 27 68 83 
87 91 92 94).
[50 70] .
317 Spiraea Ulmaria.
Counties all, except 74 107 ; 
doubtless it does occur in 
all of them.
318 Spiraea Pilipendula.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
Bloomfield.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse cat.
31 Hunts?
"Aikin." 
32 Northampton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
"WUmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop ?
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
130 
318 SPIE^A FILIPENDtlLA.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
Pinder ms.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
09 Caithness.
(Grant).
(77 91 106).
320 (323) Dryas octopetala.
39 Stafford.
49 Carnarvon.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
69 Westm.
Backhouse, 1869.
87 Perth west.
(Croall).
88 mid !
Hooker sp.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
98 Argyle.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
04 Bb. north.
05 Eoss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
[66 109 ; errors of place ?] 
321 Geum urbanum.
Counties all, except 71 74 97 
102 104 107 108 110 111 
112.
321-2 Geum intermedium.
3 Devon south ?
4 north.
6 Somerset n.
Parsons rec.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
Spicersp.
19 Essex north.
23 Oxford.
(Druce).
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Marshall sp.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
56 Notts.
67 Derby.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmor.
E. Brown sp, 
70 Cumberland.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
N.B. A most puzzling plant; 
some examples more like 
rivale, others more like 
urbanum.
, 322 Geum rivale.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
822 GBUM EIVALE, 
131 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north.
PampHn ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Kadnor.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
60 Denb.
J. B.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat 
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham eat, 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Henuedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherstou cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharsou cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirhng.
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Mrs. Atkins sp.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon cat.
Sutherland.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
324 Sibbaldia procumbens.
73 Dumfries ?
78 Peebles.
86 Stirhng.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid !
132 
324 SIBBALDIA PROCUMBENS.
89 Perth east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber south!
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
12 Shetland.
" Eonas Hill." 
[8 Dartmoor] .
325 Potentilla frutieosa.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmor.
Backhouse ms.
70 Cumberland.
(A.
Ley).
(28 68 77 83).
326 Potentilla rupestris.
47 Montgom.
J.E.Bowman sp.
[49 83] .
327 Potentilla anserina.
Counties all, except 74 97.
328 Potentilla argentea.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
8 Devon south.
Eogers sp.
5 Horn, south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
11 Hants south !
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
15 K6nt east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Crespigny.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Harris sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Miss Bell sp.
26 west.
Cooper sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Gibson ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Brown sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
B. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop !
Leighton cat.
47 Montgom.
J.B. Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
64 m.
west.
Jackson rec.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland ?
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlith.
Craig- Christie rec.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid.
89 east!
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
329 Potentilla verna.
329 POTENTILLA VERNA.
133 
6 Som. north ?
Thwaites cat.
26 Suffolk west?
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
34 Gloster west !
French sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
89 Stafford.
Miss Worsley.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnar.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
57 Derby !
Kirk sp.
62 York n.
east.
W. Poggitt.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west ?
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
1870.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
[3 25 40 60 62; insuffi- 
ciently vouched] .
330 Potentilla alpestris.
46 Cardigan ?
Eng. flo.
47 Montgomery.
Lees ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmor.
K.B. Bowman sp.
70 Cumberland !
88 Perth mid !
Sadler sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie ms.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
N.B. Difficult to trace an exact 
line of distinction between 
this and P.
verna.
[42 67] .
331 Potentilla reptans.
Counties all, except 42 72 74 
76 78 84 86 87 98 95 to 
100 102 to- 112.
This 
common plant of England 
becomes infrequent in Scot- 
land, and appears to be 
quite absent to the N.W.
of the Caledonian Canal.
332 Potentilla Tormentilla.
Counties all, except 73 74; but 
doubtless actually to be 
found in every one of the 
112 counties.
332 Potentilla procumbens.
(P.
nemoralis).
Cornwall.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
4 north.
Eogers.
Somerset.
Southby ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
36 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bromwioh sp.
38 Warwick.
134 
332 POTBNTILLA PROCUMBENS.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Parsons rec.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
e. F.
A. Lees ree.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
New flo.
N.D.
67 Northumberland.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland.
Melvill.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy eat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Boswell.
85 Fife ?
91 Kincardine ?
94 Banff ?
00 Clyde-isles.
06 Boss east ?
12 Shetland ?
Misnomer ?
N.B. Small trust can be given 
to the distribution as here 
set forth.
Too likely, this 
intermediate plant has been 
much confused with the 
Tormentilla, on the one side, 
and the P.
reptans, on the 
other side.
All my own 
notes of past years are re- 
jected, as I would now cer- 
tify the plant in Surrey and 
Berks only, although believ- 
ing that it has been seen 
equally in several other 
counties.
333 Poten.
Pragariastrum.
Counties all, except 35 42 46 
74 97 101 102 104 105 
107 108 110 111 112.
Orkney ?
334 Comarum palustre.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs, "v.r." 
3 Devon south.
Abraham ms.
4 north.
Wainwright.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Noteutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
Stock oat.
26 west.
Brown sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Noteutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
43 Badnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
334 COMAKUM PALUSTRB.
135 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Gutch sp.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Gibson ms.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lino, north.
Howittms.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stiiiing.
Duthie sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables oat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour oat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
08 mid.
Ross cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
" Miss Boswell." 
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Treated as a " not com- 
mon " plant on account of 
its infrequency in the south- 
ern counties.
335 Fragaria vesca.
Counties all, except 41 74 98 
110.
337 Rubus Chamsemorus.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
D. Turner ms.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Church Bab. ms.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward ms.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Bigge sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
77 Lanark.
78 Peebles.
Balfour ms.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat, 
136 
337 HUBUS CHAM/EMOEUS.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan ms.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirhng.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie ms.
93 north.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness '.
05 Ross west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
07 Sutherland east.
(Grant).
08 west !
09 Caithness.
(Ar. Bennett).
338 Rubus saxatilis.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
33 Gloster east.
E. Lees sp.
34 west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop?
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 8.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland I 
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"v.r." 
72 Dumfries.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Giay cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Tom Drummond.
86 Stirhng.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Bb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Ross cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
309 Rubus Idseus.
Counties all, except 1 16 41 
42 45 74 86 110 112: 
likely to be found in most 
of these also, more or less 
wild.
No doubt that many 
of its localities originate by 
seeds carried from gardens ; 
but the shrub itself is native 
probably throughout Britain, 
unless the extreme north, 
339 E0BUS ID^US.
137 
especially the North Isles, 
ought to be excepted.
339*Rubus Leesii.
4 Devon north.
E. Lees.
5 Somerset south.
Coleman.
38 Warwick.
69 Westmoreland.
E. Lees.
For the following sketch of 
the fruticose Rubi we are en- 
tirely indebted to Professor 
Babington.
It is founded on 
his ' British Eubi,' with the 
additions which he has since 
obtained.
340.
— 2 R.
suberectus.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Somerset south.
10 Wight.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer.
17 Surrey.
Borrer.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Bloxam.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
46 Oar£gan.
Anderson.
48 Merioneth.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
58 Chester.
63 York s.
west.
65 n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
76 Eenfrew.
81 Berwick.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
G. Don.
98 Argyle.
Hooker.
340.
— 3 R.
fissus.
4 Devon north.
Briggs.
34 Gloucester west.
35 Monmouth.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Borrer.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
58 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
63 s.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer.
70 Cumberland.
Hailstone.
72 Dumfries.
90 Forfar.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hailstone.
11 Orkney.
340.— 4 R.
plicatus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Borrer.
16 west.
Henslow.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
E. Porster.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Bicheno.
35 Monmouth.
Ley.
38 Warwick.
Bloxain.
40 Salop.
46 Cardigan.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
T 
138 
340.
4 BUBUS PLIOATUS.
58 Chester.
Wilson.
59 Lane.
s. Herb.
Withering.
62 York n.
east.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westm.
Hort and Borrer.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
81 Berwick.
Johnston.
87 Perth west.
Greville.
88 mid.
00 Clyde-isles.
340.— 5 R.
afiinis.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Borrer.
20 Herts.
33 Gloucester east.
Hort.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
42 Brecon.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
58 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Bloxam.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
Balfour.
76 Eenfrew.
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west.
97 Westerness.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour, 
340.
— 6 R.
hemistemon.
1 Devon north.
38 Warwick.
46 Cardigan.
92 Aberdeen.
340.
— 7 R.
Lindleianus.
3 Devon south.
5 Somerset south.
Flower.
10 Wight.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
E. Forster.
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
E. Lees.
27 Norfolk west.
Bloxam.
29 Herts.
32 Northampton.
Bloxam.
34 Gloucester west.
35 Monmouth.
E. Lees.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam.
40 Salop.
42 Brecon.
Hort.
43 Kadnor.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
W. Wilson.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
58 Chester.
60 Lane, north.
62 York n.
east.
68 s.
west.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer.
70 Cumberland ?
71 Man.
76 Eenfrew.
340.
7 KUBUS LINDLBIANUS.
189 
87 Clackmannan.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
340.— 8 R.
rhamnifolius.
3 Devon south.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north.
Varenne.
20 Norfolk west.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.
Warren.
34 Gloucester west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purohas.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
56 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man.
85 Fife.
Syme.
340.
— 9 R.
incurvatus.
2 Cornwall east.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
59 or 60 Lancaster.
71 Man.
76 Eenfrew.
Balfour.
340.
— 10 R.
imbrioatus.
11 Hants south.
Groves.
34 Gloster west.
Hort.
35 Monmouth.
Hort.
340.
— 10*R.
ramosus.
2 Cornwall east.
3 Devon south.
88 Warwick.
340.— 11 R.
latifolius.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour.
84 Linlithgow.
88 Perth mid.
[35].
340.— 12 R.
discolor.
4 Devon north.
5 Somerset south.
Coleman.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
E. Forster.
21 Middlesex.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
32 Northampton.
Bloxam.
34 Gloucester west.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
B. Lees.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
43 Eadnor.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Hind.
58 Chester.
G. E.
Hunt.
62 York n.
east.
67 Northumberland.
Winch.
71 Man.
75 Ayr. Balfour.
91 Kincardine.
140 
340.
— 12 auBus discolor.
00 Clyde-isles.
340.— 12=!=R.
discolor.
var.
pubigerm.
35 Monmouth.
Hort.
66 Hereford.
Purchas.
340.— 13 R.
thyrsoideus.
12 Hants north.
17 Surrey.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northampton.
Bloxam.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
340.
— 14 R.
leucostaehys.
2 Cornwall east.
Hort.
3 Devon south.
6 Somerset north.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north.
Beutall.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
34 Gloster west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Bloxam.
40 Salop.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
Borrer.
59 Lane, south.
Sidebotham.
62 York n.
east.
Spruce.
63 s.
west.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Johnston.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man.
81 Berwick.
Johnston.
340.— 15 R.
hirtifolius.
3 Devon south.
10 Wight.
340.-16 R.
Grabowskii.
13 Sussex west.
38 Warwick.
52 Anglesea.
Wilson.
55 Leicester.
340.-17 R.
Colemanni.
11 Hants south.
88 Warwick.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Hunt.
62 York n.
e. (R.
Boreanus).
340.-18 R.
Salter!.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
34 Gloster west.
40 Salop.
48 Merioneth.
Borrer.
340.
18 EUBUiS SALTERI.
141 
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
71 Man.
340.— 19 R.
carpinifolius.
9 Dorset.
Bell-Salter.
10 Wight.
Bell-Salter.
11 Hants south.
Groves.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
17 Surrey.
26 Suffolk east.
34 Gloster west.
40 Salop.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Coward.
59 Lane, south.
63 York s.
west.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Johnston.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
98 Bute.
Balfour.
340.— 20 R.
villicaulis.
1 Corn.
w. Towns.
[ScUly] , 
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
5 Somerset west.
Flower.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Bell-Salter.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
59 Lancaster south.
62 York n.
east.
67 Northumberland.
71 Man.
84 Linlithgow.
86 Stirling.
G. E.
Hunt.
340.— 20*R.
adscitus, 
[derasus).
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
58 Cheshire.
07 Sutherland east.
Oliver.
340.-21 R.macrophyllus.
var.
umbrosus.
2 Cornwall east.
4 Devon north.
11 Hants south.
Groves.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Hort.
! 
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
42 Brecon.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
Borrer.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
59 Lane, south.
Sidebotham.
63 York s.
west.
142 
340.
21 RUBUS MACROPHYLLUS.
65 York n.
west.
Baker.
67 Northumberland.
Baker.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
76 Renfrew.
85 Fife.
00 Clyde-isles.
02 Ebudes south.
340.
— 21*R.
macrophyllus, 
W. &N.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
4 north.
5 Somerset south.
13 Sussex west.
35 Monmouth.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
57 Derby.
Backhouse.
58 Chester.
68 Cheviotland.
Johnston.
69 Westmoreland.
81 Berwick.
Johnston.
86 Sturling.
G. E.
Hunt.
92 Aberdeen south.
340.
— 21 *R.
macrophyllus, 
var.
Schlechtmdalii.
2 Cornwall east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
62 York n.
east.
84 Linlithgow.
96 Easterness.
340.
— 2I*R.
macrophyllus, 
var.
amplificatns.
37 Worcester.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Bloxam.
62 York n.
east.
68 s west.
Bloxam.
00 Clyde-isles.
340.
— 21*R.
macrophyllus, 
var.
glabratus.
17 Surrey.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
58 Chester.
59 Lancaster south.
64 York m.
west.
85 Fife.
340.
— 22 R.
mncronulatus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
Borrer.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
62 York n.
east.
67 Northumberland.
81 Berwick.
Johnston.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
G. E.
Hunt.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aberdeen south.
97 Westerness.
00 Arran.
02 Ebudes south.
340.
23 RUBUS SPKENGBLII.
143 
340.— 23 R.
Sprengelii, 
var.
BoiTeri.
10 "Wight.
34 Gloster west.
36 Monmouth.
38 Warwick.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
57 Derby.
59 Lancaster south.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
340.— 23*R.
Sprengelii.
20 Herts.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
48 Merioneth.
55 Leicester.
58 Cheshire.
G. E.
Hunt.
59 Lane.
s. Bloxam & Hunt.
69 Westmoreland.
340.-24 R.
Bloxaxnii.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
64 York m.
west.
Webster.
66 Durham.
340.-25 R.
Hystrix.
1 Cornwall west.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Briggs.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Groves.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind, 
27 Norfolk east.
33 Gloster east.
Notcutt.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
65 n.
west.
68 Cheviotland.
Johnston.
340.
— 30 R.
rosaceus.
4 Devon north.
Bell-Salter.
10 Wight.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Purchas.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
340.
— 27 R.
prseruptorum.
(2?.
pygmwus, Bab.) 
16 Kent west.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
340.— 28 R.
scaber.
6 Somerset north.
Flower.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
144 
340.
28 EDBUS SCABBE.
19 Essex north.
Varenne.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
33 Gloster east.
Notcutt.
85 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
57 Derby.
62 York n.
east.
340.— 29 R.
rudis.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
6 Somerset north.
8 Wilts south.
E. Forster.
9 Dorset.
Bell-Salter.
10 Wight.
Borrer.
11 Hants south.
Hind.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
34 Gloster west.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
67 Northumberland.
Borrer.
69 Westmoreland.
Cookson.
76 Eenfrew.
81 Berwick.
340.— 30 R.
Radula.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Groves.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
72 Dumfries.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
340.-31 R.
Koehleri, verus.
1 Corn.
w. Towns.
[ScUly] .
4 Devon north.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
88 Gloster east.
Notcutt.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
58 Chester.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man.
340.— 31*R.
Koehleri.
var.
infesUis.
11 Hants south.
17 Surrey.
34 Gloster west.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
76 Eenfrew.
340.— 31*R.
Koehleri.
var.
pallidus.
6 Somerset north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
14 east.
Mitten.
340.
81*RUBUS KOEHLEEI.
146 
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
Hind.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
34 Gloster west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purohas.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
42 Brecon.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Bloxam.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
east.
66 Durham.
70 Cumberland.
Hort.
72 Dumfries.
87 Perth west.
00 Clyde-isles.
340.— 31*R.
Koehleri.
var.
cavatifoUus.
2 Cornwall east.
11 Hants south.
17 Surrey.
28 Norfolk west.
35 Monmouth.
340.— 32 R.
fusco-ater.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
' 
62 York n.
east.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
67 Northumberland.
340.
— 33 R.
emeristylus.
3 Devon south.
13 Sussex west.
340.
— 34 R.
diversifolius.
1 Com. w.
Towns.
[Scilly] , 
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
9 Dorset.
Salter.
10 Wight.
Salter.
11 Hants south.
Salter.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
E. Forster.
20 Herts.
29 Cambridge.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
43 Eadnor.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
58 Chester.
G. E.
Hunt.
59 Lancaster south.
62 York n.
east.
340.-35 R.
mutatailis.
3 Devon south.
340.
— 36 R.
Lejeunii.
2 Cornwall east.
8 Wilts south.
11 Hants south.
Salter.
18 Essex south.
Hind.
19 north.
20 Herts.
84 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
146 
840.
— 36 EUBUS lSjeunH.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Hunt.
67 Northumberland.
71 Man.
Baker.
340.
— 37 R.
pyramidalis.
1 Cornwall west.
3 Devon south.
5 Somerset south.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
49 Carnarvon.
[2].
340.— 38 R.
Guntheri.
[R.
saltmim, Focke).
2 Comwall east.
3 Devon south.
18 Essex south.
Hind.
20 Herts.
Hind.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
34 Gloster west.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
62 York n.
east.
340.— 39 R.
humifusus.
11 Hants south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne.
20 Herts.
36 Hereford.
40 Salop.
47 Montgomery.
58 Chester.
Borrer.
62 York n.
east.
' 
67 Northumberland.
70 Cumberland.
Borrer.
72 Dumfries.
87 Perth west.
340.— 40 R.
foliosus.
3 Devon south.
11 Hants south.
88 Warwick.
Briggs.
340.— 41«.R. glandulosus, 
var.
Bellardi.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
62 York n.
east.
340.
— 41 B.
glandulosus, 
subvar.
dentatus.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam.
55 Leicester.
63 York s.
west.
340.
— 41 R.
glandulosus, 
var.
hirtm.
13 Sussex west.
Mitten.
20 Herts.
34 Gloster west.
35 Monmouth.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
48 Merioneth.
Borrer.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
340.— 41*R.
glandulosus, 
subvar.
rotundifolius.
37 Worcester.
55 Leicester.
63 York s.
west.
340.— 41 R.
glandulosus, 
var.
Reuteri.
340.
41 KUBUS GLANDULOSUS.
147 
36 Hereford.
37 Gloster west.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
92 Aber.
south.
340.— 42 R.
Balfourianus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
6 Somerset north.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Borrer.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
22 Berks.
Bicheno.
29 Cambridge.
33 Gloster east.
Notcutt.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
58 Chester.
Sidebotham.
62 York n.
east.
69 Westmoreland.
81 Berwick.
Johnston.
340.— 43 R.
oorylifolius, 
typical.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
14 east.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
65 n.
west.
71 Man.
430.— 43*R.
corylifolius, 
var.
conjungens.
10 Wight.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
Sowerby.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
29 Cambridge.
80 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
86 Hereford.
Purchas.
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
59 Lancaster south.
62 York n.
east.
76 Eenfrew.
86 Stirling.
Hunt.
00 Arran.
Clyde-isles.
Balf.
340.— 43*R.
corylifolius, 
var.
pm-pureus, 
6 Somerset north.
13 Sussex west.
27 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
36 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
40 Salop.
65 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
00 Arran.
Balfour.
340.— 44 R.
althseifolius.
6 Somerset north.
10 Wight.
12 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
18 Essex south.
E. Forster.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind.
148 
340.
44 KUBUS ALTH^IFOLIUS.
29 Cambridge.
33 Gloster east.
Notcutt.
86 Hereford.
Purchas.
38 Worcester.
58 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
71 Man.
340.— 45 R.
tuberculatus.
7 Wilts north.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
34 Gloster west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees.
40 Salop.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
70 Cumberland.
340.
— 46 R.
csesius.
Provinces 1 to 15.
Uni- 
versally distributed in Eng- 
land and Wales, and in 
Scotland up to Perth, but 
not known farther north.
341 Rosa spinosissima.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
16 Kent west.
French sp.
17 Surrey !
Castle sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
21 Middlesex !
Twining sp.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.+ 
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutch sp.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denb.
J. E.
BowmsJn cat.
51 FUnt. Eev.
J. Poole ms.
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Hiern.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp, 
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" v.c." 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
841 EOSA SPINOSISSIMA.
149 
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotheston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie ms.
94 Banif.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Oh. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
09 Caithness !
[Ill Orkney.
Lowe's list] .
342 Rosa hibernica.
17 Surrey, (var.
Orovesii).
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Baker mon.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Borrer sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Baker mon.
343 Rosa Sabini, etc.
(R.
involuta, Sm.) 
3 Devon south.
E. Parfitt ms.
4 north.
Maw cat.
10 Wight.
Baker Monograph.
Sussex, Borrer.
Monog.
15 Kent east.
Beeby.
17 Surrey.
Groves.
21 Middlesex.
Twining sp.
82 Northton.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster east.
Notcutt sp.
86 Hereford.
Purohas flo.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk.
Bree.
39 Stafford.
Purchas.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Hooker sp.
51 Flint.
Fisher sp.
52 Anglesea.
E.LeesinPhytol.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumb.
Leefe sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.t 
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington.
Balf.
flo.
83 Edinburgh.
Balf.
flo.
84 Linlithgow.
Craig- Christie.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
Monog.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
"Eev. J.
Keith." 
97 Westerness.
"Dr. Walker." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
" Dr. Walker." 
05 Ross west.
(Druce).
09 Caithness.
Dick.
11 Orkney.
344 Rosa moUissima.
11 Hants south.
J. Groves.
17 Surrey ?
Crespigny.
20 Herts.
Blow.
27 Norfolk east.
Ar. Bennett.
32 Northton.
Druce.
150 
344 BOSA MOLLISSIMA.
36 Hereford.
Ley reo.
37 Worcester.
Lees.
38 Warwick.
BagnalL 
89 Stafford.
BagnalL 
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
44 Oarmartlien.
Ley rec.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
" Borrer." 
49 Carnarvon.
" Wilson." 
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby.
'  Purchas." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Hailstone sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
"Eobertson." 
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Farquharson rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
89 east.
Druce rec.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
98 Argyle .
' ' Hailstone .
' ' 
00 Clyde-isles.
Baker.
05 Boss west.
(Druee).
09 Caithness.
"Dick." 
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N.B. Under the names of vil- 
hsa mollis or mollissima this 
Eosa is reported from 60 or 
70 counties ; but it has been 
so frequently confused with 
toinentusa on the one side, 
and even with Sabini or 
"gracilis" on the other side, 
through so called scabri- 
uscula, — that no reliance 
can be given to book records 
in general.
I have certainly 
seen it in several counties 
of North England and Scot- 
land ; although I dare not 
now trust to my old notes, 
and my specimens of roses 
were destroyed by acci- 
dental fire, while in the 
house of Mr. Baker.
The 
counties named above must 
be taken as an incomplete 
selection.
345 Rosa tomentosa.
Counties all, except 8 31 46 
53 72 to 74 86 88 89 95 
96 97 102 106 107 109.
In some of these counties it 
has very likely been seen 
and mistaken for ' ' mollis- 
sima " ; in others, the con- 
verse may have occurred, 
^ through misnomers of the 
latter as if the present 
species.
Mr. Baker has 
seen it from Cornwall and 
Caithness ; and it is enume- 
rated in the lists for He- 
brides, Orkney, Shetland.
346 Rosa "sepiTim, Thuil." 
14 Sussex east.
Jenner.
17 Surrey.
Baker sp.
38 Warwick.
Bree.
N.B. Hosa JudziUiana, placed 
under No. 346 in the London 
Catalogue, has been subse- 
quently united with " tomen- 
tosa," by Mr. Baker.
This 
seems near R, micrantha.
347 BOSA INODOEA.
151 
347 Rosa inodora, 
6 Som. north.
" Woods." 
63 York s.
west.
" S.
King." 
65 n.
west.
"Ward." 
66 Durham.
" Robertson." 
68 Cheviotland.
Baker.
N.B. The counties and authori- 
ties are taken from Baker's 
Monograph.
I do not under- 
stand the species.
[38] .
348 Rosa Borreri, etc.
N.B. Now referred to canina in 
Baker's Monograph.
See 
Comp.
Cyb. Brit, page 507.
349 Rosa micrantha.
1 Corn.
west.
Briggs.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Stephens sp.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pryor.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
H. Groves rec.
17 Surrey !
Baker mon.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Castles ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
" Borrer." 
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
Coleman ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Ar. Bennett.
80 Bedford.
Blow rec.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
"Wilson." 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Ches.
"F.M.Webb"inMon.* 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
" A.
M. Norman." 
68 Cheviotland.
" Chrisp." 
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
350 Rosa rubiginosa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs.
t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers.
+ 
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
Baker " wild." 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.t 
14 east.
Coleman oat.
1 5 Kent east .
G. E .
Smith cat.
16 west.
J. Groves.
17 Surrey.
Liunell sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
152 
859 ROSA BDBIGINOSA.
26 Suffolk east.
Purchas eat.t 
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notoutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortbton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
35 Monmoutb.
Conway oat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
co.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones.
t 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh ?
Faun.
Grust.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.f 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Fisher ms.* 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.t 
64 m.w. F.
A. Lees oat.t 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
New flo.t 
67 Northumb.
New flo.t 
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.t 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.t 
[4].
(72 73 76 to 79 81 
to 86 88 89 90 92 94 95 
96 99 100 101 105).
N.B. The counties of England 
are given above as found on 
reoordforthe" Sweet-brier." 
Those of Scotland are all 
enclosed ( ) with the sign of 
distrusted nativity ; so few 
botanists there regarding it 
as a native shrub.
The 
Flora of Edinburgh and 
even that of Clydesdale are 
exceptions, admitting it un- 
questioned.
I have never 
seen 'it quite satisfactorily 
indigenous in England, of 
late years ; and at earlier 
dates I confused together 
this and micrantha ; indeed, 
I can hardly say now that 
ruhiyinosa is not truly a gar- 
den variety of micrantha.
351 Rosa canina, etc.
Counties all, except 42 74 
97 102 104 110.
Not cer- 
tain for Shetland.
352 Rosa systyla.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Baker mon.
4 north.
Eogers rec.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
Baker mon.
11 Hants south.
Pry or.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Groves rec.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 n.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
352 EOSA SYSTYLA.
153 
38 Warwick.
" gallicoides." 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmartlieu.
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
70 Cumber.
" Th. Benson." 
[1 4 29 50 62 77 84 86 
90 96 97 99; insufficiently 
vouched] .
An incongruous 
cluster of forms, more or 
less intermediate between 
canina and arvensis ; both of 
which, I fully believe, are 
taxed to aid in making uj) 
the cluster named systyla or 
stylosa.
At first, I had here 
simply interposed one Dog- 
rose between the spinosissima 
and arvensis, in sheer despair 
about the possibility of enu- 
merating the counties under 
the several species with any 
approach to accuracy.
And 
I am now far from satisfied 
with what is done above.
353 Rosa arvensis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunhack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex, Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babingfcon cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster aast.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
J.E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flmt !
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln s.
Fowler & Lees.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
154 
36 KOSA ARVENSIS.
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Pmder ms.
70 Cumberland.
Edmonds sp.
(Scotland 76 77 80 81 to 
86 88 89 90 91; treated 
by Professor Kennedy as an 
introduced rose in the wes- 
tern lowland counties ; and 
the same by Dr. Boswell 
Syme, in the eastern high- 
land counties.
The Flora 
of Edinburgh gives it un- 
questioned as a native in 83 
84).
354 Agrimonia Eupatoria.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
84 97 98 101 104 to 107 
110 111 112.
354 Agrimonia odorata.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
10 Wight.
More oat.
12 Hants north.
Matthews.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
14 east.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
F. A.
Hanbury.
16 west.
More sp.
17 Surrey !
Eoper.
18 Essex south.
27 Norfolk e.
Arth.
Bennett.
31 Hunts.
Druce sp.
84 Gloster west.
Purchas ms.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Purchas sp.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
55 Leicester.
Purchas sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
Baker.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
More.
70 Cumber.
" W.Eobinson" sp.
86 Stirling.
Craig-Christie rec.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley sp.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
1872.
N.B. Miss Worsley observed 
this plant in a cottage gar- 
den near St. Fillans, not 
far from the only spot in 
which she found the plant 
quasi-wild.
355 Sanguisorba ofGlcinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Parfitt ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
20 Herts.
Error ?
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west ?
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
355 SANGUISORBA OFFICI^^ALIS.
155 
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Gibson ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgom.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
? 
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J.L.Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Brand sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Johnston ms.
81 Berwick.
90 Forfar, "naturalised." 
355 Poterium Sanguisorba.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Keys sp.
3 Devon south !
Briggs eat.
4 north.
Hiern.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent east!
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock eat.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon!
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
E. Brown ms.
52 Anglesea !
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg eat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester ?
59 Lane, south ?
156 
355 POTEEIUM SANGUISOEBA.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embletoii sp.
69 Westmoreland !
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
.81 Berwick.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
88 Perth mid.
89 east !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin ?
"Mr. Martin." 
(82 85).
[72 77] .
Some 
of these recorded habitats 
perhaps belong to the alien 
P. muricatum, introduced 
through foreign seeds or 
ballast, and not easily dis 
tinguished while without 
fruit.
This latter has been 
noticed in 3 6 9 10 12 
18 15 17 22 23 24 26 29 
30 86 37 38 63.
356 Alchemilla vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Hiern ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
(Townsend).
12 north.
(Townsend).
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Jordan rec.
28 Norfolk west.
Geldart.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Warner sp.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh!
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howiit cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey eat.
G8 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan eat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
356 ALCHEMILLA VULGARIS.
157 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme cat.
86 Stirling !
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
84 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson oat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Sutherland east !
09 Caithness !
E. Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
(10 " one planted root.") 
357 Alchemilla alpina.
65 York u.
west.
Tatham sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme eat.t 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle !
Montgomery ms.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
Campbell sp.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth-.
west !
Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
E. Brown Campst.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[3 Dartmoor, Devon ; Eaven- 
shaw flo.
dev.] .
357*Alchemilla conjuncta.
70 Cumberland ?
90 Forfar.
(Black).
00 Arran.
Tyacke.
358 Alchemilla arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 60 74 
89 97 98 108 110.
360 Crataegus Oxyacantha.
Counties all, except 74 107 
111 ; often in planted hedge- 
rows only ; and few bota- 
nists regard it as being more 
wild in North Britain than 
a casual straggler, probably 
brought from the hedgerows 
by birds.
Different as the 
oxyacanthoides and monogyna 
or erwcarpa appear in their 
extreme forms, I find many 
intermediates in Surrey, 
through cross-combinations 
of their teclmical characters.
158 
360 CBAT/BGUS OXYACANTHA.
(? 85-112).
361 Cotoneaster vulgaris.
49 Carnar.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
[6].
362 Pyrus communis.
N.B. Almost invariably the 
botanists who have sent 
specimens of this tree, or 
marked the name in their 
local lists, have done so 
with indications of distrust 
as to its genuine indigenous- 
ness.
In the Flora of Edin- 
burgh, indeed, it is given as 
a true native ; but perhaps 
the proper reading of that 
entry is, that the Flora itself 
cannot be safely relied upon 
to answer questions about 
nativity.
362* Pyrus Briggsii, Syme.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
363 Pyrus Malus.
Counties all, except 35 46 74 
78 79 82 85 to 87 90 to 
99 102 to 112.
(1 54 60 
69 72 81 88 90 94 95).
100 Kennedy oat.
101 Bal- 
four cat.
Including the 
casual [niitis) derived from 
garden apples along with 
the true Crab {austera) less 
seldom met with ; the loca- 
lities of the two being in- 
extricably confused thgether 
by their recorders.
P. acerba 
has been recorded from 3 
9 11 17 21 and 27.
364 Pyrus torminalis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Barham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west ?
29 Cambridge ?
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcesterr 
38 Warwick.
BagnaU ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh ?
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Cliester.
" truly wild." 
864 PYEUS TORMINALIS.
159 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
68 Cheviotland ?
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland ?
N.B. Surrey and West Kent 
are the only counties in 
wliich this tree has been 
seen by myself as an appa- 
rent native ; and there it 
may be truly so.
Perhaps 
the P.
scandica or Moiigeotii 
may sometimes be misnamed 
turmiiialk.
365 Pyrus Aria, including 
P. rtipicola.
3 Devon s.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Atwood sp.
7 Wilts north ?
Eng. Bot.
3. 
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west.
Mrs. Atkins sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Native ?
22 Berks.
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
30 Bedford ?
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg oat.
57 Derby !
Whittaker sp.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec* 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowmansp.
68 Cheviotland.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
69 Westmoreland !
83 Edinburgh.
Eng. Bot.
3. 
92 Aber.
south.
Baker sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Stables sp.
(19 25 26 27 58 59 61 62 
67 70 75 77 81 85 90 94 
95 98 103 104; introduced 
or less certainly indigenous).
365*Pyrus latifolia.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Giilord sp.
6 north !
Flower sp.
10 Wight.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
34 Gloster west.
Ley sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
50 Denbigh.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
8. 
365*Pyrus fennica.
16 Kent west.
J. Macnab sp.* 
34 Gloster west.
Sandys sp.
? 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.* 
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.* 
90 Forfar.
Watson sp.* 
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Arran.
Syme sp.
Duthie.
365*Pyrus scandica.
85 Kinross.
Syme.* 
00 Arran.
Syme sp.
Duthie.
365*Pyrus pinnatifida.
160 
365*PYRUS PINNATIFIDA.
12 Hants north.
Borrer sp.
13 Sussex west.
Atkins sp.
50 Denbigh.
Leighton.
70 Cumberland.
Ley.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
Doubtfully wild, and probably a 
hybridbetween P.
Aria and 
Aucuparia.
366 Pyrus Aucuparia.
Counties all, except 15 31 32 
42 54 74 84 98 109.
(Be- 
sides those counties, it is 
indicated as only a doubted 
native in 1 7 8 18 19 23 
to 29, and less dubiously so 
in 46 59 72 85).
In my 
own notes I find it entered 
without marks of doubt for 
counties 6 12 16 17 22 39 
49 50 59 69 70 83 87 88 
89 90 92 96 97 106 107 
108.
367 Epilob.
angustifolium.
3 Devon squth.
Biiggs cat.f 
4 north ?
6 8om.
south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Bromf.
sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey 1 Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.t 
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Introduced ?
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
30 Bedford.
" rare." 
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton.
Druce rec* 
33 Gloster east.
Dyer sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
36 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.+ 
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
43 Radnor.
Ley cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line.
s. Fowler & Lees.
54 north.
Britten Ire.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
e. F.
A. Lees rec.
62 n.
e. Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham oat.
65 n.
w. Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland 1 
71 Man. Forbes oat.
72 Dumfries.
Winch sp.
73 Kircudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
(MoAndrew).
76 Ayr. Duncan oat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.+ 
367 BPILOBIUM ANGUSTIFOLIUM.
161 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.+ 
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Graham sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Basterness !
97 Westerness !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
01 Oantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
N.B. Beckoned up by the 
number of its counties, this 
might appear to rank among 
common plants ; but being 
quite a local plant in several 
counties, and perhaps too 
uncertainly native in others 
named above, its counties 
have been cited in detail.
368 Epilobium hirsutum.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
78 92 (93) 94 95 (96) 97 
to 108 (109) 110 [111] 112.
Less numerous than the 
preceding, as to its counties, 
but too abundant in England 
to be placed among the non- 
common plants.
369 Epilob.
parviflorum.
Counties all, except 42 43 61 
72 73 74 78 84 97 98 103 
106 to 109 111 112.
370 Epilobium montanum.
Counties all, except 74 ; in 
which doubtless it may be 
found.
371 Epilob.
lanceolatum.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
12 Hants north.
Baker sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.t 
17 Surrey!
Clearly indigenous.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
371*Epilobium roseum.
1 Corn.
west.
Briggs, 1871.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
11 Hants south !
More ms.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
IB Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east ?
30 Bedford.
Newbould.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford !
162 
371*EPILOBIUM EOSEUM.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Kadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Windsor sp.
60 west !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
83 Edinb.
F. M.
Webb rec.
(8 10 66) [82 85 90 96 ; 
insufficiently vouched] .
372 Epilobium palustre.
Counties all, except 31 32 34 
41 48 72 74 103.
373 Epilobium tetragonum, 
including obscurum.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
80 84 97 98 105 106 to 
108 112.
The aggregate, 
that is, including both the 
subjoined segregates.
373 Epilob.
eu-tetragouum.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Dyer.
9 Dorset.
Kogers rec.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
R. A.
Pryor.
21 Middlesex.
29 Cambridge.
34 Gloster west.
Flower sp.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester ?
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
83 Edinburgh ?
89 Perth mid ?
N.B. Less frequent, and per- 
haps much less widely dis- 
tributed than is the Kp.
obscurum.
The absolute 
distinctness of the two 
seems questionable, because 
intermediate forms occur, 
which are not confidently 
assignable to one of the se- 
gregates only.
373 Epilobium obscurum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell rec.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
14   east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Hertford.
R. A.
Pryor.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
(Druce rec.) 
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington, 
29 Cambridge.
373 EPILOBIUM OBSCUHUM.
163 
82 Northton.
Druoe reo.
85 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley oat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webh eat.
60 west !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat, 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker oat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
88 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aberdeen south !
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
02 Ebudes mid.
Grieve cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
09 Caithness.
11 Orkney.
Boswell.
No doubt also in many other 
counties.
I think to have 
seen it in Sutherland.
374 Epilobium alpinum.
including anagallidifolium.
66 Durham.
Trevelyan sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
70 Cumber.
Addison sp.
1867.
85 Fife ?
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
Brand ms.
90 Forfar 1 Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Eastemess !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson sp.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
N.B. I do not know how to 
distinguish the " anagallidi- 
folium" from the plant 
which stands in my notes 
as alpinum.
It may be on 
this account that I scarcely 
know where to draw the 
line between this present 
and the next species.
[49 56 64; errors].
374 Epilob.
alsinifolium.
49 Carnar.
I J.
B. Bowman ms.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviot.
W. H.
Brown sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Hooker sp.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Balfour sp.
164 
874 BPILOBIUM ALSINIFOLIUM.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
Church Bab. sp.
04 Eb. north.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
12 Shetland.
N.B. Approximates to alpinum 
on one side, towards the 
mountain states of obscurum 
on the other side ; thus in- 
troducing some degree of 
uncertainty into the reports 
of its localities.
[44] .
376 Isnardia palustris.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Hooker sp.
[70 Cumberland] .
377 Circsea lutetiana.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
18 "Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
' 20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
8. Foster sp, 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
Ley.
49 Carnarvon !
Twining sp.
50 Denbigh !
J.E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb oat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Paine sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland 1 
377 OIBC^A LUTETIANA.
165 
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.+ 
72 Dumfries.
Gordon ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgli.
Duncan cat.
81 BerwicK.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
86 Stirliag.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar?
"G.Don." 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
96 Easterness ?
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss cat.
08 Suth.
east ?
09 Caithness ?
N.B. Treated as a non-com- 
mon plant on account of its 
rarity in North Britain, with 
a comparatively sparse dis- 
tribution elsewhere ; al- 
though it may actually 
occur in every county of 
South and Mid Britain.
377-8 Circsea intermedia.
34 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
39 Stafford.
48 Merioneth.
(W.
W. Reeves.) 
50 Denbigh.
Sandys sp.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester.
G. E.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south ?
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 York m.
west.
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham?
"Storey." Error?
69 Westmoreland.
Watson sp.
70 Cumberland.
Crotch sp.
77 Lanark.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
Arth.
Bennett.
88 Perth mid.
Watson sp.
89 east.
Gardiner sp.
90 Forfar ?
Don only ?
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
"Moray." 
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire ?
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08 Suth.
west ?
C. alpina / 
N.B. A most troublesome 
plant.
In citing the speci- 
mens from my herbarium I 
foUow Dr. Ascherson, of 
Berlin, who appeared to 
know the intermedia better 
than I can make it out ; my 
own view still inclining to a 
belief that approximating 
forms of lutetiana and of 
alpina equally get assigned 
to the intermedia.
For ex- 
ample, I refer my own West- 
moreland specimens confi- 
dently to alpina and Mr.
Hunt's Cheshire (Cotterill 
Wood) examples less confi- 
dently to lutetiana; that is, 
assuming two species only.
378 Circsea alpina.
38 Warwick.
Litroduced.
49 Carnarvon.
(B.D.Jackson).
65 York n.
w. P.
A. Lees rec.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Miller.
166 
378 CIECJEA ALPINA.
89 Perth east?
' 
90 Forfar.
Gard.
flo.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie Guide.
92, Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie Bot. Guide.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables oat.
97 Westerness.
intermedia ?
98 Argyle.
intermedia ?
99 Dunbarton.
Clyde flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
Light, scot.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
[6 25 35 39 43 44 47 48 
49 50 55 57 58 59 63 64 
67 68 75 77 82 83 85 
111 ; insufficiently vouched; 
partly erroneous, although 
perhaps not wholly so ; and 
some of the counties named 
are at best uncertain.] .
379 Hippuris vulgaris.
1 Cornwall west ?
Extinct?
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns.
12 north !
Towns.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Boper cat.
15 Kent east !
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould eat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
Buckman sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridee sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinsoi) cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line.
s. F.
A. Lees rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northum.
E. B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selku-k.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
879 HIPPURIS VULGAEIS.
167 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
Syme oat.
86 Stirling.
Croall sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie oat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables oat.
98 Argyle.
Gibson ms.
01 Gantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate eat.
380 Myriophyllum 
verticillatum.
1 Corn, west ?
TeUam.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell 
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer oat.
14 east.
15 Kent e.!
G.E. Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Wallis sp.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Noteutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
G. 8.
Gibson sp.
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
« 
33 Glosfcer east.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford?
40 Salop.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Howitt sjd.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
68 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Bloxam ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
MissBeevor.
70 Cumberl.
Baker cat.
1871.
[46 50 51 96 111, insuffi- 
ciently vouched, and the two 
latter certainly errors; and in 
some of the other counties 
perhaps the plant thus named 
was truly alterniflorum,] .
381 Myrioph.
"spioatum." 
Aggregate.
Counties all, except 2 5 42 43 
46 47 48 51 63 61 71 74 
78 86 98 97 98 99 101 
104 105 107 [112].
This 
is the recorded distribution 
of spicatum more or less 
confused with alterniflorum.
This latter is a segregate 
168 
381 MYRIOPHyLLUM " SPICATUM." 
of recent date ; the older 
records apparently assigning 
some of its localities to spi- 
catum, and others of them 
to verticillatum ; a confusion 
still occasionally made down 
to present time.
381 Myrioph.
spicatum !
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east !
17 Surrey !
Coleman cat.
18 Essex southi Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
(Druce rec.) 
23 Oxford.
(Druce rec.) 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
54 Lincoln north I 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren eat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
e. (F.
A. Lees rec.) 
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.west.
Tathamcat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum, E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Gheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumber.
Baker cat.
1871.
76 Eenfrew.
Clydesdale flo.
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale flo.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston eat.
83 Edinburgh !
Graham sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
10 Hebrides.
Balf.
Bab. flo.
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
N.B. The others are too un- 
certain and reckoned under 
the aggregate " spicatum." 
382 Myrioph.
altemiflorum.
1 Corn.
west.
Briggs.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns.
12 north !
Towns.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Eay sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
86 Hereford.
Ley sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
Eobinson eat.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
382 MYEIOPHYLLUM ALTERNIFLORDM.
169 
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb oat.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
78 Peebles.
Dyer.
80 Eoxburgli.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
87 Perth west.
Croall rec.
88 mid.
(P.
B. White).
89 east.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
96 Easterness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Bbudes south.
Grieve.
04 north.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
12 Shetland.
383 Callitriche verna.
Counties all, except 42 74 93 
105 106 107.
Such is the 
recorded distribution of C.
verna; but no doubt more 
or less including the two 
other very unsatisfactory 
species treated underneath 
as nos.
384 and 385.
384 Callitriche platycarpa.
Counties all, from 1 to 112; 
but with many exceptions 
to the records through bota- 
nists not generally distin- 
guishing this from the pre- 
ceding.
My list of counties 
affords no sufficient autho- 
rities for the following : — 4 
6 8 16 25 26 35 37 39 
41 42 43 48 50 51 54 56 
57 60 61 71 72 73 75 79 
84 90 93 95 97 103 106 
to 109 ; in some of these 
counties very likely seen by 
myself without special notes 
being kept.
384*Call.
obtusangula.
1 Corn.
west.
TeUam rec.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
11 Hants south.
Groves sp.
13 Kent east Duthie sp.
14 Sussex east.
Beeby.
15 Kent east.
Duthie sp.
16 west.
Groves rec.
17 Surrey.
Groves rec.
20 Hertford.
Blow rec.
21 Middlesex.
Groves rec.
29 Cambridge.
Blow sp.
30 Bedford.
(E.
A. Pryor).
33 or 34 Gloster.
(Duthie).
38 Warwick.
(Bagnall).
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren.
385 Callitriche hamulata.
(C.
pedunculata).
Counties all, from 1 to 112 ; 
but with still more nume- 
rous exceptions.
Several 
segregates are included, very 
dubiously distinct, and va- 
riously named at different 
dates.
The plant varies 
much according to its situa- 
tions, in deep water, in 
z 
170 
385 OALLITRICHE HAMULATA.
shallow -water, in still or 
running water, or in places 
alternately covered with 
water or left hare.
The va- 
riations so induced are de- 
scribed as different" species ; 
their localities inextricably 
confused in book records.
386 Callitriche autumnalis.
3 Devon south.
" Parfitt sp." 
52 Anglesea.
Babington sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
67 Northumb.
Thornhill sp.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston ree.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Stables sp.
89 east.
Syme.
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
91 Kinc.
Dickie sp.
Syme sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
oat.
11 Orkney.
" Loch of Glum ; Amott." 
" LochClunie;" Stables, &c.
[9 12 15 17 19 21 25 30 
86 37 38 39 41 46 52 55 
56 59 62 65 70 82 108 
112; aU insufficiently vouch- 
ed, and most of them errors 
through mistaking some 
form of no.
385 for the pre- 
sent clearly distinct plant] .
387 Callitriche truncata.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
388 Ceratophyllum 
aquaticum.
1 Cornwall west.
8 Devon south.
'6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Stratton.
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Baker.
15 Kent e.
! G.
B. Smith cat.
16 west.
Groves sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Sansom sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce.
83 Gloster east.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
89 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh ?
Faun.
Grust.
51 Flint?
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea ?
Eobinson cat.
58 Line, south.
F. A.
Lees.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons.
62 n.
east.
888 CERATOPHYLLUM AQUATIOUM.
171 
63 York s.
west.
Parsons.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Arnott sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour sp.
S. E.
Highlands ?
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
389 Lythrum Hyssopifolia.
1 Corn.
west.
Pascoe.
2 east.' 
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Miss Barnard.
29 Cambridge.
Hooker sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
[3 70] .
(10 15 17 21 22 
23 26 30 31 37 39 44 55 
56 57 59 64 80; casual or 
erroneously reported).
390 Lythrum Salicaria.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 8om.
south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notoutt cat.
12 north !
Towns.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Arth.
Bennett).
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northum.
R.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
172 
390 LYTHEtIM SALICAKIA.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Soutter rec.
80 Eoxburgh.
Br other ston rec.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
and cat.t 
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Miller.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Kooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Can tire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
N.B. Although plentiful in 
England, this is too local 
in Scotland to come under 
the " common plants." 
391 Peplis Portula.
Counties all, except 6 33 42 
68 71 73 74 78 80 82 84 
86 97 98 104 105 107 110 
112 ; likely to be found in 
all of these, unless in the 
two or four highest num- 
bered.
393 Bryonia dioica.
3 Devon south.
Planted ?
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north !
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Kants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 Kants north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Kerts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Kind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Sir J.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Killhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester !
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Gordon ms.
63 Lino, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
66 Notts.
Church.
Bab. ms.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.t 
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
393 BBYONIA DIOICA.
173 
63 York s.
west.
Oh. Bab.
ms.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Ward sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Chrisp ms.
75 Ayr.
394 Montia fontana.
Counties all, except 81 42 74 
79 82 84 98 107; doubt- 
less to be found in every 
county.
395 lUecebrum 
verticillatum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Fascoe cat.
3 Devon south ?
4 north ?
396 Corrigiola littoralis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
397 Herniaria glabra.
26 Suff.
west.
Skepper ms.
27 Norf.
west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
53 Lincoln south ?
[6 11 21 25 41 56 59 81 
88 or 89 ; insufficiently 
vouched, and mostly errors] .
397*Herniaria ciliata.
1 Corn, west !
Pascoe sp.
397*Herniaria hirsuta.
11 Hants south.
Townsendsp.
398 Polyearpon 
tetraphyllum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
Bromf.
ms.
9 Dorset.
Borrer ms.
{21 41 61 80; introduced 
into these counties, if not 
simply errors in 41 61).
399 Scleranthus annuus.
Counties aU, except 5 81 85 
41 42 43 45 47 48 60 69 
74 97 98 103 104 105 110 
111 112 ; perhaps really 
absent from the three or 
four last numbered counties.
400 Scleranthus perennis.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norf.
east ?
28 west.
Wardale sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
43 Eadnor.
Purchas sp.
[5 or 6 15 17 32 39 48 
58 90 ; all or mostly errors] .
401 Ribes nigrum.
N.B. Scarcely any botanists 
whose opinions can be held 
of any weight in the ques- 
tion of indigenousness, omit 
the mark, or other indica- 
tion of uncertain nativity, 
in connexion with the name 
of this shrub.
404 Ribes rubrum.
N.B. This is nearly as much 
questioned as the preceding, 
although on the whole less 
174 
404 EIBES BUBKUM.
positively rejected as a na- 
tive shrub.
Possibly it may 
be indigenous in the pro- 
vinces of Humber, Tyne, 
Lakes, East and West High- 
lands ; although chiefly in 
form of petraum or spicatum, 
if not exclusively So.
404 Ribes petrseum.
{R.
Smithiammi).
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.-f 
88 mid !
90 Forfar ?
93 Aber.
north ?
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Gordon sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north, "spicatum." 
N.B. Passes into the sylvestre 
variety of rubrum by inter- 
mediate degrees of pubes- 
cence, etc.
See Comp.
Cyb.
Brit, page 414.
405 Ribes alpinum.
34 Glosterwest?
Waring, B.G.
86 Hereford.
Purohas flo.* 
38 Warwick ?
With.
arr.
89 Stafford.
Garner, "wild." 
41 Glamorgan ?
44 Carmarthen.
Milne, t 
49 Carnarvon.
Davies.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman oat.
52 Anglesea.
Welch Bot.
55 Leicester.
Coleman flo.* 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Purchas ms.f 
58 Chester ?
Bradbury.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.* 
61 York s.
east?
"recorded." 
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.west?
Dill, K.S.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
" native." 
66 Durham.
New flo.f 
67 Northumberland.
New flo.f 
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.+ 
69 Westmoreld.
Annals of K.
70 Cumberland.
Jos. Eobson.
76 Eenfrew.
Clydesdale flo.t 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.* 
80 Koxburgh.
Brotherston.-!= 
81 Berwick.
Brotherston.* 
88 Edinburgh.
Balf.
flo.* 
84 Linlithgow.
Balf.
flo.* 
89 Perth east.
(P.B.White *).
.92 Aber.
south.
Dickie G.* 
N.B. This shrub has been 
often planted in the gardens 
and shrubberies of North 
England, probably on ac- 
count of its early leafing 
and flowering, unshowy as 
its flowers are.
Nowhere 
seen by myself in a truly 
wild state.
In citing the 
reported counties here book 
records have been resorted 
to, with the double series of 
marks, to indicate greater 
(*) or less (+) suspicion 
against the true nativity of 
the shrub.
406 Ribes Grossularia.
N.B. When we attempt to trace 
the distribution of this shrub 
through Britain, county by 
county, the adverse opinions 
against its real nativity 
greatly predominate over 
the very few given in sup- 
406 EIBBS GKOSSULAMA.
175 
port.
What can be said in 
favour of its nativity, may 
be seen on pages 377 to 382 
of Phytologist, volume third ; 
and those who admire a ram- 
bling and illogical style of 
writing may there find a 
striking example of the late 
Dr. Bromfield's capacity for 
wordiness of that kind.
Ee- 
corded in eighty counties ; 
chiefly, if not solely, the off- 
spring or descendants from 
seeds conveyed out of gar- 
dens.
407 Tillsea muscosa.
2 Corn, east?
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
25 Suff.
east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Hooker sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
[22 Berks ; Brit, contrib.] .
408 Sedum Rhodiola.
42 Brecon, — or Glamorgan ?
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
64 York m.
west.
Baker.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid !
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north, "sea-coast." 
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
09 Caithness.
. Nicolson cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
409 Sedum Telephium.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Edmonds sp.
6 Somerset.
Southby ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
" Pulteney." 
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Indigenous ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
An escape ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
176 
409 SEDUM TELEPHIUM.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock oat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bab.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Grloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill eat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh!
R.B.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
57 Derby !
Norman sp.
58 Chester.
69 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.+ 
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Miss Twining sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxbm-gh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson ms.t 
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.+ 
88 mid.
Miss Worsley.t 
89 east !
+ 
(54* 86* 90 92 95 96 111 
112; introduced to these 
counties ; likely so to se- 
veral of those enumerated 
by name).
It appeared to 
me truly native on the coast 
rooks near the Land's End, 
Cornwall.
It may be so in 
Surrey ; though I feel un- 
decided about that county 
as well as all the rest dis- 
tinguished by the sign " !
" 
409='=Sedum Pabaria.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse oat.
43 Radnor.
Ley cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Ley oat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
410 Sedum villosum.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray eat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
G. Macnab sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthiesp.
87 Perth west I Syme eat.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
410 SEDUM VILLOSUM.
177 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy eat.
[59 " James Eoscoe."] 
412 Sedum anglioum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs eat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Salmon ms.
14 east.
Maw sp.
15 Kent east.
French sp.
1 9 E ssex north ?
' ' Irvine .
' ' 
25 Suff.
east.
Varenne sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp, 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
co.
43 Eadaor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
46 Cardigan.
Twining sp.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea!
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren eat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
" Mudd sp." 
65 n.
w. P.
A. Lees rec.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Crotch sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray eat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray eat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew, Hennedy cat.
85 Fife !
May Isle.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Miller cat.* 
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle !
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy eat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
[28 92 ; both errors ?] 
414 Sedum acre.
Counties all, except 46 47 74 
79 97 104 105 107 112; 
likely to occur in these also, 
unless the last of them.
415 Sedum reflexum.
N.B. This cannot be treated 
as a true native.
It is re- 
ported from over sixty coun- 
ties, usually as an escape 
from gardens.
Two gar- 
den species pass under this 
name ; one of which is also 
occasionally mistaken fornj- 
pestre, when found in a quasi- 
wild state.
In turn, the 
truly wild S.
rupestre is made 
up out of two other species; 
one of these other two being 
much confused with S.
Fors- 
terianum.
Herbarium spe- 
2a 
178 
415 SEDUM REFLEXUM.
cimens of the five plants, 
thus confused together, are 
seldom in a state to yield 
much aid in diagnosis .
The 
book characters, especially 
those of the two treated 
underneath, are misleading 
through describers mistaking 
mere states of growth or 
luxuriance for specific cha- 
racters, ex.
gr.
" leaves in 
rose-like tufts." 
416 Sedum rupestre.
" elegans." 
4 Devon north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
34 Gloster west.
Borrer ms.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas ms.
40 Salop.
48 Eadnor.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
Miss Atwood.
47 Montgomery.
Newman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Newman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eev. J.
Harris.
(3 15 27 32 88 66 67 68 
69 74 86).
[86 52 57].
416*Seduin Porsterianum.
aureum, Wirtgen ?
5 Som. south.
Flower.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
oo.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh, J.
E. Bowman ms.
[8 5 6 32 35 ; very un- 
certain ; nor can much trust 
be given to the counties as- 
signed by name above either 
to this species or to the pre- 
ceding] .
418 Cotyledon Umbilicus.
1 Com. west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bloomfleld.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
28 Oxford.
32 Northton.
Druce.* 
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
48 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Stables sp.
50 Denbigh !
J.E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
418 COTYLEDON UMBILICUS.
179 
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.t 
65 n.
w. ?
" Miss Otter." 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
08 Ebudes mid.
Stables sp.
422 Saxifraga stellaris.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon!
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Binder ms.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot, Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
78 Peebles.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east 1 
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Boswell ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie oat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
Montgomery ms.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
08 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 Eb. north.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west!
Graham sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
423 Saxifraga nivalis.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
69 Westmoreland, very rare.
70 Cumberland, very rare.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
Gourlie sp.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
H. M.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
" Vou:lich." 
03 Eb. mid ?
04 north.
Lawson cat.
[48 50 ; misnomers] .
424 Saxifraga Hirculus.
58 Chester.
Extinct.
65 York n.
west.
Oliver sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker ms.
77 Lanark.
Campbell sp.
81 Berwick.
Johnston sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme " v.
s." 
[Aberdeen ?
" James Eae."] 
425 Saxifraga aizoides.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Pinder ms.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberld.
Winch sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. J.
Macnab.
ms.
75 Ayr. Landsborough ms.
180 
425 SAXIFEAGA AIZOIDBS.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley oat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle !
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east !
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Syme sp.
08 west !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
11 Orkney.
Neill.
Syme ms.
[49 57 58; errors?].
426 Saxifraga oppositifolia.
42 Brecon.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
64 York m.
west.
Eylands sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland I 
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark.
Planted ?
86 Stirling.
Hooker Sp.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb reo.
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
G. Macnab sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
On sea cliffs.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Sutherland west I 
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney?
Syme ms.
12 Shetland.
427 Saxifraga granulata.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.* 
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Dyer ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
. 
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
427 SAXIPRAGA GKANULATA.
181 
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J.L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Scholes sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Gourlie sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Gordon ms.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Miss Boswell.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
(71 111).
428 Saxifraga cemua.
88 Perth mid !
429 Saxifraga rivularis.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar ?
? 
92 Aber.
south.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness !
430 Saxifraga tridactylites.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E.Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper cat.
28 west.
Notcutt eat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould eat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
182 
430 SAXIFRAGA TRIDACTYLITES.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
Price sp.
49 Carnarvon!
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n; east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. J.
B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson oat.
82 Haddington.
Christy sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
96 Easterness.
" Dr. Hope." 
06 Boss east.
" Mr. Brichan." 
07 Suth.
east.
" Dr. Gordon." 
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
431 Saxifraga hypnoides.
6 Som. north.
Clark ms.
85 Monmouth.
Ley.
36 Hereford.
Gissing ms.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
47 Montgomery.
MelviU cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Streeten sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy eat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme oat.
92 Aber.
south I Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westemess !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
04 Eb. north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.* 
11 Orkney ?
[3].
[9 38).
482 SAXIPEAGA CJESPITOSA.
183 
432 Saxifraga csespitosa.
94 Banff.
Dr. M.
Barry sp.
97 Westerness.
" J.
Woods." 
[49 57 69 70 90 92] .
434 Chrysosplenmm 
oppositifolium.
Counties all, except 29 31 42 
53 74 98 107 110 112; 
likely to be found in all, un- 
less the two first and two 
last should be real excep- 
tions.
Far from common 
in the south-eastern coun- 
ties of England.
435 Chrys.
alternifolium.
4 Devon n.
" Wainwright." 
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
Ellis sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Kingsley sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
Hurst ms.
26 Suffolk east.
Coleman sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 • west.
H.W.Eeader.
85 Monmouth.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
54 Lincoln north.
Allen rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Johnston ms.
82 Haddington.
88 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
86 Stirling.
Farquharson rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
(Ross rec).
99 Dunbarton.
[16 error of species ?] .
[24 " error of coimty."] .
436 Farnassia palustris.
184 
436 PAENASSIA PALUSTRIS.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell "v.
sp." 
11 Hants south.
J. S.
Mill.
17 Surrey.
Eev. E.
Wood ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Pamplin ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 North ton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb eat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess !
Stables cat.
97 Westemess !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfom- cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west I Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[6 7 8 10; insufficiently 
vouched, by Sole, etc.] 
437 Adoxa Moschatellina.
1 Cornwall west.
2 east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
437 ABOXA MOSCHATELLINA.
185 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 G-loster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
. 
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
43 Kadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
J.E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
" Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
438 Hedera Heliz.
Counties all, except 74 97 98 
107 110; likely to occur in 
all, unless 110 be a real 
exception.
439 Cornus sanguinea.
1 Com. west.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
2b 
186 
439 OOBNDS SANGUINBA.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 uortli !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 More cat.
11 Hants south.
Nottcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
B. Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
'Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Bab. cat.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Ley rec.
45 Pembroke ?
48 Merioneth.
Miss Barnard.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman oat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.f 
60 west..
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Wild ?
(67 68 77 80 to 85 88 95 
102 ; perhaps also not truly 
wild in 68 59 60).
440 Cornus suecica.
62 York n.
east.
J. Bean sp.
68 Oheviotland.
Tate ms.
88 Perth mid !
Hooker sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
(Boss reo.) 
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon sp.
07 Sutherland east.
08 west !
[83 Edinburgh.
By a trick?] 
441 Hydrocotyle vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
80 89 97 98 107 108 ; 
probably grows in all of 
these counties.
442 Sanicula europsea.
442 SANIOULA EUEOP^A.
187 
Counties all, except 71 72 74 
78 89 97 98 101 103 107 
111 112.
444 Eryngium maritimum.
1 Corn, west!
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 8om.
south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Clark sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea !
54 Line.
n. !
Thompson ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
Extinct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
73 Kirkcudb.
Gordon ms.
74 Wigton.
(Me Andrew).
75 Ayr. Hooker sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Extinct ?
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine ?
93 Aber.
north.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
12 Shetl.
? 2 loc.
in Edm. flo.
445 Eryngium campestre.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
1847.
15 Kent east.
F. J.
Hanbury.
25 Suff.
e. Bloomfield 1856.
32 Northton.
Notcutt 1843.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.t 1843.
67 Northumb.
" ballast hills." 
[1 35 36 or 37 60].
446 Conium maculatum.
Counties all, except 35 42 43 
74 78 88 97 98 104 to 
107 112.
Dubiously in- 
digenous northward of the 
Grampians.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caithness !
10 Hebrides ; Ball Bab. cat.
11 Orkney; Syme.
447 Physospermum 
comubiense.
1 Corn.
west.
Ar. Bennett.
2 east !
Bree ms.
3 Devon south.
Banker sp.
448 Smymium Olusatrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
188 
448 SMYENIUM OLUSATKUM.
4 Devon north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Swete flo.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.+ Bromf.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.+ 
14 east.
Hall ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.* 
16 west.
Pamplin ms.+ 
17 Surrey.
Brewer flo.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
W.C. flo.* 
21 Middlesex.
T.D. flo.* 
22 Berks.
Britten Contrib.
23 Oxford.
Sibthorpe flo.
24 Bucks, "reported." 
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
H. S.
flo.
27 Norf.
east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. flo.* 
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Gloster w.
Thwaites cat.t 
36 Hereford.
Ley rec* 
37 Worcester.
E. Lees M.
flo.
39 Stafford.
Garner flo.+ 
40 Salop.
Leighton flo.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Leefe ms.f 
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman ms.
62 Anglesea.
Davies flo.
55 Leicester.
Coleman flo.* 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
58 Chester.
Liverpool new flo.
61 York s.
east.
" denizen." 
62 n.
east.
" denizen." 
63 s.
west, "denizen." 
64 m.
west.
" denizen.
'> 
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy oat.
81 Berwick.
" Parsons.
Bay." 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
B. & S.
flo.
85 Fife.
Hooker flo.
scot.
86 Stirling.
An escape.
91 Kincardine.
" introduced." 
92 Aber.
south.
" introduced." 
93 north, "introduced." 
99 Dunbarton.
Clydes.
flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Landsborough.
N.B. Finding myself unable 
to indicate the counties 
in which this plant is in- 
digenous, if truly indige- 
nous anywhere, I resort to 
the plan of citing authorities, 
with the addition of the two 
signs (* +) to show their 
greater or less distrust of 
nativity.
I have seen the 
plant in about a score of 
counties ; its inland localities, 
always near old dwellings.
Possibly wild on coast cliffs.
449 Cicuta virosa.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
20 Herts.
Crespigny sp.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Marshall ms.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
30 Bedford.
35 Monmouth.
37 Worcester.
36 Hereford.
Prior ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson oat.
53 Lincoln south.
56 Notts.
Extinct ?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Windsor sp.
449 OIC0TA VIBOSA.
189 
62 York n.
east.
65 n.
west.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray.
Lloyd.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
Dewar sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbar ton.
Hooker sp.
[8 9 13 to 17 21 24 61 
63 64 67 70 92 111 ; 
these are on old authority, 
or insufficient through the 
plant having been confused 
with Oenanthefluviatilis,a,ndi 
perhaps also with 0.
crocata 
and PhellandriuniJ] 
450 Apium graveolens.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west!
J.L.Warren.
14 east.
Hall cat.
16 Kent east !
16 west !
18 Essex'south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
E. A.
Pryor.* 
21 Middlesex.
25 Suff.
east.
Cooper sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west 1 Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester ?
perhaps wild.
39 Stafford ?
perhaps wild.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
J. E.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
54 north !
Howitt ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
Parsons rec.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
87 Perth w.
Dr. T.Drummond.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson oat.
(7 8 20 22 23 26 30 31 
33 36 40 55 56 63 64 
83 85 87 92 95 ; aU in- 
land localities for this much 
cultivated littoral plant 
must be regarded with sus- 
picion, unless certified on 
the safest authority).
452 Petroselinum segetum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Goulding sp.
4 north ?
5 Som, south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Hort sp.
190 
452 PETKOSELINUM SBGETUM.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Eev. E.
H. Fox sp.
10 Wight !
Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Farre sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Gibson sp.
20 Hertford.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
"Warren 1869." 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
- 25 Suffolk east.
Skepper.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
34 Gloster.west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
E .
Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bloxam ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
Mrs. Eussell.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
[103 " Dr. Walker."] 
453 Trinia vulgaris.
3 Devon s.
Woodward sp.
6 Som. north.
Crotch sp.
84 Gloster west.
Russell sp.
[86 49 70 ; errors] .
454 Helosciadium 
nodiflorum.
Counties all, except 42 43 47 
71 72 74 75 78 79 86 to 
98 103 to 112..
Too plen- 
tiful in England to render 
the citation of counties and 
authorities needful.
And 
yet very local in North 
Britain ; being limited appa- 
rently to its most southern 
counties, Fifeshire and 
South-west Highlands.
He- 
losciadium repens is recorded 
in many counties, from Corn- 
wall to Fife ; but usually it 
is only a small state of 7wdi- 
florum which is so named.
See Comp.
Cyb. Brit, page 
519.
455 Helosciadium 
inundatum.
Counties all, except 5 6 33 35 
41 42 48 60 71 72 74 78 
79 84 86 88 97 99 103 
104 105 107 108 110 112; 
in most of these it may 
have been overlooked.
106 
Gordon cat.
109 Brown 
cat.
Ill H.
H. Johnston.
456 Sison Amomum.
2 Corn east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north 1 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
456 SISON AMOMUM.
191 
12 Hants north!
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman oat.
15 Kent e.!
G.B. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
ElHs ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
BaBington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
' 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Gordon ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
[67] (66 81).
457 .^gopodinm 
Podagraria.
Counties all, except 42 45 47 
69 71 74 97 105 106 107 
108 110 112.
In many of 
the other counties it is in- 
dicated as appearing to be un- 
certainly indigenous ; more 
especially so in those of 
North Britain.
459 Carum verticillatum.
2 Cornwall east.
W. Wise sp.
3 Devon south ?
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
70 Cumberland.
Heysham ms.
71 Isle of Man.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
G.E.Hunt sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
460 Carum Bulbocastanum.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
24 Bucks.
E. A.
Pryor.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
30 Bedford.
Coleman ms.
[7 Wilts flo.
21 Flo. brit.] 
461 Bunium flexuosum.
Counties all, except 42 45 46 
47 53 74 97 98 101 107 
110; probably in-all of these, 
unless 110.
192 
462 PIMPINELLA SAXIPEAGA.
462 Fimpinella Saxifraga.
Counties all, except 42 60 71 
74 97 98 99 103 to 107 
109 to 112.
463 Fimpinella magna.
1 Com.
-west.
" Oliver," 1869.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
7 Wilts north.
Prior ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset ?
11 Hants south ?
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Sandys sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
28 Norfolk west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Nortbton.
Anderson ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt eat.
58 Chester.
Bickham sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Leefe sp.sp.
63 s west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberla,nd.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston reef 
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
[49 60] .
464 Sium latifolium.
3 Devon s.
Tate ms.
1871.
5 Som. south.
Melvill.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
11 Hants s.
More ms.
1868.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Dyer.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Pox sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortbton !
33 Gloster east.
37 Worcester.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop?
" W.
P. Brookes." 
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Linoolns.
Fowler&Leesrec.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
464 SIUM LATIFOLIUM.
193 
56 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees 
64 m.
west.
Parsons reo.
. 66 Durham.
Extinct.
68 Cheviotland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
86 Stirling.
Maughan sp.
[2 7 9 20 38 41 55 64 69 70 
82 ; insufSciently vouched] .
465 Slum angustifolium.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
! 
. 11 Hants south.
Groves sp.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent.
e. !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman, cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skeppercat.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould eat.
32 Northton I Notcutt cat.
S3 Gloster east.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley reo.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb oat.
60 west !
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries ?
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
88 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
1870.
87 Perth west.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Kerr to Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Eoy he.
1872, 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
[Ill Neill, "common"].
2o 
194 
466 BDPLBUEUM TENUISSIMUM.
466 Bupleurum 
tenuissimnm.
3 Devon s.
Eev. W.
Hore.
5 Som. north.
9 Dorset.
Eev. H.
B .
Fox sp.
10 Wight.
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Farre sp.
13 Sussex west.
J.L.Warren.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Henslow sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts ?
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
54 Line, north.
Whitelegg sp.
58 Chester.
" Miss Grundy."* 
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
66 Durham.
(17 Surrey, twice seen).
467 Bupleur.
aristatum.
8 Devon south.
Henslow sp.
14 Sussex e.
Bab. man.
ed.
5. 
N.B. Destroyed on the Flag- 
staff Hill, but still found at 
Daddy's Hole, South Devon ; 
Eev. T.F.Ravenshaw, 1871.
468 Bupleur.
faleatum.
17 Surrey.
Brewer flo.
18 Essex south.
Christy sp.
[58 Chester ; error.] 
469 Bupleur.
rotundifolium.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
A. Prior sp.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Extinct ?
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
, 
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.f 
14 ' east ?
15 Kent.
e. G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Pordham sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Pordham sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
83 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford ?
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
53 Lincoln south.
55 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
56 Notts.
One locality.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west ?
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norma,n cat.f 
(1 49 59 80 ; and scarcely 
better than a casual in some 
other counties ?) [25.] 
470 Oenanthe fistulosa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
470 oenanthe pistulosa.
195 
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
G.E. Smith eat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Barham sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley flo.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Su£f.
east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick, i Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Fhnt I 
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, s.',!
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
" Lake district unrecorded." 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kii-kcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
75 Ayr.
81 Berwick.
[76 85 90 99 ; not verified 
of late, and perhaps Lache- 
waK was the species intended 
in those counties] .
471 Oenanthe 
pimpinelloides.
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs sp.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Newb.
1852.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers sp, 
9 Dorset.
Mrs. Wyndham sp.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt ms.
13 Sussex west.
Gibson sp.
14 east.
Hall cat.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west.
E. Lees sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
N.B. By name this is recorded 
for many other counties, but 
the species really intended 
was Lachenalii.
471 Oenanthe Lachenalii.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack.
196 
471 OENANTHE LACHENALH.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Christy sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Bromfield sp.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west!
Borrer cat.
14 east.
MiU sp.
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
16 west.
Ar. Bennett.
17 Surrey.
Ar. Bennett sp.
18 Essex south.
Crespigny.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex !
23 Oxford.
E. A.
Pryor.
25 Suff.
east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
84 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarv.
J. E.Bowman sp.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
J. B.
Bowman sp.
53 Line.
s. Fowler & Lees rec.
54 north !
56 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Mitchell sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west !
Eylands sp.
61 York s.
east.
Syme sp.
62 n.
east.
63 York s.
west.
0. Moore sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Foggitt.
70 Cumberland.
Heysham sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan eat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat, 
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid ?— [22] .
N.B. Old records for so-called 
" pimpinelloides " have been 
taken as truly intending the 
species now understood to be 
Lachenalii.
472 Oenanthe silaifolia.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
13 Sussex w.
" Winch herb.'' 
14 e.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Mill sp.
Salmon sp.
22 Berks.
Newbould.
23 Oxford.
Dyer.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east ?
28 _ west ?
29 Cambridge.
Lemann sp.
30 Bedford.
Sm. Herb.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
33 Gloster east.
E. Lees sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
472 OBNANTHE SILAIFOLIA.
197 
55 Leicester, Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
N.B. In several other counties, 
from Devon to Northumber- 
land, on faith of records or 
manuscript reports ; but this 
species having been much 
confused with Lachenalii and 
even fistulosa, a selection 
only of the least unlikely or 
best certified counties is made 
above.
473 Oenanthe crocata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13' Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Miss Bell sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
34 Gloster w.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shaw sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Baghall.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Dr. Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
MissD.Farquharsp.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh !
J. E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Bailey rec.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. James Macnab ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east !
Byrne sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
198 
473 OBNANTHE CKOOATA.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Stables sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
474 Oen. Phellandrium.
3 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper 
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Anderson ms.
33 Gloster.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
53 Line, south !
54 north I Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
Bickham sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Lees eat.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nor thumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Melvill.
70 Cumberland ?
"Winch." 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
[97 99 ; misnomers ?] 
474 Oenanthe fluviatilis.
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower ms.
8 south.
Carey.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
11 Hants south.
Borrer ms.
12 north.
Bromf.
ms.
15 Kent east.
"Borrer." 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Godley sp.
22 Berks.
Boswell Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
Rev. H.
E. Fox. sp.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
34 Gloster west.
Purchas ms.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
474 OENANTHE PLUVIATILIS.
199 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
475 iEthusa Cynapium.
Counties all, except 42 48 71 
73 74 78 84 88 89 96 to 
99 101 to 110 (111) 112.
Common in England.
Eare 
in North Britain ; and re- 
garded as an introduced 
weed there by Professor 
Dickie and the Eev. Dr.
Gordon.
476 Poeniculum vulgare.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.f 
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. north.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.t 
10 Wight.
More cat.* Bromf.t 
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.t 
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
t 
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
18 Essex s.
" indigenous." 
19 north.
Gibson flo.
25 Suff.
east.
Miss Bell ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
34 Gloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.-i= 
52 Anglesea.
Welsh Bot.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.f 
58 Chester.
Liverpool flo.* 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.* 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.* 
66 Durham.
" ballast hiUs." 
67 Northumb, " ballast hills." 
71 Man. Forbes cat.t 
83 Edinburgh.
Balf flo.* 
[90 Forfar.
Don in G.
flo.] 
N.B. Eejecting at once the 
many inland counties, in 
which this much cultivated 
herb has been reported, it is 
here traced along the coast 
counties only, with the two 
signs (t *) to show the 
opinions on its nativity or 
other such indications afford- 
ed by the authorities quoted.
477 Seseli, or Athamanta 
Libanotis.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
29 Cambridge.
Bromfleld sp.
[24 Bucks ; Huds.] 
478 Ligusticum scoticum.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
75 Ayr. Veronge sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Stables sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westemess.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.' 
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
09 Caithness.
Gordon ms.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
200 
479 SILAUS PEATENSIS.
479 Silaus pratensis.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt eat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex 1 Harris sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson eat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson oat, 
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren cat.
(il York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland I 
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan eat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
483 Meum athamauticum.
48 Merioneth.
Price sp.
59 Lane, south.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Error?
65 n.
west.
Pinder ms.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Pinder ms.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Eirkcudbright.
Gordon ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brother ston.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
89 east 1 
90 Forfar I 
91 Kincardine, 
480 MEUM ATHAMANTICUM.
201 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton.
[3 Devon; "Bartlett"].
481 Crithmum 
maritimum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
18 Sussex w.
Borrer cat.
co.
. 
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Hardy sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowmanms.
69 Westmorld.
Gibson ms.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
[27 59 83 or 85 ; extinct or 
erroneously recorded ; the 
name of ' samphire ' is occa- 
sionally given to the 8ali- 
cornia] , 
482 Angelica sylvestris.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
107 ; but doubtless it does 
occur in every county.
483 Feucedanum offiicinale.
15 Kent east.
Oowell sp.
19 Essex n.
Greenwood sp.
[13 27 56; errors arising 
from the Oenanthe Lachenalii 
being thus misnamed ?] 
484 Feucedanum palustre.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
18 Essex south ?
" J.
Bay." 
25 Suff.
east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Winter sp.
28 west.
Bray rec.
29 Cambridge.
J. Bay sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
66 Notts ?
One locaHty.
63 York s.
w. 0.
A. Moore sp.
[36 59 61 69 76 83] .
484*Selinum caruifolia.
64 Lincoln north.
(Fowler).
486 Fastinaca sativa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.t 
2 east.
Briggs cat.t 
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat, 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.!
J. L.Warren cat.
14 east !
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
2 D 
202 
486 PASTINACA SATIVA.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms 
26 west.
Bab. ms 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west 
29 Cambridge 
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Babington.
Bell sp.
Babington cat.
HUlhouse oat.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tliwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.+ 
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
' 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.* 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.* 
58 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55.
Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren flo.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb oat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.+ 
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
t 
64 m.
west, "native." 
65 n.
west, "native." 
66 Durham.
" prob.
indigen." 
(54 62 67 68 75 100; dubi- 
ously indigenous also in 
Wales, Cornwall, and else- 
where).
487 Heracleum 
Sphondylium.
I Counties all, except 74 98.
I 488 Tordylium maximum.
18 Essex south.
Crespigny sp.
21 Middlesex.
Castle sp.
23 Oxford.
Extinct everywhere?
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
" v.
s." 
[22 83 Buokman, B.
G. C] .
489 Dauciis Carota.
Counties all, except 74 78 86 
87 94 97 99 105 107 (111); .
and marked as uncertainly 
native in the catalogues for 
Elgin, Nairn, and Caithness.
Abundant in Shetland, ac- 
cording to Edmonston's 
Flora.
490 Daucus maritimus.
(D.
gummifer.) 
1 Corn, west !
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Banker sp.
8 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. north.
ColUns ms.
9 Dorset.
" variety of D.
C." 
10 Wight ?
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants s.
Townsend cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.Warren rec.
14 east.
Bromfield.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowmanms.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
74 Wigton (McAndrew).
[58 59 66 (^80) 98 104 ; 
certain in the Peninsula, 
scarcely so elsewhere ; but 
Withering's plant appears 
to be simply a maritime 
form of Carota.] 
491 CAUCALIS DAUCOIDES.
203 
491 Caucalis daucoides.
6 Som. north.
Withers ms, 
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
16 Kent west.
Bossy sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
'Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
28 Norfolk west.
" rare." 
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
80 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Dyer.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
62 York n.
east.
" colonist." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Hebblethwaite.
65 n.
west.
" colonist." 
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
492 Caucalis latifolia.
5 Som. south.
Quekett sp.
6 north.
Collins ms.
20 Herts.
Single locality.
29 Camb.
" Lemann 1833." 
30 Bedford.
Two localities.
84 Gloster.
Flower sp.t 1870.
44 Carmarthen.
Three spns.
(11 19 39 or 57, casual and 
extinct, if not erroneous).
Scarcely better than a casual 
in any county.
493 Torilis Anthriscus.
Counties all, except 71 97 106 
to 108 111 112.
494 Torilis infesta.
2 Corn.
east.
Hart Smith sp.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Luxford sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northampton.
Britten.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.- 
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Tyler sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
204 
494 TOBILIS INFESTA.
49 Carnarvn.
J.E.Bowman ms.
51 Flint., Eobinson eat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker eat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
[75 83 98 ; possibly seen as 
casuals in these three coun- 
ties ; more likely erroneous] .
495 Torilis nodosa.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaek eat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Mower oat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More eat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
! Borrer eat.
co.
14 east I Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith eat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Vareune eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock eat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
Noteutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west !
Thwaites eat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
(H.
L. Jones rec.) 
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg eat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb eat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
" Mr. Croall." 
94 Banff.
" Mr. Bissett !
" 
496 SOANDIX PEOTEN VENERIS.
205 
496 Scandix Fecten 
Veneris.
Counties all, except 47 48 60 
69 71 72 73 74 78 79 87 
88 97 to 105 107 108 110 
(111) 112.
Introduced in 
Moray ; Coll.
Mor.
497 Anthriscus vulgaris.
(Gharophyllum Anthriscm.) 
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.f 
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.f 
14 east.
Bor. cat.
co.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Holman sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cut.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaitescat.
87 Worcester.
F. A.
Lees rec.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
(Eeeves).
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
West.
rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.+ 
77 Lanark.
"Veryrare"; C.flo.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherstonrect 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar, "frequent." 
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
07 Suth.
east!
Introduced?
[112 "abundant"; Ed. flo.] 
498 Anthriscus sylvestris.
[Chmrophpllum sylvestre.) 
206 
498 ANTHEISCUS SYLVESTEIS.
Counties all, except 35 42 46 
71 72 73 74 80 97 103 
105 106; doubtless to be 
found in all.
500 Chserophyllum 
temulentum.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 
96 97 101 to 105 107 108 
110 111 112.
106 Gordon, 
Eoss cat.
109 Caithness, 
Brown Campst.
cat.
501 Myrrhis odorata.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
37 Worcester.
Ballard.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
89 Stafford.
James Carter.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Eng. Flora.
48 Merioneth.
" John Jones." 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinsonoat.t 
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Griffith in B.
G. 
52 Anglesea.
Welch Bet.
64 Lincoln n.
Fowler rec* 
55 Leicester.
Coleman list.* 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
1 loc.
57 Derby 1 Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren flo.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.f 
61 York s.
east.
Authority ?
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.!
D.Turner.
70 Cumberland !
Baker.
+ 
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" scarce." 
72 Dumfries.
, Dr. Burgess.
+ 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson oat.* 
80 Eoxburgh.
Border flo.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
flo.
Syme sp.f 
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.* 
89 east.* 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
91 Kino.
Mrs. Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.* 
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.* 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.* 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.* 
99 Dunbarton.
Glot.
flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
05 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
Balf.
Bab. cat.
N.B. Finding it impossible 
clearly to distinguish the 
counties in which this plant 
should be deemed truly in- 
digenous, from those in 
which it occurs under more 
doubtful conditions, recourse 
is again made to the plan of 
enumerating all the recorded 
counties shewn by my notes ; 
those of the first four pro- 
vinces excepted.
The two 
signs of doubted nativity 
(t *) are used to indicate 
more or less suspicion against 
nativity, on the part of the 
authorities so quoted, Mr, 
501 MYBEHIS ODOEATA.
207 
Baker, in the ' Botany of 
' North Yorkshire ' and in the 
' New Mora of Northumber- 
land and Durham ' gives 
the plant positively as a 
" native " in those counties.
Balfour and Sadler, in the 
' Flora of Edinburgh,' treat 
it as an unquestioned native 
of the Forth counties.
In 
the ' Clydesdale Flora ' Pro- 
fessor Hennedy indirectly 
suggests some apparent sus- 
picion to the contrary, by 
the word " near villages " 
and " formerly cultivated ; " 
two remarks suggestive of 
some uncertainty.
503 VisGum album.
3 Devon south.
Planted ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
"Warren cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Winch ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Cooper sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 w.
Woodward ms 
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Christy sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
G. Macnab sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman sp.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
" frequent." 
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren flo.
? 
64 York m.
west.
(1 2 8 10 [52] 59 61 62 
63 66 67 68 89 90).
504 Sambucus nigra.
Counties all, except 74 84 89 
97 98 99 (106) 107 108 
(109) 110 (111) 112.
Cata- 
logued as if indigenous in 
the West Highlands, by 
Professors Lawson, Balfour, 
and Hennedy.
In the East 
Highlands it is noted only 
as an introduced shrub by 
Dr. Boswell Syme, Prof.
Dickie, and the Eev. Dr.
Gordon.
505 Sambucus Ebulus.
1 Cornwall west.
Ealfs.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.t 
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flow'er cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 gussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
208 
505 SAMBUCUS EBULUS.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
" common." 
31 Hunts.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Briggs.t 
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
! 
39 Stafford!
Ch.Bab. ms.t 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Pamplin ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
e. "indigenous." 
63 s.
w. Leyland ms.t 
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
w. "indigenous." 
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
68 Cheviotland.
" denizen." 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.* 
85 Fife.
Lloyd sp.
Ed. flo.
88 Perth mid.
Miller eat.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.t 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie eat.
93 north.
Dickie Guide.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson.f 
(95 96 106 Gordon.*) [1] .
I have not seen this even 
quasi-wild except in one 
spot in Fife ; and there I sup- 
posed it an introduced plant 
originally.
Held native by 
many botanists.' 
506 Viburmun Opulus.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G.B. Smith eat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
506 VIBUBNUM OPULUS.
209 
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaitescat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purcbas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
48 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley eat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
P. M.
Webb cat.
60 west !
Linton oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.t 
69 Westmoreland I 
70 Cumberland I Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Ed. flo.+ 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.+ 
85 Fife.
Syme cat.t Ed. flo.t 
87 Perth west.
Edinb.
flo.t 
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar, "probably planted." 
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
" reported." 
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
f 
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
Stables.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Sutherland east.
Stables.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
N.B. Frequent in England.
Bare in North Britain, if not 
so throughout Scotland; and 
usually reported as uncer- 
tainly indigenous there.
507 Viburnum Lantana.
1 Corn, west ?
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
Briggs ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 WUts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
2e 
210 
507 VIUKNUM LANTANA.
12 Hants north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
F. A.
Lees rec.+ 
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.t 
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
" rare." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker.
63 s.
west.
(64 66 67 613 75 76 77 81 
83 90.
Dunglass Glen.) 
[25].
508 Lonicera 
Periclymenum.
Counties all, except 41 42 74 
98 107.
511 Linnsea borealis.
62 York n.
east.
67 Northumb.
Introduced ?
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Graham sp.
88 Perth mid !
89 east ?
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Basterness.
"LordCawdor." 
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
512 Rutaia peregrina.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Groves sp.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Stables sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Stables sp.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Bidwell sp.
50 Denbigh.
F. M.
Webb.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
[22 29 70 102].
513 Galium verum.
Counties all, except 42 47 74 
98 105 ; doubtless occurs in 
every county.
O. ochro- 
leucum, a hybrid between 
514 GALIUM VEEUM.
211 
this and G.
Mollugo, is re- 
ported from 2 3 io 13 14 
and 58.
514 Galium cruciatmn.
Counties all, except 2 42 46 
52 74 96 to 98 101 102 
104 to 109 111 112.
Very 
dubious from 93 to 95.
Mr.
Boy found Asperula taurina 
in the Banffshire locality 
(94) reported for this plant, 
and there as an escape from 
the Manse garden.
Balfour 
and Babington's record for 
the Hebrides has been lately 
confirmed by Mr. Boss.
515 Galium palustre.
Counties all, except 74 ; doubt- 
less to be found in all.
Ga- 
lium elongatmn reported in 1 
3 10 15 17 18 19 21 22 
29 80 38 56 58 59 62 66 
67 68.
G. Witheringii re- 
ported in forty counties.
516 Galium uliginosum.
1 Corn.
west.
Ounnack cat.
2 east ?
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 "Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north !
Towns, cat 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent.
e. !
€r.
B. Smith oat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 - west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
A. Fryer sp.
32 North ton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones.
45 Pembroke ?
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Bobinson oat.
54 Lino.
n. Lees & Fowler reo.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat, 
66 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat, 
75 Ayr.
212 
516 GALIUM ULIGINOSUM.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbar ton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
N.B. Perhaps this is occasion- 
ally confused with G.
palus- 
tre.
Edmonston gives it as 
" frequent " in Shetland, 
and it is given also in Lowe's 
Hst for Orkney ; these habi- 
tats need to be verified by 
safer botanists.
I have not 
seen specimens from North 
Britain ; but the species is 
amply certified there.
517 Galiunf.
saxatile.
Counties all, except 31.
Pos- 
sibly this may be a true 
exception.
518 Galium erectum.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, ms.f 
12 Hants north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Christy sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Trevelyan sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Neville sp.
20 Herts.
Blow rec.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
A. Bennett ms.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
D. Turner ms.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
40 Salop, t 
56 Notts.
Mrs. Eussell ms.
57 Derby.
Howitt eat.
92 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
[2 3 6 7 8 10 28 82 84 
37 39 55 61 64 81 83 90 
106; in sufficiently vouched] .
Some of those counties pos- 
sibly correct ; but it is a 
difficult species, and one not 
clearly understood by my- 
self.
519 Galium MoUugo.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs eat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw eat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east 1 Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
519 GALIUM MOLLUGO.
213 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Noteutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaitescat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
63 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bickham sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman cat.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east !
(90 91 92 94 95, as a dis- 
trusted native).
520 Galium sylvestre.
6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
1868.
34 Gloster west.
Borrer ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
39 Stafford.
57 Derby !
Purchas sp.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
" Poggitt sp." 
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
78 Peebles.
" Blackie." 
80 Eoxburgh.
88 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
86 Stirhng.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme sp.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
[1 or 2 30 37 50 59 ; coun- 
ties insufficiently vouched] .
521 Galium anglicum.
6 Som. north ?
14 Sussex east ?
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin.
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Blowms.
Webbsupp.
214 
521 
GALIUM ANGLICUM.
26 Suffolk west.
Babington sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Gibson sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
[21 25 33 88 89 44 58 61 
80 ; records insufi&ciently 
vouched] .
522 Galium tricorne.
5or6 Som. CoUinsms.Poolems.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south ?
12 north.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east I Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Ar. Bennett, t 
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
87 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
41 Glamorgan?
54 Lincoln north !
Fowler.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Kussell.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
68 Oheviotla^d.
New flo.
(2 8-59).
[67 70; errors?].
523 Galium Aparine.
Counties all, except 74.
Pos- 
sibly a colonist only in some 
of the more northern coun- 
ties.
524 Galium Vaillantii.
18 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
[29 34 misreported.
G. 
spurium in 80 62 65 70 
90, by misnomers.] (17 37 
83).
525 Galium boreale.
42 Brecon.
49 Carnarvon J.E.Bowman ms.
62 York n.
east.
Foggitt.
63 s.
west.
64 m.w. E.B.Bowman sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Boswell Syme sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery ms.
77 Lanark.
Gourlie sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Worsley ms.
89 east 1 Syme sp.
90 Forfar !
625 GALIUM BOBEALE.
215 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.- Balfour sp.
03 Eb. mid.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
" G.
C. Smith." 
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
IJ Orkney ?
Lowe's list.
12 Shetland ?
Edmon.
flo.
(36 Hereford ; Purchas flo.*) 
526 Sherardia arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
98 104 105 107 108 110 
111 112.
527 Asperula odorata.
Counties all, except 13 31 42 
46 48 71 72 74 78 97 98 
108 110 111.
A single 
locality in the Flora of 
Shetland.
Marked in Dr.
Brown's list for Caithness.
Noted as seen by myself in 
Sutherland, in 1832, but the 
exact locality is now for- 
gotten.
528 Asperula cynanchica.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
i 9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
BUis ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbui-y sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Gibson ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
S. Foster sp.
82 Northton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Christy sp.
34 west.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
41 Glamorg.
J. B.Bowmanms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
55 Leicester ?
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Wesley.
69 Westm.
Martindale ms.
531 Valeriana dioica.
Cornwall.
Pascoe ms.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
F.A.Leesrec.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower ms.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU eat.
10 Wight !
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north 1 Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
216 
531 VALERIANA DIOICA.
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south I 
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad herb.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Miss Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson oat.
80' Eoxburgh.
Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson cat.
[2 77 99 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
532 Valeriana officinalis.
Counties all, except 42 74 108 
112.
This may be taken to 
represent the common form 
or sarribucifolia.
The other 
form, the Mikanii of English 
Botany, edition third, is 
very sparingly on record 
hitherto.
532*Valeriana Mikanii.
6 Som. north, Druce rec.
11 Hants south.
E. A.
Pryor.
12 north.
E. A.
Pryor.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
E. A.
Pryor.
22 Berks.
(Druce reo.) 
23 Oxford.
(Druce reo.) 
31 Hunts.
A. Pryor.
54 Lino.
n. P.
A. Lees reo.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
534 Valerianella olitoria.
Counties all, except 31 42 43 
47 48 53 73 74 79 95 97 
98 101 103 to 105 107 
(108) 110.
535 Valerianella carinata.
536 VALEBIANBLLA CAEINATA.
217 
1 Corn.
west.
Gurnow.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
17 Surrey.
Ar. Bennett.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
39 Stafford.
Ley.
57 Derby.
Ley.
536 Valerianella Auricula.
1 Corn.
w. Miss Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Borrer ms.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
CoUins ms.
9 Dorset.
Gibson ms.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
ms.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
33 Grloster east.
34 west 
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
62 York n.
east.
Foggitt sp.
63 s.
w. "G.B.Snjith." 
85 Fife.
Macauley sp.
537 Valerianella dentata.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Macreightsp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east!
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent.
e. G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
EUis ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hin'd cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon !
50 Denbigh!
J.B.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
218 
537 VALERIANBLLA DENTATA.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
77 Lanark ?
Patrick flo.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston ree.
82 Haddington.
G. Macnab sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife !
BosweU Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
89 east.
(F.
B. White.) 
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait ms.
538 Valerianella eriocarpa.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
ManseU sp.
87 Worcester.
(E.
Lees.) 
45 Pembroke.
(Newbould.) 
539 Dipsacus sylvestris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton I Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
H.L.Jones oat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
E.B. Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Blox'am ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam eat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb eat.
61 York s.
east.
539 DIPSACUS SYLVESTEIS.
219 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
w. P.
A, Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
" native." 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.t 
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark ?
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife !
G. Macnab sp.
89 Perth west.
(F.
B. White.) 
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
(81 86 87 90 95; recorded 
as an introduced plant in 
these counties ; perhaps it 
should be held the same in 
some of the other counties 
of Scotland).
540 Dipsacus pilosus.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
5 Som. south.
Poole ms.
6 north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell," certain." 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyansp.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
• 16 west.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bromf.
ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Fordham sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbouldcat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
Poole ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
47 Montgomery.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms.
51 Flint ?
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 n.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
56^ Notts.
57 Derby !
Church.
Bab. ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
(66 83 85).
541 Scabiosa succisa.
Counties aU., except 42 74 104.
542 Scabiosa columbaria.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. s.
F. A.
Lees rec.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight I More eat.
220 
542 SCABIOSA COLUMBARIA.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall oat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
-29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northampton.
Britten.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 w.
I Thwaites oat.
35 Monmouth, Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
BagnaU ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigh ton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh !
J. B .
Bowman sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north 1 Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
59 Lano.
s. Chadwicke sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan oat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall oat.
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south ?
Dickie ms.
543 Knautia arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 43 47 
48 74 78 86 94 97 98 101 
to 105 107 109 110 112.
An uncommon plant in North 
Britain.
I saw it in 96 106 
108, but distrusted its nati- 
vity there.
(95 96 106 108 
111).
544 Tragopogon pratensis, 
including minor.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Banker sp.
4 north.
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman oat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west I Syme sp.
544 TRAGOPOGON PEATENSIS.
221 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop !
Leighton sp.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby !
58 Chester !
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
88 Perth mid.
(P.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
Introduced ?
09 Caithness.
546 Helminthia echioides.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall oat.
15 Kent east !
G. B .
Smith cat.
16 west.
Twining sp.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat 
222 
546 HELMINTHIA EOHIOIDES.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babiugton cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Twining sp.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt 1 
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lano.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Linton.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec* 
81 Berwick.
Cleghorn sp.
82 Haddington.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
(80 83 85 ; introduced).
547 Ficris hieracioides.
1 Corn.
west.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Briggs.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Groves rec.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
BagnaU.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgom.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
(W.W. Beeves).
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
52 Anglesea ?
Eobinson cat.
58 Line, south.
Fowler reo.
647 PIORIS HIERACIOroES.
223 
54 Line, north !
Bogg eat.
55 Leieester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
70 Cumberland.
Baker oat.
80 Koxburgh.
Broth erston reef 
(67 68).
[77 Hook.
Scot.] 
548 Leontodon hirtus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs oat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer oat.
14 east !
Coleman oat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind oat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purohas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman oat.
51 Flint !
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bean sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees oat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
Windsor.
70 Cumb.
"Thomas Benson." 
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balf.
flo.
[77 88] .
(92 Dickie t).
This plant well illustrates 
the practical difficulty in 
tracing a line of severance 
between " common " and 
" not common " plants.
Its 
abundance in South Eng- 
land would place it in the 
list of common plants for 
the first forty or sixty coun- 
ties ; yet it is quite rare or 
local in Scotland, if genu- 
inely wild anywhere in that 
northern half of Britain.
224 
549 lbOntodon hispidus.
549 Leontodon hispidus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12.
north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east!
Coleman cat.
15 Kent.
e. G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex I 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton I Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west I Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford I Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Lincoln south I 
54 north !
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west !
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Nor thumb.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Borrer ms.
75 Ayr.
. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston rec.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh.
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid.
Miller cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy eat.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss oat.
04 north ?
Lawson cat.
[Ill ; a misnomer].
550 Leontodon autumnalis.
Counties all, except 42 71 to 
74 84.
Doubtless it occurs 
550 LEONTODON AUTUMNALIS.
225 
in every county.
L. pra- 
tensis and Taraxaci are in- 
cluded herewith, as being 
only trifling varieties.
551 Hypochoeris glabra.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Eogers sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
" Mr. Prampton." 
10 Wight.
More cat.
12 Hants north !
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
16 Kent west.
G.E.Smith.
17 Surrey !
20 Herts.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
56 Notts ?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis rec.
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
75 Ayr.
87 Perth west.
Tate ms.
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
[61 62].
(66).
552 Hypochoeris maculata.
1 Com. west.
Cunnack sp.
19 Essex north.
Gibson ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Extinct ?
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Fielding ms.
69 Westmorl.
Windsor sp.
[4 9 26 28 33 64 70 90 ; 
maculate varieties of Hiera- 
cium have been repeatedly 
mistaken for this plant] .
553 Hypochoeris radicata.
Counties all, except 42 60 74 
80 98 103 112.
554 Lactuca virosa.
2 Cornwall east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.t 
6 Som. north.
Parfitt ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
14 east.
Bor. cat.
co.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms, 
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babiagton.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
34 w.
EusseU n.
b. g.
36 Hereford.
" Wiknott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
2 G 
226 
554 LACTUCA VIEOSA.
40 Salop ?
Bad authority.
41 Glamorgan.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 B.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
MelviU.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
86 Stirling !
G. Macnab sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east!
[11 84 49 50 111 ; aU 
errors ?] 
555 Lactiica Scariola.
16 Kent west.
Syme.
17 Surrey, Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
37 Worcester.
Westcombe sp.
[13 21 25 26 57; errors?].
556 Lactuca saligna.
14 Sussex east.
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east.
F. Brent sp.
16 west !
French sp.- 
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
25 Suffolk east.
27 or 28 Norfolk.
(K.
Trimmer).
29 Cambridge.
Fryer.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
[9 36 37 55 56 ; not veri- 
fied of late years] .
557 Lactuca muralis.
1 or 2 Corn.
" G.
S. Gibson." 
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Gibson ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Miss Bell ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bell sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30-Bedford.
(Saunders rec.) 
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Briggs.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
557 LAOTUCA MUBALIS.
227 
46 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Ar. Bennett).
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea ?
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Hiern.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 ' m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
88 Perth mid.
Miller.
+ 
(83 95 104; introduced).
558 Sonchus palustris.
16 Kent west.
Kippist sp.
18 Essex south.
Newman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
[8 9 11 or 12 17 20 23 39 
40 55 56 69 75 83].
All 
these are probably erro- 
neous ; possibly extinct in 
21, which may have been 
correct.
559 Sonchus arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
98 104 107 or 108 lib.
560 Sonchus asper.
Counties all, except 23 42 50 
52 56 57 61 71 to 75 80 
84 89 92 to 98 106 107 
108 ; very likely to occur in 
all of these counties, but 
was long passed by as a form 
of oleraceus, 
561 Sonchus oleraceus.
Counties all, except 42 47 73 
74 78 97 98 110; very 
likely to occur in all.
562 Mulgedium alpinum.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Ab. south.
H.M. Balfour sp.
[67 75 ; some error ?] 
563 Crepis virens.
Counties all, except 42 72 
73 74 97 107 108 111 
112.
564 Crepis biennis.
14 Sussex e.
Mrs. Oakeshott.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 n.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
Skepper cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton !
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
228 
564 CEEPIS BIENNIS.
62 York n.
east.
92 Aber.
south.
(Prof.
Traill).- 
(2 3 7 10 17 21 58 66 80).
[5 9 17 28 39 44 49 56 57 
61 64 66 67 69 82; coun- 
ties insufficiently vouched, 
and perhaps mostly erro- 
neous ; this name having 
been formerly misapplied to 
the Barkhausia taraxaci- 
566 Crepis succisifolia.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Babington ms.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine ?
92 Aber.
s. Eoy, to 370 yards.
94 Banff.
Roy ms., 265 yards.
99 Dunbarton.
[85 Inverkeithing ?] 
567 Crepis paludosa.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford ?
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Anderson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
55 Leicester.
Oh. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Eev. A.
Ley sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south I Goodlad hb.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat, 
65 n.
west.
"Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkii'k.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
CroaU cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess !
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
Church Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
e. ?
" Ben Clibrick." 
08 w.?
"Ben Clibrick." 
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
[3 4 28 ; erroneous ?] 
569 HIEBACIUM FILOSELLA.
229 
568 Hieracium Filosella.
Counties all, except 42 74 98 
112.
569 H.
coUinum.
[H.
pratense, Fries.) 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson.* 
83 Edinburgh.
Craig Christie.* 
95 Elgin.
Eev. J.
Keith, sp.* 
570 H.
alpinum.
Aggr.
49 Carnarvon.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
CroaU sp.
96 Easterness !
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
05 Eoss west.
08 Suth.
west !
570*H.
melanooephalum.
(H.
alpinum, Baokh.
Mon.) 
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
s. !
Backhouse sp.
96 Eastern.
? " on Braeriaoh." 
570*H.
holosericeum.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
88 Perth mid !
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
s. Backhouse sp.
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
Ross.
570*H.
eximium.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
CroaU sp.
94 Banff.
97 Westerness 1 
570*H.
calenduliflorum.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
570*H.
gracilentum.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Backhouse sp.
98 Argyle.
Eoy.
570*H.
globosum.
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
94 Banff.
Bng. Bot.
edit.
3. 
571 H.
pulmonariiun.
Aggr.
65 York n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
85 Fife ?
88 Perth mid.
Syme sp.
89 east.
Mackay, 1800.
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness!
J.E. Smithhrb.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
N.B. This may be understood 
to include the nigrescens and 
chrysanthuni of Mr. Back- 
house's Monograph.
571*H.
nigrescens.
230 
571*HIEKACIUM NIGEESCENS.
88 Perth mid.
Sj'me sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
96 Easterness.
Hooker sp.
97 WesternesB.
[65 69 70 85 89 94 108].
571*H.
lingulatum.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
96 Easterness.
Miller.
97 Westerness !
571*H.
senescens.
85 Fife.
Balf.
and Sadler flo.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
99 Dunbarton.
571*H.
chrysanthum.
.69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Groall sp.
96 Easterness.
Hooker sp.
97 Westerness I 
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
572 H.
murorum.
Aggr.
Counties all, except 1 2 10 11 
15 18 19 23 26 31 41 44 
47 48 51 53 54 56 61 71 
72 73 74 97 98 102 103.
As thus taken it must be 
understood to include the 
murorum and cmsium of the 
Monograph ; two alleged 
species which I am unable 
to distinguish with any cer- 
tainty.
[20 29] .
572*H.
murorum.
Segr.
7 Wilts north.
Preston.
9 Dorset.
17 Surrey.
33 Gloster east.
Stephens sp.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
57 Derby.
Buckland sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
572*H.
caesium.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon, var.
camhricum.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
w. Backhouse sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer.
70 Cumberland.
Ley rec.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south !
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
(29).
572*H.
flooculosum.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse.
92 Aber.
s. Backhouse sp.
96 Easterness ?
" Braeriach." 
573 H.
sylvatieum.
Aggr.
Counties all, except 2 16 25 
578* HIBRAOIUM SYLVATICUM.
231 
26 80 31 43 45 51 71 72 
74 84 93 105 111.
As 
thus taken it must be under- 
stood to include vulgatum of 
the Monograph, more or less 
mixed up with tridentatum, 
gothicum, and perhaps also 
with some other species of 
the Monograph.
573*H.
vulgatum.
7 Wilts north.
Preston.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex s.
G. S.
Gibson flo.
19 n.
G. S.
Gibson flo.
20 Herts.
Wallis sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cont.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
43 Eadnor.
B. H.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarv.
Backhouse mon.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees 
64 m.
w. Backhouse sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
Soutfcer sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat !
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
03 Eb. mid.
04 north.
05 Boss west.
Lawson cat.
(Druce).
573 i=H.
gothicum.
48 Merioneth.
Backhouse mon.
49 Carnarv.
Backhouse mon.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Baker.
80 Eoxburgh ?
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
87 Perth west.
Boswell sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Croall sp.
573 H.H=Dewari.
87 Clackmannan.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Syme.
574 H.
maculatum.
N.B. I am not aware of any 
really indigenous locality for 
this plant, after separating 
from Smith's species the 
stained-leaved variations of 
' murorum ' and of other 
species similarly marked.
575 H.
pallidum.
3 Devon south.
Dartmoor !
4 north.
Mott rec.
5 Som. south?
Gifford sp.
36 Hereford ?
Purchas sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley.
50 Denbigh!
J.E. Bowman sp.
232 
575 HIEEACIUM PALLIDUM.
57 Derby.
Kirk sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviot.
W. H.
Brown sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh !
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid.
Miller.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
96 Basterness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
06 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Oliver sp.
08 west ?
09 Caithness.
(Grant).
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N.B. This name is one of 
recent introduction into our 
descriptive Floras.
Smith 
probably would have divided 
the specimens between his 
murorum and Laiusoni.
575*H.
cinerascens.
(H.
lasiophyllum, Bab.) 
36 Hereford ?
47 Montgomery.
Melvill eat.
49 Carnarvon.
68 Cheviotland.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
s. Backhouse sp.
12 Shetland ?
575*H.
Gibsoni.
64 York m, west.
Tatham sp.
575*H.
argenteum.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
89 Perth east.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
s. !
Backhouse sp.
08 Sutherland west.
(Miller).
10 Hebrides.
575*H.
nitidum.
92 Aber.
s. Backhouse sp.
96 Basterness.
575*H.
aggregatum.
90 Forfar.
Eoy.
92 Aber.
s. Backhouse sp.
576*H.
anglicum.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid !
Miller cat.
89 east!
90 Forfar !
CroaU sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
08 Bbudes mid.
Eoss rec.
N.B. This includes the Lawsoni 
and cennthoides of the older 
botanists ; and it has occa- 
sionally been reported under 
the name of vilhsum.
[81 88 86 91 96 97 98 104 
105 108 110 111.] 
577 H.
iricutn.
576 HIEEAOIUM IRIOUM.
233 
65 York n.
west.
Gibson sp.
66 Durham.
Babington sp.
72 Dumfries.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
08 Suth.
west.
OUver sp.
09 Caith.
? Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Miss.
Portescue.
578 H.
Borreri.
{H.
Jwanum, Fries.) 
79 Selkirk?
"Dickson." 
99 Dunbarton.
Borrer ms.
N.B. Still remains a dubious 
plant ; see Cyb. Brit.
vol.
3, 
page 859.
The name denti- 
culatum has been variously 
applied, perhaps most fre- 
quently to examples of 
strictum.
Mr. Backhouse 
referred dried specimens of 
this plant to prenanthoides, 
with which I cannot concur, 
after cultivating both of them 
during many years.
579 H.
prenanthoides.
42 Brecon ?
Ley ree.
57 Derby.
Whitelegg sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
79 Selkirk?
Parquharson cat.
88 Perth mid !
MiUer cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Balfour sp.
96 Basterness.
Stables cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
[69 70 77 81 83 84 85 86 
89 90 91 95 104 ; un- 
certain] .
580 H.
crocatum.
48 Merioneth.
Ley reo.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees oat.
65 n.
west.
Gibson sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston reo.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston reo.
87 Perth west.
Balfour sp.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Porfar.
Kerr sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
96 Easterness ?
Gordon sp.
? 
98 Argyle ?
Lyon sp.
? 
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss rec.
[10 112 ; erroneous] .
581 H.
strictum.
{H.
denticulatum, Sm.) 
57 Derby ?
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
85 Pife.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
87 Perth west, Balfour sp.
88 mid.
Balfour sp.
90 Porfar.
Kerr sp.
96 Easterness.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
98 Argyle.
Lyon sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08 Suth.
west !
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. I do not clearly know this 
species, and trust chiefly to 
Mr. Backhouse for the 
names of my specimens 
cited above.
It seems nearly 
allied to crocatum, formerly 
called inuloides.
[64 65].
2h 
234 
581 HIEEACIUM TBIDENTATUM.
582 H.
tridentatum.
8 Devon south.
Eogers sp.
4 north !
8 Wilts south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 "Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north !
Baker oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
16 west !
Atkins sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
29 Cambridge ?
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Ley rec.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Wood sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland ?
87 Perth west.
Syme.
N.B. This includes the so-called 
gothicum and rigidum of the 
southern counties, but is 
different from the rigidum 
of Backhouse, no.
31.
583 H.
corymbosum.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Gibson sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Johnston sp.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
96 Easterness.
B. B.
ed.
3. 
03 Ebudes mid.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
11 Orkney.
Boswell.
N.B. This is the rigidum of 
Backhouse's Monograph, 
perhaps partly confused with 
striatum; certainly I do fail 
in assigning some of the 
dried specimens between 
these two.
584 H.
umbellatum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Noteutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
584 HIEEAOIUM UMBELLATUM.
235 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
34 Gloster west.
Wilmott sp.
35 Monmouth.
Bladon sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
F. A.
Lees rec.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford!
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
B. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gordon ms.
73 Kirkcudb.
Balfour sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherstonrec.
[77 81 83 88 90 91 100 
101 102 108 109; all un- 
certain, though possibly some 
of them correct] .
584 H.
boreale.
Counties all, except 31 42 43 
47 48 60 71 72 74 75 78 
82 86 88 89 93 95 to 98 
103 105 to 112.
Frequent in 
England ; much less so in 
Scotland.
Seldom confused 
with any other species, but 
a Surrey example of triden- 
tatum was named loreale by 
Dr. C.
H. Schultz ; although 
other examples of each 
species were rightly named 
by him.
Said to be mis- 
named umhellatum by some 
of the Edinburgh botanists.
585 Barkhausia fcetida.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.+ 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east I Syme sp.
16 west !
Macnab sp.
17 Surrey ?
18 Essex south.
19 n.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
21 Middlesex.
Ar. Bennett hrb.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bab. sp.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
[21 36 ; both errors ?] 
586 B.
taraxacifolia.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs.f 
3 Devon south.
9 Dorset.
Eogers.
15 Kent east.
Blow rec.
236 
586 BAEKHAUSIA TARAXACIFOLIA.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey.
Ar. Bennett sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Blow reo.
21 Middlesex.
Neve sp.t 
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
eat.
32 Northampton.
Druce rec.+ 
49 Carnarvon.
" J.
Eoberts !
" 
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
t 
[14 59] .
(66 67 80).
588 Taraxacum officinale.
Counties all, except 41 74.
588*T.
officinale, 
var.
eryihrospermum.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
13 Sussex west.
Syme sp.
14 east.
Roper.
16 Kent west.
F. A.
Hanbury.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
E. A.
Pryor.
21 Middlesex 1 
26 Suffolk west.
Bab. cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb eat.
64 York m.
west.
West ree.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White) .
89 east.
(F.B.White).
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N. B.
Probably common ; 
hitherto sparingly on re- 
cord.
558*T.
officinale, 
var.
IcBvigatum.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
13 Sussex west.
29 Cambridge.
40 Salop.
52 Anglesea.
69 Westmoreland.
85 Fife.
588*T.
officinale, 
var.
palustre.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 or 6 Somerset.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wgt.
" udum, not palustre.' 
11 Hants south.
Towns cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey?
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Radnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb oat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Borrer cat.
Bab. cat.
Stock cat.
Stevens sp.
588*TABAXAOUM OFFICINALE, VAE.
PALUSTEE.
237 
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker.
70 Cumberland !
Baker eat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennsdy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy oat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
85 Fife !
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall ree.
87 Perth west.
F.M.Webbreo.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
93 north.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Ross east.
" Wilson." 
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides ?
11 Orkney.
Syme.
12 Shetland.
" abundant." 
589 Arnoseris pusilla.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, ms.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
32 Northampton.
54 Lincoln north.
Britten.
55 Leicester.
66 Durham.
" introduced." 
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.f 
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.f 
N.B. Reported in some other 
counties, which require veri- 
fication.
Uncertain in its 
localities from year to year.
590 Lapsana communis.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
103 112; may be really 
absent from the last of these, 
Shetland.
591 Cichorium Intybus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
1 5 Kent east !
G. E .
Smith cat.
16 west !
Roper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
238 
591 CICHOBIUM INTYBUS.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt oat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse oat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.+ 
44 Carmartben.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.f 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west, "colonist.'' 
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton eat.+ 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes oat.f "v.r." 
(58 59 75 77 80 to 85 89 
90 92 93 95 96 99 109).
592 Arctium Lappa.
Aggr.
Counties all, except 46 74 78 
97 98 103.
592 A.
majus.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 or 6 Somerset.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Eogers.
10 Wight.
More ms.
11 Hants south.
H. Groves sp.
12 north.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
E. A.
Pryor.
24 Bucks.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Blow rec.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bromwioh sp.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler rec.
54 n.
Fowler & Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Kirk ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
64 n.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
[66 82 84 85 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
592 A.
minus.
592 ABOTIUM MINUS.
239 
1 Cornwall west.
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Bab. ms.
7 Wilts north.
Bab. ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Rogers ms.
10 Wight.
More ms.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
Syme ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Blow rec.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druoe rec.
84 Gloster w.
F. A.
Lees rec.
85 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
88 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
(H.
L. Jones).
53 Line.
s. Lees & Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
57 Derby.
Kirk ms.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
(F.
A. Lees).
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
(Lewis).
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr.
" Ailsa craig." 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
(Druce).
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
592*A.
intermedium.
1 Cornwall west.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
14 Sussex e.
J. L.
Warren cat.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north.
21 Middlesex.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
(Eeeves).
49 Carnarvon.
57 Derby.
61 York s.
east.
(F.
A. Lees).
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
240 
592*AKCTIUM NEMOKOSUM.
592*A.
nemorosum.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
15 Kent east.
Blow rec.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Blow rec.
21 Middlesex.
29 Cambridge.
E.A.Pryorsp.
49 Carnarvon.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
67 Northumberland.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
11 Orkney ?
593 Saussurea alpina.
48 Merioneth.
Backhouse.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Foggitt.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
87 Perth west.
Hooker sp.
88 mid !
89 east.
(P.
B. White), 
90 Forfar I 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
97 Westemess !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Horn rec.
10 Hebrides.
1 locality.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[59 Hall, in B.
G.] 
594 Serratula tinctoria.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north 1 Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Noteutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.^ 
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent west.
E. Twining sp.
17 Surrey !
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
26 Suffolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HilLhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Noteutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
BagnaU ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babiagton cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Harris sp.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
594 SEKBATULA TINOTOKIA.
24:1 
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmor .
! H.
E .
Smith sp.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver ms.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
[26 77 111 ; errors ?] 
595 Carduus nutans.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south I Notoutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west?
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 B^rks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purohas ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Notcutt cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
81 Hants !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh .
J .
E .
Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Gordon ms.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Lino, south 1 
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
OUver sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.+ 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
91 Kincard.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
N.B. Is it truly indigenous in 
Scotland ?
[Ill] .
2i 
242 
596 CABDUUS CEISPUS.
596.
0. crispus.
Counties all, except 4 35 42 
43 47 48 71 to 75 80 88 
89 93 94 96 97 98 100 
• 103 105 to 112.
Bare, and 
perhaps not truly indi- 
genous in North Britain ; so 
that it might be included 
among the less common 
plants.
Until lately it was 
usually named acanthoides 
in our Floras, etc.
597 C.
tenuiflorus.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Atwood ms.
7 Wilts north ?
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
ISSus.w.!
G.E.Smithcat.co.
14 east !
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
J. L.
Warren rec.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
80 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
(Parsons rec.) 
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Dtirham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Foggitt.
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes oat.
' 74 Wigton.
(MoAndrew).
75 Ayr.
77 Lanark ?
79 Selkirk.
Soutter rec* 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan oat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Graham sp.
85 Fife.
E. Young sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
90 Forfar.
91 Kino.
" Mr. Chrystall." 
95 Elgin ?
00 Clyde-isles ?
599 C.
lanceolatus.
Counties aU, except 42 78 74 
98.
No doubt it occurs in 
every county.
600 C.
eriophorus.
600 CABDUUS EBIOPHOBDS.
243 
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
' 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith oat.
17 Surrey ?
18 Essex south ?
19 north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east ?
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Druoe.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Lloyd sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.+ 
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester ?
60 Lane, west ?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
New flo.
(67 77 87).
[1 2 3 18 14 
70 84 85 '98 99] .
601 C.
palustris.
Counties all, except 74 98 104 
108.
Doubtless to be found 
in every county.
602 C.
arvensis.
Counties all, except 74.
Doubt- 
less it occurs in every 
county.
604 C.
pratensis.
2 Corn.
east.
Wise sp.
3 Devon south.
Gibson ms.
4 north.
Wise sp.
6 Som. north.
CoUins.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
sp.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Brewer sp.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Crespigny.
22 Berks !
Mrs. Eussell sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 w.
Bloomfield cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
244 
604 CABDUUS PKATENSIS.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
39 Stafford.
Bidwell sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
42 Brecon.
E. Forster ms.
43 Radnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
N. Wales.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
[66 67 75 100 102] .
605 C.
tuberosus.
7 Wilts north.
Preston rec.
8 s.
now "scarce." 
[7 41 C.
Woodwardi] .
606 C.
acaulis.
8 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Poole ms.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
BeU sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Pamplin ms.
18 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Bah. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse eat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Morley sp.
34 west !
Atwood sp.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
" Robinson." 
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
[67 70 ; probably en-ors] .
607 C.
heterophyllus.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Flint.
(H.
L. Jones rec.) 
57 Derby !
J. B.
Bowman ms.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb.
69 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
. 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
A. Sibbald sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Montgomery cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
607 CARDUUS HBTEBOPHYLLUS.
245 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Synie cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
E. Twining ms.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
03 mid.
Eoss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east.
08 west.
Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
[17 21 22 27 55 ; errors, per- 
haps through the mistake of 
giving this name to luxuriant 
examples of G.
pratensis.] 
608 Onopordum 
Acanthium.
1 Cornwall west.
8 Devon south.
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
Collias ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Extinct ?
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 Hants north.
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Pamplin ms.
18 Essex s.
G. S.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.* 
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.* 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.t 
39 Stafford.
Garner n.
h. 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.t 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montg.
J. E.Bowman ms.+ 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.t 
50 Denbigh ?
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec* 
55 Leicester.
Coleman flo.* 
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor ms.=;= 
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
w. Parsons rec* 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y.* 
66 Durham.
New. flo.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" v.
r." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
" from gardens." 
80 Eoxburgh.
246 
608 ONOPOKDTJM ACANTHIUM.
81 Berwick.
" introduced." 
82 Haddington !
Maughan sj).
83 Edinburgh, "introduced." 
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour.>:= 
(112 Shetland Flora.
+) 
N.B. The localities for this 
plant seem to be temxjorary 
at best ; and often it occurs 
only as a casual, lasting 
very few years.
609 Carlina vulgaris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som, south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purohas ms.
26 west.
Bab. cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HUlhouse.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
89 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
48 Eadnor.
B. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 n.
! Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Bloxam ms.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham »p.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
R. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
Embleton sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
93 Aber.
n. " found in 1872." 
95 Elgin.
"Dr.Innes"; Gord.+ 
00 Clyde-isles.
Atkin sp.
N.B. Occasionally misnamed 
Carduus acaulis; thus leading 
to false records for that plant.
611 CENTAUKEA NIGBA.
247 
611 Centaurea nigra.
Counties all, except 42 74.
Ears and perhaps an intro- 
duction by man in the three 
groups of North Isles.
The 
radiate variety occurs in 
many counties, from Corn- 
wall to Banff, but is most 
frequent in the south- 
western counties of England.
612 C.
Cyanus.
Counties all, except 35 42 to 
45 47 48 70 to 73 79 87 
97 98 99 101 to 105 108 
110 (111 112).
612 C.
Scabiosa.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack eat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat 
13 Sussex west !
Borrer oat.
14 east !
Eoper.
15 Kent, e.!
G.E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bab. cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31.
Hunts !
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
69 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
" Mr. Astley." 
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west.
(Lewis).
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham eat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy oat.+ 
80 Eoxburgh.
" Eev. J.
Baird." 
248 
613 CENTAUEEA SOABIOSA.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
J. B.
Balfour ms.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie 1843.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.t 
96 Basterness.
Stables sp.
08 Suth.
west.
" near Farr ?
" 
N'.B. My notes show this plant 
recorded only in one-fourth 
of the Scottish counties, and 
dubiously indigenous in some 
of those.
Thus am I in- 
duced to place it among the 
less common, although so 
frequent in England.
615 C.
Galcitrapa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
Pamplin ms.
26 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
27 Norfojk east.
C5oper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
32 Northampton.
41 Glamorgan.
Pleydell ms.
(18 19 20 63 66 67j.
[10 
21 62, extinct or erroneous ; 
perhaps the like in some 
other counties] .
617 Bidens cernua.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south !
4 Devon north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. s.
? Southby cat.
co.
6 north?
"near Bath." 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, eat.
12 north I Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
'24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
34 Gloster west.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick!
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester .
J. E.
Bowman sp.
617 BIDENS OEBNUA.
249 
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb oat.
60 west.
Liaton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 u.
east.
63 s.
west.
" rarely." 
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
618 B.
tripartita.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Hiern.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 ' south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
12 north 1 Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey 1 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat, 
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
Gordon sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat, 
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobiason cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman oat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea..
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
w. E.B.Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
2 K 
250 
618 BIDENS TEIPAETITA.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Kinross; Syme ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
95 Elgin.
" found in 1869." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
618*Galinsoga parvifiora.
17 Surrey.* 
21 Middlesex.* 
619 Eupatorium 
cannabinum.
Counties all, except 42 43 74 
78 79 84 93 94 97 101 
103 105 107 109 to 112.
Not a common plant in 
Scotland.
620 Chrysocoma 
Linosyris.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
6 Som. north.
Christy sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington s^d.
[14].
(9 18; casual here).
621 Diotis maritima.
1 Cornwall west.
3 Devon south.
9 Dorset.
10 Isle of Wight.
11 Hants s.
H. & J.
Groves sp, 
15 Kent east.
19 Essex north.
25 Suffolk east.
52 Anglesea.
N.B. This has been recorded 
from the nine counties enu- 
merated.
It has become 
extinct in most of them.
" Occasionally at Pakefield 
and Southwold ; " Flora of 
Suffolk.
623 Artemisia campestris.
26 Suffolk west.
Wardale sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Salmon sp.
29 Cambridge ?
(66 85).
[3 9 62] .
624.
A. maritima.
2 Corn.
east.
" reported." 
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Nbtcutt cat.
13 Sussex w.
! J.L. Warrenms.
14 east.
Banking sp.
16 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Winch ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
84 Gloster west!
Cooper sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L, Jones oat.
48 Merioneth.
i49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
624 ARTEMISIA MAKITIMA.
251 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
Hall sp.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Norman sp.
66 Durham.
E, B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
" three loc." 
93Ab.north.
"added in 1871." 
625 A.
Absinthium.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnaokcat.t 
2 east.
Briggs oat.t 
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.t 
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north ?
Flower cat.
8 south ?
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex w.
? Borrer oat.
co.
14 e.
? Borrer cat.
oo.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.f 
21 Middlesex.
Pamplin ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock eat.
. 
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat, 
86 Hereford.
Purohas oat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Gordon ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Line, south !
Introduced ?
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J.L.Warren cat.f 
62 York n.
east.
" denizen." 
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.t 
64 m.
w. F.A. Leescat.t 
65 n.
w. " denizen." 
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumberland, "den." 
68 Cheviotland.
" denizen." 
69 Westmor.
T. J.
Foggitt.
71 Man. Forbes oat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Lawson ms.t 
87 Perth west.
90 Forfar.
" A.
Croall." 
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.t 
252 
625 AETEMISIA.
ABSINTHIUM.
12 Shetland, Edm. flo.
N.B. This may be a native 
plant along the coast, and 
even some distance inland ; 
in the maritime counties 
but all the truly inland 
localities are to be distrusted 
as really indigenous ones.
621 Artemisia vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
97 107.
Doubtless it is to 
be found in every county.
Shetland " common." 
627 Gnaphalium dioicum.
1 Corn, west !
Hore ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
230xford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
SO Bedford.
E. H.
Webb.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea ?
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Macnab ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Grieve.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Balfour sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edmburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables oat.
97 Westerness I 
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
OS mid.
Stables sp.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Eoss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
627 GNAPHAIilUM DIOICUM.
258 
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east I 
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
GiUies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
630 Gnaphal.
sylvatioum.
Counties all, except 2 4 5 10 
26 34 42 44 45 47 48 72 
74 78 101 110; probably 
to be found in most of these, 
if not in all.
25 extinct ?
630 Gnaphal.
norvegicum.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.B.White).
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
s. Backhouse sp.
631 Gnaphalium supinum.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
- 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Eastemess !
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
05 Boss west.
(Druoe).
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
[Ill Orkney ; Clouston] .
632 Gnaphal.
uliginosum.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
98 105 108 110.
634 Filago minima.
Counties all, except 83 35 41 
42 46 47 48 57 60 69 71 
to 74 78 97 98 102 to 105 
108toll2.
Likely to be often 
overlooked ; thus increasing 
the number of counties 
hitherto left non-recorded.
635 rilago germanica.
Counties aU, except 42 60 69 
72 74 78 84 98 97 98 99 
102 to 105 107 to 112.
635*Filago apiculata.
{F.
lutescens, Jord.) 
11 Hants s.
Townsend cat.
12 north !
17 Surrey !
Dr. Mateer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
26 Suff.
west.
Babington sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newb.
oral.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
87 Worcester.
63 York s.
w. G.
E. Smith sp.
635*Filago spathnlata.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell.
10 Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south.
J. Groves sp.
12 north.
Spicer ms.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east !
15 Kent east.
Syme.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
254 
635*FILAGO SPATHULATA.
18 Essex south.
19 n-.
G. S.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
26 Suffolk west.
Ar. Bennett.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
54 Lincoln north.
N.B. This and the preceding 
are recent segregates ; their 
counties imperfectly on re- 
cord.
636 Petasites vulgaris.
Counties all, except 10 41 42 
46 71 74 87 97 98 104 to 
108.
(109).
[110 111 112] .
Widely distributed, but 
scarcely a common plant.
It has been recorded from 
Isla (Balfour) and Skye 
(Lawson).
Also from the 
Hebrides (Balf.
Bab.), from 
Orkney (Lowe), and from 
Shetland (Edmonston) ; in 
each of which there are 
grounds to infer that the 
Tussilac/o was mistaken for 
the Petasites.
637 Tussilago Farfara.
Counties all, except 74.
No- 
minally also unrecorded for 
the Hebrides, in Balfour and 
Babington 's list ; on which 
omission see the preceding 
species.
638 Erigeron alpinus.
88 Perth mid.
Maughan sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
639 Erigeron acris.
1 Cornwall west.
Ealfs.
4 Devon north.
" Stewart." 
5 Som. south.
Alexander ms.
6 north!
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Mrs. Tickner sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Introduced ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
BeU sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
82 Northton.
33 Gloster east, Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Baguall ms.
40 Salop.
Shawe sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery, 
639 BKIGEKON AOBIS.
255 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinsonoat.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman ms.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester!
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Nor thumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
(80 Eoxburgh ; Berw.
Proo.) 
641 Aster Tripolium.
Counties aU the maritime ones, 
except 35 74 88 92 (extinct) 
94 96 105 108 112.
Ee- 
oorded in 6g other maritime 
counties.
642 Solidago Virgaurea.
Counties all, except 31 42 60 
74 78 93 98.
643 Senecio vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 74 97.
644 Senecio sylvaticus.
Counties all, except 42 57 74 
84 93 98 105 108 110 112.
645 Senecio viscosus.
14 Sussex east.
Carr sp.+ 
16 Kent east.
Ar. Bennett.
19 Essex north.
Tempere.f 
25 Suffolk east.
Varenne sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Briggs.
49 Carnarvon.
Bab. sp.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
Eev. J.
Bigge sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
69 Lake Lane.
F. A.
Lees rec.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
73 Zirkcudb.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy eat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour eat.
85 Fife.
BosweU Syme ms.
87 Perth west.
Edin.
flo.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
N.B. This has been reported 
for numerous other counties ; 
but the mistake of giving 
the name of this species to 
examples of 8.
sylvaticus has 
been so frequent that I hesi- 
tate to enumerate any of the 
following <5ounties as cer- 
tain ; namely, [1 3 6 7 8 
16 17 18 19 23 26 27 28 
29 32 33 37 39 48 57 58 
59 62 64 76 80 82 91 92 
111;] (21).
Some of these 
may be correct.
647 Senecio erucifolius.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som, south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
256 
647 SENECIO ERUCIFOLIUS.
8 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Bahington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babiagton cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Lees rec.
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Liacoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby .
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tathamcat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland ?
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale flo.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
N.B. Common in South Bri- 
tain ; perhaps the same in 
England generally ; very 
rare in Scotland.
648 Senecio Jacobsea.
Counties all, except 42 74.
648 Senecio aquaticus.
Counties all, except 35 42 74 
93 97.
649 Senecio paludosus.
26 Suffolk west.
" Hemsted." 
27 or 28 Norf.
Bng. Bot.
ed.
8. 
53 Line, south.
" Banks." 
[29 Camb.
" Marshall sp." 
58 Chester, an error] .
651 Cineraria palustris.
{Senecio palustris).
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
"Eagle." 
27 Norf.
east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Marshall sp.
29 Cambridge.
Eelhan.
81 Hunts.
Woodward in B.
G. 
53 Lino, south.
" Banks." 
651 OINEHABIA PALUSTRIS.
257 
[1 or 2 39 41 48 59 or 60 
69 ; all errors ?] Extinct 
in 29 and 31.
652 Cineraria campestris.
(Senecio campestris.) 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Southby sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south.
E. A.
Pryor.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Duthie sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten "v.
sp." 
29 Cambridge.
Henslow sp.
30 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
32 Northton.
33 Grloster east.
Eoberts ms.
52 Anglesea.
John Ball sp.
54 Lincoln north.
Britten ms.
[70 Eobson in Phytol.
v. 5] .
652*Ciner.
spathulsefolia.
52 Anglesea.
65 York n.
west.
(Backhouse).
655 Inula Helenium.
N.B, This conspicuous plant 
is recorded in more than 
sixty counties ; although 
most frequently with some 
intimations of distrust in its 
real nativity.
Many years 
ago (when less experienced) 
I deemed it wild on rough 
lands in West Cornwall ; but 
in the Isle of Wight, and in 
Surrey, and even so far 
north as Ross, it seemed to 
be obviously an introduced 
plant.
The witnesses for its 
true nativity are few ; the 
most positive being in gene- 
ral the least reliable of au- 
thorities on such a question, 
for instance.
Dr. Bromfield.
There are some real ex- 
ceptions however, for Mr.
Baker declares it native in 
North Yorkshire ; and Mr.
Mansell-Pleydell thinks that 
such may be the case in 
Dorset.
It has certainly 
been introduced into most 
of its counties ; possibly not 
so into all of them ; but I 
find their due allotment im- 
practicable.
656 Inula Conyza.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs oat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
2 L 
258 
656 INULA CONYZA.
23 Oxford.
Harris sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
32 Nortbton.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmoutb.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Sbawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Leessp.
46 Cardigan.
Purcbas ms.
48 Merionetb.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J .
E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lino.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
69 Westmoreland !
(66 67, on ballast).
[89] .
657 Inula crithmoides.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Eev. H.
E. Fox sp.
10 Wight.
More & Stratton.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Gibson sp.
15 Kent east.
French sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Syme sp.
34 Gloster west.
Cooper sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen?
"One plant." 
45 Pembroke.
Stables sp.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowman sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
[25 27 ; extinct or errors] .
658 Inula dysenterica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs eat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer oat.
14 east !
Coleman eat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith eat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
658 INULA DYSENTEEICA.
259 
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Eirk oat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat, 
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F, M.
Webb cat.
60 west.- Linton' cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
74 Wigton.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
"Landsb." 
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
2 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
659 Inula Pulicaria.
1 Corn.
w. Ealfs.
" extinct." 
8 Wilts south.
Bell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
ms.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Coleman ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
Gibson ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east ?
" Crabbe." 
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford, "rarely." 
37 Worcester.
More ms.
38 Warwick.
Extinct ?
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
55 Leicester ?
[Somerset.
York] .
660 Bellis perennis.
Counties all, except 74.
661 Chrysanthemum 
segetum.
Counties all, except 42 78 79 
98.
662 Chrys.
Leucanthemum.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 
97 107 110; doubtless to 
be found in every county.
260 
663 PYKETHBUM, OK OHEYSANTHBMtIM PAKTHENIUM.
663 Pyrethrum, or Chrys.
Parthenium.
Counties all, except 49 54 60 
71 to 75 93 97 98 101 to 
105 107 108 110 to 112.
Almost always now recorded 
as a more or less distrusted 
native ; especially so in the 
more northern counties.
664 Chrys.
Tanacetum.
(T.
vulgar e).
Counties all, except 42 46 
(51) 69 74 78 84 97 98 99 
103 105.
Native and fre- 
quent in South Britain.
It 
is so designated in the 
' Botany of North Yorkshire ' 
and in the 'New Flora of 
Northumberland and Dur- 
ham.' Unquestioned also 
in the Floras of the Clyde 
and Forth ; but at best it 
is one of the doubtfully 
indigenous plants in Scot- 
land.
665 Pyreth., or Matricaria, 
or Chrysanth.
inodorum.
Counties all, except 42 74 80 ; 
doubtless does occur in all.
The Pyrethrum maritimum is 
usually, if not always, repre- 
sented by a maritime state 
of inodorum.
It has been 
found in districts 12 3 5 
or 6 9 10 11 13 18 28 41 
45 46 52 58 59 61 62' 66 
to 77 81 83 90 to 104 106 
109 to 112.
666 Matricaria, or Chrys.
Chamomilla.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
8 Devon south.
Twining sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight ?
More excl.
list.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
(J.
B. Vize).
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson eat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat, 
666 MATRICARIA, OR CHRYSANTHEMUM OHAMOMILLA.
261 
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman oat.t 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb eat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B.Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
70 Cumberland.
(75 77 80 83 85 86 91 97).
[10 110 111] .
Liable to a 
confusion with Anthemis 
Gotula.
667 Anthemis nobilis.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs eat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight.
More eat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt eat.
12 north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west- 
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock eat.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
35 Monmouth.
Conway eat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan ?
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
48 Merioneth, "plentifully." 
52 Anglesea.
" not rare." 
56 Leicester.
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
"Wilson." 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
New flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Gait ms.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
(51 79 81 109 111).
668 Anthemis arvensis.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.f 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight.
More eat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex west.
Baker ms.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Syme sp.
24 Bucks.
More ms.
25 Suffolk east.
262 
668 ANTHEMIS AEVENSIS.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Mann sp.
28 west.
Notoutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
36 Hereford.
37 "Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
64 Lincoln north.
Allen reo.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Bidwell sp.
58 Chester.
Gordon sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.t 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
" Cruickshank." 
92 Aber.
south.
Eoy ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.f 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
N.B. Apparently there is fre- 
quent confusion between 
this plant and Gotula; for 
instance, specimens of the 
latter came to my hands 
labelled as arvensis from 
Worcestershire and Middle- 
sex.
669 Anthemis Cotula.
, 1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman oat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten oat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt oat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
35 Monmouth.
Ley reo.
669 ANTHEMIS OOTULA.
263 
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
63 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Dugdale sp.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland, "reported." 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.t 
80 Roxburgh.
82 Haddington.
Macpab sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Gilbert Macnab sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
[90 111 112].
It would 
seem an error to include 
this abundant weed of Eng- 
land among the plants " not 
common," if we failed to 
notice its rarity in Scotland ; 
where, indeed, it is rather a 
casual than a true colonist.
670 Achillea Ptarmica.
Counties all, except 5 15 42 
74 100.
Not very common ; 
though likely to occur in 
every county.
671 Achillea Millefolium.
Counties all, except 42 74.
One of the most common 
and most widely diffused of 
our native plants.
675 Campanula 
rotundifolia.
Counties all, except 31 42 74 
106 111.
Apparently absent 
from Orkney ; and recorded 
in the Shetland Flora for a 
single locality only.
676 Campanula patula.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Miss BeU sp.
9 Dorset ?
11 Hants s.
? " Eobinson." 
12 north.
Salmon sp.
13 Sussex w.
G. E.
Smith ms.
16 Kent west.
Holmes.
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
BidweU sp.
41 Glamorgan ?
42 Brecon.
Gibson ms.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
Berkeley ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
264 
676 CAMPANULA PATULA.
64 York m.
west.
66 Durham ?
69 Westmoreland ?
(3 18 19 20 24 27 29 ; in- 
troduced, or partly errors ?) 
677 Camp.
Rapunculus.
N.B. The only locality in which 
I have seen this plant, is 
the long-recorded one of 
EsherandHersham; around 
these two villages the plant 
is to be seen yearly in 
several spots, varying in 
place and quantity from 
year to year.
Perhaps not 
well established in any 
other county, although re- 
ported for the following : — 
(1 5 12 13 16 to 22 24 25 
27 28 29 32 36 37 38 89 
49 50 52 66 61 62 63 66 
85).
678 Campanula latifolia.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east ?
Stock cat.
27 Norfolk east ?
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Babington ms.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Butler sp.
40 Salop.
43 Eadnor.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Bobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Church.
Bab. sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Ku-kcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Montgomery ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
Syme eat.
86 Stirling.
Gourlie sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
89 east.
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie oat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.t 
[1 or 2 8 11 21 23 ; mostly 
errors through giving this 
name to Trachelium] .
679 Camp, rapunculoides.
N.B, This is an alien, by nearly 
678 CAMPANULA KAPUNCWLOlDMS.
265 
general assent, but it seems 
to have become fairly well 
established in some coun- 
ties ; in others it is met 
with simply as a casual 
escape from gardens, in 
which it readily becomes 
a troublesome weed.
My 
collected notes show locali- 
ties reported in these coun- 
ties :— (9 11 17 21 23 30 
33 34 37 38 55 56 58 62 
63 64 67 82 83 85 89 90 
92).
680 Camp.
Trachelium.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.* 
3 Devon south.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
16 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west !
Sansom sp.
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Miss Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Gibson ms.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
E. Brown.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
" Spruce." 
69 Westmoreland, Gibson ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh ?
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Eobertson sp.
(68 86).
[99 error for 86] .
681 Campanula glomerata.
5 Som. s.
F. A.
Lees rec.
6 north !
Collius ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight !
Miss Bell sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex w.
Borrer cat.
co.
14 east.
Hall cat.
16 Kent west.
Dennes sp.
17 Surrey!
John Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
2m 
266 
681 CAMPANULA GLOMEHATA.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris herb.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper ms.
28 Norf.
west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
30 Bedford.
8. Foster sp.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Ley sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife !
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincard.
Mrs. Dickson cat.
683 Campanula hederacea.
[Wahlenbergia hederacea).
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Clark ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Ellis ms.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
16 Kent west.
Tonb.
flo.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
Freeman sp.
22 Berks.
" Bagley woods." 
33 Gloster east.
Roberts ms.
34 west.
Purchas ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway sp.
36 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Woodward ms.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Gordon sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson sp.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh ?
Faun.
Grust.
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west ?
71 Man. Jowett sp.
75 Ayr. Landsborough bot.
76 Eenfrew.
Hook Scot.
98 Argyle.
Clydesdale flo.
684 Campanula hybrida.
[Specularia hybrida).
1 Corn.
w. Miss Warren ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
684 
CAMPANULA HYBRIDA.
2B7 
10 "Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns.
12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Casual ?
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow sp.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west?
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.f 
38 Warwick.
Leefe sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
"Ibbotson." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
(58 68 82 85, casual; and 
scarcely a true colonist in 
some other of the more north- 
erly counties).
685 Phyteuma orbiculare.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell, " certain." 
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Crotch sp.
14 east !
HaU cat.
15 or 16 Kent.
" Beacon Hill." 
17 Surrey !
EUis sp.
[21 63 ; require verifica- 
tion] .
686 Phyteuma spicatum.
14 Sussex east.
Miss Hall sp.
" Abounds in woods far 
from any habitation " ; Miss 
Hall.
(38 88).
687 Jasione montana.
Counties aU, with many excep- 
tions, especially northward ; 
namely, 6 16 81 33 34 
54* 61 68 74 78 80 to 90 
92 98 94 96 98 99 103 to 
110.
Eeported from Ork- 
ney, and alleged to be 
" common " in Shetland.
688 Lobelia urens.
3 Devon south.
Gutoh sp.
(Kent, one plant ; Rev. J.
Dix).
Mr. T.
B. Flower 
found it still growing near 
Axminster, in South Devon, 
in 1872.
689 Lobelia Dortmanna.
40 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
4 1 Glamorgan .
' ' Dill wyn .
' ' 
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Harris sp.
268 
689 LOBELIA DOBTMANNA.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker sp.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy oat.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
Trevelyan ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss rec.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Gordon oat.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Kebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
690 Erica Tetralix, 
Counties all, except 32 83 42 
74 78.
Is it actually ab- 
sent from 32 33 ?
690*Eriea Watsoni.
1 Cornwall west !
9 Dorset.
(Sir J.D.Kookersp.) 
691 Erica ciliaris.
1 Corn, west 1 Cunnaok sp.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
[12 17 ; through some error, 
probably, although speci- 
mens are shown thus local- 
ized by their labels] .
692 Erica cinerea.
Counties all, except 30 31 83 
42 61 74; and it may be 
really absent from some of 
the first three.
694 Erica vagans.
1 Corn, west !
'Cunnaok cat.
(3 87).
[34 37 41 56 57 
67 75 96 98; misreported 
or planted] .
695 Calluna vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
103 ; doubtless to be seen in 
aU.
696 Menziesia cserulea.
88 Perth mid.
Brand sp.
Still there in 1866 ; Mr.
Frederick Naylor.
[110] .
698 Azalea procmnbens.
(Loiselmria pi-ocumbens).
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
88 Perth mid !
Sadler sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south I Dickie oat.
94 Banff.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Bb. north.
Gutch sp.
05 Eoss west.
698 AZALEA PEOCUMBENS.
269 
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
11 Ork. Miss Fortescue, 1880.
12 Shetland.
Hewitson sp.
[8.
C.E.Moore, M.D.].
[85.
J. Anderson, D.D.] .
699 Andromeda polifolia.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
28 Norfolk west.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones reo.
46 Cardigan.
Lees sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
0. Moore sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Extinct ?
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Balfour sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
87 Perth west.
Bushnan sp.
[3 24.
Hants; Eng. Bot.
ed.
3 ; this name was a 
misprint for Hunts] .
700 Arbutus alpina.
(Arctostaphylos alpina.) 
88 Perth mid ?
90 Forfar, Brand, 
92 Aber.
south.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness !
06 Boss east.
Gordon sp.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Brown cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[70 103 104 105; errors 
through mistaking the other 
species for this one ; but 105 
seems likely to be correct] .
701 Arbutus Uva-ursi.
[Arctostaphylos Uva-ursi.) 
67 Derby.
Whitehead rec.
58 Chester?
62 York n.
east ?
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
78 Peebles.
81 Berwick.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley oat.
89 east !
Wight sp.
90 Forfar !
G. Macnab sp.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Stables sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid !
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.!
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
270 
701 AEBUTUS UVA-UKSI.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
703 Vaccinium Myrtillus.
Counties all, except 7 16 19 
25 26 28 29 31 32 33 42 
53 54 74 ; in some of these 
it appears to be really want- 
ing, ex.
gr.
in Suffolk and 
Cambridge.
704 Vaccinium uliginosum.
66 Durham.
G. S Gibson sp.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
Hooker sp.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
[49 50 65 ; unsatisfactory] .
705 Vaccinium Vitis-Idsea.
8 Devon south.
" BuUer." 
18 Essex south.
Extinct.
85 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Herefdrd.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford I Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Lees sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Babington ms.
50 Denbigh !
J. E.Bowman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south!
Goodladhb.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Eobertson cat.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west !
Syme eat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
Stables ms.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
oat, 
10 Hebrides, 
706 VACOINIUM VITIS-IDJEA.
271 
12 Shetland.
[6 15 ; errors or extinct] .
706 Vaccinium Oxycoccos.
5 Som. south.
Trevelyan ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
10 Wight.
More ms.
1869.
12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
BorrerinB.G.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
"French." 
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge, "now lost." 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
37 Worcester ?
Extinct ?
38 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford !
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones- oat.
44 Carmarthen.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid.
90 Forfar I Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
John Eoy ms.
96 Easterness.
Coll.
Mor.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson eat.
05 Eoss west.
(Druce).
06 east.
" G.
Smith." 
[4 ; perhaps by misnomer] .
707 Pyrola rotundifolia.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Extinct.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
59 Lane, south.
Hardy sp.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
69 Westmoreland, arenaria.
78 Peebles?
"Blackie." 
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
89 Perth east.
Lyon sp.
90 Forfar I Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
272 
707 PYEOLA BOTUNDIFOLIA.
96 Basterness.
Stables sp.
[3 13 or 14 23 33 or 34 63 
69 70 73 75 77 80 81 83 
87 88 111 112; in most of 
these counties, if not in all 
of them, the media or minor 
has been mistaken for the 
present rarer species] .
708 Pyrola media.
13 Sussex...
? Borrer ms.
87 Worcester.
Prentice sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
59 Lane, south.
Leyland sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Foggitt.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton ms.
69 Westm.
P. A.
Lees reo.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark ?
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Eussell sp.
88 mid.
Miller.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
" sp.
seen." 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
(Boss).
03 Bb. mid.
Gordon sp.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
12 Shetland.
Edmon.
flo.
[20 23 24 60; likely errors 
for P.
minor] .
709 Pyrola minor.
3 Devon south ?
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper sp.
15 Kent east.
" Mr. Beeves." 
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Sandys sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster e.
H. C.
Eeader.
34 w.
H. C.
Eeader.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
Prentice sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leigton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
J. Hooker ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
" W.
Morris." 
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
WhaUey sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Trevelyan sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Ottley hb.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
709 PTROLA MINOK.
273 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
08 Eb. mid.
Gordon sp.
04 north.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Horn rec.
N.B. Occasionally misreported 
as media or rotundifolia.
710 Pyrola secunda.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
65 York n.
west.
Pinder sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
70 Cumberland !
Bab. sp.
72 Dumfries.
" Walker." 
88 Perth mid.
Miller cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie oat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon oat.
[13 64 67 75 76 77].
711 Pyrola uniflora.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
92 or 98 Aberdeen.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
"Macgillivray." 
06 Boss east.
Gordon sp.
07 Suth.
east.
. 
10 Hebrides ?
[69 75 90; errors?].
' 
Possibly 88 89 may be one 
locality, in 88 only.
712 Monotropa Hypopitys.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Dutton sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Balfs.
12 north.
PampUn ms.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hall oat.
15 Kent e.
G.B. Smith cat.
16 w.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Eeynolds sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
88 Gloster east.
Stephens sp.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick ?
2n 
274 
712 MONOTBOPA HYPOPITYS.
39 Stafford ?
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
53 or 54 Lincoln .
. .
? 
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
King sp.
61 York s.
east.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
w. " Cramound." 
65 n.
w. Hebblethwaite.
69 Westmoreland.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie ms.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
[41 67 ; bad authority] .
713 Ilex Aquifolium.
Counties all, except 31 42 53 
74 78 93 98 99 106 107 
109 (110) 111 112.
In se- 
veral of the Highland coun- 
ties it is reported to be 
doubtfully indigenous ; also 
in Haddington and Edin- 
burgh.
My own notes of 
1832 mark it as if seen wild 
in 97 and 108.
714 Ligustrum vulgare.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 e.
! Coleman cat.f 
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten eat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper eat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse eat.t 
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.+ 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson eat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
" sea-coast." 
58 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
66 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
66 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
not wild.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.+ 
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
714 LIGUSTEUM VULGABB.
275 
65 Yorkn.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey ms.+ 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
not wild.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.-i 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
88 Perth mid.
Miller, t 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
(81 83 85 86 87 91 92 94 
95 100 101 102 105 109; 
expressly reported as non- 
indigenous in these counties ; 
the rest will stand on the 
authorities cited).
Certainly 
indigenous in the chalk dis- 
tricts ; perhaps so on other 
calcareous ground, and on 
coast cliffs.
715 Fraxinus exeelsior.
Counties all, except 74 93 104 
107 108 111 112.
(85 87 
90 91 92 94 95 101 102 
109 110 ; reported uncer- 
tainly indigenous ia these 
counties).
716 Vinca minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggscat.t 
^ 3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south?
6 north.
Thwaites cat.* 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.* 
8 south.
Flower cat.=:= 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More cat.t 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Indigenous ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.f 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Baxter, "wild." 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.+.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Bab. cat.f 
30 Bedford.
HiLlhouse cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites.* 
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
" wild." 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
45 Pembroke, "wild?" 
47 Montg.
" certainly wild." 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.+ 
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.f 
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.t 
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Eobinson ms.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.t 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.A. Lees cat.t 
65 n.
west.
" alien." 
66 Durham.
" ahen." 
67 Northumb.
" alien." 
68 Cheviotland.
"ahen." 
70 Cumberland ?
276 
716 VINOA MINOE.
71 Man.
73 Kirkoud.
Gray eat.
co.* 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.-i 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.t 
81 Berwick, "naturalised." 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
86 Fife.
Syme cat.* Lawson.* 
90 Forfar.
" naturalised." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.* 
94 Banff.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.* 
03 Mull.
Boss cat.* 
N.B. I have never seen the 
Periwinkle in a certainly 
native state ; although seen 
quasi-wild in many counties.
In the above full enumera- 
ration of counties both the 
alternative signs are used, 
as applied by the botanists 
quoted, or as suggested by 
tiieir remarks.
718 Gentiana verna.
66 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Todd rec.
70 Cumberland ?
[24 61 ; by misnomers] .
719 Gent.
Pneumonanthe.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south !
Flower sp.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex?
22 Berks.
26 Suffolk east.
Extinct ?
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
64 north.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
66 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
Miss Beck sp.
69 Lane, south.
Phillips sp.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
Kingsley sp.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Fowler rec.
66 n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
720 Gentiana nivalis.
88 Perth mid.
Gourlie sp.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
[97 Boue, in N.B.G.J .
721 Gentiana Amarella.
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs sp.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
Sawbridge sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warrenms.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Wing sp.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey 1 Wood ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
721 GBNTIANA AMABELLA.
277 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Watkins sp.
87 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman cat.
51 FUnt.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln s.
Browne rec.
54 n.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts !
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
I. B.
Balf.
ms.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
05 Eoss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
09 Caith !
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
" Miss Boswell." 
12 Shetland.
721 Gentiana germanica.
12 Hants n.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
17 Surrey.
18 or 19 Essex.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
45 Pembroke.
York.
N.B. The above counties are 
on record for this large- 
flowered variety ; how far 
correct, and how many 
others ought to be added, 
my notes do not show.
722 Gentiana campestris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascbe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Very rare.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
" Baxter, 1819." 
26 Suffolk west.
278 
722 GENTIANA OAMPESTEIS.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
37 Worcester.
(E.Lees).
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Atwood ms.
48 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmartlien.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson eat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
Croallrec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
, 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Basterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Burnett sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east !
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
east !
08 west !
09 Oaith.
! Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[4 12 13 16 17 21 24 33 
36 ; old authorities, not 
verified ; but some of these 
counties may have been cor- 
rectly reported] .
It is the 
rarity, and often uncertainty, 
of this plant in South Bri- 
tain, which cause it to be 
included among the " not 
common " plants ; although 
frequent or even common in 
North Britain.
723 Cicendia filiformis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south I Harris sp.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
723 OIOENDIA PILIFORMIS.
279 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
724 Erythrsea Centaurium.
Counties all, except 42 43 74 
78 79 86 88 89 91 93 94 
97 104 105 107 108 109 
111.
Eare in Shetland.
724 Erythrsea littoralis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
10 Wight.
Error ?
14 Sussex east.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
(Reeves).
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Whittaker sp.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south !
Rylands sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
67 Northumberland ?
' 
68 Cheviotland.
Winch sp.
69 Westm.
Carrington sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
91 Kincardine.
93 Aber.
north ?
94 Banff.
95 Elgin ?
96 Basterness ?
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
N.B. A dwarfed state of the 
Centaurium is mistaken for 
this segregrate, which in- 
cludes two sub-forms besides.
I have several specimens of 
the plant usually labelled 
" littoralis " in Moray, 95 
96, but do not feel quite 
satisfied that they are not 
simply small states of Cen- 
taurium.
The enumeration 
of counties must be accept- 
ed with caution ; especially 
those left in blank for per- 
sonal authorities.
724 Erythrsea pulchella.
1 Corn.
west.
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Fox sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
Ward sp.
11 Hants s.
G.E. Smith Corr.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Banking sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Syme.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
37 Worcester ?
41 Glamorgan.
Henfrey sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
280 
724 ERYTHK«A PULOHELLA.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
J. E .
Bowman sp.
54 Line, nortli.
Thompson ms.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
60 west.
Fielding sp.
' 
61 York s.
east.
69 Westmoreland.
Foggitt.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
724 Erythraea latifolia, Sm.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
[1 2 3 4 9 10 13 14 45 
46 48 52 58 66 67 70 97 
103 ; errors through the 
mistake of transferring the 
name of Smith's plant to 
hroad-leaved forms of Cm- 
taurium, not otherwise dif- 
ferent] .
The true plant of 
Smith, the segregate with 
small very crowded flowers, 
I still look upon as simply 
an abnormal or irregular 
growth of Centaurium, which 
may chance to occur in other 
places besides the Lanea- 
shire coast.
724*Erythr8ea capitata.
10 Wight.
Townsend sp.
725 Chlora perfoliata.
2 Cornwall east.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bromf.
sp.
15 Kent east !
Trevelyan sp.
16 west !
Dennes sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
T. B.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
BagnaU ms.
88 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane, south !
Ch. Bab.
sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
725 CHLOBA PBBFOLIATA.
281 
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Eobson.f 
69 Westmoreland.
[67 70 ; verification needed] .
726 Villarsia 
nymphseoides.
(lAmnanthemum nymphaoides).
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
sp.
17 Surrey !
Looks native in 
21 Middlesex !
the Thames.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Fox sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
(10 18 20 33 37 38 39 56 
58 62 67 69 70 77 81 89 ; 
probably or certainly intro- 
duced into all of these coun- 
ties ; insufficiently vouched 
in some few of them).
727 Menyanthes trifoliata.
Counties all, except 5 31 42 
47 48 74 97 99 107 ; pos- 
sibly may be absent from 
some two or three of these 
counties.
728Polemonium cseruleum.
39 Stafford.
57 Derby !
Christy sp.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
69 Westm.
Baker bot.
n. y.
N.B. Clearly native in the 
limestone tracts of North 
England.
Long a favourite 
plant in cottage gardens ; 
and springing freely from its 
scattered seeds, it gives loose 
writers the chance to swell 
their local lists by enume- 
rating it, and often as if a 
truly wild plant.
I do not 
know that the following 
enumeration will include 
only such records, nor whe- 
ther (if so) it will fully ex- 
haust the series of records 
of the kind :— (1 3 6 7 8 
17 20 21 22 23 32 to 36 
38 39 40 49 50 55 58 62 
63 65 66 70 to 73 75 77 
81 to 87 90 92 94 100 102 
109).
729 Convolvulus arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 43 69 
72 73 74 78 79 80 84 87 
88 89 93 94 97 98 99 101 
103 105 108 110 to 112.
Abundant in South Britain.
Bare and dubiously indi- 
genous in North Britain.
(75 77 95 96 100).
730 Convolvulus sepium.
Counties all, except 42 43 47 
74 78 79 80 84 to 98 104 
to 112.
Eecorded as an in- 
troduced plant in the follow- 
ing additional counties : — 
(81 85 87 to 90 95 109).
Thus, almost general through 
England ; and recorded as 
a native northward to the 
Forth and Clyde, and to 
the south-west extremity of 
North Britain.
731 Convol.
Soldanella.
2 o 
282 
731 CONVOLVULUS SOLDANELLA.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
.S Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Hiern.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutch sp.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Darby ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
71 Man. Forbes to Brand sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr ...?
to Twynam sp.
82 Haddington ?
90 Forfar.
"A.
Croall." 
97 Westerness ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Islay.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Boss cat.
732 Cuscuta europsea.
3 Devon s.
Tate ms.
1871.
5 Som. south.
Collias ms.
6 north.
Bab. ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren.
14 east.
Unwin sp.
17 Surrey 1 Neve sp.
18 Essex south..
19 north.
20 Herts.
S. Lucas sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west?
29 Cambridge.
Babiagton cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Wintle ms.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
88 Warwick.
Bree ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
58 Chester.* 
63 York s.
west.
Eoberts rec.
[21 28 39 62 64 72 77 (80) 
83 90 92 ; mostly errors ?] .
The name europma appears 
to have been occasionally 
misapplied to examples of 
the other species ; and thus 
only recent reports, by really 
competent botanists, can be 
satisfactorily relied upon in 
the case of this present 
species.
734 Cuscuta Epithymum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
734 CUSOUTA EPITHYMUM.
283 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Freeman sp.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowman ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
62 York n.
east.
68 Cheviotland.
73 Kirkcudbright ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh ?
[77 " on flax "] .
735 Cuscuta Trifolii.
Eeported for many counties, 
from Cornwall to Perth ; 
whether always "re-intro- 
duced among the seeds of 
clover, or sometimes latent 
in the ground, it may be 
difficult to decide confidently.
I have seen it on Chenopo- 
dium urbicum or intermedium 
in a farm-yard in Surrey.
736 Hyoseyamus niger.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 .
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
284 
736 fiYOSCYAMtJS NiGEfi.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat, 
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.f 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmartlien.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.!
50 Denbigh!
J. B.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
(H.
L. Jones rec.) 
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.f 
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.-east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew ?
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
. 82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balf.
& Sad. flo.
86 Stirling.
Duthie.
89 Perth east.
" W.
Gorrie." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
(Introduced; Dickie Bot. G.
Not a native in the northern 
counties ; J.
Eoy ms.).
737 Solanum nigrum.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnackcat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.+ 
3 Devon south.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.t 
15 Kent e.
! G.
B. Smith cat..
16 west 
17 Surrey !
Groves.
18 Essex south.
19 north, Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
Britten.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman cat'.
51 Flint r Eobinson cat.
737 SOLANUM NIGEUM.
285 
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lino, north.
Fowler rec.t 
55 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
"Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
" colonist." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
" colonist." 
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
67 Northumb.
" ballast hiUs." 
68 Cheviotland.
" colonist." 
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
(75 80 81 83 85 98 100 ; 
introduced).
738 Solanum Dulcamara.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northwards ; namely, 
42 43 74 78 79 84 (91 to 
94) 97 98 99 101 103 104 
105 107 to 112.
Professor 
Dickie holds it an intro- 
duced plant in counties 91 to 
94.
Treated as a native in 
the Flora of Moray ; and 
equally so in, the Floras of 
Clyde and Forth.
738b Solanum miniatum.
15 Kent east.
(F.
M. Webb).
739 Atropa Belladonna.
7 Wilts north.
Flower rec.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman, sp.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Christy ms.
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Varenne ms.
36 Hereford, "native"; Bab.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
60 Lane.
west.
Fielding ms.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
" native." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baines sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
' 
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumb.
" denizen." 
68 Cheviotland.
" denizen." 
69 Westmor.
Simpson sp.
(2 3456789 [10] 18 
19 27 28 37 38 39 40 41 
45 50 51 55 56 57 70 72 
75 76 77 81 83 85 86 87 
90 95 [98] 103; iU vouched 
in these counties, or re- 
ported there as an uncertain 
native) .
This plant possibly 
may be indigenous in some 
of the chalk or limestone 
districts.
The roots are 
long -lasting, and the seedling 
plants spring up freely in 
gardens ; peculiarities which 
tend to establish the plant 
in localities to which it may 
have been originally carried 
by human hands.
The lo- 
calities on record for it af- 
ford not a few instances 
286 
739 ATEOPA BELLADONNA.
in illustration of the delusive 
manner in which superficial 
botanists have endeavoured 
to palm off the artificial as 
if genuinely indigenous lo- 
calities.
740 Verbascum Thapsus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 8om, south.
Coleman cat.
6 , north!
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.t 
15 Kent e.
Q. B.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.+ 
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Ar. Bennett).
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.t 
53 Lincoln south Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.t 
56 Notts.
67 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 8.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham, "native.." 
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
" v.r." 
73 Kirkcud.
Gray cat.
co.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfi-ew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
81 Bewrick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
J. B.
Balf.
ms.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.* Lawson.
86 Stirling.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid.
Miller.
740 VEEBASOUM THAPSUS.
287 
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.* 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.* 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.* 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Oampst.
cat.* 
741 Verbascum Lychnitis.
5 Som. south.
Bab. in Gaz.
6 north.
Bath flo.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
20 Herts.
E. H.
Webb flo.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
39 Staff.
Pearce & Eraser rec.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
(1 3 4 5 7 10 21 24 25 
26 27 29 33 40 56 65 85 
86 88 99 ; partly misnomers 
of the species, partly coun- 
ties into which it has been 
introduced).
742 Verb, pulverulentum.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
Bromfield sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Eitt sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
[3 10 12 17 30 56 36 94; 
introduced or erroneous] .
743 Verbascum nigrum.
1 Cornwall west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west !
Baker ms.
14 east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west !
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey !
ElUs ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Cooper ms.
26 west.
Miss Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock ms.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line.
s. (E.
M.Brown rec.) 
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
(62 63 65 to 68 81 82 83 
85).
746 Veronica spicata.
26 Suffolk west.
Miss Bell sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Wardale.
29 Cambr.
Ar. Bennett 1876.
1 3 4 18 33 4] 70 111 ; 
misnomers ?
34 49 61 69 ; 
the other segregate only ?] .
288 
746 VERONICA HYBRIDA.
746 Veronica hybrida.
6 Som. north.
Error ?
34 Gloster west I Thwaites sp.
43 Eadnor.
Purchas 1852.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
60 Denbigh.
E. Brown.
51 Phnt.
Griffith.
69 Westm.
Eev.G.Pinderms.
747 Veronica arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 
97 105 ; doubtless to be 
found in every county.
748 Veronica verna.
25 Suff.
east.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Salmon sp.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
[14 Bot. Gaz.
i. 307] .
[50 Faunula Grustensis] .
749 Veronica triphyllos.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Wardale sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
63 York s.
w. " G.E. Smith." 
64 m.
w. Thompson sp.
[38 Midland Flora] .
750 Veronica serpyllifolia.
Counties all, except 42 74 108 
105 107; doubtless to be 
found in every county.
750 Veronica humifusa.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
50 Denbigh.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland ?
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar I 
92 Aber.
south !
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
08 Suth.
west.
751 Veronica alpina.
86 Stirhng.
" Ben Lomond." 
88 Perth mid.
" Ben Lawers." 
89 east.
(Druce rec.) 
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
" Ben Avon." 
96 Easterness.
" Badenoch." 
97 Westerness !
752 Veronica saxatilis.
88 Perth mid !
Maughan sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
94 Banff.
CroaU.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle ?
Dr. Walker.
08 Suth.
west ?
753 Veronica seutellata.
Counties all, except 6 34 42 
46 48 53 60 72 74 78 84 
97 99 102 105 110; likely" 
to occur in most of these.
754 Veronica Anagallis.
Counties all, except 43 46 47 
48 71 74 78 84 86 88 89 
94 97 98 99 103 104 105 ; 
likely to occur in several of 
these counties.
Some eon- 
fusion between this and the 
754 VBEONIOA ANAGALLTS.
289 
preceding species in the 
Shetland lists ; do both 
occur there ?
755 Veronica Beccabunga.
Counties all, except 74 97 98 
105 108 ; and most likely it 
may be found in every 
county.
See the preceding.
756 Veronica officinalis.
Counties all, except 42 74 105 
107; doubtless it grows in 
every county.
757 Veronica montana.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
Q. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Purchas cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Church.
Bab. sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Allen reo.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Gheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
86 Stirling.
2 p 
290 
757 VERONICA MONTANA.
90 Forfar.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton ?
02 Eb. south.
Grieve.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
758 Veronica Chamsedrys.
Counties all, except 74 105 
110.
Probably in every 
county, although it may be 
that 110, Hebrides, is a real 
exception to eomital gene- 
rality.
759 Veronica hederifolia.
Counties all, except 42 46 48 
60 69 71 74 78 98 100 
103 104 105 107 108 110 ; 
most likely in aU these 
counties.
760 Veronica agrestis.
Counties all, except 41 42 
46 74 84 97 104 105 107 
108 ; likely to be found in 
every county.
761 Veronica polita.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 e.!
J. L.Warren ms.
15 Kent east !
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babiagton.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Pryor.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babiagton cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
761 VERONICA POLITA.
291 
68 York s.
weat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey cat.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowmansp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddiagton.
83 Edinburgh I Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
90 Porfar.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour oat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N.B. This would rank more 
properly among the " Com- 
raon plants," unless its ap- 
parently few counties of 
North Britain should turn 
out to indicate many actual 
blanks in its areal distribu- 
tion.
It is little more than 
forty years since the polita 
became separated from the 
agrestis in our local lists ; 
and thus is the former less 
frequently reported under its 
distinctive name.
762 Veronica Buxbaumii.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Hall oat.
15 Kent east !
Berkeley ms.
16 west.
H. Groves rec.
17 Surrey !
Well established.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Warner sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Boswell Syme sp.
28 Oxford.
Borrer ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper.
26 west.
Coleman sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Pryor.
82 Northton.
Britten.
34 Gloster west.
Purchas ms.
85 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west !
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
292 
762 VERONICA BUXBAUSni.
65 York n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheyiotland.
69 Westmor.
Bailey rec.t 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Miller.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
N.B. A colonist in Britain, 
during the present (middle) 
half - century, say, 1825 — 
1873 ; and already met with 
as freq[uently, and as well 
established in tillage fields, 
as are several others which 
have been reckoned British 
plants for a whole century 
or two.
Of course, always re- 
ported as an introduced plant .
763 Bartsia alpina.
64 York mid.
Tatham sp.
65 north.
66 Durham.
Trevelyan sp.
69 Westmoreland.
88 Perth mid.
Gourlie sp.
97 Westerness ?
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
05 Boss...?
764 Bartsia viscosa.
1 Corn.
w. !
Miss Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Camarthen.
Jones rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.t 
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Bean sp.
60 west.
Fielding Ins.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.t 
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
765 Bartsia Odontites.
Counties all, except 42 74 105 
107 112.
Perhaps really ab- 
sent from Shetland, no.
112.
766 Euphrasia oflacinalis.
Counties all, except 42 74 103 
105.
No doubt it occurs in 
every county.
767 Rhinanthus 
Crista-galli.
Counties aU, except 42 74 105 
107 109.
767 Rhin.
C.-g.
major.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
61 York s.
e. F.
A. Lees rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
767 EHINANTHUS O.-G MAJOE.
293 
63 York s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.Bowman sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Balfour cat.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
12 Shetland ?
[Cornwall ?
Gloster ?] .
768 Melampyrum 
cristatum.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ?
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
26 Suffolk west.
Bell sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Payne sp.
31 Hunts.
Bree sp.
32 Northton.
Henslow sp.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler.
[24 37 40 66 ; these four 
counties require verifica- 
tion] .
769 Melampyrum arvense.
10 Wight.
More sp.
19 Essex north.
Gipson sp.
20 Herts.
One locality in flo.* 
21 Middlesex.
Tempere.* 
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper flo.* 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Munfordflo.* 
[9 33 38 58 ; four counties 
needing verification] .
770 Melam.
pratense.
Counties aU, except 31 42 56 
71 74 78 98 105 107 112.
771 Melam.
sylvaticiim.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
" Woods." 
70 Cumberland.
" Woods." 
73 Kirkoud.
G. Lloyd ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
" A.
Jerdon." 
81 Berwick.
88 Perth mid !
Stables sp.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south!
Gordon sp.
94 Banff.
J. Eoy ms.
95 Elgin ?
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Syme !
06 Eoss east.
09 Caithness.
3 6 34 35 36 38 40 48 
49 50 57 58 62 83 111; 
these counties have been 
recorded on authority that 
is insufficient taking into 
account the frequent mis- 
take of giving the name 
sylvaticum to examples of 
pratense.
11 2 Pedicularis palustris.
Counties all, except 6 42 60 
74 78 86 99 105.
773 Pedicularis sylvatica.
Counties aU, except 42 74 105.
774 Serophularia nodosa.
Counties all, except 42 74 97 
105 107 108 111 112.
294 
775 SCEOPHULABIA BALBISIJ.
775 Serophularia Balbisii.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs sp.
4 north I 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith eat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Bab.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
B. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. B .
Bowman sp.
51.
Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren ms.
69 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Lhiton oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton cat.
69 Westmoreland ?
81 Berwick.
One locality.
83 Edinburgh ?
[76 77 84 85 87 111 ; re- 
quire verification ; perhaps 
in all these counties the 
Ehrharti was the plant seen, 
excepting Orkney likely al- 
together erroneous] .
775 Serophularia Ehrharti.
14 Sussex east.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
88 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Babington ms.
60 Lane.
w. ?
"near Preston." 
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
70 Cumberland.
Baker.
76 Eenfrew ?
77 Lanark.
Kennedy ms.
775 SOROPHULAEIA EHEHARTI.
295 
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Brand sp.
[1 or 2 22 24 ; dubious] .
776 Scroph.
Scorodonia.
1 Corn, west !
Greenwood sp.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
4 north.
Eogers.
[20 "Gough's Camden"].
778 Digitalis purpurea.
Counties all, except 29 31 33 
42 53 74 105 107 112 ; ap- 
parently quite absent from 
some few of these counties, 
notably Cambridge.
780 Antirrhinum Orontium.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.+ 
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Miss Bell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Bromf.
ms.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren rec.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith -cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Bell sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Anderson ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.t 
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
48 Merion.
J.E.Bowman ms.
49 Carnar V.
J. E .
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh ?
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
58 Chester.
Ward rec* 
62 York n.
east.
70 Cumberland.
(65 66 67).
782 Linaria spuria.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south..
Briggs cat.+ 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
- 8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Hall sp.
296 
782 LINARIA SPURIA.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Coleman sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts!
Newbouldoat.
32 Nortbton.
" Allen sp." 
33 Gloiter east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall rec.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester..
Kirby flo.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
[62 63] .
(66 67).
783 Linaria Elatine.
1 Corn, west!
Bailey sp.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
8 Devon south !
Briggs cat.+ 
4 north !
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Plevdell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.!
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Eussell sp.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
58 Lino.
s. Lees & Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.A.Leescat.t 
(58 59 66 67).
784 Linaria repens.
1 Corn.
w. !
Miss Warren sp.
3 Devon south.
Stewart flo.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites eat.
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south !
Borrer ms.
784 LINARIA EEPENS.
297 
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
1872.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Ayres sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten ms.
1873.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
41 Glamorgan.
Collins ms.
42 Brecon.
W. Darby ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Babington sp.
62 York n.
east.
" denizen." 
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer ms.
(13 44 57 58 65 67 75 88 
87 or 88 90 92 ; on ballast, 
planted, or otherwise intro- 
duced).
[27] .
785 Linaria vulgaris.
Counties all, but with many ex- 
ceptions northward ; namely, 
42 74-78 87 89 93 94 96 
97 102 to 112.
(91 92).
Eecorded as " frequent " in 
Forfar and Moray.
Pro- 
fessor Dickie and Mr. Eoy 
concur in deeming it an in- 
troduced plant in the inter- 
vening counties of Kincar- 
dine and Aberdeen.
787 Linaria minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
EusseU sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Syme ms.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Church.
Bab. sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Brecon.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
" colonist.'' 
69 Westmoreland.
Lewis.
75 Ayr. Lands, bot.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy eat.
2q 
298 
787 LINAKIA MINOK.
80 Eoxburgh.
Border flo.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
(85.
Naturalised on gravel 
walks in Kinross ; Dr.
Walker Arnot sp.).
Profes- 
sor De Candolle deems this 
to be altogether an alien 
species, introduced into Eng- 
land.
Its tendency to grow 
by road-sides and on unculti- 
vated wastes induced me in 
Cybele Britannica to accept 
it as a native plant.
Abun- 
dant on the chalk in Surrey.
788 Limosella aquatica.
Cornwall ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
6 north ?
Wilts.
Southby cat.
co.
11 Hants south !
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Newbould sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Gibson ms.
28 west.
Dr. Lowe.
29 Cambridge.
" Henslow." 
30 Bedford.
82 Northton.
An error ?
34 Gloster west ?
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
BagnaU ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
51 Flint.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam 6p.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Hardy sp.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east ?
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
w. E.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Lawson sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
82 Haddington.
Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
" Common." 
91 Kincardine.
" One locality." 
N.B. Seen about 1500 feet near 
Malham Tarn, Yorkshire, by 
Dr. E.
A. Lees.
789 Sibthorpia europsea.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
14 Sussex east.
Bromf.
sp.
41 Glamorg.
Anna Thomas sp.
44 Carmarthen.
[21 53 69 70; errors pro- 
bably] .
790 Orobanche major 
" rapiun." 
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south I Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman oat.
15 Kent east.
Hind sp, 
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
790 OEOBANOHE MAJOR " EAPUM." 
299 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleuian cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Misnomer ?
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
B. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat, 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Bigge sp.
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
[Fife.
Perth ?
Ebudes] .
791 Orob.
caryophyllacea.
15 Kent east.
Henfrey sp.
26 Suffolk w.
? H.
& S.
flo.
[3 South Devon ; an error] .
792 Orobanche elatior.
6 Som. north.
CoUins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Miss Bell ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants s.
H. & J.
Groves sp.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey.
Ar. Bennett.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Miss Bell sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west ?
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
55 Leicester.
62 York n.
east.
[Cornwall, Devon, Denbigh, 
Lincoln, and Argyle might 
be added to the above list of 
counties ; but the authorities 
for them are insufficient.
And several of those enume- 
rated may also prove to be 
erroneous] .
793 Orobanche minor.
Counties 1 to 29 33 to 36 41 
42 44 45 49 50 52 55 59 
61 62 64 65 68 (85).
These nos.
include the 
300 
793 OKOBANCHE MINOR.
counties on record for " mi- 
nor " in the -wider applica- 
tion of the name, that is, 
to include also Hedera, Pi- 
cridis, and Eryngii or ame- 
thystea.
793 Orobanche eu-minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Miss Bell sp.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat..
13 Sussex w.
J. L.Warren cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Arth.
Bennett.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex s.
E. Twining sp.
20 Herts.
Blow.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Miss Bell sp.
28 west.
MissBeUms.
29 Cambridge.
42 Brecon.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
Chrisp sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell.* 
N.B. The above selection of 
counties takes in those spe- 
cially reported for eii-minor, 
along with some others re- 
ported for minor as growing 
on " clover " or " Crepis." 
It will thrive on other plants 
quite well ; for instance on 
the Scarlet Geranium and 
Campanula Vidalii.
793 Orobanche Eryngii.
1 Corn.
west.
" MenneU." 
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Bab. man.
9 Dorset.
(Eidley & Fawoett).
14 Sussex e.
Mrs. Jones sp.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
N.B. Imperfectly understood 
by myself ; so that I cannot 
either confirm or contradict 
the nomenclature of the 
" sps." Mr. Borrer doubted 
the correctness of the name 
" amethystea " apphed to the 
plants of Cornwall ; but it is 
retained in Eng. Bot.
edition 
third.
79 3* Orobanche Picridis.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Sur. Wintlerec.
"on teazle." 
29 Cambridge.
Gibson sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
N.B. This also is imperfectly 
understood by myself.
An 
Orobanche which I find in 
Surrey, growing on Picris 
and Crepis, appears to me 
the same as the Orobanche 
minor often found on clover 
in the same county.
793*Orobanche Hederse.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Borrer ms.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
8> Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
793*OEOBANOHE HEDEBiE.
801 
10 Wight.
More oat.
15 Kent east.
Borrer.
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
42 Brecon.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones reo.
45 Pemhroke.
Bahington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eylands sp.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
(Griffith).
55 Leicester ?
794 Orotaanehe rubra.
1 Com. west.
Cunnack sp.
41 Glamorgan.
64 York m.
west.
Windsor.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
74 Wigton.
(MoAndrew).
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
98 Argyle.
Gourlie sp.
03 Eb. mid !
04 north.
05 Boss west.
Bowman ms.
[16].
795 Orobanche cserulea.
1 Corn.
west.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
12 Hants north ?
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
22 Berks ?
Hurst ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimen.
35 Monmouth.
41 Glamorgan ?
Misnomer ?
797 Lathrsea squamaria.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Abraham ms.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Christy ms.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
30 Bedford.
82 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
38 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
84 west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
F. A.
Lees rec.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester E.
Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
Eraser oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
County ?
47 Montgomery.
(Vize).
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson oat.
60 Denbigh !
J.E .
Bowman oat.
51 EUnt. Robinson oat.
53 Lincoln south.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Hind sp.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
302 
797 LATHSaiA SQXJAMARIA.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy oat.
79 Selkirk.
FarquharsoD oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwiok.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
97 Westerness.
798 Verbena officinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
t 
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Coleman oat.f 
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Blow rec.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
1 Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Ar. Bennett).
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Miss Barnard.
49 Carnarvon.
Gordon ms.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Mr.
" Benson." 
85 Fife.
" Dr. Parsons." 
799 Salvia Verbenaca.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Crotch sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
799 SALVIA VBRBENACA.
303 
13 Sussex west.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east.
Taylor sp.
15 Kent.
e. G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
82 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
'-Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
31 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
63Tiine.
south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.w. E.B.Bowmanms.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland, Tate ms.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
BosweU Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
G. Lawson ms.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
800 Salvia pratensis.
15 Kent east.
Jeffreys.
16 west.
Sansom sp.
23 Oxford.
Fox sp.
Linton sp.
(10 17 26; casually).
[13 14 21 22 27 30 82 
34 37 40 41 62 57 62 ; 
perhaps all of these were 
erroneous, through mis- 
nomers of the preceding 
species] .
801 Lycopus europseus.
Counties all, except 42 47 48 
72 74 78 79 81 82 83 88 
89 90 92 93 94 99 103 
104 105 107 to 112.
Thus 
my records for it fail in three 
Welsh counties and twenty- 
three Scottish counties, while 
they give authorities for it 
in all the counties of Eng- 
land.
802 Mentha rotundifolia.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Bath flo.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell " v.
sp." 
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrerms.f 
304 
802 MENTHA BOTUNDIFOLIA.
16 Kent west.
Foster, b.
g. 
17 Surrey.
Salmon flo.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
W. flo.* 
21 Middx.
? "church-yards."* 
24 Bucks.
Eayer, in b.
g. 
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
27 Norfolk east..
Trim.
flo.
28 west.
Trim.
flo.
29 Cambridge ?
Eelhan flo.
32 Northton.
Anderson ms.
84 Gloster west.
Hort sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Maw sp.
P. flo.
37 Worcester.
B. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton flo.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn mat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.t 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarv.
J.B.Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby ?
Wood in Phytol.
62 York n.
e. ?
Eobson b.
g. 
63 s.
west.
" Inohbald." 
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Northumb.
" native ?
" 
68 Cheviotland.
' ' native ?
' ' 
70 Cumber.
Dickinson ms.t 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.* 
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.f 
90 Forfar.
Gard.
flo.
extinct.
00 Clyde-isles.
Misnomer.
N.B. The round-leaved forms 
of sylvestris are sometimes 
confused with this plant ; 
and perhaps the same holds 
true with the crispa form of 
viridis.
Clearlyindigenous in 
the south-western counties.
802 Mentha alopecuroides.
15orl6Kent...?Eng.bot.ed.3.
17 Surrey.
Eeeves.f 
18orl9Essx...?Eng.bot.ed.3.
27Norf....
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3.+ 
68 Cheviot.
Brotherston rec.+ 
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
88 Perth mid.
Bab. ed.
6. 
00 Arran.
Bab. Man.
ed.
6. 
N.B. Perhaps an escape from 
cultivation.
And further a 
troublesome plant from the 
topographical view, through 
being so intermediate be- 
tween rotundifolia and sylves- 
tris, that its affinity to either 
is viewed differently by our 
best describers.
803 Mentha sylvestris.
1 Corn.
west.
Gunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.* 
4 north.
6 Som. north.
8 Wilts south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman sp.
30 Bedford.
82 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
34 Gloster west.
Watkins sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
803 MENTHA SYLVESTEIS.
305 
86 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
. 41 Glamorgan.
Knight sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
47 Montgomery.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmansp.
51 Flint.
54 Line, north.
55 Leicester.
Howitt ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
69 Westmoreland.
Melvill.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
89 Perth east.
Syme.
90 Forfar.
95 Elgin.
" J.
B." sp.t 
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton, 
[10 20] .
[88 100 M.
alopecuroides] .
This is often seen near old 
mansions and farm houses, 
apparently the reUct of for- 
mer culture.
I have seen it 
quasi-wild in several coun- 
ties, from Devon and Surrey 
to Derby and Lincoln ; but 
always in situations where 
its true nativity was doubt- 
ful at best.
804 Mentha viridis.
N.B. Well established in many 
places, especially in moun- 
tain dales and glens.
Thiis 
in Scotland, large patches of 
it mark the sites where cot- 
tages formerly stood, but 
have been destroyed in the 
process of re-converting the 
land into wastes for game.
Mr. Baker designates it a 
" denizen " in the provinces 
of Humber and Tyne ; Dr.
Lees and Mr. Tatham deem 
it truly wild in West York- 
shire.
805 Mentha piperita.
1 Corn, west !
Watson sp.
2   east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Banker sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU " v.
sp." 
13 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennecat.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west, 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Coleman ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Ley sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Bennett sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. B.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
2b 
306 
805 MENTHA PIPERITA.
47 Montgom.
J.B. Bowman cat.
48 Merioneth.
(W.
W. Eeeves).
54 Lincoln n.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J.L.Warrenms.* 
59 Lane, south.
Heys sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n: east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
"Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Baker ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan oat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
Carnegie sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
[10] • .
. .
N.B. Certainly not indigenous 
in several of the counties 
here enumerated.
Two forms 
are distinguished in English 
Botany, edition third, offici- 
nalis and vulgaris ; the former 
being the spiked variety cul- 
tivated for use, and occa- 
sionally found established 
near gardens, &c.
This 
doubleness of form, and 
local uncertainties of nati- 
vity, throw distrust on se- 
veral of the counties here 
enumerated.
The subcapi- 
tate form from Thirsk " vul- 
garis " appears to my own 
eyes extremely near the Kew 
Garden plant which is dis- 
tributed as citrata by Mr.
Baker ; and the same with 
the specimens above indi- 
cated from West Cornwall 
and South Devon.
806 Mentha aquatica.
(M.
hirsuta).
Counties all, except 42 48 72 
73 74 87 97 99 105 107 
108 110 112.
806*Mentha pubescens.
1 Cornwall west.
Ealfs.
33 Gloster east.
Ley.
807 Mentha sativa.
Counties all, except 25 31 43 
46 51 60 61 71 74 78 79 
86 88 89 90 92 93 94 96 
to 99 103 to 112.
As thus 
topographed, it must be un- 
derstood to include the 
miscellaneous segregates 
grouped under the aggre- 
gate name sativa in the 
' London Catalogue of Bri- 
tish Plants,' edition of 1867.
Their recorded localities 
cannot be segregately as- 
signed with any confidence 
or completeness.
808 Mentha arvensis.
Counties all, except 81 42 46 
71 to 74 78 96 97 104 105 
107 108 110 112 ; in near- 
ly all of these it may be 
expected to occur, though 
110 and 112, Hebrides and 
Shetland, may perhaps be 
808 MENTHA ABVBNSIS.
307 
real exceptions to a county 
generality.
106 Gordon cat.
109 Brown Campst.
cat.
Ill Syme cat.
809 Mentha Pulegium.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
5 or 6 Som. Southby cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
10 "Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Many localities.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Dennes ms.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
31 Hunts.
32 Northton.- 
33 Gloster east.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Extinct ?
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
51 Flint.
J. E.Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby ?
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
" scarce." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
One locality.
(83 85 109; and perhaps 
only a garden escape in some 
other of the counties named).
810 Thymus Serpyllum.
Counties all, except 31 42 60 
74 104.
811 Origanum vulgare.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight!
J. E.Gray sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
Mrs. Tiokner sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
308 
811 ORIGANUM VULGABE.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purohas sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwioli." 
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leigbton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Borrer sp.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
Britten.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Browne rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
P.A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick, "frequent." 
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Maughan sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
812 Galamintha Acinos.
2 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.f 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris herb.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
BloomjGield.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
812 OALAMINTHA AOINOS.
309 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Lees sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Winch ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
J. B.
Bowman sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Prof.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
" Dunlop." 
80 Eoxb.
Br other ston rec.
81 Berwick.
One locality.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.+ 
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
90 Forfar.
G. Macnab sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
813 Calamiutha Nepeta.
16 Kent west 1 Sandys sp.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
23 Oxford.
Dr. Bidwell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
45 Pembroke, Babington cat.
64 York m.
west.
P. A.
Lees.
N.B. The menthifolia form of 
Calamintha officinalis has 
been so frequently mistaken 
for Xepeta that I can cite 
here none of the recorded 
counties besides the two 
certified by Professor Ba- 
bington and those from 
which I have actually re- 
ceived specimens of the true 
plant.
The other recorded 
counties are 12 3 4 6 7 
8 9 14 15 17 18 22 24 
25 26 27 28 33 37 40 41 
50 54 55 56 57 62 65 66 
67 71 ; some of these likely 
to be correct, the majority 
as likely to be erroneous.
814 Calamintha officinalis.
(C menthifolia).
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Pascoe sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Hort sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Atkias sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
310 
814 CALAMINTHA OFFICINALIS.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris herb.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.' Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Mrs. Farquharson.
44 Carmarthen.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
50 Denbigh !
J.E. Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
(Dr. Parsons rec).
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
Fisher sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham?
"Extinct." 
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland ?
(68 87) or [68 87] .
814*Calanimtha sylvatiea.
4 Devon south.
Towns, ms.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
12 Hants north.
Spicer.f 
N.B. This is the C.
officinalis 
of various continental bota- 
nists ; that to which we give 
the same name being the 
meiitJiifolia or ascendens, one 
or both.
See the note under 
813 Cal. Nepeta.
815 Calamin.
Clinopodium.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north 1 Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Banking sp.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey 1 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
815 OAIiAMINTHA CLINOPODIUM 
311 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton !
Notoutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
48 Merioneth.
( W.
W. Beeves) .
49 Carnarvon.
Bailey rec.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robert Brown.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
w. Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr ?
" near Busby." 
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme ms.
1870.
86 Stirling.
CroaU rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kinc.
" Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
J. Eoy ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
N.B. This frequent English 
plant is unreported for 23 
of the Scottish counties, 
more than one-half, accord- 
ing to my collected notes.
817 Melittis 
Melissophyllum.
1 Corn.
w. Miss Warren sp.
2 east.
Pasooe ms.
3 Devon south !
Goulding sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromfieldms.
13 Sussex west.
Christy sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.Lees).
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
[8 9 17 33 41 45 55 ; 
possibly two or three of 
these counties are correct, 
although aU need verifica- 
tion] .
818 Teuerium Scorodonia.
Counties all, except 31 42 54 
74 78 98 105 107 109 112.
819 Teuerium Seordium.
4 Devon north.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Eussell sp.
312 
819 TBUOEIUM SCOEDIUM.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
54 Line, north.
65 Yorkn.w. E.B.Bowman sp.
820 Teucrium Botrys.
17 Surrey.
Gibson, Ingall sps.
Native in Surrey ; Borrer.
822 Ajnga reptans.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
97 98 101 105 108 110.
823 AJTiga pyramidalis.
69 Westm.
Backhouse ms.
96 Basterness ?
97 Westerness ?
"Dr. Hope." 
98 Argyle.
" Carmichael." 
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Grant.
08 west.
Oliver sp.
09 Caithness.
Syme !
10 Hebrides.
Bowman ms.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
[49 Carnarvon ?] 
824 Ajuga Chamsepitys.
12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
16 Kent west.
Palmer sp.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Walhs sp.
Blow ms.
29 Cambridge.
Fordham sp.
30 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
32 Northton ?
[7 10 14 33 or 34 45 47 ; 
insufficiently vouched, and 
perhaps mostly errors] .
825 Ballota nigra.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4r north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse oat.
31 Hunts I Newbould oat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west !
Thwaites oat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purohas oat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat, 
39 Stafford !
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purohas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
825 BALLOTA NIGRA.
813 
51 Flint !
Brand sp.
52 Anglesea.
Bobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumber.
" T.
Benson." 
75 Ayr. Landsborough Bot.
76 Eenfrew ?
Glott.
flo.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.t 
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife?
B. &S.flo.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.t 
95 Elgin.
"Dr. Innes." 
N.B. This vulgar weed of 
South Britain becomes rare 
in Scotland, and scarcely 
occurs in North Britain un- 
less as an introduced casual.
825 Ballota rnderalis.
23 Oxford.
Newbould sp.
36 Hereford.
(Bab. Man.
ed.
8.).
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
[10 21 27 29 40; all probably 
misnomers] .
(Casual in 33 
or 34).
Intermediate forms 
in Middlesex (Eev. James 
Harris) andHants ( J.O.Man- 
sel-Pleydell, Esq.), and East 
and West Sussex, but nearer 
to fcetida, of the two.
827 Lamium Galeobdolon.
1 Corn.
west.
" H.
S. herb." 
2 east.
Briggs eat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey!
E. Woodms.
18 Essex south.
Yarenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Coleman ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Kadnor.
Ley oat.
2s 
314 
827 LAMIUM GALEOBDOLON.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
J. E.
Bowman sp.
51 FUnt. Eobinsoncat.
53 Line.
s. ' F.
A. Lees rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
70 Cumberland.
(82 83 85).
[98] .
828 Lamiuin album.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northward, namely, 42 
46 48 52 71 74 88 91 to 
94 (96 96) 97 to 112.
Lowe 
reports it in 111 Orkney, 
and Nicolson in 109 Caith- 
ness.
830 Lamium amplexicaule.
Counties all, except 35 41 to 
44 46 47 48 50 60 69 70 
73 74 78 89 97 98 99 
102 104 106 112 ; no doubt 
simply overlooked in nearly 
all of these.
But for some 
of the northern counties the 
intermedium and amplexicaule 
may not have been clearly 
kept apart.
830 Lamium intermedium.
60 Lane.
west.
Melvill.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Gourlie sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Tyacke sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south, "not native." 
93 north.
Syme ms.
95 Elgin.
98 Argyle.
Cli. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caithness.
Grant cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[10 40 49 ; insufficiently 
vouched] .
831 Lamium purpureum.
Counties all, except 35 42 74 
97 105 107.
Doubtless it 
occurs in every county.
831 Lamium incisum.
1 Corn.
west.
"Hore." 
2 east.
Briggs 
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.t 
6 Som. south.
" W.
H." 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Flower Ho.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Roper.
831 LAMIUM INOISUM.
315 
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Sandys sp.
17 Sun-ey !
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Blow.
E.H.Webb.
21 Middlesex.
T. & D.
flo.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
" Baxter." 
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 w.
Bromfield ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
Notcntt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington flo.
31 Hunts.
Newbouid ms.
• 
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn mat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Tenby flo.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
64 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
58 Chester.
. J.
L. Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Melvill.
61 York s.
east.
Supplement.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Supplement.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
New flo.
67 Northumberland.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate oat.
69 Westmoreland !
71 Man. Forbescat.
"common." 
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour sp.
84 Linlithgow.
B. & S.
flo.
85 Fife.
Dewar, Syme sps.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
" frequent." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
10 Hebrides.
B. & B.
cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. The above enumeration 
of counties is to be received 
with some distrust.
The 
leaves of purpureiim vary 
much in outline and cutting, 
occasionally simulating those 
.of incisum.
very closely ; while 
in turn this latter is occa- 
sionally confused with am- 
plexicaide and even interme- 
dium.
832 Galeopsis Ladanum.
1 Cornwall west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12   north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
316 
83^ gAleopsis ladanum.
22, Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
(W.W. Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
51 Flint.
Miss Atwood ms.
52 Anglesea ?
Kobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Boswell Syme ms.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec* 
82 Haddington.
Carnegie sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie ms.+ 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.t 
04 Eb. north ?
Lawson cat.
[Ill Orkney ; Lowe's hst] .
833 Galeopsis ochroleuca.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Crotch sp.
54 Lincoln n.
Fowler rec.t 
56 Notts.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. Leyland ms.f 
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowinan sp.
[38 59 64 ; counties re- 
quu'ing verification] .
834 Galeopsis Tetrahit.
Counties all, except 42 73 74 
105 107.
No doubt it is 
to be found in every county.
835 Galeopsis versicolor.
1 Corn.
west.
Gunnack.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.+ 
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey !
t 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.+ 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.t 
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock oat.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Kippist sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.f 
835 GALEOPSIS VERSICOLOR.
317 
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.f 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ealfs.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Kippist ms.
54 north 1 Hewitt ms.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester.
"J.
L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright, Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
87 Perth west.
Brand sp.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Gordon ms.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Eastemess.
97 Westerness !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
05 Boss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east.
Gordon oat.
836 Betonica officinalis.
(Stachys Betonica).
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 8om.
south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notoutt cat.
12 north I Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
818 
836 BETONICA OFFICINALIS.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 vr.
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick'.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford !
. Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west!
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.
68 Cheviotland.
EmlDleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew ?
" reported." 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.+ 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour oat.
84 Linlithgow ?
" Sibbald." 
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
89 Perth east.
Stables sp.
04 Eb. north ?
Lawson cat.
N.B. It will be observed that 
my compiled notes give only 
ten counties of Scotland, as 
habitats for this common 
plant of England ; and two 
or three out of the ten seem 
to need verifipation.
It is 
one, among many other simi- 
lar examples, showing how 
much the general vegetation 
changes in a northerly 
course, through the thinning 
out and gradual disappear- 
ance of plants plentiful and 
conspicuously characteristic 
in South Britain.
A comital 
enumeration brings out that 
striking fact much more 
clearly than a provincial 
arrangement under eighteen 
divisions only.
The county 
series of this plant is here 
shown to be continuous for 
England proper, apart from 
Wales.
837 Staohys palustris.
Counties aU, except 35 42 43 
74 98 105 107 108.
837 Stachys ambigua.
1 Corn, west !
Curnow sp.
2 east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Syme sp.
PleydeU.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Baker.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
32 Northtou !
837 STACHYS AMBIGUA.
319 
85 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
48 Merioneth.
Hunt sp.
57 Derby.
Bailey rec.
59 Lane, south.
Windsor sp.
63 Yorks.
west.
(Johnson rec).
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
80 Eoxburgh'.
Brotherston rec.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Eeported also in 6 10 
20 21 23 27 28 29 33 35 
36 39 40 41 45 50 55 58 
62 69 71 73 76 77 81 82 
83 92 96 98 100 101 
104 105 ; but the mistake 
of applying the name am- 
bigud to examples of palus- 
tiis with shortly stalked 
leaves, having been so fre- 
quent, it seems safer to look 
upon all the counties repre- 
sented by those numbers as 
requiring confirmation.
838 Stachys sylvatica.
Counties all, except 72 74 97 
98 105 107.
839 Stachys germanica.
12 Hants north.
Spicer sp.
16 Kent web*t.
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
Fox sp.
1872.
(15).
[1 or 2 3 22 27 or 
28 30 53 54 57 62 ; all 
needing verification, and per- 
haps mostly erroneous] .
840 Stachys arvensis.
Counties all, except 30 42 47 
53 60 72 73 74 78 79 86 
88 97 98 99 105 107 109 
110 112 (ni).
841 Glechoma hederaoea.
( Sepeta (Heclioina).
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
87 89 99 104 105 107 
108 110 112 (111).
842 Nepeta Cataria.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
4 north, 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
Stratton.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Verdun ms.
22 Berks.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
23 Oxford.
Eev. E.
Fox sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
820 
842 NEPETA CATABIA.
28 Norfolk west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse oat.
31 Hunts.
Blow rec.
32 Northton.
Druoe.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. B.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
54 Lino, north !
An escape ?
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
An escape ?
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
(77 81 87 107 112; most 
likely introduced).
843 Marrubium vulgare.
1 Corn.
west.
, 
2 east.
Briggs oat.* 
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.* 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplia ms.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.t 
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.* 
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.+ 
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.* 
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Henslowms.* 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druce rec* 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott.* " 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 FUnt.
(H.
L. Jones).
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson eat.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam sp.
54 north.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren oat.* 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.* 
62 York n.
east.
" native." 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west, "native." 
65 n.
west.
Ward eat.t 
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Northumb.
" native." 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.f 
75 Ayr. Landsborongh bot.* 
843 MABRUBIUM VULGAEB.
321 
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec* 
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.* 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.* 
N.B. The enumeration of coun- 
ties is here given in full, 
without an attempt, vain as 
it would prove, to eliminate 
those in which the plant has 
been seen only as a casual 
or as an established escape.
The alternative signs are 
resorted to, for indicating 
intimations of less (1) or 
more (*) distrust.
Though 
seen by myself in many 
counties, from Devon to 
Edinburgh, I have doubts 
as to its real wildness in 
any of them ; possibly the 
Isle of Wight ought to be 
made an exception, for the 
Horehound looks native on 
the chalk there.
In Surrey, 
seen near houses and on 
village ' greens.' 
844 Prunella vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 74 
105 ; but doubtless plenti- 
ful in every county.
845 Scutellaria 
galericulata.
Counties all, except 35 42 43 
46 47 48 74 78 82 85 87 
89 92 105 107 108 109 
111 112.
110 Isle of Har- 
ris ; Balfour and Babington.
846 Scutellaria minor.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14   east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
Trevelyan sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Bromfieldsp.
27 Norfolk east.
Notcutt ms.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Merrick sp.
2 T 
322 
846 SCUTELLARIA MINOB.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
-west.
64 m.w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
71 Man.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
" Miss Baird." 
86 Stirling.
Christie.
97 Westerness.
Miller.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy sp.
03 Eb. mid.
Boss rec.
[77].
847 Myosotis palustris.
1 Corn, west?
Cunnack cat.
2 east ?
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south!
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks, Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 Suffolk w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites oat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones oat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
(Vize).
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam pat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren cat.
69 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 u.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
847 MYOSOTIS PALUSTRIS.
323 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray eat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79.
Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west ?
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
92 Aber.
south.
" strigulosa." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid ?
Eoss cat.
09 Caithness?
Nicolsbn cat.
11 Orkney.
Boswell.
strigulosa.
[93 94 96 96 106 to 108 
110 112 ; in most of these 
northern counties, if not in 
aU of them, the repens has 
been recorded under the 
naxae oi palttstris.
Dr. Bos- 
well Syme's specimens, from 
Edinburgh and Fife, are 
named stiigulosa by himself ; 
they diverge slightly from 
the type, as seen in the 
south of England, in form 
of calyx as well as in their 
appressed pubescence.
It is 
the former confusion be- 
tween repens and palustris, 
which induces me to detail 
their counties here ; the 
latter is a rare plant in 
North Britain, where the 
former prevails] .
848 Myosotis repens.
1 Corn, west.
Ounnack.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Hiern.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
6 north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns.
Cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
20 Herts; 
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west ?
27 Norfolk east ?
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
F. A.
Lees rec.
38 Warwick.
BagnaU ma.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Jones rec.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
47 Montgom.
" C.
E. Parker." 
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Hiern.
50 Denbigh.
Stratton ms..
54 Lincoln n.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts ?
57 Derby.
Bailey rec.
58 Chester.
'J.
L.Warren ms.' 
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp; 
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb, Winch sp.
324 
848 MYOSOTIS EEPENS.
68 Clieviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland!
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherstou cat.
79 Selkirk.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherstonrec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
MiUer.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Gantire.
Balfour cat.
07 or 108 Sutherland.
N. flo.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Boswell sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
849 Myosotis csespitosa.
Counties all, except 42 43 46 
48 52 56 72 73 74 93 95 
96 98 105; in some of 
these counties likely not 
distinguished from palust7-is, 
with which it was combined 
or confused a half century 
850 Myosotis alpestris.
65 York n.
w. Backhouse sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Baker ms.
88 Perth mid !
Hugh Balfour sp.
851 Myosotis sylvatica.
12 Hants north.
Borrer ms.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Newman.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
20 Herts.
Pryor.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees reo.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate eat.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
79 Selkirlj.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
[3 5 or 6 8 21 29 37 77 
851 MYOSOTIS SYLVATICA.
325 
92 ; these counties require 
verification] .
852 Myosotis arvensis.
Counties all, except 73 74 97 
105 107 ; doubtless to be 
found in every county.
853 Myosotis coUina.
Counties all, except 23 36 
42 43 46 47 48 51 61 69 
70 72 73 74 78 79 80 
87 88 89 96 to 112.
109 Caithness?
112 Shet- 
land ?
Imperfectly recorded, 
through being so lately dis- 
tinguished from arvensis and 
versicolor.
854 Myosotis versicolor.
Counties all, except 31 41 42 
46 48 '58 69 74 97 98 99 
104 105 107 108 110 ; 
likely to occur in all of 
them, unless the Shetland 
species should prove to be 
collina only, without versi- 
color also.
855 Lithospermum.
officinale.
1 Corn', west.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 Hants north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
. Weaver sp.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
F. A.
Lees rec.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Eraser oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
69 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
326 
855 LITHOSPERMUM OFFICINALE.
65 York n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
" Oliver.'' 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy eat.f 
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh!!
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
88 mid.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
" occurs." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness?
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
856 Lithosperiu.
arvense.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northward, namely, 
41 42 43 46 47 48 60 71 
74 79 87 88 89 97 to 105 
107 to 112.
Hebrides ; 
Balfour and Babington.
857 Lithospermum 
purpuro-cseruleum.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
5 Som. south ?
6 north.
Duthie sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
26 Suffolk west.
"Bergholt." 
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
50 Denbigh.
Whittaker sp.
(62 85).
[34 36 70] .
858 Mertensia maritima.
46 Cardigan ?
49 Carnarvon.
Hewitt sp.
52 Anglesea.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westm.
Miss Hodgson sp.
70 Cumberl.
Kingsley sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. James Wilson sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
81 Berwick.
Johnston ms.
85 Fife.
G. Maonab sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north, Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
^tables sp.
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
06 Eoss east.
Syme sp.
08 Sutherland west.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
Cornwall, Devon and Hants 
have also been reported for 
this plant.
859 Symphytum officinale.
1 Corn, west!
Cunnaok oat.f 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat'.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight.
More oat.
. 
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
859 SYMPHYTUM OFFICINALE.
327 
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent.
e. G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Henry Bull sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts!
Newbouldcat.
32 North ton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn ms.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.* 
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt.
Robinson cat.
58 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.f 
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Northum.
R.B. Bowman sp.t 
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
71 Man. Forbes eat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Eorkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxb.
Brotherston ree.* 
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour eat.
t 
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.f 
89 east.
Duthie reef 
90 Forfar.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.* 
(91 92).
860 Sympb.
tuberosum.
30 Bedford.
Miss Foster ms.f 
39 Stafford.
48 Merioneth.
Pamplin ms.
54 Lincoln north.
61 York s.
east.
0. A.
Moore.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour eat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
828 
860 SYMPHYTUM TUBEROSUM.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 nortli.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
45 Elgin.
Gordon oat.f 
99 Dunbarton ?
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
(1 13 17 19 20 21 24 55 
89 109), [25 27 29 84 
66] .
Difficult to distinguish 
the three categories of habi- 
tat in the case of this plant, 
— indigenous, or introduced, 
or erroneous ; perhaps the 
county of Bedford, long ac- 
cepted in botanical books, 
ought to be transferred from 
the first to the second, if all 
the other south-eastern coun- 
ties are rightly referred to 
second and third.
" I have always had doubts 
as to its being reaUy indige- 
nous "(in 91 92).
"It used 
to be grown frequently in 
cottage gardens." John Eoy 
ms.
862 Lycopsis arvensis.
[Anchusa arvensis).
Counties all, except 31 85 42 43 
46 47 48 72 74 78 97 98 
99 103 105.
By reason of 
the frequent occurrence of 
this plant on waste ground 
and road-sides, and in other 
situations not closely con- 
nected with agriculture, it 
was designated " native " in 
Cybele Britannica.
Profes- 
sor De CandoUe, however, 
holds it introduced into this 
island from southern Eu- 
rope (Geog.
Bot. p.
679) and 
perhaps rightly so.
864 Anchusa sempervirens.
Counties numerous by the re- 
cords, from Cornwall to 
Caithness ; but usually re- 
ported as uncertainly native 
or certainly introduced.
Few 
botanists, whose opinion is 
worth anything in answer 
to such a questioii, declare 
it an indigenous plant.
865 Asperugo procTunbens.
16 Kent west.
E. Edwards.
17 Surrey.
Arth.
Bennett.* 
18 Essex s.
" Mr. Quekett !
" 
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
40 Salop.
"Dr. J.Babington." 
49 Carnarvon.
" Griffith." 
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.+ 
82 Haddington.
Maughan sp.+ 
85 Fife.
W. Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
95 Elgin.
" Brodie herb." 
06 Boss east.
Syme sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Borrer 1808.
[6 8 9 14 26 29 87 ; coun- 
ties requiring verification] .
Scarcely a true native in 
Britain ; rather, a fugitive 
casual ?
(17 20 Herts).
866 Cynoglossum oflacinale.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs.* 
8 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight I More oat.
CYNOGLOSSUM OFFICINALE.
829 
11 Hants south !
Towns, eat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
14 east.
Eoper oat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purohas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Camarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Ar. Bennett cat.).
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh !
J. E .
Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
T. G.
Eylands sp.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F, M.
Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
" rare." 
64 m.
west, "rare." 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
" indig." 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Alien ?
(75 77 93 94 96 106).
[Ill ; by Lowe's list] .
867 Cynog.
sylvaticum.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middx.
Extinct, or error ?
23 Oxford.
27 Norfolk east.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
34 west.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
40 Salop.
" Miss MacGhie." 
(89 90).
[14].
And pro- 
bably some of the counties 
named should be added to 
one or other of these cate- 
gories.
2u 
330 
868 PULMONAEIA ANGUSTIFOLIA.
868 Pulmonaria 
angustifolia.
6 Som. n.
? " Stephens hb." 
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
(17).
[25 51 63].
868 Pulmon.
officinalis.
Not indigenous ; but reported 
in about three dozen coun- 
ties, and usually as an ad- 
mitted introduction.
869 Echium vulgare.
Counties aU, except 42 46 47 
48 60 71 to 74 78 79 88 
89 97 98 99 101 103 to 
105 107 108 111 .112.
In 
the Moras of Clydesdale and 
Moray it is treated as ques- 
tionably indigenous ; and 
Mr. Eoy doubts it being 
truly native in Aberdeen or 
Kincardine.
Notwithstand- 
ing its frequenoyin England, 
it thus comes almost into the 
category of " hot common " 
plants, through being local 
in Scotland, and dubiously 
indigenous in North Britain.
870 Ech. plantagineum.
1 Corn.
w. Ealfs.
Introduced?
872 PingTiicula vulgaris.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 or 6 Som. Southby cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.
12 Hants north !
Pamplin ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Pamplin ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Extmct.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
, 
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton ms.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon 1 Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
" Mr. Astley." 
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton.
69 Westmoreland 1 
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
872 PINGUIOULA VULGARIS.
331 
75 Ayr. Duncan eat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
BaKour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson cat.
86 Stirling !
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
.88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east !
Gordon cat.
07 Sutherland east !
08 west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N. B.
This enumeration of 
counties would make the 
Pinguicula a commoner plant 
than the Echium ; and the 
more so because human 
agency has tended to lessen 
the localities for the former, 
while it has increased those 
for the latter plant.
Of 
course it is the frequency of 
this plant in Scotland which 
balances against its rarity 
in South England.
873 Pinguicula alpina.
04 Skye.
" James Mackay." 
06 Ross east.
Stables sp.
[Ill Orkney; Lowe's list; 
not confirmed, and perhaps 
huitanica] .
874 Pinguicula lusitanica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south I Russell sp.
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Crotch sp.
6   north?
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight.
Bromfield.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
71 Man. Forbes to Brand sp.
74 Wigton.
(Mc Andrew).
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
96 Easterness.
Coll.
Mor.
97 Westerness.
Lloyd sp.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Bb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Ross cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Campbell sp.
08 west !
09 Caithness.
Brown Campst.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Fortescue.
875 Utricularia vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Ralfs.
^32 
875 UTEICUtABiA VULGABtS.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt ms.
12 north !
13 Sussex west !
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Coleman oat.
15 Kent e.!
G. B.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunhury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
83 or 34 Gloster.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line.
s. P.
A. Lees & Fowler.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
J. L, Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bloxam ms.
63 8.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowmansp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
-'Bentall." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark ?
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
91 Kincard.
" Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
" Miss Boswell." 
12 Shetland.
" scarce." 
N.B. The above enumeration 
will include neglecta also ; 
the counties for it not being 
yet separable from those 
which possess the more usual 
form of vulgaiis only.
875*Utricularia neglecta.
2 Cornwall east.
Ealfs sp.
11 Hnts.
s. Wilkinson t.Darwin.
15 Kent east.
Blow sp.
17 Surrey.
Crespigny rec.
19 Essex north.
Varenne.
875*UTRICWLABIA tJEGLEClA.
833 
34 Gloster west.
Wintle.
876 Utricularia intermedia.
9 Dorset.
Borrer ms.
11 Hants south.
" Borrer." 
28 Norf.
west ?
Trimmer flo.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69"Westmor.
"F.
J. A.Hort." 
70 Cumberland.
Winch, con.
81 Berwick.
Border fio.
90 Forfar.
Maughan sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south.
North, flo.
98 Argyle.
" Winch add." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hrb. Nicholson.
05 Ross west.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Graham ex.
08 west.
Excurs.
1827.
[Devon Somerset, Bucks, 
Gloucester, Elgin have also 
been recorded] .
877 Utricularia minor.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
6 Som. north.
' Withers ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
18 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hemsley.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
22 Berks.
Arth.
Bennett.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Prentice sp.
28 west.
29 Cambrid|;e.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Harrison sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumb.
ThornhiU sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Dalzell sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Lyon sp.
81 Berwick.
(Br other ston).
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
86 Stirhng.
Croall rec.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Eastemess.
Brichan sp.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Bb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
" Repack." Ch. Bab.
sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham exc.
10 Hebrides.
" N.
Uist." 
11 Orkney.
Halcro Johnston.
[8 and 56 ; needing confirm- 
ation, and some others also] .
334 
878 PRIMULA VULGARIS.
878 Primula vulgaris.
Counties all, except 41 42 74 
78 105 107; doubtless to 
be found in every county.
879 Primula elatior !
19 Essex north.
Doubleday sp.
26 Suffolk west.
J. Bay sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
880 Primula veris.
(P.
officinalis).
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Hiern.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman oat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Coleman ms.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino, south!
Bloxam oat.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J.L.Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker oat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. J.
P. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxb.
James Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife I G.
Lawson ms.
880 PEIMULA VEEIS.
335 
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
88 Perth mid ?
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme oat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.
! Brown Campst.cat.+ 
(76 77 87 95 96 100 111 ; 
mentioned as an introduced 
plant in these counties).
Certainly a rare plant in 
Scotland; but it appeared 
to me to be genuinely indi- 
genous in Fife, Aberdeen, 
Sutherland, and perhaps 
Caithness.
881 Primula farinosa.
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west ?
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
78 Peebles.
G. Macnab sp.
[2 16 26 49 51 83 ; mis- 
reported counties] .
882 Primula scotica.
94 Banff ?
08 Suth.
west !
Oliver sp.
09 Caith.
1 Brown Campst.cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
884 Trientalis europsea.
62 York n.
east.
Mudd sp.
68 s.
west, lieyland sp.
64 York m.
west.
Parsons reo.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
" A.
Hutton." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
" Mr. Soubki." 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
G. Macnab sp.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
MiUer cat.
89 east.
90 Forfar !
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms, 
00 Clyde-isles.
06 Boss east.
07 Sutherland east.
Grant.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland.
Hewitson sp.
885 Hottonia palustris.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
12 Hants n.
J. 
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent e.
G. 
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Collins ms.
Thwaites cat.
L. Warren.
Borrer cat.
HaU cat.
E. Smith cat.
Varenne cat.
836 
885 HOTTONIA PALUSTRIS.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp!
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
Druce.
33 or 34 Gloster.
Lees sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bree ms.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
65 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.t 
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane, s.!
F.M.Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Storey sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Syme sp.
1844.
69 Westmoreland.
[90 Forfar ; not Reliable] .
886 Lysimachia vulgaris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 ' east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
"Davis " sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
J. Whittaker.
58 Chester.
J. L.- Warren cat.
886 LYSIMACHIA VULGARIS, 
337 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
" Fairlamb !
" 
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr".
Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
Extirpated ?
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.f 
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
& cat.f 
86 Stirling.
"Mr.Learmouth." 
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Miller cat.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
99 Dunbarton !
Maughan sp.
03 Eb. mid.
Ross cat.
887 Lysimach.
thyrsiflora.
56 Notts.
Berkeley ms.
59 Lane, south.
Alcock.^' 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west ?
65 n.
west.
Baker bot.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Gourliesp.H. cat.-j- 
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
Christie sp.
89 Perth e.
Hay, exc.
club.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Craig Christie.
(6 7 planted by Sole, and 
perhaps extinct).
[20 52 
58 61 63 64 70 91 92; 
insuificiently vouched, and 
mostly errrors] .
888 Lysim.
Nummularia.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman eat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith eat.
16 west !
Trevelyan sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock eat.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Morley sp.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas eat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas eat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
47 Montgomery.
(J.
E. Vize).
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson eat.
60 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
2x 
338 
888 LYSIMACHIA NUMMULAKIA.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg oat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Buckland sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
66 .
n. w.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
" native." 
67 Northumb.
Extinct ?
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker eat.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.t 
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
86 Stirling.
W. Gait sp.
(10 80 81 83 85 90 100; 
Uncertainly indigenous in 
Scotland, and also in Eng- 
land beyond York and Dur- 
ham.
By^the Border Flora 
and the Edinbugh Flora it 
is an introduced plant in the 
I East Lowlands).
889 Lysimachia nemoram.
Counties all, except 31 42 46 
53 72 74 103 105 107 110 
112.
A frequent plant, but 
not quite a common one.
Perhaps to be found in every 
county from Cornwall to 
Caithness, unless that of 
Huntingdon should be a real 
exception ; and it is said to 
be rare'or very local in Bed- 
ford and Cambridge.
890 Anagallis arvensis.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
79 89 93 97 98 102 to 
112.
Scarcely entitled to 
a higher predial grade in 
North Britain than that of 
a casual colonist.
Anagallis 
ccsrulea has the like cha- 
racter for Britain generally ; 
see Comp.
Cyb. Brit.
p. 550.
891 Anagallis tenella.
Counties all, except 16 21 23 
42 43 48 74 78 79 80 86 
to 90 97 99 104 to 108; 
some of which may be real 
exceptions to a comital gene- 
rality.
892 Centunculus minimus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More eat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat, 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
J.L.Warren!
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west ?
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
892 OBNTUNCULUS MINIMUS.
339 
30 Bedford.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
40 Salop.
(Sergeantson).
41 {jlamorgan.
Henfrey ms.
45 Pembroke.
H. L.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
48 Merioneth.
Miss Worsley.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.w. G.E.Smithrec.
64 m.
w. Twining sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Jowett to Howitt sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat co.
75 Ayr. G.
Maonab sp.
76 Eenfrew.
77 Lanark ?
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
85 Kinross.
Balfour ms.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
893 Samolus Valerandi.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack eat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west I Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent.
e. !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Salmon in flo.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
S. Lucas sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northampton.
Blow.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
"Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarv.
J.B.Bowman ms.
51 Flint !
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson eat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester!
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
64 m.
w. Abbott rec.
340 
893 SAMOLUS VALEBANDI.
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray oat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss reo.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
894 Glaux maritima.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 21 74 77 89 105 107; 
in most of these it likely 
occurs.
895 Armeria maritima.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 21 35 74 77 89 105 
107 ; likely to occur in 
nearly all of these counties.
Inland on mountains.
897 Statice Limonium.
Cornwall ?
8 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G.E. Smith sp.
16 west !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
28 Norfolk west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west ?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Butler sp.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
T. B.
Hall sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver ms.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
85 Fife.
" J.
W. Brown." 
[112 Shetland Flora] .
898 Statice bahusiensis.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
Holman sp.
15 Kent east.
Brent sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
MissWorsleysp.
898 STATICE BAHUSIENSIS.
341 
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
68 Gheviotland.
" Maclagan !
" 
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Heysbam sp.
72 Dumfries.
Cruicksbank sp.
73 Kirkcudb.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
74 Wigton.
Gourlie sp.
[3 4 Eav. Flora of Devon] .
899 Statice binervosa.
1 Corn.
V7est.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Hore sp.
3 Devon soutb.
Hooker sp.
4 nortb.
Maw cat.
5 Som. north.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Boswell Syme sp.
14 Sussex east.
Norman sp.
15 Kent east !
Trevelyan sp.
27 Norfolk e.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Ball sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Howitt sp.
52 Anglesea.
J. B .
Bowman sp.
54 Line, nortb.
C. J.
Wild sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Syme sp.
69 L.
Lane, Preston.
70 Cumberland.
Brady sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
[10 13 ; counties needing 
confirmation] .
900 Statice caspia.
25 Suffolk east.
Babington.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington sp.
28 west.
Noteutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
53 Line, soutb ?
54 n.
" Banks herb." 
[6 15 70 ; misnomers] .
901 Plantago major.
Counties all, except 74 105.
902 Plantago media.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.j 
3 Devon soutb.
Briggs cat.+ 
4 nortb.
5 Som. soutb.
Coleman eat.
6 nortb !
Thwaites cat.
7 WUts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith eat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Esses south.
19 nortb.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman eat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 -Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purehas ms 
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
HUlhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould eat.
32 Northton !
Noteutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway eat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
342 
902 PLANTAGO MEDIA.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
(Vize).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Fhnt !
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.f 
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
F.A.Leescat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham eat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumber.
"W.
Eobinson sp." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
83 E dinburgh !
Babington eat .
85 Fife, 
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south ?
98 north.
Dickie flo.
(77 112).
[111].
Is it truly 
wild in any county of North 
Britain ?
903 Plantago lanceolata.
Counties aU, except 74 105.
904 Plantago maritima.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 16 21.
It occurs also 
in some few of the exclu- 
sively inland counties, for ex- 
ample in Mid-west andNorth- 
west York and Mid-Perth.
905 Plantago Coronopns.
Counties all, except 31 32 33 
42 43 47 53 64 65 73 74 
77 to 80 86 88 89 97 104 
105.
906 Littorella lacustris.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pascoe eat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.
4 north.
Maw eat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G,.
E. Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
29 Cambridge ?
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick.
Dr. Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
906 LITXOBELLA LACUSTEIS.
343 
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
J.B. Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lino, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
P. Gray ms.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
I. B.
Balfour.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87.Perth west.
Syme cat.
88* mid !
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
91 Kino.
Miss Boswell ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Basterness.
Stables cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
GO Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Stables ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Mrs. Eussell.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides, 
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
908 Chenopodium olidum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
8 Wilts, south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren oat.
14 east.
Bromf.
sp.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.f 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 w.
Babington ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
82 Northton.
87 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.t 
64 York m.
west.
" colonist." 
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
85 Fife ?
(59 60 62 68 ; " natura- 
lised " or casual).
[49 52].
909 Ohenop.
polyspermum.
344 
909 CHENOPODIUM POLYSPEBMUM.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south.
Tate sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north ?
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
A. Carr sp.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind oat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
- 27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortiiton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purohas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leigh ton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, north.
(Fowler rec).
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Eussell ms.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
62 York n.
east.
65 n.
west.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
(59 66).
[61 64 90 ; report- 
] ed, but need confirmation] .
910 Chenop.
urbioum.
intermedium.
1 Corn, west !
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
6 .
north ?
8 Wilts north ?
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
A. Carr sp.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Pamplin ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Wilson.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
" colonist." 
65 n.
west, "colonist." 
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
68 Cheviolland " colonist." 
(81 83), [8 9 50 92] .
It 
is to be feared that very 
little reliance ought to be 
placed on recorded habitats 
910 OHENOPODIUM URBIOUM.
345 
for this plant ; states of 
ruhrum being mistaken for 
it.
Indeed, few botanists 
appear able to name the 
Chenopodia correctly.
911 Chenopodium rubrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Gibson sp.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Tate sp.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Flower sp.
6 north!
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex !
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Syme sp.
28 west.
Syme sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
88 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
More.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmathen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobiuson cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north I 
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
- 
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.+ 
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
An error ?
911 Chenop.
taotryoides.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south ?
Gibson flo.
19 north ?
Gibson flo.
25 Suffolk east.
Eng. flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
[2 13 or 14 17 21 28 49 
67 85 ; in all these counties 
it is probable that pseudo- 
botryoides, the dwarf variety 
of C/i.rj(6)-i{»!, has been mis- 
taken for true botryoides] .
912 Chenopodium murale.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
2y 
346 
912 CHENOPODIUM MUKALE.
5 Som. south.
Miss Gifford.
6 north; Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydellsp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west !
Bbrrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
Stevens sp.
16 , west.
17 Surrey !
Christy sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Christy sp.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Miss Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
80 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
38 Warwick.
Bree cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
[7 50 68 71 77 80 90 ; in- 
sufficiently vouched, and 
perhaps all erroneous] .
913 Chenop.
hybridum.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
ManselPleydell sp.
16 Kent west!
Dr. Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
23 Oxford ?
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Marshall sp.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
Westcombe sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
59 Lane, south ?
(66 67 88).
[6] .
914 Ohenopodinm album.
Counties all, except 5 42 57 
73 74 86 97 98 104 105 
108.
915 Chenop.
ficifolium.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
J. L; Warren.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Christy sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east, 
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
62 York n.
east.
[8 9 11 34 40 55 ; re- 
915 CHENOPODIUM PICIFOLIITM.
347 
quiring verification] .
(66 
67 ; on ballast hills).
The 
payanuni or virescens form of 
album is occasionally mis- 
taken for this species.
I 
have seen it only in and 
from localities in the Thames 
province.
916 Chenop.
glaucum.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
17 Surrey !
Only once seen.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Syme sp.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
27 Norf.
east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
41 Glamorgan.
Gutoh cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker bot.
66 Durham.
Ward sp.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
85 Fife.
' Syme sp.
& ms.f 
N.B. Very scarce, and uncer- 
tain in its localities.
917 Chen.
Bonus-Henricus.
Counties all, except 42 46 73 
74 78 88 89 97 98 99 101 
to 105 107 108 110 111 
112.
The indigenous-ness 
of this plant is looked upon 
with doubt ; more especially 
so in Scotland, where few 
writers declare it truly 
native.
918 Obione portulacoides.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eogers.
5 Som. south.
Colhns ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Bell Salter sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east !
Buckland sp.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east..
Woodward sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
[83 89 ; extinct or errors ?] .
919 Obione pedunculata.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
53 Line.
s. Sir Jos. Banks.
(44 66 ; on baUast).
920 Atriplex laciniata.
[A.
arenaria.
Woods).
1 Corn.
west.
348 
920 ATEIPLEX LACINIATA.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants s.
H. Groves sp.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.Warren cat.
14 east.
' Eoper cat.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Christy sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Extinct ?
28 west.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Howitt ms.
68 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Bloxam ms.
60 west.
Syme sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
(Mc Andrew).
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde isles.
01 Cantire.
02 Eb. south.
06 Boss east ?
08 Sutherland west !
[83 85 90 92 95 96 111; 
need verification, as perhaps 
also some of the counties 
named] .
N.B. Dr. Ascherson has shown 
that our plant is really the 
Atrijilex l.aciniata of Linneus 
(' Spec, plant, ed.
1, p.
1053, 
no.
5, exclud.
syn.
flo.
suec.') 
and thus improperly re- 
named by Joseph Woods.
921 Atriplex Babingtonii.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Parfitt sp.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-PleydeU sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren.
15 Kent east !
Syme sp.
3 6 west!
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Bab..
cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
48 Merioneth.
(Eeeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Hunt sp.
52 Anglesea ?
64 Liiic.
north !
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westm.
Miss Hodgson.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Gourlie sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
921 ATBIPLEX BABINGTONII.
349 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour b]}.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy oat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
-. 
[21 37 106; need confirm- 
ation] .
922 Atriplex hastata.
patula, 8m.
Counties all, except 42 43 46 
47 48 71 78 74 78 79 84 
88 97 101 103 105 106 
107 110, 
922 Atriplex deltoidea.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Koper.
15 Kent east.
Mrs. Jones sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
(Druce rec).
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 .west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
84 Northampton.
Druce rec.
85 Monmouth.
F. J.
A.Hortms.
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
51 Flint.
(Parsons rec.) 
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
(Lewis rec.) 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
72 Dumfries.
80 Eoxburgh.
" introduced." 
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
04 Eb. north ?
N.B. I do not see how this 
differs essentially from has- 
tata.
[112] .
923 Atriplex angustifolia.
" patula/' L.
Counties all, but with many 
exceptions at present ; pro- 
bably through the species 
being imperfectly known.
The counties for which I 
lack authorities, are 35 36 
37 42 44 46 48 61 71 72 
to 75 79 80 84 86 87 88 
92 to 98 103 105 to 108.
923 Atriplex erecta.
2 Corn.
east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
350 
923 ATKIPLEX EEECTA.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
J.L.'Vy^arren.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer sp.
22 Berks !
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
53 Line.
s. Bloxam- ms.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
61 York s.
east.
Moore ms.flo.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68',Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
10 Hebrides.
" N.
Uist." 
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. This common species has 
been much misunderstood, 
and confusion has arisen 
from a supposition that the 
name was applicable ex- 
clusively to an extremely 
luxuriant state, and not to 
the normal plant [Atriplese 
patula, var.
serrata, Eng.
Bot., edit.
3), as seen in 
corn-fields.
In general ap- 
pearance the normal state 
stands between angustifolia 
and hastata, weakly examples 
difficult to distinguish from 
the former.
924 Atriplex littoralis.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Syme sp.
14 , east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east !
Jacob sp.
16 west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28   west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler reo.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren eat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.* 
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
- 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton eat.
924 ATRIPLEX LITTORALIS.
351 
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
70 Cumberland.
Addison.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Twynam sp.
83 Edinburgh ?
84 Linlithgow !
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
(92) [1 106 108; require 
confirmation.
To 92 the 
plant is stated to have been 
introduced, and subsequent- 
ly to have become extinct 
there] .
924 Atriplex marina.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !- Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
J.L.Warren.
15' Kent east !
Hind sp.
16 west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
T.B. Hallsp.
21 Middx.
Extinct or error.
54 Line, north !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
925 Beta maritima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw eat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west !
Fordham sp.
14 east.
Banking sp.
15 Kent east !
Twining sp.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne^ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge ?
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Butler sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.f 
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.* 
70 Cumberland.
Addison.
71 Man. Jowett to Hewitt sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfoiir sp.| 
83 Edinburgh.
Macnab sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
02 Bb. south.
Balfour cat.
[56 Notts.
Ill 112].
926 Salsola Kali.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith eat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Skepper ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
352 
926 SAIiSOLA KALI.
48 Merioneth.
Gibson ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb oat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
e. (F.
A. Lees rec.) 
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.|- 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westm.
Miss Beevor.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumf.
Miss Twining sp.
75 Ayr. Balfour sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss cat.
09' Caithness.
" Mr. Peach." 
927 Suaeda maritima.
1 Cornwall west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north 1 Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north, Butler sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
18 Sussex w.!
J.L.Warrenms.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west!
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
84 Gloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Arth.
Bennett.) 
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
58 Line, south !
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab cat.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew.) 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow !
Macnab sp.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
- 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
927 SUfiDA MABITIMA.
353 
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy eat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Eb. mid.
(Eoss reo.) 
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[In the Floras of Berwick, 
but the localities are on the 
English side only] .
928 Suseda fruticosa.
9 Dorset.
Bromfield sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babingtonsp.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
44 Glamorgan ?
(62 67 75).
[18 6 70] .
929 Salicornia herbacea.
Counties all the maritime ones, 
except 21 35 61 71 73 74 
77 81 88 89 94 97 103 
105 107 108 109; doubt- 
less it does occur in most of 
these counties.
930 Salicornia radicans.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight.
Syme sp.
ir Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
15 Kent east.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Syme sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
62 York n.
east.
[6 41 90].
Miss Bell sp.
Baker sp.
931 Polygonum Bistorta.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.* 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Gutch sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset, Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.t 
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
French, Dyke sps.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 w.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
Lees sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
2z 
854 
93l POLYGONUM BiSTOKTA.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
" denizen." 
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Leylaud sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.t 
(1 to 4 10 85 90 to 96 98 
100 102 104 106 109 111 
112 ; probably introduced to 
all these counties, although 
reported as if a native in 
some of them).
932 Polygonum viviparum.
49 Carnarvon.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Finder sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
85 Fife 1 Dewar sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south j Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie fio.
94 Banff.
" frequent." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Basterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Johnston ms.
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[37 53 54 62 ; erroneous, 
and perhaps also some of 
the counties not verified 
recently on safe authority] .
933 Polyg.
amphitaium.
Counties all, except 42 43 46 
47 48 72 74 84 103 104 
105 108.
934 Polyg.
lapathifolium.
Counties all, except 5 42 46 
48 72 74 79 84 89 93 94 
96 97 99 103 104 105 107 
108 110.
934*Polyg.
maculatum.
(P.
laxum, E.B.S.non Reich.).
1 Corn.
w. (Soilly).
Towns.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
17 Surrey.
Syme.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
984*POLYGONUM MACULATUM.
355 
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
K. H.
Webb flo.
21 Middlesex.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
Babington.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Purchas sp.
35 Monmouth.
Babington sp.
86 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
45 Pembroke.
Trimen.
55 Leicester.
Coleman.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
85 Fife.
Syme.
(nodosum).
935 Polyg.
Persicaria.
Counties all, except 42 74 89 
98 105 107 108; doubtless 
it occurs in every county.
936 Polygonum mite.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
Supp.
flo.
vect.
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer 1867.
23 Oxford.
Linton rec.
28 Norfolk west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
58 Chester.
Ex. club 1859.
62 York n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
[10 11 12 22 37 41 47 70; 
insufficiently vouched, but 
otherwise not unlikely ex- 
cept the last ; an ill-under- 
stood species, quite distinct 
from minus, with which it 
has been confused, but very 
near to Persicaria] .
937 Polyg.
Hydropiper.
Counties all, except 42 74 78 
89 93 98 105 to 110.
[Ill 
112] .
938 Polygonum minus.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
. 3 or 4 Som. Southby cat.
9 Dorset.
Rogers.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants s'outh !
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east ?
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Baker sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Pamplin ms.
22 Berks.
Britten " v.
sp." 
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
26 west ?
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.' 
29 Cambridge?
"Bay." 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton !
37 Worcester ?
" Dr. Stokes." 
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan ?
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
" Pulteney." 
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat, 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east, 
356 
938 POLYGONUM MINUS.
64 York m.
west.
66 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Balfour sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
"Dr. Boss." 
87 Perth w.
(Clackmannan).
N.B. Several of the counties 
here enumerated rest on un- 
safe testimony or on old and 
unconfirmed authority.
[90 
Forfar; G.Don].
939 Polygonum aviculare.
Counties all, except 85 42 74 
93 97 105 ; no doubt it is 
to be found in every county.
The various segregates are 
so imperfectly distinguished 
as yet, and their localities so 
seldom recorded apart, that 
I do not here attempt to cite 
their counties.
940 Polygonum Rail.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Flower sp.
4 north.
5 or 6 Somerset.
"Borrer." 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Borrer ms.
13 or 14 Sussex.
Borrer ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Flower sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babingion sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Addison sp.
71 Man.
" Edward Forbes." 
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Stewart Murray sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
[112 " common" ; Edm. flo.] .
940 Polyg.
maritimum.
1 Corn.
west.
Groves.
4 Devon north.
Rogers sp.
11 Hantss.
Borrer.
Groves 1879 
[14 28 46 49 75; all errors 
probably through mistaking 
the Baii for this present 
species] .
941 Polyg.
Convolvulus.
Counties all, except 42 46 60 
74 97 98 104 105 107 112 
(111).
M. Alphonse De 
Candolle regards this as an 
Asiatic plant, introduced 
into Britain by human a- 
gency.
If so, it is a remark- 
able instance of complete 
naturahsation through the 
greater part of the island, 
although in the more north- 
erly counties of North 
Britain it might quite suit- 
ably be classed as a colonist 
only, or even as a casual in 
941 POLYGONUM CONVOLVULUS.
357 
the North Isles.
942 Polyg.
dumetorum.
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
6 Som. north.
Babington sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
Buckell reo.
12 north.
Bromf.
sp.
14 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Colenaan sp.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
[68 Cheviotland, an error] .
943 Rumex 
Hydrolapathum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
6 Som north.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Mower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More eat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bloomfield.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
oat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Druce.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas eat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill eat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. E.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Miss Hancock sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
75 Ayr. Walker-Arnott ms.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Syme.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
(77).
[90 98 99].
943*Ruinex maximus.
1 Corn.
w. (Scilly).
Briggs.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
358 
948*RUMEX MAXIMUS.
11 Hants south.
(Warner).
14 Sussex e.
J. L.
Warren sp.
19 Essex north ?
Varenne.
944 Rumex crispus.
Counties all, except 42 61 73 
74 98 105 107.
944 Rumex aquaticus.
domesticus.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.west.
Tathamcat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Babington sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland?
75 Ayr.
" Mr. Goldie." 
76 Renfrew.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
87 Perth west !
Syme sp.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
99 Dunbarton ?
04 Eb. north.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
[2 3 27 31 33 37 40 52; 
probably intending Hydro - 
lapathum] .
944 Rumex eonspersus.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
85 Kinross.
Walker-Arnott sp.
85.
Fife.
L B.
Balfour ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
11 Orkney.
Bos well.
N.B. Prof.
Areschoug named 
the Scottish plant " eon- 
spersus," on seeing the 
specimens in my herbarium ; 
so that its identity with the 
Swedish plant so named 
may be fully acquiesced in.
945 Rumex pratensis.
{R.
acutus, L.) 
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs 
8 Wilts s.
J. L.
Warren ms.
9 Dorset.
Borrer ms.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J.L.Warren cat.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer sp.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
(Newbould).
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Hort ms, 
945 KUMEX PRATENSIS.
859 
85 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
38 Warwick.
Brom-wioh sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
.41 Glamorgan.
Bab. ms.
45 Pembroke.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
E. Brown.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Newbould ms.
59 Lane, south.
F. M.
Webb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. To my eyes this appears 
to be a miscellaneous medley 
of specimens more or less 
intermediate between crispus 
and obtusifolius, and on that 
account not confidently 
assignable to either.
In the 
citation of " sp." I do not 
guarantee the name in any 
other sense.
Professor 
Areschoug considered Dr.
Boswell Syme's examples 
from Fife to be rightly thus 
named.
947 Rumex obtusifolius.
Counties all, except 42 71 to 
74 97 103 105.
947*Rumex sylvestris.
15 Kent e.
J. L.
Warren rec.
16 west.
J. L.
Warren.
17 Surrey.
J. L.
Warren.
20 Herts.
Blow sp.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.
Warren.
948 Rumex nemorosus.
sanguineus, Sm.
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northwards ; namely, 
24 32 42 43 46 51 54 60 
71 to 74 79 86 89 (90) 92 
or 93 94 96 97 98 103 to 
112.
Perhaps confused oc- 
casionally with the next, or 
neglected like other unin- 
teresting " Docks." 
948 Rumex conglomeratus.
[R.
acutm, Sm.).
Counties all, except 42 43 47 
48 71 72 73 75 79 86 88 
89 94 to 98 101 102 105 
to 110 [111 112] .
948*Rumex rupestris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunuack ms.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
11 Hants south.
(J.
Woods).
13 Sussex e.
J. L.
Warren ms.
949 Rumex puleher.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Eogers.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Poole ins.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
360 
949 RUMEX PULCHEK.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer ms.
14 east !
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north, Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk e.
Woodward ms.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
37 Worcester.
F. A.
Lees rec.
88 Warwick.
Newbould.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
(Vize).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino, south !
56 Notts.
G. Howitt sp.
(67 " ballast hills "80).
[36 70 75 77] .
950 Rumex maritimus.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex.
(Newbould).
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Church.
Bah.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 B.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
67 Northum.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.t 
(66 68, on ballast, &c.).
[8 4 23 24 41 51 72 85 
92 94 111 ; insufaciently 
vouched, and the higher 
nos.
probably erroneous] .
950 Rumex palustris.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
9 Dorset.
Bloxam ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
16 Kent west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
950 BUMEX PALUSTRIS.
861 
20 Herts.
'21 Middlesex.
Wing sp.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Syme sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
37 "Worcester ?
38 Warwick ?
89 Stafford?
53 Lincoln s.
Streatfield rec.
58 Chester?
J. E.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane, south.
(Lewis).
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
(66 67 on ballast hills).
[1 3 55 68 75 82 90 ; 
counties requiring verifica- 
tion, and the same may be 
true for some of the others 
here cited interrogatively] .
951 Rumex Acetosa.
Counties all, except 74 105.
952 Rumex Acetosella.
Counties all, except 42 74 lOo.
953 Oxyria reniformis.
48 Merion.
J.E. Bowman ms.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.Bowman ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
(Mull).
Syme.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
[34 64 or 65] .
954 Hippophae rhamnoides.
14 Sussex east.
Bloomfield.
16 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk e.
Bloomfield ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
54 Lino, north.
Bogg cat.
62 York n.
east.
Mudd sp.
(8 14 18 68 82 to 85 101 
102 108 ; probably planted 
in all of these counties).
955 Daphne Lanreola.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Arth.
Bennett.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
22 Berks.
8 A 
362 
955 DAPHNE LATJREOLA.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfleld.
26 west.
Wallis sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
J. Hooker ms., 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Howitt ms.
40 Salop.
Leigliton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea ?
One locality.
53 Lincoln south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. ms.
58 Chester?
"J.B.Wood." 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
-Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
(1 2 21 50 59 68 69 75 
77 81 83 85 91 ; recorded 
as uncertainly indigenous 
or certainly introduced in 
these counties).
956 Daphne Mezereum.
12 Hants n.
Townsend cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Jenner rec.
24 Bucks.
Britten sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
Norman sp.
(3 6 7 8 9 10 11 17 19 20 
22 26 27 28 33 or 34 36 
38 89 40 57 63 69 75 83 ; 
probably an alien in all of 
these counties ; and not 
clearly indigenous in those 
named).
Mr. Borrer held 
it " native" in Sussex ; and 
Dr. Bromfield declares it 
to be so in Hampshire.
Mr.
Baker gives it the grade of 
" denizen " in Yorkshire and 
Durham.
It is sown by 
robins, which feed on its 
berries in the gardens.
957 Thesium humifusum.
1 or 2 Cornwall...?
Butler sp.
8 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Southby sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat; 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
12 north.
Macreightsp.
13 Sussex west.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren ms.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Pordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
Bloomfleld.
28 Norfolk west.
Miss BeU sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Miss Twining sp.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
958 Asarum europseum.
8 Wilts south.
Flower sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten "v.
spec." 
958 ASAETJM EUROPIUM.
363 
50 Denbigh, (M.
C. Cooke).
69 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
(3 20 22 28 36 55 68 69 
70 75 83 84 85 ; not indi- 
genous in these reported 
counties ; and perhaps not 
so in any of the other five 
specially named).
960 Empetrum nigriun, 
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Withers sp.
13 Sussex west.
Extinct.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
88 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
89 Stafford !
Howitt sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Lees sp.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones.
44 Carmarthen.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh!
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 FHnt.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
68 s.
west.
Barham sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
63 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
• 
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
co.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
co.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 to 112.
All North Britain, 
and so plentifully that it 
appears qiiite unnecessary 
to cite the names of coun- 
ties, with their personal 
authorities in detail.
[21] .
961 Euphorbia Peplis.
1 Corn, west !
Seen in 1831.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
Ealfs.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Colhns ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell.
10 Wight.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
962 Euphorb.
Helioscopia.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 
78 97 98 105 107.
963 Euphorbia platyphylla.
2 Corn.
east.
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, eat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bromf.
sp.
364 
963 EUPHORBIA PLATYPHYLLA.
16 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.t 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Pryor.
24 Bucks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould ms.
32 Northton !
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Buckman sp.
34 west !
37 Worcester ?
64 York m.
west.
West reo.
(25 or 26 62 63 64 67 68).
963 Euphorbia stricta.
34 Gloster w.
" P.
J. A.
Hort." 
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
[6 12 ; misnomers, perhaps 
through confusion with E.
stricta of Smith, which was 
a small state of platyphylla] .
964 Euphorbia hiberna.
4 Devon north !
Eussell sp.
(62).
[15 21 59].
965 Euphorbia pilosa.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
14 Sussex east.
" wild." 
969 Euphorbia Paralias.- 
1 Corn, west!
Cuunack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex w.
G.E.Smithms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Notcutt sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 -Pembroke.
Eussell sp.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merion.
J. E.
Bovraian ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bidwell sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea ?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south !
Soholes sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Miss Beevor sp.
71 Man. Forbes oat.
(85 Balfour ms.*).
970 Euphorb.
portlandica.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaek cat.
2 east.
Goulding sp.
3 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
4 north !
Maw cat.
9 Dorset.
Trevelyan sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon ?
51 Flint.
Edwards.
52 Anglesea.
Harris sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Scholes sp.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Jowett to Howitt sp.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
(84 85).
[13 15] .
971 EUPHORBIA BXIGUA.
865 
971 Euphorbia exigua.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 8om.
south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east !
Coleman cat.
15 Kent.
e. G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west!
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
(Vize).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobiason cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
58 Chester!
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey rec.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
72 Dumfries ?
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy eat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
89 east.
" Gorrie." 
90 Forfar, "frequent." 
94 Banff.
" Mr. Bissett." 
00 Clyde-isles.
A common plant in Eng- 
land, but scarce in Scotland.
972 Euphorbia Peplus.
Counties all, with many seem- 
ing exceptions northward ; 
namely, 42 43 72 73 74 78 
91 97 98 101 102 106 to 
108 110 112.
366 
974 EUPHORBIA AMYGDALOIDES.
974 Euph.
amygdaloides.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 nortli !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 " north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south., 
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind oat.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell ms.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Miss Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
HUlhouse cat.
32 Northton.
Druce.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
39 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ball sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
" Deering." 
57 Derby.
Eev. A.
Bloxam ms.
64 York m.
west.
Moore ms.
68 Cheviotland.
Bigge sp.
69 Westm.
Miss Barnard.
(66).
976 Mercurialis perennis.
Counties aU, except 71 74 97 
105 107 109 110 112.
Ill 
Orkney ; Miss BosweU.
977 Mercurialis annua.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.+ 
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north!
Henslow sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.f 
10 Wight.
More sp.f 
11 Hants south I Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warrenms.
14 east !
Fordham sp.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
21 Middlesex.
Harris sp.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Varenne sp.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.+ 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
977 MEECUEIALIS ANNUA.
867 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Pembroke.
Babington'cat.
48 Merionetli.
49 Carnarvon ?
Eobinson oat.
51 Flint ?
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
56 Notts.
59 Lane, south.
Dugdale sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.f 
66 Durham.
" colonist." 
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.+ 
(70 75 83 85 87 ; a casual 
introduction in these coun- 
ties, as well as in some of 
the English counties enume- 
rated ; while in some others 
of the latter it is an abun- 
dant and troublesome weed.) 
978 Urtica urens.
Counties all, except 35 42 43 
47 73 74 98 105 108.
979 Urtica dioica.
Counties all, except 74 97 105 
107 ; no doubt it occurs in 
all of them.
980 Parietaria officinalis.
(P.
diffusa, M.
& K.) 
Counties all, with many excep- 
tions northwards, namely, 
71 72 73 80 84 88 89 
97 98 99 101 to 105 107 
to 112.
(91 to 96 100 
106).
983 Hamulus Lupulus.
1 Corn, west !
t Cunnaok.* 
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notoutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.f 
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
\ Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford !
Eraser cat.f 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Miss Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
t Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
+ 
54 north.
Bogg cat.
868 
983 HHMULUS LUPULUS.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
68 Chester !
+ J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.t 
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.+ 
63 s.
west.
P.A.Leescat.
64 m.
west.
Tathamcat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
" not native." 
67 Northumb.
Storey cat.* 
68 Cheviot.
Embleton oat.* 
69 Westmoreland !
+ 
70 Cumberland!
f Baker.* 
71 Man. Forbes cat.
f "rare." 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.* 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.t 
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.t 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.* 
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.* 
83 Edinburgh !
+ Balf.
cat.* 
85 Fife.
Lawson cat.+ Balf.* 
92 Aber.
south !
* 
95 Elgin.
Coll.
Mor.* 
N.B. The Hop is generally re- 
ported as a truly indigenous 
plant in South England ; 
but becoming much doubted, 
or quite discarded as such, 
in the northern counties.
984 Ulmiis montana.
Counties all, except 11 14 31 
32 41 45 46 49 51 53 54 
71 73 74 79 80 84 93 94 
97 105 107 109 111 112.
And in several of the other 
counties it is reported as 
being uncertainly native or 
certainly alien.
985 Ulmus suberosa.
N.B. It is found utterly impos- 
sible to say in which of the 
counties this much planted 
tree is indigenous, and in 
which of them it is simply 
an introduction.
The name 
campestris, so frequent in 
books, has sometimes in- 
tended montana, but perhaps 
more frequently this other 
species.
V. "suberosa" is 
reported in counties 1 to 6 
9 to 14 17 to 22 24 29 80 
31 34 36 to 40 43 44 45 
46 47 48 49 to 52 54 55 
56 58 59 60 to 68 70 72 
76 77 81 83 87 91.
U. 
" campestris " is reported in 
counties 2 to 9 11 12 14 
15 17 to 20 22 23 25 to 
30 32 33 34 36 to 40 44 
50 52 55 to 59, 61 [to 65 
68.
[77 80 81 83 90] .' 
988 Quercus Robur.
Counties all, except 71 74 75 
79 105 107 109 to 112, 
with the usual nine others.
This includes the two segre- 
gates taken together under 
the one name made more or 
less common to both.
They 
are again enumerated in de- 
tail below, as I find them 
severally reported.
But the 
record is misleading nume- 
rically, hecause ^," peduncu- 
lata " is less frequently dis- 
tinguished by name, as a 
segregate from Robur, than 
is the ," sessiliflora " ; this 
latter being.
really less fre- 
quent than the former, 
988 QUBBCUS PBDUNOULATA.
369 
988 Quercus peduuculata.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
6 Som. north !
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, oat.
12 north !
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
Eoper sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.t 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
82 ]Srorthp,nipton.
Druce rec.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington eat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
(Beeves).
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland, 
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
88 Edinburgh !
+ Balfour oat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.t 
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
89 east !
t 
98 Argyle.
Clyde flo.
99 Dunbarton.
Clyde flo.
988 Quercus sessiliflora.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
+ Eoper sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.t 
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.t 
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouge oat.
84 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kii-k oat.
3s 
370 
988 QUBRCUS SESSILIFLOBA.
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.f 
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merionetb.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J.B. Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.t 
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.f 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f 
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west ?
88 mid.
99 Dunbarton.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
N.B. For neither segregate is 
it possible clearly to dis- 
tinguish the counties in 
which it is indigenous, from 
those in which it exists only 
as a planted tree or as the 
offspring from planted trees.
True sessiliflora is better dis- 
tinguished by its leaves, 
than by its sessile fruit ; 
the acorns of peduncidata 
being not seldom subsessile ; 
through which occasional 
misnomers occur.
989 Pagus sylvatica.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.* 
2 east.
Briggs oat.f 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.t 
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 n.
Thwaites cat.* 
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.t 
8 south.
Flower cat.+ 
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
Bromf.f 
11 Hants south !
Bromfield.
12 north.
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Floral Guide.
16 west.
Tonbridge flo.
17 Surrey !
Brewer in flo.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.f 
19 north.
Varenne cat.+ 
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Sibthorpe flo.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.-:= 
26 west.
Skepper flo.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.t 
30 Bedford.
Abbot flo.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 w.
Thwaites cat.* 
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.t 
38 Warwick.
Kkk cat.+ 
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.+ 
40 Salop.
Leighton flo.f 
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. Jones cat.f 
989 PAGUS SYLVATICA.
871 
47 Montgomery.
Ley oat.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.f 
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman oat.
t 
51 Fhnt.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Davies flo.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.* 
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.f 
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
" recorded." 
62 n.
east.
Baker bot.t 
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker bot.t 
65 n.
west.
Baker bot.f 
66 Durham, "not indigenous." 
67 Norfchumb.
New flo.* 
68 Cheviotland.
New flo".* 
(Scotland 72 73 75 76 77 
78 80 to 85 86 87 90 91 
92 94 95 96 98 100 101 
102 103 104 106; planted, 
not indigenous).
N.B. The alternative signs 
(* f ) are resorted to in this 
case of the Beech, because 
the reported English coun- 
ties are enumerated in detail ; 
to assist in showing where the 
Beech is apparently non- 
indigenous.
Those counties 
in which it yet occurs truly 
spontaneous can scarcely be 
eliminated from the rest.
990 Carpinus Betulus.
3 Devon south.
Eogers reef 
6 Som. north !
+ 
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.t 
8 south.
Flower cat.+ 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.t 
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
" 
14 east.
Banking sp.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat-t 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.i- 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
82 Northampton.
Druce reef 
84 Gloster west.
Grieve sp.
35 Monmouth.
F. J.
A. Hort.
36 Hereford.
Purchas.t 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.t 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.t 
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.t 
40 Salop ?
47 Montgomery.
(Vize).
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.t 
52 Anglesea.
Davies flo.
(2 30 54 55 56 58 59 62 
to 70 72 76 77 78 81 83 
85 86 87 90 91 92 95 103; 
recorded, but usually as an 
alien).
990 Corylus Avellana.
Counties all, except 74 98 105 
107 112 (110).
Shetland is 
apparently a real exception 
to comital generality.
And 
in the Hebrides the Hazel 
has perhaps been introduced 
again, after having become 
extinct there.
992 Alnus glutinosa.
372 
992 ALNUS GLUTINOSA.
Counties all, except 71 74, 105 
111 112 (109 110).
993 Betula alba.
Counties all, except 42 46 48 
(61) 71 74 93 98 105 110 
112.
(1 18 19 29; re- 
corded as an introduced 
tree).
993 Betula verrucosa, 
pendula.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs ms.
12 Hants north !
Baker cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
14 east.
Bailey rec.
17 Surrey !
21 Middlesex.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
34 Gloster west.
Druce rec.
36 Hereford.
Eev. A.
Ley ms.
53 Line.
s. F.
A. Lees rec.
54 n.
F. A.
Lees rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.f 
00 Clyde-isles.
Bailey rec.
N.B. Seldom recorded unless 
under the aggregate name 
of " alba " ; the only name 
entered in my own notes 
until a recent date.
It 
may prove to be the more 
common of the two segre- 
gates, and to be tacitly 
taken as the type of alba.
993 Betula glutinosa.
pubescens.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
A. Bennett.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Baker cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
53 Line.
s. F..A. Lees rec.
54 n.
F. A.
Lees rec.
65 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Hunt sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
87 Perth west !
89 east !
92 Aber.
south !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
North Highlands ; Bab.
994 BETULA NANA.
373 
994 Betula nana.
68 Cheviotland.
77 Lanark ?
78 Peebles.
81 Berwick ?
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
94 Banff.
' Gordon ms.
95 Elgin ?
Sir W.
Hooker sp.
96 Easterness.
Eutherford sp.
97 Westerness !
05 Boss west.
06 east.
Gordon sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
995 Populus alba.
N.B. My notes show habitats 
for this Poplar in upwards 
of sixty counties, from Corn- 
wall to Cantire and Elgin.
For the majority of those 
counties it is marked as a 
tree likely or certainly intro- 
duced.
It is given as an 
unquestioned native in the 
Floras of Surrey, Essex, 
Herts, Suffolk, Norfolk, 
Cambridge, &c.
In the 
Floras of Tyne and North 
Yorkshire it is reduced to 
the grade of " denizen." 
And if I rightly know the 
distinction between alba and 
canescens, I should now deem 
the latter native, and the 
former planted, as • seen in 
Surrey and elsewhere.
996 Populus canescens.
1 or 2 Cornwall.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
10 "Wight.
More cat.+ 
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
16 Kent west !
17 Surrey !
Syme " sp." 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varennecat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.* 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
82 Northampton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
37 "Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Fraser eat.
40 Salop.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.f 
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.+ 
66 Durham.
" denizen." 
67 Northumberland.
" den." 
68 Cheviotland.
" den." 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.* 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
+ 
81 Berwick.
" planted." 
997 Populus tremula.
Counties all, except 5 32 34 
42 46 47 60 72 73 74 78 
82 84 102 105 112.
Likely 
enough it occurs in nearly 
all of these counties.
It is 
874 
997 POPULUS TREMULA.
marked as an uncertain 
native in the lists for (12 3 
4 11 76 91).
998 Populus nigra.
N.B. This name is enume- 
rated in nearly three score 
local Floras and Catalogues ; 
but is branded as non-indi- 
genous, with some few ex- 
ceptions.
It is allowed as 
indigenous in the Flora of 
. Cambridge, which wiU be 
my excuse for noticing it at 
all in a series disregarding 
the non-indigenous.
999 Salix pentandra.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
88 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
" abundant." 
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
(J.
B. Griffith).
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bailey rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.+ 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.+ 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65- n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland 1 
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
"rare." 
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
78 Kirkcud.
Gray oat.
co.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Bell sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White.) 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.+ 
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.t 
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
10 Hebrides.
Planted ?
(2 8 9 13 14 17 19 20 21 
23 25 36 ; apparently planted 
in these counties ; very rare 
and uncertain in some of 
them).
Bare and (as I now 
think) always planted in 
Surrey.
1001 Salix fragilis, etc.
Counties all, except 4 24 25 
31 32 35 43 45 46 51 57 
60 71 to 74 85 93 94 97 
98 99 108 to 112 (79 106 
110).
• Planted in Boss and 
Hebrides, and perhaps not 
anywhere truly indigenous 
in Scotland.
1002 Salix alba, etc.
1002 SALrS ALBA, ETC.
375 
Counties all, except 4 35 41 
42 43 46 47 48 51 57 60 
61 71 73 74 (79) 82 84 
88 89 94 96 97 (103) 104 
to 112.
Planted in Suther- 
land and Hebrides, and the 
same in many of the other 
counties which have been 
reported for it.
Indeed I 
have never seen the White 
Willow certainly native.
1003 Salix triandra, etc.
Counties all the English, except 
4 5 6 31 33 42 43 45 46 
47 48 51 54 57 58 60 61 
71.
In Scotland, reported 
for 80 81 83 87 90 91, and 
likely not indigenous in 
these six.
1003* Salix undulata.
17 Surrey.
(Baker).
21 Middlesex.
(Baker).
39 Stafford.
64 York m.
west.
(Baker).
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
1005 Salix purpurea, etc.
Counties all, except 12 4 5 6 
10 16 22 31 35 41 to 51 
57 70 71 73 74 75 82 85 
94 to 99 103 to 112.
But 
in several of them it cannot 
be declared "truly indi- 
genous." 
1006 Salix rubra, etc.
Counties all the English, except 
1 to 7 9 10 12 to 15 20 27 
31 33 34 35 37 38 41 42 
43 47 48 to 51 53 54 55 
57 58 60 61 63 69 71.
In 
Scotland * Forbymia is re- 
corded for 81 and 90 ; and 
rubra for 80 83 86 and 90, 
on most unsafe authority.
1007 Salix viminalis.
Counties all, except 4 8 15 31 
41 42 43 45 46 47 57 60 
61 71 72 74 78 79 82 86 
94 96 97- 99 103 to 112.
Planted at Eoddal, in 
Hebrides ?
1008 Salix Smithiana.
acuminata.
Counties all the English, except 
1 4 6 7 8 23 24 25 30 31 
35 42 43 46 47 48 49 50 
51 53 57 60 61 63 71 In 
Scotland, Smithiana (or fer- 
ruginea) is reported for 80 
81 83 84 85 86 90 101 
102 ; and acuminata for 76 
77 81 83 99 102 111.
But 
truly little or no trust can 
be given to these numerals 
either way.
The reported 
localities of the two species 
(if species at all) are inex- 
tricably confused.
Further, 
it is impossible at present 
to eliminate correctly the 
native from the planted 
habitats of this or of any of 
the preceding species of the 
genus.
1010 Salix cinerea, etc.
Counties all, except 24 26 30 
31 35 42 43 48 50 57 72 
73 74 97 98 103 to 109.
376 
SALIX CINEBEA, ETC.
Likely occurs in every 
county.
1011 Salix aurita.
Counties all, except 12 15 28 
31 32 42 43 45 48 51 57 
60 71 73 74 82 98 99 105 
106.
Probably it occurs in 
most of these counties, if 
not in all of them.
1012 Salix caprea.
Counties all, except 1 35 41 
42 45 48 51 57 60 71 to 
74 86 94 98 101 104 to 
112.
Doubtless it occurs in 
all of these counties up to 
no.
100, and perhaps truly 
indigenous in all of them.
1013 Salix nigricans.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton ?
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
80 Eoxb.
.Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston.
83 Edinburgh ?
88 Perth mid !
Syme sp.
89 east !
Gardiner sp.
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber, south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
[3 8 14 17 23 28 36 38 
56 59].
1014 Salix laurina.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
66 York n.
west.
Leefe no.
73.
66 Durham.
New. flo.
67 Northumb.
New flo.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
69 Westm.
Winch sp.
tenuifolia.
88 Perth mid.
" Borrer." 
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
[9 10 20 27 or 28 44 99].
I do not understand this 
Willow myself, and give its 
counties as they are found 
reported .
1015 Salix phylicifolia.
59 Lane, south.
" Dugdale !
" 
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston.
rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
88 Perth mid !
Gardiner sp.
89 east!
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
[1 14 17 28 38 58].
1016 Salix ambigua.
N.B. This is a Willow which 
I do not understand at all 
clearly.
Belying on leaf- 
specimens named by Dr.
1016 SALIX AMBIGUA.
377 
Boswell Syme, I believe to 
have seen it on the heaths 
of Surrey and Berkshire 
and in the East Highlands.
There are records for " am- 
bigua " in 2 3 13 or 14 18 
19 25 27 54 61 67 68 80 
88 89 90 96 or 97 103 
107 109 111.
1017 Salix repens, etc.
Counties all, except 5 7 32 
35 36 42 43 46 47 48 51 
57 60 71 72 74 78 82 84 
86 98 99 105 106; likely 
to be found in all or nearly 
all of these counties.
1021 Salix arbuscula, etc.
72 Dumfries.
" Maughan." 
88 Perth mid !
Balfour sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar ?
" G.
Don." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie g.
99 Argyle.
" Dr. Stuart." 
11 Orkney ?
Neill Tour.
1022 Salix Lapponum.
83 Edinburgh.
Maughan sp.
86 Stirling.
Prof.
Balfour.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Cleghom sp.
92 Aber south !
Macnab sp.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
05 Boss west.
Campbell sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
11 Orkney ?
Neill Tour.
[45 56 66 misnomers ?] 
1023 Salix lanata.
88 Perth mid.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
1025 Salix Myrsinites.
88 Perth mid.
CroaU.
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
Gordon ms.
98 Argyle.
Brit.
flo.
ed.
4. 
06 Boss east ?
'• reported." 
08 Suth west ?
" reported." 
[55 65 ; errors] .
1025*Salix Sadleri.
92 Aberdeen south.
Sadler.
1026 Salix reticulata.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar!' PoUexfen sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham exc.
[49 64 69 70; errors].
1027 Salix herbacea.
42 Brecon.
49 Carnarvon.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle !
Church.
Bab. ms.
3c 
378 
1027 SALDC HERBACEA.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Syme sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1027*Salix Grahami.
08 Sutherland west.
Graham.
1028 Myrica Gale.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 or 6 Som. Trevelyan ms.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey I 
21 Middlesex ?
Ever found ?
22 Berks.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
31 Hunts.
Fryer sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinsou cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Kobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
G. Lloyd ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson eat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Syme.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
G. Macnab sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness!
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Syme.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east !
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east!
08 west 1 Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
1 Brown Campst.
cat.
1029 PINUS SYLVBSTRIS.
879 
1029 Pinus sylvestris.
61 York s.e. Parsons.
"native." 
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. Whitel.
89 east.
[¥.
B. White).
92 Aberdeen south !
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
03 Mull.
Boss cat.
05 Boss west.
Oh. Bab.
ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Lightf.
N.B. The Pine formerly grew 
throughout Britain, as is 
shown by its remains still 
found plentifully in peat 
moors and elsewhere.
Some 
natural forests of it still 
exist in the counties enume- 
rated above ; possibly in some 
few others also.
Thousands 
of seedling fir-trees spring 
up yearly on the heaths of 
Surrey, and counties adja- 
cent ; which grow up to be 
timber trees where allowed 
to remain ; but apparently 
all these can trace back their 
origin to planted trees only, 
or to other immediate off- 
spring of planted trees ; so 
that, they cannot be ac- 
cepted now as purely native 
trees, however thoroughly 
naturalised again.
1030 Juniperus communis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight ?
"one bush only." 
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north, Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman eat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Mrs. Tickner sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.f 
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat, 
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
82 Northampton.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 wegt.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
62 Anglesea.
(J.
E. Griffith).
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
B. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Benfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Boxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
• 
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
CroaU cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
380 
1030 JUNIPBEUS COMMUNIS.
88 Perth mid.
P. M.
Webb reo.
89 east.
(B.
White).
90 Forfar!
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbar ton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy oat.
02 Eb. south.
Grieve.
06 Eoss east !
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Neill tour.
12 Shetland.
Edmon.
flo.
(27 39 55).
[52].
Mr.
Cunnack's Juniper (" var.
prostrata ") from the Lizard, 
Cornwall, is a dwarf form 
much like nana, the next 
species or segregate.
1030 Juniperus nana.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south, Balfour sp.
03 mid, Eoss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Pick.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
N.B. It is difficult to trace any 
absolute line of separation 
between the Dwarf and the 
Common Juniper, much dis- 
. similar as their general as- 
speot certainly is while we   
are contrasting the extreme 
forms only.
[65 76; re- 
quiring verification] .
1031 Taxus baccata.
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
Oakeshott rec.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.' Smith cat.
16 west.
Groves sp.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.* 
26 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.t 
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh!
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.] 
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.t 
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland, 
1081 TAXUS BACCATA.
381 
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
- 
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
76 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
88 Perth mid.
(B.
White).
98 Argyle.
Lightf.
scot.
(1 3 4 10 18 19 21 27 29 
33 55 58 59 61 63 77 81 
83 85 90 91 92 95 96; 
more or less uncertainly in- 
digenous ; perhaps intro- 
duced to most of these 
counties).
1032 Goodyera repens.
70 Cumberl.
F. A.
Lees rec.i- 
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
. Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Boss west.
[11 20 67 70 ; errors] .
1033 Spiranthes 
autumnalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Flower sp.
4 north.
G. Maw ms.
5 Som. south.
Poole ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Miss Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Trevelyan sp.
14 east.
Miss Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Broome sp.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgom.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
68 s, w.
F. A.
Lees cat, 
382 
1033 SPIEANTHES AUTUMNALIS.
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
65 n.
west.
69 Westm.
Q. "Pinder ms.
1034 Spiranthes aestivalis.
11 Hants south.
Brewer sp.
37 Worcester.
Giasing ms.
[3 South Devon ; error ?] 
1036 Neottia Nidus-avis.
1 Corn.
west.
Pascoe ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. s.
F. A.
Lees rec.
6 north.
G. S.
MiU sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Eussell sp.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman- cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Holman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
23 Oxford.
Christy ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 w.
Thwaites oat.
35 Monmouth.
Gissing ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Fraser oat.
40 Salop.
H. Darby ms.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid !
Miller cat.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Eoy mse.
92 Aber.
south.
Lady Huntly.
94 Banff.
Eoy msc.
96 Easterness.
Miss Grant sp.
98 Argyle !
1037 Listera cordata.
1037 LISTEBA COEDATA.
883 
4 Devon north.
Hore sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
9 Dorset.
" Mr. Borrer." 
11 Hants south.
Eoberts ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
48 Merioneth.
Price sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman ms.
57 Derby.
"Mr. Valentine." 
58 Chester.
" Mr. Astley." 
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
Storey sp.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
68 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid !
Worsley ms.
89 east.
90 Forfar I 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. s.
(Colonsay) Grieve.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Boss west.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1038 Listera ovata.
Counties all, except 41 42 46 
71 73 74 78 93 97 101 
104 105 107 110 111 112; 
likely to occur ia most of 
these.
1039 Epipactis latifolia.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
1 1 Hants south !
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts ?
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse cat.
384 
1039 BPIPACTIS LATIFOLIA.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Lees sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn ms.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmancat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler reo.
54 north; Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton oat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman eat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour eat.
86 Stirling.
G. B.
Hunt sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin ?
00 Clyde-isles.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss reo.
N.B. The distribution, as above 
set forth, may partly include 
the next two species or segre- 
gates, long usually included 
under the name of " lati- 
folia." Eeported in 105 and 
107, West Eoss and West 
Sutherland ; but this latter 
intended the ovalis or atro- 
riibens, and probably the 
former also.
' ' True latifolia 
in Moray and Banff" ; J.
Eoy 
ms.
1039 Epipactis violacea.
[E.
media, Bab.) 
3 Devon south ?
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants s.
Marquand rec.
12 north.
Townsend.
14 Sussex east.
" Luxford." 
15 Kent east.
" Haslam." 
17 Surrey !
Linnell sp.
18 Essex south.
Gibs.
flo.
19 north.
Gibs.
flo.
20 Herts.
E. H.
Webbflo.
295.
21 Middlesex ?
T. D.
flo.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
E. B.
S. 2775.
82 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Ku-k eat.
40 Salop.
Babington ms.
49 Carnarvon?
J.E.Bowman.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
57 Derby.
Bab. Man.
1039 EPIPACTIS VIOLACBA.
385 
62 York n.
east.
" Foggitt!
" 
63 s.
west.
" Newb." 
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
70 Cumberland.
Bab. ms.
84 Linlithgow.
" Balfour." 
N.B. This includes the " ]mr 
purata" of English writers ; 
but whether all the authori- 
ties quoted could really dis- 
criminate between this segre- 
gate and the other two, the 
latifolia and ovalis, I am not 
able to say.
The root or 
rootstock, not represented 
in the figure in English Bo- 
tany, differs from those 
shown in the figures of lati- 
folia and atrorubens ; being 
tufted, not creeping.
[46].
1039 Epipactis atrorubens.
[E.
ovalis, Bab.) 
28 Norfolk west.
Bell sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
49 Carnarvon.
Lees.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
N. Y.
hot.
69 Westm.
J. Backhouse.
08 Suth.
west !
Oliver sp.
[10 Wight ; Bromfield] .
N.B. This appears to be the 
true media of Fries, the plant 
so named in the • Manual ' 
being the violacea, including 
purpurata.
1040 Epipactis palustris.
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs.
2 east.
8 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw oat.
6 Som, north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat, 
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren sp.
15 Kent east.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Miss Twining sp.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtou cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bid well sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillw.
ms.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York «.
east.
62 u.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Pringle sp.
3 D 
386 
1040 EPIPACTIS PALUSTEIS.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
James Macnab sp.
87 Perth west.
(P.
B. White.) 
89 mid.
(F.
B. White.) 
04 Ebudes north ?
1041 Cephalanthera 
grandiflora.
6 Som. north.
Flower.
7 Wilts north.
Broome sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
" Ingram." 
12 north.
Herb.
Kidd.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Atkins sp.
17 Surrey.
Linnell sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
22 Berks.
Twining sp.
23 Oxford.
Godley sp.
24 Bucks.
Pamplin ms.
29 Cambridge.
" Wenton." 
30 Bedford.
' ' Anderson .
' ' 
32 Northton.
" Henderson." 
88 Gloster east.
Morl^y sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
48 Merioneth.
Dyer.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
[88 98 100; C.
msifolm.?] 
1042 Cephalanth.
ensifolia.
8 Wilts south." 
9 Dorset.
PleydeU.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
15 or 16 Kent...?
17 Surrey.
Mrs. Eobinson sp.
20 Herts.
28 Oxford.
E. M.
Cox sp.
83 Gloster east.
H.Eobertsms.
34 w.
Eev.H.C.Eeader.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bloxam Sip.
88 Warwick.
BagnaU.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
62 York n.
east.
Bean sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham ms.
66 Durham.
" Mr. Bungey !
" 
67 Northumb.
Leefe.
69 Westmoreland.
75 Ayr. Harper sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
88 Perth mid.
"Bishop." 
89 e.
DrummondHayrec.
98 Main Argyle.
Boss rec.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
" Isle of Mull." 
1043 Cephalanthera rubra.
5 Som. south.
Collins, 1885.
31 Hunts?
"Woodward." 
33 Gloster east.
Wintle.
84 w.
(Beck.
1876.) A.Bennett.
[64 York mid-west] .
1044 Epipogum aphyllum.
36 Hereford.
Extmct ?
1044 Corallorhiza innata.
1044 COHALLOKHIZA INNATA.
887 
75 Ayrshire ?
81 Berwick.
" W.
Shaw." 
83 Edinburgh !
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid.
Extinct ?
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Eoy.
92 Aber.
south.
Dr. Eoy.
96 Easterness.
Miller.
05 Boss west.
06 east ?
Gordon ms.
[16 West Kent ; an error] .
1045 Orchis Mprio.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 "Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
Q. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey!
Alcie Parfett sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
" Very common." 
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
" one locality." 
70 Cumberland.
"T.Benson." 
[83 111; errors both?] 
1046 Orchis mascula.
Counties all, except 41 42 48 
53 71 74 78 96 97 101 
103 to 105 107 108 110 
111.
1048 Orchis ustulata.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
388 
1048 ORCHIS USTULATA.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
22 Berks.
Miss Bell sp.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Blomfield.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
Isaac Brown sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester ?
89 Stafford.
" HewgiU." 
40 Salop ?
58 Line, south.
Bloxam sp.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts ?
57 Derby !
60 Lane.
west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.w. E.B.Bowman sp.
65 n.
west.
, Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
' ' coast.
' ' 
69 Westm.
Gissing, 1867.
70 Cumberland.
1049 Orchis fnsca.
purpurea.
13 Sussex west.
Extinct ?
15 Kent east.
Henfrey sp.
16 Kent west.
Herb.
Borrer.
[17 21 24 53 or 54] .
1049 Orchis militaris.
20 Herts.
E. H.
Webb flo., &c.
22 Berks.
Boswell Syme sp.
23 Oxford.
Boswell Syme sp.
24 Bucks.
Hanbury sp.
[Kent ?
Middlesex ?] 
1049 Orchis Simla 
tephrosanthes.
16 Kent w.Peete in herb.
Borrer.
22 Berks.
Druce.
28 Oxford.
Syme sp.
[17 Surrey ?] 
N.B. These three Orchids (1049) 
have been much confused and 
cross-named; so that only the 
recent reports can be relied 
upon, and if made by expe- 
rienced botanists.
' 1050 Orchis hircina.
15 Kent east.
" Oxenden." 
16 west.
•' Wollaston." 
17 Surrey ?
" Graves." 
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
j;56 57 70 ; errors] .
1051 Orchis pyramidalis.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Sawbridge sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
1051 OBCHIS PYRAMIDALIS.
889 
14 Sussex east.
Hall cat.
16 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Bree sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
'37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Bloxam ms.
50 Denbigh.
Bailey rec.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
"Very rare." 
58 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby J Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
F. M.
Webb cat.
69 Lane, south.- 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Leefe sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
81 Berwick.
" Stuart, 1870." 
02 Colonsay.
Grieve.
[85 ; an error ?] 
1052 Orchis latifolia, Agg.
Counties all, except 18 42 45 
to 47 74 97 69 105 107 
108.
The two segregates are 
treated apart underneath.
1052=:=Orchis maialis.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
17 Surrey !
24 Bucks.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
40 Salop.
Leighton in flo.
48 Merioneth.
(W.
W. Beeves).
53 Line, south.
Fowler ree.
64 north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
69 Lane, south.
E. Brown.
66 Durham.
F. A.
Lees rec.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie ree.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
N.B. This is the more frequent 
segregate, and the one to 
which the name of latifolia 
is usually applied.
But few 
writers have yet distinguish- 
ed between this and the next ; 
so that the localities of both 
390 
1052 OKCHIS MAIA.LIS.
segregates remain imperfect- 
ly recorded.
1052*Orehis incarnata.
1 Corn.
w. Ealfs & Curnow .
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
7 "Wilts north.
Preston ms.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
E. B.
8. 
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 n.
(C.B. Clarke sp.) 
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey.
Syme.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Blow rec.
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
27 Norfolk east.
Ar. Bennett.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
87 Worcester.
Matthews.
40 Salop.
Leighton in flo.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
F. A.
Lees rec.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Webster rec.
64 m.
west.
Webster rec.
67 Northumb.
Brotherstonrec.
70 Cumberland.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Eoy Ire.
93 Aber.
north.
Alex.
Watt.
02 Eb. south.
(Grieve).
1053 Orchis maculata.
Counties all, except 42 46 47 
71 74 80 105.
1054 Orchis Conopsea.
Counties all, except 4 5 41 42 
48 45 46 47 51 53 71 74 
78 79 82 105 107 110.
Extinct in 21 ; and uncer- 
tain in 11 58.
Very scarce in 
112.
Not common, although 
known in about ninety coun- 
ties.
1055 Habenaria bifolia, Ag.
Counties all, except 41 42 46 
53 74 78 79 86 101 103 
105 107 110 111 112.
This 
includes the two segregates 
treated apart below.
1055*Hataenaria eu-bifolia.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.- 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Groves rec.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Crespigny rec.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
87 Worcester.
Matthews.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
1055*HABENAEIA EU-BIFOLIA.
391 
43 Badnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
51 Flint.
Bacon.
54 Line.
n. Fowler & Lees.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
" Mr. Astley." 
, 60 Lane.
west.
Bailey sp.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Djirham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmor.
Matthews.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Ley rec.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
92 Aber.
south.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
N.B. This may truly be the 
more frequent of the two 
segregates ; but being usu- 
ally recorded under the name 
' ' bifolia , ' ' which is applicable 
to either, the records fail to 
be discriminative ; even my 
own notes of former years 
can be used only under the 
joint name, not specially for 
either this segregate or for 
chlomntha.
Another added 
to the many other illustra- 
tions of the confusion and 
inconvenience which arise 
through the use of the same 
name generally for an aggre- 
gate and specially for one of 
its segregates only.
" Com- 
mon throughout the north- 
eastern counties " of Scot- 
land ; John Eoy ms.
1055*Haben.
chlorantha.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
15 Kent east.
Brent sp.
17 Surrey!
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
, Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
35 Monmouth.
Gissing ms.
392 
1055*HABBNAEIA CHLOEANTHA.
36 Hereford.
Purohas ms.
37 Worcester.
Matthews.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley reo.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Thompson ms.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumherland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmor.
Miss Barnard.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray eat.
74 Wigton.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Bell sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour sp.
85 Fife.
Syme ms.
86 Stirling.
Duthie rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Ley rec.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
91 Kincardine.
Eoy ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Roy ms.
98 Argyle.
99 Dimbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Ross rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
1056 Habenaria viridis.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
F. A.
Lees rec.
6 north.
Russell sp.
7 Wilts north.
, Flower cat.
8 south.
Southby sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
17 Surrey.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Roberts ms.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Gissing ms.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
42 Brecon.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson oat.
54 Lino, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
1056 
HABENAKIA VIKIDIS.
393 
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Brand sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar 1 Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Stables sp.
03 mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Lawson oat.
06 Boss east Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
Brown.
Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1057 Habenaria albida.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
E. J.
Price sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Bidwell sp.
58 Chester?
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan eat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 • north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Eastemess !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton !
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy eat.
01 Cantire.
02 Eb. south.
04 north.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
•12 Shetland.
One locality.
[11 32 37 40 ; insufficiently 
vouched, and likely errors] .
105 8 Aceras anthropophora.
8 E 
394 
1058 ACEBAS ANTHKOPOPHOKA.
13 or 14 Sussex.
Borrer oat.
co.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
Dennes ms.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 -west.
Henslow ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
54 Lincoln north.
63Yorks.w.
"Mrs.Broadrick." 
1059 Herminium 
Monorchis.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Jenner sp.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
19 Essex north.
Extinct ?
20 Herts.
S. Lucas sp.
21 Middlesex ?
Extinct ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford ?
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Marsden sp.
34 west.
Eeader.
[69 70 ; need verification] .
1060 Ophrys apifera.
1 Com. west.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
EusseU sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
" Miss E .
Burton !
" 
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, ca.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Holman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Lees sp.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
"Mrs.Skipwith," 
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
G. Lloyd sp.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
53 Lincoln south.
1060 OPHEYS APIPEEA, 
396 
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
One specimen.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 ra.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward ms.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
1060 Ophrys arachnites.
15 Kent east.
Brent sp.
17 Surrey.
"W.Wood, 1838." 
[34.
Phytol.
iv, 1055] .
N.B. It would seem by the 
coloured figures in Mr. Tra- 
herne Moggridge's paper on 
Ophrys, that the present one 
is more closely allied to 
aranifera than to apifera, and 
traceable to it through inter- 
mediate variations.
1061 Ophrys aranifera.
(0.
fucifera).
9 Dorset; Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
14 Sussex east.
HaU cat.
15 Kent east.
French sp.
16 west.
Macnab sp.
17 Surrey.
Extinct?
19 Essex north.
23 Oxford ?
26 Suffolk west.
29 Cambridge, "not recently." 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Extinct ?
[7 20 25 40 53 or 54 64] .
1062 Ophrys muscifera.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
] Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
co.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Ellis sp.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
22 Berks.
W. Hurst ms.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
W. Hurst ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Druce; 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Gissing ms.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester ?
One locality?
40 Salop.
One locality.
52 Anglesea.
" Very rare." 
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
69 Westm.
Gissing &c.
N.B. The localities for this 
and other -species iare de- 
creasing.
1063 Malaxis paludosa.
396 
1063 MALAXIS PALUDOSA.
4 Devon north.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight ?
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
A. WaUis sp.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
20 Herts ?
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Warner sp.
30 Bedford.
39 Stafford.
49 Carnarvon.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Percival.
63 York s.
west.
Whitehead.
65 n.
west.
" Binks." 
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
" Lyall." 
74 Wigton; " Winch." 
75 Ayr. Dunean cat.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
86 Stirling.
Craig Christie.
87 Perth w.
A. C.
Christie sp.
88 mid.
J. Sadler sp.
90 Forfar !
Nieolson sp.
91 Kincardine.
Eoy sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
96 Basterness.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
Church.
Bab. ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson eat.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
" Wilson" sp.
07 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
1064 Liparis Loeselii.
15 Kent east ?
26 Suffolk west.
Bloomfield, 
27 Norfolk east.
Barham sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
31 Hunts; Bree sp.
1065 Cypripedium 
Galceolus.
62 York n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham.
" N.
Usher " sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
[70 ; likely an imposition] .
1066 Iris foetidissima.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack eat.
2 east !
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw eat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman eat.
6 north.
Atwood ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt eat.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.
14 east.
Koper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten eat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
t 
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock eat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
S. Foster sp.
33 Gloster east.
1066 IBIS FCETIDISSIMA.
897 
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
61 York s.
east.
Druce.t 
62 n.
east.
Hincks sp.
64 m.
w. .F. A.
Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Mudd.
66 Durham.
New flo.
(83 85 100; introduced).
1067 Iris Pseudaeorus.
Counties all, except 42 73 74 
89 105.
1068 Gladiolus illyricus.
11 Hants south.
J. E.
Wise sp.
(3 9 10 ; one or two casual 
plants in each).
N.B. In 
one of its places in the New 
Forest it is reported to be 
found in proximity to planted 
Ehododendrons.
Possibly all 
the spots might be connected 
with planted' trees or shrubs.
1069 Trichonema 
Columnse.
3 Devon south.
Trevelyan sp.
1070 Crocus nudiflorus.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.f 
40 Salop.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Whittaker sp.
58 Chester, "truly wild."; J.K.
59 Lane, south !
Scholes sp.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.+ 
N.B. Wild now, but dubiously 
native in England.
1072 Narcissus 
Pseudo-Narcissus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.f 
14 east.
HaU cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.f 
16 west.
Young sp.
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex?
Hind cat.* 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.* 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.f 
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.f 
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
S. Poster sp.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
398 
1072 NABCISSUS PSBttDO-NAllCISSUS.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.t 
45 Pembroke.
" common." 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigli.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.t 
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.t 
56 Notts ?
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.t 
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
Bloxam ms.
70 Cumberland.
(75 76 77 81 83 85 86 87 
'90 95 98 ; not truly wild in 
Scotland ; and perhaps the 
garden plant, Narcissus ma- 
jor, is exclusively the species 
found there in a quasi-wild 
state ; as may be the case 
also in some of the English 
counties).
1073 Galanthus nivalis.
N.B. My collection of notes 
shows the Snowdrop reported 
from 64 counties.
In very 
few instances is it suggested 
to be even probably native, 
unless by collectors whose 
opinion would not be of any 
value in the question.
The 
Flora ofEdinburgh, however, 
Snowdrop, Daffodil 
and Tulip equally as natives.
1074 Leuoojum vernrnn.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
23 Oxford.
N.B. Possibly introduced to 
Dorset ; as being a plant not 
likely to occur therein a truly 
native state.
[38] .
1075 Leucojum sestivum.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
16 Kent west.
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
More.
22 Berks.
Britten " v.
sp." 
23 Oxford.
Eev. A.
Ley sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Herb.
Borrer.
(2 3 18 21 38 67 69; Ukely 
introduced to these counties ; 
also very iU vouched in 
some of them).
1077 Tulipa sylvestris.
N.B. My notes show records 
for this Tulip in upwards of 
thirty counties, most usually 
as an introduced plant.
Dr.
F. A.
Lees thinks that it 
may be indigenous in South- 
west Yorkshire.
1078 Fritillaria Meleagris.
6 Som. north.
" for ages.'' 
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
Bromf.
sp.
17 SuiTey. Christy sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Colemau sp.
1078 FEITILLARIA MELEAGEIS.
399 
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
J. H.
Wilson sp.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bidwell sp.
(2 3 9 13 14 40 55 62 64 
69 70 75 ; introduced to 
these counties, and likely also 
to some of those enumerated 
by name).
1081 Allium Scordoprasum.
59 Lane, south.
Babington sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Hailstone sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Thompson sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Maclagan sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
77 Lanark., Horn.+ 
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
89 Perth east !
Syme sp.
(96).
[1 9 37 90].
1082 Allium oleraceum.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
1870.
10 Wight.
More ms.
1869.
11 Hants south.
Notcuttms.
12 north.
Spicer ms.
1 3 Sussex west.
Crotch sp.
15 Kent east.
" carinatum." 
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Ar. Bennett.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
H. C.
W. 1856.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford, "carinatum." 
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Garner.
+ 
44 Carmarthen.
Oakeshott rec.
45 Pembroke ?
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts.
68 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall s.p.
(91 Kincardine ; D.
G.) 
1082*AlIium carinatum.
53 Line, south.
(17 88h 
Berkeley.
1083 Allium vineale.
400 
1083 AlIilUM VINEALB.
1 Corn, west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Bloxam sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
14 east.
Oakeshott rec.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks!
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
86 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Lloyd sp.
39 Stafford* Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley reo.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarv.
J. E .
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
04 Lino, north, F, A, Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland.
" Benson." 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
1084 A.
sphseroceplialum.
84 Gloster west, Stephens sp.
Stephens in 1847.
Flower 
in 1869 ; so far constant.
1084 A.
Schcenoprasiim.
1 Corn, west !
" sibiricum." 
42 Brecon.
Moggridge.
67 North.
Storey sp.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Winch ms.
69 Lake Lane.
" J.
Seward." 
(36 57 62 77 81 85).
[98 Argyle, very doubtful] , 
1086 ALLIUM UESINUM.
401 
1086 Allium ursinum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat 
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent.
e. G.
B. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Skepper cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Warner sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Dyke sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
MelviU cat.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh!
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinsoii cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler reo.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n- east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland!
Bloxamms.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Isle of Man. Forbes cat.t 
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat, 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Syme sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
G. Lawson ms.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
89 east.
Druce rec.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness !
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Bb. south.
Stables sp.
3r 
402 
1086 ALLIUM UESINUM.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss oat.
04 north.
Gordon ms.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
N.B. The above records leave 
this GarHck unvouohed in 
little over a score of the 
counties.
Thus, while tested 
by its counties, it would 
seem to be one of the " com- 
mon plants." But I have 
myself met with it only once 
in North Britain ; and I 
have never seen it in Surrey 
or counties adjacent ; nor 
have observed it often else- 
where.
1086 Allium triquetrum.
1 Corn.
west.
Ounnaok sp.
N.B. Mr. Cunnack reports this 
"undoubtedly wild " in West 
Cornwall.
The so-called 
Leucojum mstiimm of the Isle 
of Dogs, Middlesex, would 
seem to be this plant.
See 
Comp.
Cyb. Brit.
581.
1087 Gagea lutea.
6 Som. north.
French sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 or 14 Sussex.
17 Surrey ?
20 Herts.
Buxton fide Pryor.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
82 Northton.
Druce.
83 Gloster east.
Woodward sp.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
e. "Mrs. Atwood!" 
68 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland ?
73 Kirkcudb.
Cruickshank sp.
77 Lanark ?
80 Eoxburgh.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife !
1880.
Extinct now ?
86 Stirling.
Croallrec.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar ?
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
1088 Ornithogalum 
pyrenaicum.
6 Som. north !
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Broome sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
22 Berks.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
80 Bedford.
Gloster...?
[3 17 21 40 ; not sufficient- 
ly vouched] .
1091 Scilla verna.
1 Corn.
west.
Pascoe sp.
2 east.
Crotch sp.
3 Devon south.
41 Glamorgan.
' Gutoh sp.
45 Pembrolie.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
1091 SOILLA VEENA.
403 
51 Flint.
Bacon.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
(McAndre-w).
75 Ayr.
81 Berwick.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. s.
(Colonsay).
Grieve.
03 mid.
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[10 21 ; probably errors] .
1092 Scilla autumnalis.
1 Corn, west 1 Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Neve sp.
4 north.
Rogers.
10 Wight.
More sp.
16 Kent west.
Dennes sp.
17 Surrey !
G. Wood ms.
21 Middlesex.
Newbould.
84 Gloster east.
Thwaites cat.
[4 6 39 49 71 ; errors ?] 
1093 Hyacinthus 
non-scriptus.
[Scilla nutans).
Counties all, except 42 74 86 
97 98 103 105 108.
(110 
111 112).
1094 Musoari racemosum.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
(2 3 17 19 to 22 29 55; 
apparently an introduction in 
all these counties ; perhaps 
also in Suffolk and Norfolk).
1095 Lloydia serotina.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
1095 Simethis bicolor.
9 Dorset.
Borrer- sp.
Extirpated before 1875.
1095 Narthecium 
ossifragum.
Counties all, except 7 18 to 21 
23 25 26 32 33 42 53 55 
56 60 61 74 78 82 105.
The drainage and enclosure 
of bogs and marshes no 
doubt must gradually banish 
this plant from many of its 
localities.
Bare in the south- 
eastern counties ; abundant 
in Scotland.
1096 Asparagus officinalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
9 Dorset.
Flower ms.
1869.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
52 Anglesea.
Crotch sp.
(3 6 10 11 14 15 16 17 
18 19 25 27 29 34 45 53 
59 60 82; in most or all 
of these counties the plant 
is simply an escape from 
gardens ; while in the five 
which are cited by name and 
authority, it is the wild pros- 
trate form which is found).
1097 Buscus aculetus.
404 
1097 KUSCTJS ACULEATXJS.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north.
Maw oat.
5 or 6 Somerset...?
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.* 
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south I Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Bromf.
sp.
15 Kent east.
Hind sp.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Varennems.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.* 
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
,25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
27 Norfolk east.
41 Glamorgan.
Henfrey ms.
55 Leicester.
(29 62 64 65 66 68 75 77 
83 85 95 102; planted or 
misreported in these coun- 
ties).
[36 56].
1098 Maianthemum 
bifolium.
62 York n.
east.
Ward sp.
(21 30 59 64 68 84 ; very 
dubiously indigenous in these 
counties, and lost from some 
of them).
Several botanists 
have declared it likely a na- 
tive near Scarborough, in 
North-east Yorkshire).
1099 Convallaria majalis.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
6 Som. north.
Thwaitessp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
1873.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
Ire.
12 north.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 West!
17"Surrey.
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
T. B.
Blow ms.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
, 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
Eeynolds sp.
32 Northton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Ley reo.
85 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
86 Hereford.
Purohas ms.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
50 Denbigh.
J.B.Bowman oat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
55 Leicester.
Howitt sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Eobinson ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
oo.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.w. E.B.Bowman sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
1099 CONVALLAKIA MAJALIS.
405 
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmor.
Bloxam ms.
70 Cumberland.
Introduced ?
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.t 
88 mid.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar.
" one native loc." 
96 Easterness.
Gordon sp.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.f 
(59 68 73 76 77 83 85 94 
95).
Perhaps not indi- 
genous in some of the coun- 
ties named.
The Bev. Dr.
Gordon holds it " clearly in- 
digenous " in 96.
1100 Polygonatum 
verticillatum.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
J. Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
Planted ?
[21 72 ; insufficiently vouch- 
ed] .
Uncertain native.
1101 Polyg.
multiflorum.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Waterfall.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
. Pleydell cat.+ 
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
, 
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Ellis sp.
18 Essex south.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster cast.
43 west.
Leader.
36 Hereford.
39 Stafford.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
(1 2 6 14 20 21 38 59 
62 68 69 70 72 75 76 77 
82 83 86 87 90 91 92 95 ; 
dubiously indigenous in these 
counties, and perhaps also 
in some of those named).
1102 Polyg.
officinale.
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
33 Gloster east.
E. Lees sp.
34 west.
Eeader.
35 Monmouth.
" Gissing." 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Backhouse reo.
57 Derby.
A. Ley ms.
1873.
60 Lane.
west.
Gissing ms.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
E. Brown.
[8 12 16 21 25 27 28 70 
92 ; errors ?] 
1103 Paris quadrifolia.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Pamplin ms.
12 north.
Pamplin ms.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Pamplin ms.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
406 
1103 PARIS QUADEIFOUA.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Notoutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
B. Lees sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino, south.
Fowler reo.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb oat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Bloxam.
70 Cumberland.
Baker ms.
72 Dumfries ?
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Hunter sp.
86 Stirling.
Hennedy ms.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid.
Craig Christie.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
94 Banff.
J. Eoy Lre.
96 Easterness !
"Anderson." 
09 Caithness.
Nioolson cat.
1104 Tamus communis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south, Briggs cat.
4 north !
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.^ Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt eat.
12 • north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent e.
! G.
B. Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind oat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Campbell sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock oat.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
1104 TAMUS COMMUNIS.
407 
28 Norfolk west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notoutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmoutli.
Conway cat.
86 Hereford.
Purclias cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
(W.
W."Eeeves).
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
J. E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
63 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northum.
E. B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Apparently quite absent from 
Scotland, although so nearly 
general to the counties of 
England.
1105 Colchicnm autumnale.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
12 Hants north.
13 Sussex west.
Extinct.
17 Surrey.
Freeman sp.
19 Essex north.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford., 
32 Northton.
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Edmonds sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
" abundant." 
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
• 
89 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Church.
Bab. sp.
58 Chester.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
west.
Baker eat.
63 s.
west.
F. A.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65- n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
" G.
T. Fox." 
69 Westmoreland.
"Woods." 
(21 51).
[3 10 83 87].
1106 Tofieldia palustris.
408 
1106 TOPIELDIA PALUSTEIS.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
R.B.Bowman sp.
88 Perth mid !
89 east !
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Eoy h-e.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Gordon ms.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
04 Eb. north.
05 Ross west.
08 Suth.
west.
[55 " Mr. Moore " in K.
flo.] 
1107 HydroGharis 
Morsus-ranse.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
OoUins ms.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset ?
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Hall oat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat, 
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bab. ms.
27, Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33- Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Withers ms.
37 Worcester.
89 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
- Bid well sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
51 Fhnt !
Robinson eat.
54 Lincoln north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor ms.
60 west.
Linton.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
(10 ; introd.
by Dr. Salter).
[83 Edinburgh ; an error?] 
1107 Anacharis 
Alsinastrtun.
(^Elodea canadensis).
N.B. Recorded in fifty counties 
or upwards, from Cornwall 
to Aberdeen.
Had the in- 
troduction of this water- 
weed chanced to occur a 
century earlier, we should 
now be treating it as an 
aboriginal native of Britain.
Mr. Marshall's account of 
its earlier and successive 
appearances in different lo- 
calities is a valuable bit of 
botanical history.
Pity that 
similar accounts for other 
plants did not commence 
two centuries back ; we want 
such an early history for the 
next plant below.
1108 Stratiotes aloides, 
1108 STEATIOTES ALOIDES.
409 
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Baker sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
54 Lincoln north.
Bogg cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
67 Northum.
R.B. Bowman sp.
(10 17 19 20 22 23 60 62 
65 88 89 90).
[70] .
N.B. Extremely difficult to 
separate the artificial from 
the natural stations for this 
plant, if any of them are 
absolutely native localities 
for it.
I have seen it in the 
province of the Mersey only, 
and distrusted all the few 
localities where observed.
The province of Ouse seems 
the most deserving of 
trust.
1109 Alisma Plantago.
Counties all, except 42 48 74 
78 97 98 103 104 105 107 
to 112.
1110 Alisma ranuncnloides.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
! J.L.Warrenms.
14 east.
Hall cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
(Straker).
48 Merioneth.
(Straker).
49 Carnarvon Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
58 Line, south.
Fowler rec, 
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
69 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
8a 
410 
1110 ALISMA BANUNCULOIDBS.
65 York n.
west.
Ward ms.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Isle of Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Brand sp.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
(F.
B. White).
88 mid.
(F.
B. White').
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables oat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Boss east !
1111 Alisma natans.
40 Salop.
Bloxam sp.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
61 York s.
east.
65 n.
west.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
[36 37; insufficiently vouch- 
ed ; was repens intended ?] 
1112 Actinocarpus 
Damasonium.
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
Extinct ?
17 Surrey.
LinneU sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Kerts." 
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east ?
37 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
40 Salop.
[1 Corn.
west.
Bree] .
1113 Sagittaria sagittifolia.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
11 Kants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Warren sp.
14 east.
Warner sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hmd cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley eat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
. 
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat, 
1113 SAGITTARIA SAGIlTlFOLlA.
411 
32 Northton !
Notoutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
87 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Eussell sp.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
76 Eenfrew.
Hooker sp.
C.f.t 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.t 
(Scotland, planted ?) 
1114 Butomus umbellatus.
1 Corn.
west.
Miss Millett.
3 Devon south.
Eare, if wild.
4 north ?
6 Som. north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
1862.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Warner sp.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Eeynolds sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat 
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
G. Eeece sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
EobLason cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowmanms.
53 Line, south !
54 north 1 Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Dunbavand sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 , m.
w. Tatham eat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
(68 70 83 87 88 89).
412 
1115 TKIGLOOHIN MARITIMUM.
1115 TrigloGhin maritimum.
Counties all the maritime, from 
Cornwall to Shetland, ex- 
cept 35 71 74 97 105 107; 
probably in all of these.
1116 Triglochin palustre.
Counties all, except 16 35 42 
43 47 74 78 86 103 105 
107.
1117 Scheuchzeria palustris.
40 Salop.
56 Notts.
Berkeley (sent to).
58 Chester.
Eev. G.
Pinder sp.
63 York s.
west.
Harrison sp.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
88 Perth mid.
Gardiner sp.
1118 Potamogeton densus.
8 Devon south ?
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt sp.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.!
J. L.Warren ms.
14 east.
J.L.Warren.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Sltopper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
west.
0. Moore flo.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
Oliver sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Maughan sp.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
1119 P.
pectinatus.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow sp.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
1119 POTAMOGETON PEOTINATUS.
418 
12 Hants north I 
13 Sussex w.!
J.L. Warren cat.
14 Sussex east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
W.D. Biden sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Twining sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
(Holmes).
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Hort sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
34 west !
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
" Motley." 
47 Montgomery.
(Hind).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Hall sp.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Whalley sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatliam cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. J.
P. Duncan cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
J. Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
06 Boss east ?
08 Sutherland west ?
09 Caithness.
(Grant).
11 Orkney.
Syme.
[112 P.
filiformis only ?] 
1119*P.
flabellatus.
6 Som. north.
Babington.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU oat.
11 Hants south.
"Borrer." 
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
(Beeby).
15 Kent east.
Syme ms.
16 west.
Syme ms.
17 Surrey !
Syme ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
W. & C.
flora.
21 Middlesex.
Power.
22 Berks.
J. L.
Warren ms.
23 Oxford.
(Druce).
24 Bucks.
(Beeby).
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer.
28 west.
Babington.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
(Ley).
38 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
39 Stafford.
Douglas.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam.
56 Notts.
Mitchell.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
414 
1119*P0TAM0GET0N FLABBLLATtJS.
59 Lane, south.
Whalley.
61 York s.
east.
Newbould.
62 n.
east.
Baker.
64 m.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
Norraan ms.
80 Koxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
N.B. At present it is impos- 
sible to apportion the locali- 
ties of the aggregate jiectina- 
tus between the eu-pectinatus 
and flahellatus, with the sub- 
ordinate scoparius or marinus 
so called.
Perhaps they are 
really all of them one self- 
same species, variable as 
water plants frequently are 
seen to be.
1119 Potamogeton filiformis.
81 Berwick.
E. B.
ed.
3. 
85 Fife.
Boswell Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Mrs. Fotheringham !
06 Boss east.
B. B.
ed.
3_.
08 Sutherland west.
(Miller).
09 Caithness.
(Grant).
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. Through a confusion of 
nomenclature between this 
and scoparius, the "marinus" 
of several collectors, various 
other counties have been 
erroneously reported for the 
present plant.
1120 P.
trichoides.
25 Suffolk east.
Ar. Bennett.
27 Norf.
east.
Barnard sp.
28 west.
Dr. Lowe.
1121 Potamogeton pusillus.
Counties all, with rather nume- 
rous exceptions, probably 
because it is often over- 
looked by collectors or 
deemed too frequent to re- 
quire special records.
My 
notes give no authorities for 
counties 32 35 42 43 46 
47 48 53 57 74 78 79 86 
87 88 97 98 100 103 to 
108 110 112.
1121 P.
compressus, Sm.
(P.
mucronatiis, Schrad).
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
12 Hants north.
(Beeby).
13 Sussex west.
(Beeby).
14 east.
(Mennell).
15 Kent east.
(Newbould).
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
22 Berks.
(Druce).
23 Oxford.
(Druce).
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
29 Cambridge.
(Ar. Bennett).
32 Noi-thton.
Druce rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
55 Notts.
T. H.
Cooper sp.
68 Chester.
(J.
L. Warren).
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
73 Kirkcudbright.
(Coles).
85 Fife.
Miss Boswell sp.
90 Forfar.
(Sturrock).
99 Dunbarton.
(Gibson).
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. Greatly confused with 
pusillus on one side, and with 
acutifolius or obtusifolius on 
the other side.
It is re- 
ported from many other 
counties besides those above 
selected as being about the 
best vouched ; but some of 
the " sps." are in leaf only, 
and not quite certain.
1123 POTAMOGETON OBTUSIPOLIUS.
415 
1123 P.
obtusifolius.
(P.
gramineus, Sm.) 
12 Hants north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east!
Smith cat.
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
(Hind).
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer.
28 west ?
32 Northton.
Druoe rec.
38 Gloster east ?
36 Hereford.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick.
Ku-k sp.
89 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Bloxam ms.
47 Montgomery.
(Hind).
49 Carnarvon.
Bailey.
51 Flint ?
52 Anglesea.
Bobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 n.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
(Linton).
61 York s.
east ?
62 n.
east.
Bloxam ms.
63 s.
west.
Carr rec.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
78 Kirkcudb.
(McAndrew).
77 Lanark.
Gourlie sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson eat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
(Brotherston).
85 Fife.
Syme eat.
87 Perth west.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
[1 3 6 9 70 83 111 ; these 
are insufficiently vouched] .
N.B. The note of interrogation 
is added to several of the 
counties named, to indicate 
the desirability of verifica- 
tion afresh.
It is the gra- 
mineus of several botanists, 
a name variously applied, 
and so better given up.
1123 P.
acutifolius.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.
14 east.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Groves.
27 Norfolk east.
54 Lincoln n.
" Banks hb." 
61 York s.
east.
(Herb.
Smith).
62 n.
east?
"reported." 
N.B. Distribution imperfectly 
ascertained ; the plant itself 
perhaps confused with obtu- 
sifolius, under name of gra- 
mineus.
1123 P.
zosterifolius, Schum.
(P.
compressm, L., non Sm.) 
18 Essex south.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
L:vine sp.
33 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
27 Norfolk east.
E. bot.
ed.
3. 
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
87 Worcester.
Matthews, 
416 
1123 POTAMOGETON ZOSTBBIFOLIUS.
88 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Cooper sp.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
62 York n.
e. (Herb.
Smith).
89 Perth east.
Arnott ms.
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
[13 17 85; errors].
1124 Potamogeton crispus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 "Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notoutt ms.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Seeley sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Skepper.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notoutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton I Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas eat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Lincoln south.
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt eat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
w. Tatham oat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Ohver ms.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
78 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Dunoan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme eat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
1124 POTAMOGETON CRISPUS.
417 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
(Fortescue.) 
[112 Shetland ; error ?] 
1125 P.
perfoliatus.
Counties all, except 2 5 10 26 
34 35 42 43 45 46 47 48 
50 51 61 74 78 79 82 84 
86 96 to 99 101 103 105 
106.
1126 Potamogeton lucens.
8 Devon south.
6 Som. north !
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south 1 
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren ms.
15 K;ent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Warren ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
(Dr. Hind).
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
(Herb.
Mus. Brit.) 
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
Purohas sp.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
" Motley." 
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Murray sp.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Fotheringham sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
99 Argyle.
(Bolton King).
[10 111 112; errors?] 
1126*P.
salicifolius.
3h 
418 
ll26*POTAMOGBTON SALICIFOLIUS.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
1126*P.
decipiens, 
6 Som. north.
(Mrs. Hopkins).
36 Hereford.
(Ley).
80 Eoxburgh.
(Brotherston).
81 Berwick.
(Brotherston).
90 Forfar.
(Sturrock).
1127 P.
praelongus.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
22 Berks.
Dyer sp.
23 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Pryor.
37 Worcester ?
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
(Beckwith).
53 Lincoln south.
62 York n.
east ?
' 
63 s.
west ?
68 Cheviotland.
Johnston ms.
69 Westmoreland.
Borrer.
78 Kirkcudb.
, (McAndrew).
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Johnston ms.
83 Edinburgh ?
85 Eife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
88 Perth m.
Drummond-Hay.
89 east.
(E.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin ?
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
09 Caithness.
(Grant).
[17 64; errors?] 
1129 P.
heterophyllus.
4 Devon north ?
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
9 Dorset ?
12 Hants n.
! J.L. Warren ms.
14 Sussex east.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Coleman ms.
20 Herts ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
39, Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
60 west.
(Bailey).
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
0. Moore sp.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Thompson sp.
69 Westmoreland.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
(E.
J. Bennett).
75 Ayr.
"P.
Maclagan." 
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
1129 POTAMOGETON HETEKOPHYLLDS.
419 
87 Perth west.
Brand (?
sp.) 
88 mid.
(P.
B. White).
89 east.
(Sturrook).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kinoard.
" Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon (?
sp.) 
96 Easterness.
Stables.
98 Argyle.
(E.
T. Bennett).
00 Bute.
Turner.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour oat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suther.
west.
(Miller).
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
(? sp.) 
N.B. This enumeration of coun- 
ties is to be received with 
caution.
Examples of the 
pseudo-Jiidtans state of P.
ob- 
longm are occasionally mis- 
labelled as heterophyllus ; and 
it is difficult to avoid con- 
fusion between this present 
and the next species, par- 
ticularly among early or 
imperfect specimens in the 
herbarium.
1129*P.
nitens.
67 Northum.
Brotherston rec.
68 Cheviot.
(Brotherston).
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
88 Perth mid.
Syme sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
(Sturrock).
93 Aber.
n. E.
C. rep.
3 870.
95 Elgin.
" Wilson." 
96 Easterness.
" Stables." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hunt sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. Confused with the lan- 
ceolatus on the one side, and 
with heterophyllus on the 
other side.
The doubts 
shown with some of the 
specimens (?
sp.) cited un- 
der the preceding species 
are queries whether they 
ought to be assigned to this 
present species instead.
1129-P.
Zizii.
52 Anglesea.
Wilson.
69 Westm.
(Bailey).
70 Cumberland.
(Bailey).
73 Kirkcudb.
(McAndrew).
79 Selkirk.
(Eenton).
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
87 Perth west.
P. B.
White.
89 east.
(Dr. Traill).
90 Forfar.
(Sturrock).
1130 P.
lanceolatus.
29 Cambridge.
Ar. Bennett sp.
52 Anglesea.
Bowman sp.
N.B. Eecorded from fourteen 
other counties also, but sup- 
posed to be misnomers in 
all of them.
1131 P.
rufeseens.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
8 Devon south ?
5 Som. south.
Collins ms.
6 Som. north.
(Baker).
8 Wilts south.
(Lynch.) 
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydell.
11 Hants south.
Groves sp.
12 n.
(Beeb.&A.Bentt.) 
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
17 Surrey !
19 Essex north.
Hall sp.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
420 
1131 POTAMOGETON KUFESCENS.
24 Bucks.
Britten " v.
sp." 
26 Suffolk west.
(Dr. Hind).
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
37 Worcester.
Matthews.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.' 
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
G. E.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Merrick sp.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
West rec.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman sp.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp, 
73 Kirkcudb.
(McAndrew).
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Twynam sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
N.B. Some confusion has taken 
place between this species 
and the pseudo-fiuitans state 
of polygonifolius, as also oc- 
casionally between this and 
heterophylliis, and even lucens 
and pralongiis.
1132 P.
" natans," Agg.
Counties all, except 34 42 43 
46 48 70 74 78 86 97 108 
104 105 107.
But, as thus 
indicated, it must take in 
also many records which 
truly belonged to polygoni- 
folius, long included with 
this species under the one 
name of " natans." 
1132 P.
natans (true).
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
8 Wilts south.
Rogers rec.
10 Wight.
More.
11 Hants south.
J. Groves sp.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
14 Sussex east.
Roper.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey 1 
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Pryor.
21 Middlesex.
J.L.Warren ms.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Pryor.
24 Bucks.
Druce rec.
25 Suffolk e.
Bloomfleld cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Trimmer flo.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
40 Salop.
(Herb.
Mus. Brit.) 
46 Cardigan.
(Straker).
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merionetli.
(Reeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Newbould ms.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts.
(Cooper).
1132 POTAMOGETON NATANS (tKUE).
421 
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
62 n.
east.
Bailey rec.
63 s.
west.
F. A.Leesrec.
64 m.
-w.
F. A.
Lees rec.
67 Nor thumb.
(Storey).
76 Renfrew.
(Renton).
68 Cheviotland.
Border flo.
69 Westm.
(Ley).
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
77 Lanark.
Clydesdale ilo.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington .
(Miller) .
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour oat.
86 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
92 Aber.
south.
(Mennell).
00 Clyde-isles.
Clydes.
flo.
08 Sutherl.
west.
(Miller).
09 Caithness.
(Grant).
11 Orkney.
Syme 1873.
12 Shetland.
(Herb.
Mus. Brit.) 
N.B. Likely to occur in most 
of the other counties ; but 
it has become necessary to 
reject all records made by 
botanists who either neg- 
lected or were insufSciently 
prepared to separate true 
nutans from the more abun- 
dant poly gonif alius, 
1133 P.
polygonifolius.
[P.
oblonf/iis, Vir.).
1 Corn.
west.
Scilly list.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More oat.
. 
11 Hants south !
Warren mg 
12 Hants north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
16 west.
Groves.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
37 Worces.
(Herb.
Mus. Brit.) 
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
" flidtans.'' 
43 Radnor.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
H. L.
Jones.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Hort sp.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Lewis.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Hunt sp.
69 Lane, south.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
" fluitans." 
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
Hort ms.
422 
1133 POTAMOGETON POLTGONIFOLIUS.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
71 Man.
(Murray).
75 Ayr.
76 Eeufrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
(Brotherston cat.) 
80 Eoxburgh.
(Brotherston).
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Oroall rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme.
cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 , east !
90 Forfar !
Sturrock.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
98 north.
94 Banff.
96 Basterness !
98 Argyle.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour oat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Syme ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
(Grant").
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. This is perhaps the com- 
monest species of its genus, 
and seems likely to occur in 
every county ; many of its 
localities having been re- 
corded for the aggregate 
natam.
1134 F.
plantagineus.
6 Som. north.
(Herb.
Borrer).
14 Sussex east.
Roper.
15 Kent east !
20 Herts.
Webb flo.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper fio.
26 west.
(Dr. Hind).
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Dr. Lowe.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
40 Salop.
(Sergeantson).
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Babington.
54 Line, north.
P. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
61 York s.
east.
Babington.
62 n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
y. 
66 Durham.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
Oliver.
68 Cheviotland.
New flo.
70 Cumberland.
Hort ms.
81 Berwick.
Border flo.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Babington.
[3 doubtful.
10 11 64 98 
errors] .
1135 Ruppia maritima, Agg.
Counties 1234569 10 
11 13 1415 16 18 19 27 
28 29 41 44 45 48 49 50 
51 52 58 59 62 66 67 68 
70 73 74 75 82 90 91 94 
95 96 97 101 102 110 111 
112.
In all these recorded 
under the aggregate name 
of maritima ; and usually in 
such wise as to prevent an 
assignment of the locaUties 
specially to one of its two 
segregates treated below.
1135*Bappia spiralis.
1136*KUPPIA SPIRALIS.
423 
6 Som. north.
Hort sp.
10 Wight.
J. Groves sp.
11 Hants s.
J. L.
Warren rec.
13 Sussex west.
Hunt sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
19 Essex north.
Syme sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 -west.
Fryer.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
Warren & Webb.
62 York n.
east.
" Baker." 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Balfour sp.
11 Orkney ?
1135'''Ruppia rostellata.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 n'orth.
Eogers rec.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Bromfield.
13 Sussex west.
" Borrer." 
14 east.
Hemsley.
15 Kent east.
18 Essex south.
Gibson flo.
19 north.
Gibson flo.
28 Norfolk west.
Syme sp.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
33 or 34 Gloster...?
Eng.bot.3.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
58 Chester.
Lewis rec.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
-Storey sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
82 Haddington.
Eng. hot.
3. 
91 Kincardine.
D. Guide.
94 Banff.
Dickie Guide.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
1136 Zanuichellia palustris, 
Aggregate.
1 Corn.
west.
Curnow.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 , north.
Hort sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 s.
J. L.
Warren ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat' 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
14 east.
Norman sp.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 n.
Greenwood sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
J.L. Warren ms.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 Suffolkwest.
Skepper oat.
72 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobmson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
64 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
424 
1136 ZANNICHELLIA PALUSTEIS.
57 Derby.
Kev. A.
Ley sp.
58 Chester.
Miss Burton sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
'61 York s.
east.
Moore flo.
~ 
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
P. Hort sp.
67 Noi-thumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
71 Man. J.
Macnab ms.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery ms.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
06 Boss east.
Syme sp.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
1136='-Zann.
pedicellata.
2 Corn., east.
Briggs.
3 Devon sonth.
Briggs.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
16 west.
28 Norfolk west.
Fryer sp.
63 York s.
west.
87 Perth west.
1136*Zann.
polycarpa.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
1137 Zostera marina.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Poole ms.
9 Dorset.
Twining sp.
10 Wight I More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
13 Sussex west.
Gibson sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purohas cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard m^s.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
66 Durham.
Lawson sp.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton sp.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Lawson oat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Basterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Lyon sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss rec.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
cat.
06 Eoss e.
Dr. G.
Johnston.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst, cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
" common." 
12 Shetland.
" common." 
1137 Zostera nana.
1137 ZOSTEKA MABINA.
425 
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs.
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
9 Dorset.
Borrer sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Gibson sp.
49 Carnarvon.
More.
52 Anglesea.
Asoherson ms.
66 Durham.- Trevelyan sp.
67 Northumberl, Storey sp.
75 Ayr. Prof.
Arnott ms.
90 Forfar.
" Carnegie !
" 
98 Argyle.
" Nichol !
" 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[Ill Orkney list; an error] .
1137*Naias flexilis, 
89 Perth east.
Sturrock.
1138 Lemna minor.
Counties all, except 42 43 74 
78 88 89 97 105 107 108 
110 112.
1139 Lemna gibba.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Butler sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Gibson ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat, 
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32.Northton !
34 Gloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
67 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.!
83 Edinburgh.
Syme sp.
85 Fife ?
Syme ms.
1840.
1140 Lemna polyrhiza.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Withers sp.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper ms.
15 Kent e.
! G.
B. Smith cat.
16 west.
Eoper.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
3 I 
426 
1140 LEMNA POLYEHIZA.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Broome sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites oat.
86 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Mint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Hewitt cat.
58 Chester !
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
e. Baker " v.
sp." 
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
'77 Lanark.
Arnott sp.
Hen.i- 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
• 1141 Lemna trisulca.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Withers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Warren ms.
15 Kent.
e. !
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper eat.
27 Norfolk east.
Mann sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas eat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Church.
Bab. sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east..
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
1141 LEMNA TRISULCA.
427 
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.+ 
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington ?
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling .
' ' Hunt herb .
' ' 
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Sturrock.
91 Kincardine.
" Mr. Croall." 
94 Banff.
-'Dr. Stewart." 
1141*Lemna arhiza.
Wolffia arhiza.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
Spicer ms.
18 Essex south.
21 Middlesex !
Syme sp.
[Hants ; an error] .
1142 Arum maculattim.
Counties 1 to 70, except 42 46 
48.
72 Dumfries.
" Stevens." 
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfre\?.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick, "wild." 
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
00 Clyde-islea.
Hennedy cat.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.* 
(71 85 87 90 92 94 95).
1142* Arum italicum.
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs.
9 Dorset.
(Ridley &Fawoett).
10 Wight.
A. G.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
14 Sussex east.
Herb.
Borrer.
1142'"Calla palustris.
17 Surrey.
Mrs. Gardiner sp.
N.B. This plant is not indi- 
genous in England, although 
now so well established in a 
secluded pond, amid pine 
woods on the still non- 
enclosed common between 
Esher and Cobham, that it 
presents an equal semblance 
of genuine nativity as the 
Hypericum elodes, among 
which it creeps along the 
shallow margin of the pond.
It is stated to have been 
planted there by " a medical 
man ; " — a statement which 
may well be credited, as 
medical men usually succeed 
only in doing mischief when 
unwisely they interfere with 
nature.
This record is made 
here, to prevent future bo- 
tanists being deceived by the 
doctor's reprehensible expe- 
riment in science.
1143 Acorus Calamus.
6 Som. north.
CoUins ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
1873.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
"Dr. White." 
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey !
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex I J.L. Warren ms.
428 
1143 AOOBUS CALAMtJS.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Mrs. James sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
30 Bedford.
HiUhouse cat.
87 Worcester.
(E.
Lees).
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.t 
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
"Dr. Lloyd.-I-" 
55 Leicester.
Church.
Bab. sp.
56 Notts.
Dr. Mitchell sp.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.* 
(3 4 13 20 29 83 or 34 
37 41 47 60 65 75 76 
77 ; introduced to these 
counties, or insufficiently 
vouched), 
1144 Sparganium 
minimum.
1 Wight .
' ' Bromf .
herb .
" 
11 Hants south.
H. Groves sp.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
19 Essex north.
Gibson fio.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
35 Monmouth ?
Authority lost.
86 Hereford.
Purchas flo.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
41 Glamorgan.
"Thohipson.' 
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
Eobinson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker bot.
65 York n.
west.
Baker bot.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr ?
Clydesdale flo.
76 Eenfrew.
Gourlie sp.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour sp.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar.
Croall.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
98 Argyle.
Clydesdale flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Clydesdale flo.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss cat.
07 Suth.
east.
Oliver sp.
08 west !
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
I144*S.
affine.
17 Surrey.
Borrer herb.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
54 Lincoln north !
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
70 Cumberland.
Bailey rec.
88 Perth mid.
E. Woods.
89 east.
Dr. Syme.
91 Kincardine.
E. B.
3. 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Eng. Bot.
ed.
3. 
96 Easterness.
Keith sp.
97 Westerness !
11 Ork. MissFortescue f.
Syme.
12 Shetland.
"Dr. Fleming !
" 
N.B. The earlier records for 
this or the preceding segre- 
gate were made under the 
aggregate name "naixms"; 
and thus they cannot be 
assigned now specially to 
either one of the segregates.
Besides the counties above 
enumerated, under one or 
other, the aggregate "na- 
tans" has been reported also 
from 5 6 7 9 20 25 28 
39 40 50 51 52 55 56 59 
1144*SPAKGANIUM AFPINE.
429 
61 66 68 69 72 73 79 80 
81 82 84 85 87 93 95 99 
104 105 106 110 112.
The 
larger segregate of natmis, 
that named a.ffine, is so diffi- 
cult to distinguish from the 
floating state of simplex that 
I now question it in Surrey, 
where it was believed to 
have been seen by myself 
near Pirbright ; but only 
unreached lq the water, and 
some years ago.
1145 S.
simplex.
Counties all, except 5 35 46 
47 48 74 78 79 82 84 86 
88 89 96 97 99 101 104 
105 107 108 110 112 [111] .
Apparently scarce in North 
Britain, but included in the 
Caithness catalogue by Dr.
Eobert Brown, as also in 
that for Eoss by the Eev.
Dr. Gordon.
1146 S.
ramosum.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 
84 86 88 89 97 98 100 
105 107 108.
1147 Typha latifolia.
Counties all in South and Mid 
Britain, except 4 6 35 42 
43 48 60 61 71.
In North 
Britain it is reported from 
72 73 75 76 77 80 to 84 ; 
and as a doubtful native 
from 79 85 90 100 111.
1148 Typha angustifolia.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack eat.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south !
J. E.
Wise.
13 Sussex west.
J.L.Warren.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind oat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line.
s. Fowler & Lees ree.
54 north.
Thompson.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
430 
1148 TYPHA ANGUSTIFOLIA.
64 York m.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
E. B.
3. 
77 Lanark.
" A.
M. Dunlop." 
83 Edinburgh Balfour ms.* 
85 Fife.
Arnott, " truly wUd." 
1149 Eriocaulon 
septangulare.
OSBb.mid.
"Dr.Maccullooh." 
04 north.
Stables sp.
1150 Juncus filiformis.
69 Westmoreland.
Bay.
70 Cumberland !
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
[21 58 88 111 ; errors] .
1151 J.
conglomeratus.
Counties all, except 74 97 98 
99 105 107 108.
1151.* J.
efifusus.
Counties all, except 42 46 74 
105 110.
1151*J.
diffusus.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
6 Som. north.
Hopkins sp.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east.
Baker.
17 Surrey !
Borrer ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper ms.
31 Hunts !
33 or 34 Gloster.
Eev.A.Leyms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Wore.
Towndrow fid.
More.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
54 Line.
n. E.
H. Webb sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west?
"Ilkley." 
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
67 Northumberl.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Oliver sp.
87 Perth west.
Bab. man.
[28 58 85 91 ; eiTors] .
1152 J.
glaucus.
Counties all in South and Mid 
Britain, except 24 33 42 
46 47 48 61 71 74 84.
In 
North Britain, reported as 
underneath : — 
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Gordon ms.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
[Ill Orkney; MissBoswell] .
1153 J.
balticus.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Loch Drum.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
" Cullen Sands." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
1153 J0NCUS BALTICUS.
431 
96 Easterness.
Gordon sp.
06 Boss east.
Syme sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
1154 J.
maritimus.
1 Corn, west !
Bailey ms.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon soutli.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 - east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
41 Glamorgan.
Withers ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Eussell sp.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
50 Denbigh.
J.E. Bowman ms.
51 FUnt !
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north !
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Hind sp.
70 Cumberland.
Bailey rec.
72 Dumfries.
Gordon ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Landsborough hot.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Arnott ms.
85 Fife ?
Mackay in B.
F. 
91 Kincardine.
Murray.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Arnott ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfoui- cat.
1155 J.
acutus.
1 Corn, west ?
3 Devon south.
4 north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east !
Buokland sp.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Newbouldms.
41 Glamorgan.
Woodward sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Eussell sp.
48 Merion.
J. E.Bowman ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
[9 18 33 51 69 73 ; insuf- 
ficiently vouched, and pro- 
bably erroneous] .
1156 J.
acutiflorus.
Counties all, except 30 31 41 
42 72 73 74 80 103 104 
105 107; but likely to be 
found in every county, un- 
less 30 and 81 should prove 
real exceptions to a comital 
generalitj'.
1157 J.
lamprocarpus.
432 
1157 JUNCUS LAMPROOARPUS.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
80 97 104 105 107; doubt- 
less to be found in all of 
these seemingly exceptional 
counties.
1158 J.
obtusiflorus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
Hutchison.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 "Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Bligli sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Roper ms.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Baker sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt oat.
83 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms, 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
Dr. Wood sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
Moore flo.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
" Moore." 
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Eev. J.E. Leefe.
67 Northumberland.
73 Kirkcudb.
Q. Lloyd ms.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Clydesdale flo.
77 Lanark ?
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
[83-84 90; errors?] 
N.B. It is likely that these 
three do not exhaust the 
counties that have been er- 
roneously reported for this 
rush, which seems to be 
occasionally confused with 
both supinus and lamprocar- 
pus.
The Surrey locality, 
given in ' New Botanist's 
Guide ' on the authority of 
" Watson sp." was probably 
an error ; the specimen being 
young, and paler and more 
divaricate than Usual with 
lamprocarpus, it may have 
been mistaken at the remote 
date of 1834, and incorrectly 
assigned to the present spe- 
cies instead.
1159 J.
supinus.
J. uliginosus.
Counties all, except 7 24 83 
84 42 57 61 72 78 74 79 
80 93 103 105; likely to 
occur in every county or 
nearly so.
1160 JUNCUS CCENOSTTS.
433 
1160 J.
coenosus.
J. Gerardi.
1 Corn.
west.
Scilly flo.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat.
4 .
north !
Eussell sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north ?
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight !
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt sp.
13Sussexw.
! J.
L.Warren cat.
14 e.
J. L.Warren ms.
15 Kent east !
16 west !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Hall sp.
21 Middlesex.
Crespigny.* 
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Blow rec.
40 Salop ?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
53 Line, south !
54 north !
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Dickinson sp.
60 west !
61 York s.
e. P.
A. Lees rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Parsons ree.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westm.
P. A.
Lees rec.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Brand sp.
85 Pife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96^ Easterness.
Stables eat.
98 Argyle !
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson eat.
09 Caithness.
Grant.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. This maritime segregate, 
and the other inland one 
more specially named " com- 
pressus," are distinguished 
with difficulty, and their lo- 
calities are thus much con- 
fused.
The true or segre- 
gate compressiis, apart from 
Gerardi, occurs by the 
Thames in Surrey and Mid- 
dlesex, the only counties in 
which it has been seen by 
myself.
It has been reported 
also from the inland coun- 
ties 7 17 21 22 23 30 32.
36 37 39 40 55 56 63 65 
80 89, as likewise from seve- 
ral of the maritime counties ; 
but in these latter perhaps 
usually the Gerardi was the 
plant observed.
1162 J.
bufonius.
Counties all, except 49 74 104 
105 ; doubtless it occurs in 
3 K 
iU 
1162 JUNCUS BUFONIUS.
every county.
1163 J.
squarrosus.
Counties all, except 31 33 35 
36 47 71 72 74 105.
1164 J.
castaneus.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
soutli !
Dickie oat.
97 Westerness.
Sadler reo.
99 Dunbarton ?
Balfour sp.
[3 Soutli Devon, certainly 
an error.
66 Durham pro- 
bably an en-or] .
Dr.Balfour's 
specimen may have come 
from a locality in Argyle, 
not in Dunbarton.
1165 J.
trifidus.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness 1 
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland.
[70 Eobson in Phytol.] 
1166 J.
capitatus.
1 Corn.
west.
Beeby sp.
1872.
1166*J.
pygmseus.
1 Corn.
west.
Beeby sp.
1872.
N.B. This should be looked for 
in other counties, as it may 
have been passed by for a 
small bufonim, to which it 
has much first glance resem- 
blance.
1167 J.
biglumis.
88 Perth mid !
Hooker sp.
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
04 Eb north.
Lawson sp.
[86 89 90 92 94 97 100] .
1168 J.
triglumis.
49 Carnarvon.
Babington sp.
65 York n.
west.
" Planted." 
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness..
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson oat.
05 Eoss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Campbell sp.
12 Shetland.
1169 Luzula sylvatica.
Counties all, except 8 13 25 
26 31 32 42 46 74 78 100 
105.
Not frequent in the 
south - eastern counties ; I 
have not seen it in Surrey 
or counties adjacent (West 
1169 LUZULA SYLVATIOA.
436 
Kent excepted), although it 
does occur locally in each 
of them.
1170 L.
pilosa.
Counties all, except 42 48 60 
74 78 79 .89 98 104 105 
108 ; probably in every 
county.
1171 L.
Forsteri.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
6 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north !
8 Wilts south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
G. E.
Smithms.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
34 Gloster west.
Hort sp.
85 Monmouth.
Hort ms.
86 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bloxam sp.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
[8.9 70 75 90 ; counties in- 
sufficiently vouched] .
1172 L.
campestris.
Counties all, except 41 46 53 
74 79 98 102 103 105 107; 
doubtless to .
be found in 
every county.
1173 L.
congesta.
L. multiflora.
Counties all, except 30 33 42 
48 50 67 60 71 74 75 79 
89 93 94 95 103 104 105 
106 108 112; likely to be 
found in all, or nearly all 
of the counties, but liable to 
be passed by as if simply a 
form of campestris.
1174 L.
arcuata.
89 Perth east ?
90 Forfar ?
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
08 Suth.
west.
Campbell sp.
1175 L.
spicata.
49 Carnarvon.
69 Westmoreland.
86 Stirhng.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth w.
P. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid !
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Church Bab. ms.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland, 
436 
1176 CYPEEUS LON&US.
A 
1176 Cyperus longus.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok, 1866.
6 Som. north.
Flower ms.
8 Wilts south.
F. White sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Bell Salter sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
[27 39; errors?] 
1177 C.
fuscus.
17 Surrey!
One locality.
21 Middlesex.
Sown.
N.B. Dubiously native.
[62] .
The single Yorkshire locality 
is now admitted to be wrong ; 
and as it was alleged to have 
'" beenoonfirmedasecondtime, 
there would seem to have 
5"^^been imposition added to 
possible error in the first in- 
stance.
Dr. J.E.Gray wrote 
to me that " Haworth never 
made a secret of sowing the 
Cyperus fuscus " in the Chel- 
sea station ; and he suspects 
that it " was equally sown at 
Godalming." The alleged 
Yorkshire specimens were 
sent to that county from the 
Shalford locality, between 
Guildford and Godalming.
1178 Cladium Mariscus.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaok cat.
5 or 6 Somerset ...
? 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Extinct ?
37 Worcester.
Extinct.
88 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
Howitt ms.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Moggridge sp.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
(Straker).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
Eobinson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotl.
Eichardson sp.
70 Cumberland.
74 Wigton.
81 Berwick.
90 Forfar.
Extinct ; E.
B. 8.
08 Suth.
west.
Campbell sp.
1179 Sehoenus nigricans.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnaoji; cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Winch ms.
17 Surrey.- 
18 Essex south.
Extinct ?
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west, Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
1179 SCHCENUS NIGRICANS.
437 
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Nevvbould cat.
32 Northton, Druoe rec.
37 Worcester.
Extinct ?
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembrolie.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarv.
J.E.Bowman ms.
50 Denbigh.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester, F.
M. Webb sp.
60 Lane.
west.
Bailey rec.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
e. Baker cat.
co.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Dm'ham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincard.
" Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
•96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hooker sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Syme ms.
04 north.
Lawson cat, 
05 Boss west.
Oh. Bab.
ms.
06 east, Ch. Bab.
sp.
07 Suth.
east.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
08 Suth.
west !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
1180 Rhyncospora alba.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Brigg^s cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 or 6 Som. Southby cat.
8 WUts south..
Rogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notoutt qat.
12 n.
! J.
L. Warren ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey !
Warren ms.
22 Berks.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge, "lost." 
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley.
37 Worcester.
Freeman.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Howitt sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Dillwyn.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley eat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line.
n. Lees & Fowler.
55 Leicester ?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F, M, Webb cat, 
438 
1180 EHYNCOSPOBA ALBA.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Stables sp.
72 Dumfries.
Balfour sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gordon ms.
74 Wigton.
Syme sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
Croall rec.
88 mid.
Balfour 1872.
90 Forfar, 
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westemess.
Miss Twining.
98 Argyle.
Gordon ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
05 Boss -West.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
07 Suth.
-east.
Campbell sp.
08 west !
Graham sp.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
One locality.
[East Lowlands ?] 
1181 Rhyncospora fusca.
2 Corn, east ?
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
9 Dorset.
Norman sp.
11 Hants south.
Dyer sp.
41 Glamorgan 
S. Wales.
Henslow sp.
[42 62 ; both errors ?] 
1182 Blysmus compressus.
6 Som. north.
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Baker ms.
13 Sussex w.
Eev. F.
Arnold.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
D. Cooper sp.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Crespigny.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford ?
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt oat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
82 Northton.
Druce sp.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
36 Heref.
Purchas " sp.
seen." 
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
39 Stafford.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
40 Salop.
49 Carnarvon.
Gibson ms.
51 Flint.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north.
Fowler rec.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
59 Lane, south.
Eylands sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eiohardson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
1182 BLYSMUS COMPBESSUS.
439 
70 Cumberland.
75 Ayr. Walker-Arnott ms.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquliarson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[1 3 73 99 102; insuf- 
ficiently certified ; and in 
the two iatter counties the 
plant was Blysmus riifits thus 
misnamed] .
1183 Blysmus rufus.
49 Carnarv.
J.E.Bowmanms.
51 Flint.
J. L.
Warren ms.
52 Anglesea.
Crotch sp.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
59 Lane, south!
Tudor sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate oat.
70 Cumberland.
R. Woods.
71 Man. Winch in N.
B. G.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy eat.
77 Lanark.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie ms.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
T. B.
Bell sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hooker sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Stables sp.
08 Eb. mid.
Ross cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Ross west.
08 Sutherland west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme eat.
12 Shetland.
" scarce." 
1184 Scirpus lacustris.
Counties all, except 10 35 42 
43 45 47 48 60 69 71 74 
78 84 86 87 94 96 97 100 
105 107 ; some few of which 
may be real exceptions to a 
comital generality.
The two 
next are barely separable 
from this species.
1184 S.
glaucus.
{8, Tabernoiinontani, Gmel.) 
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Gifford sp.
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Brewer sp.
14 east.
Roper.
15 Kent east !
17 Surrey.
H. E.
Fox sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex ?
Extinct.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
440 
1184 SCIEPUS GLAUCUS.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
44 Carmartlien.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north !
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lano.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Parsons rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
73 Kircudbright.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
" David Don." 
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
96 Easterness.
Ley ms.
1873.
99 Dunbarton.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
[81 63 111; errors?] 
1184 S.
carinatus.
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat; 
16 west.
Syme sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.Warren ms.
[39 55 ^ errors, apparently 
through mistaking the syl- 
vaticiis for this species] .
1185 (1188) S.
triqueter." 
2 Cornwall east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs.
18 Sussex west.
17 Surrey.
Syme sp.
etc.
21 Middlesex.
[27 55 ; same error ?] 
1186 (1191) S.
sylvaticus.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs oat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Ebgers rec.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk west ?
32 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
BagnaU ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson oat.
60 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat..
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
1186 (1191) SOIEPUS SYLVATICUS.
441 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Nortlium.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Greville sp.
88 mid.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
1187 (1190) S.
maritimus.
1 Corn, west !
Ounnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs oat.
4 north !
Maw oat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north!
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Eleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More oat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex w.
! J.
L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Eoper ms.
15 Kent e,.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey.
J. L.
Warren sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.
Warren ms.
22 Berks.
Britten.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtoncat.
81 Hunts !
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
Hort ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Bidwell sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman oat.
51 Flint!
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
53 Lincoln south I 
54 north !
58 Chester !
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Tudor sp.
60 west I 
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
Parsons rec.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey rec.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gordon ms.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh ?
Ed. cat.
5. 
84 Linlithgow !
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
3 L 
442 
1187 (1190) SCIRPUS MAEITIMUS.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hooker sp.
01 Oantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Ebudes south.
(Grieve).
03 mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
1188 (1185) S.
Holoschoenus.
4 Devon north !
Flower sp.
[5 9 11 37 70; not found 
now, and the two latter cer- 
tainly errors, if the three 
former were once correct] .
1189 (1186) S, setaceus.
Counties all, except 24 31 32 
42 47 48 53 69 71 72 74 
78 86 97 99 103 104 105 
107 112.
1190 (1187) S.
Savii.
1 Com. west !
2 east.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Withers sp.
5 Som. south.
9 Dorset.
Gibson sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
27 Norf.
east.
"Eev. J.Downs." 
41 Glamorgan.
Withers ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Butler sp.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
Babington sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb sp.
71 Man. Forbes sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr.
" G.
Macnab." 
00 Clyde-isles.
Arnott ms.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
[103] .
1191 (1197) S.
acicularis.
1 Corn.
west.
"Johns!" 
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman eat.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex !
Borrer B.
G. 
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat, 
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east, 
62 u, east.
1191 (1197) SCIEPUS ACICULAEIS.
443 
63 York s.
west.
Gibson sp.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman sp.
67 Northumberland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
88 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling ?
87 Perth west.
Syme "v.
sp." 
88 mid.
89 east, 
90 Forfar.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
11 Orkney ?
Lowe only ?
12 Shetland ?
1192 S.
palustris.
Counties all, except 4 42 47 
53 69 71 72 73 74 97 105 
108 ; likely to be found in 
all.
1193 S.
uniglumis.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight!
Eev. W.
Spicer.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Beeby sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
21 Middlesex?
22 Berks.
W. T.
Dyer ms.
25 Suffolk east ?
probably so.
47 Montgomery.
Lawson.
58 Chester !
P. M.
Webb sp.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb sp.
60 west ?
Chadwick sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Oliver sp.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme.
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie ms.
94 Banff.
Gordon sp.
(? co.) 
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Syme ms.
10 Hebrides.
"Babington." 
11 Orkney.
Syme.
N.B. Several of these coimties 
and authorities are enume- 
rated from the labels of 
specimens ; but the plant is 
to me so unsatisfactory as a 
segregate that I am ill pre- 
pared to guarantee the usual 
"sp." here.
Certainly it is 
occasionally recorded under 
the names of palustris or 
multicaulis.
There are two 
sub-forms placed under this.
1194 S.
multicaulis.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 n.
! J.L. Warrenms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex?
444 
1194 SCIKPUS MULTIOAULIS.
23 Oxford.
" Boswell." 
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babingtonoat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall sp.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
49 Carnarv.
J.B.Bowman sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west ?
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
(Dewar) Gourlie sp.
86 Stirling.
Croallrec.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
F.M.Webb rec.
89 east.
(F.
B. White.) 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Bbudes mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N.B. This enumeration of coun- 
ties is to be accepted with 
some caution, the plant 
having been confused with 
the two preceding species.
I reject my own notes, ex- 
cepting those of recent date.
1195 S.
pauciflorus.
1 Corn, west ?
Jones Tour.
3 Devon south.
Parfitt ms.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 n.
J.L. Warrenms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
15 Kent east ?
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
28 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
I 41 Glamorgan.
Withers ms.
1195 SCIEPUS PAUCIFLOKUS.
445 
42 Brecon.
Ley rec.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
(Griffiths).
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester !
J.L. Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
0. Moore.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Hort ms.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
06 Eoss east.
08 Sutb.
west.
Oliver sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney ?
Neill Tour.
N.B. Some confusion occurs 
between this plant and the 
ccespitosus, which is occasion- 
ally mistaken for it.
1196 S.
csespitosus.
Counties all, except 4 10 20 
23 24 31 32 36 42 53 54 
60 72 74 82 105.
[21.] 
1197 S.
parvulus.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-PleydeU sp.
11 Hants s.
Bolton King sp.
N.B. This diminutive plant 
should be looked for in 
muddy places on the south 
and west coasts, where its 
discovery may reward the 
botanical observers in other 
counties.
1198 S.
fluitans.
1 Corn, west !
C. Bailey ms.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 n.!
J.L. Warren ms.
13 Sussex west ?
Borrer co.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
446 
1198 SCIRPUS FLUITANS.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Marshall ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites ms.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobuison cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lino.
s. Carrington sp.
54 north.
Fowler reo.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A: Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Bmbleton oat.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenlrew.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
83 Bdinbui'gh.
Balfour oat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley cat.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie oat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Eastemess.
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Murray flo.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
1199 Eriophorum alpinum.
90 Forfar.
Extinct.
08 Suth.
west.
Error ?
N.B. There seems no reason 
for doubt that the Alpine 
cotton-grass was formerly 
a real constituent in our 
native flora.
Thus, in the 
geographical view, it ought 
to be counted as a British 
plant, although consigned to 
the extinct category on pre- 
sent knowledge.
Nor does 
there seem any improbability 
against a re- discovery of it 
somewhere in North Britain.
1200 E.
vaginatum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
8 Wilts south.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
17 Surrey.
Brewer sp.
23 Oxford.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
33 Gloster east ?
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
1200 EEIOPHORUM VAGINATUM.
447 
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Leigh ton sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Lees sp.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh !
J.E. Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. "Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northnm.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
Counties of Scotland all, except 
that my notes do not yield 
authorities for 74 78 105; 
likely to be found in all 
of these ; and almost cer- 
tainly seen by myself in 
some of them.
Drainage is 
destroying it in South Eng- 
land, as is the case with 
various other bog and marsh 
plants.
[10] .
1200 E.
angustifolium.
Counties all, except 34 42 47 
60 74 105.
Is 34, West 
Gloucester, a real exception 
to comital generality ?
1201 E.
latifolium.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east ?
8 Devon south.
" Borrer.'' 
4 north ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
" v.
r." 
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12   north ?
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east ?
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford ?
32 Northon.
Berkeley ms.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
52 Anglesea.- 
53 Lincoln south.
55 Leicester ?
56 Notts.
58 Chester ?
59 Lane, south ?
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Trevelyan sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshank sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
89 Perth east.
[F.
B. White.) 
90 Forfar.
"A.
Croall." 
96 Easterness.
" Brodie herb," 
448 
1201 EEIOPHOEUM LATIFOLIUM.
05 Eoss west.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
06 east, Gordon sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
N.B. Confused with the broader 
leaved states of the preceding 
species ; several of the coun- 
ties are queried in order to 
suggest the need of verifica- 
tion by more competent bo- 
tanists than their present 
recorders.
1202 E5.
gracile.
11 Hants s.
(Bolton King.) 
17 Surrey!
Borrersp.
Extinct.
65 York n.
west.
Borrer !
[13 37 49 88 90, requiring 
confirmation, likely errors.] 
1203 Elyna caricina.
{Kobresia caricina.) 
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
69 Westmoreland.
88 Perth mid !
[3 Jacob, in Flo. Dev.] .
1204 Garex dioica.
Cornwall ?
6 Som. north.
Flower ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell.
Borrer.
12 Hants north ?
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
17 Surrey.
19 Essex north?
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
" Boswell." 
23 Oxford.
"Boswell!" 
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt oat.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
1836.
30 Bedford.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
64 m.west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Twynam sp.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar I 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo, 
94 Banff.
1204 OAKEX DIOICA.
449 
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.
96 Easterness !
Stables eat.
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
P. M.
Webb rec.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Stables sp.
08 west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[10].
N.B. A scarce plant in the 
southern counties, and need- 
ing confirmation in several 
of those enumerated above.
In some, it may have be- 
come extinct through drain- 
age ; as is said to be the 
case now in Cambridge.
In 
others, the pulicaris has been 
mistaken for dioica ; while 
Seirpus fluitans is stated by 
More to .have been recorded 
for it in the Flora Vectensis.
Its near ally Careo) Davalli- 
ana may yet be re-found in 
Britain.
1205 C.
pulicaris.
Counties all, except 16 26 42 
47 53 71 72 74 82 84 105 
107 ; but doubtless it may 
be found in most of these, 
if not in every one of them.
1206 C.
pauciflora.
62 York n.
east.
97 Nortbumberl.
Winch sp.
72 Dumfries.
77 Lanark ?
very uncertain.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid !
MiUer cat.
89 east !
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Boy ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Boy ms.
" rep." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
Ley sp.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Balfour sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
07 Suth.
east.
Graham sp.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
1207 C.
mpestris.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
08 Suth.
west.
Ch.- Bab. sp.
" on low rocks." 
1208 C.
inourva.
68 Cheviotland.
Holy Island.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine, Dickie ^p.
92 Aber.
south.
Stables sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
06 Boss east.
Syme sp.
07 Suth.
east.
08 west.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
12 Shetland.
[82 83 84 110; are these 
3m 
450 
1208 CAKEX INCHRVA.
correct ?] 
1209 C.
stellulata.
Counties all, except 4 31 42 
51 71 74 78 105 107 ; 
likely to occur in every coun- 
ty, unless 81 is an exception.
1210 O.
leporina.
(C.
lagopino,, Wahl.) 
22 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
1211 C.
ovalis.
Counties all, except 35 41 42 
48 51 74 105.
1212 G.
carta.
(C.
canescens, L.) 
2 Corn, east?
3 Devon south?
6 Som. north ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 "Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
11 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 " east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
22 Berks.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites ms.
87 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
88 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J, E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
e. Baker cat.
co.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Winch sp.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Winch sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfr'ew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
BaKour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow ?
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.
88 mid.
Ball sp.
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
squth !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle ?
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles ?
02 Eb. south.
N.B. This is indicated in the 
Clydesdale Flora as being 
" very common " in that dis- 
trict; and hence it is sug- 
gested (questionably) as 
occurring in 98 99 and 100.
Lightfoot found it in 102, 
1212 CAKEX ALPIOOLA.
451 
1212 C.
alpicola.
(C vitilis, Pries.) 
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
" Hort I " 
62 York n.
east.
"Mudd!" 
66 Durham.
Baker sp.
70 Cumberland.
Ley ms.
88 Perth mid !
Arnott ms.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
06 Eoss east.
Bab. man.
1213 C.
elongata.
13 Sussex west.
Beeby sp.
16 Kent west.
Borrer.
17 Surrey !
very local.
19 Essex north.
Bentall sp.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
58 Chester.
G. E.
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south.
Wood sp.
61 York s.
east.
Baker sp.
62 n.
east ?
68 s.
west.
" J.
Hardy." 
64 m.
west?
[3, insufficiently vouched] .
1214 C.
remota.
Counties all, except 41 42 47 
48 49 51 60 71 74 78 82 
84 in South and Mid Britain.
In North Britain it is re- 
corded from about a dozen 
counties, as follows : — 
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar ?
" Q.
Don." 
91 Kincardine.
" J.
Smith." 
94 Banff.
Stables sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables oat.
98 Argyle.
J. H.
Balfour.
99 Dunbar ton.
Balfour sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss reo.
06 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
1215 C.
axillaris.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Flower sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
H. Groves sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
Syme sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Bentall sp.
20 Herts.
Blow sp.
21 Middlesex.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock sp.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
.Fitt sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
34 Glosterw.
(W.E.WaterfaU).
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick.
Bromwich.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. Whitehead sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
H. Johnson.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
[14 83 88 ; perhaps the next 
species only was intended in 
these three counties] .
1216 C.
Boenninghausen- 
iana.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
452 
1216 CAKEX BOENNINGHAUSENIANA.
10 Wight.
More sp.
13 Sussex west.
"Borrer." 
14 east.
Coleman sp.
16 Kent west.
More sp.
17 Surrey !
Uncertain ?
20 Herts.
38 Warwick ?
47 Montgomery.
Lewis ms.
58 Chester.
Whitehead sp.
70 Cumberl.
Eev. E.
Wood.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
88 Perth mid.
89 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Stables sp.
N.B. This is a very difficult 
plant, approximating to axil- 
laris or remota on one side, 
and to the depauperized 
forms of paniculata on the 
other side.
The Congleton 
examples have the " lower 
spikelets digitately com- 
pound " as in axillaris, while 
their glumes more resemble 
those of paniculata and the 
present species (?) by having 
" white scarious margins " ; 
and thus they might be re- 
ferred to either species, ac- 
cording to the character 
relied upon for diagnosis; 
but, on the whole characters, 
perhaps, Mr. Sidebotham's 
assignment of the Congleton 
plant to Boenninghttiiseniana 
was the better choice.
1217 C.
intermedia.
(C.
disticha, Huds.) 
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Flower sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Eeg. Pryor.
12 Hants north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
80 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
45 Pembroke.
Purchas Ire.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Hunt sp.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
68 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Sjme sp.
75 Ayr.
1217 CAREX INTERMEDIA.
458 
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington".
83 Edinburgh !
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
93 Aberdeen north.
Watt.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
1218 C.
arenaria.
Counties all the .maritime ex- 
cept 16 53 61 73 74 97 
104 105 107 ; likely to 
occur in any of these.
In- 
land it occurs in sandy 
ground in 17 Surrey and 26 
West Suffolk.
1219 C.
divisa.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Withers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex w.!
J.L.Warren ms.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east.
Hind sp.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex.
Crespigny.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper ms.
27 Norfolk east.
G. Fitt ms.
28 west.
Bell sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowmanms.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
54 Lincoln north !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Bloxam ms- 
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees sp.
[17 64 67 83 90; insuf- 
ficiently vouched, and likely 
to be errors] .
1220 C.
muricata.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 ' north.
Kogers rec.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Duthie sp.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk ea^t.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper^cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Druce.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
iM 
1220 CABEX MUBZCATA.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
48 Merioneth.
More.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham..
Norman oat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray oat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
BoswellSyme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
88 Perth mid.
89 .
east.
(F.
B. White).
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
96 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Balfour sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
1221 C.
;iivulsa.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Gifford sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Eogers rec.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Kants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
J.L. Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Kerts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington eat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Anderson ins.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
86 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
47 Montgomery.
Warren sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea ?
58 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
1221 CAEEX DIVULSA.
455 
56 Leicester.
Bloxam cat, 
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
W. Webb ms.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
[66 76 83; errors all?] 
N.B. There being a state or 
form of jmo-icata (the " pseu-_ 
do-divulsa ") which much re- 
sembles the present plant, 
it is possible that some of 
the enumerated counties may 
be on record through mis- 
nomers.
1222 C.
vulpina.
Counties all, with many ex- 
ceptions northward, namely, 
85 42 43 47 48 69 71 to 
74 78 79 80 88 93 94 96 
to 99 105 106 107 308 109 
111 112; likely to occur in 
several of these counties.
1223 C.
teretiusctila.
3 Devon south'.
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants s.
J. Groves rec.
12 north !
13 Sussex west.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Brewer.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell ms.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
. 
40 Salop.
Bloxam sp.
45 Pembroke.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Hunt sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Leyland sp.
55 n.
west.
Ward ms.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Lake Lane.
(Miss Hodgson.) 
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray, cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Macnab sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Croall rec.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Main Argyle.
Boss rec.
99 Dunbarton.
Horn rec.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
1223='-C.
paradoxa.
27 Norfolk east.
61 York s.
east.
0. Moore sp.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
N.B. The specimens of this 
are accepted on faith, and 
cited accordingly.
It has 
been reported for [3] South 
Devon, but only a single 
plant.
456 
1224 CAEEX PANIOULATA.
1224 C.
paniculata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
"Wise sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
Mrs. Eussell sp.
28- Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east Eoberts ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat 
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Miss B.
Jones sp.
48 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh J.
E .
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 -Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westm.
Matthews.
75 Ayr. Arnott ms.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
92 Aber.
south.
Eoy, 1872.
98 north.
Eoy ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss rec.
. 
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
1225 C.
alpina.
(C.
Vahlii, Schk.) 
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Wight sp.
1227 C.
atrata.
49 Carnarv.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
69 Westm.
Backhouse, 1871.
72 Dumfries.
W. Stevens.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar !
H. M.
Balf.
sp.
1227 CAKBX ATRATA.
457 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
98 Argyle.
F. M.
Webb rec.
[58 Chester ; Bradbnry] .
1228 C.
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 42 47 48 
72 to 76 98 105 109; likely 
to be found in every county, 
but omissions may have oc- 
curred in lists through the 
changes of name from caspi- 
tosa first to Goodenovii and 
then to vulgaris.
1229 C.
rigida.
48 Merioneth.
Ley rec.
49 Carnarvon !
Ball sp.
65 York n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
80 Eoxburgh.
Cheviot hills.
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid !
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle !
99 Diinbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
, Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west !
Graham sp.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
[4 50; insufficiently vouched] .
1230 C.
aquatilis.
68 Cheviot.
Brotherston rec 
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Brotherston rec.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
84 Linlithgow.
Ed. bot.
soc.
85 Fife.
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Croall sp.
93 north.
Roy sp.
96 Moray.
E. C.
rep.
1870.
09 Caithness.
Horn rec.
N.B. The plant of Caithness, 
Lanark, Linlithgow, Moray, 
Roxburgh, and the other 
lowland stations, is the 
segregate Watsoni; — though 
I could wish it known by 
a different name.
The moun- 
tain plant of Aberdeen and 
Forfar, perhaps extending 
also into East Perth, is 
the other segregate held to 
be typical aquatilis.
The 
specimens from Linhthgow 
came labelled as " Carex 
stricta." 
1231 C.
'striota.
6 Som. north ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
13 Sussex west.
Beeby sp.
15 Kent east !
Syme ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
Purohas cat.
3 N 
458 
1281 CAKEX STEICTA.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
T. B.
BeU sp.
41 Glamorgan.
" Motley." 
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
" Spruce." 
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
w. Ward oat.
66 Purham.
Norman cat.
69 Westm.
, Bloxam.
Borrer.
70 Cumberland.
Matthews.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Prof.
Balfour.
00 Clyde-isles.
N.B. Perhaps the least well 
understood, and the most fre- 
quently misreported, among 
all the species of Sedge.
The following counties can- 
not be received for it unless 
verified afresh :— 2 8 31 67 
83 84 85 90 95 98.
[10 
11] .
Garex acuta, Watsoni, 
and often vulgaris have been 
mislabelled as striata.
1232 C.
acuta.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
3 Devon south ?
4 north ?
6 Som. north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More oat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlx.
! J.L. Warren ms.
22 Berks.
28 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk' east.
Stock oat.
26 west ?
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould cat.
31 Hunts.
Fryer sp.
82 Northton.
Druce rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Maw sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Bloxam sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Bobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman eat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
w. Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Normaii cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Matthews.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
1232 CAKEX ACUTA.
459 
77 Lanark.
Gourlie sp.
80 Boxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
[83 84 90 91 92 93 95 96 
98 100 102 109 111; all 
doubtful, though possibly 
some of these correct.] 
1233 C.
saxatilis, including 
pulla and Grahami.
86 Stirling ?
88 Perth mid !
Hooker sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Graham sp.
92 Aber.
south.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
Eoy sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
08 Suth.
west.
Graham sp.
1234 C.
flava, Aggregate.
Counties all, except 24 41 42 
47 48 51 58 74 99 104 
105 107.
1234*0.
flava eu-flava.
4 Devon north !
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
17 Surrey.
20 Herts.
I. Brown sp.
23 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren.
26 Suffolk west.
Duthie sp.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
32 Northton.
Druoe sp.
84 Gloster west.
Purchas sp.
85 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
88 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
_ 
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler ap.
52 Anglesea.
Bloxam sp.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
61 York s.
east.
Baker sp.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey.
80 Eoxburgh.
"G.
Macnab." 
83 Edinburgh !
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Balfour sp.
89 east!
92 Aber.
south.
Druce rec.
96 Easterness !
98 Argyle !
00 Clyde-isles.
Syme sp.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss rec.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
Doubtless in many other of 
the counties.
1234*0.
flava lepidocarpa.
2 Corn.
east.
Wise sp.
3 Devon south.
Eogers sp.
8 Wilts south.
Eogers.
10 Wight !
11 Hants, south !
Towns, sp.
12 north !
Toiyns.
cat.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren.
18 Essex south.
Duthie sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Bell sp.
31 Hunts.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley sp.
37 Worcester.
Matthews.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
40 Salop.
E. Jones sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgom.
J. L.
Warren.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley rec.
52 Anglesea.
Bloxam sp.
460 
1234*CAREX PLAVA LEPIDOCAKPA.
58 Cheater.
J. L.
Warren.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
69 Westmoreland !
84 Linlithgow.
86 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
(F.
B. White).
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
29 Aber.
south.
02 Eb. south.
Grieve cat.
03 mid.
Staples sp.
11 Orkney, Syme.
Perhaps in almost all the 
counties, and more frequent 
than eu-flava in the south.
1234*C.
Oederi!
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, sp.
12 n.
! J.
L. Warren sp.
17 Surrey!
29 Cambridge.
P. Hort sp.
31 Hunts.
• 
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
48 Merioneth.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
52 Anglesea.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
53 Line.
s. Lees & Fowler.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Whalley sp.
61 York s.
e. F.
A. Lees rec.
63 s.
west.
Can- rec.
75 Ayr. Arnott sp.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
85 Fife.
Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Drummond.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
96 Easterness.
Ley rec.
11 Orkney.' Syme sp.
N.B. Several other counties are 
on record nominally for this 
species, but in which it is 
supposedthat lepidoearpayfa,s 
thus misnamed ; both may 
be found to occur in almost 
any of the counties, if dis- 
tinctly looked for.
1235 C.
extensa.
1 Corn.
w. !
Miss Warren sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
Eussell sj.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notoutt sp.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer.
15 Kent east !
19 Essex north.
25 Suff.
east.
Woodward sp.
26 west.
" Gissing !
" 
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west ?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
J.E.Bowman.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland, Tate.
69 Westm.
Bailey rec.
70 Cumberland, 
71 Man. Jowett sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
G. Macnab sp.
75 Ayr.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
1235 CAREX EXTENSA.
461 
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Grant sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Edmonston sp.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Bb. south.
Balfour cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Lost ?
Syme cat.
[40 60 72 ; not certain.] 
1236 G.
pallescens.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Kingsley sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
43 Kadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
53 Line.
s. Lees & Fowler rec.
54 north.
F. A.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotlaud.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Hort ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle !
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Stables sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
462 
1236 CABEX PALLESCENS.
09 Caitlmess.
Ar. Bennett sp.
N.B. Scarce in the southern 
counties ; frequent in the 
northern counties ; and 
though widely spread it 
scarcely comes up to the 
grade of a "common plant." 
1237 C.
fulva.
C. spdrostachya.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
1872.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
8 south.
Kogers.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south !
Towns, cat.
12 n.
! J.
L. Warren ms.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Koper.
15 Kent e.
G. B.
Smith cat.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Isaac Brown sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
32 Northton.
Druce rec.
83 Gloster east.
Notcutt ms.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Watkins sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall sp.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
Jones oat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Mrs. Eussell sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
50 Denbigh.
J. E .
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
57 Derby.
Whitehead sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Wood sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Cruickshauk sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Dr. Dewar sp.
86 Stirlmg.
87 Perth west!
Syme sp.
88- mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness I Stables cat.
97 Westerness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour oat.
03 mid.
Eoss rec.
1237 CAREX FULVA.
468 
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west.
Campbell sp.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme 
[21 112; errors?] 
1238 C.
distans.
1 Corn, west !
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south.
Kogers.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydellsp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex w.
! J.L.Warren oat.
14 east.
Trevelyan ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east ?
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall rec.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
48 Merioneth.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester !
Dickinson sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. G.E. Smith rec.
66 Durham.
Winch sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
Bailey.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
85 Fife.
G. Macnab sp.
90 Forfar.
Duthie sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon sp.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
08 mid.
Eoss rec.
08 Suth.
west.
Campbell sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland ?
[7 21 23 30 37 39 56 57 
64 65 76 81 83; on record 
for "distans" so named, but 
all seem to require veri- 
fication afresh] .
There is 
certainly much confusion be- 
tween this and binervis, on 
one side, and between this 
and/wtort, on the other side.
1238 C.
punctata.
1 Corn, west?
2 east.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
J. Groves sp.- 
45 Pembroke.
C. Bailey sp.
52 Anglesea.
73 Kirkeudb.
"Eraser" sp.
[70 Cumberland ; very du- 
bious] .
1238*C.
frigida.
92 Aberdeen south.
Sadler, 
464 
1239 CABEX BINEKYIS.
1239 C.
binervis.
Comities all, with many real 
or only seeming exceptions.
My notes do not show 
authorities for it in the fol- 
lowing counties, — 8 28 30 
31 32 37 41 42 46 47 56 
60 61 71 72 74 84 105 
107.
1240 C.
laevigata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
W. Wise sp.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Martin sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, oat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
" Borrer." 
14 e.
J. L.
Warren cat.
15 Kent east.
G.B. Smith oat.
16 west.
More sp.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
88 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. B.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Ley cat.
52 Anglesea.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Whitehead.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad sp.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Johnson rec.
64 n.
west.
Tatham cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Johnston sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Hort ms.
72 Dumfries.
Winch sp.
75 Ayr. Syme ms.
76 Kenfrew.
Balfour sp.
77 Lanark.
Arnott ms.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid.
Ley rec.
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
Boy ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
Eoy " 1871." 
99 Dunbarton.
Balfour sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Syme ms.
N.B. Possibly the localities 
about Lochwhinnoch and 
Looh-lomond may be placed 
under too many "counties, 
namely, 76 77 and 86 99.
1241 C.
panicea.
Counties all, except 42 74 100 
105 ; but likely to occur in 
every county.
1241 C.
vaginata.
88 Perth mid !
Syme sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar I Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Croall sp.
96 Easterness.
99 Dunbarton.
08 Suth.
west.
1242 C.
depauperata.
l24Si!
CAREX depaupeeata.
465 
6 Som. north.
Norman sp.
16 Kent west.
17 Sui-rey.
Salmon sp.
[3 90 99 ; erroneous as to 
the two last, and probably 
so for the first, although de- 
pauperata has been reported 
" frequent " in Devon] .
1243 C.
capillaris.
64 York mid west.
West.
65 n.
west.
Bot. n.
j. 
66 Durham.
Leefe sp.
70 Cumberland.
" Miller." 
72 Dumfries.
" Stevens." 
87 Perth west.
Croall rec.
88 mid !
89 east.
Hooker sp.
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
" J.
Bissett." 
98 Argyle.
F. M.
"Webb rec.
06 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
08 Suth.
west !
Macnab sp.
12 Shetland.
Edmonston flo.
[36 Hereford ; an error cer- 
tainly] .
Cumberland and 
Dumfries may be said to 
require a second authority 
in confirmation.
1244 C.
limosa, Aggregate.
Counties for one or other of the 
three segregates, so far as 
the records can be exactly 
assigned, are detailed nomi- 
nally underneath ; but some 
of the stations have been 
destroyed by drainage.
The 
counties for the aggregate 
under some form are these : 
— [6] 9 11 25 27 28 37 
89 40 41 50 52 58 59 62 
63 64 65 67 68 69 70 72 
73 75 77 80 81 84 85 87 
to 90 92 94 96 98 99 104 
108 109.
1244*0.
limosa!
11 Hants south.
"Borrer." 
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
40 Salop.
Jones rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
63 York s.
west.
Parsons rec.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston.
84 Linlith.
(Craig-Christie).
85 Fife.
Hunter sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 west.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
G. Macnab sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
08 Suth.
west ?
1244*0.
irrigua.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberl.
Winch sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Balfour sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray sp.
77 Lanark.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid.
D. Hay sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
98 Argyle.
Balfour sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
1245 0.
rariflora.
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south.
Brand sp.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
08 Suth.
west ?
C. limosa ?
1246 O.
strigosa.
8 o 
466 
1246 OAKEX STEIGOSA.
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
Bell Salter sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex- w.
Borrer cat.
co.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Gibson sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge ?
30 Bedford.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Hort sp.
35 Monmouth.
Lej rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
39 Stafford.
Eraser eat.
40 Salop.
» 
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
57 Derby.
Bloxam sp.
58 Chester Bickham sp.
59 Lane, south.
64 York mid.
Tatham cat.
[3 75 83 106 ; likely to be 
errors ; and some of the 
counties named are possibly 
in the same category] .
1247 C.
sylvatica.
Counties all, with many ex- 
ceptions northwards ; name- 
ly, 42 47 48 61 71 73 74 
78 84 88 89 91 93 94 97 
101 102 104 to 112.
I 
have seen it in Forfar, and 
for higher numbers it is tes- 
tified as under : — 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie Guide.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
Clydesdale flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss cat.
1248 C.
pendula.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.+ 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
Bell sp, 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton, Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
"Wilmott." 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
1248 CAEEX PKNDULA.
467 
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Donb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester.
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
e. Baker oat.
co.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward eat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate eat.
70 Cumberland.
75 Ajrr.
Duncan cat.' 
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour eat.
83 Edinburgh !
I. B.
Balf.
ms.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
90 Porfai: ?
Don only ?
91 Kincardine.
Oroall sp.
92 Aber.
south ?
93 • north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
1249 0.
Pseudooyperus.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites eat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, eat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren eat.
14 east.
Coleman eat.
15 Kent e.!
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Reynolds sp.
17 Surrey !
Syme ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Syme sp.
22 Berks !
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Miss Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Fryer.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk eat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas eat.
40 Salop.
Leighton eat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson eat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Robinson eat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bloxam ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren eat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Soutter.
95 Elgin.
Gordon eat.+ 
02 Bb. south.
Lightf.
Scot.
1250 C.
glauca.
Counties all, except 42 71 to 
75 97 105 107 108; Hkely 
to occur in all of these.
468 
1251 CA.REX PEiECOX.
1251 C.
prsecox.
Counties all, except 4 31 42 
46 47 48 51 53 72 74 94 
97 99 101 to 110; but 
likely to occur in all of these 
unless the numbers 101 to 
110 should some of them 
prove real exceptions.
Ork- 
ney, by Syme's list, and 
indicated as " common " in 
the Shetland Flora.
1251 C.
ericetorum.
26 Suffolk w.
Ar. Bennett sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Ar. Bennett.
29 Cambridge.
Syme sp.
N.B. A recent re-discovery ; 
possibly this Sedge being 
passed by as C.
prmcox in 
other counties.
1251 C.
montana.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
11 Hants south.
Marquand.
14 Sussex east.
Mitten sp.
34 Gloster west.
Hort ms.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
"Westcombe." 
^ 1252 C.
pilulifera.
Counties all, except 6 13 24 
31 33 42 45 46 47 51 53 
60 69 71 74 82 84 94 97 
101 102 105 106 107 ; per- 
haps simply overlooked in 
most of the counties thus 
enumerated.
1253 C.
tomentosa.
7 Wilts north.
Borrer sp.
[33 Buokman B.
G. C] 
1254 G.
humilis.
C. clandestina.
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
8 south.
Flower sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
11 Hants s.
(Townsend flo.).
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
1255 C.
digitata.
3 Devon south.
Stewart flo.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites sp.
7 Wilts north.
Withers sp.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Hort, in Phyt.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt flo.
57 Derby.
Eogers rec.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. G.
S. Smith sp.
64 m.
w. Carpenter sp.
65 n.
w. Bot. n.
y. 
N.B. Devon and Notts of these 
may be correct, but confirm- 
ations would be desirable, in 
addition to the authorities 
cited for them.
1255*0.
ornithopoda.
57 Derby.
Whitehead.
64 York m.
west.
Herb.
Borrer.
1256 C.
filiformis.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Clark sp.
11 Hants south.
Borrer 1858.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
1256 CAREX PILIFORMIS.
469 
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Harris sp.
81 Hunts.
Newbould eat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bloxam sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line.
n. P.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Q. E.
Smith sp.
61 York s.
e. F.
A. Lees rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
67 Northumberl.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westm.
" Mr. Miller." 
70 Cumb.
" Mr. Tweddle." 
73 Kirkcud.
Cruickshank sp.
75 Ayr.
" Dr. Hope." 
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
88 Perth mid.
(P.
B. White).
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Porfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Eoy sp.
95 Elgin.
" Mr. Borrer." 
96 Easterness.
Ley rec.
98 Argyle.
Clydesdale flo.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss rec.
07 Suth.
east.
Exours.
08 west.
Stables sp.
[34 ; Swayne in B.
G.] 
1257 C.
hirta.
Counties all, except 41 42 45 
to 49 53 61 69 71 72 74 
78 97 98 102 to 112.
It 
will be noted that this fre- 
quent Sedge of England is 
absent apparently from the 
most northern counties.
1258 C.
ampuUacea.
Counties all, except 5 16 21 
31 32 43 46 47 48 53 60 
71 72 74 78 99 105 107; 
in very few of these does it 
seem likely to be really 
wanting.
Occasionally it is 
mistaken for versicaria, much 
the less frequent species, 
especially in Scotland.
1258 C.
involuta.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
N.B. This is here treated as a 
species apart, because so 
made in 'English Botany,' 
edition third, although hesi- 
tatingly.
To my apprehen- 
sion, it is too closely con- 
nected with ampuUacea, by 
intermediate links, to war- 
rant specific separation ; al- 
though the Cheshire speci- 
mens (Warren, Bickham) 
look fairly separable while 
contrasted against the oppo- 
site extreme of C.
ampuUacea, 
apart from the intermediate 
forms.
1259 C.
vesicaria.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
6 Som. north ?
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
Jeffrey.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
470 
1259 CABEX VESIOAKIA.
19 Essex north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.
Warren ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffolk east.
' 
26 west.
Henslow ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
Purcbas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford!
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line.
s. Lees & Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
89 east., (F.
B. White).
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
96 Basterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Ross rec.
[10 83 92; doubtful].
1260 C.
paludosa.
1 Corn.
west.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Salter sp.
9 Dorset.
Mansel cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Kants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer oat.
14 east.
Roper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Leefe sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind oat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten oat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
Pryor.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway oat.
36 Hereford.
Piirohas cat.
1260 CAREX I'ALUDOSA.
471 
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall sp.
89 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
48 Radnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke ?
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson oat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.* Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Whitehead.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
G. Macnab sp.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
88 Edinburgh !
Campbell sp.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Balfour sp.
91 Kincardine.
Grant sp.
95 Elgin.
98 Argyle.
Syme sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
06 Ross east.
Stables sp.
N.B. Some confusion exists 
among the records for this 
species and acuta ; also occa- 
sionally a confusion arises 
between this and riparia.
1261 C.
riparia.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs oat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Roper cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J.L. Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Leefe sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites oat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 'Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford !
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
49 Carnarvon.
Robinson oat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman oat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
472 
1261 CAKEX RIPABIA.
53 Line.
a. Fowler & Lees rec.
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Bailey rec.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A".
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Ciuickshank sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
90 Forfar.
Cowell sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
94 Banff.
[106 Eoss, very doubtful] .
1262 Leersia oryzoides.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer sp.
17 Surrey !
Linnell sp.
1263 Spartina striata.
3 Devon s.
Abraham ms.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants s.
! Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ms.
15 Kent east.
Croall sp.
18 Essex south, Syme sp.
19 north.
Christy sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchascat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
54 Lincoln north.
Howitt sp.
[21 Midx.
A misnomer] .
1263 Spartina alterniflora.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
sp.f 
Dr. Tate reports this from a 
second station ; namely, "in 
great abundance, and appa- 
rently perfectly wild, at Hill 
Head Haven, at the mouth 
of the Titchfield stream, 
1872." Likely it may gra- 
dually extend farther along 
the coast.
1263'''Spartiiia Townsendi.
11 Hants s.
(H.
& J.
Groves).
1264 Cynodon Dactylon.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack sp.
3 Devon south.
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
(17 Surrey.
Casual at Kew).
1265 Digitaria humifusa.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
17 Surrey !
Extinct ?
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west ?
(62 92.
Casual only ?) 
1267 Setaria viridis.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.* 
6 Som. north.
Flower.* 
10 Wight.
F. Stratton ms.* 
11 Hants south!
Casual.
12 north !
Casual.
1267 SETABIA VIEIDIS.
473 
14 Sussex east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent east!
Casual.
16 west.
"Bossey." 
17 Surrey !
Several places.
t 
19 Essex north.
Gibson flc* 
20 Herts.
E. H.
Webb flo.* 
21 Middlesex.
J. L.
Warren.
!= 
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper flo.
26 west.
" Eagle." 
27 Norfolk east.
Stock sp.
28 west.
Trimmer flo.
29 Camb.
(Eelh.) Extinct?
34 or 35 Gloster...
? Brody sp.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.f 
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.f 
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.f 
58 Chester.
J. H.
Lewis sp.* 
62 York n.
east.
Bot. n.
y.* 
63 s.
w. Giss.
" 1859." 
66 Durham.
" ballast hills." 
67 Northumb.
" ballast hills." 
80 Eoxb.
Berw.
Proc.
1869.
92 Aber.
south, "ballast, ext." 
N.B. The counties, for this 
grass have been enumerated 
in full, so as my notes show 
them.
This is done by way 
of exemplifying the reported 
state of a plant which is 
gradually spreading about 
England, although most 
likely not an aboriginal na- 
tive of this country.
Setaria 
verticillata seldom occurs ; 
and S.
glauca is too impa- 
tient of frost to become any- 
thing better than a casual 
here.
1269 Phalaris arundinaeea.
Counties all, except 42 43 71 
74 105 108 110 ; very likely 
to occur in aU of them.
1270 Anthoxanthum 
odoratum.
Counties all, except 41 72 74^ 
105 107 ; almost certain to 
occur plentifully in all of 
them.
1270*Anthox.
Puelii.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
17 Surrey.
J. Groves sp.
36 Hereford.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
Thompson rec.
39 Stafford.
Eraser.* 
58 Chester.
Britten.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec* 
1271 Hierochloe taorealis.
90 Forfar.
Extinct, if found.
00 Caithness.
Eob. Dick sp.
1272 Phleum alpinum.
88 Perth mid !
90 Forfar 1 
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 " Garway moor " — Dickson.
1273 P.
pratense.
Counties all, except 42 48 71 
74 97 98 103 105 106 107; 
doubtfully indigenous in the 
North Isles, and perhaps 
also everywhere to the north- 
west of the Caledonian Canal.
[110 111 112].
1274 P.
arenarium.
1 Corn.
west.
Herb.
hort.
soc.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
Sogers sp.
3 p 
474 
1274 PHLEUM AKENAEIA.
4 Devon north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Trevelyan sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell eat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants s.
J. L.
"Warren ms.
13 Sussexw.
J. L.
Warren ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 west.
Bunbur-y sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood ms.
48 Merioneth.
P. Hort ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Thompson ms.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
71 Man. E.
Forbes sp.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
[94 very uncertain.
"Don."] 
1276 P.
Boehmeri.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
26 Suffolk west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norfolk west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Henslow sp.
30 Bedford.
Blow sp.
[ 33 Buckman b.
g. c] .
1277 Alopecurus alpinus.
88 Perth mid.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
96 Easterness.
Gordon ms.
06 Boss east.
"Wilson." 
1278 A.
pratensis.
Counties all, except 42 48 60 
69 71 74 97 102 105 (107) 
108 ; scarce in the northern 
counties ?
1279 A.
geniculatus.
Counties all, except 42 47 48 
71 74 97 105 107 108 ; al- 
most certain to occur in all.
1280 A.
fulvus.
3 Devon south.
Tate ms.
5 or 6 Somerset.
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
13 Sussex west.
Newbould.
14 east.
J. L.
Warren.
17 Surrey !
Linnell sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Ben tall sp.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
1280 ALOPEOURUS FULVUS.
475 
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
36 Hereford.
A. Ley sp.
37 Worcester.
Maw sp.
38 Warwick.
Brorawich sp.
39 Stafford ?
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman ms.
55 Leicester.
58 Chester.
C.Bailey sp.
[62 85 90 ; authority bad.] 
1281 A.
bulbosus.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Coleman sp.
9- Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Spicer sp.
11 Hants south.
Eoberts ms.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren sp.
14 e.
J.L. Warrenms.
16 Kent west.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Duthie sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Townsend sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
F. Hort ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Pleydell ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Bailey ms.
58 Chester.
" Mr. Buxton !
" 
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
[66.
Misnomer, yid«Baker] .
1282 A.
agrestis.
2 Corn.
east.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight 1 More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J.L. Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
Christy sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
26 west.
Babington ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts 1 Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk oat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh ?
* 
61 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
58 Chester.
J.L. Warren cat.
+ 
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 ' n.
east.
Baker oat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
476 
1282 ALOPECUEUS AGEESTIS.
64 York m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
" colonist." 
70 Cumb.
" T.
Benson." 
(Scotland 75 77 82 85 86 
90 91 92 ; casual weed in 
corn fields, scarcely a colo- 
nist).
1283 Knappia agrostidea.
18 Essex south.
Ever found ?
52 Anglesea.
J.E.Bowman sp.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.* 
N.B. This diminutive grass is 
supplied with about a half- 
dozen of aliases.
Stated to 
have been sown in Hadding- 
tonshire, by Dr. Knapp, and 
to have become extinct there 
before 1868!
1284 Gastridium 
lendigerimi.
1 Corn.
w. Miss Warren sp.
2 east.
W. S.
Hore.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
4 n.
Bot. Dec, 1879.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
Bromfield sp.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bromf.
sp.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Coleman sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms 
19 north.
Christy sp.
20 Herts.
26 Suffolk west ?
Dedham cat, 
27 Norfolk east.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp, 
86 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam ms.
41 Glamorgan.
(80 casual).
[50 51] .
1285 Polypogon littoralis.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
16 Kent west !
18 Essex south.
27 Norfolk east.
Bloxam sp.
28 west.
(80 85).
[9 Bell Salter] .
1286 P.
monspeliensis.
9 Dorset.
Mansel- Pleydell sp.
11 Hants south.
-Bromf.
sp.
16 Kent west !
18 Essex south.
Bab. sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Bab. sp.
28 west.
(1 3 10 21 34 64 80 85; 
more or less casual in these 
counties ; and perhaps Eng- 
lish only through introduc- 
tion originally).
1287 Milium efifusum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.- Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Town send.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Bloomf.
ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west I 
1287 MILIUM EPFUSUM.
477 
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
. 
29 Cambridge.
Babingtou cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas oat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
45 Pembroke ?
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Robinson cat.
54 Line.
n. F.
A. Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. E.
M. Webb cat.+ 
60 west.
Linton cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey ms.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries ?
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Soutter rec.
80 Roxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fifo.
87 Perth west.
Drummond.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
93 north.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
Stables sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
[Ill Orkney, msc.
flo.] 
1288 Apera Spica-venti, 
Agrostis Spica-venti.
12 Hants north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
14 east Eoper.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey!
Locally abundant.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.f 
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Varenne sp.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
(38 40 41 50 56 68 59 61 
62 64 66 83).
[70 111].
1288 Apera interrupta.
Agrostis interrupta.
478 
1288 APEBA INTEEEUPTA.
19 Essex north ?
"1843." 
25 Suff.
east ?
26 west.
Newbould sp.
28 Norf.
west.
Gibson sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
(82 Haddington).
1289 Agrostis setacea.
1 Corn, west !
Warren sp.
2 east.
Pasooe cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
9 Dorset.
Bell Salter sp.
10 "Wight !
More sp.
11 Hants south !
Bromf.
sp.
12 n.!
J.L.Warren ms.
14 Sussex east.
Borrer ms.
17 Surrey !
Bisley Common.
22 Berks.
" Bagshot Heath." 
41 Glamorgan.
Withers ms.
[50 Faun.
Grust.
62 E.G.] 
1290 A.
canina.
Counties ^11, except 4 24 31 
82 40 41 42 46 53 64 57 
60 69 71 to 74 81 89 96 
97 104 105 107 110; per- 
haps often overlooked or 
disregarded.
[38] .
1291 A.
vulgaris.
Counties all, except 74 105.
1291*A.
nigra.
37 Worcester.
(Bagnall).
38 Warwick.
(Bagnall).
39 Stafford.
(Bagnall).
40 Salop.
(Bagnall).
1292 A.
alba.
Counties aU, except 48 74 80 
97 105 107 ; doubtless to be 
found in all.
1293 Fsamma arenaria.
Ammophiia arundinacea.
Counties all the maritime, ex- 
cept 16 84 35 53 71 74 76 
77 87 88 89 97 98 99 103 
to 107.
[12] .
1293 Fsamma baltica.
68 Cheviotland.
Holy Isle.
1294 Phragmites communis.
Arundo Phragmites.
Counties all, except 42 47 48 
71 74 78 89 97 98 100 
105 to 108.
But I think to 
have seen it in Sutherland, 
either 107 or 108.
1295 Arundo Calamagrostis.
Calamagrostis lanceolata, 
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south.
18 Sussex west.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey ?
18 or 19 Essex...
? 
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
26 Suff.
west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
PO Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
Church.
Bab. ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites cat.
1295 AEUNDO CALAMAGEOSTIS.
479 
37 Worcester ?
38 Warwick.
Kirk sp.
89 Stafford.
40 Salop.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
41 Glamorgan.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman ms.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
J.L. Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webh cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees ms.
64 m.
west.
55 n.
west.
Ward sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate ms.
[70 83 ; probably errors in 
these two counties ; and 
some of those before enume- 
rated by name are too un- 
certain, through confusions 
between the present species 
and the next one] .
1296 Arundo Epigejos.
3 Devon south !
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Eussell sp.
9 Dorset.
PleydeU cat.
10 Wight.
Miss Twining sp.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer eat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Biden sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suff.
east.
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt eat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Harris sp.
32 Northton.
Church.
Bab. ms.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 west.
Flower sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Ku'k cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south.
64 north.
55 Leicester.
Church.
Bab. sp.
56 Notts.
68 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
69 Lane, south.
60 west.
Syme ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westm.
F. A.
Lees.
70 Cumberland?
Dubious.
75 Ayr.
"Dr. G.
Macnab." 
85 Fife.
Prof.
Balfour.* 
91 Kino.
Specimen seen ; Syme.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
03 Eb. mid.
Gordon ms.
[80].
1298 Arundo striata.
58 Chester.
Bickham sp.
90 Forfar.
Long extinct.
09 Caithness.
Dick.
1299 Sesleria ceernlea.
480 
1299 SBSLERIA C^RULBA.
60 Lane.
west.
Bailey rec.
64 York m.
west.
Tatliam sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
J. E.
Leefe sp.
68 Oheviotland.
Tate sp.
69 Westmoreland !
Bloxam.
70 Cumberland.
86 Stirling.
88 Perth mid !
05 Boss west.
[1 40 92; errors?] 
1300 Aira csespitosa.
Counties all, except 71 74 105 
107 ; likely to be found in 
every county.
1301 A.
alpina.
49 Carnarvon ?
86 Stirling ?
88 Perth mid!
Balfour sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Brand sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Syme sp.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness.
Ley rec.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Balfour sp.
08 Suth.
west !
Campbell sp.
10 Hebrides ?
" Harris isle." 
[66 111 ; errors?] Very 
difficult to distinguish be- 
tween this grass and the 
mountain states of the pre- 
ceding ; indeed, I am uncer- 
tain even in my own nomen- 
clature of them, and suspect 
them both to be simply va- 
rieties of caspitosa.
1302 A.
flexuosa.
Counties all, except 31 41 42 
60 71 74 82 84 105 107 ; 
likely to occur in all, or in 
nearly all of the counties.
1302-A.
uliginosa.
(A.
setacea).
11 Hants s.
Groves & Marquand.
12 n.
! J.L.Warren ms.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren sp.
27 Norfolk east?
58 Chester.
Miss Potts.
90 Forfar ?
91 Kiuc.
Eoy. ms.
Sim sp.
92 Aber south.
Eoy ms.
07 Sutherland east.
1303 A.
caryophyllea.
Counties all, except 41 42 48 
54 61 71 74 98 105 107 
110 ; doubtless simply over- 
looked in all or most of these 
counties.
1304 A.
prseeox.
Counties all, except 24 31 42 
48 72 74 99 105; no doubt 
simply overlooked.
1305 A.
cauescens.
(Corynephonis canescens.) 
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Paget sp.
28 west.
[5 or 6 9 10 15 56 75 ; 
errors ?] 
1307 Avena fatua.
Counties all the English, ex- 
cept 8 35 53 60 69 70.— 
Wales, reported in 44 46 
49 50 51 52.— Scotland, in 
1807 AVENA PATUA.
481 
75 77 80 to 83 85 87 88 
89 91 92 94 95 96 111 
112; but regarded as an in- 
troduced plant in nearly all 
of these.
1309 A.
pratensis.
3 Devon south.
Eogers rec.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
J. L.
Warren ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex ?
22 Berks.
2& Oxford.
24 Bucks.
J. L.
Warren ms.
25 Suff.
east ?
26 west.
Bunbury sp.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
82 Northton.
Druee rec.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Bagnall ms.
89 Stafford.
45 Pembroke.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Macnab cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Koxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Balfour sp.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Gordon sp.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Boss rec.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
N.B. It is suspected that Mid- 
dlesex and some others of 
the southern counties may 
have been erroneously re- 
ported for pratensis instead 
of pubescens.
1310 A.
pubescens.
1 Corn.
w. " Miss Warren." 
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
482 
1310 AVBNA PUBBSOENS.
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Towns, oat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
J. L.
Warren ms.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
J. L.
Warren ms.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
Skepper oat.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Baker sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 ' west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Bagnall ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
60 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
0. Moore flo 
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Baker cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid ?
89 .
east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
01 Oantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
05 Eoss west.
Church.
Bab. sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
eat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland".
Tate sp.
1311 A.
flavescens.
Counties all those of England, 
except 35 46 71.
In Scot- 
land, authorities collected as 
underneath : 
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy eat.+ 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
" Common." 
1311 AVENA FLAVESCENS.
483 
82 Haddingt.
E.B.S.cat.
"6." 
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour oat.
84 Linlithgow.
B. & S.
flo.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling !
Near the castle.
87 Perth west.
(F.B. White).
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F- B.
White).
90 Forfar.
" G.
Don." 
91 Kinoard.
" Miss Boswell." 
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie.
Eoy.t 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.* 
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
[Ill Orkney; Lowe].
1312 Arrhenatherum.
avanaceum.
[Avena elatior.) 
Counties all, 42 71 74 103 
105 108 ; no doubt it is to 
be found in all of them ; but 
it should be stated that the 
only specimen thus labelled, 
which I have seen from 
Shetland, was really Avena 
puhescens.
Edmonston re- 
cords it as being common in 
Shetland.
1313 Holcus lanatus.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
105 ; doubtless occurs in all.
The Isle of Man 71 is a fre- 
quent exception for grasses 
and sedges, in consequence 
of Edward Forbes not enter- 
ing them in the catalogue 
chiefly quoted as the au- 
thority for that island.
1314 HolGus mollis.
Counties all, except 31 42 46 
47 48 60 71 74 97 99 105 
107 108.
A single locahty 
given in the Flora of Shet- 
land, and only the rather 
suspicious one of " Eoddall " 
for Hebrides.
1315 Triodia decumtaens.
Counties all, except 41 42 47 
53 60 71 72 74 86 97 101 
105 107 ; most of these 
being counties iu which the 
lists of the commoner plants 
are least complete.
1316 Koeleria cristata.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 ' north.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east!
J.L.Warren.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Bell sp.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice oat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
484 
1316 KCELEBIA ORISTATA.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
" Bromwich." 
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
41 Glamorgan.
46 Cardigan.
Miss Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh J.
E .
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Carpenter sp.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
60 Lane.
west.
Binder ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate oat.
69 Westmoreland.
Finder ms.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
74 Wigton.
77 Lanark ?
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
87 Perth west !
88 mid.
(F.B.White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie oat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness!
Stables oat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour oat.
02 Eb. south.
Stables sp.
03 mid.
Church.
Bab. ms.
06 Eoss east.
Syme sp.
08 Suth.
west !
i 
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.cat.
N.B. This grass, so plentiful 
in many counties, remains 
in my lists without authority 
ascertained for forty of the 
counties, and is testified to 
as a rare plant only in some 
of the other seventy-two 
counties.
Even the pains- 
taking Authors of the Flora 
of Middlesex give only two 
localities inthatwell-searoh- 
ed county.
I could, how- 
ever, myself have recorded 
two others before 1866, the 
date of their first.
Are the 
Eev. George Finder's habi- 
tats of "Silverdale" and 
" Arnside '' rightly placed 
under two vioe-oounties, 60 
and 69 ?
1317 Melica uniflora.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Fleydell cat.
10 Wight 1 More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
16 west I 
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
1317 MELICA UNIFLOEA.
485 
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
J. L.
Warren ms.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt oat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
, 31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Nortbton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Tbwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea !
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
55 Leicester.
Coleman oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Noi-thumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
Hort ms.
70 Cumberland !
Hort ms.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. James Wilson sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme.
86 Stirling; Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
89 -^ east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south ?
" reported." 
95 Elgin.
Coll.
Mor.
98 Argyle ?
Clydesdale flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Mull.
Eoss cat.
[112 Shetland, 1 loc] 
1318 M.
nutans.
33 or 34 Gloster.
.. ?
Hort ms.
35 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
36 Hereford.
" Wilmott." 
87 Worcester.
Matthews.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
50 Denbigh ?
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Church.
Bab. ms.
58 Chester?
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
63 s.
wept.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumberland.
486 
1318 MELICA NUTANS.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberl.
Thompson sp.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Campbell sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Byrne ms.
88 mid.
Worsley oat.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
Eoy ms.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie oat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Eutherfordsp.
98 Argyle.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon sp.
1319 Molinia cserulea.
Counties all, except 16 33 42 
60 72 74 78 99 105 107 ; 
seldom, if ever, really absent 
from a whole county.
1320 Oatabrosa aquatica.
Counties all, except 1 4 85 41 
42 43 44 46 47 48 60 71 
73 74 75 76 78 79 80 84 
86 88 89 97 98 105 106 
107 108 109 ; likely to be 
found in most of these ; 
perhaps not in all of them.
A grass already ascertained 
in eighty counties, and ex- 
tended from Cornwall to 
Shetland, can hardly be 
classed with the uncommon 
species, while its census is 
taken by counties ; but this 
is on the whole a sparsely 
scattered grass ; and one for 
which I do not find any au- 
thority to be cited under the 
North Highland province.
Shetland ; Tate sp.
1321 Glyoeria aquatica.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More ms.
1862.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex 1 Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Conway cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford I Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
BidweU sp.
1321 GLYOEBIA AQUATICA.
487 
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke Babingtoa cat.
48 Merioneth.
(Eeeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint !
53 Lincoln south !
64 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. E.
Bowman ms.
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
Druce rec.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees oat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman oat.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray oat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
"Kilmenney." 
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme ms.
88 mid !
' 
90 Forfar.
Stables sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie.* 
95 Elgin.
Stables in N.
F. 
03 Mull.
Boss cat.
1322 G.
fluitans.
Counties all, except 71 74 84 
105 ; very likely to be found 
in all.
1322 G.
plicata.
1 Com, west.
Soilly flo.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Preston ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.
11 Hants south !
Towusend.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
Sansom sp.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex J.L.Warren ms.
22 Berks !
25 Suffolk east.
" Skepper." 
26 west.
" Skepper.
' 
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Douglas sp.
31 Hunts.
Newbould oat.
33 or 34 Gloster...
? Hort ms.
35 Monmouth.
Ley reo.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
Matthews.
38 Warwick.
Bromwich sp.
39 Stafford.
. Douglas sp.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
51 Flint !
, 
53 Lincoln south !
55 Leicester.
Coleman oat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane, south !
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Hort ms.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Syme ms.
488 
1322 GLYCBKIA PLICATA.
84 Linlithgow, Syme ms.
85 Fife.
BoswellSyme ms.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
11 Orkney ?
" doubtful." 
N.B. The specimens which I 
have seen labelled as being 
the " pedicellata " (Town- 
send) look like connecting 
links between this and the 
preceding grass, though 
nearer to flidtans of the two.
The recent-ness of this segre - 
gate, and its close resem- 
blance to flidtans, may lead 
to it being often passed by 
imnoticed.
Likely, it is 
common, and spread more 
generally than the above 
enumeration of counties 
might seem to imply.
1323 Sclerochloa maritima.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex w.
J.L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Gibson ms; 
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
" Marshall." 
34 Gloster west.
Stephens sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eiobinson cat.
51 Fhnt.
Eobinson cat.
62 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker eat.
co.
63 s.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
87 Perth.
Syme ms.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Ai-gyle.
Gibson ms.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Syme sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
oat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1324 S.
distans.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
1324 SOLEEOOHLOA DISTANS.
489 
4 Devon north !
Maw cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Townsend.
ISSussexw.
! J.
L.Warren cat.
14 east !
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith oat.
16 west !
17 Surrey ?
Probably so.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
Dyer sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
41 Glamorgan.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms.
51 Flint !
J. E.
Bowman sp.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
Kirk sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren sp.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Johnston.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Hailstone sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
83 Bdinb.
? B.
S. Ed. cat.
5. 
85 Fife !
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme sp.
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner flo.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
N.B. Desirable to re-verify some 
of the Scottish counties.
Occasionally seen inland, al- 
though chiefly a coast plant.
1324*S.
Borreri.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell ms.
1873.
10 Wight.
More sp.
Borrer.
11 Hants south.
Borrer.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren sp.
15 Kent east.
Blow rec.
16 west.
French sp.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
25 Suff.
e. Newb.
ms.
1869.
27 Norfolk east.
Jordan rec.
62 York n.
east.
Bot. n.
y. 
N.B. Notwithstanding the spe- 
cimens kindly supplied to 
me, as above cited, even yet 
I do not properly understand 
this alleged species ; perhaps 
through not having seen it 
living, unless at old dates 
when it would be passed as 
maritima or possibly distans.
1325 S.
procumbens.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
14 e.
J.L.Warrenms.
15 Kent east.
Crespigny sp.
16 west !
Bossey ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
27 Norfolk.
Ar. Bennett.
3 B 
490 
1324 SOLEKOCHLOA PBOCUMBENS.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmoutli.
Hort sp.
45 Pembroke ?
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
62 York n.
e. Baker cat.
co.
66 Durham.
Ward sp.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.t 
68 Cheviotland.
"native." 
[75 81 83 90 ; doubtful] .
1326 S.
rigida.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south!
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 e.
! J.L. Warrenms.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
J.L. Warren ms.
38 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley oat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
Notcutt oat.
29 Cambridge.
Babington oat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
Newbould oat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 Gloster west!
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Bailey rec.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
48 Merioneth.
Britten.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bidwell sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Hewitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
e. Baker cat.
oo.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
83 Edinburgh I Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kino.
Sim to Lewis sp.
06 Eoss east.
Syme sp.
1327 S.
loliaoea.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack sp.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs eat 
4 north.
6 Som. north.
Collins ms.
9 Dorset.
J. Eay sp.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend, 
1372 SOLBEOOHLOA LOLUCEA.
491 
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 e.
J.L.Warren ms.
15 Kent east !
French sp.
18 Essex south, Crespigny sp.
19 north.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
41 Glamorgan.
Withers ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
Eussell sp.
51 Flint.
52 Anglesea.
54 Lino, north.
Whitehead sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.f 
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumb.
Eev. F.
Addison sp.
71 Man. Carrington sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand (?) sp.
85 Fife !
Lloyd sp.
[90 110 111 ; errors ?] 
1328 Poa annua.
Counties all, except 71 74 105 
107; doubtless common in 
every county.
1329 P.
bulbosa.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
10 Wight.
Bromfield sp.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
15 Kent east.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
[Tregantle, Cornwall, Sur- 
rey and Middlesex have also 
been recorded for this local 
grass] .
1330 P.
alpina.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
64 York m.
west.
Gibson sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland ?
86 Stirling.
Hooker sp.
87 Perth west.
(F.
B. White) 
88 mid !
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
Graham sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
96 Easterness.
97 Westemess !
99 Dunbarton.
08 Suth.
west.
Campbell sp.
[15 error] .
1330 P.
laxa.
P. m-laxa.
92 Aber south.
Syme sp.
97 Westerness ?
1330 P.
laxa.
P. stricta.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
97 Westerness.
"Babington!" 
N.B. Much confusion has oc- 
curred between these two 
grasses, and in their nomen- 
clature.
The names used 
here are adopted from Dr.
Boswell-Syme's edition of 
English Botany.
Li the 
sixth edition of the Manual, 
Professor Babington gives 
the former as P.
minor, the 
latter as P.
laxa.
492 
1331 POA PEATENSIS.
1331 F.
pratensis.
i 
Counties all, except 85 42 46 
71 74 97 105 107; doubt- 
less to be found in every 
county.
13'32 P.
trivialis.
Counties all, except 42 46 71 
74 97 105 107 ; doubtless 
to be found in every county.
1333 P.
compressa.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Mower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Bromfield ms.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer ?
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Barnard sp.
21 Middlesex !
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
25 Suffollc east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper oat.
27 Norfolk east.
Geldart sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
81 Hunts !
Newbonld cat.
32 Northton !
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
84 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
Purchas sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
50 Denbigh?
J. E.Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south!
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren.
61 York B.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Johnston.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees rec.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
Embleton ms.
88 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
85 Fife ?
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar ?
06 Boss east.
Syme ms.+ 
[112 " common " ; error ?] 
1334 P.
nemoralis.
1 Corn, west ?
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north !
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
1334 POA NEMOEALIS.
493 
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight.
More, 1862.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat 
15 Kent east.
Baker.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton, Druce ree.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser oat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
43 Eadnor.
Jones oat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
50 Denbigh.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman oat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberl.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Hort ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour- sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selku-k.
Farquharson oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west !
88 mid !
Worsley oat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
99 Dunbarton.
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson oat.
1334 P.
glauca.
P. Balfourii.
49 Carnarvon.
Hort ms.
64 York m.
west.
Baker sp.
68 "Cheviotland.
69 Westm.
Backhouse ms.
88 Perth mid.
Syme sp.
90 Forfar !
H. M.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south.
94 Banff.
Eoy ms.
" 300 yds." 
98 Argyle ?
99 Dunbarton.
Balfour sp.
N.B. This has been named also 
" casia " and " dissitiflora ; " 
but in a case where all the 
records have to be assigned 
among the plants or names, 
it is needful to make only a 
single aggregate species : 
nor, indeed, am I able to fix 
494 
1334 POA GLAUCA.
on a clear line of severance 
between glauca and Balfourii.
15 East Kent has been re- 
corded for "glauca;" that 
name unquestionably intend- 
ing some other grass there.
The glaucous tint and some 
other slight technical cha- 
racters will distinguish the 
living Balfourii from Par- 
neilii ; but dried examples 
are difficult to separate, es- 
pecially in an early stage of 
their inflorescence.
1335 Briza media.
Counties all the English, ex- 
cept 71.
In Wales and 
Scotland recorded as un- 
der : — 
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Misa Barnard.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Mint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy oat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
JFarquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 LinUthgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling..
Croall reo.
87 Perth west 1 Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 Perth east I 
90 Forfar !
91 Kinc.
Mrs. Dickson ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easternes.
Stables cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
(Ill Orkney; Syme ms.f) 
1336 Briza minor.
2 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat, 
2 east.
Briggs cat.f 
3 Devon south.
Borrer.
6 Som. north.
Withers ms.* 
9 Dorset.
Townsend sp.
10 Wight.
Stratton sp.
11 Hants south.
Bromf.
sp.
(17 21 51; casuaUy).
[83 34 37 39 58].
1337 Cynosurus cristatus.
Counties all, except 42 74 
105.
1339 Dactylis glomerata.
Counties all, except 74 105 
107.
1340 Pestuca uniglumis.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Eussell sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Withers ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex east.
16 Kent east.
French sp.
18 Essex south.
1840 FBSTUOA UNIGLUMIS.
495 
19 Essex north.
Gibson sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Varenne sp.
28 Norfolk west.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
52 Anglesea.
J. Macnab sp.
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
(East Lowlands, casual).
[61 South-east York] .
1341 P.
sciuroides.
F. hromoides.
Counties all, except 42 46 47 
48 57 60 69 70 71 74 79 
82 84 89 97 104 105 107 
108 (110 111).
Thus be- 
coming rare in Scotland.
1341*F.
Pseudo-myurus.
1 Corn.
west.
" Hore !
" 
2 east.
Briggs sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
6 Som. north.
Thwaites oat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
1869.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Roper oat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne eat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Newbould sp.
23 Oxford.
Beesley ms.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Jordan rec.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west, Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites sp.
36 Hereford.
Shaw sp.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
42 Brecon.
Ley rec, 
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Eowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester J.
L. Warren ms.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.f 
65 n.
west ?
(66 67 77 81 85).
[90].
1341*F.
ambigua.
(F.
ciliata, var.
glabra).
9 Dorset.
Mansel-Pleydell sp.
10 Wight.
A. G.
More sp.
26 Suffolk west.
Ar. Bennett.
28 Norfolk west.
Ar. Bennett.
1342 F.
ovina.
Counties aU, except 31 60 71 
74 105 107 ; presumably 
occurring in plenty in every 
county.
1343 F.
duriuscula.
Counties aU, except 24 31 42 
44 45 46 51 53 54 60 71 
73 74 80 84 93 97 98 
103 104 105 107 108.
These twenty-three seeming 
496 
1343 PESTUCA DUBIUSCULA.
exceptions to a oomital ge- 
nerality do not exhaust the 
uncertainties about this 
grass.
It has -been so con- 
fused with ovina on one side, 
and with rubra or areiiaria 
on the other side, that per- 
haps the better course now 
would be to treat duriuseula 
and arenaria as two grasses, 
any counties for which might 
properly be recorded de novo ; 
provided, of course, this were 
done by botanists prepared 
to discriminate these two 
from each other and also 
both of them from ovina.
1344 F.
rubra.
F. arenaria.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Ley.
8 Devon south.
4 north ?
6 Som, north.
Thwaites cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Jeffrey.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
84 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Bobinson cat.
54 Lincoln north !
58 Chester !
J. H.
Lewis sp.
69 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west !
61 York s.
east.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Oheviotland.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr. Boswell-Syme sp.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat; 
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh ?
85 Fife.
Balfour sp.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Syme sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Binflf.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables eat.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Syme sp.
07 or 08 Suth.
North flo.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney ?
12 Shetland ?
Probably.
N.B. This grass, brought into 
the gardens from the sandy 
coast of Lincolnshire, and 
kept under flower-pot cul- 
ture, became so like the 
prdinary inland F.
duriuseula 
as to be scarcely separable 
from the latter.
Inland lo- 
calities are rejected ; ex.
gr.
Andover ; Clarke Flora.
1345 F.
sylvatiea.
1345 PESTUCA SYIiVATICA.
497 
7 Wilts north.
Flower oat.
14 Sussex east.
Eeeves.
34 Gloster west.
Ley rec.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
Mr. Moseley.
39 Stafford.
Garner Hist.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
57 Derby.
Whitehead sp.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ley rec.
66 Durham.
Backhouse.
69 Westmoreland !
Gibson.
70 Cumberland.
Baker sp.
83 Edinburgh.
J. Macnab sp.
87 Perth west.
Bot. soc.
ed.
88 mid.
Stables sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
91 Kincardine.
Dickie G.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie G.
94 Banff.
Northern Flora.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Western.
" Fort Augustus." 
99 Dunbarton.
Hook.
Scot.
[1 3 27 75 77 ; on au- 
thority hardly sufficient] .
I 
have not seen a specimen 
from any county to the 
southward of Derby ; but 
the personal authorities, as 
above cited for South Britain , 
seem to leave no warrant for 
disbelief in its occurrence 
there.
1346 F.
elatior.
F. arundinacea.
Counties all, except 7 25 36 
to 48 58 60 69 71 to 74 
78 80 97 104 to 108.
N.B. Looking to the specimens 
in my own herbarium only, 
I much doubt whether any 
one botanist could separate 
those named as above, into 
two quasi-specific groups, to 
the satisfaction of all other 
botanists.
By comparing 
their books, lists, and labels, 
it is made evident that the 
same botanists, at different 
dates, have applied both 
names to the same grass.
Moreover pot-culture proves 
that the great coast grass, to 
which the name arundinacea 
has been more especially ap- 
plied, can be reduced into 
rather a small state of ordi- 
nary elatior.
See .further, 
the remarks under the next 
species or couplet of names.
To give the names of coun- 
ties with personal authorities 
in detail, would less show 
the distribution of the four 
grasses themselves, than the 
use of the four names by in- 
dividual botanists, too often 
only the doubting use of 
them.
1347 F.
pratensis.
F. loliacea.
Counties all, except 32 45 to 
48 51 60 71 74 78 84 86 
93 95 to 98 102 104 105 
107 108 110 112.
N.B. According to the accepted 
use of these two names in 
England, every grade of 
intermediate form may be 
found in various places; and 
one form of inflorescence 
can be converted into the 
other on the self-same root 
under experimental culture.
Unfortunately, a binary 
3 s 
498 
1347 FESTUCA PBATENSIS.
yoking of the four names 
(under 1346 and 1347) fails 
to remove all the difficulties 
in the nomenclature of the 
grasses themselves.
The 
two names pratensis and 
elatior are often used in- 
terchangeably ; and I have 
seen specimens so interme- 
diate as to prevent me from 
putting either of these two 
names to them with any 
confidence of being correct 
in the choice.
1348 Bromus gigantens.
Counties all, except 5 42 46 
47 60 61 71 72 74 78 97 
104 to 112.
It will be seen 
that my notes fail to shew 
any counties for this grass 
to the north-westward of 
Moray and Argyle.
1349 B.
asper.
Counties all, except 42 43 48 
60 71 74 78 89 96 to 99 
102 104 to 112.
The north- 
ward limit is thus slightly 
more restricted than that 
of the preceding grass.
1350 B.
sterilis.
Counties all the English, except 
69 and 71.
In Wales and 
Scotland it has been recorded 
as under : — 
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. B.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80- Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
81 Berwick.
82 Kaddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh !
Lloyd sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Duthie sp.
87 Perth west.
(F.
B. White).
88 mid.
Eoy ms.
89 east !
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.f 
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton ?
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Camp'st.
cat.
N.B. This grass, so abundant 
in the southern counties, 
must surely take rank among 
the less common in Scotland.
Marked as " very common " 
in the Edinburgh Catalogue.
1351 B.
madritensis.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Eussell sp.
11 Kants south.
14 Sussex east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
23 Oxford ?
34 Gloster west !
Thwaites ms.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat, 
l35l BROMtJS MADEITENSIS.
499 
45 Pembroke.
(66 85).
[37 83] .
1353 B.
erectus.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.* 
6 Som. north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset ?
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Gibson ms.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
J. L.
Warren ms.
26 Suffolk west.
Skepper cat.
28 Norfolk west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton ?
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
E. Lees sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Matthews.
38 Warwick.
Bagnall.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south !
Bloxam ms.
54 north !
Gh. Bab.
sp.
55 Leicester.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
. Norman cat.
73 Kirkcudbright ?
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
(18).
[2 25 45 ; more safe 
authority needed] .
1354 B.
seealinus.
Counties all, but with many 
exceptions, especially north- 
ward.
Authorities can be 
cited for about 80 counties 
and ranging from Cornwall 
to Boss, but in few of these, 
if in any of them, has this 
grass of tillage, fields got a 
constant hold of the ground.
The B.
velutinus, of Smith, 
is simply a variation of the 
same grass with pubescent 
flowers.
The like variation 
occurs in commutatns, mollis, 
and other species.
1355 B.
commutatus.
B. pratensis, Sm.
1 Com. west.
2 east, "racemosus." 
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
4 north.
" racemosus." 
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
8 Wilts south, "racemosus." 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More sp.+ 
11 Hants south.
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Dyer sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
Bossey sp.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Barnard sp.
600 
1355 BBOMUS COMMUTATUS.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Ayres sp.
, 
24 Bucks.
Pryor.* 
25 Suff.
east.
" racemosiis." 
26 west.
" racemosus." 
'ill Norf.
east, " racemosus." 
28 west.
" racemosus." 
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
" racemosus." 
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.
Ley sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
G. Maw sp.
38 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
Babington sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Barnard ms.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
50 Denbigh.
" racemosus." 
52 Anglesea.
"racemosus." 
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
T. H.
Cooper sp.
58 Chester!
J. L.
Warren sp.
59 Lane, south.
Lewis sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
72 Dumfries, "racemosus." 
73 Kirkcud.
" racemosus." 
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.f 
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.f 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
81 Berwick, "racemosus," 
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh !
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
Syme ms.
1870.
86 Stirling !
87 Perth west.
Syme oat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syine cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
96 Easterness !
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour oat.
02 Bb. south.
Balfour sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.t 
[11 Orkney.
Gillies ms.] 
N.B. Not unlikely to occur in 
Orkney; but the specimen 
labelled " pratensis" in the 
herbarium of Dr. Gillies is 
a subglabrous mollis.
The 
name " racemosus," as used 
in books and on labels often 
intended this present spe- 
cies ; but it was perhaps 
almost equally often applied 
to a state of moUis with gla- 
brous inflorescence.
The eu- 
racemosus (of Syme, in Eng.
Bot. ed.
3) is a third appli- 
cation of the name to a 
closely allied grass, which 
apparently is a casual im- 
portation along with foreign 
seeds of rye -grass, &c.
Li 
the work referred to, Dr.
Syme enumerates counties 
]0 17 18 or 19 20 21 29 
80 and 58 for his eu-racemo- 
sus.
Mr. Briggs sent a spe- 
cimen of it from South 
Devon, and Dr. Syme one 
so labelled from Fife.
My 
186S BEOMUS COMMUTATUS.
501 
own knowledge of it other- 
wise is limited to its rare 
occurrence in Surrey, in 
fields sown with Italian rye- 
grass and clover, and a spe- 
cimen or two occasionally by 
railway stations.
1356 B.
mollis.
Counties all, except 41 71 74 
105 ; no doubt it occurs in 
every county.
1357 Brachypodium.
sylvaticum.
Counties all, except 42 48 71 
74 78 89 97 99 105 108 
110 112.
There are speci- 
mens of this grass in the 
Orkney herbarium of Dr.
Gillies; and it is marked in 
the Caithness catalogue by 
Dr. Brown ; apparently ra- 
ther a rare grass in North 
Britain.
1358 B.
pinnatum.
3 Devon south ?
several rec.
6 Som. north !
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Withers ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south.
Trevelyan sp.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 e.!
J. L.
Warren oat.
15 Kent east.
Trevelyan sp.
16 west.
Reynolds sp.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
19 Essex north.
20 Herts.
Pordham sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
Ch. Bab.
ms.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
35 Monmouth.' Hort sp.
36 Hereford.
Purchas sp.
37 Worcester.
Matthews 
38 Warwick ?
39 Stafford ?
53 Line, south !
54 north !
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
Mrs. Kussell sp.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 B.
west.
64 m.
w. Hailstone sp.
N.B. The. rejected counties are 
detailed underneath, with 
their authorities so far as 
the restricted space will 
allow.
Possibly it may be 
deemed worth while here- 
after to print a full hst of 
the rejected and queried 
counties, under all the spe- 
cies ?
[21 Middlesex.
"Lrvine." 
25Suff.
e. "Woodward." 
27 Norf.
e. " Woodward." 
66 Durham.
King in Phyt.
70 Cumb.
" Hutchinson." 
85 Fife.
Woodf.
Ed. cat.
94 Banff.
Bot. Soc.
Ed.] 
1359 Triticum caninum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 Devon south.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 s.
J. L.
Warren ms.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
502 
1359 TRITICTM CANlNUM.
11 Hants south.
To-wns.
cat.
12 north.
Towns, cat.
13 or 14 Sussex.
Borrer cat.
co.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper 
27 Norfolk east.
Stock cat.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
81 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
32 Northton !
38 Gloster east.
34 w.
! Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort ms.
86 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford !
BagnaU ms.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley ms.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt oat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Eobinson ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Hailstone sp.
65 York n.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hooker sp.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Sym« cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
" common." 
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
" frequent." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Boss cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
Sutherland.
Johnston ms.
[10 Bromf.
Ill Clouston] .
1360 T.
repens.
Counties all, except 42 71 74 
97 105 107 108.
Doubt- 
less it occurs in every 
county.
1361 T.
"littorale." 
1 Corn.
west.
Scilly flo.
3 Devon south.
" Uttoreum." 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex west I 
1361 TKITICUM "LITTOEALE.
503 
15 Kent east !
16 west !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts ?
Webb Supp.
no.
2. 
34 Gloster west !
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
51 Flint !
52 Anglesea.
54 Lincoln north !
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Baker sp.
70 Cumberland.
Oliver sp.
83 Edinburgh !
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Ch. Bab.
ms.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
" maritimum." 
04 Bb. north.
Lawson cat.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland "maritimum." 
N.B. Apparently this is the 
same thing with pungens, 
though possibly some of the 
counties reported may belong 
only to a glaucous variety of 
repens; thus, not properly 
quotable under pungens.
1361*T.
"pungens." 
1 Cornwall.
" Oliver." 
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
10 Wight.
More cat.
E.B.3.
11 Hants south.
Towns, cat.
18 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren cat.
14 e.
J. L.
Warren ms.
15 Kent east.
Syme ms.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
94 Gloster west.
Druce rec.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
58 Ches.
J.L.Warrenms.l873.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
03 Ebudes mid.
N.B. See the remark under the 
l^reeeding species or segre- 
gate ; apparently a synonym 
with this present, as to 
name ; not certainly so, as 
to county habitats.
1361*T.
"acutum." 
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
3 DeVon south.
Briggs sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants s.
J. L.
Warren ms.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren ms.
15 Kent east.
Syme " sp." 
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas ms.
27 Norfolk east.
Babington.
28 west.
45 Pembroke.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
58 Chester.
E. Brown.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
70 Cumberland.
83 Edinburgh.
85 Fife.
Syme " sp." 
00 Clyde-isles.
. Hennedy cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
13ei*T.
"laxum." 
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
Atwood " sp." 
10 Wight.
Syme " sp." 
11 Hants south, 
13 Sussex west.
Mitten "sp." 
16 Kent east.
16 west.
Syme " sp." 
19 Essex n.
Varenne •' sp." 
25 Suffolk west.
Purchas ms.
28 Norfolk west.
504 
1861*TBITICUM " LAXUM." 
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker " sp." 
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
" Chambers." 
83 Edinbtirgh.
00 Clyde-isles.
N.B. The laxum and acutum are 
supposed to be synonyms 
for the self- same segregate ; 
but in actual use, I suspect 
the former name has been 
occasionally applied to pun- 
gens or UUorale.
Hence the 
keeping apart for the pre- 
sent.
1362 T.
junceum!
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north.
Eogers.
10 Wight.
More Supp.
F. V.
11 Hants south.
(Towns, flo.) 
13 Sussex w.
J.L. Warren cat.
14 east.
Jenner rec.
15 Kent east.
Ar. Bennett.
18 Essex south.
Orespigny.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
27 Norf.
east.
Babington.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones reo.
46 Cardigan.
Jones cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Druce rec.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
Webster rec.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss rec.
09 Caithness.
Nicolson cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
N.B. The counties for this sea- 
side grass are doubtless 
much more numerous than 
are given here.
So far as 
the use of the name junceum 
goes, my notes shew that it 
has been reported from all 
the maritime counties, ex- 
cept 48 69 71 72 73 74 
84 87 89 97 105 107.
As 
thus reported, however, it is 
not simply the segregate or 
truly distinct species here 
intended, but a commute 
jumble of it with the three 
or four preceding, which are 
rightly judged by Dr. Syme 
to be more closely allied to 
T. repens than to junceum 
strictly so named.
1363 Lolium perenne.
Counties all, except 74 105.
1364 L.
temulentum.
L. arvense.
Counties sixty-four, rather less 
than half of the whole num- 
ber, find authorities for this 
colonist or casual grass 
among my collected notes.
The awnless state, arvense, 
is perhaps the more frequent 
plant, though the name of 
temulentum occurs more fre- 
quently in books.
It seems 
needless to enumerate coun- 
ties and authorities in detail 
for a plant so uncertain of 
being re-found in the same 
places (fields or even farms)' 
from year to year.
1365 Elymus arenarius.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield cat.
1365 ELYMUS AEENARIUS.
505 
27 Norf, east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
49 Carnarvon.
Gibson ms.
54 Lino, north !
Thompson ms 
59 Lane.
s. P.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland ?
75 Ayr.
82 Haddington ?
85 Fife ?
90 Forfar.
Syme sp.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie sp.
93 north Brand sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
97 Westerness !
Gordon ms.
00 Clyde isles.
Syme 1872.
07 Suth.
east.
08 west!
Graham sp., 
09 Caith.
! Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
GilUes herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[3 6 9 46 ; counties not 
very unlikely, yet seeming 
to require confirmation.
Cardigan may be held a 
likely county, but I can cite 
for it no better authority 
than the unreliable one of 
Aikin in Botanist's Guide] .
1366 Hordeum sylvatieiim.
7 WUts north ?
12 Hants north.
16 Kent west.
Borrer ms.
17 Surrey.
Groves.
19 Essex north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Woodward sp.
34 west.
Stephens sp.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester ?
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp, 
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Storey cat.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp, 
[29 50].
1367 H.
pratense.
1 Corn.
west.
Ealfs.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north !
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat, 
12   north.
Towns, cat.
13 Sussex west !
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
! G.
E. Smith cat, 
16 west !
17 Surrey !
Christy sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex !
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
Stock cat.
26 west.
Skepper cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
8 T 
506 
1367 HOEDEUM PRATENSB.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
31 Hunts !
Newbould cat.
82 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west !
Thwaites cat.
85 Monmoutli.
Watkins sp.
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
51 Mint !
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea ?
Eobinson cat.
53 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Hewitt sp.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
Gordon ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Moore flo.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
[75 81 83 85 87; counties 
which seem to require con- 
firmation ; that of Berwick 
is simply a question of poli- 
tical boundary,between Eng- 
land and Scotland; through 
Dr. Syme I have a specimen 
supposed to have been picked 
on the north side of the 
Tweed] .
1368 H, murinum.
Counties all in South Britain, 
except 42 43 47 48.
The 
records for Mid and North 
Britain run as follows : — 
58 Lincoln south !
54 north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
co.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
64 m.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Embleton cat.
70 Cumberland ?
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
89 Perth east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
" doubtless in- 
Aberdeen.
troduced." 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
& cat.t 
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.* 
[116 Orkney ; Lowe] .
1369 H.
maritimum.
1 or 2 Cornwall ?
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt sp.
13 Sussex w.!
J.L.Warren cat.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent e.
! G.
B. Smith cat.
16 west !
1369 HOBDEUM MABITIMtTM.
507 
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Christy sp.
25 Suffolk east Bloomf.
cat.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Bell sp.
29 Cambridge ?
34 Gloster w.
! Thwaites cat.
41 Glamorgan ?
48 Merioneth.
(Eeeves).
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
66 Durham.
[58 68 70 87 90; counties 
requiring confirmation] .
1370 Nardus striata.
Counties all, except 6 81 32 33 
58 71 74 105; possibly 31 
and 32 may be real excep- 
tions to a comital generality.
1371 Lepturus filiformis.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Hore sp.
4 north-.
Eussell sp.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
Thwaites sp.
9 Dorset.
Gibson sp.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
13 Sussex w.
J. L.
Warren.
14 east.
Eoper cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
25 Suffolk east.
Bloomf.
cat.
27 Norfolk east.
Fitt sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
" Marshall." 
34 Gloster w.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Hort sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Jones rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms.
51 Flint.
J. E.
Bowman sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north !
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Tudor sp.
60 west.
Syme sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
West rec* 
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
J. Dickson sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
82 Haddington.
Syme sp.
83 Edinburgh ?
84 Linlithgow 1 Gentle sp.
85 Fife.
Drummond.
03 Ebudes south.
(Grieve).
N.B. This enumeration will be 
understood to include the 
counties reported for so- 
called incurvatus, if reported 
as a truly wild grass, not on 
ballast, etc.
1372 Ceteraeh oflacinarum.
1 Corn.
west.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north !
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
508 
1372 CETEBACH OFPIOINABUM.
11 Hants south.
Tate ms.
12 north.
1.3 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith oat.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts ?
21 Middlesex.
Extinct ?
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suffolk west.
27 Norfolk east.
82 Northton.
Berkeley ms.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west !
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas pat.
87 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
89 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton oat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Stables sp.
45 Pembroke.
Babington sp.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
47 Montgomery.
Pamplinms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
60 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowmanms.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Scholes sp.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south ?
60 west.
68 York s.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
68 Cheviotland.
Extinct, 
69 Westmorel.
Simpson sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Renfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark ?
81 Berwick?
88 Perth mid.
" Ogilvie." 
89 east.
Gardiner sp.
98 Argyle.
" GourUe." 
1373 Woodsia ilvensis.
48 Merioneth.
Backhouse rec.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
66 Durham.
J.E.Bowmansp.
€9 Westmorel.
Bloxam ms.
70 Cumberland ?
72 Dumfries.
Gray ms.
88 Perth mid.
90 Forfar !
J. Eoy ms.
[65 " Mr. Potter." F.F.] 
1373 W.
hyperborea.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
88 Perth mid.
Maughan sp.
90 Forfar.
J. Eoy sp.
[72 Dumfries] .
This fern is 
with difficulty distinguished 
from the preceding ; and 
some of the stations are 
assigned now to one, now to 
the other of them.
For in- 
stance, the name on Mr.
Eoy's label was altered to 
ilvensis by Dr. Syme ; while 
to my own eye the specimen 
(from Glen Isla) looks quite 
as near hyperhorea, under 
which it is placed here.
So, 
again, I found ilvensis on the 
Clova mountains in 1831 
or 2 ; and then showed the 
station to Mr. Brand, and 
sent specimens thence to Sir 
William Hooker ; neverthe- 
less, Sir William published 
the station for hyperborea on 
the seeming authority of 
1373 WOODSIA HYPERBOEEA, 
509 
Mr. Brand.
And so, of other 
stations ; the very confusion 
tending to support the view 
of specific identity.
1374 Polypodium vulgare.
Counties all, except 42 74 105.
1375 P.
Phegopteris.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Parsons rec.
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydellsp.
14 Sussex east.
83 Gloster east.
34 west.
Purchas cat.
36 Monmouth.
Pryer.f 
36 Hereford.
Shawe sp.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
42 Brecon.
Ley oat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley oat.
44 Carmarthen.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
Eussell sp.
49 Caarnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Miss P.
Walker.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westm.
1 Miss Beevor sp.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley oat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Basterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Gibson ms.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east !
07 Suth.
east.
Johnston ms.
08 west !
Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
12 Shetland, one loc.
in E.F.
[17 21 Beevis in F.
F.] .
1376 P.
Dryopteris.
2 Corn.
east.
M. Bull sp.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
M. Bull sp.
34 Gloster west.
Hort ms.
35 Monmouth.
510 
1376 POLYPODIUM DBYOPTBKIS.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
87 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
' ' Planted ?' ' 
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
BidweU sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
45 Pembroke.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
50 Denbigh.
J. E Bowman ms.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
Eobinson oat.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
w. Ch. Bab.
sp.
6B n.
west.
Ward eat.
66 Durham.
E.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
Binder ms.
70 Cumberland !
Baker ms.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
"84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
86 Fife.
Syme cat.
1868.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley oat.
89 east I 
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.- 
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
12 Shetland.
Norman ms.
[6 Som. Mr.
Flower.
B. G.
7 Wilts.
Dr. Alexander.
9 Dorset.
" Mr. Pox." 
13 Sussex.
Error; W.B.
18 Essex.
Warner Woodf.
23 Oxford.
Sibthorp flo.
54 Lincoln.
Irvine flo.
56 Notts.
Bot. Guide.] 
N.B. The confusion between 
this and the next species 
throws doubt on all the 
southern counties recorded 
for the present, except those 
recently reported on safe 
authority.
Cystoptm-isfragilis 
has also been mistaken for 
this fern in Notts, etc.
1377 P.
ealeareum.
P. Robertianum.
6 Som. north.
Trevelyan sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower eat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Spec, seen ; Britten.
33 Gloster east.
Woodward sp.
34 west.
Purchas ms, 
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
87 Worcester.
Dr. Fraser sp.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Salwey sp.
1377 POLYPODIUM CAIiOAEEUM.
511 
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
57 Derby !
J. E.
Bowman sp.
59 Lane, south.
Leyland sp.
63 York s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland !
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. White).
(10 Wight, "planted").
[60 88 93 ; .
insufficiently 
vouched, but possibly cor- 
rect] .
1378 AUosorus crispus.
4 Devon north ?
5 Som. south.
Dr. Bull sp.
37 Worcester ?
40 Salop.
Newman ms.
41 Glamorgan.
Newman Ire.
43 Radnor.
Jones cat.
46 Cardigan.
Gibson ms.
47 Montg.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat, 
50 Denbigh.
57 Derby ?
68 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Leyland sp.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
" extinct." 
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberland.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Montgomery ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
" Mr. Dunlop." 
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxbu'rgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
McHardy.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
Stables sp.
91 Kincardine.
Eoy ms.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie ms.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
" Mr. Wilson." 
08 Suth.
west.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.t 
10 Hebrides.
Harris isle.
[36 55 83.
Errors ?] 
1379 Cystopteris fragilis.
C. dentata.
1 Corn.
west.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Bull sp.
6 north.
Babington sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset ?
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
17 Surrey.
21 Middlesex.
33 Gloster east.
Eoberts ms.
34 west.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick..
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
512 
1379 OYSTOPTEEIS FRAGILIS.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley oat.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmartlien.
Oakeshott rec.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
47 Montgomery.
Leighton sp.
48 Merion.
J. B.
Bowman sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Bidwell sp.
51 Flint.
Bidwell sp.
52 Anglesea.
Bobinson oat.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Eiley sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
60 Lane.
west.
Linton oat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Thornhill sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
73 Kirkcudbriglit.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson oat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west !
Syme sp.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness !
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Ebudes south.
Grieve cat.
03 mid.
Eoss oat.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campet.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
" Anderson " sp.
[Kent ?
Essex ?
Suffolk ?
Norfolk ?] 
1380 Cystopteris alpina.
66 Durham.
Backhouse ms.
N.B. Mr. Backhouse informed 
me that he had found true 
alpina in Teesdale, 1872.
The so-called alpina in Essex 
is or was on a (garden ?) 
wall ; doubtless introduced.
1381 C.
montana.
88 Perth mid.
Gourlie sp.
90 Forfar.
Backhouse sp.
92 Aber.
south.
"Mr. Croall." 
[49 94 ; insufficiently vouch- 
ed, and Mr. Eoy writes that 
94 was an error] .
1382 Polystichum 
Lonchitis.
41 Glamorgan ?
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton ms.
69 Westm.
Martindale, 1871.
86 Stirling.
Croall oat.
87 Perth w.
F. M.
Webb rec.
88 mid !
1382 POLYSTIOHUM LONCHITIS.
513 
89 Perth east!
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
94 Banff.
Eoy ms.
95 Elgin.
96 Basterness I 
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Landsborough.
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
09 Caithness.
" 0.
W. Peach." 
[29 32 70 77 111] .
1383 P.
lobatum.
P. aculeatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower oat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt oat.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 ' east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne oat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
28 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield cat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Notcutt cat, 
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
30 Bedford.
Which species ?
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
38 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites sp.
85 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley oat.
45 Pembroke.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J.E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north !
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.M. Webb cat.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
68 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Oheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
88 Edinburgh !
Brand sp.
8 u 
514 
1383 POLYSTIOHUM LOBATUM.
85 Fife !
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie fio.
95 Elgin.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
08 mid.
Boss cat.
04 north.
Lawson ms.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caithness.
Grant.
11 Orkney.
Johnston.
N.B. Some confusion occurs 
between this present species 
and angulare ; the name 
aculeatum having sometimes 
been used to designate the 
latter; while in most in- 
stances it intends an inter- 
mediate form (as to cutting 
or division of the pinnse) 
between lobatum and angu- 
lare, but passing into ordi- 
nary lobatum by inseparable 
gradations of duration, out- 
line, cutting, texture, and 
colour.
1384 Polystichum angulare.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south !
Greville sp.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north.
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Trevelyan sp.
15 Kent east.
Stevens sp.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
26 Suffolk east.
Purchas cat.
26   west.
27 Norfolk east.
81 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Kobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
Miss Walker sp.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
68 s.
west.
64 m.
w. F.
A. Lees eat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumberland.
69 Westmoreland.
Ball sp.
70 Cumberland.
Chambers sp.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
76 Ayr.
1384 POLYSTIOHUM ANGULARE.
515 
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
1385 Lastrea Thelypteris.
3 Devon south ?
6 Som. north.
Withers sp.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight!
More sp.
11 Hants south.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
22 Berks ?
25 Suffolk east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Salmon sp.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 w.
Woodward sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
36 Hereford.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
Atwood sp.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
J. B.
Bowman ms.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line.
n. Lees & Fowler rec.
55 Leicester?
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
69 Westm.
Miss Hodgson ms.
70 Cumberland.
90 Forfar.
Maughan sp.
[112 Bdm. flo.] 
1386 L.
Oreopteris.
Counties all, except 24 26 28 
29 (extinct?) 30 31 33 42 
43 47 48 73 74 82 84 93 
94 97 105.
1387 L.
Pilix-mas.
Counties all, except 74 97 105.
Shetland recorded, but very 
doubtful.
1388 L.
rigida.
6 Som. north ?
? J.
E. Vize.
59 Lane, south.
60 west.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham sp.
65 n.
w. Thompson sp.
69 Westmorel.
Simpson sp.
N.B. At an elevation of about 
200 yards on Whitbarrow 
and Farleton Knot ; fide Mr.
J. A.
Martindale ms.
1389 L.
cristata.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norf.
east.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
Eobinson sp.
63 York s.
w. F.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west ?
74 Eenfrew.
Gait sp.
[8 23 30 37 84 92.] 
1389 L.
uliginosa.
18 Essex??
27 Norf.
west.
516 
1889 LASTBEA ULIGINOSA.
28 Norf.
east.
Wardale sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
[38 40 91 ; errors] .
1390 L.
spinulosa.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
3 Devou south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Dyer ms.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west I Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east !
16 west.
17 Surrey I 
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Wing sp.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford ?
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomf.
ms.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
30 Bedford.
Hillhouse cat.
31 Hunts.
Newbould cat.
32 Northton.
83 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
F. Hort ms.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
88 Warwick.
Bloxam sp.
39 Stafford !
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Maw sp.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt oat.
58 Chester.
Brent sp.
59 Lane, south.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
w. P.
A. Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumb.
Babington sp.
71 Man ?
Forbes cat.
76 Eenfrew.
80 Eoxb.
Brotherston rec.
83 Edinburgh ?
E. B.
S. cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
(F.
B. White).
88 mid.
A. 0.
Black sp.
89 east.
(P.
B. White).
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine ?
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin ?
97 West.
Mrs. Maske'lyne sp.
98 Argyle ?
99 Dunbarton.
02 Ebudes south.
Grieve cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
06 Eoss east ?
10 Hebrides ?
N.B. This has been much and 
strangely confused with the 
very different dilatata.
Se- 
veral counties are queried 
1390 LASTBBA SPINULOSA.
517 
in consequence, but rather 
because the testifiers are 
supposed to have been un- 
prepared to apply the names 
rightly, than because the 
counties are to be considered 
unlikely in themselves.
1391 L.
dilatata.
Counties all, except 28 31 42 
to 74 105 to 108.
In some 
few instances, where the 
spimdosumia marked in lists, 
and dilatatwn left unmarked, 
it has been assumed that the 
present more general species 
has been the one intended.
1392 L.
semula.
L. Fcenisedi.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
8 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
9 Dorset.
14 Sussex east.
Broome sp.
16 Kent west.
Trevelyan sp.
80 Hereford ?
40 Salop ?
41 Glamorgan.
" Vize!
" 
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
(Eeeves).
49 Carnarvon.
62 Anglesea.
62 York n.
east.
Bean sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
SOEoxburgh?
81 Berwick ?
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Gourlie sp.
02 Eb. south.
Grieve cat.
03 mid.
03 north.
Lawson cat.
10 Hebrides ?
11 Orkney.
N.B. This continues to be con- 
fused with dilatata, even by 
botanists who have oppor- 
tunities to see the ferns 
living.
There are specimens 
in my herbarium, brought 
fi-om Cornwall to Edinburgh 
in 1830 or 1831, which Dr.
Greville then pronounced a 
species quite distinct from 
dilatata.
[11 64 65 90 ; 
likely all errors] .
1393 Pseud athyrium.
alpestre.
87 Perth west.
F. M.
Webb.
88 mid.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Backhouse sp.
94 Banff.
Eoy Ire.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
08 Suth.
west.
Oliver sp.
N.B. The Polypodium alpestre oi 
most botanists.
There is a 
segregate, which has been 
described as a distinct spe- 
cies under name of flexile, 
and is stated to occur in 88 
90 97 108.
1394 Athyrium F.
foemina.
Counties all, except 28 81 53 
74 97 105 106.
The vari- 
ously named varieties shade 
off, one into the other, by 
insensible gradations ; and 
518 
1394 ATHYBIUM F.
PCEMINA.
some of them may be seen 
on the same root at the 
same time, if early and late 
fronds be compared.
But 
to this there is one decided 
exception, according to my 
experience, after cultivating 
it alongside the ordinary 
Filix-fmninathrongh.
a series 
of years.
It would be named 
incisum by Mr. Newman ; 
and is readily distinguished 
from ordinary Filix-fmmina, 
by its fronds having the 
deltoid outline and approxi- 
mate pinnse; such as are 
usually seen in Lastrea 
amula.
The pinnse cease 
abruptly downward, leaving 
a lengthened naked stipes ; 
as seen in Polystichum angu- 
lare contrasted against P.
lobatum.
I have vainly 
sought it in Surrey and 
adjacent counties, and sup- 
pose that my roots of it 
came from Wales.
1395 Asplenium viride.
35 Monmouth.
Ley ms.
37 Worcester.
Extinct.
39 Stafford.
41 Glamorgan.
Lees sp.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
Ealfs.
49 Carnarvon !
57 Derby.
58 Chester ?
59 Lane, south ?
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west ?
64 m.w. E.B.Bowman sp-.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
B.B. Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
Winch sp.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumb.
Thornhill sp.
72 Dumfries.
75 Ayr. Landsborough ms.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
88 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife ?
86 StirUng.
87 Perth west.
88 mid !
• Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
H. M.
Balfour sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie cat.
95 Elgin, 
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
97 Westerness.
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde isles.
Hennedy cat.
06 Boss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
(13 17).
[3 15 21 55 84 ; 
insufficiently vouched, err- 
ors, or intro,ductions] .
1396 A.
Trichomanes.
Counties all, except 81 42 53 
74 97 105 107 112; per- 
haps really absent from three 
or four of these counties.
It 
is undergoing a process of 
eradication in the Metropo- 
htan counties ; being sent to 
Covent Garden for sale.
1397 A.
marinum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north, Thwaites ms.
1397 ASPLEINUM MAEINUM.
519 
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
Very rare.
14 Sussex.
Bromfield sp.
41 Glamorgan.
Conway sp.
44 Carmarthen.
Oakeshott rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
Atwood sp.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren ms, 
59 Lane, south.
Hall sp.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
66 Durham.
E.B.Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. E.
Forbes sp.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme sp.
74 Wigton.
Balfour sp.
76 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
86 Fife.
Balfour cat.
90 Forfar.
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south ?
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
J. Eoy Ire.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 raid.
Syme sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Stables sp.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
1398 A.
lanceolatum.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack cat.
"2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Goulding sp.
4 north ?
6 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
14 Sussex east.
16 Kent west.
Borrer ms.
34 Gloster west.
Thwaites sp.
41 Glamorgan.
45 Pembroke.
48 Merioneth.
Worsley.
63 York s.
w. Eev. E.
Agathy.
[9 10 23 40 49 64; at best 
doubtful, likely all errors.] 
1399 A.
Ad. nigrum.
Counties all, except 31 42 53 
60 61 72 74 78 86 93 97 
105 106 107.
1400 A.
Ruta-muraria.
Counties all, except 31 42 63 
71 74 97 105 106 107 112.
1400 A.
germanicum.
A. alternifoUum.
49 Carnarvon.
Kirk sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate sp.
70-Cumberland.
Miss Wright.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
83 Edinburgh ?
Dr.
"Inglis." 
85 Fife.
Dr.
" A.
Dewar." 
89 Perth east.
(F.
B. White).
[5 T.
B. Flower] .
1401 A.
septentrionale.
3 Devon south.
Eogers.
4 north.
Hore sp.
5 Som. south.
Edmonds sp.
48 Merioneth.
Hart.
49 Carnarvon.
Butler sp.
50 Denbigh.
520 
1401 ASPLENIUM SEPTENTEIONALE.
64 York m.
west.
68 Cheviot.
Atkinson sp.
69 Westmoreland ?
70 Cumberland !
Hort sp.
80 Eoxburgh.
Dnncan cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
89 Perth east.
Gardiner sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Dickie ms.
[15 90 111 ; all errors ?] 
1402 Scolopendrium 
vulgare.
Counties all the English, ex- 
cept 42 43 47 48 53.
In 
Scotland, my notes are 
thus : — 
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
79 Selkirk.
Farquarson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
86 Stirling.
Croall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine.
Croall sp.
93 Aber.
north.
Dickie flo.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
03 mid.
Eoss cat.
04 north.
Graham sp.
07 or 08 Sutherland ?
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
oat.* 
11 Orkney.
Gillies ms.
12 Shetland.
One locality.
1403 Blechumn boreale.
Counties all, except 31 42 74 
98 105 ; likely to occur in 
all these counties, unless the 
two first nos.
should be real 
exceptions.
1404 Pteris aquilina.
Counties all, except 74 105.
1405 Adiantum C.
Veneris.
1 Corn.
west.
Tozer sp.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Flower sp.
4 north.
J.E.Gray sp.
6 Som. north ?
9 Dorset.
" Miss Payne !
" 
41 Glamorgan.
Brent sp.
71 Man. Eylands, 1841.
N.B. Curiously enough, seed- 
ling plants of Pteris aquilina 
have been repeatedly report- 
ed as the Adiantum.
[39 40 
57 91 100] .
1406 Trichomanes radicans.
41 Merioneth.
Backhouse.
64 York mid west, extinct ?
98 Argyle.
Landsborough.
00 Arran.
Landsborough.
This fern has been reported to 
grow in South and North 
Wales, in Cornwall, West 
Yorkshire, Arran and Argyle.
Mr. Backhouse holds it truly 
native in South Wales ; its 
station being difficult of ac- 
cess and looking natural.
But surely such a situation 
is the one likely to be select- 
ed for experimental intro- 
duction.
The other alleged 
1406 TEIOHOMANES RADICANS, 
521 
localities are suspected to be 1 
either errors or artificial ; 
and yet there seems no very- 
good reason to adduce against 
an a prion likelihood of this 
fern being found indigenous 
in Britain.
Why should it 
not be so ?
1407 Hymenophyllum 
tunbridgense.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs sp.
4 north.
5 Som. s.
Collins ms.
1860.
6 north ?
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Coleman sp.
16 Kent west.
Trevelyan sp.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon ?
59 Lane, south ?
63 York s.
west.
68 Cheviot.
Eichardson sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy oat.
78 Peebles.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
Gourlie sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Arnott ms.
03 Eb. mid.
Syme sp.
[39 42 52 57 58 62 64 
102 105 ; not certainly er- 
roneous, but needing verifi- 
cation, on account of the 
confusion between this and 
Wilsoni] .
1408 H.
Wilsoni.
H. unilaterale.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
3 Devon south.
Briggs oat.
4 north ?
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
46 Cardigan.
Purchas ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
59 Lano.
south.
60 west.
62 York n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Syme ms.
75 Ayr. Landsborough ms.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
85 Fife.
Balfour ms.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Balfour ms.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
G. Maonab.
sp.
92 or 93 Aber.
" Bennaohie." 
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
Hooker sp.
99 Dunbarton.
GourHe sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Syme sp.
04 north.
Lawson eat.
05 Eoss w.
" Tunbridgense." 
08 Suth.
west!
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Miss Boswell.
o X 
622 
1408 HYMENOPHYLLUM WILSONI.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1409 Osmunda regalis.
1 Corn, west !
Cunnack oat.
2 east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
Maw cat.
5 Som. south.
6 north ?
8 Wilts south ?
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
16 Kent west.
17 Surrey !
Eastmond sp.
18 Essex south.
Varenne ms.
19 north.
Varenne ms.
21 Middlesex.
Extinct.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Hurst ms.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
26 west.
Varenne, 1856.
27 Norfolk east.
Marshall ms.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Likely extinct.
86 Hereford.
Ley rec.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
E. H.
Jones.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington oat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
BidweU sp.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Lino, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
58 Chester.
" E.
Holland." 
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
60 west.
Tatha;m sp.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Baker sp.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Thompson sp.
67 Northumberland.
68 Cheviotland.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Lloyd ms.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
74 Wigton.
(McAndrew).
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
81 Berjrick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour oat.
84 Linlithgow.
I. B.
Balf.
ms.
86 StirHng.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid.
Worsley cat.
91 Kincardine.
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton !
Hooker sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour oat.
03 mid.
04 north.
Lawson oat.
05 or O6E0SS...?
08 Suth.
west.
Johnston ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
12 Shetland.
" one tuft." 
N.B. This and the two suc- 
ceeding ferns are almost too 
frequent to demand a de- 
tailed enumeration of their 
counties.
And yet there are 
considerable blanks in the 
1409 OSMUNDA EEGALIS.
523 
series.
In about one-third 
of the whole I am either 
absohitely without authori- 
ties for the conspicuous 
Osmunda, or it is rare, and 
likely to become extinct.
1410 Botryohijim Lunaria.
1 Corn.
west.
Scilly isles.
2 east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
Withers ms.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
11 Hahts south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
14 east.
Eoper.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey.
Wood ms.
19 Essex north.
Extinct.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks ?
25 Suffolk east.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
Ar. Bennett.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
33 Gloster east.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Fraser cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat: 
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat 
47 Montgomery.
Bloxam ms.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad lib.
60 west.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Leyland sp.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B.Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie rec.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east.
Brand sp.
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables cat.
624 
1410 BOTKYCHIUM LUNAEIA.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
02 Eb. south.
(Grieve).
03 mid.
Eoss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
05 Eoss west.
06 east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
1411 Ophioglossum 
vulgatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Briggs.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north.
5 Som. south.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
Townsend.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Weaver sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
F. Brent sp.
17 Surrey !
Wood ms.
18 Essex south.
Syme sp.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Fordham sp.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten oat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Bloomfield ms.
26 west.
27 Norf.
east.
Woodward sp.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat, 
30 Bedford.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk' cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas oat.
40 Salop.
Bidwell sp.
41 Glamorgan.
" Young." 
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Jones rec.
45 Pembroke.
Bailey ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh.
J. E.Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
53 Line, south.
Fowler rec.
54 north.
Bogg cat.
55 Leicester.
Bloxam cat.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren oat.
59 Lane, south !
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumberl.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Brand sp.
85 Fife.
Dewar sp.
86 Stirling.
Croall rec.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
1411 OPHIOGLOSSUM VULGATUM.
525 
90 Forfar ?
91 Kincardine.
98 Aber.
north.
Eoy Ire.
95 Elgin.
Gordon oat.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
a var.
* 
12 Shetland.
l_loc.
in Ed. flo.
N.B. Contrary to what is said 
in Pern-books, the Adder's 
Tongue is earsily transplant- 
ed from the fields, and may 
be kept in the garden with 
little care for its safety there.
1411*0.
ambiguum.
1 Scilly isles.
Curnow.
48 Merioneth.
Bailey.
11 Orkney.
Syme.
1412 Lycopodium clavatiun.
2 Corn.
east.
Briggs cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north !
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
6 north.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More ms.
1869.
11 Hants south.
12 north.
13 Sussex west.
Freeman sp.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
26 Suff.
west.
Bloomfield ms.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
36 Hereford.
Purchas ms.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
48 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denbigh I J.B.Bowman oat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson oat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
68 s.
west.
Lees cat.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Makepeace sp.
68 Cheviotland..
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Gardiner sp.
526 
1412 LYOOPODIUM CLAVATUM.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie oat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
03 Eb. mid.
Eoss reo.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
[25].
1413 L.
annotimun.
49 Carnarv.
J.E.Bowman cat.
69 Westm.
H. E.
Smith sp.
70 Cumberl.
" H.
B. Smith." 
88 Perth mid !
Syme sp.
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar !
92 Aber.
south !
Hooker sp.
94 Banff.
Gordon ms.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
97 Westerness !
00 Clyde-isles.
N. Hist.
03 Eb. mid.
Syme sp.
05 Eoss west.
Stables sp.
09 Caithness.
" Anderson." 
11 Orkney.
Syme ms.
[21 error.
55 59 66 du- 
bious] .
1414 L.
inundatum.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnaok cat.
2 east.
Pascoe cat.
3 Devon south.
4 north.
Briggs.
5 Som. south.
Coleman cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 Wilts south.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants south-!
Townsend.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Freeman sp.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
Salmon sp.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne sp.
21 Middlesex.
22 Berks !
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suff.
east.
Paget sp.
26 west.
Bloomfield.
27 Norfolk east.
Cooper sp.
28 west.
Wardale sp.
29 Cambridge.
Babington cat.
30 Bedford.
31 Hunts.
Berkeley ms.
37 Worcester.
E. Lees sp.
38 Warwick.
Kirk ms.
39 Stafford.
48 Merioneth.
Ealfs.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lano.
south.
Hobson sp.
61 York s.
east.
62   n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
west; Leyland sp.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Miss Edmonds sp.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
88 Perth mid.
Worsley, 1869.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
91 Kincardine ?
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness.
Stables sp.
99 Dunbarton.
Balfour sp.
05 Eoss west.
1414 LYCOPODIUM INUNDATUM.
.527 
06 Eoss east.
" Wilson " sp.
N.B. Is this lyoopod very 
scarce in Wales and some 
adjacent counties ?
I have 
not seen any specimen from 
Wales, and can cite from my 
notes only the single autho- 
rity named for Carnarvon, 
— a county in which Mr.
Eobinson indicates all the 
species as actually seen 
there by himself.
1414*L.
complanatum.
33 Gloster east.
(Eeader).
55 Leicester.
(Church.
Bab.) 
90 Forfar.
(Druoe).
02 Eb. south.
(Lawson).
(12 37 ; require further in- 
vestigation).
1415 L.
alpinum.
5 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
42 Brecon.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
46 Pembroke.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
54 Line.
n. Extinct.
F. A.
Lees.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
59 Lane, south.
62 York n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B.Bowman ms.
66 Durham.
Norman cat.
67 Northumb.
Thompson ms.
68 Oheviotland.
Tate ms.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
78 Peebles.
Brotherston cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westemess !
Grieve.
00 Clyde-isles.
Kennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon ms.
08 Suth.
west!
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Gillies herb.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[37 40 41 ; confirmation is 
needed for these counties] .
1416 L.
Selago.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
3 Devon south !
Briggs cat.
4 north.
6 Som. south.
Coleman sp.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Mansell-Pleydell.
11 Hants south.
Groves rec.
12 north !
528 
1416 LYOOPODIUM SELAGO.
13 Sussex west.
Freeman sp.
14 east.
Eoper.
17 Surrey.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks ?
27 Norfolk east.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Extinct.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
E. Lees sp.
41 Glamorgan.
42 Brecon.
Ley cat.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
45 Pembrok-e.
Jones rec.
46 Cardigan.
48 Merioneth.
Lees sp.
49 Carnarvon !
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
! J.
E. Bowman cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
57 Derby !
58 Chester !
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker ms.
63 B.
west.
64 m.
w. Tatham cat.
65 n.w. E.B. Bowman sp.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumberland.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
71 Man. Forbes cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
86 Stirling.
Oroall cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickson cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
98 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables cat.
97 Westerness !
Grieve.
98 Argyle.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
03 mid.
Syme sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
N.B. To the botanist of North 
Britain it will appear rather 
odd that Selago should be 
treated as an uncommon 
plant, being one which he is 
perhaps accustomed to see 
on almost every mountain 
andmoor.
Let him botanize 
in South Britain, and he wiU 
find the case widely different.
Among the forty English 
counties, included in South 
Britain, my collected notes 
shew authorities for twenty 
only ; and Selago is a decided 
rarity in most of those coun- 
ties, even doubtful in two or 
three of them.
Those who 
look at Britain as a whole 
will get very different notions 
about common or uncommon 
1416 IjYcopodium selago.
529 
plants, as compared with 
those who look chiefly to 
sections of the whole.
1417 L.
selaginoides.
49 Carnarvon !
Howitt sp.
51 Flint.
Eohinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
Fowler.
57 Derby.
58 Chester.
F. Brent sp.
59 Lane, south !
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward sp.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland !
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan oat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
79 Selkirk.
Farquharson cat.
80 Roxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
83 Edinburgh.
Howitt sp.
85 Fife.
I. B.
Balfour ms.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
Worsley cat.
89 east !
90 Forfar !
Croall sp.
91 Kincardine.
Syme cat.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie sp.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
' 
96 Easterness !
Stables oat.
97 Westerness !
98 Argyle.
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy cat.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
08 mid.
Boss rec.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
06 Ross east.
Gordon cat.
08 Suth.
west !
09 Caithness.
Balfour cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme cat.
12 Shetland.
Tate cat.
[34; not a very unlikely 
plant to occur on Dartmoor 
or Exmoor, but the pub- 
lished authorities are unre- 
liable] .
1418 Isoetes lacustris.
40 Salop.
48 Merioneth.
Hort ms.
49 Carnarvon.
Brent sp.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman ms.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumb.
Miss Edmonds sp.
85 Fife.
Arnott ms.
86 Stirling.
87 Perth west.
Syme.
88 mid.
Greville sp.
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Graham sp.
92 Aber.
south.
Brand sp.
94 Banff.
Roy ms.
2100 feet.
96 Easterness.
97 Westerness.
Sadler.
99 Dunbarton.
Babington ms.
00 Clyde- isles.
Hennedy cat.
04 Eb. north.
07 Suth.
east.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
[40 41 62 67 ; these four 
counties require to be veri- 
fied afi-esh.
I have seen the 
Littorella labelled as Isoetes, 
and by more than a single 
botanist of fair knowledge] .
3y 
530 
1418*ISOETES ECHINOSPORA.
1418*1.
echinospora.
49 Carnarvon.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aberdeen south.
99 Dunbarton.
03 Ebudes mid.
Eoss.
10 Hebrides ?
1419 Pilularia globulifera.
1 Corn.
west.
Cunnack cat.
2 east.
Pasooe cat.
3 Devon south.
6 Som. north.
8 Wilts south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
11 Hants soilth!
Townsend.
12 n.
! J.L.Warrenms.
14 Sussex east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
20 Herts.
One loo.
in Flora.
21 Middlesex.
24 Bucks.
25 Suffolk east.
27 Norfolk east.
32 Northampton.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
E. H.
Jones cat.
45 Pembroke.
47 Montgomery.
Melvill cat.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Bobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
Eobinson cat.
65 Leicester.
58 Chester.
Biokham sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
Parsons rec.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward oat.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
70 Cumberland.
72 Dumfries.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Kennedy oat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
83 Edinburgh !
Twynam sp.
84 Linlithgow.
I. B.
Balf.
ms.
85 Fife.
87 Perth west.
Craig-Christie.
88 mid.
(P.
B. White).
89 east.
90 Forfar.
Brand sp.
91 Kincardine.
Dickie sp.
92 Aber.
south.
95 Elgin.
" Eev. G.
Wilson." 
99 Dunbarton.
04 Eb. north.
Lawson cat.
07 Subh.
east.
Campbell sp.
N.B. Likely the Pillwort is 
more freq^uent than would 
appear from this comital 
enumeration ; an inconspi- 
cuous plant, the finding of 
which depends much on the 
evaporation from its watery 
stations.
Drainage may have 
destroyed it in some places.
1420 Equisetum maximum.
[F.
Telmatda).
1 or 2 Cornwall.
Pascoe ms.
3 Devon south.
Briggs cat.
4 north ?
5 Som. south.
Coleman oat.
6 north.
Thwaites cat.
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
8 south.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell oat.
10 Wight !
More cat.
11 Hants south !
Notcutt cat.
12 north !
Townsend.
13 Sussex west.
Borrer cat.
14 east.
Coleman cat.
1420 EQUISETUM MAXIMUM.
531 
15 Ken e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
16 west.
17 Surrey !
J. L.
Warren ms.
18 Essex south.
19 north.
Varenne cat.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Barham sp.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
Beesley cat.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
25 Suffolk east.
Purchas oat.
26 west.
27 Norfolk east.
28 west.
29 Cambridge.
Marshall sp.
30 Bedford.
Newbould ms.
82 Northton.
Notoutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice cat.
34 , west.
Thwaites cat.
35 Monmouth.
Ley rec.
36 Hereford.
37 Worcester.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Eraser cat.
40 Salop.
Leighton cat.
41 Glamorgan.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley cat.
45 Pembroke.
Babington cat.
46 Cardigan.
H. L.
Jones eat.
48 Merioneth.
(Beeves).
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Denb.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
52 Anglesea.
54 Line, north.
Fowler rec.
55 Leicester.
57 Derby.
Howitt cat.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
60 west.
Linton cat.
61 York s.
east.
62 n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
Storey sp.
67 Northumb.
Oliver sp.
68 Cheviot.
Embleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
Baker cat.
75 Ayr. Landsb.
Bot. Ayr.
76 Eenfrew.
Montgomery cat.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
Boswell-Syme.
83 Edinburgh.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife ?
90 Forfar ?
Gard.
flo.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
01 Cantire.
Balfour cat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour sp.
04 north.
Lawson cat.
[91 92, fide Flora Abredo- 
nensis; but not found in 
Kincardine or Aberdeen, _^de 
J. Eoy ms.
Ill Orkney, 
fide Lowe] .
1421 E.
umbrosum.
[E.
pratense).
59 Lane, south ?
65 York n.
west.
66 Durham.
68 Cheviotland.
Storey sp.
69 Westmoreland.
77 Lanark.
Balfour sp.
83 Edinbfirgh.
Balfour cat.
84 Linlithgow.
Campbell sp.
85 Fife.
Boswell-Syme sp.
86 Stirling.
Gourlie sp.
87 Perth west.
Dewar sp.
88 mid.
Pagan.
89 east.
H. M.
Ball sp.
90 Forfar.
Eoy ms.
91 Kincardine.
92 Aber.
south.
H. M.
Balf.
94 Banff.
J. Eoy ms.
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
1422 E.
arvense.
Counties all, except 48 71 73 
532 
1422 BQUISBTUM AEVENSE.
74 105 : very likely it occurs 
in every county.
1423 E.
sylvaticum.
3 Devon south.
4 north ?
6 Som. north ?
7 Wilts north.
Flower cat.
9 Dorset.
Pleydell cat.
10 Wight.
More cat.
11 Hants south.
H. Groves.
14 Sussex east.
Coleman cat.
15 Kent east.
17 Surrey !
18 Essex south.
19 north.
20 Herts.
Coleman cat.
21 Middlesex.
Hind cat.
22 Berks.
Britten cat.
23 Oxford.
24 Bucks.
Britten cat.
27 Norfolk east.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct.
32 Northton.
Notcutt cat.
33 Gloster east.
Prentice ms.
36 Hereford.
Purchas cat 
37 Worcester.
Bagnall ms.
38 Warwick.
Kirk cat.
39 Stafford.
Douglas cat.
40 Salop.
41 Glamorgan.
43 Eadnor.
Ley cat.
44 Carmarthen.
Motley eat.
45 Pembrolje.
Purchas ms.
46 Cardigan.
47 Montgomery.
Ley cat.
48 Merioneth.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
50 Deub.
J. E.
Bowman cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
54 Line, north.
J. E.
Lees rec.
55 Leicester.
Coleman cat.
56 Notts.
57 Derby.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester !
J. L.
Warren cat.
59 Lane.
s. !
F. M.
Webb cat.
60 west.
Simpson sp.
62 York n.
east.
Baker cat.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
Tatham oat.
66 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northumb.
Storey eat.
68 Cheviot.
Bmbleton cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland !
Baker cat.
72 Dumfries.
Gray cat.
73 Kirkcudbright.
Gray cat.
75 Ayr. Duncan cat.
76 Eenfrew.
Hennedy cat.
77 Lanark.
Hennedy cat.
79 Selkirk.
Parquharson cat.
80 Eoxburgh.
Duncan cat.
81 Berwick.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
83 Edinburgh.
Brand sp.
84 Linlithgow.
Balfour cat.
85 Fife.
Syme cat.
86 Stirling.
Duthie cat.
87 Perth west.
Syme cat.
88 mid !
89 east !
90 Forfar !
91 Kincardine.
CroaU sp.
92 Aber.
south !
Dickie cat.
93 north.
Dickie flo.
94 Banff.
95 Elgin.
Gordon cat.
96 Easterness !
Stables oat.
97 Westerness !
99 Dunbarton.
00 Clyde-isles.
Hennedy oat.
02 Eb. south.
Balfour cat.
04 north.
Lawson oat.
06 Eoss east !
07 Suth.
east !
09 Caith.
Brown Campst.
cat.
10 Hebrides.
11 Orkney.
Syme sp.
12 Shetland.
Tate sp.
[25 or 26 Suffolk.
"Moore."] 
Ii24 EQUISETUM PALUSTRE.
533 
1424 E.
palustre.
Counties all, except 31 35 46 
47 48 51 71 74 97 105 
107 108; likely to occur 
in every county.
1425 E.
limosum.
Counties all, except 1 4 8 38 
34 35 42 47 48 '51 71 74 
97 105 107 108.
Although 
less common than palustre, 
this species may he expected 
in most of the counties here 
enumerated negatively as 
exceptional.
Some con- 
fusion has occurred between 
limosum and maximum, 
through the name fiuviatile 
having been used in two 
different applications, either 
as a synonym for maximum 
(at length reached, after the 
intermediately applied name 
of Telmateia) or for the 
branched states of this pre- 
sent limosum.
1426 E.
hyemale.
15 Kent e.
G. E.
Smith cat.
17 Surrey.
Salmon sp.
26 Suffolk west.
BJoomfield.
29 Cambridge.
Extinct ?
80 Bedford.
36 Hereford.
87 Worcester.
88 Warwick ?
39 Stafford ?
40 Salop.
"Bloxam." 
41 Glamorgan.
"Moggridge." 
50 Denb.
J. B.
Bowman cat.
.51 Flint?
55 Leicester.
Ch. Bab.
sp.
56 Notts.
Howitt sp.
58 Chester.
J. L.
Warren ms.
59 Lane, south.
Goodlad hb.
62 York n.
east.
Baker sp.
63 s.
west.
64 m.
west.
65 n.
west.
Ward cat.
66 Durham.
67 Northum.
E.B. Bowman sp.
68 Cheviotland.
Tate cat.
69 Westmoreland.
70 Cumberland.
73 Kirkcudbright.
75 Ayr. Boswell Syme sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
81 Berwick.
83 Edinburgh !
Balfour cat.
87 Perth west.
88 mid.
(F.
B. White).
89 east.
(F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Gardiner sp.
91 Kincardine.
" Lindsay "sp.
92 Aber.
south ?
94 Banff.
"J.
Bissett!" 
95 Elgin.
Gordon sp.
96 Easterness.
Croall rec.
06 Eoss east.
Gordon cat.
[4 6 7 8 21 ; insufficiently 
vouched, and some of them 
likely erroneous] .
1428 E.
variegatum.
3 Devon south.
Carpenter sp.
6 Som. north?
" arenariam." 
28 Norf.
w. Eev. H.
WiUiams.
49 Carnarvon.
Eobinson cat.
51 Flint.
Eobinson cat.
58 Chester !
Lieut.
Phillips sp.
59 Lane.
s. F.
M. Webb cat.
64 York m.
west.
Tatham cat.
65 n.
west.
Baker cat.
66 Durham.
E. B.
Bowman sp.
67 Northumb.
Winch sp.
70 Cumberland.
Storey sp.
77 Lanark.
Kennedy cat.
82 Haddington.
Balfour cat.
534 
1428 EQUISETDM VAEIKGATUM.
85 Fife.
88 Perth mid.
(F.
B. "White).
89 east., (F.
B. White).
90 Forfar.
Greville sp.
91 Kincardine.
" Lindsay " sp.
00 Clyde-isles.
Balfour sp.
06 Eoss east." Gordon sp.
EXPLANATIONS OF THE CATALOGUES.
Mr. C.
C. Babington, M.A. Prof.
Bot. Cambridge.
29.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Cambridge.
This may be held a list of all the 
species treated in Professor Babington's excellently worked out 
Flora of Cambridge, excepting those not actually seen within the 
county by its Author.
The Flora was not itself formally quotable 
in this work, firstly, because it is a compilation or summary of 
the local reports on various personal testimony ; and, secondly, 
because it has been made a rule in this work not to quote books, 
but persons.
45.
London Catalogue, edition third, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Pembroke.
Date of 1861.
(Professor Babington 
subsequently printed his list of Pembroke plants, in ' Seemann's 
Journal of Botany,' September, 1863).
(We are indebted to Professor Babington for the whole of the 
account of the distribution of the frutiose Eubi in this edition).
Mr. John Gilbert Baker.
12.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants 
observed in July, 1869, about Liphook and Woolmer.
Used, 
but scarcely, quoted, because the vice-county of North Hants had 
been entered in my notes from other sources before receipt of 
this catalogue.
13.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in July, 1869, in North-west Sussex, near Shotter Mill, Lynch- 
mere, and Fernhurst.
62.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
536 CATALOGUES.
seen within five miles of Thirsk, in the vice-county of North-east 
York A second series of marks distinguishes other plants found 
elsewhere in the same vice-county, beyond the five-mile radius.
For these plants the catalogue is cited as " Baker cat.
co." or 
simply as "Baker ms." Mr. Baker's admirable work "North 
Yorkshire ; Studies of its Botany, Qeoloyy, Climate and Physical 
Qeography " is of later date, 1863, and embraces also the vice- 
county of North-west York, along with a portion of Mid-west 
York, — ' The Ainsty,' situate to the southward of the other two 
vice-counties.
70.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Cumberland, during a brief sojourn there in 
1872.
61, 62, 63, 64, 65.
To Mr. Baker also I was indebted for a 
most useful operation, without which I should have been put to 
much trouble and with incomplete success, in assigning the 
localities of the ' Flora of Yorkshire ' to their proper vice- 
counties.
In a copy of his Supplement to Baines' Flora of York- 
shire Mr. Baker kindly noted on the margins of the pages, by 
their corresponding nos.
12 3 4 5, the vice-counties to which 
the localities of the Flora were to be assigned.
With compara- 
tively few exceptions the citation of "61 York s.
east" has 
been drawn entirely from the paginal margins of this special and 
most serviceable copy of the Supplement here under notice.
It 
would hardly be possible to over-estimate the botanical assist- 
ance which my own writings have derived from Mr. Baker's 
published works, manuscript notes, numerous specimens, &o.
Dr. J.
H. Balfour.
Late Eeg. Prof.
Bot. Edinburgh.
82, 83, 84, 85.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked to 
shew the plants seen in the Forth counties ; — distinguishing the 
four counties of Haddington, Edinburgh, Linlithgow, and Fife, 
by means of their abbreviated names set after the names of the 
plants.
The Catalogue is quoted in accordance ; and it is hoped 
that mistakes have been avoided in enumerating the several 
CATALOGUES.
537 
counties thus certified, under the various species ; but the com- 
pression of four county lists on to a single copy of the London 
Catalogue was found to be rather confusing in referencial use.
101, 102.
London Catalogue, edition first, checked for plants 
seen in the Mull of Cantire, a vice-county of Argyle, and in 
Isla, the principal isle in the vice-county of South Ebudes.
(This catalogue has been subsequently published in the Phytblo- 
gist, volume second).
Prof.
Isaac Bayley Balfour.
83, etc.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for addi- 
tional plants of the Forth counties, as a short list supplementary 
to the above-mentioned Catalogue checked for this work by his 
Father, Professor John Button Balfour.
The additions mostly 
falling under the category of introduced species, it was seldom 
needful to cite Mr. I.
B. Balfour's Catalogue, and the alternative 
form of " ms." was therefore preferred instead.
Mr. Thomas Beesley.
23.
" The Botany of the neighbourhood of Banbury," in the 
county of Oxford.
This list formed a portion of The History 
of Banbury, by Alfred Beesley, 1841.
I was under obligation to 
Mr. Thomas Beesley for a separate copy of The Botany, inter- 
leaved, annotated and added to it in manuscript ; thus brought 
under the rules of an original and personally vouched list.
Miss Bell.
(Formerly of Stow Vicarage).
27, 28.
Alphabetical Catalogue of plants found, in the county 
of Norfolk, chiefly in West Norfolk ; — either seen there by Miss 
Bell, or represented by Norfolk specimens in her herbarium.
Date of 1832.
This is the " Bell cat." of the New Botanist's- 
Guide.
Along with various manuscript notes, made on the 
printed catalogue or sent apart, the list is quoted in this present 
work as " Miss Bell ms." or shortly as " Bell ms." 
3 z 
538 CATALOGUES.
Rev. E.
N. Bloomfield.
25, 26.
London Catalogue, checked for plants seen in East 
Suffolk.
A second set of marks to indicate those (fewer) seen 
in West Suffolk.
Mr. Thomas Bates Blow.
20.
Manuscript list of plants observed in the county of Hert- 
ford.
Date of 1873.
This Ust is seldom cited ; having been 
received at a late date, and relating to a county for which 
Mr. Coleman's list had already been used.
Rev. Andrew Bloxam.
38.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within three miles of Atherstone, aU in the county of 
Warwick.
55.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
within three miles of Twycross, all in the county of Leicester.
Mr. Thomas Wemyss Bogg.
44.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
within ten miles of Louth, in the vice-county of North Lincoln.
This list was very acceptable, although not numerous in its 
species.
So much at a loss had I been for any list of the com- 
moner plants found in Lincolnshire, as to have felt it necessary 
to visit that county myself in order to become warranted in 
stating " buttercups and daisies " do certainly grow there.
Mr. William Borrer.
13.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within three or four miles of Henfield, in the vice-county 
of West Sussex.
Additional marks used to distinguish other 
plants found in the county at greater distances from Henfield.
The citation of "Borrer cat.
co." is given under several of the 
plants which were so marked in the list ; the proper vice county 
having, been ascertained from Mr. Borrer's manuscript notes, or 
CATALOGUES.
539 
from records printed elsewhere.
My own estimate of Mr. Borrer, 
as a truly faithful recorder of plant-localities, has been given in 
a former work, namely, in a Supplement to the Compendium of 
Cybele Britannica, page 115.
Mr. J.
E. Bowman.
50.
Alphabetical Catalogue of plants checked for those seen 
in the neighbourhood of Wrexham, in the county of Denbigh ; — 
supplemented by marks to the names of other plants seen else- 
where in the same county ; also with manuscript notes of the 
rare plants seen in other counties of North Wales, or in 
Cheshire and Shropshire.
The name of " Bowman " cited as 
the authority for plants in any of those counties, will be under- 
stood to stand for Mr. J.
E. Bowman, late of Wrexham.
— The 
same surname, if cited as the authority for any county or vice- 
county in the provinces of Humber or Tyne, wiU always intend 
Mr. E.
B. Bowman of Richmond, or of Newcastle on Tyne.
Many of the specimens for which my herbarium- was under 
obligation to this last named botanist, had been collected by 
Miss Mary Jane Hancock, and that Lady's name is occasionally 
quoted in my notes (and thus, here also) instead of the name 
of the actual donor of them, Mr. E.
B. Bowman.
Rev. W.
T. Bree.
38.
Alphabetical Catalogue of plants checked for those seen 
in the county of Warwick, chiefly about Allesley and Coleshill.
This catalogue was used in the New Guide ; but it has been 
superseded subsequently by the arranged London Catalogue 
checked for the county by Mr. Thomas Kirk.
(Mr. Bagnall has 
very lately favoured me with many notes on the plants and 
localities in Warwickshire and the adjacent Staffordshire).
Mr. T.
R. Archer Briggs.
2. London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the vice-county of East Cornwall.
Dated 1871.
540 CATALOGUES.
3. London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the vice-county of South Devon, chiefly those in the neigh- 
bourhood of Plymouth.
Dated 1871.
Mr. Briggs has further 
supplemented these two catalogues, from time to time, by many 
specimens and valuable notes relating to the plants of these two 
vice-counties).
Mr. James Britten.
22.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Berks.
Date of 1873.
24.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Buckingham.
Date of 1873.
44.
Manuscript Hst of 183 plants observed between Berwyn 
and Dolgelly, Merionethshire, June 1877.
Dr. Robert Brown.
" Gampsteriensis." 
109 London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Caithness; — partly by himself; partly by the 
late Mr. Eobert Dick, the re-discoverer of Hierochloe borealis in 
Scotland; — with some additions subsequently made to the 
original list drawn up in 1861-2 by Mr. C.
W. Peach.
Rev. W.
H. Coleman.
5. London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
during a sojourn in the vice-county of South Somerset, in the 
spring and early summer of 1849.
The list of plants relates to 
the vicinity of Minehead and Dunster ; and takes (firstly) a 
radius of five miles, with (secondly) an extension of the same so 
as to shew other plants distant between five and ten miles.
Practically for the object sought in this present work, the 
Catalogue is thus one for the north-western portion of the vice- 
county of South Somerset.
14, 17.
Manuscript Catalogue of plants seen in the neighbour- 
hood of East Grinstead, in the vice-county of East Sussex ; 
the area extending partially into the county of Surrey also, 
CATALOGUES.
541 
Localiites are given for several of the rarer plants ; some of them 
being so indicated for Surrey only.
All others are assumed to 
occur in the vice-eounty of East Sussex.
19, 25 26.
, Manuscript " Catalogue of plants observed near 
Dedham, in the counties of Essex and Suffolk." No date, but 
probably made in 1837.
Here also a series of, localities for the 
rarer species is appended to the general list.
These special 
details enable me to place the plants under their respective 
counties ; but I have still been at fault with regard to several of 
the Suffolk plants, whether to treat them as belonging to Bast 
Suffolk or to West Suffolk.
For instance, under Corydalis clavi- 
cuLita, the entry of " Suff.
west.
Coleman ms." probably ought 
to have run thus instead " Suff.
east.
Coleman ms." It may 
be observed, that the idea of equalizing the counties somewhat 
better, by subdividing the larger of them into two or more vice- 
counties, was not acted upon until after the date of Mr. Coleman's 
manuscript lists.
20.
Manuscript " Catalogue of plants observed near Hert- 
ford "...." a circle of five miles round the town "...
"during 
1838 and 1889." It was a forerunner of the Floi-a of Hertford, 
the joint work of Webb and Coleman.
This was a well worked 
out Flora, with one great defect such as we could never have 
anticipated from Coleman, who really did possess sound ideas on 
the requirements of science and facilities for its references ; 
namely, the quotiag of three dozen correspondents by initials 
instead of names.
See further on this subject under " Varenne." 
55.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
in the neighbourhood of Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in the county of 
Leicester, either withia the distance of three mUes, or beyond 
three and within seven miles.
Through an accident, this Cata- 
logue is less cited than it might have been otherwise.
In her 
Flora of Ldeestershire, Miss Mary Kirby had the efficient aid of 
three clerical botanists well qualified by their local and general 
knowledge of British botany, namely, the Eeverends Bloxam, 
Coleman, and Churchill Babington.
542 
CATALOGUES.
Mr. Charles Conway.
35.
Manuscript list of plants seen in the neighbourhood of 
Pontnewydd Works, in the county of Monmouth.
This list did 
not profess to be a fall enumeration for the county ; so far as it 
goes, it still remains the only general catalogue of Monmouth- 
shire plants in my possession.
Its date was probably in 1836 ; 
having come into use in the Supplement to the New Botanist's- 
Guide.
Mr. James Cunnack.
1. London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for the vice- 
county of West Cornwall.
(To Mr. Cunnack I am further 
under obligation for specimens of several of the very local plants 
found in West Cornwall chiefly or eKolusively).
Dr. George Dickie.
Late Prof.
Bot. Aberdeen.
92.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
in the vice-county of South Aberdeen.
This catalogue, of more 
recent date, and relating to a single viee-county, of course has 
superseded the " Catalogue of plants within fourteen miles of 
Aberdeen," which was used in the New Guide.
93.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
(or reported to be found) in the vice-county of North Aberdeen 
As Dr. Dickie was not in a position to make out an approximately 
complete list of plants for North Aberdeen, as an eye-witness, he 
was requested to make it a compilation.
In order to mark the 
difference, the abbreviation " flo." is substituted for " oat." 
(Dr. Dickie's very useful work, " The Botanist's Guide to the 
counties of Aberdeen, Banff, and Kincardine," is occasionally 
referred to in some abbreviated form, as "Dickie Guide" or 
more briefly as " D.G.") 
Mrs. Dickson.
(Miss Penelope Soott.) 
91 London Catalogue, edition third, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Kincardine by herself or her sister Mrs. Farquhar 
CATALOGUES.
543 
(Miss Diana Scott)— daughters of Mr. David Scott, late of 
Brother ton.
Rev. Robert C.
Douglas.
39.
London Catalogue, edition third, checked for plants seen 
within three miles of Stafford.
Dated 1851.
Rev. James Duncan.
89.
Manuscript Flora of Jedburgh, in the county of Eoxburgh.
Date about 1830.
Rev. J.
P. Duncan.
75.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Ayr. Ayrshire lists now include a considerable 
sprinkling of casual plants, introduced through ballast or other- 
wise, and several of them likely to be temporary only ; Mr.
Duncan allowed me to pass over any of these in his Catalogue, 
without even so much notice as (75).
The considerable county 
of Ayrshire had long been a difBculty with me, through the want 
of any general list of its plants and their localities.
Eecently, 
this want has been partly supplied by the Eev. D.
Landsborough's 
printed list of the less common plants ; but being a printed list 
and one in which the plants are only partially given on Mr.
Landsborough's single authority, it is of course not one of the 
quotable lists here.
Mr. J.
F. Duthie.
86.
London Catalogue, edition seventh, checked for plants 
seen in Stirlingshire in 1875.
Mr. Robert Embleton.
68.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
within four miles of Embleton, in the vice-county of Cheviotland.
To Mr. Embleton, a botanical friend from our Student days, 
I have been constantly indebted also for keeping me posted up 
544 CATALOGUES.
in the Proceedings of the Berwickshire NaturaHsts' Club, 
actively carried on for many years.
Mr. Thomas Bruges Flower.
7. London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
in North-west Wilts.
Also, another copy of the same Catalogue 
checked for the plants of North-west Wilts; the two taken 
together constituting a Hst of plants seen in the vice-county of 
North Wilts.
8. London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
in the vice county of South Wilts.
Mr. Flower's Mora of 
Wiltshire, printed by a local Society in successive parts, is 
now completed.
The typographical arrangement renders it an 
inconvenient Flora to consult with others, and consequently the 
earher Catalogues have not always been verified by the later 
Flora.
In some instances there are botanical discrepancies 
not easily understood.
Mr. Edward Forbes.
Prof.
Nat. Hist.
Edinburgh.
71.
Manuscript list of plants observed|in the Isle of Man.
This catalogue has been given up to a gentleman taking a special 
interest in the botany of that island.
Its date was somewhere 
about 1833 or 4 ; and it was written when Mr. Forbes was quite 
a young man, before his attention had been drawn from botany 
to the more showy studies, in which he became eminent.
See 
the New Botanist's-Guide for further explanations of the Manx 
hst.
Dr. John Praser.
89.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Stafford.
Dr. Fraser obligingly furnished this 
catalogue on direct application to him in 1873.
Being for the 
county generally it is more ample than the one checked for the 
county-town by the Eev. E.
C. Douglas., Unfortunately, much 
of this work was already printed off before Dr. Fraser' s assistance 
CATALOGUES.
545 
was applied for ; and thus his catalogue could be quoted only in 
the latter portion of the county lists, where it is made supple- 
mentary to that of the Kev. E.
C. Douglas.
Mr. George Staoey Gibson.
1, 2.
Alphabetical Catalogue (Edinburgh) checked to show 
the plants observed in the county oif Cornwall in 1846.
As 
this list relates to the whole county, not specially to a vice- 
county, it is scarcely used in this work.
Besides which, its 
alphabetical arrangement would render it non-eligible in com- 
parison with those lists made out by checking names in the 
London Catalogue, to which all the books of the present compiler 
have been adapted in names and numerical order.
Dr. Gillies.
" Gillies herb." 
111.
Manuscript " Mora Orcadensis," including plants found 
in Orkney by Dr. Gillies himself or by Mr. Alexander Duguid, — 
with the addition of those mentioned in Neill's Tour in the 
Orkney Isles, and in " a list inserted in Barry's History of 
Orkney, from the MSS.
of the Eev. Mr.
Lowe." This Flora 
was given to me by -Dr. Gillies in 1832, and was then probably 
several years old.
Being thus a compilation, and including one 
authority (Lowe) very little to be relied upon, the Flora might 
have passed unnoticed in this present work, except for a con- 
nected circumstance.
Some years afterwards I bought from 
Mr. Pamplin of London a small collection of Orkney plants, 
" collector unknown." The handwriting on several of the labels, 
the special stations, and two or three misnomers, all assisted to 
shew that the plants had belonged to Dr. Gilhes, and had been 
collected in Orkney by himself or Mr. Duguid.
The collection 
is accordingly quoted as " Gillies herb." 
Mr. Joe Goodlad.
" Goodlad hb." 
59.
A local collection of South Lancashire plants, collected 
chiefly in or near Presfcwich in that vice-county, and sent to the 
4 A 
646 
CATALOGUES.
Botanical Society of London.
Some few of the plants were 
likely gathered at some considerable distance from Prestwich, 
eai.
gr.
Vaccinium Vitis Idsea.
Rev. George Gordon.
95.
' Collectanea for a Flora of Moray,' checked so as to 
render it " a list of specie's for the county of Elgin generally; — 
including with Elgin that part of Inverness which lies imbedded- 
in or divides Elgin in twain." Dr. Gordon made use of a copy 
of his own printed ' Collectanea,' as more convenient to himself, 
and also a work very familiar to myself, througji very frequent 
use of it since 1839, the year of its date.
]09.
Alphabetical Catalogue of British Plants, checked for 
the county of Boss.
Dated 1834.
This catalogue has been 
quoted under the vice-county of East Boss, on assumption that 
all the plants were seen to the eastward of the watershed, which 
cuts off the vice-county of West Boss.
Without the valued 
assistance of Dr. Gordon, with his friend and fellow- worker in 
natural science Mr. W.
A. Stables, my own writings would have 
been sadly deficient in the botany of Moray and Boss.
Mr. James Grant.
109.
London Catalogue, edition seventh, checked for plants 
seen in Caithness.
Mr. Peter Gray.
72.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within three miles of the town of Dumfries, on that county 
side ; also, marks for other species seen in the county of 
Dumfries beyond the three-mile radius.
N.B. The authority 
for these latter plants is entered occasionally (not invariably) as 
" Gray cat.
co." or as " Gray ms." 
73.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
within three miles of the town of Dumfries, on the Kirkcudbright 
side ; also, marks for other species seen beyond the three-mile 
radius.
. N.B. The like remarlt may be repeated here.
CATALOGUES.
547 
Mr. Symington Grieve.
102.
Catalogue of plants observed in the island of Colonsay.
1879.
Miss Wilhelmina L.
Hall.
14.
Manuscript catalogue of the rarer plants seen in the 
neighbourhood of Eastbourne, either by herself or her friend 
Miss Woodhouse.
This catalogue was not to hand in time for 
citation on the earlier sheets of Part First ; and being at first 
entered on the proofs, it was misprinted " Hill cat." in two or 
three instances, instead of " Hall cat." 
Mr. Roger Kennedy.
Late Prof.
Bot. Anders.
Univ.
76.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Eenfrew.
Date of 1872.
77.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Lanark.
Date of 1872.
100.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Bute or Clyde Isles ; — including Arran, Bute, 
Cumbraes.
Date of 1872.
N.B. These three counties constitute the south-eastern portion 
of the area included under the Clydesdale Flora, an excellent 
Local Flora in a small compass and unpretending form, by 
Professor Kennedy.
Mr. William Hillhouse.
30.
Lithographed list of plants observed in Bedfordshire.
A 
second more extended list afterwards pubhshed.
Rev. W.
M. Hind.
21.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
within four and a half miles of Harrow, all in Middlesex.
Mr.
Hind afterwards printed a somewhat more ample list of Harrow 
plants.
And this again was extended in the Flora of Harrow, 
by J.
C. Melvill.
But in accordance with the rule laid down, 
548 CAtfALOGOES.
the original ms.
catalogue is cited in the present work as " Hind 
cat." The county of Middlesex is so small in its area, and so 
humanly altered in its surface, that the temptation was con- 
siderable to leave it out of notice in this work; and now I regret 
that it was not originally combined with Hertford, instead of 
being separately numbered ; — as Eutland with Leicester, as 
Kinross with Fife, as Nairn with Easterness, etc.
Mr. John Hogg.
62, 65, 66.
Alphabetical Catalogue, checked for plants ob- 
served on either side of the Tees, from the coast upwards to 
Blackwell.
As this old catalogue does not distinguish the plants 
by counties, it has not been quoted in the present work, although 
used in former works by the same writer.
Mr. Baker's ad- 
mirable Botany of North Yorkshire and (jointly with Dr. Tate) the 
New Flora of Northumberland and Durham were really made 
the basis for vice-counties 62 64 65 66 67 68 ; although good 
personal authorities have been cited from other sources.
This 
basis was the more convenient because the New Flora recognizes 
my triple division of the two Tyne counties and arranges its 
localities in accordance.
Dr. George Johnston.
68, 81.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
found within three mUes of Berwick-on-Tweed ;" the space being 
nearly all of it "in England" although partly "north of the 
Tweed." As the catalogue will thus relate to portions, not only 
of two counties, but even of two primary provinces, Tyne andEast 
Lowlands, it becomes non-available in the present work.
Actu- 
ally, however.
Dr. Johnston's very pleasing work, The Natural 
History of the Eastern Borders, is the chief (unquoted) authority 
for the county of Berwick, and for much in adjacent counties 
also.
CATALOGUES.
549 
Mr. E.
H. Jones, of Cwm Ithy.
43.
London catalogue, edition seventh, checked for plants 
observed in Eadnorshire.
Mr. Thomas Kirk.
38.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Warwick.
Mr. Kirk's emigration to New 
Zealand was a loss to our home botany : but in his new country 
he has proved an active promoter of botany and kindred 
sciences.
M. A.
Lawson.
Late Prof.
Bot. Oxford.
104.
Manuscript list of plants seen by himself and the Kev.
H. E.
Pox in the Isle of Skye, the chief isle of the vice-county 
of North Ebudes.
Dr. P.
Arnold Lees.
63.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the vice-county of South-west York.
Date of 1873.
64.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the vice-county of Mid-west York.
Date of 1873.
(A large proportion of the additions contained in this second 
edition are taken from the reports of the Botanical Eecord 
Club, which Dr. Lees has edited).
Rev. William AUport Leighton.
40.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within four miles of Shrewsbury, in the county of Salop ; — 
supplemented by other species seen in Shropshire, beyond the 
four-mile radius from the county town.
Mr. Leighton's able 
Flora of Shropshire records numerous localities, and ought to be 
in the hands of every botanist visiting the county.
Mr. F.
A. Malleson.
13, 14.
Manuscript Flora of Sussex.
N.B. The arrangement 
550   CATALOGUES.
being alphabetical, and no distinction being made between East 
and West Sussex, this has been little used.
Mr. George Maw.
4. London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants seen 
within four miles of Bideford, in the vice-county of North 
Devon ; with others seen about Barnstaple Creek and Braunton, 
beyond the four-mile radius.
Mr. J.
Cosmo Melvill.
47.
Manuscript list of plants observed on the Breidden Hills, 
Montgomeryshire, in 1877.
Mr. J.
Montgomery.
76.
Manuscript list of plants seen in the county of Eenfrew, 
with notes of localities in that county and borders of Ayrshire.
This catalogue was obtained for me over thirty years ago, by the 
kind instrumentality of Dr. Hooker.
It was quoted in the New 
Guide ; but for the purposes of this present work it has been 
almost entirely superseded by the hst of Eenfrewshire plants 
furnished by Professer Hennedy.
Mr. O.
A. Moore.
61 — 5.
Mr. Moore had drawn up a new Flora of Yorkshire, 
and kindly allowed me to inspect his manuscript ; from which I 
-took some few notes on the additions there made to the list of 
species in the Flora published, by Baines.
But then hoping to 
see it shortly in a printed form, it was too little noted from.
Mr. Alexander G.
More.
10.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
in the Isle of Wight.
Mr. More has subsequently printed (1871) 
a Supplement to the Flora Vectensis by Dr. Bromfield ; — an 
useful critical supervision, adding plants and localities, and 
correcting some of Dr. Bromfield's errors.
Mr. More had also 
CATALOGUES.
551 
printed "A Catalogue of the Flowering Plants and Ferns 
growing wild in the Isle of Wight," intended " to serve as an 
Index to the Herbarium of Dr. Bromfleld." It is more than 
this ; being in eleven pages a much truer list of Veotian plants, 
than could be got from Bromfield's ponderous book of eight 
hundred pages of close print, as the Flora of one little Isle !
In 
Bromfield's verbose work, it took over fifty lines of close print- 
say, 500 words — to record the occurrence of the common red 
Poppy in the Isle of Wight.
In More's Catalogue, that curious 
fact is sufficiently announced by two words.
' Mr. James Motley.
44.
A Manuscript Flora of some portion of the county of 
Carmarthen, chiefly (I believe) the neighbourhood of LlaneUy.
This Flora was lent to me, and shortly claimed back, before 
Mr. Motley's departure from Britain for Borneo.
Notes had 
been hurriedly taken from it, which are now quoted as " Motley 
cat." without the chance of again referring to the Flora itself.
< 
Rev. W.
W. Newbould.
31.
London Catalogue, edition third, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Huntingdon ; the parts examined being chiefly 
Somersham Soke, Holme Fen, and the neighbourhood of Gam- 
lingay.
30.
Mr. Newbould also kindly checked the Bedfordshire 
Monocotyledons in a London Catalogue, for use in the Second 
Part of this work.
His list, as not at all professing completeness, 
is quoted along with various manuscript notes, in the form of 
" Newbould ms." 
In various modes I have been assisted by Mr. Newbould, 
while writing this and former works.
Indeed, that gentleman's 
ever readiness to take trouble on behalf of other botanists, is too 
well known to need eulogy from my pen ; though it may be 
allowable here to record an expression of my own grateful sense 
552 
CATALOGUES.
of his indefatigable and disinterested zeal in the promotion of 
botanical knowledge.
Mr. D.
Nicolson.
109.
London Catalogue, edition seventh, cheeked for plants 
seen in Caithness, with additions on faith of specimens in the 
herbarium of the late Robert Dick.
Rev. A.
M. Norman.
66.
London Catalogue, edition fifth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Durham.
Mr. Norman has ceased his botanical 
correspondence with me.
Perhaps, in taking earnestly to other 
departments of Natural History, the local details of Botany may 
have ceased to interest.
Mr. W.
L. Notcutt.
11.
" Catalogue of Plants observed in the neighbourhood of 
Fareham." (Phytologist, vol.
2, part 1, pages 201—216).
28.
London Catalogue, edition second, cheeked for plants 
seen within five miles of Fakenham, in the vice-county of West 
Norfolk.
32.
"Catalogue of Plants observed in the neighbourhood of 
Daventry, Northamptonshire." (Phytologist, vol.
1, pages 500 
—508).
N.B. It will be seen that Mr. Notcutt's two printed Cata- 
logues have been quoted, as well as the manuscript one in form 
of a London Catalogue specially checked for the neighbourhood 
of Fakenham.
Correspondence with Mr. Notcutt induced me to 
accept and adopt the two published Local Catalogues in lieu of 
specially checked copies of a more general one.
Mr. Francis P.
Pascoe.
2. London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within five miles of Trewhiddle, situate near the western 
boundary of the vice-county of East Cornwall.
Further, dis- 
CATALOGUES.
§53 
tinctive marks were affixed to the names of other plants seen 
or reported in Cornwall, beyond the five-mile radius.
(The 
Catalogue checked for plants of East Cornwall, at a later date, 
by Mr. Archer Briggs, is cited by preference, not only on 
account of its later date but also because it takes in the more 
truly eastern side of the county).
Mr. J.
C. Mansel-Pleydell.
9. London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Dorset.
This will be an almost complete 
county list, Mr. Mansel-Pleydell having been actively engaged 
for some years in collecting together the data for a Flora of 
Dorset, now published, and in personally investigating the 
botany of the county ; one interesting result from which was a 
restoration of Scirpus parvulus to the flora of England.
Mr. Charles Prentice.
33.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within three miles of Cheltenham, in the vice-county of 
East Gloucester.
Rev. T.
A. Preston.
7. London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked to shew some 
species additional to those marked by Mr. Flower for the vice- 
county of North Wilts.
Dated 1873.
These additions are 
quoted as " Preston ms." A Flora of Marlborough, edited by 
Mr. Preston for the Students of the College, is published in 
the "Eeports of.
the Marlborough College Natural History 
Society." It unfortunately chances that the line of division 
between North and South Wilts, adopted in my own works, crosses 
the area taken under notice in the Flora, thus rendering it iU avail- 
able for use in relation to either vice-county taken separately.
Rev. W.
H. Purehas.
30.
London Catalogue, edition first, checked for plants seen 
4 B 
554 CATALOGUES.
in the vicinity of Eoss, in the county of Hereford.
With 
additions by Mr. A.
F. "Wilmot ; under which, in the preceding 
pages, the quoted authority for this county is " Wilmott" ; the 
double " tt " being apparently an incorrect mode of spelling the 
name.
(A good " Summary of the Geographical Distribution 
of Plants in Herefordshire," drawn up by Mr. Purchas, is 
printed in the " Transactions of the Woolhope Naturalists' 
Field Club," with the more recent date of 1866.
Many of the 
additional species given in this Flora had been entered in my 
own notes from the letters of Mr. Purchas, and they are indi- 
cated on preceding pages under the cited authority of " Purchas 
ms.") 
25, 46.
By the kindness of Mr. Purchas, also, I have short 
lists of plants observed by him in East Suffolk, or near 
Aberystwith, Cardiganshire.
These are quoted irregularly as 
"ms." or as "cat." 
Mr. W.
W. Reeves.
(48, 49.
Catalogues sent for the second edition of species 
noted in the counties of Merioneth and Carnarvon).
Mr. J.
Frederic Robinson.
49.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Carnarvon.
Date of 1873.
51.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of FHnt. Date of 1873.
52.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the county of Anglesea.
Date of 1873.
N.B. These three catalogues came to hand too late in 1878 
for citation under the orders Banunculacm — Umbelliferm.
They 
are quoted from ' Sambucus onward ; and they often supply a 
personal authority for one or more of the counties named, 
which might otherwise have stood in blank only, as quoted' 
from books, or have been altogether left out of the county lists 
under some species.
A fairly complete lisl of Anglesea plants 
CATALOGUES.
555 
was published in Welch Botanology by Davies ; but no general 
list of plants for Flint or Carnarvon was in my own hands 
before 1873, although I had myself visited both counties, and 
Anglesea also, in years long ago ; then neglecting to make full 
lists of the plants observed there.
Mr. Freeman C.
S. Roper.
14.
" The Natural History of Eastbourne and its vicinity," — 
a capital model for similar local Epitomes, — includes a list of 
plants for a portion of East Sussex.
This being a printed 
pamphlet and joint production, it would not come under the 
prescribed rule for citing personal authorities.
But Mr. Eoper 
very kindly rendered it appropriate by attaching a distinctive 
mark to the comparatively few species of flowering plants 
which he had not himself seen within the area.
Mr. Eoper has 
subsequently printed further addittons to this work.
Mrs. Russell.
(Miss Anna Worsley.) 
6, 34.
Catalogue of plants seen near Bristol, quoted in the 
New Guide as " Worsley cat." As this catalogue was not 
specially adapted to either vice-county, and is now of old date, 
antecedent to the New Guide of 1835, it gives place to the more 
recent catalogue checked for the Bristol circuit by Mr. Thwaites, 
as presently to be explained.
My botanical correspondence with 
Mrs. Eussell, and interchanges of specimens, have been carried 
on through a long series of years, and on my side with ever 
increasing satisfaction.
Oi course the " Worsley cat." of the 
New Guide (under Gloucester) and the " Worsley cat." of this 
present work (under Mid Perth) are quite distinct in place and 
person ; except that the two Misses Worsley, senior and junior, 
are in the related position of Aunt and Niece, and most suitably 
so from the botanical point of view.
I am gratified in being 
enabled to repeat the old form of " Worsley cat." in this present 
volume, and in a related sense.
556 CATALOGUES.
Rev. Gerard Edwards Smith.
15.
Alphabetical Catalogue checked for plants seen in South- 
east Kent.
Date about 1834.
The alphabetical arrangement 
of this printed catalogue, with some crowding of manuscript 
initials on it (used for indicating also other parts of Kent and 
Sussex) rendered it rather confusing for consultation; and I 
was informed by Mr. Borrer that the initials relating to Sussex 
had been misunderstood in some few instances.
In this work, 
Mr. Smith's Catalogue is cited almost exclusively for the vice- 
county of Bast Kent, under which his sectional division of 
" South Kent " appeared to come.
Dr. A.
Southby.
(Formerly Dr. Gapper.) 
5, 6 and 7, 8.
Alphabetical Catalogues checked for plants 
seen in Somerset and in Wilts.
The former was quoted as 
" Gapper cat." in the New Guide.
The latter is of more recent 
date, and scanty in its number of checked names.
They have 
been superseded by the newer catalogues, suitable for quotation 
specially under the four several vice-counties.
Still, the 
Somerset list proved of much service to me in years ago, and it 
ought to be included in the present enumeration, although very 
little used in compiling this work.
Mr. William Alexander Stables.
96.
' Collectanea for a Flora of Moray,' checked in order to 
render it a list of species seen by Mr. Stables in the little 
county of Nairn, included in that large portion of Eastern 
Inverness which constitutes the vice-bounty of Eastemess ; an 
abbreviated compound name, to reduce it to a more convenient 
length for lists in column, etc.
To Mr. Stables I am further 
indebted for numerous specimens, as well as notes about the 
plants and their places, as observed in his far northerly part of 
Britain.
Mr. Daniel Stock.
25, 27.
Manuscript "List of Plants growing about Bungay 
CATALOGUES.
557 
in the county of Suffolk.
May, 1834." Such is the title of a 
small book written out for me by Mr. Stock, and quoted in the 
New Guide.
At a later date, Mr. Stock presented a similar 
manuscript list to the Botanical Society of London.
In that 
list of later date several of the plants had localities indicated for 
them ; and some of the stations being in Norfolk only, I noted 
my earlier list to correspond, by attaching the letter N to the 
names of plants for which Norfolk localities only were given in 
the second and more enlarged Manuscript.
The apparent want 
of consistency, between the title given to the earlier list and the 
fact of Norfolk locahties only being given for some of the same 
plants la the list of later date, unavoidably casts some doubt 
upon the former as a list of plants strictly for a part of the vice- 
county of East Suffolk.
I have, however, assumed all the 
plants to be really found in that vice-county, except as to those 
for which Norfolk localities only are mentioned in the second 
Hst.
(I had that second list knocked down to me, in a lot with 
other books not cared for, at an auction sale of the property of 
the dissolved Botanical Society of London, — unaware that I 
had been bidding for it against its Author.
Mr. Stock evinced 
some unwillingness to let it remain in my possession, and an 
arrangement was made accordingly for him to take it in my 
stead.
Thus, for the purposes of the present work, I fall back 
on the earlier list of 1834, as altered by myself to correspond 
with the later list of 1851.
And " Stock cat." thus appears 
occasionally in connexion with East Norfolk, as well as with 
East Suffolk).
Mr. John Storey.
66, 67.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within five miles of Newcastle, partly in Durham, partly in 
Northumberland, as indicated by the corresponding initials.
This catalogue is cited occasionally ; but the gift of numerous 
specimens by Mr. Storey, together with other assistance, 
usually rendered the citation of the catalogue itself unnecessary.
658 CATALOGUES.
Several of the specimens sent by Mr. Storey were collected by 
Mr. Makepeace, whose name is usually cited.
Dr. J.
T. Boswell-Syme.
85.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
within half-a-dozen miles of Balmuto House, in the county of 
, Fife, in the years 1868-9.
" Limits : — Aberdour to Kirkcaldy, 
Kirkcaldy to Auchtertool, Auchtertool to Loch Gelly, Loch 
Gelly to Cowdenbeath, Cowdenbeath to Otterston by Cullalo, 
Otterston to Aberdour." Some additional species, mentioned 
by letter of later date, have been vouched on preceding pages 
by " Syme ms." or " Syme sp." 
87.
London Catalogue, edition third, checked for plants seen 
in Ochillshire.
Date of 1851.
'  Under Ochillshire are included.
first, Clackmannanshire, second, the detached part of Stirling- 
shire, in which Aloa lies, third, the parts of Perthshire between 
Clackmannanshire and Kinross-shire, fourth, Kinross-shire, and 
fifth, the part of Perthshire between Clackmannanshire and 
Fifeshire, which lies on the Firth of Forth, and in which the 
maritime plants grow, mostly about the mud banks at Kin- 
cardine." As thus explained the area wiU include some portion 
of the county of Fife, no.
85, as it is taken in the map drawn 
for this work ; although mostly constituting a portion of West 
Perth, no.
87 ; and the catalogue is quoted only under the 
latter no.
91.
London Catalogue, edition third, checked for the county 
of Kincardine.
N.B. Several plants in this catalogue stand 
there on the authority of Miss Boswell, Aunt of Dr. Boswell- 
Syme ; and under those plants the county is certified by that 
lady, as " Miss Boswell ms." or in some form more abbreviated.
111.
To Dr. Syme I am further under obligation for a hst of 
plants observed by himself in his visits to Orkney, which is 
occasionally quoted as " Syme cat." The name of " Miss 
Boswell " again comes in occasionally for Orkney.
CATALOGUES.
559 
Dr. George R.
Tate, R.A.
68.
London Catalogue edition second, checked for plants 
seen within five miles of Alnwick, in the vice-county of Cheviot- 
land.
Dr. Tate having had the opportunity to include the 
results of his own researches, in the New Flora of Northumber- 
land and Durham, in which the vice-county of Cheviotland is 
specially distinguished from the other two divisions, it was 
deemed advisable in this present work to give priority to the 
Catalogue by Mr. Embleton ; falhng back on that of Dr. Tate as 
a supplementary list.
Mr. John Tatham.
64.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within three miles of Settle, in the vice-county of Mid- west 
York.
Some few additional plants, the rarer hill plants, are 
seen only beyond the distance of four miles.
The citation of 
" Tatham cat." applies to either set of plants, but Mr. Tatham 
had sent specimens of so many of the rarer plants, either direct 
to myself or through the Botanical Society of London, that 
" sp." will often supersede " cat." in connexion with the name 
of " Tatham." I never had the good fortune to meet Mr.
Tatham personally, although a correspondence through many 
years always gave the wish for a closer intimacy.
Dr. G.
H. K.
Thwaites.
6, 34.
London Catalogue, edition first, checked for plants 
. seen within ten miles of Bristol ; the marks varied so as to 
shew those seen in both vice- counties.
North Somerset and 
West Gloucester, and those found in either one only.
This 
Catalogue was obtained for me by the kind instrumentality of 
Dr. J.
D. Hooker.
Being made on the first edition of the 
London Catalogue, dated in 1844, of course it is deficient in the 
names of many recent segregates.
560 CATALOGUES.
Mr. Frederick Townsend.
11, 12.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for Hants 
south and north.
(His ' Flora of Hampshire,' in which these 
lists are revised, was published too late to be used).
Mr. E.
G. Varenne.
19.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within four miles of Kelvedon.
Mr. Varenne more recently 
has supplied me with a Manuscript List of additional plants 
and their locaUties, having reference both to North and South 
Essex, always carefully distinguished.
The authority for these 
latter is given as "Varenne ms." in contradistinction to "Va- 
renne cat." The catalogue and list from Mr. Varenne have 
been valuable aids to me.
There is a good Flora of Essex by 
Mr. Gr.
S. Gibson; but my own division into South and North 
being ignored in that work, and the Author's divisions being 
crossed by my boundary line, the Flora was here of small use 
in placing the plants under their two vice-counties.
It has 
likewise the highly objectionable peculiarity of citing fifty per- 
sonal authorities by initials, although surnames are scarcely 
longer, far more clear to eye and understanding, and less liable 
to misprint.
Imagine so unwise a plan to have been adopted in 
" Topographical Botany." How lucid, distinctive, and well 
adapted for ready recollection, would have been the four or five 
hundred set of initials, printed in pairs and trios, instead of 
names !
Of course, while obliged to consult the Flora of Essex 
and other Floras on like plan (Cambridge, Hertford, &c.), my 
course was to regard them as promiscuous compilations un- 
vouched, without attempting to keep in recollection all the 
different sets of initials used in those several Floras, so 
bewildering when brought under notice together.
Mr. James Ward.
65.
London Catalogue, edition second, checked for plants 
seen within three miles of Eichmond, in the vice county of 
CATALOGUES.
561 
North-west York.
N.B. In some of my earlier writings an 
alphabetical list was used, also checked by Mr. Ward, but 
including a much wider area than the catalogue cited in the 
present work.
Miss Elizabeth Warren.
1,2.
Manuscript List of Cornish Plants in the Hortus Siccus 
of the Eoyal Horticultural Society of Cornwall.
This List was 
returned to Miss Warren by her own desire, after I had 
checked off the names of the plants, in the folio edition of the 
London Catalogue.
And as the list of names related to the 
whole county, not specially to either vice-county, it was found 
practically almost useless for the objects of the present work.
There are names entered in the list, which are those of plants 
very unlikely to be found in the county, such as Primula 
farinosa and Polygonum maritimum ; so that either misnomers 
or mis-locations would appear to be found in the collection.
Hon. J.
B. Leicester Warren.
13, 14.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked to shew 
some of the less common (chiefly coast) plants seen in West or 
East Sussex, in the autumn of 1873.
This Catalogue became 
available only in Part Second of the present work, namely, for 
the monocotyledonous orders ; and being accompanied by manu- 
script notes in letters and also labelled specimens, these " ms." 
and " sp." supersede the " cat." under various plants.
Mr.
Borrer's Catalogue (inland one) had priority under 13, his own 
vice-county.
58.
Manuscript Flora of Cheshire, lent to me by Mr. Warren 
in 1867.
While this carefuUy drawn up Flora was in my own 
holding, I checked off in a London Catalogue the names of all 
the species which appeared to be entered on the personal 
authority of Mr. Warren himself.
This is the list referred to as 
" Warren cat." 
58.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked so as to shew 
4 c 
562 CATALOaUES.
distinctively all the species actually seen by Mr. Warren in the 
county of Chester up to 1873.
This Catalogue came to hand 
after the larger portion of Part First of the present work had 
been printed off.
In the later printed pages, and taken along 
with various oral and manuscript notes, it is referred to as 
" Warren ms." 
Mr. Frederick M.
Webb.
59.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
in the vice-county of South Lancaster.
In the absence of this 
Catalogue, and that of Mr. Warren for the conterminous county 
of Chester, I should have found myself botanicaUy much at a 
loss, notwithstanding a familiarity with portions of each county 
in my early years.
The envii'ons of the two great towns, 
Liverpool and Manchester, are in both counties ; and their 
Local Floras fail to state their botanical stations in a manner 
easily to be understood in a comital sense by a non-resident.
Mr. Webb edited a Flora of Liverpool, in the " Liverpool Natu- 
ralists' Journal," carried on to Verbmacea, in 1868 ; and I 
understand that it has been again continued by somebody else, 
after a temporary cessation.
Dr. P.
Buchanan White.
87, 88.
89.
Dr. White has kindly indicated for us in manu- 
script, in connection with his ' Perthshire Flora,' published in 
the ' Scottish Naturalist,' the vice-counties in which the 
species are ascertained to grow.
Miss Alice Worsley.
88.
London Catalogue, edition sixth, checked for plants seen 
by Miss Worsley and Mademoiselle Cerf, in the neighbourhood 
of St. Fillans, in the vice-county of Mid Perth, in the summer 
of 1872.
Miss Worsley kindly checked this catalogue to meet 
my special request for it, made on hearing that she was a 
temporary resident in a vice-county for which there was no 
CATALOGUES.
563 
published Flora ; nor had I any unpublished lists of its plants 
from other botanists, except indeed my own notes made chiefly 
about KiUin.
(See further under Mrs. Kussell, page 555.) 
Various Correspondents.
Except as otherwise explained, the before mentioned Cata- 
logues are understood to be full lists of the plants, common or 
rare alike included.
Numerous other manuscript lists of the 
rarer plants in special areas, and with or without detailed 
localities, have been kindly sent by botanical correspondents.
These have been quoted as " ms." in connexion with the names 
of their contributors ; that abbreviation being understood to 
signify a locality, more or less precisely stated, but at any rate 
presumed to be somewhere within the county or vice-county to 
which it is assigned.
Donors to Herbarium.
The abbreviation " sp." will carry nearly the same local 
significance.
But it is to be recollected that duplicate speci- 
mens often pass from hand to hand ; and thus not seldom they 
may become connected with the names of Donors who were not 
the actual collectors of the specimens.
A considerable portion 
of those referred to under the abbreviation " sp." reached the 
Compiler's herbarium through the instrumentality of the Ex- 
change Societies.
Of course, he cannot warrant the accuracy 
of their labels in respect of comital habitats.
The " sp." 
means, however, that the Compiler has himself seen a specimen 
which was sent or labelled as having been gathered in the 
county named.
Ebmaeks on the Catalogdes.
Some of the preceding Catalogues have been described as 
Manuscript Lists.
That is perhaps the best form for rendering 
them accurate as to names and plants, but with increased 
564 CATALOGUES.
likelihood of inadvertently omitting some.
While writing ont a 
long list of plant-names, the chance ia not small that one or 
two may he left out, which ought to have been included.
But 
such an oversight introduces no other error into the list, 
beyond the simple omission of some plant which might properly 
have been given.
Indeed, it is not an easy matter to make 
sure of any local list being so absolutely complete that its 
negative evidence can be quite relied upon.
In some of our 
printed Local Floras we find one or more species added like a 
tail-piece at the end, either because first ascertained in the 
county or other area while the Flora was under press, or 
because accidentally left out of the manuscript as prepared for 
the printing oflSce.
The greater number of the cited Catalogues have been formed 
in a different manner, one by which the chance of bringing in a 
wrong plant is increased, while the chance of leaving out a 
right one may be rather lessened.
A printed list or general 
catalogue of British Plants has been converted into a local 
catalogue ; so managed by attaching some sign or mark to the 
names of all those plants which have been observed by the 
marker within some definite area.
This mode is less likely to 
induce errors of omission, perhaps, because the printed names 
are there to serve as reminders.
But, unless deliberate care be 
taken in attaching the marks to the plant-names, there is the 
risk of attaching some of them inadvertently to the wrong 
names ; the hand and the thought not acting synchronaUy.
Such printed lists ought not only to be marked deliberately, but 
to be also carefully read over after being marked.
Eepeatedly, 
before and while citing the Catalogues, it was found necessary 
to re-apply to the marker, to ascertain whether he had really 
intended to affix a mark to some particular plant suspected to 
have been wrongly marked by him.
After some experience had been acquired by noting the very 
different manner in which local botanists looked at plants, — 
more especially as to the likelihood of certain species being 
OATAIOGUES.
565 
introduced or truly indigenous in the area under observation, 
and the remarkable confusion often made between eye -sight 
and hear-say evidence, — a series of four marks was adopted for 
the sake of uniformity among the lists, or such an approxi- 
mation towards uniformity as it was found possible to obtain.
The four marks were these : — 
- Native in the area, seen there by the Marker himself.
t Possibly introduced there.
Ditto.
* Probably (or Certainly) introduced.
Ditto.
o Eeported'on or by some other authority.
This seems clear and simple enough.
It has not been found 
so in practice.
There were Catalogues in which Semperdvum 
teetotum and Elodea canadensis, were at first marked as true 
natives.
The ordinary corn-field weeds, the Colonists of the 
Cybele Britannica, are marked as natives usually, but occa- 
sionally as introductions, in neighbouring counties where they 
really occur under almost precisely similar conditions.
Planted 
trees are marked variously, either as natives or as possibly or 
probably introduced.
Even the wide difference of meaning 
between " - " and " o " has not always been faithfully adhered 
to.
Still, be it observed, such incongruities may be found in 
the printed Local Floras, as" well as in the Catalogues cited in 
this present work.
And on the whole, the Catalogues here 
under explanation, and cited on preceding pages, after having 
been critically considered, are probably quite equal in trust- 
worthiness to the printed Floras.
Indeed, if a like number of 
each should be fairly compared together, it would assuredly be 
found that the printed Floras include more errors ; that they 
have given currency and record to far more errors in the names 
and locaUties of plants, than the -Catalogues cited in this 
present work will do.
In their several dates, they may be described as ranging from 
1832 to 1880 inclusive.
It is important to bear in mind this 
lengthened range of date, when looking to their evidence as 
shewing the occurrence of particular plants within their 
666 CATALOGUES.
respective counties or other areas.
During the two score years 
many changes have been made in the species accepted and 
described in our technical books.
Some newly detected plants 
have been brought into our descriptive Floras ; and those not 
also local rarities ; for instance, Sagina ciliata and Ranunculus 
Lenormandi.
A much greater number, formerly deemed varieties 
and little noticed as such, have been allowed to gain specific 
rank ; for instance, Filayo apiculata and spathulata.
The total number of plants which would come under these 
categories is by no means scanty.
As they have been gradually 
increasing in their numbers during the two score years referred 
to, it follows that the earlier the date of a, catalogue, the less 
likely on the whole to shew some of these plants, even although 
found in the area to which it related.
It is partly on this 
account that the form of the cited Catalogue has been men- 
tioned, and the particular edition of the London Catalogue that 
was converted into a Local List.
Most of them being undated 
otherwise, and the exact years of marking them not having been 
kept in recollection, the form or the edition is thus substituted 
as an approxim'ete date instead.
The earliest printed lists were alphabetically arranged copies 
of the names of plants, taken from Hooker's British Flora.
The 
first Catalogue was made out from the first edition of the British 
Flora.
A second Catalogue, still alphabetical, was taken from 
the second edition of the same Flora.
Then came a Catalogue, 
by Mr. George Francis, arranged on the Linnean System of 
classification, and taken from the third edition of the same 
British Flora, which bears date in 1835.
Dr. Godfrey Howitt's 
Catalogue of Derbyshire Plants is made out by marking a copy of 
this Linnean Catalogue.
The Botanical Society of Edinburgh has printed several 
Catalogues, or editions in different forms of arrangement.
Up 
to 1841, or later, it adhered to the alphabetical form.
But at 
some after date a change was made to a sort of mongrel com- 
promise between alphabetical and systematic classification, the 
CATALOGUES.
567 
exact character of  which I do not now recollect.
More recently 
it has become strictly systematic.
The Botanical Society of London for a time attempted to 
cary on their exchanges and distribution of specimens by aid of 
the Edinburgh Catalogue.
But its alphabetical arrangement 
and changed nomenclature being found exceedingly inconvenient 
for such use of it, I was requested to try whether some other 
form of Catalogue could not be adopted instead, more convenient 
in its arrangement for the purpose required.
Not unwUlingly 
I undertook this little, task ; looking forward to the service 
which such a Catalogue would be calculated to render to myself 
also, as a ready mode of obtaining Local Lists of plants in a 
systematic instead of an alphabetical form.
It will have been seen by those users of this book, who have 
looked over the list of Catalogues explained, that the greater 
number of them have been made out by marking copies of the 
' London Catalogue of British Plants ' ; also, that the edition 
used has always been mentioned in the explanation.
As before 
remarked, this gives their successive and approximate dates 
and it so far suggests a clue to the states or stages of our 
descriptive botany at the time the local lists were made out.
During the thirty-six years, nearly, from the first alphabetical 
list to the sixth edition of the London Catalogue in 1867, there 
has been a continued tendency to subdivide old Linnean species 
into more numerous modern segregates, and the tendency has 
been increasingly apparent since (say) 1842.
The effect of this 
appears of course in the catalogues of names ; the later the 
edition of a catalogue used in marking off a local list of plants, 
the greater the chance for a segregate name to be marked in it 
and either along with or in lieu of a more aggregate name.
The 
several editions of the London Catalogue are dated thus : — 
1844 edition first.
1857 edition fifth.
1848 „ second.
1867 „ sixth.
1850 „ third.
1874 ,, seventh.
1853 ,, fourth.
568 CATALOGUES.
(In the seventh edition of the London Catalogne, which was 
published after the first edition of Topographical Botany, the 
numbers prefixed to the species were changed, and were raised 
from 1428 to 1665.) 
' Topographical Botany ' is adapted to the Sixth Edition 
of the London Catalogue, as before explained, both in nomen- 
clature and numeration with some few discrepancies ; and the 
cited lists are made on the same or earlier editions.
But while 
alluding to the nos.
connected with the specific names — an old 
custom of botanical books revived there for its special useful- 
ness — I wish to make record of the advantages derived by 
myself from those nos.
Being used throughout my own books, 
they give a very ready reference from one book to another.
I 
can find a species more readily and rapidly through the 
nos.
than through order and genus.
This is the case, whether 
it is wished to turn from one book to' another, from books to 
herbarium, or from herbarium to books.
Lideed, it may be 
literal truth to say, that ' Topographical Botany ' would never 
have been written, never got to by me, if the specific names 
of the London Catalogue had been unnumbered.
If rightly used, they vastly facilitate exchanges and dis- 
tribution of specimens.
Ex. gr.
The one-time active Secretary 
of the Botanical Society of London, the late Mr. George Deimes, 
really knew but little of botany ; he never was able to name a 
plant from book description.
Yet, through aid of the nos.
to 
the specific names in the London Catalogue, he found it suffi- 
ciently easy to look out, or assist in looking out, the desiderata 
of members.
Using the nos.
he and I together have looked 
out upwards of a score of desiderata lists on a Christmas-day 
morning, and some of them not ai all short lists.
At its best 
days the London Society mustered about two hundred members ; 
and the main annual distributions were usually got through in 
December or January, while done by the Secretary (much tied 
by his professional duties) and myself.
I wish particularly to 
record that circumstance, while writing of the uses of the 
CATALOGUES.
569 
London Catalogue, because Dr. Boswell Syme assures me, in 
1873, that he has never found the nos.
to the names " of the 
least use." My own experience of them -was, and stiU is, widely 
different indeed.
I dislike much to receive a manuscript list 
of plants or localities, in which the plant-names are not written 
in the same sequence, and with the same nos.
affixed, as seen in 
the London Catalogue.
But a list of mere nos.
without names 
has usually got thrown into the fire forthwith.
4 D 
GENEBAL LIST OP COBEESPONDENTS.
WITH OTHEK 
PERSONAL AUTHORITIES CITED.
Mr. Abraham, cor.
3. 
Miss Adams, soe.
3 11.
Eev. Frederick Addison, soc.
70.
Mr. Allen, through Eev. Churchill Babington, 32.
Dr. E.
C. Alexander, cor.
6 7 26.
(Dr. A.
Prior.) 
Mr. A.
Anderson, through Mr. Gardiner, 89.
John Anderson, cor.
30 32 48.
Mr. E.
J. Andrews, cor.
20.
Eev. J.
H, Arnold, cor.
13.
Prof.
G. A.
Walker-Arnott, cor.
75 83 85 89 99 100.
Dr. Ascherson, of Berlin, cor.
52.
Zostera nana.
Mr. F.
D. P.
Astley, through Eev. Ch.
Babington, 57 58.
B. J.
Atken, soc.
63 100.
(? correct name.) 
Mrs. Atkens, soc.
13 16 98.
Mr. E.
C. Atkinson, through Mr. Storey, 68.
Miss M.
M. Atwood, cor.
6 41 43 45 46 49 51.
Dr. P.
B. Ayres, soc.
23.
Eev. Henry Baber, soc.
29.
Prof.
C. C.
Babington, cat.
1 3 4 5 10 11 17 26 28 29 31 34 
36 39 40 41 45 46 49 50 52.
Eev. Prof.
Churchill Babington, cor.
32 37 39 55 57 59 64 95 
97 98 99 103 104 105.
Mr. James Backhouse, cor.
64 65 69 90 92.
CORRESPONDENTS, ETC.
571 
Mr. Francis E.
Bacon, cor.
51.
James Bagnall, cor.
87 38 39.
Charles Bailey, cor.
1 48 58 70.
Henry Baines, through Mr. Leyland, 64.
J. G.
Baker, cat.
12 13 17 62 64 65 66 67 70.
Hugh M.
Balfour, cor.
81 85 88 89 90 92.
Prof.
Isaac B.
Balfour, cat.
83 to 86.
John Hutton Balfour, oat.
69 73 74 75 77 -82 83 84 85 
88 101 102.
Mr. John Ball, cor.
84 41 49 52 69 88.
J. Banker, soc.
2 8.
Frederick Barham, soc.
17 21 27 63.
Miss A.
M. Barnard, cor.
20 27 41.
Dr. Martin Barry, cor.
94.
Mr. John Barton, soc.
29.
Silene italica.
W. Bean, Junr., soc.
58 59 62.
Miss Beck, cor.
58.
Gentiana Pmumonanthe.
Mr. W.
H. Beeby, cor.
1. Juncus pygmcBus, etc.
Alfred Beesley, soc.
15.
Sinapis tenuifolia.
Thomas Beesley, cat.
15 28.
Miss M.
Beevor, soc.
69 70.
A. Bell, oat.
7 8 10 12 22 25 26 27 28 36.
Bell, through Mr. Storey, 67.
Eev. T.
B. Bell, soc.
40 88 100.
Mr. William Bennett, cor.
17.
Lathyrus hirsutus.
A. W.
Bennett, soc.
1, Armaria verna.
Arthur Bennett, 17.
oor.
26 28 29 ; (and many lists 
supplied for the new edition ; also revision of Potamo- 
geton.) 
Thomas Benson, through Prof.
Oliver, 69.
Thomas Bentall, soc.
19.
Eev. M.
J. Berkeley, cor.
15 81 32 55 57.
Mr. Spencer H.
Biokham, soc.
57 58.
W. D, Biden, cor.
17 64.
Dr. Henry Bidwell, soc.
23 39 40 49 50 51 56.
672 CORBBSPONDENTS, ETC.
Eev. J.
F. Bigge, soc.
66 67 68.
Mr. A.
0. Black, through ...?
88.
James Bladou, soc.
35.
E. Bligh, soc.
11.
Juncus obtusiflorus.
Eev. E.
N. Bloomfield, cat.
14 25 26.
Notes, etc.
Mr. T.
B. Blow, eat.
20.
Eev. Andrew Bloxam, cat.
27 38 53 55 57 69.
Mr. Thomas Bodenham,' soc.
40.
T. Wemyss Bogg, cat.
54.
William Borrer, cat.
3 7 9 13 14 15 26 70 98 99.
Dr. Francis Bossey, soc.
16.
Mr. J.
E. Bowman, cat.
40 45 47 48 49 50 51 52 57 58.
R. B.
Bowman, cor.
65 66 67.
G. S.
Brady, through Mr. Baker, 70.
William Brand, cor.
82 83 85 87 89 90.
Eev. W.
T. Bree, cat.
31 32 38.
Mr. Francis Brent, soc.
15 41 49 58.
J. A.
Brewer, soc.
11 13 14 17.
J. Brichan, quoted.
94 96 106.
" J.
B." 
T. E.
Archer Briggs, cat.
2 3 4.
James Britten, cat.
22 24 32 54.
Dr. W.
A. Bromfleld, cor.
9 10 11 12 14 16 26 29.
Mr. H.
Bromwich, soc.
38.
0. E.
Broome, soc.
7 15 29.
Isaac Brown, soc.
20 30.
Eobert Brown, cor.
Notes.
50 51 58 59.
Dr. Eobert Brown, " Campsteriensis," cat.
109.
Mr. W.
H. Brown, soc.
68.
S. Buckland, soc.
15 57.
James Buckman, soc.
83 37.
Henry Bull, soc.
17.
Dr. Martin M.
Bull, cor.
2 4 5.
Mr. J.
W. BuUer, through Mr. Parfitt, 3.
Sir J.
C. P.
Bunbury, cor.
25 26.
Mr. Burnet, through Mr. Storey, 103.
CORRESPONDENTS, ETC.
573 
E. Burton, soc.
9 11 58.
Dr. Stevenson Bushnan, cor.
87.
Andromeda.
Eev. Thomas Butler, soc.
6 34 37 40 48 49 52 53.
Mr. W.
H. Campbell, cor.
77 88 89 105 106 107 108.
Carey, cor.
80.
Dr. Carnegie, soc.
82 90.
{Badiola 90, not 85.) 
Eev. H.
Carpenter, soc.
3. Equisetum variegatum.
P. P.
Carpenter, through Mrs. Eussell, 64.
Dr. B.
Carrington, soc.
53 54 56 69 71.
Miss Carr, through Mr. Keys.
Impatiens.
Mr. A.
Carr, soc.
14 16.
Eobert Castles, cor.
17 21.
Earl of Cawdor, through Mr. Stables, 96.
Linnma.
Mr. George Chadwicb, soc.
59 60.
Gardner Chambers, soc.
70.
John Chrisp, cor.
67 68.
A. Craig Christie, soc.
86 87.
W. C.
Christy, cor.
6 13 16 17 18 19 21 23 34 49 57 82.
G. C.
Churchill, cor.
Thomas Clark, cor.
5 6.
Thomas Clark, junior, soc.
6 9.
Dr. H.
Cleghorn, soc.
81 90.
Mr. Frederick Clowes, cor.
69.
G. A.
Clowes, soc.
27.
Eev. W.
H. Coleman, cat.
5 14 17 19 20 25 29 30 55.
J. C.
Collins, cor.
5 6.
Mr. Chatles Conway, cat.
35.
Da'niel Cooper, soc.
17.
George Cooper, cor.
25 27 28 34 77.
T. H.
Cooper, cor.
56.
M. H.
Cowell.
soc.
15.
Miss E.
M. Cox, cor.
38.
Eev. H.
H. Crewe, through Mr. Whittaker, 50.
Mr. Alexander Croall, cor.
90 91 92 96.
574 COBKESPONDENTS, ETC.
Eev. W.
E. Crotch, soc.
1 5 6 13 52 69.
Mr. James Cruiokshank, soc.
72 90.
James Cunnack, cat.
1. 
William Curnow, soc.
1. 
Dr. Davidson, through Dr. Howitt, 57.
Mr. Davis, through Mrs. Eussell, 37.
N. A.
Dalzell, soc.
72.
W. Darby, cor.
40 42 46.
G. E.
Dennes, cor.
16 21.
Henry Denny, cor.
63.
Dr. A.
Dewar, soc.
85 87.
Mr. Bobert Dick, soc.
109.
Hierochloe.
Prof.
George Dickie, cor.
92 93.
D. G.
91 to 94.
Mr. William Dickenson, cor.
70.
Dr. Joseph Dickinson, soc.
40 50 58 59.
Mrs. Dickson, cat.
91.
Mr. J.
Dickson, soc.
72.
Lepturus.
L. W.
Dillwyn, through Mrs. Maskelyne, 41.
Henry Doubleday, soc.
19.
Eev. E.
C. Douglas, cat.
29 39.
J. Downs, through Mr. Ward, 16.
Mr. G.
0. Druce, cor.
32, cat.
105.
M. E.
Grant-Duff, quoted.
94.
Dugdale, soc.
58 59.
H. Dunbavand, cor.
58.
Eev. James Duncan, cat.
80.
J. P.
Duncan, cat.
75.
Mr. A.
M. Dunlop, quoted.
77.
J. F.
Duthie, cor.
6 15 18 19 20 23 26.
Dutton, through Mr. French, 6.
W. T.
Thiselton Dyer, cor.
11 17 21 22 23 83.
T. J.
Dyke, soc.
17 41.
Mrs. Eastmond, cor.
4 17.
COBRESPONDENTS, EtO.
575 
Mr. Booth Eddison, see.
56.
Miss Mary Edmonds, cor.
4 34 70.
Mr. Thomas Edmonston, oor.
95 112.
Edward Edwards, soo.
16.
Miss Harriet Ekins, cor.
30.
Mr. John Ellis, oor.
12 17.
Eobert Embleton, cat.
68.
W. Evans, soc.
edin.
29.
Silene italica.
Mr. Fairlamb, through Mr. Storey, 67.
Dr. P.
Parre, soc.
11 16.
Mr. H.
B. Fielding, cor.
49 60.
H. S.
Fisher, soc.
50 51 58 59.
George Fitt, cor.
27, 
T. B.
Flower, cat.
3 6 7 8 34.
T. J.
Foggitt, through Eev. F.
Addison, 62.
William Foggitt, soc.
62 66.
Prof.
Edward Forbes, cat.
71.
Mr. Henry Fordham, soc.
13 14 20 29 30 58.
Edward Forster, cor.
16 42.
Miss S.
Foster, soc.
30.
Miss Fotheringham, soc.
90.
Rev. H.
E. Fox, cor.
9 23 104.
Mr. Frampton, through Mr. Pleydell, 9.
Eev. James Eraser, through Mr. Gray, 72.
Dr. John Eraser, cat.
39.
Mr. Joseph Freeman, soc.
17 18.
J. B.
French, soc.
6 15 16 17 34.
Alfred Fryer, cor.
29 32.
Mr. Walter Gait, cor.
75 76 77 86 100.
Mrs. Lynedoch Gardiner, cor.
17.
Calla palustri 
Mr. Williani Gardiner, cor.
90 91.
H. D.
Geldart, quoted.
Gentle, cor.
84.
Lepturus.
576 COEKESPONDENTS, ETC.
G. S.
Gibson, cat.
1 3 4 13 17 19 27 28 29 35 43 46 48 
50 65 66 89.
Samuel Gibson, spc.
63 
Miss I.
Giflford, soc.
5 6.
Dr. Gillies, cat.
111.
•' Gillies herb." 
Mr. T.
W. Gissing, cor.
8 35 36 37 60 63 69.
W. Godley.
21 23.
Goldie, quoted, 75.
Joe Goodlad, cat.
59.
Eev. Dr.
George Gordon, cat.
58 72 73 94 95 96 98 106 107.
Mr. F.
H. Goulding, cor.
23.
William Gourlie, cor.
74 76 77 81 86 88 98 99.
Prof.
Eobert Graham, cor.
74 83 90 105 106 108.
Miss Harriett Grant, through Mr. Stables, 96.
Mr. J.
A. Grant, through Mr. Stables, 91.
Dr. John Edward Gray, cor.
10 17 21.
Mr. Peter Gray, cat.
72 73.
Alfred Greenwood, soc.
1 19.
Dr. E.
K. Greville, cor.
3 87 88 108.
Mr. Symington Grieve, cor.
78 ; cat.
102.
Mr. Henry Groves, cor.
11 17.
James Groves, cor.
11 17.
Miss Grundy, quoted, 58.
Mr. J.
W. G.
Gutch, Cor. 3 41 45 69 104.
Miss Wilhelmina L.Hall, cat.
14.
Mr. Thomas B.
HaU, cor.
19 58.
Samuel Hailstone, soc.
63.
F. A.
Hanbury, soc.
24 29.
Miss M.
J. Hancock, through Mr. E.
Bowman, 66.
Hardwicke, per Dr. Boswell, 25.
Mr. Jdhn Hardy, soc.
41 68 59 63.
Eev. James Harris, cor.
12 20 21 23 29 31 49 51 52.
Mr. E.
Harrison, through Mr. Christy, 63.
Colonel Drummond~Hey, soc.
88 89.
COREESPONDENTS, ETC.
577 
Mr. Hebblethwaite, through Mr. Baker, 63 65.
Hemsley, quoted, 14, 
Arthur Henfrey, soc.
3 15 41 58.
Prof.
Eoger Hennedy, cat.
76 77 100.
J. S.
Henslow, cor.
3 22 26 27 29 32.
Mr. W.
C. Hewitson, through Mr. E.
B. Bowman, 112.
A. Heys, soc.
59.
T. 0.
Heysham, cor.
70.
W. P.
Hiern, cor, 4 29 36 39 40 58 60.
Wilham Hill, cor.
2. Eryngium campestre.
William Hillhouse, cat.
30.
Eev. D.
T. Hincks, soc.
62.
W. M.
Hiad, eat, 15 21 40 69, 
Mr, Edward Hobson, cor, 59, 
Elizabeth Hodgson, cor.
69.
John Hogg, cat.
page 527.
H. M.
Holman, soc.
13 16 17.
Sir W.
J. Hooker, cor.
27 29 49 52 88 92 95 96.
J. D.
Hooker, cor.
36 75 77 86 98 99 100.
Eev. W.
S. Hore, cor.
12 3 4, 
P, J, A, Hort, cor, 6 26 29 33 34 35 48 49 66 69 70.
Dr. Godfrey Howitt, cat.
49 54 55 56 57.
Mr, G.
E. Hunt, soc.
13 41 48 49 58 86 100.
Hunter, soc.
85.
Paris quadrifoUa.
Lady Huntley, soc.
92.
Mr, William Hurst, through Mr. Pamplin, 22 24, 
A. Hutton, through,,,?
72, 
Mr, T, Ingall, soc, 17.
Teucrium Botrys.
Dr, Innes, quoted, 94 95, 
Mr. Alexander Irvine, soc.
19 21 37.
Mr. P.
W. Jacob, see.
15.
Mrs. W.
James, soc.
24.
Eev. H.
S. Jenner, soc.
16, 
4 E 
578 COBBESPONDBNTS, ETC.
Miss E.
Jones, soc.
40.
Mr. E.
H. Jones,- cat.
43.
Mrs. W.
Jones, soc.
14 15.
Eev. C.
A. Johns, cor.
1. 
Dr. George Jolinston, cat.
68 80 81 106 107 108.
Mr. Jowett, through Dr. Howitt, 71.
Eev. James Keith, soc.
96.
Mr. Andrew Kerr, soc.
90.
I. W.
N. Keys, cor.
3. 
John King, soc.
59.
Eev. W.
P. Meade King, cor.
Mr. Henry Kingsley, soc.
17 21 64 70.
Eichard Kippist, cor.
16 32 53.
Thomas Kirk, cat.
38 57.
A. Knight, through Mr. Thwaites, 41.
Eev. D.
Landsborough, cor.
75.
Mr. Lawrence, soc.
21.
(Initials illegible.) 
Prof.
George Lawson, cor.
85.
M. A.
Lawson, cat.
66 104.
Eev, J.
E. Leefe, cor.
29 30 38 48 49 50 62 64 65 66 69.
Mr. Edwin Lees, soc.
33 37 40 41 42 47 49 52.
Dr. F.
Arnold Lees, cat.
63 64.
Eev. W.
A. Leighton, cat.
40.
Dr. Charles Lemann, cor.
29.
Mr. J.
H. Lewis, cor.
47 48 59.
Eev. Augustin Ley, soc.
23 34 36 57 70 96 97.
Mr. Eoberts Leyland, cor.
59 63.
Mrs. Lilly, 20.
Eev. E.
M. Lingwood, soc.
14.
Mr. John Linnell, soc.
17.
Eev. William Little, cor.
83.
Mr. Linton, soc.
23.
G. N.
Lloyd, cor.
72 73 82 83 85.
OORBESPONDENTS, ETC.
679 
Dr. George Lloyd, see.
3 38 39 40 97.
Mr. S.
Lucas, soo.
20.
George Luxford, soe.
17.
E. Lyon, soc.
77 88 89 98 99.
Mr. James Mackay, quoted, 104.
Pinguieula alpina.
Dr. P.
W. Maclagan, soc.
68 75.
Gilbert Macnab, soc.
87 74 75 78 80 82 83 84 85 86 90 
100.
Mr. James Macnab, cor.
16 52 71 83 85 89 90 108 109.
William Macnab, cor.
85 108.
(Maonabs confused ?) 
Dr. D.
C. Maereight, soc.
11 12.
Mr. Makepeace, tbrough Mr. Storey, 67.
E. J.
Mann, soc.
27.
J. Marsden, soc.
83.
William Marshall, cor.
28 29.
H. P.
Marsham, soc.
27.
Dr. G.
A. Martin, soc, 10 13.
Mr. J.
A. Martindale, cor.
69.
Mrs. Maskelyne, cor.
97.
Dr. Mateer, soc.
17.
Mr. William Mathews, quoted, 12.
Eobert Maughan, cor.
72 78 80 83 84 85 88 90 99 103.
George Maw, cat.
4 36 37.
J. Cosmo Mellvill, cor.
Additions.
5 60 69.
J. Merrick, soc- 58 59.
E. M.
Middleton, cor.
112.
J. Stewart Mill, cor.
14 17.
G. S.
Mill, through Mr. Thwaites, 6.
Miller, through Dr. Petermann.
Dr. J.
Mitchell, soc.
56.
Mr. WiUiam Mitten, cor.
13 14.
Matthew Moggridge, cor.
41 42 44.
James Montgomery, cat.
75 76 , 98.
0. A.
Moore, oat.
61 63.
S80 cokkesponCenIs etc.
A. G.
More, cat.
10 11 16 24 37.
C. Morley, soc.
33.
James Motley, cat.
44.
F. T.
Mott, cor.
55.
Moxon, through...?
18.
W. Mudd, through Mr. Baker, 62.
Stewart Murray, soc.
75.
Lady Keith Murray, soc.
87.
Mr. Frederick Naylor, cor.
88.
Menziesia, p.
268.
Hon. Miss Neville, soc.
19.
Eev. W.
W. Newbould, cat.
17 21 29 30 31 63.
Mr. Edward Newman, cor.
17 18 36 40 41 43 47 18.
0. Newnham, quoted.
12.
Nicholson, through Sir W.
Hooker, 53.
D. Nicholson, cat.
109.
Dr. Patrick Nicolson, cor.
85 90.
Eev. A.
M. Norman, cat.
6 9 14 57 66.
Mr. W.
L. Notcutt, cor.
11 25 28 32.
Prof.
Daniel Oliver, cor.
1 65 67 68 69 70 107 108.
Mr. Jonathan Ottley, cor.
70.
Sir James Paget, cor.
25 27.
Mr. W.
D. Paine, soc.
65.
Fdward Palmer, soc.
16.
William Pamplin, cor.
11 12 16 17 18.
Miss Alcie Parfett, cor.
17.
Mr. Edward Parfitt, cor.
8 5 6.
C. Eyre Parker, soc.
47.
Dr. Parsons, 61.
Mr. P.
P. Pascoe, cat.
1 2.
Miss Payne, through Mr. Mansell-Pleydell, 9.
S. M.
Payne, soc.
2 9 30.
(A confusion of name ?) 
Mr. Peach, through Dr. Eobert Brown, 109.
COKBESPONDENTS, ETC.
581 
Lieut.
Phillips, N.N., cor.
58 59.
Rev. George Binder, cor.
58 60 65 69.
Mr. J.
C. Mansell-Pleydell, cat.
9 41.
Dr. J.
H. PoUexfen, soc.
90.
Eev. John Poole, cor.
3 5 85 48 51.
Mr. Charles Prentice, cat.
27 33 37.
Eev. T.
A. Preston, oat.
7. 
Mr. E.
J. Price, cor.
48 50.
Miss Pringle, soc.
68.
Dr. E.
0. A.
Prior.
(See Alexander.) 
Mr. E.
A. Pryor, cor.
11 12 14 20 23 24 25 30 35.
Eev. W.
H. Purchas, cat.
25 34 35 36 43 45 46.
Mr. E.
J. Quekett, soc.
5 18.
Mr. John Ealfs, cor.
1. 
Eobert Eanking, soc.
14.
Eev. T.
F. Eavenshaw, cor.
4. 
Mr. John Eay, soc.
9 18 19 26 29.
G. Eeece, soc.
87.
W. W.
Eeeves, soc.
16 17 ; cat.
48 49.
Eeid, soc.
90.
John Reynolds, soc.
16 21 30.
William Eichardson, soc.
68.
J. Eiley, soc.
57.
Eev. Henry Eoberts, cor.
11 38.
Mr. J.
Eoberts, through Prof.
C. C.
Babington, 94.
A. Eobertson, through Prof.
Balfour, 85.
J. F.
Eobinson, cat.
49 51 52 58 59.
William Eobinson, through Prof.
Oliver, 70.
Mrs. Eobinson, soc.
17.
Mr. George Eogers, cor.
6 34 45.
Eev. W.
M. Eogers, cor.
Notes, etc., 15 8.
Mr. F.
C. S.
Eoper, cat.
14.
John Eoy, 89 90 91 92 93 94 97.
582 COBRESPONDENIS, ETC.
Mrs. EusseU, cat.
1 3 4 6 11 12 22 34 38 45 46 48 56 77.
Eev. Andrew Eutherford, soc.
96.
Mr. T.
G. Eylands, cor.
49 57 58 59 60 64.
Mr. John Sadler, soc.
88.
J. D.
Salmon, cor.
12 13 14 17 18 27 28.
Dr. T.
Bell Salter, soc.
9 10.
Mr. J.
W. Salter, through Mr. Borrer, 9.
Eev. T.
Salwey, through Mr. More.
G. W.
Sandys, soc.
16 24 34 46 49 50.
Mr. Thomas Sansom, cor.
16 18 21 50 58 59.
Miss Sawhridge, soc.
6. 
Mr. T.
S. Scholes, cor.
57 59.
Misses Scott.
(See Mrs. Dickson, page 542.) 
Mr. W.
Scott, soc.
83.
James Seeley, soc.
17.
Eev. J.
Shawe, cor.
36 40.
Mr, A.
Sibbald, soc.
72.
Samuel Simpson, cor.
60 64 65 69.
Edmund Skepper, cor.
19 25 26.
Eev. G.
B. Smith, cat.
15 16 58 63.
Mr. H.
Ecroyd Smith, soc.
54 58 69 70.
Eev. T.
H. Hart Smith, cor.
2. 
Dr. Anthony Southby, cat.
5 6 8.
Mr. J.
P. Soutter, cor.
66 79.
Eev. W.
W. Spicer, cor.
10 11 12 17.
Dr. E.
Spruce, soc.
62.
Mr. W.
A. Stables, cat.
49 96 102 103 106 108.
H. 0.
Stephens, soc.
6 33 34.
E. C.
Stevens, soc.
15 29.
W. Stevens, quoted.
72.
Daniel Stock, cat.
25 27.
E. Straker, through Arthur Bennett, cat.
43 48.
.John Storey, cat.
66 67.
Frederick Stratton, cor.
10 11 60.
COERESPONDENTS, ETC.
583 
Mr. Streatham, soo.
11.
R. J.
N. Streeten, soc.
49.
Dr. J.
T. Boswell-Syme, cat.
15 16 17 18 19 21 22 23 29 60 
81 82 83 85 87 88 89 90 91 92 106 111.
Mr. George Tate, cor.
68, 
Dr. G.
E. Tate, oat.
3 10 11 68 87.
Mr, Ealph Tate, cor.
112.
John Tatham, eat.
64.
Henry Tayler, soc.
14 16.
Miss Anna Thomas, soc.
41.
Sibthorpia.
ReVi J.
H. Thompson, cor.
54.
Mr. John Thompson, through Mr. Storey, 69 70.
Sylvanus Thompson, through Mr. Baker, 64.
Thomhill, through Mr. Storey.
67.
Dr. G.
H. K.
Thwaites, cat.
6 34.
Mrs. Tickner, cor.
17.
Mr. Frederick Townsend, cor.
3 9 11 12 25.
Notes, etc.
Eev. J.
S. Tozer, cor.
1. 
Mr. Spencer Trevelyan, through Mr. Storey, 67.
Sir W.
C. Trevelyan, cor.
3 5 6 9 11 13 14 15 16 29 66 67 98.
Mr. H.
W. Trott, soc.
22 23.
E. A.
Tudor, cor.
59.
Dawson Turner, cor.
30 42 49.
Miss Elizabeth Twining, cor.
9 10 12 16 18 20 64 72 88 97.
Mr. Thomas Twining, cor.
3 9 15 17 '21 83 49 64.
Walter Twynam, cor, 75 82 83.
Dr. Tyaeke, soc.
83 86.
Mr. W.
W. Tyler, soc.
87 38.
Mr. W.
C. Unwin, soc.
14.
Gusciita mroptBa.
N. Usher, through Mr. Storey, 66.
Cypripedium.
Mr. E.
G. Varenne, cat, 18 19.
Verdun, through Mr. Twining, 27, 
584 COHEESPONDBNTS, ETC.
Dr. Veronge, soe.
75.
Eev. T.
Wainwright, through Eev. T.
P. Eavenshaw, 4.
Mrs. Wakefield, cor.
4. 
Miss Frances Walker, cor.
50.
Mr. Arthur Wallis, soe.
18 19 20 26.
James Ward, cat.
62 64 65 66.
B. D.
Wardale, soe.
15 26 28.
S. Warner, soe.
13 14 19 20 29 30.
Miss Elizabeth Warren, cor.
1. 
Hon. J.
B. L.
Warren, cat.
8 13 14 17 21 22 23 47 58.
Mr. B.
M. Watkins, cor.
34 35 36.
J. W.
Watson, through Mr. Baker, 65.
Alexander Watt, cor.
93.
Joseph Weaver, cor.
11 13.
F. M.
Webb, cat.
59 71.
Notes, etc.
Eev. E.
H. Webb, cor.
24 54.
Mr. J.
S. Wesley, cor.
64.
W. J.
West, soe.
15.
Linum angustifolium.
Thomas Westcombe, soe.
1 37 43.
J. E.
Whalley, soe.
59.
Dr. P.
Buchanan White, cat.
87 88 89.
Mr. F.
I. White, soe.
(Two or three Whites ?) 
J. Whitehead, cor.
57.
J. Whitelegg, cor.
54.
Joseph Whittaker, soe.
51 57.
Dr. Eobert Wight, cor.
92.
Mr. Wilmott, 36.
(Purehas eat.
page 554.) 
Eev. George Wilson, quoted.
94 106.
Mr. James Wilson, eor.
75.
J. H.
Wilson, soe.
22.
Fritillaria.
William Wilson, quoted.
52 59.
N. J.
Winch, eor.
6 17 84 49 66 67 69 70 72 97.
Dr. John Windsor, soe.
52 58 59 69.
Mr, W.
Wing, soe.
11 15 21, 
COKKESPONDENTS, ETC.
685 
Mr.
"W.
Winter, soc.
27.
G. L.
Wintle, soc.
33 or 34.
J. Eowe Wise, cor.
11.
Gladiolus, etc.
William Wise, cor.
2. Carum verticillatum, etc.
E. Withers,, cor.
4 5 6 7 34 35 41.
Eev. E.
Wood, cor.
17.
Dr. J.
B. Wood, soc.
38.
Mr. S.
P. Woodward, cor.
2 3 27.
Miss Alice Worsley, cat.
88.
Mrs. Wyndham, through Sir W.
C. Trevelyan, 9.
Mr. E.
Young, 85.
Dr. J.
Forbes Young, soc.
6 16.
Notes on the Authorities cited.
The abbreviations "cat.
cor.
soc." are added to the names of 
those personal authorities who may be considered as cited 
directly from manuscripts under some form.
Surnames within 
inverted commas are cited at second-hand, be it from books or 
from manuscript notes or oral reports by other botanists.
Other 
quotations, whether names of persons or abbreviated book-titles, 
almost always refer to what is already in print elsewhere.
A 
blank, in place of any authority after a county name, may 
also be understood to mean that something in print elsewhere 
warrants the mention of that county.
The abbreviation "cat." will be understood to refer to the 
Local Catalogues of plants received from various correspondents, 
and explained on preceding pages.
— The " cor." will be under- 
stood to intend other Correspondents, to whom the compiler has 
been indebted for manuscript notes or labelled specimens sent 
directly to himself.
— The " soc." will distinguish those collectors 
of specimens, with whom there has been little or no direct com- 
munication : but from whom specimens have come indirectly 
4 F 
586 PERSONAL AUTHOEIlIES.
under inspection, and chiefly through the agency of Distributing 
Societies, that is to say, the Exchange Club or the Botanical 
Societies of London and Edinburgh.
This triple distinction cannot be made on a hard and positive 
line, however, since several of the botanists named might readily 
come under two or even all three of the categories stated.
In 
several instances specimens have come in both modes from the 
same collector ; some of them direct, some of them through a 
society ; Professors Babington and Balfour are instances in 
point.
Yet the distinction is not unimportant, so far as it can 
be made, as will presently appear ; the " sp." being a far more 
safe and satisfactory evidence towards shewing a locality, when 
direct from a correspondent himself, than is the " sp." received 
indii-ectly through a society.
Taken in connexion with the 
signs of certainty or doubt "1 ?
" and the three abbreviations 
used in the county lists " sp.
ms.
cat." (or their non-use) the 
cited authorities become distiilctively grouped thus : — 
1. Seen in the county by the compiler' himself.
2. Named in a local catalogue.
8. A msc.
note from a correspondent.
4. Specimen from the actual collector.
5. Specimen from a donor, not the coUeotor.
6. Specimen through a distributing society.
7. Some personal authority or book quoted.
8. Authority blank ; accepted but not quoted.
9. Authority more or less insufficient.
" ?
" 
Besides these, we have the nos.
enclosed ( ) or [ ] .
The 
former ( ) in the case of counties accepted as reported or seen, 
but the genuine indigenous-ness of the plant there held in 
distrust, more or less positive.
The latter [ ] in the case of 
counties either positively rejected or else decidedly held to 
require confirmation.
On each of the above classes or categories 
of testimony some further explanatory remarks appear to be 
desirable.
PERSONAL AUTHOBITIES.
587 
1. The compiler's oim notes, including with them the labels of 
specimens collected by his own hand at any past date, and still 
preserved in his herbarium.
These have gradually accumulated 
during the long period from 1830 to 1880 ; and much that was 
seen during the two score years and over, without being specially 
noted in writing, has been as gradually fading from recollection.
The sign of certainty " !
" has thus been used in this work more 
sparingly than otherwise it might have been given.
Indeed, the 
omission of that sign has been made in some instances, although 
localities for the plants have been printed elsewhere on the 
compiler's own testimony.
It has not been added to the names 
of the counties in this work simply because present recollection 
or manuscript note now fails, although the former book record 
is stiU believed to be a true one.
On the other hand, his own 
recollections for Surrey being recent and confident, he has taken 
little care to confirm them by a second personal authority.
But a new chance of error in the use of the " !
" has crept in, 
which was quite unexpected, and thus not thoroughly guarded 
against while correcting the proofs, more especially those of the 
earlier pages.
The printing had not proceeded far, before it 
became too evident that compositors occasionally exchanged 
these three signs " !
. ?
" set after the names of counties, 
placing one instead of the other ; at the same time also it was 
seen that the three abbreviations " sp.
ms.
cat." were occasion- 
ally exchanged one for another.
Substitutions of this kind, if undetected on the proofs, might 
bring about an utter alteration of statement or falsification of 
fact.
For instance, if " Cornwall ?
" were set " Cornwall." 
instead, the doubting query would of course be converted into an 
undoubting acceptance ; and if it were set " Cornwall !
" instead, 
the compiler would be made to express certainty on his own 
personal testimony, where he had meant to shew questioning 
uncertainty as to some other person's testimony.
So, likewise, 
if, " Smith sp." were set instead of " Smith ms." the misprint 
would importantly change the testimony, and would make the 
588 PERSONAL AUTHORITIES.
compiler certify the accuracy of the nomenclature, and do 
so without having seen a specimen of the plant.
Although 
these examples are here given with an "if" as explanatory 
illustrations, there are unfortunately a few real cases of like 
kind.
Of course, in writing out the names of counties and 
persons thousands on thousands of times, some similar sub- 
stitutions of one sign or abbreviation for another might 
be made inadvertently in the original notes, or in the press 
manuscript itself equally as in the process for converting it 
into type or letter-press.
Such errors, however, are much 
more likely to be those of simple omission, than those of 
commission, so far as the sign of individual certainty is con- 
cerned ; and no mischief is wrought by leaving it out.
2. The catalogues have been amply ex^jlained on pages 535, &c.
It, will be kept in recollection here, that the correct nomen- 
clature of the plants, as well as the certainty of their occurrence 
in the county, must both rest ex"clusively with the botanist by 
whom the catalogue was made.
If he should have marked any 
name therein by guess-work, or on the report of some other 
botanist or on some record in a book, so far he will have falsified 
the personal testimony.
This subject was alluded to in the intro- 
ductory remarks, and it might seem unnecessary again to revert 
to it here.
And yet some short lists of " Additions " have been 
received since, in which plants were included although the 
senders of the lists had truly never seen them in the counties or 
more special localities stated for them ; — so di£S.cult is it to get 
even weU-educated and well-iritentioned men to give their 
evidence correctly, and adhere to logical accuracy in their 
statements !
3. The manmcnpt notes do not differ essentially from some of 
the catalogues.
One of them may be a special and very careful 
description of the place where some rare plant has been found.
Another may be simply a written list of plants observed within 
some stated area, perhaps differing from the more general cata- 
logues only by the omission of common plants, or by being 
PERSONAL AUTHOBITIES.
589 
curtailed in some other raode.
Between these extremes there 
is room for a good deal of diversity.
4, The label sent with an actual specimen is truly a manuscript 
note also, although the evidence yielded is rather different ; that 
is, through the receiver getting the option of endorsing the 
name of the plant, and so accepting on faith its locality only, 
not both name and place.
If specimen and label have come 
direct from the collector to the compiler, the probability of 
correctness may be held very great.
A fairly careful collector 
seldom mislocalizes a plant ; and in case of any difference of 
view, as to the right name of the plant, some further communi- 
cation will usually have passed between them, tending to settle 
the name correctly.
But it should be noted here, that " sp." is 
made to cover other specimens besides those that may remain 
still within reach ; including, not present herbarium specimens 
only, but also others which have passed through hand for tem- 
porary inspection ; and the examination may have chanced 
many years ago in some instances, when the compiler was 
younger and less practised; At first, it was in thought to dis- 
tinguish them by using " dp." instead of " sp." in cases where 
the specimens themselves had not been retained so as to allow 
re-examination at present dates.
This idea was rather reluctantly 
given up, lest its practical adoption should lead to an increase 
of misprints.
5. Specimens may have passed through intermediate hattds 
between collector and compiler ; each such transfer tending to 
increase the list of errors.
Specimens occasionally get 
mingled ; and labels get misplaced to wrong specimens.
Some 
collectors habitually omit to write their own names on their 
labels ; so that the locality soon becomes anonymous, certified 
by nobody in particular, and an intermediate distributor may 
then become credited with the locality.
In re-writing labels 
some distributors put only their own names on them, omitting 
those of the actual collectors ; thus virtually making themselves 
false testifiers to localities never really seen by them.
That 
590 PEESONAL AUTHORITIES.
particularly stupid form of label, where " Ex. herb." is the 
printed substitute for correct description, has doubtless led to 
numerous mis-records.
Under the very condensed form of this 
present work, it was impossible to shew the transfer of a speci- 
men from A to B, and possibly a further transfer of the same 
from B to C, befoj^e the surname on its label came to be quoted 
here as the authority for a county.
Nor would the labels them- 
selves by any means always have afforded the data for doing so, 
even if space had allowed.
6. Specimens which have passed through the distributing 
societies, must be still more likely to create and spread errors 
arising from the displacement of labels.
When members send 
more specimens than labels, or labels so inaccurate as to require 
re-writing, there is constant chance of mis-copying the names of 
places carelessly written.
Such names are often so written by 
contributors themselves, as to be found utterly illegible to any- 
body at a distance, and not specially famUiar with the names of 
perhaps very insignificant places.
It is not uncommon to see 
the names so penned that only two or three of their letters can 
be made out clearly.
And it has unfortunately chanced that 
some of the most active distributors on behalf of the Exchange 
Club, and also of the Botanical Society of London, were botanists 
whose writing it was difficult to decipher, especially so with 
respect to local names ; their own labels thus setting bad 
examples to other contributors.
Another frequent default is that of omitting the coimty ; and as 
the same name applies to two or more places in hundreds of 
instances, a fertile source of error arises through not adding the 
county in which the locality is situate.
Every botanical work, 
dealing much with localities, has instances of wide misposition 
through sameness of names in different counties, or even in 
different parts of the same county.
Such mispositions, however, 
are usually traceable back to remissness in the first reporters of 
the locaUties, and are thus not fairly attributable to after 
compilers.
Even the names of persons get confused apd inter- 
Peesonax, authokities.
591 
changed on the re-copied labels of societies, when there are two 
or more collectors of the same surname contributing specimens 
to the same society.
The Christian name of a contributor is 
often omitted on re-written or printed labels ; and the sex of a 
contributor is even left to be guessed, as well as professional 
designation, such as Mr. or Dr. When societies or individuals 
label their specimens "Ex. herb.
Smith" or "Ex. herb.
Jones" 
or " Ex. herb.
Wilson," how lucidly do they distinguish between 
the various botanists, male and female, who have borne those 
names !
The condensed plan of this present work would have 
shared the same defect, if the county lists had been printed 
without the general list of Authorities or the explanations of the 
Catalogues, as necessary adjuncts thereto.
And it is scarcely to 
be expected that no mistakes have been made in taking personal 
names from the imperfect or half-legible labels of collectors and 
re-distributors.
7. Although it was made a general rule not to quote printed 
boohs, on grounds already shewn and also to avoid citing per- 
sonal authorities at second-hand, yet practically these have 
been rules observed only with a good many exceptions.
The 
inducements to the several exceptions are mostly obvious 
enough, and are in some instances directly pointed out ; as in 
the instances of Berberis and Viola odorata, where it was sought 
to shew also the opinions of various botanists on the question of 
nativity or otherwise.
The Callitriche autumnalis, on page 
170, affords a different example.
Two counties on the list 
were recently ascertained habitats, considerably altering the 
area and limits of the species, as set forth in the Cybele 
Bntannica and its Compendium of 1868.
The finders of that 
plant had not themselves communicated any information about 
it before the manuscript was sent to the printing office, but a 
notice of their discoveries had actually come to hand through 
other correspondents.
Accordingly "Parfitt sp." and "War- 
ren " were given at second-hand, as the personal authorities 
reported for the plant in the two counties named.
So, again, it 
592 PBESOJIAL AUTHOBITlES.
will certainly not lessen the usefulness of Topographical Botany, 
to find the abbreviated quotation " Eng. Bot.
3 " or " E.B. ed.
3 ' 
coming in rather frequently, although space allowed not the 
addition of volume and page to the title of the work.
Such 
occasional exceptions, indeed, well serve to illustrate what was 
said on this subject in the introduction.
8. Under the rule mentioned very many names of counties 
stand in blank, that is, uncertified by any cited authority ; 
although the writer's private notes do refer to an authority in 
all those instances.
With few exceptions there are already 
recorded in print elsewhere sufficient personal authorities for 
the counties named in blank, and not questioned by the sign of 
distrust or uncertainty " ?
" In some very few instances a 
manuscript authority only has come under cognizance, although 
under such form or condition as not to admit of personal 
quotation.
At one time there was a project for starting altogether de novo, 
Umiting the counties for nominal enumeration strictly to those 
for which a present or recent personal authority could be 
adduced, and without adding thereto the name of a single 
county on faith of the records in books alone.
Completeness 
would thus have been sacrificed for the sake of increased accu- 
racy.
But the plan of affixing the query " ?
" to the less certain 
counties, and weeding out those least to be trusted, by enclosing 
their nos.
[ ] and omitting their names from the enumerating 
lists, will really go far towards making the unvouched equally 
reliable as those vouched by a personal authority.
Doubtless 
there will still be a per centage of errors in either case, although 
it be only a fraction per centum ; for it is not anticipated that 
the errors left in will amount to so much as an entire unit per 
cent.
On the contrary, too, a small per centage of the rejected 
counties may turn out to have been correct, although recorded 
an authorities which at present are held to require confirmation 
before final acceptance.
It is to be kept in recollection that there are top widely 
PERSONAL AUTHOBITIES.
593 
different grounds for rejecting the reports or records of botanical 
collectors.
The first and most frequent is want of confidence in 
their botanical discrimination, chiefly in regard to the so-called 
"critical" species.
The other and less frequent is a want of 
confidence in their moral good faith.
The instances are very few, apparently, in which botanists 
have deliberately sown plants in order to discover them after- 
wards, or have resorted to any direct deceptions otherwise ; but 
the instances of indirect or careless deceptions are unfortunately 
not few in number, and are various in kind.
For instance, the 
frequent suppression of circumstances which would tell against 
the nativity of plants in places where found ; also the careless 
trick of labelling specimens as if really picked in certain 
localities, where the same species is supposed to grow, although 
the labelled specimens were not themselves picked there.
In the General list of Contributors the names are followed by 
the nos.
of the counties with which they were connected as 
simple surnames.
This, will serve to identify and distinguish 
the personal authorities.
But only few of the names which are 
quoted within inverted commas or at second-hand from books, 
have been included in the General List ; that list being intended 
to shew and explain the personal authorities, as taken from 
wunuscrvpt papers or labels in the compiler's own possession, not 
book authorities equally open to all enquirers.
4 fi 
WOEKS ON TOPOGEAPHIOAL BOTANY.
Abbot.
Flora Bedfordiensis.
1798.
Ainsworth and Cheek.
Edinburgh Journal.
1830.
Anderson.
Description of a New Eubus, etc.
Babington, 0.
C. Flora Bathoniensis.
1834 and 1839.
Flora of 'Cambridge.
1860.
Botany of South Pembrokeshire.
1863.
Eubi Britannici.
1869.
Manual of British Botany.
Editions 1 — 8.
List of Plants observed near Cromer in 1875-6.
Babington, Churchill.
(See Bloxam.) 
Backhouse.
Monograph of the British Hieraoia.
1856.
Baines.
Flora of Yorkshire.
1840.
Baker.
Supplement to Flora of Yorkshire.
1854.
North Yorkshire ; its Botany, etc.
1863.
Eeview of the British Eoses.
1864.
Monograph of the British Eoses.
(Eeprint.) 
Baker & Tate.
New Flora of Northd.
and Durham.
1868.
Balfour & Babington.
Vegetation of Outer Hebrides.
1841.
Balfour & Sadler.
Flora of Edinburgh.
1863.
Baxter.
British Flowering Plants.
1834, vol.
1st.
Beesley.
Botany of Banbury.
1841.
Bentham.
Handbook of the British Flora.
1858.
Bloxam & Babington.
Botany of Charnwood Forest.
1842.
Boswell.
See Syme.
Brewer.
New Flora of Eeigate.
1856.
Briggs.
Flora of Plymouth.
1880.
Britten.
Flora of Buckinghamshire.
1867.
BOOKS USED.
595 
Britten.
Contributions to a Flora of Berks.
1871.
List of Lincolnshire Plants.
1872.
Bromfield.
Flora Vectensis.
1856.
Buokman.
Botanical Guide to Cheltenliam.
1844.
Buxton.
Botanical Guide to Manchester.
1849.
Clark.
Barer Plants of the Turf Moors, Somerset.
1866.
Clarke, C.
B. List of Andover Plants.
1866.
Cooper, D.
Flora Metropolitana.
1837.
Cooper, T.
H. Botany of Sussex.
1834.
Cowell.
Floral Guide for Bast Kent.
1889.
Croall.
Catalogue of Stirling Plants in 1875 : Eeport of 
Botanical Eecord Club.
Davies.
Welsh Botanology.
1818.
Deering.
Catalogus Stirpium, &o.
(Nottingham).
1738.
Dickie.
Flora Abredonensis.
1838.
Botanist's Guide to Aber.
Banff.
& Kinc.
1860.
Dickinson.
Flora of Liverpool.
1851.
Dillenius.
Eaii Synopsis, editio tertia.
1724.
Edmonston.
Flora of Shetland.
1845.
Falconer.
Flora of Tenby.
Date ?
(Copy mislaid.) 
Flower.
Flora of Wilts.
Serial nos.
Flora Thanetensis.
1847.
Forster.
Flora Tonbrigensis.
1810.
Francis.
Analysis of the British Ferns.
1837, 1842.
Gardiner.
Flora of Forfarshire.
1848.
Garner.
Natural History 6i Stafford.
1844.
Gibson, G.
S. Flora of Essex.
1862.
Gissing.
Ferns of Wakefield.
1862.
Flora of Wakefield.
1867.
Gordon.
Collectanea for a Flora of Moray.
1839.
596 BOOKS USED.
Graham.
Botanical Excursions.
Various Beports.
Greville.
Flora Edinensis.
1824.
Gulliver.
Catalogue of Banbury Plants.
1841.
Hall.
Flora of Liverpool.
1838.
Hannaford.
Flora Tottoniensis.
1851.
Hastings.
Natural History of Worcestershire.
1834.
Henfrey.
Botanical Gazette.
1849-1851.
Hennedy.
Clydesdale Flora.
Second edition in 1869.
Henslow.
Catalogues.
Cambridgeshire & Hitcham.
Henslow & Skepper.
Flora of Suffolk.
1860.
Hiern.
Batrachium section of Eanunculus.
1871.
Hogg.
Natural History of Stockton on Tees.
1827.
Hillhouse.
List of Plants seen in Bedfordshire.
1875.
Hooker, J.
D. The Student's Flora of British Islands.
1870.
Second edition.
1878.
Hooker, W.
J. Flora Scotica.
1821.
British Flora.
Various editions.
1830-1842.
Journal of Botany.
Various titles.
1830-1851.
Hooker & Arnott.
British Flora.
Editions 6-8.
1850-1860.
Hooker & Others.
Supplement to English Botany.
Hopkirk.
Flora Glottiana.
1813.
Howitt.
The Nottinghamshire Flora.
1839.
Hudson.
Flora Anglica.
1762 & 1798.
Jacob.
PlantsB Favershamienses.
1777.
Jardine.
Magazine of Zoology and Botany.
1837-8.
Jones, J.
P. Botanical Tour in Devon and Cornwall.
1821.
Johnston.
Flora of Bel-wick on Tweed.
1829-81.
Nat. Hist, of Eastern Borders.
1853.
Keys.
Flora of Devon and Cornwall.
1866-70.
Kingston & Jones.
Flora Devoniensis.
1829.
Kirby.
Flora of Leicestershire.
1850.
BOOKS USED.
597 
Landsborough.
Botany of Ayrshire.
1872.
Lees, E.
Botany of Malvern.
1868.
(1843.) 
Lees, Dr. P.
A. Annual Eeports of the Botanical Locality 
Eecord Club.
1873-1881.
Leighton.
Flora of Shropshire.
1841.
Ley. Catalogues in the Eeports of Botanical Eecord.
Club 
for Brecon, Eadnor, and Merioneth.
Lightfoot.
Flora Sootica.
1777.
Linton.
Catalogue of Plants of West Lancashire.
Bot. Soc.
Eecord Club.
1874.
Loudon.
Magazine of Natural History.
1829-36.
Luxford.
Flora of Eeigate.
1888.
' 
Mansell-Pleydell.
Flora of Dorsetshire.
1874.
Martyn.
PlantsB Cantabrigienses.
1763.
Melvill.
Flora of Harrow.
1864.
Miall & Carrington.
Flora of the West Eiding.
1862.
Milne & Gordon.
Indigenous Botany.
1798.
More.
Catalogue of Plants in Isle of Wight.
1858.
Supplement to Flora Vectensis.
1871.
Morton.
Natural History of Northamptonshire.
1712.
Munford.
Flowering Plants in Western Norfolk.
1841.
Botanical Productions of Norfolk.
1864.
Murray.
The Northern Flora.
1886.
Newman.
The Phytologist.
1842-1856.
History of British Ferns.
1840, 1844, 1864.
Paget.
Natural History of Yarmouth.
1834.
Patrick.
Indigenous Plants of Lanarkshire.
1831.
Perry.
Plantse Varvicenses Selectse.
1820.
Preston.
Flora of Marlborough.
1868.
Ed. 2, 1867 — ?
Purchas.
Flora of Herefordshire.
1866.
Purton.
The Midland Flora.
1817-21.
598 BOOKS USED.
Ravenshaw.
Botany of North Devon.
Flowering Plants and Ferns of Devon.
1860.
Ray, Syn. Method.
Stirp.
Brit.
ed.
2. 1696.
Relhan.
Flora Cantabrigiensis.
1785 and 1820.
Roper.
Flora of Eastbourne.
1875 and Supplements.
Ross.
Catalogue of Plants of Mull and West Ross, in Report 
of Locality Record Club., 
Salmon & Brewer.
Flora of Surrey.
1863.
Salter.
Botany of Poole.
1839.
Seeman.
Journal of Botany.
1863-70.
Sibthorp.
Flora Oxoniensis.
1794.
Smith, J.
E. Flora Britannica.
1800-4.
English Flora..
1824-8.
Smith, G.
E. Phsenogamous Plants of South Kent.
1829.
Stewart.
Handbook of the Torquay Flora.
1860.
Swete.
Flora Bristoliensis.
1854.
Syme.
English Botany.
Edition 3.
1863-1872.
Thompson.
Plants of Berwick-upon-Tweed.
1807.
Trimen & Dyer.
Flora of Middlesex.
1869.
Trimmer.
Flora of Norfolk.
1866.
Turner & Dillwyn.
The Botanist's Guide.
1805.
Walker.
Flora of Oxfordshire, etc.
1838.
Warner.
Plantse Woodfordienses.
1771.
Warren.
Flora of Hyde Park, etc.
1871.
(Reprint.) 
Watson, H.
C. Outlines of Geog.
Dist.
of British Plants.
1832.
Remarks on Geog.
Dist.
of B.
Plants.
1835.
The New Botanist's Guide.
1835, 1837.
Cybele Britannica, four vols.
1847-1859.
Supplement to Cybele Britannica.
1860.
Compendium of Cybele Britannica.
1868-70.
Supplement to Compendium of C.
B. 1872.
Webb, F.
M. Flora of Liverpool.
1867-8.
Incomplete.
BOOKS USED, 599 
Webb, E.
H. & Coleman.
Flora Hertfordiensis.
1849.
Webb, E, H.
Two Supplements to Flora Hertf.
1851, 1859.
Williams.
Faimula Grustensis.
1880.
Winch.
Flora of Northumberland & Durham.
1831.
Contributions to the Flora of Cumberland.
1833.
Geog.
Dist.
of Plants through N.
C. D.
1825.
Withering.
Arrangement of British Plants.
Ed. var.
Wood.
Flora Mancuniensis.
1840.
Woodforde.
Catalogue of Phsenogamic Plants in the vicinity of 
Edinburgh.
1824.
The above list is not to be received as an exhaustive one for 
works which treat on topographical botany in this country.
It 
includes those only which stand on my own bookshelves, and 
have been used more or less in writing this present and other 
antecedent books.
Two local Floras are left out simply because 
copies do not chance to be on those shelves, namely, for 
Sidmouth and Tonbridge ; possibly there may be others whoUy 
unknown to me, although deserving of notice ; certainly there 
are other books intentionally ignored, as including a dangerously 
large admixture of error amid what is sound.
Some little of 
British topographical botany, mostly good as far as it goes, is 
to be found scattered in the Annals of Natural History, under 
various Editors ; and even in the Linnean Transactions.
Only 
very imperfect sets of these two serials are in possession.
A few old writers have been named in the above list, such as 
Eay and Dillenius, because some very few counties still rest on 
their original records, repeated by more recent writers seemingly 
without having been verified afresh.
Throughout my own 
topographico -botanical writings, and more especially in this 
present work, the leading object has been to shew the botany of 
Britain as it actually exists, or did very "recently exist, in living 
reality on the ground.
But no single botanist ever sees more 
than a portion of the surface of the ground and its floral covering.
And if his writings are required to cover all, — at any rate, 
600 BOOK EECORDS.
approximately all, — that has been ascertained respecting the 
areal and more local distribution of each and every plant, he 
must needs accept on trust the greater portion of what has to be 
included; that is, he must learn it through the eyes of other 
botanists, accepting on faith what they may report to him indi- 
vidually, or may have put into the form of printed records for 
general use.
During the present century, and increasingly during the last 
thirty or forty years, the facilities for acquiring a knowledge of 
individual plants as species, and the facilities for visiting their 
actual localities, both have been vastly augmented.
The general 
result is, not only very numerous additions to our stores of 
knowledge, but also an increased accuracy in the records of its 
details ; the per-centage of error becomes less and less, as we 
get nearer to our own times, and nearer to the actual present 
time.
The farther we go back, and the more we depend solely 
on old book records, or old labels and specimens, the larger will 
be the per-centage of error.
To a great extent, that which was 
true and accurate a century or two ago will have been subse- 
quently verified or confirmed, afresh ; leaving a balance of old 
records unconfirmed, which are gradually coming to consist 
chiefly of errors.
The state of the case may be summarized 
thus : — 
1. Old records, more recently confirmed afresh.
2. Old records, not more recently confirmed : 
A. Accurate at their date.
B. Inaccurate at their date.
Suppose that we allow only five per cent, of inaccuracies to the 
old records of the pre-Linnean times.
This would be a small 
per-centage, because we must let that per-centage cover errors 
of place as well as of plant, and also subsequent errors in trans- 
lating the old name-descriptions into Linnean binomials.
Take 
a thousand old records, which will thus give us fifty inaccuracies 
of one kind or other.
Say, that nine hundred of the old records 
have been subsequently confirmed afresh.
There will remain 
BOOK EECOBDS.
601 
one hundred of such records still unconfirmed; and of these 
one-half will he errors.
It is this tendency in the residue to become more and more a 
mere mass of inaccuracies and uncertainties, which renders it so 
little desirable to go on repeating them as facts, and so much 
more desirable to rely upon recent records, or still more recent 
unpublished observations ; in which the per-centage of errors is 
Hkely to be a mere fraction, as against the increasingly large 
per-centage certain to occur in the residue of the old records.
But supposing the object of a botanical writer to be almost 
entirely different ; not to be that of ascertaining the present 
areas and localities of plants, with the view, inter alia, of com- 
paring one county with another, or contrasting one against all ; 
but rather to trace out the history of certain plants within any 
given county, the length of time they have been known or 
believed.
to grow there, and whether more or less plentifully, etc.
— then of course it is found needful to trace back to the oldest 
records, and to connect them as accurately as may be with what 
is now seen.
The local history of plants has an interest of its 
own quite apart from larger views ; and it has also some bearing 
on present areas of distribution.
But actual distribution, not 
history, is the main object of this present work ; and to this end 
the best evidence is found in what we see with our own eyes; 
that which we accept on trust because we find it printed in old 
books, is evidence of a very inferior kind ; — the former is real 
knowledge, the latter is now at best only a belief.
Unfortunately, there is a dangerous drawback to the modem 
superiority contended for, and indisputable in the main.
Along 
with the increase in facilities for acquiring an accurate know- 
ledge of plants, there has been a large increase also in the 
facilities afforded for inexperienced and superficial botanists 
prematurely to rush into print, and to add their own blunders to 
swell the accumulating stores, still descending for the perplexity 
and vexation of our successors.
The journals, the reports of 
provincial societies, the local floras, each and all help in this 
4 H 
602 BOOK EEOOKDS.
wise to disseminate and perpetuate errors, through the facilities 
they offer to youthful inexperience and adult incompetence.
Although much offence has been given to some of my own 
friendly and well-meaning correspondents, by refusals to accept 
several, of their reported localities, it may stiU be feared that this 
present and other connected works will be found in turn to have 
added to the stock of errors on record.
If all that has conie to 
my hands in form of manuscript lists and notes, including labels 
with specimens, had been accepted on trust as sent, the erroneous 
records so introduced into my books would have counted up to 
hundreds, perhaps even to thousands.
Truly, many errors have 
been intercepted and sifted out ; but in turn I may also have 
erred in instances, and without any one to intercept or correct 
my own errors.
Amid all the Local Floras enumerated in the preceding list, 
it may be doubted whether there is any one of them which 
has failed to add something fresh to the accumulated mass 
of error, over and above the repetition of errors copied from - 
their predecessors.
And yet, if any book should be expected 
to come out free from errors of plant and place, surely a Local 
Flora is exactly the one which ought to do so !
Treating of a 
reduced number of plants only, and treating of their localities in 
a very restricted area, which ought to have been carefuUy and 
thoroughly examined before a botanist presumed to publish its 
Flora, — where is the cause, where is the excuse, for new errors 
to be found ?
The cause may be more easy to find than the excuse.
In 
several of them, the primary cause of error (with prevailing 
badness of plan) is found in the youthful inexperience or in the 
very superficial botanical knowledge of their Authors.
In other 
instances, where the Author was himself competent to the duty, 
he may have really delegated part of it to others who were much 
less so ; that is, he may have accepted reports of localities from 
-contributors unprepared to name the plants seen in a correct 
manner, or (too frequent fault 1) unfaithful in their statements as 
BOOK BEOOBDS.
603 
to wildness, &c.
In most of our Local Floras there is a dis- 
creditably large portion of the recorded localities, even disputable 
localities, which have never been examined by the -writers of the 
Floras.
"Why should a botanist deem himself qualified to write 
the Flora of a whole county because he has examined half a 
dozen of its parishes ?
Perhaps the unpretending B'lora of Reigate, by the late George 
Luxford, is the one which ought to stand at the head of aU, 
when the test of superiority is made to rest on real research and 
rehability.
There appears no reason to question the truth of his 
own account of his book, as given in these words: — "I have 
endeavoured to render the work a guide to the localities of the 
plants growing in the localities of which it treats ; and the only 
merit it can claim is that of being a faithful record of my own 
researches in the neighbourhood of Eeigate.
So that however 
trifling it may be considered in a scientific point of view, I trust 
a certain value will attach to it, as being, — not a mere compila- 
tion from the labours of others, — but the result of actual observation.
I believe I have not admitted a single plant which I have not 
seen growing in the recorded localities, with the exception of the 
very few collected by friends of undoubted veracity, whose names 
are invariably given as authorities.
I possess specimens of aU 
the plants so collected ; and have, whenever it was practicable, 
verified the observations of my friends." 
The internal evidence afforded by the book itself appears fully 
to accord with and warrant Mr. Luxford's own description of the 
work.
And it is noteworthy that most of the few (really few) 
exceptions alluded to, are plants which ought not to have been 
admitted into the work at all.
How gladly would I have burnt 
every other Local Flora in the list — good, as some of them are, 
after their own fashion, — if their places could have been supplied 
by as many others written on the same faithfully simple plan as 
this Flora of Reigate.
Perhaps the nearest resemblance to it may 
be found in the checked Catalogues so much quoted in the county 
lists of this.
work.
But these catalogues cannot be declared 
604 BOOK BBOOEDS.
equally reliable as a specially printed list should be.
The 
chances for inadvertently marking a wrong name, while check- 
ing the names in a printed general list, or of entering a wrong 
name while writing out a local list of plant-names, must be at 
least appreciable, and in some cases even considerable ; and 
there is no cheek or test against such inadvertencies, except that 
they wUl have been afterwards subjected also to the receiver's 
scrutiny and scepticism.
In a printed Flora, it may be assumed, 
the hst of plants or names will have passed repeatedly under the 
writer's eyes and ideas ; leaving small chance for mere inad- 
vertencies, as distinct from errors arising through inadequate 
knowledge.
But if the Local Floras, books in which accuracy might more 
especially be expected, often add their quotas to the store of 
false records, what else can be expected from the Reports of 
Provincial Societies ; so many of whose members must be com- 
paratively quite novices in science.
It is only to those reports 
from provincial societies, which have regularly passed under the 
supervision of some competent and responsible botanist, that 
trustful credence can be given.
There may be much that is 
useful and correct in them ; the objection lies in the mingled 
errors too often allowed to find entrance.
Fortunately, most of 
those reports remain merely local ; being seldom copied from 
into the more general works.
If they do become the means of 
giving wider currency and more permanent record to some errors, 
it is mostly effected through being recognized and re-copied in 
the periodical journals.
The editors of Natural History journals, in any department, 
have a somewhat difficult task to perform.
It is slow suicide to 
let their journals sink into the low grade of becoming repertories 
of blunders ; and yet they are compelled to admit much that is 
worthless, if not positively erroneous, to please their contributory 
subscribers.
On the rule of propitiating subscribers, what a host 
of blunders did Loudon's Magazine of Natural History bring into 
permanent record 1 At a later date something of like kind, 
KOOK REOOEDS.
605 
combined with editorial unfitness, made the second series of the 
Phytologist a journal beneath quotation, and brought it to 
dissolution.
Better is it, — over and over again I would repeat, — far better 
is it to overlook and ignore a hundred alleged facts, if only five 
or ten of them are likely to be bad, to be false and misleading, 
although the other ninety may perchance be sound and valuable.
If the vitiating grains cannot be winnowed out, must remain for 
a time undistinguishable, let the whole be rejected.
The Author 
of a Local Flora, the reporting Secretary of a Provincial Society, 
the Editor of a fact-recording Journal, who allows his work to 
be adulterated by the errors of incompetent contributors, is so 
far giving the stamp of his own authority to what is worse than 
valueless.
Let us look back to the starting ground of modern compila- 
tions ; back only to the date of the original Botanist's Guide in 
1805.
To how many false records did Turner and Dillwyn give 
a currency and importance which have compelled subsequent 
compilers to repeat them, either actually accepted on faith or 
only doubtfully queried ; and so repeated, simply because they 
had been allowed printed place unquestioned on the pages of 
that celebrated Guide, the base coins there made current along 
with the truer metal.
In the original Botanist's Guide, a work dated early in the 
present century, we find abundant evidence to shew the unin- 
quiring manner in which the localities of plants were accepted 
for record, even' down to that comparatively modern date.
In 
the New Guide, of thirty years later, this was illustrated by the 
frequent use of the signs " ?
* f " affixed to the names of plants ; 
indicating its Compiler's doubts as to the existence of the plant 
in the county at all, or as to its real wildness there.
A large 
proportion of those marked with the sign of increduhty (?) in 
the second Guide, were simply repetitions from the easier 
Guide.
A false record, whether of plant or place, once made current 
606 BOOK EBCOEDS.
in a work of botanical authority, cannot well be wholly ignored 
in succeeding works of like kind, although it may be questioned 
there.
In topographical botany, where the alleged facts accu- 
mulate upon us by tens of thousands, no cautious vigilance 
or even sceptical scrutiny will suffice for entirely weeding out 
the false ; but a too easy acceptance may greatly increase the 
mischief.
-INDEX TO THE GENEEA, 
And also to the Species of the labge Genera.
[TJiose printed in italics are Synonyms).
Acer, 93.
Aceras, 893.
Achillea, 263.
Aconitum, 17.
Acorus, 427.
Actaea, 18.
Actinoearpus, 410.
Adiantum, 520.
Adonis, 4.
Adoxa, 184.
iEgopodium, 191.
^thusa, 199.
Agrimonia, 154.
Agrostis, 477, 478.
Aira, 480.
Ajuga, 312.
Alcfiemilla, 156.
Alisma, 409.
Allium, 399.
Allosorus, 511.
Alnus, 371.
Alopecurua, 474.
Althaea, 86.
AnvmopJiila, 478.
Anacharis, 408.
Anagallis, S38.
Anchusa, 328.
Andromeda, 269.
Androsismnmi, 87.
Anemone, 4.
Angelica, 201.
Anthemis, 261.
Anthoxanthum, 473.
Antirrhinum, 295.
Anthriscus, 205.
AnthylUs, 106.
Apera, 477.
Apium, 189.
Aquilegia, 17.
Arabis, 41, 43.
Arbutus, 269.
Arctium, 238.
Arctostaphylos, 269.
Arenaria, 76.
Armeria, 340.
Armoracia, 45.
Arnoseris, 237.
Arrhenatherum, 483.
Artemisia, 250.
Arthrolobium, 118.
Arum, 427.
Arundo, 478.
Asarum, 362.
Asparagus, 403.
Asperugo, 328.
Asperula, 215.
Asplenium, 518.
Aster, 255.
Astragalus, 116.
Athamanta, 199.
Athyrium, 517.
Atriplex, 347.
Atropa, 285.
Avena, 480, 483.
Azalea, 268.
Ballota, 312.
Barbarea, 43.
Barkhausia, 235.
Bartsia, 292.
Bellis, 259.
Berberis, 18.
Beta, 351.
Betonica, 317.
Betula, 372.
Bidens, 248.
Blechnum, 520.
Blysmus, 438.
Botrychium, 523.
Brachypodium, 501.
Brassioa, 48.
Briza, 494.
Bromus, 498.
Bryonia, 172.
Bunium, 191.
Bupleurum, 194.
Butomus, 411.
Cakile, 27.
Calamagrostis, 478.
Calamiintha, 308.
Oalla, 427.
CalUtriche, 169.
Calluna, 268.
Caltha, 15.
Campanula, 263.
CapseUa, 31.
Oardamine, 38.
Carduus, 241.
Carex, 448—472.
acuta, 458.
alpicola, 451.
alpina, 456.
ampullacea, 469.
aquatilis, 467.
arenaria, 453.
atrata, 456.
axillaris, 451.
binervis, 464.
Bonninghauseniana, 
451.
canesoens, 450.
capillaris, 465.
clandestina, 468.
curta;, 450.
depauperata, 464.
digitata, 468, 
608 
INDEX TO GENERA.
Carex dioioa, 448.
distans, 463.
disticha, 452.
divisa, 453.
divulsa, 454.
elongata, 451.
erioetorum, 468.
extensa, 460.
flliformis, 468.
flava, 459.
frigida, 463.
fulva, 462.
glauoa, 467.
Qrahami, 459.
hirta, 469.
humilis, 468.
incurva, 449.
intermedia, 452.
involuta, 469.
irrigua, 465.
laevigata, 464.
lagopina, 450.
lepidooarpa, 459.
leporina, 450.
llmosa, 465.
montaua, 468.
murioata, 453.
Oederi, 460.
ornithopoda, 468.
ovalis, 450.
pallesoens, 461.
paludosa, 470.
panicea, 464.
paniculata, 456.
paradoxa, 455.
pauoiflora, 449.
pendula, 466.
pilulifera, 468.
prseoox, 468.
pseudo-oyperus, 
467.
pulioaris, 449.
pulla, 459.
punctata, 463.
rariflora, ,465.
remota, 451.
rigida, 457.
riparia, 471.
rupestris, 449.
saxatilis, 459.
speirosiachya, 462.
gtellulata, 450, 
Oarex striota, 457.
strigosa, 465.
sylvatioa, 466.
teretiusoula, 455.
tomentosa, 468.
vaginata, 464.
Vahlii, 466.
vesioaria, 469.
vitilis, 451.
vulgaris, 457.
vulpina, 455.
Watsoni, 457.
Carlina, 246.
Oarpinus, 371.
Carum, 191.
Oatabrosa, 486.
Cauealis, 203.
Oentaurea, 247.
Centunoulus, 338.
Cephalanthera, 386.
Cerastium, 79.
Ceratophyllnm, 170.
Ceteraoh, 607.
Ohseropliyllum, 205, 
206.
CheUdonium, 28.
Chenopodiiim, 843.
Gherleria, 83.
CKLora, 280.
Ckrysantliemum, 269, 
260.
Chrysoooma, 250.
Clirysosplenium, 183.
Cioendia, 278.
Ciehorium, 237.
Cicuta, 188.
Cineraria, 256.
Cirosea, 164.
Cladium, 436.
Clematis, 1.
ClinopoAiurh, 310.
Cochlearia, 35.
Colohicum, 407.
Comarum, 134.
Conium, 187.
Convallaria, 404.
Convolvulus, 281.
Corallorhiza, 386.
Cornus, 185.
Coronopus, 28.
Corrigiola, 173.
Corydalis, 24.
Oorylus, 371.
Oorynephorus, 480.
Cotoneaster, 158.
Cotyledon, 178.
Crambe, 28.
Crataegus, 167.
Orepis, 227.
Crithmum, 201.
Crocus, 397.
Cuscuta, 282.
Gynodon, 472.
Cynoglossum, 328.
Cynosurus, 494.
Cyperus, 436.
Cypripedium, 396.
Cystopteris, 511.
Daetylis, 494.
Daphne, 361.
Caucus, 202.
Dentaria, 88.
Dianthus, 62.
Digitalis, 295.
Digitaria, 472.
Diotis, 250.
Dipsacus, 218.
Draba, 37.
Drosera, 59.
Dryas, 130.
EcMum, 380.
Elatine, 62.
Elodea, 408.
El3rmus, 604.
Elyna, 448.
Empetrum, 363.
Epilobium, 160.
Epipactis, 383.
Epipogum, 386.
Equisetum, 530.
Erica, 268.
Erigeron, 254, 
Eriocaulon, 480, 
Eriophorum, 446, 
Erodium, 94, 
Eryngium, 187, 
Erysimum, 46.
Erythrsa, 279.
Euonymus, 101.
Eupatorium, 250.
Euphorbia, 363.
Euphrasia, 292.
Fagus, 370.
Festuea, 494.
Filago, 258.
Foeniculum, 199.
Fragaria, 135.
Frankenia, 62.
Fraxinus, 275.
Fritillaria, 398.
Fumaria, 24.
Gagea, 402.
Galanthus, 398.
Galeopsis, 315.
Galinsoga, 260.
Galium, 210.
Gastridium, 476.
Genista, 104.
Gentiana, 276.
Geranium, 94.
Geum, 130.
Gladiolus, 397.
Glaucium, 23.
Glaux, 340.
Glechoma, 319.
Glyeeria, 486.
Gnaphalium, 252.
Goodyera, 381.
Habenaria, 390.
Hedera, 185.
Helianthenaum, 52.
HeUeborus, 16.
Helminthla, 221.
Heloseiadium, 190.
Heraoleum, 202.
Herminium, 394.
Hemiaria, 173.
Hieraoium, 239—235.
aggregatum, 232.
alpinum, 229.
anglicum, 232.
argenteimi, 232.
boreale, 235.
Borreri, 233.
ceesium, 230.
calenduliflorum, 
229.
ohrysanthum, 229, 
230.
cinerascens, 232.
collinum, 229.
oorymbosum, 234 
INDEX TO GENERA.
Hieracimn crooatum, 
238.
denticulatum, 233.
Dewari, 230.
eximium, 229.
flooculosum, 280.
Gibsoni, 232.
globosum, 229.
gothioum, 230.
graoilentum, 229.
holosericeum, 229.
irioum, 232.
inuloides, 233.
juranvmi, 233.
lasiophylliMn, 232.
Lwwsoni, 232.
lingulatum, 280.
maoulatum, 231.
melanocephalum, 
229.
murorum, 230.
nigresoens, 229.
nitidum, 232.
pallidum, 231.
Pilosella, 229.
pratense, 229.
prenantboides, 233.
pulmonarium, 229.
rigichim, 284.
seuescens, 280.
strictum, 233.
sylvatioum, 230.
tridentatum, 234.
umbellatum, 284.
vulgatum, 230.
Hierochloe, 473.
Hippocrepis, 119.
Hippophae, 361.
Hippviris, 166.
Holous, 483.
Honkeneja, 73.
Hordeum, 505.
Hottonia, 335.
Humulus, 867.
Hutohinsia, 31.
Hyacinthus, 403.
Hydrooharis, 40S.
Hydroootyle, 186.
HymenophyUum, 521.
Hyoscyamus, 283.
Hypericum, 87.
Hypoeboeris, 225.
609 
Iberis, 32.
Ilex, 274.
lUeoebrum, 173.
Impatiens, 100.
Inula, 257.
Iris, 396.
Isnardia, 164.
Isoetes, 529.
Jasione, 267.
Juncus, 480.
, 
Juniperus, 879.
Knappia, 476.
Knautia, 220.
Kobreaia, 448.
Koeleria, 483.
Laotuoa, 225.
Lamium, 313.
Lapsana, 237.
Lastrea, 515.
Lathrsea, 301.
LathyruB, 124.
Lavatera, 87.
Leersia, 472.
Lemna, 425.
Leontodon, 223.
Lepidium, 32.
Lepigonum, 74.
Lepturus, 607.
Leucojum, 398.
Ligusticum, 199.
Ligustrum, 274.
Limnanthemwm, 281.
Limosella, 298.
Linaria, 296.
Linusea, 210.
Liiium, 83.
Liparis, 396.
Listera, 382.
Litliospermum, 325.
Littorella, 342.
Lloydia, 403.
Lobelia, 267.
Loiseleuria, 268.
Lolium, 504.
Lonioera, 210.
Lotus, 115.
Luzula, 434.
Lychnis, 67.
Lyoopodium, 525.
4 I 
610 
INDEX TO GENERA.
Lyoopsis, 328.
Lycopus, 303.
Lysimaoliia, 336.
Lythrum, 171.
Maianthemum, 404.
_ Malaxis, 395.
Malva, 84.
Marrubium, 320.
Matricaria, 260.
Matthiola, 47.
Meconopsis, 23.
Medioago, 107.
Melampyrum, 293.
Melica, 484.
Melilotus, 108.
Melittis, 311.
Mentha, 303.
Menyanihes, 281.
Menziesia, 268.
Mercurialis, 366.
Mertensia, 326.
Meum, 200.
Milium, 476.
Moenohia, 68.
Molinia, 486.
Monotropa, 273.
Montia, 173.
Mulgedium, 227.
Musoari, 403.
Myosotis, 322.
Myosurus', 5.
Myrica, 378.
Myriophyllum, 167.
Myrrhis, 206.
Naias, 425.
Narcissus, 397.
Nardus, 507.
Narthecium, 403.
Nasturtium, 43.
Neottia, 382.
Nepeta, 319.
Nuphar, 20.
Nymphsea, 19.
Obione, 347.
(Euauthe, 194.
Onobrychis, 119.
Ononis, 105.
Onopordum, 245.
Ophioglossum, 524.
Ophiys, 394.
Orchis, 387.
Origanum, 307.
Ornithogalum, 402.
Ornithopus, ll8.
Orobanche, 298.
Orobus, 126.
Osmunda, 522.
Oxalis, 101.
Oxyria, 361.
Oxytropis, 117.
Papaver, 21.
Parietaria, 367.
Paris, 405.
Paruassia, 183.
Pasfinaca, 201.
Pedicularis, 293.
Peplis, 172.
Petasites, 254.
Petroselinum, 189.
Peucedanum, 201.
Phalaris, 473.
Phleum, 473.
Phragmites, 478.
Physospermum, 187.
Phyteuma, 267.
Picris, 222.
Pilularia, 530.
Pimpinella, 192.
Pinguicula, 830.
Pinus, 379.
Plantago, 341.
Poa, 491.
Polemonium, 281.
Polycarpon, 178.
Polygala, 60.
Polygonatum, 405.
Polygonum, 853.
Polypodium, 509.
Polypogon, 476.
Polystiehum, 512.
Populus, 378.
Potamogeton, 412.
Potentilla, 132.
Poterium, 155.
Primula, 884.
Prunella, 321.
Prunus, 126.
Psamma, 478.
Pseudathyrium, 517.
Pteris, 620.
PuUcaria, 259.
Pulmonaria, 330.
Pyrethrum, 260.
Pyrola, 271.
Pyrus, 158.
Quercus, 368.
Eadiola, 83.
Banunculus, 5.
Baphanus, 51.
Eeseda, 51.
Bhamnus, 102.
Ehinanthus, 292.
Bhynoospora, 487.
Eibes, 178.
Eosa, 148.
Bubia, 210.
Eubus, 185—148.
adsoitus, 141.
affinis, 138.
althiEifoUus, 147.
amplificatm, 142.
Ba&ourianus, 147.
Bellardi, 146.
Bloxami, 143.
Boreanus, 140.
Borreri, 143.
csesius, 148.
carpinifolius, 141.
cavatifolius, 145.
Chamsemorus, 185.
Golemanni, 140.
oonjungens, 147.
ooryUfolius, 147.
dentatus, 146.
derasus, 141.
discolor, 139.
diversifolius, 145.
emersistylus, 145.
fissus, 137.
foliosus, 146.
fusco-ater, 145.
gldbratus, 142.
glandulosus, 146.
Grabowskii, 140.
Guntheri, 146.
hemistemon, 138.
hirtifolius, 140.
hirtus, 146.
humifusus, 146.
Hystrix, 148.
INDEX TO GENEKA, 
611 
Eubua Id83us, 136.
imbricatus, 139.
incurvartus, 139.
infestus, 144.
Koehleri, 144.
latifolius, 139.
Leesii, 137.
Lejeunii, 145.
leuoostachys, 140.
Lindleianus, 138.
macrophylluB, 141, 
142.
miicronulatus, 142.
mntabilis, 145.
pallidas, 144.
plioatus, 137.
prseruptorum, 143.
pubigerus, 189.
purpureus, 147.
pygmcBUs, 143.
pyramidalis, 146.
Eadula, 144.
ramosus, 139.
Beuteri, 146.
rhamnifolius, 139.
rosaoeus, 143.
rotundifoUus, 146.
rudis, 144.
Salteri, 140.
saltv/u/m, 146.
saxatilis, 136.
soaber, 143.
ScJilechtendalii, 
142.
Sprengelii, 148.
suberectus, 137.
thyrsoideus, 140.
tuberoulatus, 148.
vmbrosua, 141.
villicaulis, 141.
Euppia, 422.
Eumex, 357.
Euscus, 403.
Sagina, 69.
Sagittaria, 410.
Salicomia, 353.
Salix, 374—378.
acuminata, 375.
alba, 374.
ambigua, 376.
arbusoula, 377.
Salix aurita, 376.
oaprea, 376.
cinerea, 376.
ferruginea, 375.
Forbyana, 376.
fragilis, 374.
Grabami, 378.
herbaoea, 377.
lanata, 377.
Lapponum, 877.
laurina, 376.
myrsinites, 377.
nigricans, 376.
pentandra, 374.
phylicifolia, 376.
purpurea, 876.
repens, 877.
reticulata, 377.
rubra, 375.
Sadleri, 377.
Smitbiana, 375.
tenuifolia, 376.
triandra, 375.
undulata, 375.
viminalis, 375.
Salsola, 351.
Salvia, 302.
Sambucus, 207.
Samolus, 389.
Sanguisorba, 154.
Sanioula, 186.
Saponaria, 64.
Bcvrothainnus, 108.
Saussurea, 240.
Saxifraga, 179.
Scabiosa, 219.
Scandix, 205.
Scbeuchzeria, 412.
Schoenus, 436.
Scilla, 402, 403.
Scirpus, 439.
Soleranthus, 173.
Soolopendrium, 520.
Sclerochloa, 488.
Scrophularia, 293.
Scutellaria, 821.
Sediun, 1?'6.
Selinum, 201.
Senecio, 255, 256.
Serratula, 240.
Seseli, 199.
Sesleria, 479.
Setaria, 472.
Sberardia, 215.
Sibbaldia, 131.
Sibthorpia, 298.
SUaus, 200.
Silene, 64.
Simethis, 403.
Sinapis, 48.
Sison, 190.
Sisymbrium, 45.
Sium, 192.
Smyrnium, 187.
Solanum, 284.
SoUdago, 255.
Sonchus, 227.
Sparganium, 428.
Spartina, 472.
Spartium, 103.
Specularia, 266.
Spergula,71,72,73,77.
Spergularia, 74.
Spirsea, 129.
Spirantbes, 381.
Staohys, 317, 818.
Statice, 340.
Stellaria, 77.
Stratiotes, 408.
Suseda, 352.
Subularia, 87.
Symphytum, 326.
Tamus, 406.
Tanacetum, 260.
Taraxacum, 236.
Taxus, 880.
Teesdalia, 31.
Teucrium, 311.
Thalictrum, 1.
Thesium, 362.
Thlaspi, 80.
Thymus, 807.
TiUa, 87.
TUlffia, 176.
Tofleldia, 407.
Tordylium, 202.
Torilis, 203.
Tragopogon, 220.
Trichomanes, 620.
Trichonema, 807.
TrientaUs, 336.
Trifolium, 109.
Triglochin, 412.
612 INDEX TO GENBKA.
Trigonella, 109.
Ulmus, 368.
Vieia, 119.
Trinia, 190.
Urtica, 367.
Villarsia, 281.
Triodia, 483.
Utrioularia, 331.
Vinoa, 275.
Tritionm, 501.
Viola, 53.
Trollius, 15.
Vaccinimn, 270.
Visciim, 207.
Tulipa, 398.
Valeriana, 2i5.
Wahlenlergia, 266.
Turritis, 43.
ValerianeUa, 216.
Wolffia, 427.
TussUago, 254.
Verbascmn, 286.
Woodsia, 508.
Typha, 429.
Verbena, 302.
Veronica, 287.
Zanniohellia, 423.
Ulex, 103.
Viburnum, 208.
Zostera, 424.
PEINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN, AND CO., 54, HATTON GAKDEN, E.G.
Missing Page 
4 1 *  '«*-^ 