...
THE 
NATURALIST: 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
President of the Conchological Society, and Hon. Secretary Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union, &c; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S, 
Member of the British Ornithologists' Union, and of the British Association 
Committee on the Migration of Birds ; Hon. Secretary Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union, &c.
1886.
LONDON: 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds : Basinghall Street.
PREFACE.
On reaching the conclusion of another voluriie of The Naturalist, 
the Editors believe that it is fully equal in merit to the preceding one, 
and that it adequately fulfils the objects for which it is conducted, 
viz., that of being a medium for recording in detail, facts and obser- 
vations bearing upon the natural history of the North of England, 
facts and observations which will be of the greatest use to future 
writers upon any of the subjects of which this journal takes cogni- 
zance.
For so gratifying and satisfactory a result the Editors are 
indebted to a numerous array of contributors in all parts of their 
district.
An inspection of the contents of the volume will show that while 
numerous valuable papers and notes referring to Cumberland and 
Westmoreland, Lancashire and Cheshire, Yorkshire and Lincolnshire 
have appeared, there are on the other hand comparatively few dealing 
with Northumberland and Durham, the Isle of Man, Notts, or 
Derbyshire.
Surely this is not to be taken as evidence of slackened 
energy in the naturalists of these latter counties, and the Editors and 
their readers would be pleased to have evidence in their next volume 
that this is not the case.
The Editors would draw attention to the bibliographical articles 
which are given, and which they regard as one of the most useful and 
valuable features of their journal.
In its preparation they wish to 
enlist, co-operation, and would be pleased if such of their friends as 
are willing to assist will kindly volunteer to do so.
Assistance is 
already given in the geological portion by gentlemen to whom the 
Editors feel much indebted.
In conclusion, the Editors would ask their present subscribers to 
assist them in increasing their subscription list.
At the commence- 
ment of the present year the journal was enlarged, in the hope and 
expectation that a sufficient number of new subscribers would be 
forthcoming to recoup the proprietors for the additional cost incurred, 
but so far this expectation has not been realised.
As the Editors 
derive no pecuniary benefit whatever from the Naturalist, they feel 
fully at liberty to press its claims upon all who sympathise with the 
objects which it is intended to promote.
They base these claims on 
the solid utility and practical value of its contents.
They are quite 
aware that useful and practical articles are not always readable, but 
they feel fully justified in asking for the substantial support of all who 
believe that a repertory of facts of this kind for a definite area is 
calculated to be of service to science.
No. 126.
JANUARY, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
©entente : 
Lincolnshire — John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U.
Entomological Notes from Huddersfield :- G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S 
Migration of the Salmonidee, Part I, Notes on ' Early' and 'Late' Salmon Rivers— 
Francis Day, C.I.E., F.L.S., &>c 
Ornithological Notes:—..
Variety of.
the Crow — W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.
; Flamborough Bird-Notes — 
Matthew Bailey ; Notes on the Breeding of the Cuckoo and Ring Ouzel— F.
B. 
Whitlock; Sparrowhawk and Viper — J.H. Gurney, jun., F.L.S.
, F.Z.S., &c; 
Quail in North Lancashire — E.
T. Baldwin ; Fulmar Petrels near Hartlepool — 
J. E.
Robson.
Notes on Lepidoptera :— ..
.. 
Varieties of Ephyra punctaria and Numeria pulveraria near Barnsley — John 
Harrison.
Cryptogam ic Notes :— 
Hedwigidium imberbe and Grimmia hartmanni found in England — Geo. Stabler; 
Barbula squarrosa in Westmoreland — C.
H. Binstead, B.A.
Book Notices:— 
(Lord Lilford's Figures of British Birds ; Pennington's Natural History of British 
Zoophytes.) 
Notes and News: — ...
Meteorological Returns for October 1885— (Edited by Geo. Paul, F.G.S., F.R.Met.S.
PAGE 
i to 15 
16 
19 to 29 
17 & 18 
15 & xl 
31 
) 32 
LONDON : 
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CaRDINGTON STREET, EUSTON : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
May also be had of G.
E. East, jun., 241, Evering Road, Upper Clapton' London', \L 
All Communications should be Addressed:— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
X:o< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof : 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free.
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Natural History Journal for December.
1885.
[J.
E. Clark, Editor.
On the Corallian Rocks of England.— Rev. J.
F. Blake, M.A., F.G.S., and 
W. H.
Hudleston, M.A., F.G.S., 1877.
[Mr. Hudleston.
Gasteropoda of the Portland Rocks.— W.
H. Hudleston, M.A., F.G.S., 1881.
[Author.
Contributions to the Palaeontology of the Yorkshire Oolites, W.
H. Hudleston, 
M.A., F.R.S., 12 papers, 1882-3.
[Author.
The Yorkshire Oolites.— W.
H. Hudleston, M.A., F.G.S., 3 parts, 1874-8.
[Author.
Report of an Excursion of the Geologists' Association to the West Riding of 
Yorkshire.— W.
H. Hudleston, M.A., F.G.S.
[Author.
Hertfordshire Natural History Society.
— Transactions, vol.
iii, parts 5 and 6.
[Society.
Psyche, a journal of Entomology, vol.
iv, Nos. 129-134.
[Camb.
Ent. Club.
On Slaty Cleavage and Allied Rock-structure, with special reference to the 
Mechanical Theories of their Origin, by Alfred Harker, M.A., F.G.S.
, 
40 pages, 8vo.
[The Author.
Midland Naturalist for December 1885.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for December 1885.
Q. E.
Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for December 1885.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for December 1885.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for December 1885.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
EXCHANGES.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Dried Plants.
— Duplicates.
London Catalogue, 7th Edition : Nos. 7, 1 
26, 40, 41, 131, 273, 273c, 274, 275, 305, 325, 350, 372, 374, 564, 568, 572, 574 
576, 577, 581, 587, 594, 595, 608, 813, 816, 821, 823, 831, 835, 838, 856, 858 
875, 914, 998, 999, 1007, 1008, 1039, 1040, 1261, 1264, 1265, 1276, 1277, 1280.
1282, 1285, 1294, 1297, 1305, 1325, 1327, 1330, 1333.
Desiderata.
Nos.
90, 101, 119, 186.
214, 228, 348, 349, 370, 377, 479, 536, 538, 545, 546, 547, 600 
720, 730, 762, 817, 826, 834, 845.
851, 855, 997, 1027, 1030, 1033, 1042, 1 133, 1266 
1267, 1279, 1286, 1302, 1304, 1315, 1320, 1338, 1347, &c.
— Herbert Goss 
Berrylands, Surbiton Hill, Surrey.
Set Of Old Series of Naturalist (1864 to 1867) wanted immediately, 
preferable if in numbers as published ; state price and particulars.
— Editors of the 
Naturalist, Park Row, Leeds.
IMPORTANT NOTICE.— On the 19th September the Editors received 
a communication post-marked 'York,' and directed in a lady's hand, enclosing 
2s.
6d.
postal order, but with no clue as to the sender.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
The NATURALIST 
For 1886.
LINCOLNSHIRE.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes, Ulceby, Lincolnshire; Convener of the British Association Committee 
on the Migration of Birds.
It is somewhat curious that even in the present day so much 
misconception should linger in connection with the second in size of 
English shires, popularly invested with fens and fogs, ague and marsh 
fever; a haunt of wild-fowl and waders, reeds and watercress; where 
the rainfall is excessive, floods the order and not the exception.
One 
of 'the greatest of modern authors adds to this general prejudice 
when in commencing his work* he writes 'it was raining down in 
Lincolnshire,' a remark perhaps as little complimentary as that of 
Henry VIII, who spoke of the county as 'being one of the most 
brute and beastly of the whole realm, and of the least experience.
't 
Even at the commencement of the present century Lincolnshire was 
comparatively a terra incognita, and was looked upon as the ultima 
Thule of English counties.
This isolation probably was in great part 
due to its position with the broad frontage of a great tidal river 
and the sea to the north, east, and south-east, separated also, as in 
the Isle of Axholme and the fens, by impassable swamps and 
morasses from the rest of England.
Thus it came to pass that 
Lincolnshire folks were considered behind the age, and it is yet 
somewhat of a reflection on the literary enterprise of the shire that, 
notwithstanding the materials ready to hand, it should stand almost 
alone in having no county history.
From north to south Lincolnshire extends seventy-five miles, and 
from east to west forty-five.
The area is 1,767,962 acres — the Isle 
of Axholme containing 50,000 ; of the whole a very small portion, 
5,762 acres, now remains which is not either cultivated or in pasture.
Fuller in quaint language likens it to 'a bended bow, the sea making 
the back, the rivers Welland and Humber the two horns thereof, 
* Charles Dickens, ' Bleak House.' 
+Froude, 'History of England,' (Ed. 1870), Vol. II, p.
527.
it 
Jan. 1886.
B 
2 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
whilst Trent hangeth down like a broken string, as being somewhat 
of the shortest.'* 
At the time of the Roman invasion Lincolnshire formed part of 
the territories of the powerful tribe of the Coritani, their district also 
comprising Rutland, part of Nottinghamshire, the whole of Leicester- 
shire, and some portion of Warwickshire,t Lindum being their chief 
city and stronghold, their frontier fortresses at Gainsborough, Auk- 
borough, Yarborough Camp, and Caistor predominating the Trent 
and Humber, which rivers separated them to the north and north-west 
from their equally powerful neighbours the Brigantes.
When the 
Romans, probably under Ostorius, about a.d. 70, seized Lincoln, 
they appreciated its commanding site and strongly fortified it.
Sub- 
sequently it became a chief fortress — one of the nine Colonise held by 
veterans of the legions on condition of rendering military service.
They appear also to have utilised for defensive purposes the remain- 
ing strongholds of the tribe along the northern frontier, connecting 
them byroads, Vi<z Militares et Vicinales.
Of these the most remarkable 
is the Ermine Street running above Grantham to Ancaster and 
Lincoln, and then leaving the camp at the Newport Arch, the most 
perfect Roman gateway existing in the country, it ran in a direct line 
to the north through Kirton-in-Lindsey to Wintringham-on-the- 
Humber, where there was a ferry at Brough on the Yorkshire side, 
and hence on to York.
Through a considerable portion of its course 
the ' old strete ' is still used for purposes of traffic, in others, as over 
part of Lincoln Heath and near its northern extremity, it is a wide 
green lane bordered by gorse, whin, and bramble thicket ; and in 
solitudes which once echoed to the tramp of the cohorts and the heavy 
rumbling of baggage trains, and in more recent days the march of 
great English armies towards Scotland, we now listen to the warbling 
of innumerable linnets, or the monotonous song of the yellow-hammer.
The eastern face of the Roman fortress ran nearly in line with the 
transepts of the present Minster, which stands partly within and 
partly without the camp.
From its commanding position, over- 
looking an immense extent of country, it must have been practically 
impregnable.
Those indeed who have climbed the steep slopes from 
the lower town to the castle-yard can form some estimate of its 
strength, when massive wallj was lined with the hardy veterans of 
* ' Worthies of England,' Nicholls' Ed., 181 1, Vol. II, p.
1. 
fM.
H. Bloxam, ' Lindum civitas Coritanorum.' Line.
Diocesan Arch.
Soc.
34th Report, 1877, p.
41 et seq.
X The walls of Roman Lincoln are computed at 10 to 12 feet thick, and 20 to 
25 feet high.
The area of the camp was about six or seven acres.
— Line.
Dioc.
Arch.
Soc. report, 1876, pp.
178-179.
Naturalist, 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
3 
the VI.
and X.
Legions, when iron darts from catapult hurtled through 
the air, and huge stones from the balistse bounded down the slopes.
Of the successive waves of conquerors — Saxon, Dane, and 
Norman — which during the six centuries subsequent to the Roman 
occupation swept over Lincolnshire, none have so indelibly left 
their mark as the Dane.
The county is still England's Denmark, 
and the names of 292 towns and villages indicate the prevalence of 
the Danish element.
Of these 212 have the termination by, 63 have 
thorpe, one has with, four have toft, eight have beck, and three have 
dale* Nowhere else, except in Holderness, have the repeated 
Danish invasions left such landmarks.
And, just as in the present, 
the emigrant from our shores to the backwoods of America gives to 
his small freehold the name of the old home beyond the seas, so 
likewise his Danish fore-elders, for everywhere in Denmark we find 
names having close affinity to Lincolnshire villages.
t Mr. Freeman 
shows how the Danish invasions of eastern England may be divided 
into three periods — simple plunder, period of settlement, political 
conquest.
:J Terrible indeed were the ravages, of which oral tradition 
still lingers, of these ferocious sea-rovers during the first period.
Loosing from the opposite shores of the North Sea in the early spring, 
they sped across in the long ships with big main-sails spread, wing 
and wing, running before the east wind and tossing the salt spray 
above the splendours of their richly-blazoned prows, like falcons swoop- 
ing on their prey.
The Humber offered unusual facilities for landing: 
berthing their galleys in the muddy creeks, as Grimsby and Tetney 
havens, where at low-water they lay like painted serpents in the 
slimy ooze— creeks to which the song of Kal§ the son of Kali is as 
yet equally applicable as then: 
Unpleasantly we have been wading 
In the mud a weary five week, 
Dirt we had indeed in plenty 
When we lay in Grimsby harbour.
There is scarcely a church on our eastern coast which shows not, 
in some part or other of its structure, red and calcined stones 
suggestive of Danish ravage ; and it is by no means improbable, as 
* Freeman's ' Norman Conquest,' Vol. I, p.
437.
t The whole subject of the occupation and settlement of Lincolnshire by the 
Danes has been most ably and exhaustively treated by the Rev. G.
S. Streatfeild, in 
'Lincolnshire and the Danes.' (Kegan Paul, Trench and Co., London, 1884.) 
\ Freeman, ' Norm.
Conq.,' Vol. I, pp.
12, 43 seq.
§ ' Orkneyinga Saga,' Anderson's Ed., p.
76.
Jan. 1886.
4 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
is asserted,* that beneath the broad-headed nails which stud the 
oaken doors may still be found some withered fragment of the skin 
of sacrilegious viking.
Of dread portent was the hoisting on the Saxon shore of the 
Raven banner, surnamed the ' Land waster'; 
For there 
Was shedding of blood, and rending of hair, 
Rape of maiden, and slaughter of priest, 
Gathering of ravens and wolves to the feast.
Yet one hundred years later throughout the peaceful Danelagh the 
savage marauder had become transformed into the peaceful tiller of 
the soil.
What the physical characters of the county were in the 
second period we may conjecture from the positions chosen by these 
vikings or ' creekers ' for their permanent homes, placed at regular 
intervals on the slopes or near the foot of the uplands, overlooking 
the low country or marsh.
The house or by rising on a foundation of 
stone — chalk quarried from the wold — the upper part of ' stud and 
mud' with wattled outbuildings and 'crews,' surrounded by ' garth'' 
and ' wong?
Above them stretched the open wold, rolling uplands 
of heather and gorse, and coarse tussocks of Aira ccespitosa and 
the barren brome grass, stretches of brake bright green in spring 
and golden-brown in the autumn • here and there solitary hawthorns 
quite grey with lichen, storm-twisted and venerable; and on the 
highest ridges many a tumulus and ' hoe ' — long since obliterated by 
the destroying plough.
A land without inhabitant ; the haunt of 
bustard and stone curlew, golden plover and dotterel, where in deep 
dales by chalk stream sides the otter had his home, and in the 
twilight the red deer and roe came down to graze.
Below the wold, 
covering much of what is now known as the middle marsh, stretched 
the wide forest of oak, beech, and elm, with an undergrowth of holly, 
hazel, and yew; dense thickets of blackthorn and bramble, where 
lurked the grey wolf and wild cat ; and above falcon, kite; and buzzard 
held almost undisputed possession.
Beyond the forest was the rich 
pasture of the maritime marshes merging into salt 'fitties/ purple 
with sea-lavender and thrift, or grey with the frosted sea-orache, 
muddy stretches, green with glass wort, and then the flat seabeach — 
A coast 
Of ever-shifting sand, and far away 
The phantom circle of a moaning sea.
* In a footnote, 'Lincolnshire and the Danes,' p.
4, Mr. Streatfeild says 'the 
four churches with which such traditions are distinctly connected are Rochester 
Cathedral, Westminster Abbey, and the churches of Hadstock and Copford in 
Essex.
In the case of Hadstock, the last fragments of skin did not disappear 
until 1846; and in that of Copford, not until 1843 ( see Archaeological Journal, 
Vol.V,p.
.85 ; Vol.X.p.
.67).
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
5 
Then beyond Horncastle and Spilsby, where the chalk dips below 
the fen 'from the foot of the wolds, the green flat stretched away, 
illimitable, to an horizon where, from the roundness of the earth, the 
distant trees and islands were hulled down like ships at sea.
The 
firm horse-fen lay, bright green, along the foot of the wold ; beyond 
it the browner peat, or deep fen; and among that, dark velvet alder 
beds, long lines of reed-rond, emerald in spring and golden under 
the autumn sun ; shining 'eas' or river reaches; broad meres dotted 
with a million fowl Here and there, too, upon the 
far horizon, rose a tall line of ashen-trees, marking some island of 
firm rich soil Overhead the arch of heaven spread 
more ample than elsewhere, as over the open sea ; and that vastness 
gave, and still gives, such cloudlands, such sunrises, such sunsets, as 
can be seen nowhere else within these isles.'* This was the land of 
the Girvii or Fenmen, a tribe of Angles who, even in Danish days, 
remained practically unsubdued within the fastnesses of their impass- 
able morasses.
During the Norman period Lincolnshire contained no less than 
ninety religious foundations — Abbeys, Monasteries, Preceptories of 
Knights Templars, alien Priories and Hospitals; four principal 
castles — Lincoln, Tattershall, Carlton, and Sleaford; and nine 
crenellated or fortified mansions.
Most of these have entirely 
disappeared, and there is perhaps no other county so utterly 
devoid of picturesque ruins.
With the exception of the great gate- 
way of Thornton, near Ulceby, the western part of Crowland, and 
some remains at Tupholme, Kirkstead, and Louth, and the castles at 
Lincoln, Somerton, and Tattershall, scarce a remnant now remains, 
and even the site of the buildings is in many cases with difficulty 
made outt Nowhere else in England, however, do we find so many 
interesting churches dating from early Saxon times down to the close 
of the Perpendicular period at the end of the 15 th century.
Perhaps 
the most remarkable amongst many is the ' Mother of Lincoln,' the 
Saxon church at Stowe, which for some time was the throne of the 
Bishops of Lindisse, before removal to Lincoln.
Lincoln itself at one 
period contained fifty-two churches, reduced in the reign of the sixth 
Edward to thirteen.
At Boston the magnificent tower of the parish 
church, 260 feet high, the 'stump,' as it is called, predominates the 
fens, and it is a prominent object both by sea and land from an immense 
distance.
In times of fen floods the bells were rung to warn the 
* Kingsley's 4 Hereward.' 
t For a list of Lincolnshire Religious Houses and Castles, see ' The Lincoln 
Pocket Guide,' 1880, pp.
178—180, by Sir C.
H. J.
Anderson, Bart.
Jan. 1886.
6 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
district of the impending danger.* The spire of the church at Louth, 
in North Lincolnshire, is 288 feet high, and yields to none in England 
for symmetrical proportions and beauty of decoration.
An interesting 
feature of this church is the weathercock, which was placed in position 
on Holy Rood-eve, 15 15, being made out of a copper basin taken 
two years previously from the Scottish king by the men of Lindsey, at 
the battle of Flodden.t St. Guthlac's Abbey of Crowland was 
entirely destroyed by the Danes in 870; but, as some compensation, 
on its rebuilding it was richly endowed with gifts by Canute — not the 
least remarkable of these being the skins of twelve polar bears for the 
altars, so that the feet of the officiating priests might be kept warm.
% 
Crowland at one period had six bells, the £ sweetest in all England.' 
Much of the beauty and durability of Lincolnshire churches is due 
to the Barnack-ragstone, which in medieval times was carried by 
water from the quarries of that name in Northamptonshire to every 
part of the county.
It is a coarse-grained shelly oolite, and proba- 
bly the most durable freestone in England.
The working of the 
stone appears to have been almost entirely abandoned before the 
commencement of the 15th century, probably from the exhaustion of 
the quarries.§ 
The geological strata of Lincolnshire extend in long ribbon-like 
bands, which generally correspond to the length of the county, 
running nearly north and south, and with a dip to the east, over- 
lapping in regular succession, not unlike the leaves of an open book.
|| 
Much of the picturesque beauty of the shire is due to the two main 
ranges of hills, the chalk wolds and the oolite, having an easy slope 
to the east, and more or less bold escarpments to the west.
The 
chalk or wold district commences at Barton-on-Humber, and termi- 
nates near Burgh-in-the-Marsh, fifty-two miles, dipping beneath the 
* Miss Ingelow, herself a Lincolnshire worthy, in her poem ' The High Tide on 
the Coast of Lincolnshire ' (1571), graphically pictures the perils of fen life in flood 
time, when the great bells of Boston rang out night and day to the warning tune 
of the 'Brides of Mavis-Enderby.' 
t Lincoln Pocket Guide, p.
72.
+ Monasticon Anglicanum, Dugdale, Vol. II, p.
96.
§See Miller and Skertchly, ' The Fenland Past and Present,' 1878, pp.
78, 79.
|| The Journals of the Geological Society contain several important papers on 
the geology of Lincolnshire, which may be studied with advantage by those who 
take an interest in the subject, such are ' Rhcetic beds near Gainsborough ; ' Strata 
which form the base of the Lincolnshire wolds,'' 1867, Vol. XXIII, pp.
315, 227; 
Glacial and Pcsl-glacial strata of Lincolnshire, Vol. XXIV, 1868, p.
146 ; 
Neocomian strata of Lincolnshire, Vol. XXVI, 1870, p.
326; Lias and Oolite of 
north-west Lincolnshire, Vol. XXXI, 1875, p.
115; Southerly extension of the 
Hessle Boulder Clay, Vol. XXXV, 1879, P- 397- 
Naturalist, 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
7 
fen to appear again beyond the Wash at Hunstanton, its greatest 
breadth is fourteen miles.
The oolite runs like a spine through the 
whole length of the county, and is represented by a narrow band in 
the north, and south of Lincoln (where it is once cut through and 
divided by the bed of the Witham), spreading into the wide elevated 
district known as the ' Heath,' where on its western side it forms the 
striking escarpment called the ' Cliff,' predominating the level lias 
and new red sandstones of the Trent Valley.
Between these ranges 
of the chalk and the oolite lies the great central plain of Lincolnshire 
— greensands, gault, Kimmeridge, and Oxford clays ; these all in 
South Lincolnshire pass beneath the peats, clays, and gravels of the 
fens.
There is still a third line of elevated land formed by the Lias, 
Rhsetic, and red-marl beds extending from the mouth of the Trent 
to as far as Gainsborough.
At its northern extremity, near Scunthorpe, 
is the rich bed of iron ore, twenty-seven feet thick, which has already 
added so much to the wealth and importance of this otherwise poor 
and barren district.
A section across the county from east to west 
at its greatest breadth, passes first through the chalky boulder-clay, 
overlaid in north-east Lincolnshire by a considerable thickness of 
warp, and generally along the maritime plain by recent alluvial 
deposits, sand, and clays.
In the Humber marshes borings for water 
show twelve to forty-five feet of clean stoneless warp, with an 
occasional cockle-shell; beneath the warp is the forest bed, two and 
a half feet in thickness, resting on about a foot of whitish clay and 
sand.
This old indigenous forest crops out at various places, both 
within the Humber and the sea coast, at low-water mark, presenting 
clay beds thickly interlaced with roots, also scattered stumps of trees 
in situ, identified as oak, beech, elm, birch, holly, yew, hazel, alder, 
and willow.
The only remains of animal life we have found was 
during the excavation of the new docks at Grimsby — the core of a 
horn of Bos primigenius .
In the peat bed, probably of the same date, 
which lies below the silt and sand of the Freshney Beck in Aylesby 
parish, we have dug up bones of the red deer, Bos longifrons, wolf 
or large dog, wild boar, probably wild cat, and a human ulna, like the 
rest stained perfectly black with the peat.* Below the forest bed is 
* The great forest of Kesteven in the south of the county, of which relics remain 
in Grimsthorpe Park, with its original herd of red deer, probably extended far into 
Fenland proper.
The buried forests beneath the peat comprise oak, elm, birch, 
Scotch fir, yew, hazel, sallow, alder, and willow.
Some of the oaks are of 
immense size, and the wood, a specimen of which is now before me, nearly as 
black and hard as ebony.
Years after the drainage of the West Fen the exact 
position of the' great trees was made apparent to the fenmen by the rime frost 
lying longer above them than on the surrounding fen.
Jan. 1886.
8 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
the boulder drift, a reddish clay filled with fragments of chalk and 
derivative rocks, and varying from 50 to 300 feet in thickness.
A 
peculiarity of the low-lying districts near the sea, as at Tetney and 
Great Cotes, are the ponds, locally known as ' blow-wells,' popularly 
supposed to be unfathomable; they are powerful springs, never failing 
in the driest season, rising from the chalk through the superincumbent 
drift and alluvium.
The blow-wells in the parish of Little Cotes 
supply the town of Grimsby with an unfailing source of pure water.
Many of the low-country springs in the north-east districts are more or 
less intermittent, the flow of water being regulated by the ebb and flow 
of the tides.
Mr. Clement Reid's recent researches in the north of the 
county, more especially in connection with the old coast line at the 
base of the wolds,* and the deposits of inter-glacial sands have added 
much to the geological interest of the district.
t The examination 
of the sand pits at Laceby and Croxton has resulted in the 
determination of numerous species of marine shells, some yet common 
on the coast, others slightly northern, but not Arctic, whilst some are 
indicative of a comparatively warm and equable climate.
An 
interesting find at Croxton is Corbicula flwninalis, of which living 
examples are now restricted to the Nile, the lake of Gennesareth, and 
some rivers of Asia.
This shell is extremely abundant at Kelsey Hill 
ballast pits, north of the Humber, in conjunction with bones of bison, 
leptorhine rhinoceros, and elephant.
A narrow band of red chalk 
known as the Hunstanton red chalk is traceable all through Lincoln- 
shire from Gunby to South Ferriby.
The summit of the wold near 
Pelham's Pillar is 456 feet above sea-level; the highest point is probably 
near Normanby clump, about 549 feet.
On the western slope of the 
wolds below Caistor, and running south, there are a series of ironstones, 
sandstones, and clays to which the term Neocomian has been applied.
Still following the sectional line we find the Kimmeridge clay 
represented in a narrow band, estimated at 600 feet in thickness ; 
then in succession Oxford clay and Kellaway rocks, passing into the 
cornbrash and great oolites, forming an elevated belt of varying 
breadth through the length of the county.
The Liassic clays and 
marlstones are defined by a narrow belt ten to twelve miles wide in 
the south, and running off" to a mile in width near the Humber.
Lastly, on the slopes of the Trent Valley are the oldest rocks in the 
county, the Keuper sandstone.
* At this period the coast line of Lincolnshire was represented by a chain of low- 
lying islands of chalk, separated by narrow and deep fiords.
f'The Geology of Holderness, and the adjoining parts of Yorkshire and 
Lincolnshire.' Memoirs of the Geological Survey, 1885.
Clement Reid.
Naturalist, 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
9 
Up to the present date Lincolnshire compares unfavourably 
with other counties* in having no published list of the Mammalia 
found within its bounds.
The last and most interesting addition 
to the fauna was the wild cat (Felis catus), shot in the early part 
of March, 1883, in a small plantation close to Bullington Wood, 
near Wragby.t The marten is sparingly distributed in the chain 
of great woodlands which extends from Wragby to Bourn, and 
from information recently acquired we are inclined to think it 
will be many years before it becomes extinct.
The polecat is 
common ; the otter still lingers both in the north and south ; the 
badger probably more abundant than in any of the midland counties.
The common seal is frequently seen on the coast in the autumn, and 
on that labyrinth of great sandbanks in the Wash, between Lynn and 
Wainfleet — of which some, like the Dogshead and Knock, and Seal's 
Bank, are only covered at high tides — there has been from time 
immemorial a considerable colony, and doubtless many young are 
born in the course of the season.
The grey seal is also found in the 
same locality, and with Mr. T.
Southwell, of Norwich, J remains the 
credit of adding this interesting species to the respective faunas of 
the two counties.
§ Of the smaller mammals the dormouse is found 
in the south-west of the county ;|| the red field vole is rare, the lesser 
shrew local, and the water shrew exceedingly plentiful.
Lincolnshire in the present day can boast of little of its former 
ornithological pre-eminence; it was truly described by Fuller in his day 
as ' the aviary of England, for the wild-foule therein : remarkable for 
their Plenty — Variety — Deliciousnesse.'f Few and fragmentary are 
the records which have come down to us concerning the treasures 
of the fens in the Liber Eliensis,** the Chronicles of Crowland,ft and 
*The list of Yorkshire Mammalia, in Clarke and Roebuck's Yorkshire Vertebrata, 
includes forty-five species out of a possible sixty-nine.
In Mr. T.
Southwell's list 
for the county of Norfolk, altogether forty-one species are named.
+ For a detailed account of the capture see the Naturalist, Sept.
1884, p.
33; 
Zoologist, Sept.
1884, pp.
360-1 ; Transactions of the Norfolk and Norwich 
Naturalists' Society, Vol. Ill, p.
676a.
t Trans.
Norfolk and Norwich Nat. Soc, Vol. Ill, p.
670.
§ We are afraid a similar joint claim cannot be set up in the north of the county 
in respect to the recent occurrence of Sowerby's whale, Physeter bidens, within the 
estuary of the H umber, cast up on the shore at Spurn Point in the autumn of 1885.
|| See Mr. G.
T. Rope, Range of the Dormouse in England and Wales, Zool., 
1885, p.
207.
% Worthies of England, Vol. II, p.
2. 
** Ed. Stuart, 1848.
ft Ingulph's History of Crowland, Bonn's translation.
Jan. 1886.
TO 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
from William of Malmesbury* and Camden,f and again more recently 
in the writings of Gough,J Pennant, and Colonel Montagu.
Drayton 
also in quaint verse § describes the goodly fens and their teeming life.
These passages from old writers have frequently been quoted in 
descriptions of fen scenery, and space will not permit us to do more 
than allude to them in a general way.
A glorious place in its wild 
natural state was that old fenland before man had come in to bank 
and drain, and a very paradise to the fowler and fisher were the 
boggy flats where the ' dark -green alders, and pale-green reeds 
stretched for miles round the broad lagoon, where the coot clanked 
and the bittern boomed, and the sedge-bird, not content with its own 
sweet song, mocked the notes of all the birds around, while high over- 
head hung motionless, hawk beyond hawk, buzzard beyond buzzard, 
kite beyond kite, as far as the eye could see.'|| Some idea may be 
formed of the enormous number of wild fowl frequenting the fens by 
the facts as related by Pennant,^ that in one year from only ten decoys 
near Wainfleet 31,200 ducks were sent to London.
In these times a 
flock of wild duck has been observed passing along from the north 
and north-east into the east fen in a continuous stream for eight 
hours together.** 
With the drainage of the fens the bird-life disappeared.
Gone 
now as habitual residents are the harriers and short-eared owls, the grey 
geese and ducks, the cormorants, grebes, and divers, the bitterns, 
cranes, spoonbills, and storks; gone also are the smaller fowl — the 
black-tailed godwit, the avocets, ruffs and reeves, gulls and terns.
ft 
Vanished too has many a fen plant, as the great fen ragwort, the giant 
cineraria and marsh sow-thistle, whilst others like the fragrant bog- 
myrtle, water germander, and the marsh and royal ferns manage just 
to retain a precarious footing, and are probably sooner or later 
doomed to extinction ; and with the lost plants — and mainly perhaps 
* Temp.
1 100.
+ Camden's Britannia, 1 Ed., 1695.
\ Op. cit., Cough's Ed., 1806, Vol. II, pp.
380-1.
§ Polyolbion, Song 25 (Holland's oration).
|| Kingsley, Prose idylls — the fens.
^[ British Zoology, Ed. 1768, p.
486.
** In one of the only two existing decoys worked in Lincolnshire, that of Ashby 
near the Trent, an average of 2,741 ducks, teal, and widgeon, with some others, 
were captured between the years 1834 and 1S67 ; and since this 6,321 have been 
taken in a single season, and of these 2.300 in thirty-one days, but in late years the 
annual take appears to have somewhat fallen off.
t+ It is satisfactory to know that for the last four or five years the black tern has 
nested in Lincolnshire.
Naturalist, 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
from that cause — have disappeared many beautiful insects.
The 
great copper and swallow-tailed butterflies, the red wainscot, rosy- 
marsh, red leopard and Whittlesea ermine moths, and many another 
insect treasure too numerous to mention; gone too are the myriad 
frogs, the 'Lincolnshire nightingales/ whose night croakings well nigh 
drowned all other sounds of fen-life.
Scarcely second to the fens in interest were the vast swamps and 
wastes of the Isle of Axholme, which as late as the commencement 
of the present century still swarmed with various fowl.
Mr. Stone- 
house has left some interesting notes* in connection with the avi- 
fauna of this little known district, having reference to the nesting of 
the marsh harrier, the nesting habits of the bittern, and the taking of 
ruffs ; he also says ' the gyr-falcon is sometimes seen sailing over this 
and the adjacent wastes; it boldly attacks the largest of the feathered 
race ; the stork, the heron, and the crane are easy victims ; it 
kills hares by darting directly upon them.'f In the time of James I.
a great herd of red deer wandered over Hatfield levels and the 
adjacent wastes of Lindholme, and in the inquisition of 1607 it is 
said that the number mounted to about 1,000 head, and that the herd 
is much impaired by the depredations of the borderers.
From a 
curious entry preserved in the parish registers of Finningley in 1737, 
it is probable that some of the herd remained down to the commence- 
ment of the 1 8th century.
In the first twenty years of the present century, ruffs and reeves 
were common in all the maritime marshes in the north-east of the 
county, and we have been assured by an old sportsman that he used 
regularly to.
make excursions into the Stallingborough and Imming- 
ham marshes in the spring to shoot ruffs and dotterel ; a friend also 
recently told us that he has heard his grandfather, who was a great 
shooter, talk of seeing the bank between Clee and Tetney in the 
spring covered with ruffs and reeves, and so tired with their long 
flight that you might almost knock them down with a stick, and that 
he could soon shoot as many as he could carry.
On the same coast and salt-fitties at that time came regularly to 
nest great numbers of oyster-catchers, Arctic, common and lesser 
terns, and the ringed plover ; the shelldrake also in the sandhills and 
warrens, and in the adjoining marsh the hen harrier, spotted crake, 
* The History and Topography of the Isle of Axholme, by the Rev.W. B.
Stone- 
house, M.A., 1839.
+ In an old map MDCXXVI.
of the Isle, before the drainage by Vermuyden, 
Storkcarre's are marked between Haxey and Wroote, on the east bank of the river 
Idle (Idille).
Jan. 1886.
I 2 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
ruffs and reeves, snipe, and redshank ; still further inland, in the woods 
skirting the wolds, the kite," 55 " buzzard, and hobby.
These were the 
days before the gamekeeper and the trapper were known, and sports- 
men were well content with moderate bags, shot over dogs, and with 
much healthy exercise.
All testimony proves the former abundance of birds in Lincoln- 
shire, and we only know of one exception to this.
William Cobbett, 
who died in 1835, in his 'Rural Rides,' which extended almost over 
the whole of England, coming to Horncastle, says: 'There is one 
deficiency, and that with me is a great one, throughout this county 
of corn and grass and oxen and sheep that I have come over during 
the last three weeks, the want of singing birds.
We are now just in 
the season when they sing most.
Here in all this country I have 
seen and heard only about four skylarks, and not one other bird of 
any description ; and of small birds that do not sing I have seen only 
one yellow-hammer, and it was perched on the rail of the pound 
between Boston and Sibsey.' Had he passed through the same 
district in the autumn, when the great wave of migration has set in, 
he would have probably written differently, seeing the fields swarming 
with larks, chaffinches, and buntings, the hedgerows alive with 
blackbirds, thrushes, and redwings, and in the marshes, near the 
coast, immense flocks of snow buntings, tree sparrows, linnets, and 
twites, as well as hundreds of that characteristic bird of the county 
the grey crow ; on the coast itself such flights of knot, godwit, and grey 
plover as can be seen nowhere else in England.
The old fresh-water fisheries of Lincolnshire had a great reputation, 
more especially for pike and eels ; enormous numbers of the latter 
were annually taken, and they formed no small part of the tribute and 
endowments of the monasteries and religious houses.
The fen eels 
often grew to an immense size — two are mentioned by Yarrell, taken 
in draining a fen dike, near Wisbeach, one of which weighed 27 lbs., 
the other 25 lbs.t The pike is plentiful in the rivers and drains of the 
fens ; there is an old adage which says 
Witham pike 
England has neen like ; 
and another, 
Ankholme eels and Witham pike, 
In all England are nane syke.
*The eggs of the last kite recorded as nesting in Lincolnshire were taken from 
a nest in Bullington Wood, near Wragby, in the spring of 1870.
Since this time 
it has only occurred as an immigrant passing south in the autumn.
t We recently obtained one of four large eels, Anguilla acntirostris, caught in a 
trawl net at sea some miles east of Flamborough Head.
Naturalist, 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
13 
The pike of the Witham, however, in the present day will bear no com- 
parison with the monsters of the old fen meres, as we may judge from the 
jaws of this fish found in the peat and preserved in the Cambridge 
Museum.
In the collection of the late Mr. Frank Buckland was a 
pike, weighing over 100 lbs., taken when Whittlesea mere was drained.
Valuable salmon fisheries were worked at the beginning of this 
century on the Humber.
Sir Charles Anderson* states: 'In 1806, 
John Barrick of Barrow, gamekeeper, stated that his father rented 
the fishery of Barrow, and that thirty years ago he was present at 
the taking of eighteen salmon in one tide, one weighed 47 lbs., 
another 46 lbs., the remainder from 18 to 20 lbs.
each, and sold at 6d.
per lb.; at Killingholme 100 salmon were caught in one tide.' That 
curious fish the burbolt, a freshwater cod, is common in the Trent 
and other rivers ; the barbel also is plentiful, and grows to a large 
size ; we have known six taken with a line and rod in little over the 
hour, the collective weight of which was 42^ lbs.
There are districts in Lincolnshire which require careful and 
scientific examination before we can form a correct estimate of the 
existing fauna and flora.
Such are the low-lying flats and warp 
islands at the junction of the Trent, Ouse, and Humber, where the 
Avocet nested as recently as about 1840,+ and the ruff in 1871.
Then there are the commons and warrens in the north-west, near the 
Trent, the habitat of many rare and interesting plants which thus far 
have escaped the ban of cultivation.
Here also nest, or have recently 
nested, the hen harrier and short-eared owl, sheldrake, shoveller, teal, 
and wild duck, stone curlew, rurT, redshank, snipe, dunlin, and little 
grebe ; and at Twigmoor, as well as at Manton Common, thousands 
of black-headed gulls.
The great woodlands from Wragby southward 
to Bourn, and about Horncastle, the last haunt of the wild cat, pine 
marten, and kite, would well repay a close investigation ; also the 
fenny flats at the head of the Wash, and the estuary itself, the home 
of the seal, and in the autumn and winter still the chosen retreat of 
innumerable wild fowl ; here too in the summer we have seen flights 
of various waders and scoter, which from some cause or other have 
not joined in the spring migration of their fellows to breeding grounds 
fifteen hundred miles away within the Arctic circle.
Of the present aspect of the shire, its rich fertility and picturesque 
scenery we have said little ; let such as care to estimate its agricultural 
wealth follow the wold road from Barton-on-Humber, above Caistor, 
and through Tealby and Market Stainton to Horncastle, at the 
* The Lincoln Pocket Guide, p.
85.
f Handbook of Yorkshire Vertebrata, Clarke and Roebuck, p.
72.
Jan. 1886.
14 
JOHN CORDEAUX: LINCOLNSHIRE.
season when the wide expanse of the hill country is ripening to the 
harvest.
View the imbounding prospect just south of Pelham's Pillar, 
first northward across the continuous range of the Limber and Brock- 
lesby Woods, and south-east over the rolling uplands to beyond 
Croxby and Binbrooke, every yard of which is in the highest cultiva- 
tion, under corn, turnips, and artificial grasses and clover.
What 
perhaps most strikes the observer is the absence of houses or farm- 
steads, for the wold villages as a rule lie hid away in hollows of 
the hills or along the main lines of traffic through the valleys, and at 
the best it is even now a thinly populated district compared with the 
rest of the county.
North-east towards the Humber the wold breaks 
away through the Gap (the scene of a sharp cavalry skirmish between 
a detachment of the Newark garrison and the Parliamentarian 
horse), beyond the ancient oak and beech of Riby Park and pleasant 
Aylesby, of shorthorn fame, with the fertile middle marsh merging 
into the rich pastures of the maritime plain ; there softened by 
distance, rises the graceful water tower, 300 feet high, towering above 
the blue smoke haze of Grimsby like a Florentine campanile, and 
marking the entrance to the Royal Dock ; beyond this the broad 
estuary of the river, Spurn Point and Dimlington high land, and on 
the outmost verge the silver sheen of the North Sea. Turning south, 
where the wold dips steeply to the central plain, we see the red-tiled 
houses and grey church tower of Caistor nestling in a hollow of the 
hills, with half the county spread out like a map, field succeeding 
field, with infinite shades of yellow, brown, and green, mingled with 
pinewood, coppice, and hedgerow timber, league beyond league to 
where on the blue horizon, like a great rock, rises the stately pile of 
Remigius — Lincoln Minster.
All honour to the great Lord Yar- 
borough, great great grandfather to the present earl, who with a lavish 
expenditure, and aided by an enterprising tenantry, changed the 
barren wastes into the garden of England, and who, as the inscription 
on the pillar in the neighbouring wood states, between 1787 and 
1823 planted 12,552,700 trees on his estates.
Take again the view from the heath road south of Lincoln, above 
Boothby-Graffoe, looking west across Somerton Castle and the level 
district round Newark to the furthest bounds of Nottinghamshire ; 
southward in one broad curve sweeps the wooded escarpment, mile 
beyond mile to Grantham, the graceful spires of frequent churches 
marking the position of each cliff village, till the oolite cliff becomes 
merged into that lias ridge from which the lordly towers of Belvoir 
overlook the wide vale of Trent.
Still keeping our position, but 
facing eastward, we overlook the breadth of Lincoln Heath, where the 
Naturalist, 
CRYPTOGAMIC NOTES.
J 5 
finest barley is grown and the largest sheep are reared.
In the fore- 
ground Dunstan Pillar, a lighthouse on land, built in 1 7 5 1 , to guide 
travellers over the heath.
Beyond the woods of Blankney rises at 
the edge of the fen, the massive square of Tattershall Castle, built 
by Lord Cromwell, Treasurer to Henry VIII; and still following the 
same direction, that slight-looking column on the skyline is Boston 
' stump,' overlooking the never-ending fen.
Again, drive from Spalding to Boston in the latter part of August, 
along one of those long, straight fen roads, bordered with pollard 
willow and flanked by wide drains ; from each reed-bed comes the 
rattling song of the sedge warbler, and here the reed-wren suspends 
her nest ; the white or yellow cups of water lilies float on the peat- 
stained dike, and beneath the shadow of their rounded leaves we 
detect close-packed shoals of roach.
On each side ripening sheets of 
corn extend to the horizon, or long rows of closely-placed ' stooks ' 
stand in serried ranks like the encampment of an army — nowhere 
else in England can we see oats and wheat with such length of straw 
and size of head; then there are beanflelds where each stalk is 
suggestive of that climbed by Jack in his search for the Giant's home; 
stretches of golden mustard, now in full flower ; fields of dark-green 
swedes or light-green mangolds, of which each root would not disgrace 
the stall of the seedsman in the Agricultural Hall.
Mighty oxen 
browse lazily the rich pastures, dotted too with big Lincoln wethers, 
whose recently shorn fleeces weigh from ten to even twenty pounds.
From every side comes the sound of busy labour — the noisy rattle of 
the reaping machines, creaking of the laden wains, and the rustle of 
sheaves as they are pitched on the load ; and all this under a sky 
which for intensity of blue and freedom from coal smoke, might 
compare with that of Southern Europe.
Seeing all this, we may well 
exclaim with Cobbett that ' everything taken together, here in Lincoln- 
shire are more good things than man could have had the conscience 
to ask of God.' 
CRYPTOGAMIC NOTES.
Hedwigidium imtoerbe and Grimmia hartmanni found in 
England.
— In looking over some of my old gatherings of mosses I recently 
found among them Hedwigidium imberbe Sm., collected in the Kentmere Valley, 
in the English Lake District.
The only other British habitats, so far as I am aware, 
hitherto known for this plant, are in the South of Ireland and North Wales.
I may also add that I have gathered Grimmia hartmanni Schpr.
in the same 
valley.
This has previously been reported from some part of the same province, 
from the East and West Highlands of Scotland, and from North Wales.
It was 
discovered in Britain first by Dr. Schimper, Dr. Wood and party, when in Scotland 
in the year 1865.
— G.
Stabler, Levens, Milnthorpe, Westmoreland, November 
12th, 1885.
Jan. 1886.
ENTOMOLOGICAL NOTES FROM HUDDERSFIELD.
GEO.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Huddersfield \ Preside?it of the Entomological Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union ; 
Author of the List of Yorkshire Lepidoptera ; &>c.
Among my captures during the season just over, are the following 
additions to the Huddersfield list of Lepidoptera : — 
Grapholita geminana.
Not uncommon in Butter Nab Wood.
Ephippiphora brunnichiana.
Abundant among coltsfoot at Birkby, and very variable in colour.
Penthina sauciana.
Bred some beautiful specimens from larvae collected from 
bilberry in the Netherton Wood.
Gelechia politella (expolitella).
This very local species I found in plenty in the wood, and on 
the adjoining moorland hillside overhanging Greenfield Railway 
Station, in July.
_rgyresthia conjugella.
Common in the wood at Greenfield.
Coleophora nigricella.
Abundant in Colonel Thomas Brooke's wood at Armitage 
Bridge, and less commonly in the Greenfield Wood.
Tischeria complanella.
Not uncommon in a wood at Brockholes, in June.
Lithocolletis salicicolella.
Specimens I took in the Brockholes and 
Greenfield Woods, Mr. Barrett believes to be this species.
A few notes on several other species may not be without interest.
In June, Mr. S.
L. Mosley kindly took me to the spot where he last 
year discovered Eupcecilia dubitana as new to the county list.
We 
found it again in plenty, and any number might easily have been 
taken.
About thistles in a field near, we also found several 
Argyrolepia cnicana.
In August, Scoparia coarctalis occurred in 
profusion on the wall bounding the north side of the Huddersfield 
Cemetery, and I set considerably over a hundred beautiful specimens, 
including some I bred from larvae found in moss on the wall.
A few, 
but not many, S.
muralis occurred with them, though on other walls 
that species was common.
Tortrix costana was also common about 
docks just outside the cemetery.
Acidalia inornata I found 
commoner in its old haunt at Butter Nab Wood than I have seen it 
for some years, but still in nothing like the abundance it occurred 
there in 1875.
Mr. Henry Stephenson found a specimen of Sphinx 
convolvidi at rest in the town ; and I am informed that Mr. Winter- 
mann took a very fine Acherontia atropos at Holmfirth.
______ 
Naturalist, 
*7 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES.
Notes on the Breeding of the Cuckoo and Ring Ouzel.— In 
the Naturalist for October, Mr. G.
T. Porritt gives an interesting account of find- 
ing an incubated egg of the Cuckoo on the bare ground.
Mr. Darwin in his ' Origin 
of Species,' chap, viii, p.
213, gives a similar instance on the authority of Adolf 
Miiller, to which he adds the following : — ' This rare event is probably a case of 
reversion to the long-lost aboriginal instinct of nidification.' Perhaps a few further 
notes on the Cuckoo would be of interest to readers of the Naturalist.
One does 
not often hear of two Cuckoo's eggs being found in the same nest.
My friend 
Mr. Wield t of Loughborough, however, found a Pied Wagtail's nest containing two 
eggs of the former bird, and either four or five of the latter, and as the two Cuckoo 
eggs were similar in size and colour he presumed they were placed there by the 
same bird.
Cuckoos sometimes make rather remarkable choices in selecting nests 
to deposit their egg or eggs in.
A neighbour last year brought me an egg he had 
taken from the nest of a Common Linnet, a seed-eating bird.
It would be interest- 
ing to know how the young Cuckoo would fare on a graminivorous instead of 
insectivorous diet.
Moorland Cuckoos, which are limited in their choice of nests, 
generally select that of the Meadow Pipit ; but these latter birds are generally 
sitting by the time the Cuckoo lays, so that it is probable that the young Meadow 
Pipits will aid in the hatching of their foster brother to be, and may possibly escape 
the fate generally assigned to them of being shuffled out of the nest before they can 
take care of themselves.
I found this year a Meadow Pipit's nest containing two 
of its own eggs considerably incubated, and one of the Cuckoo quite fresh ; the 
Meadow Pipit's would have been hatched in about three days or so.
I once met 
with a case in which a Cuckoo laid her egg in an unfinished nest of the Pied 
Wagtail, the latter bird laying her full complement of eggs some days later.
This 
year, at Miller's Dale, I shot a young full-grown (as regards size) Cuckoo, in a very 
emaciated but otherwise healthy condition.
As I saw no signs of its foster parents 
I concluded that they had abandoned it, and that it had not yet learned to find 
itself a sufficient supply of food.
I think it probable that a certain amount of 
mortality occurs amongst young Cuckoos every year from a similar cause.
Writing of moorlands reminds me of my favourite, the Ring Ouzel.
A friend 
has recently written to me asking if I have ever seen or heard of a Ring Ouzel's 
nest containing five eggs ?
I have never met with such a case myself.
On reading 
Mr. Seebohm's new book, it struck me that he had transposed his notes, if I may 
be so bold as to say so, on the number of eggs laid by the Ring Ouzel and Missel 
Thrush ; he says the Ring Ouzel lays four or five finely-marked eggs,' whilst the 
Missel Thrush's eggs ' rarely exceed four in number, and in but very few cases are 
less.' My own experience has been exactly to the contrary.
I should be glad to 
hear what northern ornithologists have to say in the matter.
— F.
B. Whitlock, 
Nottingham, November 4th, 1885.
Sparrowhawk and Viper.— The following is an extract from an old 
newspaper (year forgotten) : — ' A few days ago the sorter of Messrs.
Rex and Co.'s 
' establishment in High Ousegate, York, had occasion to go to the top of the 
' premises, when he was surprised to find a dying Viper.
Near it was laid a Pigeon, 
' three Rats, and a Sparrowhawk, all dead.
It is presumed the Hawk had taken 
' the whole of its prey there to devour, including the Viper, whose bite had 
'deprived the Hawk of life.'— J.
H. Gurney, Jun., Northrepps, Norwich, 
August 13th, 1885.
Quail in North Lancashire.— When shooting at Pilling, in the Fylde 
district of North Lancashire, on October 16th, I saw a Quail {Cohirnix communis).
This is the first I have seen or heard of in that district for some years.
On reference 
to Mitchell's ' Birds of Lancashire,' it will be seen that the Quail is now but a rare 
visitor in that county.
— E.
T. Baldwin, London, October 26th, 1885.
Fulmar Petrels near Hartlepool.
— Two specimens of the Fulmar 
Petrel {Fulmarus glacialis) have been taken here during the recent storm.
One 
was in a ploughed field, and allowed itself to be taken up easily.
The other was 
covered with sand on the beach.
Both are in possession of Mr. James A.
Mann 
of this town.
— John E.
Robson, Hartlepool, 24th October, 1885.
Jan. 1886.
c 
1 8 ORNITHOLOGICAL, ENTOMOLOGICAL, AND CRYPTOGAMIC NOTES.
Variety of the Crow (Corvus cor one).
— An interesting variety of 
this bird was shot near Settle, in West Yorkshire, on the 27th or 28th of October, 
and examined by me when in the flesh.
In general tint it was of a light silvery 
grey, with a slightly brindled appearance.
The head and throat were darker than 
the back and under surface, while the tail and wings were lighter and approaching a 
dove shade.
A closer examination revealed the cause of the brindled appearance, 
and of the distribution of the shades of colour ; inasmuch as each and every feather 
was found to be barred with several bands alternately dove colour and smoky 
grey ; and thus where feathers were smallest and the bars closest the plumage was 
darkest and vice versa.
Five bars were counted on one of the feathers from the back, 
while on the primaries they were much more numerous, though not so close.
The 
usual glossy plumage of the species gave a soft silky appearance, and added to the 
beauty of the specimen.
This bird presents a very remarkable departure from the 
uniformity of colouration in the feathers of every member of the Corvidce, in 
maturity and all stages of immaturity.
Can it be explained by the strong 
probability that the Crows — the most highly developed of birds — are descended 
from speckled progenitors, and that this individual has reverted to the plumage of 
some remote ancestral type?
— Wm. Eagle Clarke, Leeds, October 30th, 1885.
Flamborough Bird notes.
— I think nearly if not all the Swallows 
(Hirundo rustica) have taken their departure, as I have not seen any since 
October 18th.
On that day I saw several skimming over some sea- weed at the South 
Landing, no doubt in search of food.
We have had great arrivals of migrants this 
month.
Hooded Crows {Corvus comix) were the first to arrive on October 6th, 
also numbers — enough to till the hedgerows — of Crested Wrens {Regulus cristatus); 
likewise several Ring Ouzels ( Turdus torqiiatus) were seen on the Headland.
Large quantities of Woodcocks {Scolopax 7'iisticula) arrived on the 22nd and 23rd.
One of our farmer's sons bagged six couple ; another one bagged fiVe. The game 
keeper of Rev. Lloyd Greame, Sewerby, informs me that he also shot twelve 
couple.
They were seen in nearly all the gardens in the village.
The other day 
I shot three Little Gulls {Lanes minutus), and two Stormy Petrels (Proce/Zaria 
pelagica), all splendid specimens.
— Matthew Bailey, October 28th, 1885.
Since writing, three Swallows were seen November 1st.— November nth, 1885.
CR YPTOGAMIA.
Barbula squarrosa in Westmoreland.— I have great pleasure in 
recording the occurrence of this moss in Westmoreland.
According to the localities 
given for it in Dr. Braithwaite's ' Moss Flora ' (Part ix, p.
228), it appears not to 
have been found hitherto further north than Derbyshire.
I discovered the moss at 
Brigsteer, near Kendal, in October last.
It was growing amongst loose stones in 
exposed places.
I have lately found it on the coast, near Arnside, and in some 
quarries at Kendal, always on the limestone.
— C.
H. Binstead, B.A., Broom 
Close, Kendal, November 26th, 1885.
LEP1DOPTERA.
Varieties of Ephyra punctaria and Numeria pulveraria near 
Barnsley.— Strolling through a wood in this neighbourhood in the early part of 
June last, I accidentally disturbed a Geometer from a small birch bush, which 
settled amongst the grass, and at first sight I did not recognise it.
It, however, 
turned out to be a curiously-marked Ephyra punctaria.
In the general type we 
have the very distinct transverse brown line commencing half-way along the costal 
margin, passing through to the inner margin, and joining a similar line in the hind 
wing.
Now, in the specimen I have, the brown transverse line commences as usual 
on the costal margin, but instead of passing right down the fore wing, turns off 
elbow fashion and terminates at the base of the wings ; it also shows a decided dark- 
brown line on the outer edge or border, heaviest at the tip.
Placed beside an 
ordinary specimen, it looks very striking.
I have also bred a solitary specimen, a female, of Numeria pulveraria, in which 
the broad transverse central band of umber-brown is entirely absent on one wing 
(the left).
1 unfortunately kept it too long in the cage, expecting a male, so that it 
is not quite so perfect as I should like.
— -John Harrison, Barnsley, Dec. 9th, 1885.
Naturalist, 
*9 
MIGRATION OF THE SALMONIDiE.
Part I.
NOTES ON 'EARLY' AND * LATE ' SALMON RIVERS.
By FRANCIS DAY, CLE., F.L.S., &c, 
President Cheltenham Nattiral Science Society; Author of a ''History of the Fishes 
of Great Britain and I related,' &>c.
Among the many problems respecting salmon and their fisheries, 
there is none which exceeds in importance how to legislate for the 
different classes of rivers.
For, as is well known, certain of these are 
termed 'early' and others 'late,' while these terms are employed in 
two somewhat different senses, one alluding to the ascent of the fish 
in relationship to the time of year, the other to their ascent for breeding 
or the period of their spawning.
I propose offering a few remarks 
on this question, leaving the subject of ' migrations ' to a further 
communication.
Early rivers are those in which clean-run salmon, fit for the market, 
ascend during the first months of the year, as in February, or even 
in January; while these ascents are deferred much later in other, and 
occasionally even in contiguous, streams.
Thus, as observed by Russel, 
' there are great differences between rivers regarding the periods in 
late winter or early spring at which they contain clean fish in 
quantities sufficient to render fishing profitable, and have got rid in 
any considerable degree of the foul fish, spawned and unspawned.' 
He suggested terming the rivers 'short seasoned' and 'long seasoned,' 
as he was not of opinion that there is much difference between rivers 
at the end of the season — the season at which a greater or less propor- 
tion of the fish begin to get gravid and out of condition.
Likewise, 
it has been considered that breeding commences somewhat earlier, 
or that the fish complete their spawning operations in a shorter time 
in some rivers than in others; in either of which cases they would 
return earlier into condition than in localities where reproduction was 
deferreduntil late, or extended overalonger period.
The Commissioners 
appointed in 1861 to investigate the Salmon Fisheries of England 
and Wales came to the conclusion that 'the great breeding season in 
England and Wales of all fish of the salmon kind is in the months of 
November, December, and January .
. .
and believe it will not 
vary more than a fortnight in any river ...
in some seasons it 
may commence a little earlier, or be continued a little later, but the 
principal breeding operations are performed chiefly in the three 
months mentioned.' 
Professor Huxley suggests that ' we may call the interval between 
the ascent of the earliest and that of the latest fish in any given river 
Jan. 1886.
2 0 F.
DAY: EARLY AND LATE SALMON RIVERS.
the " anadromous period " of the river.' But however applicable such a 
designation might at first sight appear, very strong objections must occur 
to restricting such a term to migrations of anadromous Salmonidse.
For in some rivers they only ascend at the spawning time, while Char 
migrate at the same season for breeding purposes, from the depths 
of lakes or large pieces of water, to suitable streams and shallows, in 
order to deposit their ova and milt ; and this time with the char 
would be as completely their ' anadromous period ' as when similar 
conditions in the salmon caused similar movements ; but char are 
not anadromous forms : even carps in Asia similarly migrate at 
spawning time, as well as many other fish, and to term such migra- 
tions 'anadromous periods' in some fish and not in others would 
clearly be erroneous.
In the Report of the Salmon Commissioners for 1861 is a table 
showing, as far as could be ascertained, the periods at which the local 
Justices fixed the close time for rivers in their respective districts.
Thus, in the Trent and Somersetshire Avon it began on August 12 th, 
in the Ribble August 31st, in many rivers in September, some in 
October, others in November, a few in December, and in the Devon- 
shire Avon in the middle of January, ceasing on May 6th.
These 
varying periods would seem to show either that the salmon bred at 
different times in different rivers, or were variously in season at different 
places, or that the close time was not arranged solely in the interests 
of the spawning fish, the condition of the trout having possibly been 
taken into account.
Thus a very important consideration respecting the natural history 
of salmon rivers is why some should be ' early ' and others ' late,' or 
in other words, why some should contain fishes in a marketable 
condition prior to other streams, and those frequently being con- 
tiguous ones.
This is not a question simply regarding the period 
or season during which the salmon breeds, but at what time sufficient 
numbers of clean fish may be present in a river which might be 
reasonably captured for food without injuriously affecting future years' 
supply.
It is unnecessary to enter upon a detailed examination of how, up 
to 1858, three different close seasons were in force in Scotland, as for 
the Solway, the Tweed, and fisheries to the north of the latter river.
How in England and Wales, up to 1861, the close season commenced 
in various localities from August 12th to the middle of January.
How after 1861 this season was arbitrarily fixed between Sep- 
tember 1 st and February ist j and how in 1873 an Act was passed 
permitting the commencement of the close season to be varied 
between certain limits, provided it did not begin later than Novem- 
Naturalist, 
F. day: early and late salmon rivers.
21 
ber i st.
For treating all rivers in an identical manner, whether clean 
fish were present early or late in the season, and insisting upon fishing 
beginning or leaving off on a specified day in all, was, as illustrated 
by a Highland Laird, when before the Salmon Commission of 1825, 
about ' as sensible a plan as it would be to prohibit the farmers of 
England from cutting their crops till the harvests were ready in the 
Highlands.' 
G. Little, giving evidence before the Parliamentary Commission 
in 1824, observed 'that the Eden is earlier than the Esk or the 
Annan ; the fish enter it earlier than they do the others by nearly six 
weeks.
. .
. Fishing in the Solway, the Eden, and the Dee at 
Kirkcudbright, might commence on the 2nd of February; but in the 
Annan, the Esk, and the Nith, should not begin earlier than the 
middle of March.
. .
. The salmon that are caught in the Dee 
are quite out of season fully a month before they are in the Nith and 
the Annan • these are two very late rivers.' He likewise stated that 
in the Nith last season his tenant commenced on the nth March.
He was informed that he then killed upwards of 200 salmon, some of 
them positively not spawned.
James Gillies deposed (1824) respecting the Tay, where he had 
fished for twenty-six years, that ' when I went to Perth first, most of 
the river was over w r ith spawning at December, but you will now 
scarcely see one fish come there to the redd till about the end of 
November, and the throng time for spawning is generally in the 
months of December and January.' 
Yarrell considered .that 'rivers issuing from large lakes afford 
early salmon, the waters having been purified by deposition in the 
lakes • on the other hand, rivers swollen by melting snows in the 
spring months are later in their season of producing fish, and yield 
their supply when the lake rivers are beginning to fail.' The general 
impression seems to have been that the temperature of the river water 
exercised some influence in acting upon the time at which they w r ere 
ascended by salmon when desirous of entering for breeding purposes, 
they usually first selecting such as were the warmest.
Sir William Jardine observed that the causes influencing ascent 
are as yet undecided, and that where the time varies much in neigh- 
bouring rivers they are less easy of solution.
With but few exceptions 
the northern rivers are the earliest, and it has been suggested that this 
variation in the season may be dependent upon the temperature of 
the water, and that such Highland rivers as have their origin in large 
lochs are all early owing to the great mass and warmer temperature at 
their sources, and that the eggs in such localities are earlier hatched.
Thus th e Oykel, in Sutherlandshire, springs from a small Alpine lake, 
Jan. 1886.
( 
2 2 F.
day: early and late salmon rivers.
perhaps about half a mile in breadth; while the Shin, which is a tribu- 
tary of it, coalescing at about five miles from its mouth, takes its rise 
in Loch Shin, a large and deep extent of water, and connected to a 
chain of other lochs.
The river Shin, from its course between the 
loch and the tideway of the Kyle, has its temperature several degrees 
higher in winter than the waters of the rivers Oykel and Cassley, with 
which it mingles on entering the Kyle ; and the temperature is several 
degrees lower in summer than the waters of the long-run, hill-collected, 
and sun-heated rivers.
' To be sure respecting the temperature, a 
thermometer was regularly kept.
The salmon soon finds out the 
warmer side of the estuary, and the river from which that warm water 
flows.
It is well known that salmon during the winter and spring 
months, when the water of the warmest river is cold, always run on 
the sunny side of the estuary, that is, as much as possible on the 
north side, and there during that time the run of fish is to be found.
In the summer months, that is, after the ist of May, the fish run on 
the opposite side of the estuary.
The high temperature of the water 
at that time induces them to seek as much as possible to get under 
the cool sliade of the south banks, where there is the least influence 
of the sunbeams.' Of the many rivers going into the estuary, the 
only one which produces early fish is the warm Shin.
Dr. Heysham was of opinion that in Cumberland salmon at first 
spawn in the warmer streams, leaving the snow-fed ones until later on ; 
consequently, during the winter and spring, they prefer the Eden to 
the Esk, the Caldew, or the Peteril.
The two first rivers enter the same 
estuary, their mouths being merely separated by a sharp point of 
land, yet there is scarcely an instance of a new salmon ever entering 
the Esk until the middle of April or beginning of May. The 
fishermen assert that the Eden is considerably warmer than the Esk, 
the latter having a more stony bed, shallower stream, and broader 
expanse.
When snow-water comes down the Eden the fish will not 
ascend ; by the beginning of summer the temperature of the two 
rivers is about the same.
The Peteril joins the Eden a little above, 
and the Caldew at Carlisle ; yet up these rivers the salmon never run 
unless in the spawning season, and even then in no great numbers.
I will now give an instance of a river which was originally an early 
one, but was found to become a late one by the Earl of Home, who 
in 1837 observed 'that in the Tweed a very great change had taken 
place within these twenty or thirty years • a considerable portion of 
the breeding fish not arriving into breeding condition until long after 
the time they had formerly been in the habit of doing so.' The first 
inquiry here should be whether this had happened consequent upon 
any changes in the river, the placing of artificial obstructions in its 
Naturalist, 
F. day: early and late salmon rivers.
23 
course, or an alteration in the natural spawning time in the fish 
irrespective of the condition of the water.
The river itself, it was 
observed, had changed, due to the draining of the sheep farms on 
the hills, the effect produced being that a little summer flood which, 
previous to 1795 t0 °k a fortnight or three weeks to run off, now 
(in 1837) became completely run out in eight hours.
The bogs on 
the hill sides, which were the feeders to the river, have the water at 
once carried off by drains, causing sudden but short floods, which 
have all run off before the river has had time to clear itself.* 
Buckland considered that clean scaled, well-developed, fat fish 
run up some rivers during February and March, possibly earlier ; 
that these ascending fish must meet the descending kelts.
Or in 
short that there is a small spring migration ascending in contradis- 
tinction to the usual large autumnal migration for breeding purposes.
He found that the amount of fat upon the pyloric appendages of 
these spring fresh-run fish, less than what is seen in such as migrated 
later for breeding purposes.
Denying that they are barren, he 
considered that they would not breed the season they ascended the 
stream, or in fact that they were temporarily sterile.
He thought they 
had laid up sufficient fat in the sea or estuaries to take a run into 
freshwater, fancying they might be the early kelts of the previous 
year, which having reached the sea, say in January, re-appear as 
clean fish in thirteen months, or February the next year, or even 
very large fresh-run fish in twenty-five months, or February the 
succeeding year.
He likewise remarked that it is impossible to 
convert a ' late ' into an ' early ' river.
Professor Huxley in his Annual Report for 1884, entered upon 
his views regarding ' early ' and ' late ' rivers.
Having quoted Yarrell's 
observation, 1 that some rivers are much earlier than others, the fish 
in them coming into breeding condition and beginning to spawn at 
an earlier period,'t he continued : 'I am not aware of the grounds on 
* Buckland accounted for an alteration in the summer run of grilse from this 
cause, but up to the present time there have been too few and too superficial 
inquiries made to be able to decide either whether the period of migration has 
changed, or is changing, and secondly what influence the Land Drainage Act of 
1861, or rather its operation, has in reality effected.
f Yarrell's observations on this point, as remarked by himself, were based on 
those of Sir W.
Jardine, who had observed in the ' Edinburgh New Philosophical 
Journal' of 1835, from which Yarrell quoted, that 'it is a mistaken opinion to 
suppose that the spawning season is only between October and February.
In 
many rivers it would commence in the end of August, if the grounds and entrance to 
the rivers were left open and unmolested ; and in some of the Sutherland streams 
which have been left undisturbed for the last two years, the spawning season has 
been adva nced by a month or six weeks ' (pages 48, 49).
Jan. 1886.
24 
F. day: early and late salmon rivers.
which Mr. Yarrell made this statement, and I am unable to discover 
any satisfactory evidence that it is well grounded.
All the evidence 
to which I have access tends to show that, taking all the salmon rivers 
in England and Wales together, the spawning season covers more or 
less of November, the whole of December and January, and more or 
less of February.
It is rare for fish to spawn as late as March, and 
I know of no conclusive evidence that they spawn earlier than 
November' (page 28).
He concluded that the ' earliness ' or ' lateness ' 
of a river being affected by artificial conditions is devoid of foundation, 
while there is no evidence that any ' early ' river was formerly made 
' late ' by late fishing, or that any ' late ' river has since been made 
' early ' by early cessation of fishing.
He instanced the Cumberland 
Derwent, where the coops at Salmon Hall Weir used to be fished 
until October 10th, but from 1861 have been closed on September 1st 
annually ; but there is no evidence that the fish have become any 
earlier than they formerly were.
He considered the problem not so 
much why some rivers are late, as why so many are early, why fish 
should ascend months prior to any breeding necessity rendering such 
advisable.
The subject of annual or biennial breeding, amd whether 
these fish were temporarily sterile, does not appear to have claimed his 
attention.
In the same Report the Inspector observed ' in the Tamar, peal 
are said to be ready to spawn in August, and salmon in September.
In the Tavy the salmon are said to be ready to spawn in October, 
but the peal seldom spawn before November.
I very much doubt, 
however, whether anyone ever saw a salmon or a peal actually spawn- 
ing so early as August, September, or even October.
The opinion 
that they are ' ready to spawn ' is inconclusive.
Against this evidence 
may be cited the case of a neighbouring river, the Plym.
I am 
informed by Mr. Henry Clark, one of the conservators, that the 
fishermen fishing for herrings and coarse fish in the tidal waters of the 
Plym, in December last, caught at the same time spent peal just 
returned from spawning, and fresh-run salmon going up to spawn ; 
and that about the same time several salmon, weighing from 14 lbs.
to 24 lbs., killed by otters, were picked up below the weir at Cann 
Quarry, 'full of peas, nearly ripe'; while in March last year some 
fresh-run peal going up, and spent salmon coming back, were caught 
together between the weir at Cann Quarry and the tidal waters.' In 
these instances it is to be regretted that neither the Inspector of 
Fisheries or his assistant took any steps to personally ascertain the 
condition of the fish in these rivers at the period referred to, but 
accepted information received at second hand.
Naturalist, 
F. day: early and late salmon rivers.
25 
Mr. Willis-Bund, chairman of the Severn Fishery Board, in Salmon 
Problems, 1885, remarked : ' Mr. Huxley says there is no evidence that 
it (salmon which come into the river in January and February) will 
spawn before November.
The evidence of the Severn goes to prove 
it would spawn in October' (page 166).* ' I can only say I have in 
several years seen fish spawning in October, and the Severn Superin- 
tendent tells me he has constantly done so' (page 20).
'This year 
(1885) I have heard of fish spawning as late as the end of March; 
and one year I heard of fish, full of spawn, being caught in April.
On the Usk, on the 18th of May, 1861, a fish was taken full of 
spawn' (page 59).
Without further increasing the number of extracts from the writings 
of authorities on fisheries, or official statements that have been more 
or less accepted, I propose to briefly consider a few of the causes which 
have been ascribed, and some of which probably have an influence 
as to whether certain rivers are early or late.
The existence of lakes near the sources of rivers has been held to 
influence the earliness or lateness of its waters.
In England and 
Wales we find such conditions present in the Eden, 70 J miles long, 
with a catchment basin 916 square miles in extent • the Dee, 93 miles 
long, and with 850 square miles of catchment basin; the Derwent, 
35J- miles long, and 268 square miles of catchment basin ; the Ehen, 
14J miles long, with 59 square miles of catchment basin; the Irt, 
16J miles long, with 48 square miles of catchment basin; and the 
Le ven, 6 \ miles long, and with 123 square miles of catchment basin.
The 
two first, with the longest course, are early rivers ; but not so the 
remainder, which are rather late than otherwise.
Irrespective of 
which some of the earliest and some of the latest rivers are among 
such as have no lakes in their course, and are of very different lengths.
Buckland held that large estuaries at the entrance of salmon 
rivers must have the same influence as lakes near their sources, or in 
their course ; but detailed investigations hardly bear out this theory, 
while it has been remarked that in a single estuary, as of the Severn, 
three rivers with different degrees of earliness enter.
It has also been 
suggested that the conditions which occasion the early or late ascent 
of fish into freshwater may have some connection with the circum- 
stances of the marine life of the salmon, the food which it is able 
to obtain, or the enemies from which it has to escape.
What the temperature or other conditions of the water in the 
river, or the food that is present therein at various seasons of the 
year, has to do with the period at which salmon ascend into it from 
* This question will be discussed in a future paper.
Jan. 1886.
26 F.
DAY: EARLY AND LATE SALMON RIVERS.
the sea, are worthy of study.
Jardine, Yarrell, and others have 
remarked that the temperature of the river-water exercises some 
influence in the time of the ascent of these fish, they usually first 
selecting those that are warmest (of course in moderation), while in 
most streams the eggs would be more rapidly hatched ; thus, other 
things being equal, the young fish would be hatched earlier in the 
warmer than in the colder streams.
The Salmon Commissioners of 
the Tweed remarked in 1867 that it was stated by several witnesses that 
' salmon do not enter the river freely when full of ice or snow-water, 
while on the other hand, a high temperature of the river-water equally 
deters them from entering it.' Mr. A.
Young also remarked that as 
a general rule such Scottish rivers as fall into the German Ocean and 
Portland Firth are 1 early,' while those emptying themselves into the 
Atlantic are 'late.' And it is suggested that as the German Ocean 
is a cold sea, so the slight difference between the temperature of its 
waters and those of the rivers induces salmon to ascend early.
Whereas rivers on the west coast mostly descend from snow-fed 
sources, and are therefore cold, much colder than the Atlantic, 
consequently the salmon wait until the snow floods have ceased.
It 
is also evident that the same comprehensive rule extends to the 
English and Welsh rivers, and those on the east coast falling into the 
German Ocean are earlier than those on the west, or of the south 
coast of Devonshire and Cornwall, where the warmer Atlantic or 
the English Channel would have the same influence as pointed out 
by Mr. Young in Scotland.
But there are also differences in degrees in the temperature of 
the waters of rivers to be considered, and which may be influenced 
by the extent of their course, the nature of the country through 
which they pass, as well as the amount of rainfall.
Thus rivers 
which have their rise in mountains, and after a short and rapid course 
fall into the ocean, would be colder than such as are longer and 
more sluggish, and as Sir W.
Jardine's and others' observations 
pointed out, that in the cold months salmon naturally select the 
warmer streams as well as their most sunny sides.
Rainfall has been 
observed to afford an index to the temperature of rivers, for its 
distribution is dependent on the level of the land, the result being 
that such as pass through districts with the heaviest rainfall, would, 
as observed by Professor Huxley, be late rivers, while those 
traversing lowlands where the rainfall is less, would be early rivers.
According to this view the waters of the Severn should be warmer 
than those of the Wye, which latter should be of a higher temperature 
than those of the Usk, and the salmon would ascend these rivers in 
the foregoing order, which is the order in which they are tabulated 
Naturalist, 
F. DAY : EARLY AND LATE SALMON RIVERS.
2 7 
among early and late rivers.
But it must be observed that this 
theory respecting rainfall does not stand the test of examination 
throughout Scotland and Ireland.
Can any conditions of salmon ascending 'early' or 'late,' or 
breeding earlier or later, or completing their ova depositing within a 
shorter period of time, be attributed to constitutional peculiarities 
affecting the local race of fish?
Two main branches of inquiry would 
seem to be here indicated.
First, are all these early fish ascending in 
order to breed the same year?
Secondly, what are the constitutional 
peculiarities of early salmon ?
It would seem from the few investigations which have been made 
that it is by no means improbable that some of the early-ascending 
fish may be seasonally sterile, although it is generally held that in 
many ova and milt may be discovered on a microscopic investigation 
to be a very little developed, and although these last would probably 
be among such as push on to the upper waters, it seems still desirable 
of proof why it is that they should desire to remain so many months in 
the stream, away from the sea.
This gives rise to the very important 
question of how frequently do salmon breed ?
We may dismiss as un- 
tenable one consideration which has been advanced, that they may do 
so twice yearly ; still we possess the evidence of Mr Buist that he 
spawned a particular fish on two successive seasons, and of Mr. Brown, 
who treated another similarly on two alternate years, but where it was 
during the intermediate period of course it is impossible to say.
Lastly, we have Mr. Frank Buckland, who stated before a Parliamen- 
tary committee in 1877, that 'a salmon does not breed every year, 
but every three years,' and whose further remarks I have already 
quoted.
It is asserted in Nature, 1877, page 376, that a gentleman 
who at different times had marked hundreds of kelts during the 
months of February, March, and April, while they were descending 
to the sea, had never seen one returning to spawn in the river 
that autumn, but he had met with individuals he had marked 
coming back the next year.
He believed that ' they frequent the fresh 
waters from habit, although there is no sign of milt or roe,' and that 
these fish are biennial breeders.
On this point one looks in vain 
through the reports of our Inspectors of Salmon Fisheries for any 
facts, but in such there is absolutely nothing to the point except bare 
opinions, and those often crude.
In the United States Mr. Atkins 
has been able to prove from a series of experiments, extending over 
several years, that in the Penobscot the salmon, Salmo safar va.r., breeds 
every second year.
I am not going in this place to enter into the 
questions of breeding and fertility or sterility, as, prior to any reliable 
conclusion being formed, it seems desirable that those whose duty it 
Jan. 1886.
28 
F. DAY: EARLY AND LATE SALMON RIVERS.
is to investigate our salmon should ascertain whether they are annual 
or biennial breeders.
As to the constitutional peculiarities of an early or late race, 
although summarily dismissed by several authors, it does not appear 
improbable that such may exist.
Many excellent observers have 
held that the descendants of early-ascending fish would similarly 
give rise to a race having the same peculiarity.
And if this early 
habit is capable of transmission to offspring, it would be sound 
economy to stock a late river with an early breed, in order to try and 
convert it from a late into an early one.
At the same time attention 
must be drawn to the fact that it has not been proved that it is the 
early breeders that produce the early ascending fish,* and it has still 
to be shown whether the parents of these early forms do not deposit 
their milt and ova at the same time as salmon whose descendants 
have the late instincts ; while I have already drawn attention to the 
want of evidence respecting the condition of the early ascending fish 
as regards their fertility or sterility.
The Commissioners in 1861 
concluded that as to 'the alleged difference of season in certain 
rivers, we think that artificial causes have much more concern in 
producing such anomalies, than the laws of nature, ...
In 
order to enable the upper waters to be fully stocked, it is necessary to 
afford a free run to the early spawning fish, which are naturally 
impelled to seek the highest parts of the stream to breed in.
If, 
however, in consequence of an undue extension of the fishing season, 
these fish are cut off in their passage up, it follows that no stock will 
be left to replenish the river, except those later fish which 
make their ascent under the protection of the close time.
It is in 
this way that some rivers are artificially made later, and the fact 
accounted for 5 (page xxviii).
Professor Huxley seems to consider 
that, just as the capture of the early fish in early rivers has not tended 
in the least degree to make them late, so the preservation of the late fish 
in the very late rivers has not tended to make them later than they 
were.' ' I cannot say,' he continues, ' that I can discover any good 
ground for the belief that any kind of human interference is competent 
to affect the earliness or lateness of a river.
Differences in the habits 
of fish in the same river have been and are still observed where the 
artificial conditions are constant'; and he instances weirs, but denies 
that their presence has altered the inherited instincts of these fish as 
to their times of ascent.
Mr. Pike, secretary to the Dart Fishery Board, remarked in 
Land and Water, March 28th, 1885, that the Totnes Weir 
* The Commissioners for 1861 observe : ' Experience has fully proved the fact 
in Ireland, where the enforcement of an earlier closing season has produced within 
a few years a corresponding early supply in certain rivers ' (page xxviii).
_____ 
Naturalist, 
F. day: early and late salmon rivers.
29 
entirely prevents salmon ascending the river.
' For a great 
many years the river had been netted in close time to pass 
salmon over, but it is only four seasons ago that this netting was 
permitted before the rod fishing ended on October 31st.
Ever since 
the salmon were passed up early in September they have been seen 
spawning high up on Dartmoor as early as the first week in October, 
and young salmon have been hatched out the first week in January.
The result is that early spawned fish have returned again to the 
sea before Christmas, and a goodly number of large fish from 12 lbs.
to 20 lbs.
have been taken in the nets throughout the month of 
March.
This instance, the correctness of which I assume, is one 
showing that the lateness in spawning in a certain river may be 
consequent upon the presence of an artificial obstruction to ascent ; 
remove that obstruction, or pass the breeding fish over it early in the 
breeding season, the young are earlier reared, and the breeders 
return sooner into condition than had they been left to wait to a later 
period before spawning.
This and other examples which I have 
adduced, go to prove that artificial causes may convert an early breed- 
ing into a late breeding river ; that alter the conditions, and the fish 
may again breed in the earlier months, but more evidence is requisite 
to show the result of this on the early ascending fish.
Mr. Francis remarked \ 'The Erne and the Bundrowse are only a few 
miles apart ; their capabilities are very similar, both have large lakes for 
shelter, yet one gives fish in February and the other not till May.
The Editor of the Field observed, ' Where there are heavy spring 
runs which are left solely to the rod and never netted, those runs 
keep up in.
almost undiminished numbers, but as soon as the nets are 
brought to bear, they sooner or later die out altogether.' 
I would finally observe that it is clear some rivers have early 
ascending fish, while in others they may be late, and all the 
intermediate grades are seen as well as several ascents in one stream 
during the year.
I would suggest whether fishermen and the fish- 
consuming public have not a good reason to require our salmon 
fishery inspectors to afford some explanation of this phenomenon.
One wishes to be informed whether all these early fish will or will not 
breed the year they ascend, and likewise if the salmon in our rivers 
are annual or biennial spawners.
Assertions or surmises on these 
points are unavailing for proof, and as this question is one on the 
solution of which a great amount of our salmon legislation would 
have to be based, it is surely not asking too much that a definite 
number of fish should be annually marked; that this should be 
carried on for several successive years, and the results duly recorded.
Every fact ought to be given the fullest publicity, from which 
everyone would be able to draw their own conclusions.
Jan. 1886.
3° 
BOOK NOTICES.
Coloured Figures of the Birds of the British Islands.
—Issued by 
Lord Lilford, F.Z.S., &c, President of the British Ornithologists' Union.
London: R.
H. Porter, 6, Tenterden Street, W.
Part I, October 1885.
The year 1885 has been decidedly an important one for British ornithology, for 
it has witnessed the completion of the fourth edition of Yarrell's standard book on 
British Birds, also of Mr. Seebohm's most useful book on their Eggs ; and the 
commencement of the highly important work now under consideration.
So far as 
the letter-press of Yarrell is concerned, little is left to be desired, and for the next 
quarter of a century it will remain the book on the subject, but its illustrations are 
utterly inadequate to the requirements of a modern scientific production.
That a 
book containing really good coloured figures of our birds was wanted, we venture 
to say no one acquainted with the subject will venture to deny.
True it is that 
Gould's plates are difficult to surpass, but then it is a work within the reach only 
of ornithological nabobs, while Lord Lilford's, which we consider at the very least 
their equals, are issued at a price within the reach of almost all.
These chromo- 
lithographed plates are the production of Mr. Keulemans, the best of modern bird 
painters, and we consider them the most satisfactory figures of British birds extant, 
and it is with extreme pleasure that we recommend them to all our readers who are 
ornithologically inclined.
We should remark that the work, as its title implies, 
consists of plates only, but a sheet to each picture — giving references to descriptions, 
&c, of the species by leading naturalists (chiefly British), the faunal position in 
Britain, and the French, German, and Spanish names — is given.
Natural History of British Zoophytes, including the Hydroida, 
Actinozoa, and Polyzoa, found in Great Britain, Ireland, and the Channel 
Islands.
— By Arthur S.
Pennington, F.L.S. Crown 8vo, 363 pages and 
twenty-four plates (Lovell Reeve and Co.) 10s.
6d.
The publishers are to be congratulated on the appearance of a new volume of 
their well-known and much appreciated Crown Series of works on British Natural 
History, and the one now before us is a welcome successor to such useful books as 
Rye's British Beetles and Staveley's British Spiders have already proved themselves 
to be.
The author, on his part, shows an extensive acquaintance with the literature 
of his subject, and his book is calculated to prove a useful introduction to the sub- 
ject in general, and to the more advanced, more bulky, and more technical works 
of Hincks and Allman.
The term Zoophytes not now possessing any rigid 
scientific application, is a convenient popular term, and as such Mr. Pennington 
makes use of it to include the Hydroida, Actinozoa, and Polyzoa.
After a brief 
history of zoophytology and a chapter upon classification and distribution, he gives 
an account of the various families, genera, and species which are to be met with in 
the British seas, making copious mention of localities (including a great many 
North of England ones) for the less well-known forms, and giving numerous 
extracts from the writings of his predecessors in the study.
The families and 
genera are characterized, and brief diagnoses are given for many of the species, a 
few of which are described as new.
It would, however, have been an advantage, 
and one much appreciated by beginners, if the author could have seen his way to 
giving either analytical tables, or a brief and terse diagnosis (for space will not 
permit of elaborate descriptions) for every species.
At the end of the book are 
some useful directions for collecting and preserving these forms of life, a biblio- 
graphy (which is, however, wanting in precision and detail), a glossary of terms, an 
index of popular names, and a most valuable index of scientific names and syno- 
nyms, the latter being distinguished by italic type.
Typographically the book is 
not quite all that could be desired, for although it is well and handsomely printed, 
the use of one size of type for the body of the work leads to a sense of confusion on 
the part of the reader, and a want of the clearness that would have been attained 
by the judicious employment of a bolder type for -the specific names and of a 
smaller one for the synonyms.
The book is a decided acquisition to a natural 
history library, and the author (who, by the way, is a Lancashire man) is entitled 
to our thanks, while to his wife we owe the numerous plates which add much to 
the usefulness of the work.
Naturalist, 
3i 
NOTES AND NEWS.
The Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society continues to hold its 
meetings in different towns of the island.
At a recent one papers ' On the Mammals 
of the Isle of Man,' and on its butterflies (the latter including 23 names) were read.
>oo< 
We are pleased to hear of the establishment of the Kendal Natural History 
Society, which has been formed in connection with the Kendal Literary and 
Scientific Institution.
The Rev. George Crewdson is chairman, and Mr. Joseph 
Severs secretary.
We note that the society includes several members well known 
for their scientific work, and we wish them and the society all prosperity.
>co<   
The Manchester Geological Society held its annual meeting on the 6th of 
October, when a report of a favourable character was presented.
The number of 
members now stands at 218, and the financial balance at £\od.
Mr. H.
M. 
Ormerod, F.G.S., who was stated to be the oldest member of the society, was 
elected president, and Messrs.
George Wild, R.
T. Burnett, F.G.S., W.
S. Barrett, 
and H.
A. Woodward, vice-presidents.
Mr. H.
S. Ormerod was chosen treasurer, 
and Messrs.
J. S.
Martin and Mark Stirrup re-elected secretaries.
>co< : — 
The Manchester Microscopical Society having lost a valuable officer in the 
person of their late Secretary, Mr. Charles L.
Cook, who is leaving Manchester, 
advantage was taken of the opening of the winter session to present him with an 
illuminated address and a purse containing ^23.
At the same meeting — held on 
the 1st of October — the president, Dr. John Tatham, delivered an address, and the 
veteran Mr. Leo H.
Grindon spoke of the beginnings of microscopic study in Man- 
chester more than forty years ago.
>co< 
It appears that it was in 1842 that microscopy might be said to have begun in 
Manchester.
Several young men, including Prof.
W. C.
Williamson, then 
practising as a surgeon, the late Mr. Joseph Sidebotham, Mr. John Ashworth, long 
since dead, Mr. Thomas Gray, and Mr. Leo H.
Grindon, were induced to com- 
mence work with the instrument.
They gave their attention very particularly to 
aquatic vegetation and the then famous fossil infusoria from Barbadoes.
After the 
lapse of fifteen years more the little band of students was reinforced by the late 
Mr. Thomas Brittain, and a little later still by Mr. W.
H. Hayes, and little by 
little since then the study grew in their hands.
x>x 
The annual meeting of the Wakefield Naturalists' and Philosophical Society 
was held on the 23rd of September.
The report spoke of the society's position 
having become much firmer, and gave particulars of the year's proceedings.
Mr. E.
B. Wrigglesworth, to whom the society is much indebted for his five years' 
tenure of the secretaryship, retired from that office, and Mr. W.
Rushforth was 
chosen as his successor, Mr. G.
Ianson as president, Messrs.
G. Parkin and E.
B. 
Wrigglesworth vice-presidents, Mr. Councillor A.
Lupton treasurer, Mr. G.
C. 
Ramsden financial secretary, and Mr. H.
Emmett librarian.
>co< 
The ' Elizabeth Thompson Science Fund,' established ' for the advancement 
and prosecution of scientific research in its broadest sense,' now amounts to $25,000.
As the income is already available, the trustees desire to receive applications, 
addressed Dr. C.
S. Minot, 25, Mt. Vernon Street, Boston, Mass., U.S.A., Secre- 
tary of the Board of Trustees, for appropriations in aid of scientific work.
This 
endowment is not for the benefit of any one department of science, but it is the 
intention of the trustees to give the preference to those investigations, not already 
otherwise provided for, which have for their object the advancement of human 
knowledge, or the benefit of mankind in general, rather than to researches directed 
to the solution of questions of merely local importance.
Applications for assistance 
from this fund should be accompanied by a full statement of the nature of the in- 
vestigation, of the conditions under which it is to be prosecuted, and of the manner 
in which the appropriation asked for is to be expended.
Jan. 1886.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR OCTOBER 1885.
Edited by GEORGE PAUL, F.G.S., F.R.Met.S., Moortown, Leeds.
Aurios 
pheric 
pres- 
sure.
TEMPERATURE (IN SHADE).
RAINFALL.
a > 
.£* 
a 
Extremes.
Name of Station ; 
0 
ID 
li 
Greatest Fa 
ITS HEIGHT ABOVE SEA-LEVEL ; 
f Bare 
id to s< 
<3 
Highest 
Lowest 
jd 
!* 
n a 
•> AND 
<u 
3 
Maximum 
Mi 
nimum 
"3 
O 
Single Day 
Name of Observer.
0 3 
rez 
istered.
registered.
iight 
zero 
Rain 
a's 
a, 
0 0 
! Mean H< 
(reduced to 
Mean Ten 
Amount.
Date.
Amount.
Date.
Total 
Number 
there fell 
Amount.
Date.
ISLE OF MAN: 
Cronkboukne (140ft.)..
.. ) 
A. W.
Moore, F.M.S )" 
inch 
29-711 
deg.
46-07 
deg.
55-6 
TSt 
deg.
28*3 
25th 
inch 
4*879 
18 
inch 
i* 161 
30th 
(AST : 
Barrow-in-Furness ( — )..
) 
W. S.
Whitworth j 
29*676 
46*00 
56*0 
2nd 
34'o 
12th 
4*13° 
20 
0-740 
30th 
Liverpool (Bidston) ( — ) ( 
29-692 
45'7° 
58*0 
2nd 
35'o 
1 2th 
6*230 
; 
24 
0*720 
6th 
6 
w 
tA 
Hi 
Newton-Reigny (Penrith) ) 
(5 77 ft.)T.G.Benn, F.M.S. f 
29-701 
42*30 
55 '4 
2nd 
26*0 
12th 
4*no 
24 
o*55o 
30th 
w 
Hawes Junction (1,135ft.) \ 
28-437 
40*00 
52 0 
2nd 
28-0 
30th 
6*740 
27 
0*780 
2nd 
I CENTRAL 
Rev. S.
J. Perry, F.R.S. j" 
29-718 
50*20 
56*8 
I7 th 
26*9 
29th 
5 - 723 
22 
o*735 
voth 
S3 
North Shields ( — ) ..
. .
) 
J. W.
Irvine f 
29*654 
45 '30 
57 '0 
2nd 
35 '0 
25th 
3*850 
21 
0*510 
10th 
) REGIO 
Scarborough (120 ft.) 
Allan Rowntree, F.M.S. j 
29-661 
45 "92 
56-2 
f 3rd l 
1 7th j 
38-i 
28th 
4*860 
24 
0*960 
23rd 
29-675 
45*30 
58*0 
( 2nd ) 
\ 3rd f 
31 '0 
j 1 2th 
I 30th j 
4*020 
22 
o' 650 
23rd 
H 
% 
Moortown, Leeds (500 ft.)) 
G. Paul, F.G.S., F.M.S. j 
29-679 
43 '61 
56*2 
1st 
32 "5 
30th 
5*335 
24 
0*950 
23rd 
Hi 
O 
Hull, Derringham (10ft.) V 
* 
29-790 
45 "io.
58-4 
4th 
31 -o 
1 2 th 
4*880 
25 
1*440 
23rd 
Hi 
J. B.
Smith | 
29*632 
46*4 
6r'o 
2nd 
38-0 
14th 
4'57o 
28 
0*970 
23rd 
ISTERN 
Louth, Lincs.
(111 ft.) j 
T. W.
Wallis J 
29 -.660 
44*16 
56'o 
2nd 
32*0 
30th 
5*45o 
25 
1-510 
23rd 
Boston, Lincs.
(24 ft.) ....
> 
VV.H.Wheeler,M.In.C.E. j 
W. Berridge, F.M.S j 
29*670 
44'77 
57 "o 
1 6th 
33 '0 
12th 
4*890 
23 
i'540 
23rd 
W 
29*696 
45 '4 
62*0 
1 6th 
29*0 
30th 
5*620 
23 
1*240 
23rd 
29-709 
46*9 
60 *o 
1 4th ) 
( 16th j 
30 '0 
1 2 th 
3*32o 
19 
0*830 
23rd 
* Not reduced to sea-level.
Wind— T.st Division (Isle of Man) N.
13, N.E. 10, E.
4, S.E. 1, S.
1, S.W. 6, W.
16, N.W. 7, calm 4 days.
2nd Division : N.
4%, N.E. 5, E.
2, S.E. 2%, S.
1%, S.W. 5, W.
5, N.W. 5, calm day.
3rd Division : N.
5%, N.E. 4%, E.
3, S.E. 1, S.
o, S.W. 3, W.
9, N.W. 3, calm 2% days.
4 th Division: N.
4 K, N.E. 4%, E.
2^, S.E. 1%, S.
iY z , S.W. 6%, W.
4%, N.W. 5%, calm o day.
London : N.
3, N.E. 2, E.
2. S.E. 2, S.
2, S.W. 6, W.
7, N.W. 5, calm 2 days.
Gales.
— Isle of Man 7 days ; 3rd Division, 5 days; 4th Division, 7 days ; and London 5 days.
Sfioiu.
— An almost total absence of snow.
Bright- Sunshine.
— Isle of Man, 117 hours; Newton-Reigny, 6i*o hours; Stonyhurst, 68*8 hours; and 
Hull, 69*2 hours.
Highest Temperature in Sun — Isle of Man, in'9° on 1st ; Newton-Reigny, 104*9° on 3 r d ; 
Stonyhurst, 114-0° ; Hull, 82*0° on 15th ; and Leeds (Moortown) 104-8° on nth.
TTrn><^ Naturalist, 
MM 1886 
Now ready, 8vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
The list contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1.340 species of 
macro- and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local 
variation in species ; with all other necessary information connected with the 
subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, 
Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 
18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London: D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I., It, & III.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
. All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, "Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S.
, 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have givei a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Auu. 6r> Mag. Nat.
Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athenceum.
In Preparation.
A Monograph of the Land and Fresh -Water Mollusca 
of the British Fauna.
The work is intended to be full, detailed, and exhaustive, and adequately 
illustrative of Variation, Development, and Geographical Distribution.
Co-operation is invited from all interested, and any information or specimens 
(the common species of every district are particularly desired) will be welcomed 
and carefully acknowledged.
The Authors may be addressed — c/o Mr. John W.
Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Hunslet New Road, Leeds.
Information is at present specially required on the Slugs ( Testacella, Limax, and 
Arion), of which living specimens from every district are desired.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains standard Articles and Notes on 
all subjects connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the 
British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address 
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY ADD NATURAL SCIENCE.
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
This well-known Journal, the recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL 
SOCIETY, contains a number of valuable and interesting articles relating to every department 
of Microscopy and the allied Sciences.
These are all written by experienced Microscopists and Specialists in their various departments 
of Science, and are illustrated by a number of Lithographic Plates — making it not only one of the 
largest and cheapest, but also one of the most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Other special features of the Journal are "Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen 
West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., etc.;" " Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." New books 
relating to Microscopy, or to any branch of Natural Science, are carefully reviewed.
Correspon- 
dence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific interest is inserted.
There is also a section devoted 
to "Current Notes and Memoranda," "Exchanges," &c.
The Journal of Microscopy^ and Natural Science is edited by Mr. Alfred Allen, 
Hon. Sec.
of the Postal Microscopical Society, under the direction and with the assistance of the 
Committee ; and may be had of all Booksellers.
London : BAILLIEEE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
FIVE GUINEAS IN PRIZES.
2d.] THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
[2d.
A Monthly Illustrated Magazine of Natural History.
£1 Is. for best Essay on life of ROBERT DICK.
£1 Is. for best collection of 100 SHORT SAYINGS from 
well-known Natural History Writers.
£1 Is. for best account of a NATURAL HISTORY RAMBLE.
£1 Is. for best photograph of BRITISH SCENERY.
£1 Is. for best collection of 12 SPRING FLOWERS.
Specimen copy of The Naturalist's World, with full particulars of competitions, 
post-free 2 i/ 2 d.
from PERCY LUND & CO., ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all Booksellers.
No. 127.
FEBRUARY, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
" _ AND ' '' J - ( , '/ 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH OK N ITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
(Eonfents : 
Notes on Freshwater Algee, with descriptions of New Species— 
W. Harwell Turner, F.
C.S..
F. R .
M. S.,( with Pla te) 
Ornithological Notes from the Northumberland Coast — A.
C. Chapman 
Notes on the Two Spotted Eagles inhabiting the European Continent-- 
J. H Gnrney, F.Z S., M.B O.U 
Additions to the Lichen Flora of Westmoreland — Joseph A.
Martindale 
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire (Part ii, Sphinges)— 
John IV.
Ellis, L.R.C.F., L.R.C.S.E., &c 
A September Walk through Lancashire, Cheshire, and Staffordshire — 
T. D.
A. Cockerell, M.C.S ^ 
Notes — Mammalia: 
Albino Moles in Coverdale and Nidderdale — Wvi. Storey : Red Deer in Nidderdale — 
Id.
; Records of Captures of Badgers in Yorkshire — Geo. Roberts ; Former occurrence 
of Badgers in North Lancashire — Robert Standen.
Notes— Ornithology : ...
Nidification of Ring Ouzel and Missel Thrush — H .
G. 'Fomliusou ; Young; Skylarks 
fed by an older nestling — H.
G. Pearson ; Late Brood of Swallows — T.
W. Brewis ; 
Lesser Spotted Woodpecker and Grasshopper Warbler nesting in Nidderdale — 
Wm. Storey, Light-coloured Grouse in Nidderdale — Id.; Quail in North Lanca- 
shire — H.
G. Pearson; Stone Curlews on the Yorkshire Wolds — R.
Mortimer.
Note— Mollusca : .
.. ..
.. ..
Achatina acicula (the Needle Agate Shell)— C.
T. Musson, F.L.S.
Notes— Lepidoptera : ..
Heliothis peltigera in Cheshire — John W.
Ellis, L.R.C P.; Acherontia atropos and 
Sphinx ligustri near Barnsley — IV.
E. Brady.
Notes- -Botany : ...
-,«....
.AdM.I1 f 4.
Araucaria producing Seed in East Yorkshire — E.
IV.
Wade ; Trientalis europea in 
Nidderdale— J.
E. Clark, B.A., B.Sc., F.G.S.; Manchester Cryptogamic Society; 
Bradford Naturalists' Society— A Year's Botanical Work—//.
T. Soppitt and 
W. West.
* 1 8 V 
Book Notices: — ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. 
(Proceedings of the Chester Society of Natural Science, No. 3 ; Buckle}' and Harvie 
Brown's Vertebrate Fauna of Sutherlandshire : Transactions of the Leeds Geological 
Association, Part I.) 
Notes and News: — 
Meteorological Returns for November 1885 — (Edited by Geo. Paul, F.G.S., F.R.Met.
33 to 35 
37 
45—47 
49 
55" -59 
36 
58 
49 & 54 
59, 60 
61, 62 
62, 63 
S.) 64 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
McCorquodale & Co. Limited, Cardington Street^Euston : 
AND 
Leeds: Basingh.
Street.
May also be had of G.
E. East, jun.
t 241, Evering Road, Upper 
n, E.
All Communications should be Addressed:— 
The Editors of 'The Natural ist.X^/.
Park Row, Leeasv 
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
>co< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra!
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free.
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Chester Society of Nat. Science.- — Proceedings, No. 3, 1885.
' [The Society.
Leeds Geological Association.
— Transactions, part I, 1883-4-5.
[The Association.
Berwickshire Nat. Club.— Proceedings, vol.
10, No. 3, 1884-5.
[The Club.
Revue Bryologique, 1885, No. 6, and 1886, No. 1.
' [T.
Husnot, Editor.
Grevillea, a quarterly record of Crypt.
Bot., No. 70, Dec. 1885.
[Dr. Cooke, Ed.
New British Micro-Fungi, by G.
Massee, F.R.M.S.
[The Author.
British Snakes, by Linnaeus Greening, 1885.
[The Author.
British Lizards, by Linnaeus Greening, 1 885.
[The Author.
List of British Marine Shells, by A.
Somerville, B.Sc, F.L.S.
[The Author.
Royal Dublin Society.
— Scient.
Trans., vol.
i (19 parts), 1877-82.
[Society.
Royal Dublin Society.
— Scient.
Proc, vol.
i (3 parts), 1-877-8, ii (7 parts), 1878-80, 
and iii (parts I to 5), I5SI-2.
Journ.
of Micros, and Nat. Science for Jan. 1886, vol 5, No. 17.
Manchester Lit. and Phil.
Society.
— Memoirs, Third Series, vol.
8 
ings, vol.
23, 1883-4, and 24, 1884-5.
Midland Naturalist for January 1886.
The Young Naturalist for January 1886 
The Naturalist's World for January I 
Illustrated Science Monthly for January 
Science Gossip for January 1886.
[Societv.
[A.
Allen, Ed.
1884 ; Proceed- 
[The Society.
[The Editors.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
[Bogue, Publisher.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
EXCHANGES.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Fossils.— Wanted fossils from Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene, and Flint 
Implements in exchange for Woodward's 'Geology of England and Wales,' and 
his ' Manual of Mollusca'; also fossils from Chalk, Lias, Carboniferous Limestone, 
Greensand, London Clay, &c.
— Geo. E.
East, junr., to, Basinghall Street, 
London, E.C.
IMPORTANT NOTICE.— On the 19th September the Editors received 
a communication post-marked ' York,' and directed in a lady's hand, enclosing 
2s.
6d.
postal order, but with no clue as to the sender.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
? ) 
• v.7 
Nat, Feb, 1886.
Plate,/.
DESMIDS & DIATOMS.
33 
NOTES ON FRESHWATER ALGJE: 
WITH DESCRIPTIONS OP NEW SPECIES, 
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.R.Micr.S., F.C.S.
Ex-Preside7it of the Leeds Nafreratists' Club.
&>c.
References to Plate.
Fig. i.- — Mesotcenium De Greyii, five forms X 500.
Fig. 2.
— Docidium verticillatum X 255.
Fig. 3.
— Penium ( Cylindrocystis) curtum X 500.
Fig. 4.
— Staurastrum quadri-spinatum X 500.
Fig. 5.
— Micrasterias platyptera X 255.
Fig. 6.
— Euastrum or Cosinarium ?
a very puzzling form extending in its 
varieties from the rounded form of Eu. binale (Turp.) almost 
to the figure of Cosm.
crennlatum (Ehr.) Nag. Very common 
in varietal forms at Strensall x 500.
Fig. 7.
— Odontidiiim hyemale X 450.
Fig. S.—Odont.
mesodon X 450.
Fig. 9.
— Himantidium gracile, attenuate form (side view) x 500.
Fig. 10.
— Cosmarium Regnesi X 500.
The dry summers of 1884 and 1885 will long be remembered by 
both naturalists and fishermen, for their poor yield of sport for micro- 
scope and rod !
Those microscopists who sought more especially 
the peaty pools of our moorlands had a thoroughly ' bad time ' of it, 
many of the promising ponds and beds of Sphagnum and Utricularia 
being completely dried up.
It was therefore hardly to be expected 
that the journey of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union to Blubberhouses 
(on 26th September, 1885) would yield any great results from such 
habitats; and expectation being wanting, disappointment at the 
paucity of the ' catch ' could not exist.
Our courteous host kindly suggested my examination of two little 
rock pools (situated on the summits of the highest masses of rock, 
which form so striking an addition to the scenery of Blubberhouses 
Moor) which are never dry.
In these I regret to say that I found 
only Microspora vulgaris Rabh., with what appeared to be Conferva 
tenerrima Kiitz., mingled with atoms of sheep's wool, feathers, and 
plumules of lepidoptera !
My list of algae is as follows : — 
Microspora vulgaris Rabh.
Lyngbya rupesti-is Agh.
Conferva (tenerrima ?
Kiitz.
) Zygogonium ericetorum De Bary, 
C. fontinalis Berkeley.
terrestrial and aquatic forms.
Microthamnioti vexator (Turner) Cooke.
Staurospermum gracillimtim Hass.
Leptothrix ochracea Kiitz.
DIATOMACE^.
Himantidium undulatum W.
Sm. Navicula rhomboides Ehr., extending 
* H.
gracile Ehr., attenuate form.
to 3,000 ft.
altitude.
*Surirella biseriata Breb.
Synedra N.
cuspidata Kiitz.
ulna Ehr.
, very large, long.
202 p> = Diatoma elongatnm Agh. var.
y 
•008 in.
W. Sm.
Feb. 1886.
34 
W. B.
TURNER : NOTES ON FRESHWATER ALGiE.
* Odontidium hyemale Kiitz.
Tabellaria jiocculosa Kiitz.
* O.
meiodon Kiitz., extending to 6,000 ft.
T. fenestrata Kiitz.
alt.
Referred by me in 1879 to * Pinnularia lata W.
Sm., a sub-alpine 
0. turgidtduni Kiitz., a doubtful species.
species.
DE SMIDIEJE .
Penium Brebissonii Mengh.
Cosmariiun ornatum Rfs.
*P.
curium, Breb.
C. Meneghinii Breb.
* Cylindrocystis crassa De By. Eitastrum binale (Turp.) Rfs.
C. diplospora Lund.
Staurastrwn alternans Breb.
Tetmemoms Brebissonii (Men.) Rfs. S.
paradoxum Meyen.
* T.
lavis Kiitz.
* Mesotcenium De Greyii nov.
sp.
Some of the above are from the valley, but on the moor, as its 
altitude is 1000 feet, it is not surprising to meet with sub-alpine speci- 
mens.
A few of those noted are new county records, and are marked 
with an asterisk (*); the last-named I believe to be entirely new, and 
it affords me much pleasure to associate the name of Lord Walsingham 
therewith, as our good ex-president not only put the Frankland motto 
into practice on the occasion of our visit, but exceeded it by adding 
a ' libera mensa ' thereto.
The new species will stand thus : — 
Mesotaenium De Greyii nov.
sp.
Frond cylindrical, smooth, 
elongate ; no apparent constriction ; not tapering at all towards the 
ends, which are more or less broadly rounded.
The largest species 
in the genus.
Long.
76 - 104 {x = -00299 - '004 m.; Lat. 20— 23 /x = -00078 — 9 in.
Frond straight, rarely curved.
The endochrome in the specimens 
did not exhibit any well-defined chlorophyll-plate, as a transition state 
was evident, the interior mass being granular, and mixed with large 
oil-globules.
Nearest in all probability to M.
Endlicherianwn of 
Nageli.
It may perhaps be deemed a Penium, but, after some con- 
sideration, I have referred it rather to Mesotcenium.
I have to report several things from Strensall Common, the most 
important being a new species, 
Onychonema Nordstedtiana nobis, figured in the December 
number of the Trans.
Roy. Mic.
Soc; and 
Cosmarium Regnesi Reinsch., very local indeed ; though my 
friend, Mr. J.
Roy, informs me that it is common enough on 
Deeside, N.B.
NOTES OK" NEW SPECIES, &c 
The following may be of interest: — 
Micrasterias platyptera nov.
sp.
A large species ; segments 
five-lobed ; side lobes rather unsymmetrically divided into lobules, 
which bear slightly recurved spines (like M.
brachyptera Lund.) ; 
Naturalist, 
W. B.
TURNER : NOTES ON FRESHWATER ALG^E.
35 
sinus linear; end lobes truncate, with a stout spine or rostrum at 
outer angle — these lobes are slightly exserted ; frond punctate.
Long.
272 /x=-oio7 in.; Lat. max.
224 /z= '00882 in.; Lat. lob.
pol.
apic.
(s.
sp.) H2 fx - '0044 in.; Lat. isthmi 37 [x= -00146 in.
Name from irkarvs broad, irrepov wing.
Near to M.
triangularis Wolle 
and M.
depauperata Nordst.
(Note the latter species is described in 
the Desmids of the U.S. America by Mr. Wolle as M.
Kitchelii.) 
Habitat, U.
S. A.
Staurastrum quadri-spinatum nov.
sp.
Of medium size, much 
longer than broad ; frond smooth, or lightly punctate ; each angle of 
the segments bearing four stout divergent spines ; ends of segments 
slightly concave ; sinus wide, expanding rapidly.
Long.
(s.
sp.) 34 /x= '00134 in.; Lat.
(s.
sp.) 26 p= '00102 in.; 
Lat. isthmi 8 [x = -0003 in.
; Long.
spin.
10 [* = '0004 in.
Hab., Trelleck 
Common, Monmouth ; also United States.
I have been tempted to add a figure of Docidium (Triploceras) 
verticillatum Bailey, for the reason that from its publication 
(Smithsonian Trans.
1850) till now I have never seen a valid icon of 
this species.
Hab., U.
S. A.
Long, (semi-cell) 340 ^ = '0134 in.
; Lat. max.
46 [l = *ooi8 in.
; 
Lat. apic.
(s.
sp.) 76 /* = '00299 in.
Finally, I would remark, with respect to the Desmids, that our 
knowledge of them is but slight; not a single 'life-history' is perfectly 
known of a tribe numbering about 900 species, or with varieties 1,200.
The altitude as affecting their presence has very rarely been noted, 
though we are aware that Didymoprium (Bambusind), Desmidium, 
Docidium, and Closterium prefer the low-lands.
My own notion is 
that, while certain species are found everywhere, at moderately low 
levels, from the Pole to the Equator, being thoroughly cosmopolitan, 
geological influences have a ' decided something ' to do with certain 
local species ; and I have long held the opinion (as yet unshaken) 
(1) that most Desmids prefer the Igneous geological districts to others; 
(2) that some are but rarely found in districts newer than the Old Red 
Sandstone, e.g., Staurastrum ophiura, S.
cerastes, S.
Brasilietise (?), 
S.arctiscon, Micrasterias brachyptera, &c; (3) that few are found in 
chalk districts, or on the greensand; and (4) that they are most abundant 
{at least the commoner species) when the water wherein they live 
contains a small quantity of dissolved iron, though they will not 
endure so much of this metal as will the Diatoms (with their yellow 
or brownish endochrome), the colour of which a somewhat large 
percentage of iron seems to enhance, while an excess kills them !
Feb. 1886.
36 
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Albino Moles in Coverdale and Nidderdale.— There is now a 
case containing three White Moles .{Talpa europcea) — stuffed specimens, at 
Gowthwaite Hall, Pateley Bridge, which were obtained by Mr. C.
Dixon at 
Cover Head in Coverdale ; they were obtained five and eight years ago 
respectively.
Mr. Dixon has also caught White Moles at Angram in Nidderdale.
— Wm. Storey, Pateley Bridge, December 31st, 1885.
Red Deer in Nidderdale.
—There were in June 1885, in Hare well 
Woods (a patch of the old forest of Nidderdale), a pair of Red Deer ( Ceruus 
elaphus).
Red Deer have now been observed in these woods for the past seven 
years, and have probably escaped from Studley Park, having been repeatedly seen 
in Sawley Woods, which adjoin Studley.
In the years 1880, 1881, 1882, and 1884 
kids were noticed, but I very much regret some ill-disposed persons shot a kid in 
the last-named year.
I have spoken to several landowners in this neighbourhood, 
who have promised every attention to their preservation.
They usually arrive early 
in the spring, and disappear in the autumn.
— William Storey, Pateley Bridge.
Records of Captures of Badgers in Yorkshire.— The following 
records of the occurrence of the Badger in Yorkshire are all that I have met with 
down to the beginning of 1883 ; perhaps some other correspondents of the 
Naturalist may be able to make additions from Naturalists' Societies' Reports, 
newspapers, or magazines, so as to make a more complete list.
Two at Walton Hall, captured alive in 1826.
Waterton's Essays.
[viii, 188.
One at Hardplatts Wood, Stainland, Halifax, in 1832.
C. C.
Hanson, Nat., 
Two captured at Hackfall, about 1862.
E. F.
Firby, Nat., ii, 55.
Two at Kirklees, date not given.
Hobkirk's ' Huddersfield,' Ed. 1871.
One captured September 23rd, 1877, near Ripponden.
' F.
G. S.
Rawson, 
' Rural Notes,' 1877.
One captured at Pickering in 1879.
R. Andrews, Nat., v, 53.
-One at Bramham Park, March 1880.
J. Emmet, Nat., v, 140.
One at Rishworth, about 1880.
C. C.
Hanson, Nat., viii, 108.
One captured alive near Yarm, January 1882.
W. Gregson, Nat., vii, 146.
One killed at Saltburn, May 20th, 1882.
T. Raine, Nat., vii, 201.
One at Wentbridge, exhibited at the White Horse Inn, 'a few years since,' no 
date given.
T. W.
Tew.
One caught near Yarm, January 1883.
W. Gregson, Nat., viii, 123.
George Roberts, Lofthouse, near Wakefield.
Former occurrence of Badgers in North Lancashire.— 
Formerly the Badger {Meles taxus) was tolerably common, and badger-baiting was 
a favourite pastime with the inhabitants of this part of the county — North 
Lancashire.
Badger-baiting ranked third in the catalogue of manly (?) sports, 
bull and bear-baiting taking the precedence ; but it mainly fell into disuse about half a 
century ago, although the practice was kept up in the secluded country places 
until a more recent date.
Some of the old inhabitants delight in narrating 
incidents connected with this 'glorious sport,' and dwell with glee upon the 
exciting spectacle, extolling the prowess of the different dogs which in turn essayed 
to ' draw the badger ' from the tub or kennel in which it was placed.
An old 
local name for the badger is ' brock,' and it is considered by many eminent writers 
that a number of place names are derived from it.
Thus, in this neighbourhood, 
we have the Brock, a lovely stream, whose picturesque and well-wooded banks 
seem peculiarly suited as a habitat for this animal, and where it formerly abounded ; 
and there is an old county family near Garstang of the name of Brockholes, 
whose coat of arms is the brock, or badger.
There is also a large township called 
Higher and Lower Brockholes.
The steep and thickly wooded banks of the 
Ribble at Red Scar were formerly a favourite haunt of this animal, and I have 
heard an old farmer talk of them being common there, and tell of the tons of sand 
they used to excavate from their burrows ; but, so far as I can ascertain, it is some 
time since any were observed in this place.
I may mention, incidentally, that the 
term ' badger ' is very generally applied, in this part of Lancashire, to small 
dealers in greengrocery — e.g.
, ' potato-badger ' — although I am at a loss to account 
for its being so applied.
— Robert Standen, Goosnargh, near Preston.
Naturalist, 
37 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM THE 
NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
ALFRED CRAWHALL CHAPMAN.
During the last twelve years I have visited the coast of Northumber- 
land pretty regularly at all seasons, but especially during the latter 
end of August, for the purpose of seeing and collecting the birds 
which annually visit our shores, after having left their breeding 
grounds in higher latitudes.
In this paper I have endeavoured to describe the habits of some 
of our regular migrants, as observed during the time they remain on 
our shores-.
Though the autumn migration may be said to commence 
about the end of July, it is not till a month later that the majority of 
the migrants appear, and it is usually September before the Little Stint 
and Grey Plover arrive.
It is difficult, perhaps almost impossible, to 
assign anything like definite limits to the range of such a cosmopolitan 
order as are the Limicolae, but I think it may be fairly assumed that 
the Common Godwit (Limosa lapponicd), Sanderling ( Calidris arenaria) 
(in comparatively small numbers), Turnstone {Strepsilas interpres), 
Purple Sandpiper {Tringa striata), Knot {Tringa canutus), and Grey 
Plover (Squatarola helvetica), are regular winter residents with us; 
while the Curlew Sandpiper {Tri?iga subarquata), Wood Sandpiper 
(Totanus glareola), Little and Temminck's Stints {Tringa minuta and 
te?nmincki), YVhimbrel {Numenius phceopus), Dusky Redshank {Totanns 
fuscus), Greenshank {Totanns canescens), Ruffs and Reeves {Machetes 
pugnax),the Phalaropes {Phalaropus hyperboreus and fulicarius),2J=> well 
as Richardson's Skua {Stercorarius crepidatus), are only spring and 
autumn visitants, passing on to winter quarters in more southern lati- 
tudes.
This is, at least, my experience of these birds, though I am well 
aware that stragglers of some of the latter species do occur, and some- 
times not unfrequently, on our coasts during the winter months.
Their 
occurrence, however, can hardly entitle them to the appellation of 
' winter residents,' as is the case with the Common Godwit, Knot, &c.
The Green Sandpiper {Helodromas ochropus) is a typical example 
of a 'casual visitant,' occurring with almost equal regularity during 
each month of the year.
In Stevenson's ' Birds of Norfolk ' a table 
is given (ii, 223) illustrative of the erratic movements of this species.
Though Richardson's Skua is stated by Mr. Hancock, in his ' Birds 
of Northumberland and Durham,' to be 1 an autumn and winter 
visitant,' I have never once seen it on the coast during winter, and I 
believe it goes southward with the Terns, about the end of September.
The majority of our migratory ducks and geese, although having 
a very si milar breeding range to the different species of wader already 
Feb. 1886.
38 A.
C. CHAPMAN : BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
enumerated, do not arrive here till well on in the autumn, though 
I have a note of a Widgeon (Mareca penelope) shot on September 3rd, 
probably a Scotch-bred bird.
The end of September to the end of 
October is certainly their normal time of arrival, and the Brent Geese 
(Bernida brenta) do not arrive in their greatest numbers till January.
As soon as the various species arrive they usually select certain places, 
the nature of which is best suited to their habits, each individual 
class exhibiting a partiality for particular places, where they find food 
or rest, according to their varying idiosyncracies.
Thus, the Purple 
Sandpiper is essentially a bird of the rocks ; I have never seen many 
of them on the coast proper • they seem to prefer the black basaltic 
rocks which form the Fame Islands, about four miles out to sea.
Here, on August 21st, 1874, we procured four of them, and I well 
remember their extreme tameness on a cold winter's day, on the 
Megstone Rock, in January, 1881.
They like to run close down to 
the water's edge, where the surf breaks white on the black basalt, and 
here they find plenty of food, small marine insects and vegetable sub- 
stances washed up by the tide.
The Turnstone is also a rock-loving bird, and is rarely seen on 
the sands proper, and never on the mud.
I have frequently found 
them in August, about the 24th, sitting on the heaps of decomposing 
seaweed which line the high-water mark, where they feed on the 
maggots of the sea-weed fly.
I have shot them on the north shore of 
Holy Island, year after year, almost exactly on the same spot, and 
about the same day of the year.
At this season nine out of ten seem 
to be young birds of the year, in the brown dress.
Such birds have 
pale orange-coloured legs and feet ; the beak is dark brown, black at 
the tip ; their backs have a pretty purple sheen, especially on the 
scapulars; their eyes are nearly black.
On August 22nd, 1S72, my 
brother shot an old Turnstone in full red summer dress, with the 
black and white head.
The legs in the adult bird are much brighter 
coloured than in the young.
Both old and young have a fine clear 
cry, which easily distinguishes the species long before they have been 
seen.
Whimbrels and Oystercatchers (Hosmatopus ostralegus) are also 
rock-frequenting birds, though the former often go to feed on the 
mudslakes, and the latter frequently assemble in immense flocks on 
the extensive sand-flats left dry by the tide.
On August 19th, 
1885, I killed two Oystercatchers; both were hard-feathered, full-sized 
birds, but one had pink or flesh-coloured legs and feet, and a red eye, 
while the other had French-grey coloured legs and feet, and a hazel 
eye and orbits.
The beaks of both were red and hard, and I am 
inclined to think that the apparently immature bird was at least one 
Naturalist, 
A. C.
CHAPMAN : BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
39 
year old.
These birds breed on the shingle banks of the mainland, 
as well as on the Fame Islands.
Their flight is very regular, often 
in line, and can easily be mistaken for ducks on a dark winter's 
morning.
Their cry can be heard at least a mile away.
Whimbrels seem to prefer black seaweed-covered rocks, and are 
fond of wading in rock pools for their food.
They are generally a 
shy bird during the short time they remain on our shores.
I have 
sometimes heard them passing overhead on their southern migration, 
several miles inland.
They are generally found singly or in pairs, 
but they congregate in flocks prior to their final departure.
Such are the birds generally found on the black rocks along the 
shore, though others — Herons (Ardea cinerea), Redshank and Dunlin 
(Tringa alpi?id) — also frequent such places.
The latter are often to 
be seen sitting amongst the floating seaweed, but their proper haunts 
are certainly the mudflats and sands recently left by the tide.
Some 
of the sandflats on the Northumberland coast are so extensive and so 
flat that hundreds of acres, which but an hour ago were all covered 
with water, are now left dry by the tide, and the amount of sand 
upheaved in pyramidal heaps by the numberless sandworms in the 
short space of a few hours is something marvellous.
The whole 
surface is studded with their workings, and in such a place many small 
waders delight to feed.
Here are to be found Dunlin, Ring Plover 
(ALgialitis hiaticula), and Sanderlings in vast flocks ; whilst further up, 
near the dry sand links, with their stiff bent grass, small detachments 
of Curlew Sandpipers may be seen.
I noticed a pair of these birds 
on August 6th this year, quite close to the town of Sunderland.
They 
were resting high up on the beach, and close to the dry sandhills with 
the bent grass, for which they evidently have a partiality.
I have 
sometimes walked almost into the middle of a flock of small waders 
before detecting their presence, generally indicated by the cry of 
a Dunlin, as he rises within a few paces ; then one sees perhaps a 
dozen, some sitting, some running, their elegant forms reflected in the 
mirror-like glossy surface of sand.
In August, nearly all these birds are young of the year, though 
with the binoculars, one can here and there pick out a ragged- 
feathered, black-breasted Dunlin, with the incubation spot still 
conspicuous on handling him, but I have never been able to procure 
in this country a Dunlin with its summer dress, i.e., its black breast, 
nearly so perfectly developed as are those shot further north on the 
coast of Norway.
Many of the young birds shot in the end of August have 
already attained some of the grey feathers of winter.
It is not at all 
rare to find Dunlin several miles inland at this season ; they then 
Feb. 1886.
40 A.
C. CHAPMAN : BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
seek their food by the side of some secluded pond.
I have shot them 
in such places, and have also occasionally flushed them off stubble- 
fields when Partridge shooting.
Leaving the sandflats and approaching the mud, with its crop of 
sea-grass already ripe for the daily raids made on it during the winter 
months by Brent Geese, Widgeon, and Mallard (Anas boscas), one still 
finds Dunlin as numerous as ever, but I have never met Sanderlings 
on such ground.
Their place is now taken by the Knot, and mixed 
flocks of these birds and Dunlin may be found feeding together.
It is 
perhaps strange that I have never killed, or seen killed, either an aid 
Knot or Sanderling during the month of August.
Occasionally 
Knots and Turnstones may be seen associating together; on 
August 25th, 1880, I killed both species with the same shot.
They 
were young birds and seemed to be resting, probably after a pro- 
longed flight from their breeding stations.
Some young Knots are 
much more rufous on the breast and flanks than others • their legs 
are a yellowish-green or olive colour.
On August 19th this year, there were no Knots on ground usually 
frequented by them, but on the 20th they were numerous, evidently 
arrived that day.
My brother shot several, as well as a brace of Teal 
(Querquedula crecca) with the dusky spotted breasts, and an old 
Whimbrel in ragged feather.
On August 23rd, 1883, when rowing in a dingey up a bight in 
Fenham Slake, I chanced to see a bird stretch its wing and gently 
close it again.
It was sitting amongst grey whelk-covered shingle, 
and though close at hand I could not make it out, so I fired at the 
place.
Nothing flew away ; on coming up two young Knots and a 
Reeve lay dead.
This is the only time I have come across the Reeve 
in Northumberland, though it used to breed at Prestwick Car. Its 
legs were a yellowish clay colour, the irides dark hazel, nearly black.
I 
had seen a bird the night before which I felt certain was a Ruff, so 
that probably there were more of them in the neighbourhood.
The 
feathers of the back and tertials are finely edged with yellow in this 
species, when young.
On August 24th, 1872, my brother shot a young Greenshank, and 
on the 25th, 1874, I killed another in exactly the same place.
These 
birds seem to prefer feeding along the banks of some of the fresh- 
water streams which run from the country into the saltslakes, and I 
remember two being killed on a freshwater lough on Holy Island, on 
August 25th, 1879.
These dates show great regularity in the arrival 
of this species each year.
All those here mentioned were young of 
the year.
I have never come across the Dusky Redshank, but 
Mr. Adamson, in his book 4 Some more Scraps about Birds,' says 
Naturalist, 
A. C.
CHAPMAN: BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
4 1 
that so far as he is able to make out, ' its exceptional visits in our 
northern counties are during August only, and these are exclusively 
young birds hatched that year.' As might be expected, common Snipe 
(Galtinago ccelestis) not infrequently come into the saltslakes from 
the land to feed, both during the day and night.
The earliest date on which I have observed the Common Godwit 
is August nth.
This was a single bird, and as usual, one of the year, 
in the spotted rufous plumage.
On August 24th, 1880, a great flock 
appeared on the Holy Island slakes, out of which I procured six 
birds, all young.
When approaching them in small flocks of five or 
six, they allowed the punt to glide right up to them within ten yards, 
without the least suspicion, but these were invariably young birds.
The main flock, consisting of several hundred birds, on the same day 
and under exactly similar conditions, was utterly unapproachable.
When they rose, they quickly attained an immense height, and I saw 
them no more that day, and it is noticeable that on the same ground 
the following day, hardly a Godwit was to be seen ; they had evidently 
continued their migration.
Old Godwits, in the red breeding dress, are 
sometimes obtained at this season, but the proportion of young to 
old birds must be very great.
They feed along the edges of the sand, 
and often congregate in immense flocks, as the flood tide gradually 
covers their feeding grounds.
On such occasions, experience proves 
that even a punt and stanchion gun can seldom approach within range 
of them.
I have never seen Godwits on the rocks, but in some 
seasons they resort to ploughed fields inland to feed, where, as on the 
sand, they assemble in such large numbers that the ground appears 
literally 'grey with them.' Young birds, when changing to winter 
plumage, assume a pretty marbled appearance on the back.
I shot 
such a bird on October 14th, 1881, a few moments prior to the great 
storm which devastated both land and sea on that day.* The 
Black-tailed Godwit (Limosa melamira) must, I think, be a very rare 
visitor, as I have never even heard of its occurrence (except in books, 
and that but rarely) on the coast of Northumberland.
As soon as the Common Sandpipers (Tringoides hypoleucos) have 
finished rearing their young by the upland stream sides, they, 
together with the moor T bred Curlew and Golden Plover ( Charadrius 
* My boatman and I retain a lively recollection of clinging to the bottom of 
the capsized punt for upwards of three hours on this occasion.
It was interesting 
to note the rush of birds southwards, immediately prior to the on-rush of the 
northerly cyclone.
A string of a dozen Grey Geese, a large flock of Widgeon, 
Oystercatchers, Gulls, and other birds, all hurried on southwards at a tremendous 
speed in the ten minutes preceding the storm, and the straggling Gulls and 
Oystercatchers, when overtaken by it, simply flopped down into the mud, and 
instantl y crouching down, headed windwards.
Feb. 1886.
42 A.
C. CHAPMAN : BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
pluvialls) come down to the coast.
On August ist, 1870, we got 
one on the beach near Hartlepool, and I always see a few pairs by 
the * gut ' sides on the Holy Island slakes in August.
They still utter 
their well-known call-note, but are now generally very wild.
Though Grey Plovers, both the old birds with black breasts, and 
the young with the yellow-spotted backs, arrive during the month of 
August, I have never come across one myself.
September seems 
to be the month for them, as well as for the Little Stints, when they 
do occur.
A good many Grey Plover remain during the winter, and 
we have several times got them in January in very hard weather.
The two species of Phalarope can only be considered as casual 
visitors to our coast, and their occurrence is decidedly rare.
In the 
last report of the Migration Committee, both the Little and 
Temminck's Stints are mentioned as occurring on the east coast 
during September.
They are, however, scarce, probably attributable 
to the fact of their line of migration to their winter quarters in South- 
Eastern Europe and Asia, lying far to the eastward of our coast.
Flocks of young Mallard, Teal, and Shellduck {Tadorna cornutd) 
also come into the tidal estuaries at this season.
On August 18th, 
1885, my brother found three Shellducks, the old female and two 
young.
He secured one young bird, the other, though so close at 
hand as to induce him to try and catch it, dived and never reappeared!
The young at this age are white from chin to vent ; the eye is deep 
hazel ; feet and legs, lead colour ; bill, flesh coloured, with a lead- 
coloured nail.
The only other ducks observed at this season are the 
Eider (Somateria mollissimd) and the Shoveller {Spatula clypeata), 
though it is not improbable that flocks of immature non-breeding 
Scoters frequent the coast during the whole summer.
The Shoveller 
breeds annually near Holy Island.
This year I was informed by the 
fishermen that she laid ten eggs, ' rather paler coloured than those of 
the partridge, and that the old duck was so tame that they could 
catch her.' The nest appears to have been in a hayfield, some 500 yards 
from a sheet of fresh-water, and I believe was never allowed to hatch.
Another bird which appears in greater numbers some years than 
others is Richardson's Skua.
I got a dark-breasted female on August 
1 2th, 1877, and on August i8th, 1885, I secured a pair of white- 
breasted birds.
They were both quite white from chin to vent, one of 
them being slightly barred transversely on the flanks only ; the other 
was barred right across the breast and underparts like a Sparrowhawk.
The central rectrices were worn at the ends, and the back and upper 
parts were plain dark brown, the feathers being- without the pale 
edgings of the young bird.
This is, I think, a state of plumage but 
seldom met with in this species.
It is difficult to say what the 
Naturalist, 
A. C.
CHAPMAN I BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
43 
normal colour of the legs and feet is in this bird ; some are quite 
black, others are patched on the tarsus and sometimes even on the 
webs of the feet with a pale blue colour.
I have killed a bird with 
one leg nearly all black, and the other having the blue colour 
predominating, and the same remark applies to Buffon's Skua 
{Stercorarius parasiticus), shot in June at their breeding stations in 
Lapland.
Richardson's Skuas are generally to be seen in pairs at 
this season, and they frequently exhibit a strange boldness by flying 
straight at you, which generally leads to their being shot.
The Terns 
rejoice at the death of their persecutor, and a score or more may be 
seen hovering and screaming over the body of a Skua floating dead 
on the water.
As before remarked, the Skuas take their departure 
before the winter sets in.
Those species of Laridae which breed on the Fame Islands are 
naturally found frequenting the sands and slakes of the Northumber- 
land coast in large numbers during the month of August, but there 
can be no doubt that the majority of these birds migrate south- 
wards in autumn, their place being taken by more northern 
arrivals.
Common Gulls {Larus canus) make their appearance towards 
the end of August, and they are perhaps the most numerous of the 
gull tribe during winter.
Though the Merganser {Mergus serrator) 
breeds commonly in Scotland, and often on the same loch with 
Common Gulls, yet they, together with the Divers ( Colymbus arcticus 
and C.
septentrionalis), do not arrive on this coast till well on in the 
autumn.
In August the Lesser Black-backed Gull {Larus fuscus) is 
the most common species on the coast, and its changes of plumage 
still admit of further investigation.
The young of the previous year 
are at this season in perfect feather ; they have already completed 
the summer moult, but are still a pale, mottled, brownish-grey colour, 
with flesh-coloured legs and feet, and a dark-brown eye.
The young 
of the year, which are also in excellent feather at this season, are 
much darker brown than the year-old birds, which, it would appear, 
do not attain the mature (winter) plumage till the autumn of the third 
year after they are hatched, after which time they will doubtless breed.
Black-headed Gulls {Larus ridibundus) also, come to the coast during 
August, and they may often be found sitting far out on the level fields 
of sand, where they perform the autumn moult unmolested.
One has 
only to walk over the places whence the flock has just decamped, 
to find how they are employed at this season — usually the sand is 
strewn with their feathers.
They remain the winter on the coast, and 
often associate with Common Gulls and Kittiwakes {Rissa iridactyla).
Three species of Tern are found, all tolerably common, in August, 
viz., the Sandwich {Sterna cantiaca), Arctic {S.
macrura), and Common 
Feb, 1886.
44 A.
C. CHAPMAN : BIRDS OF NORTHUMBERLAND COAST.
Terns (S.
Jluviatilis), all of which breed on the Fame Islands, and 
some on the gravelly shores of the mainland.
During August, on a 
fine warm sunny day, when the spring-ebb has gradually receded so 
far that the white breakers appear miles away over the rolling wastes 
of sand, then it is that the habits of the Terns may be best observed.
Close overhead a score may be hovering and screaming, while within 
a few yards others will be taking headers into the little stagnant pools 
which, but recently left by the tide, are full of small fish, unable to 
escape the sword-like beak of the watchful birds.
Further on a dozen 
may be seen sitting, all head to windward, their short legs making 
them appear as if lying basking on the sand.
Then, perhaps, a 
Richardson's Skua, on piracy intent, makes his appearance on the 
scene, when what was peace and quiet is instantly changed to tumult 
and confusion.
Though the Roseate Tern {Sterna dougalli) used to 
breed plentifully on some of the islands lying off the coast, it can 
scarcely be said to do so now ; nor am I quite certain about the 
Little Tern {Sterna minuta).
I have never come across the latter 
species myself, but some of the fishermen assured me that it still bred, 
in limited numbers, at one spot on the coast, and that they had taken 
its eggs this year.
Such information is, however, generally unreliable.
The only note I have of the Petrels is a Shearwater, which my 
brother and I saw flying past the herring-boat, about four o'clock in 
the morning, August 23rd, 1874.
We had gone out to see the 
herrings caught, and to see the Solan Geese {Sula bassana), which 
having left their breeding station at the Bass Rock, come in numbers 
close round the boats to pick up the fish which happen to fall out of 
the meshes of the net.
Solans are seldom seen near the shore ; on 
February 16th, 1882, I observed six, all white birds, flying about 
seven miles out at sea, early in the morning, but I suspect that the 
majority of them winter further south.
Cormorants {Phalacrocorax carbo) are to be seen at all times of the 
year about Holy Island.
They come regularly into the slakes to 
catch fish in the 'guts.' They roost on the Megstone Rock, one of 
the basaltic islands of the Fame group, and which is the last visible 
outcrop we have of the great ' whin sill ' of geologists.
Thither I have 
often seen them wending their way in ' bee-lines ' towards sunset.
On August 1 8th, 1874, amongst a varied bag of sea fowl, were 
two of the Ringed Guillemot ( Lomvia troi'/e,var.),m which the white eye- 
streak was perfectly developed on the dark-brown head ; quite justly, 
however, this seems to be considered merely an accidental variety, 
insufficient to entitle the bird to specific rank.
Such are the birds most generally met with during August.
Of their habits I have given merely the results of personal observation.
Naturalist, 
45 
NOTES ON THE TWO SPOTTED EAGLES INHABITING 
THE EUROPEAN CONTINENT.
J. H.
GURNEY, F.Z.S., 
Northrepfis, Norzuich; Member of the British Ornithologists' Union; Author of 
i A List of the Diurnal Birds of Prey etc.
The European Spotted Eagles (so called from the conspicuous white 
spots which the upper portion of their plumage exhibits whilst they are 
in immature dress) are divisible into two races or subspecies, for which 
I adopt the names used by Mr. Dresser in his ' History of the Birds 
of Europe' — viz., for the larger race that of Aquila clanga Pallas, 
and for the smaller that of Aquila po?narina Brehm.
Mr. Dresser (op.
cit., vol.
5, p.
500) gives the following wing 
measurements of A.
clanga, viz.
: — 
Males ...
...
...
19*50 in.
to 21*30 in.
Females ...
...
21-0 in.
to 21*80 in.
Of A.
pomarina he gives the measurements of but one specimen, 
an adult male from Danzig, with a wing measurement of 1770 in.
Mr. Seebohm in his ' History of British Birds,' vol.
1, p.
106, 
records the corresponding measurements of several additional 
specimens of both races, with the following results: — 
AQUILA CLANGA.
19 Males ...
...
20*o in.
to 21*50 in.
9 Females ...
...
21*0 in.
to 22*0 in.
AQUILA POMARINA.
16 Males ...
...
18*0 in.
to 20*0 in.
10 Females ...
...
19*0 in.
to 21-0 in.
The following wing, measurements have been taken by myself 
from specimens in the Norwich Museum : — 
AQUILA CLANGA.
MALES.
Seville, adult 
Dobruscha, adult ...
River Volga, „ 
Damietta, immature ...
„ adult 
Northern India, adult ...
...
FEMALES.
Sarepta on the Volga, nearly adult ...
. 
Damietta, immature 
Smyrna, adult 
Northern India, adult 
19*90 in.
19-35 in.
2070 in.
19-85 in.
19- 70 in.
20- 10 in.
21-65 in.
20*10 in.
20- 10 in.
21- 20 in.
20*90 in.
Feb.
46 
J. H.
GURNEY : THE EUROPEAN SPOTTED EAGLES.
SEX NOT ASCERTAINED.
Locality unknown, adult 
55 •) > J' 
Austrian Silesia, „ 
Dobruscha, nearly adult 
Southern Russia, „ 
Cairo, immature 
India, adult...
Sumatra (collected by Sir Stamford Raffles), 
immature...
1 9 '60 in, 
21*80 in.
19*80 in.
1970 in.
20*0 in.
20*40 in.
20*50 in.
19*0 in.
AQUILA POMARINA.
MALE.
Carpathia, adult 
Pomerania, adult 
Germany, ,, 
FEMALES.
1875 in.
19*10 in.
1-9*20 in.
SEX NOT ASCERTAINED.
Albania, adult 
Beyrout, immature ...
Nubia 
I5'20 in.
...
...
...
19*0 in.
...
...
...
19*40 in.
In the adult dress the two races of Spotted Eagles are indis- 
tinguishable, except from the slight difference in size indicated by 
the wing measurements above referred to; but in the immature stage 
of plumage, the smaller race is characterised (and as far as I have 
observed invariably so) by a patch of rufous or luteous colouring 
generally about an inch in vertical diameter, and a little less if 
measured across, which is situated a little above the centre of the 
nape, whilst in the young birds of the larger race the nuchal feathers 
are either destitute of any rufescent colouring, or those that are so 
coloured are scattered singly over the hinder part of the neck, and 
are not gathered together into a distinct patch as in the smaller 
subspecies.
I have explained at p.
132 of my published list of the Diurnal 
Birds of Prey, my reasons, founded on the above diagnosis, for 
referring the Irish Spotted Eagle, which is preserved in the Museum 
of Trinity College, Dublin, and also the two recorded Cornish 
specimens, to the larger race, A.
clanga, and my opinion as regards 
one of the Cornish examples has been confirmed by Mr. Dresser in 
the Zoologist for 1885, p.
230.
Naturalist, 
J. H.
GURNEY : THE EUROPEAN SPOTTED EAGLES.
47 
I believe that the Spotted Eagle which was killed at Cresswell, in 
Northumberland, on 31st of October, 1885, should also be referred 
to A.
cla/iga, and that it is probably a male of that species ; and I have 
formed this opinion from the following information which has been 
obligingly communicated to me by Mr. R.
Duncan of Newcastle, by 
whom the specimen has been preserved.
Mr. Duncan writes, 'I 
could not ascertain the sex of the Spotted Eagle ; it is undoubtedly a 
bird of the year ; the length from the carpal joint to the tip of the 
wing is 20 J inches; the feathers on the nape of the neck are rufous- 
brown in the centre, decidedly differing in tint from the other brown 
portions of the plumage ; I think the Eagle is an example of 
A. clanga, as the feathers with rufous centres are scattered over the 
whole of the back of the neck.'' 
A. clanga appears to be a more numerous species, and with a 
wider geographical range than A.
pomarina, and is therefore, perhaps, 
the more likely of the two to find its way to the British Isles.
It will 
be seen by the list of specimens which I have measured, that the 
Norwich Museum contains an example from Spain, some from South 
Eastern Europe, others from Egypt, and others again from India, 
besides the specimen said to have been obtained in Sumatra, and 
which was formerly in the Museum (now dispersed) of the Zoological 
Society.
In 'Les Oiseaux de la Chine,' by David and Oustalet, at p.
14, 
the former of these naturalists mentions, under the title of i Aquila 
Ncevia] three Spotted Eagles observed by him in China, but I have 
not had the opportunity of examining a specimen from that country.
I may, to avoid confusion, remark, in passing, that the Eagle to which 
the authors of 'Les Oiseaux de la Chine' apply the name of ' Aquila 
clanga' is distinct from the species which in my view is entitled to 
that designation, and is not one of the Spotted Eagles ; it is entered 
at P- 55 of my list under the title of Aquila amurensis.
As regards the northern range of the larger Spotted Eagle in 
Europe, I may quote Dr. Menzbier's statement in the Ibis, 1884, 
p 305, that it breeds as far north in Russia as lat.
6o°.
The same 
author speaks in the following page of the smaller Spotted Eagle 
breeding everywhere in the Baltic Provinces, and occasionally visiting 
the Eastern shores of the Gulf of Bothnia.
The most eastern 
specimen of the smaller race which has come under my notice is 
that from Beyrout, which is preserved in the Norwich Museum, and 
the most southern is the Nubian example which is contained in the 
same collection ; the most westerly specimen which I have seen 
and noted is one from Switzerland, in the Museum at Brussels.
Feb. 1886.
4 8 
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Nidincation of King Ouzel and Missel Thrush.— Referring to 
Mr. Whitlock's note in your January number about the Ring Ouzel and Missel Thrush, 
my experience coincides with his.
I never found a Ring Ouzel's nest with more 
than four eggs in.
The Missel Thrush lays three, four, or five eggs ; not un- 
frequently, after being disturbed from its first nest, only three.
— H.
G. TOMLINSON, 
the Woodlands, Burton-on-Trent.
Young Skylarks fed by an older nestling.— In 1884 a nest of 
Skylarks were taken as fledglings and brought up, and one bird (a cock) was kept 
until the summer of 1885.
This year (1885) another nest of fledglings was taken 
after both old birds had been limed near the nest.
The nest with the young birds and 
the old birds were all put into a cage with the young cock.
The old birds paid no 
attention whatever to their young, and devoted their whole attention to trying 
to escape, but after a very short time the young cock began to feed the young 
birds, and did so until the old birds observing it quieted down, and all three 
continued to feed the young birds until the latter were able to feed themselves.
— 
H. G.
Pearsox, Barrow-in-Furness, January 2nd, 1886.
Late Brood Of SwallOWS.
— A young naturalist friend told me to-day 
(October 16th) that last Saturday, the 10th inst., he found at Ravenfield, near 
Rotherham, a Swallow's nest containing three young ones in a healthy condition.
Their characteristic hues were just showing.
I should like to know whether, in 
such a case, maternal instinct has ever detained the mother-bird after her com- 
panions have migrated.
My friend and his companion took the nest and its 
contents for the cabinet, believing that the young would perish.
— T.
W. Brewts, 
Rotherham, October 16th, 1885.
Lesser Spotted Woodpecker and Grasshopper Warbler 
nesting in Nidderdale.
— I have noticed this summer a pair of the Lesser 
Spotted Woodpecker in an old oak tree, near to Pateley Bridge.
I have 
endeavoured to obtain information with regard to this bird, but no occurrence of 
its nesting is remembered in Nidderdale.
I also observed a nest of the Grasshopper Warbler in Guyscliffe, Pateley Bridge.
This bird is rather rare in this district.
This is the second occurrence of its nesting 
here.— William Storey, Pateley Bridge, June 10th, 1885.
Light-coloured Grouse in Nidderdale.— Mr. Hanley Hutchinson 
informs me that a few years ago there was a breed of cream-coloured or very light - 
coloured Grouse {Lagopus scotiats) on Grimwith Moor, near Pateley Bridge (Nidder- 
dale).
The above gentleman endeavoured to preserve this breed, but without 
avail, as three of these were shot, and now are stuffed and in the possession of 
William Newbould, Grouse Inn, Dry Gill, near Pateley Bridge ; there is also one 
now in the possession of Mr. Hutchinson.
— William Storey, Pateley Bridge, 
January 1st, 1886.
Quail in North Lancashire.— Referring to Mr. Baldwin's note in your 
last issue, I saw a Quail while shooting at Rampside (on the opposite side of 
Morecambe Bay), on the 7th November last.
— H.
G. Pearson, Barrow-in-Furness, 
January 2nd, 1 886.
Stone Curlews on the Yorkshire Wolds.— Whilst glancing over an 
article on the Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire in the Naturalist for May 1884, 1 read that 
the Stone Curlew ( CEdicnenuts crepitans) is now becoming very rare in the Southern 
Wolds, but that a pair bred near Market Weighton in 1881.
At Fimber, Burdale, 
and Thixendale, on the Wolds, the Stone Curlew has bred for the last four years, 
In fact I have heard their nocturnal cries ; and not only that, but seen the old 
birds and young ones, also their nests and eggs.
Old men of the village tell me 
that the Curlew was very common on the Wolds half a century ago, and before 
the enclosure, and when many rabbit warrens existed.
I wrote Mr. Morris some 
two or three years ago, telling him that I had a brood of Curlews on my farm, at 
Fimber.
His reply was, that they would be Stone Curlews.
I have heard only last week that a Stockdove has a nest, on the side of a corn- 
stack, with young ones, belonging to Mr. Richard Hartley, Fimber-field, \\ Tiarram, 
York; if so, it is a curious thing to record.
— R.
Mortimer, Fimber, Wharrarn, 
York, May 5 th, 1884.
Naturalist, 
49 
ADDITIONS TO THE LICHEN FLORA OF 
WESTMORELAND.
JOSEPH A.
MARTINDALE.
I beg to put on record the occurrence of the following plants in 
Westmoreland.
Only two of them have been found previously in 
England, so far as I know, so that they form substantially an addition 
to the flora of Great Britain .
1. Calicium roscidum Flk. D.L. 42.
Nyl. Syn.
153.
On oaks in 
Lowther Park.
2. Lecidea pilularis Korb.
Par. 136.
Leight.
Lich.
Flora, 3rd ed.
342.
On mosses in Kentmere.
This has previously been 
gathered in Ireland by Mr. Larbalestier.
Larb.
Lich.
Herb., 
231, 270.
3. Lecidea plumbina (Anzi) Nyl. Anzi, Comm.
Critt.
It.
(1862), 
p. 158.
Nyl. Flora, 1869, 296.
On Coccocarpia plumbea, 
growing on oaks and ashes in Lowther Park.
This has been 
once gathered before by the Rev. W.
Johnson, near Keswick 
(1881).
4. Lecidea declinascens Nyl. in Flora, 1878, p.
243.
On rocks, 
Red Screes.
5. Lecidea rubescens Th. Fr., Lich.
Scand., 631.
On rocks and 
stones near Staveiey.
6. Lecidea obturbans Nyl. n.
sp.
nondum descripta.
On a rock 
near Winster.
7. Lecidea acutula Nyl. n.
sp.
nondum descripta.
On larch trees 
near Staveiey, and near Penrith.
8. Schizoxylon corticola (Frs.) Nyl., Lich.
Scand., 249.
Leight., 
Lich.
Flora, 3rd.
ed., p.
390.
On oaks in Lowther Park.
This has previously been gathered by the Rev. J.
M. Crombie, 
near Lyndhurst, in the New Forest.
9. Platygrapha periclea (Ach. Meth., p.
156) Nyl. Scand., p.
256.
On oaks in Lowther Park.
I have also recently gathered several plants for the first time 
within the county, but as no general county list has ever been 
published, and as I intend shortly to draw one up, it would, perhaps, 
not serve any good purpose to mention them in this communication.
NO TE — LEPID OPTERA .
Heliothis peltigera.
— In June (or July, I forget which) 1884, Mr. R.
Wilding of Liverpool beat a fine specimen of this species from an overhanging 
ledge on the Wallasey sandhills ; and either the same day or a few days afterwards 
picked up the wings of another specimen of the same, the body having been eaten 
by a bird or spider.
— John W.
Ellis, Liverpool, November 30th, 1885.
Feb. 1886.
5° 
LEPIDOPTEROUS FAUNA OP LANCASHIRE 
AND CHESHIRE.
JOHN W.
ELLIS, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.E., 
Liverpool; Honorary Secretary, Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society.
PAET II :-SPHIHGES.
(Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, June 29th, 1885.) 
Since the list of Rhopalocera was published (Naturalist, February 
and March 1885), Mr. Alfred O.
AValker has contributed to the 
Chester Society of Natural Science a list, with localities, of the 
macro-lepidoptera of his district.
From this paper, a copy of which 
he has kindly sent me, I have extracted the localities to which his 
initials are appended.
SPHINGES.
Fam. SPHINGIDsE.
ACHERONTIA, Hub..
Acherontia atropos, L.
Of frequent occurrence in both counties.
I have records of its occurrence in the following localities : — 
Lane.
— Blackpool, common in 1868 (J.
Thorpe, Ent., v, 143); 
Bootle (C.S.G.) ; Bolton, occasionally (W.J.); Formby, where 
the late Thomas West of Liverpool procured the larvae in plenty 
from the labourers in potato fields; Hale (S.J.C., C.S.G.) ; Leigh, 
common (Intell., 1859, ii, 27); Elliott Street, Liverpool, in 
October 1884 (B.
Cooke, junr., Y.N., November 1884) ; Lytham, 
common in 1865 (W.
Gregson, Ent, ii, 313) ; North Lancashire, 
generally distributed (J.B.H.); Seaforth, formerly common 
(W.
H. Weightman).
Ches.
— Bidston (C.S.G.) ; Hoylake, common (W.G.) ; Liscard 
(N.C.); Deiamere, Saughall, Tattenhall, and Upton (A.O.W.); 
Tranmere (E.
D. Fish).
In the collection of Mr. C.
S. Gregson is an interesting aber- 
ration of this species, in which the dark central band of the 
hind wing is entirely wanting.
The specimen was captured at 
Blackpool.
SPHINX, L.
Sphinx convolvnli, L.
Occurs occasionally over both counties.
Lane.
— Broad Green, near Liverpool (S.J.C.); Bury (R.
Kay, 
Ent., ix, 48, and September 1862, by T.
Pollitt, Zool., xx, 8204) ; 
Copley, near Staleybridge in October 1871 (M.
Kershaw, Ent, 
v, 443) ; Droylsden in August 1871 (J.
S. White, Ent, v, 411); 
Fleetwood (S.L.M.); Hale (C.S.G.); Manchester (F.
Kenderdine, 
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE SPHINGES.
5 1 
Intell., 1859, ii, 3); Middleton in 1881 (J.
Thorpe, Ent, xiv, 
254); Staleybridge, Stretford, and Barton Moss (J.C.) ; South- 
port in 1857 (R.
Tyrer, Intell., 1857, ii, 19).
Ches.
— Between Birkenhead and Hoylake (J.
Povall, Ent., viii, 
277); Eastham Wood (W.J.) ; Eaton Park in 1873 (A.O.W.) } 
Liscard (N.C., C.S.G.); New Brighton (C.S.G.); Oxton (J.F.B., 
C.S.G.); Claremount Schools, Wallasey (J.W.E.).
Sphinx ligustri, L.
One specimen recorded from Whittle, near 
Chorley, by Mr. J.
B. Hodgkinson.
DEILEPHILA, Ochs.
Deilephila euphorbise, L.
The only records I can find of the 
occurrence of this species, always scarce in Britain, are as 
follows : — 
A specimen, now in the cabinet of Mr. C.
S. Gregson, 
captured in an outhouse at Bidston, near Birkenhead, by 
W. Morgan ; two larvae found on Euphorbia paralias between 
Little Brighton and Hightown by C.
S. G.; a specimen captured 
near Bolton in 1865 (J.B.H., J.C).
Deilephila galii, Rott.
Another species of very occasional appear- 
ance in our district, although the year 1870 seems to have been 
marked by the appearance of this species in some places, Wallasey, 
for instance, in abundance.
Lane.
— Bolton, Middleton, and Staleybridge, very rare (J.C.) ; 
Bootle (C.S.G.)j Lytham, in 1859 (W.
Gregson, Intell., i860, 
i, 123) • Rivington in August 1870 (T.
Calderbank, Ent., v, 181); 
Staleybridge, several specimens in August 1870 (D.
Joliffe, Ent., 
v, 168) ; Warrington, a specimen captured by Miss Greening, 
August 1870 (N.
Greening, Ent., v, 168) ; Whitefield, near Bury, 
in 1842 (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., i, 31).
Ches.
— Only recorded from Wallasey and the immediate 
proximity to the Cheshire coast sandhills, where the larvae were 
found abundantly in the autumn of 1870 (S.J.C., N.C., J.
CM., 
W. Greasley, Ent, v, 183).
The larva is also recorded from 
Wallasey in August 1859 (T.
Galliers, Intell., 1859, ii, 27).
Deilephila livornica, Esp.
(Deilephila lineata, Fab.).
A few 
specimens are recorded, principally from Lancashire.
Lane.
— Bury, June 1877 (R.
Kay, Ent, x, 191); Chorlton 
and Withington in June 1844 (R.
S. Edleston, Zool, i.
736) ; 
Hale in 1847 (C.
S. Gregson, Zool., vi, 2032); Middleton in 
August 1868 (J.
Thorpe, Ent, v, 132) ; Preston, a specimen cap- 
tured by James Cooper in 1846, in coll.
J.B.H.
(Zool., v, 1653).
Ches.— Knutsford (J.C).
Feb. 1886.
52 J.
W. ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE SPHINGES.
CHAEROCAMPA, Dup.
Chaerocampa celerio, L.
This species has frequently been recorded 
from localities in Lancashire, but only once from Cheshire.
Lane.
— Bolton, three specimens (W.J.); ditto, October 1873 
(J.B.H., Ent., vi, 564); Lytham in October 1870 (W.
Gregson, 
Ent, v, 204) ; near Manchester, at Preston, and at Grange 
(J.B.H.) ; two larvae near Newton Heath about 1846 (R.
S. 
Edleston, Zool., iv, 1346) ; Oldham, September 1880 (J.
Taylor, 
Ent., xiii, 279); Southport in July 1871 (E.
Bell, Ent, v, 411) 
and in September 1873 (H.
Burton, Ent, vi, 564) ; Staleybridge 
(J.C.); Crosby, September 1885 (G.
A. Harker).
Ches.— Alderley Edge in May 1878 (W.
W. Key worth, Ent, 
xi, 160).
Chaerocampa elpenor, L.
Generally distributed throughout Cheshire 
and South- West Lancashire, but seems to become less frequent 
as we go north.
Lane.
— Recorded from Manchester, where it occurred in 1850 
at rhododendron flowers (E.
C. Buxton, Zool., viii, 2882) ; 
Chofley in 1853 (lb., Zool., xi, 4037).
Ches.
— ' Kenyon, Rixton, Knutsford, Lymm, High Leigh, 
and Withington' (J.C.) ; Wirral (J.F.B.) : Delamere and East 
Cheshire (A.O.W.); larvse on Bidston Marsh (W.G.) ; Brom- 
borough and West Kirby (F.
N. Pierce) ; Wallasey (N.C.).
Chaerocampa porcellus, L.
More frequent in its occurrence than 
the preceding, especially along the coast line of both counties.
Lane.— Crosby Sandhills (G.
Harker, F.N.P.) ; Lytham, 
where it used to be common (J.B.H.) ; near Manchester, at 
rhododendron flowers, in 1850 (E.
C. Buxton, Zool., viii, 
2882) ; Patricroft and Dunham Park (J.C).
Ches.
— Delamere Forest and East Cheshire (A.O.W.) ; Wal- 
lasey Sandhills, where it is usually collected by the attraction of 
a bunch of the flowers of the yellow iris (N.C., W.G., J.C.M.) ; 
West Kirby (F.N.P.).
SMERINTHUS, Latr.
Smerinthus populi, L.
Common throughout the whole of both 
counties.
Smerinthus ocellatus, L.
Common throughout the whole of both 
counties.
MACROGLOSSA, Ochs.
Macroglossa stellatarum, L.
This species, so frequently mistaken 
for the humming-bird by those who have seen the latter in statu 
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE SPHINGES.
53 
?iaturce, is fairly common throughout Cheshire and South 
Lancashire, becoming scarcer towards the north.
Lane— Blackpool (S.L.M.); Bolton (W.J.) ; Crosby Sandhills 
(Geo. Harker and F.N.P.); Humphrey Head near Grange (E.S.); 
Lytham (J.B.H.) ; Prestwich, abundant in 1884 (J.C.M.).
Ches.
— Common throughout the Chester Society's district 
(A.O.W.) ; Tranmere, formerly not uncommon (W.G.) ; Wallasey 
Sandhills, occasionally abundant but flies only on the tops of the 
highest hills (N.C., F.N.P., J.W.E.) ; West Kirby, where 
Mr. R.
Brown saw the species in abundance in 1884.
HEMARIS, Dalm.
Hemaris fuciformis, L.
Recorded as scarce at Bidston by J.
F. 
Brockholes.
Probably the following species is intended.
Hemaris bombyliformis, Ochs.
Two specimens recorded as 
captured at Bidston by C.
S. Gregson.
'The larvae used to 
occur on Ribbleton Moor, near Preston, now cultivated' (J.B.H.).
Fam. SESIID^E.
TROCHILIUM, Scop.
Trochilium crabroniformis, Lew.
(bembeciformis, Hub.).
Generally 
distributed wherever poplars grow through both counties.
In the collection of C.
S. Gregson is a remarkable variety, 
captured near his residence, which has the yellow markings 
replaced by fulvous orange.
SESIA, Fab.
Sesia spheciformis, W.V. Chat Moss (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., 1845, 
p. 1220, and J.C) and Botany Bay Wood in the same neigh- 
bourhood (C.S.G.) are the only recorded localities for this 
species in Lancashire or Cheshire.
Sesia tipuliformis, Clerck.
Generally distributed in South-West 
Lancashire and Cheshire, but absent or scarce in North 
Lancashire.
Lane.— Bolton (WJ.) ; Crosby (G.
A. Harker) ; Hale and 
West Derby (C.S.G.); Huyton (S.J.C.) ; Southport and Warring- 
ton (N.C.).
Ches.— Hough Green near Chester, and the larvae common at 
the Lead Works, Chester (A.O.W.) ; Bowdon and Withington 
(J.C).
Sesia myopaeformis, Bork.
Taken near Grange Station in 1880 by 
Mr. Murray of Carnforth (J.B.H. in Ent. Mo.
Mag., xvii, 70).
Feb. j 886.
54 
NOTES — LEPIDOPTERA.
Sesia culiciformis, L.
Chat Moss, rare (J.C.) ; a single specimen 
captured at Hartford (S.J.C.).
Fam. Z YGALNIDAZ.
INO, Leach.
Ino statices, L.
Appears very local in both counties, 
Lane— Crosby and Hale Marsh (C.S.G.); Chat Moss 
(J.C, W.J.); Railway bank near Chorley (J.B.H.) ; near 
Warrington (N.C.).
Ches.
— Delamere Forest (A.O.W.) ; Knutsford (T.
Harrison, 
Intell., 1857, i, 123).
Ino geryon, Hiib.
The only localities for this species of which I 
have any record are : Grange, not rare (J.B.H.), and Silver- 
dale (J.C.M.).
ZYG^NA, Fab.
Zygaena lonicerse, Esp. Recorded from Knutsford by Thomas 
Harrison (Intell, 1857, i.
123).
Zygaena trifolii, Esp. Very local.
Lane.
— Hale Marsh (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Bidston Marsh (N.C.) ; Malpas (A.O.W.) ; Oak-mere 
and Knutsford (J.C).
Zygaena meliloti, Esp.
' Formerly common near Manchester, and 
on the railway bank near Scorton ' (J.B.H.).
Zygaena filipendulse, L.
Local, but very abundant where it does 
occur.
Lane.
— All along the Lancashire coast from Blackpool to 
Crosby; in hayfields all over North Lancashire (J.B.H.) ; near 
Bolton (W.J.); Chat Moss (J.C).
Ches.
— Throughout the Chester Society's district, but local 
(A.O.W.) • Oak-mere and Knutsford (J.C.) ; Delamere (N.C).
The aberration with the spots and hind-wings yellow instead 
of crimson occurs occasionally.
NOTE— LEPIDOPTERA.
Acherontia atropos and Sphinx ligustri near Barnsley.
The past year having been somewhat remarkable for the unusual abundance of 
several of the larger Sphingidse in some districts, it may possibly be of interest 
to record the few occurrences of the same around Barnsley.
As far as I am aware 
they consist only of two larvae of Acherontia atropos which were brought to me 
from different localities during September, and one imago of Sphinx ligustri taken 
in the town and brought to me during the same month.
Both these species are 
rare here ; A.
atropos is the more plentiful of the two, having appeared in 
comparative abundance in some years, but I have no note of more than one in a 
season being reported since 1869.
S. ligustri is decidedly, unusual ; only seven 
specimens have been taken in the district to my knowledge, five of which were 
captured in 1862.
— Wm. E.
Brady, Barnsley, 6th January, 1886.
Naturalist, 
55 
A SEPTEMBER WALK THROUGH LANCASHIRE, 
CHESHIRE, AND STAFFORDSHIRE.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL, M.C.S.
Chiswick.
Having recently had occasion to go to Liverpool, I determined to 
make the most of my opportunity, and get a glimpse of North of 
England natural history.
I accordingly walked from Liverpool as far 
as Froghall, in Staffordshire, making observations on the way.
My 
attention was chiefly devoted to conchology, and I only noted such 
of the other forms of life as forced themselves upon my attention, 
generally in contrast to the more familiar South.
The lists of mollusca 
given below are arranged in the order in which they were found, and 
hence the first mentioned will in most cases be the commonest in 
that particular district.
September 9th, 1885.
— Before starting from Liverpool I visited 
the Museum.
The collections here, although small, are very well 
arranged and neatly put up — in this respect far superior to those in the 
Museum at London.
I noticed in the collection a sinistral example 
of Helix pomatia, supposed to be British.
There is a similar but 
smaller 'British' example in the London Museum, but for the present 
perhaps it would be best not to include this form in the British fauna 
on the strength of two examples, the precise locality not being stated 
in either case.
There are also some curious examples of Helix 
nemoralis from Oporto, one of them being purplish-fawn, with a 
formula 00345, and another yellow and bandless.
I will now commence the account of my walk.
LANCASHIRE.
Liverpool to Prescot.
— The Mollusca observed were : — 
Limax agvestis, type.
Hyalina cellaria.
, , v.
sylvatica.
Helix concinna.
Avion hovtensis v.
fasciata.
Hyalina nitidula v.
nitens.
Helix votundata (abundant).
Avion atev v.
vufa.
Hyalina nitidula.
Limax agvestis var.
(*) 
Helix votundata v.
pyvamidata (one).
Cochlicopa lubvica.
H. hispida.
Avion hovtensis var.
( 2 ) 
Hyalina alliavia.
The variety of L.
agrestis ( 1 ) was entirely dark greyish; that oiArion 
hovtensis ( 2 ) was greenish yellow, with a yellow mantle and scarcely 
perceptible bands.
I found several specimens, all alike.
I noticed the larvae of Spilosoma lubricipeda Esp., and of S.
men- 
thrastri Esp.
Feb. 1886.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL : A SEPTEMBER WALK.
September 10th.
Prescot to Rainhill.
— Limncea peregra was 
common in a large pond or reservoir.
I noticed the trail of a slug 
on the pavement at Rainhill, and following it up, found in the road 
a variety of Limax flavus.
It was adult, and resembled the typical 
form in its markings, but the ground colour was very light, almost 
white.
The slime was thick and yellow.
The extreme abundance of 
Equisdum arvense by the roadside, both here and round Warrington, 
seemed rather remarkable.
I never saw so much of it in the south.
Rainhill to Warrington.
— 
Planorbis albus (on Nuphar lutea in a Arion hortensis v.
fasciata.
pond).
Helix rotundata.
Arion hortensis var.
(similar to that Arion ater v.
rufa (a very large one).
found near Prescot).
Limax agrestis, type.
(In the Liver- 
Hyalina radiatitla (one).
pool brickfield the type far out- 
Pisidium pusillum.
numbered v.
sylvalica ; here the 
Planorbis contortus.
reverse was the case.
) 
Limnaa peregra.
Arion ater (two brown-black speci- 
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
mens).
Motacilla lugubris and Hirundo rustica seemed more abundant than 
I have seen them in the south, especially the former.
, The Wagtail 
was also very common in Cheshire.
The most striking point about Lancashire conchology, as far as 
I was able to investigate it, is the absence or extreme rarity of every 
species of Helix whatsoever, H.
rotundata alone excepted.
Hyalina 
(or, as most British conchologists call it, Zonites) was much less rare.
Bulimus acutus being really a Helix, perhaps finds Lancashire as 
unpleasant as the others do, and on this account does not inhabit 
that coast, but as to the cause of this dearth of a large and usually 
prominent genus I am not quite clear.
CHESHIRE.
Warrington to Knutsford.
— The Mollusca observed included : — 
Helix rotundata.
Planorbis carinatus.
Hyalina cellaria.
Limncea pereg7-a.
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Limncea truncatula.
Hyalina nitidula.
Limax lojvis.
Cochlicopa lubrica.
Hyalina nitida.
Carychinm minimum.
(b) Arion ater (very young, pale).
Helix hispida.
Hyalina alliaria.
H. concinna.
Arion hortensis v.
fasciata.
Limncea peregra var.
Hyalina crystallina (one under a brick).
Pisidium fontinale.
Physa fontinalis.
{ft) Limncea palustris.
Planorbis albus.
Sphwrium corneum.
Pisidium pusillum.
Those from (a) to (b) inclusive were all found in or round a small 
pond on the left-hand side of the road, with Nuphar lutea, Le?n?ia 
Naturalist, 
T. D.
A. COCKERELL : A SEPTEMBER WALK.
57 
minor, Alisma plantago, &c.
Limax loevis was also common round 
another pond a little further on.
It was interesting to note how, as the localities changed the 
plants in the hedges would disappear and give way to others, and 
these in turn to others.
Thus at one place the most conspicuous 
plant in the hedge was Foxglove {Digitalis purpurea), and this in 
turn gave way to Gnaphalium uliginosum, and then this disappeared, 
and Campanula rotundifolia was the principal feature.
There is a 
large rookery two miles from Knutsford.
Close to Knutsford I took 
Serica brunnea.
September 11th.
Knutsford to Chelford.
— 
Helix rotundata.
Limncea peregra (on Lemna minor in 
Hyalina alliaria.
a small pond).
Helix aspersa (one only).
Planorbis albus (on Veronica beccabunga 
Arion ater v.
rufa.
in a ditch).
Hyalina nitidula.
Limax agrestis, type.
Helix nemoralis v.
libellula 00300 (a Arion ater (very young, pale yellow).
broken shell found under a stone Sphcerium cornenm.
with Polydesmus complanaUis).
Limncea peregra v.
ovata.
Arion hortensis v.
fasciata.
Pisidium nitidum.
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Pisidium pusilhtm.
Found a specimen of Donacia dentipes Fab. on a Nuphar lutea 
leaf, in a pond four miles from Knutsford.
Near this pond I saw a 
flock of Lapwings ( Vanellus cristatus).
At Chelford I took a specimen of Hadena protea Bork.
at rest on 
an oak tree.
Chelford to Congleton.
— 
Helix nemoralis v.
petiveria 12345.
Arion hortensis var.
(with grey body, 
Cochhcopa lubrica.
yellowish shield and faint bands).
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Planorbis contortus.
Pisidium pusillum.
Pisidium pusillum var.
(large and pale 
Planorbis albus.
Limncea peregra.
yellow).
Arion hortensis var.
(light orange, a Carychium minimum.
small one.) Hyalina radiatula (one).
I noticed the red hairy gall of Cynips rosce.
Also some violet- 
flowered specimens of Viola tricolor, and several patches of Tussilago 
farfa?-a infested with sEcidiwn tussilaginis.
A Squirrel {Sciurus vulgaris) ran past me in the hedge close to 
Congleton.
Congleton to the county border.
— 
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Limnaa peregra v.
ovata (in a pond 
Arion hortensis v.
fasciata.
with Elodea canadensis and Nas- 
turtium officinale).
Feb. 1886.
T D, A.
COCKERELL : A SEPTEMBER WALK.
Hyalina cellaria.
Hyalitta alliaria.
[River.] Helix rotundata v.
alba.
(One very 
Helix rotundata.
good one on the top of a wall.) 
Hyalina crystallina.
Limax arborum.
Cochlicopa lubrica.
Hyalina radiatula.
STAFFOKDSHIRE.
Down in a hollow there is a smithy, and here, I was informed,.
I crossed the border into Staffordshire.
County border to Leek.
— 
Pisidinm pusillum.
Hyalina crystallina.
Limncea peregra.
Helix rotundata.
Hyalina alliaria.
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Fir trees being abundant, mollusca were correspondingly scarce, 
Ranunculus flammula was common in the little streams, as also before 
Congleton.
At Leek I found a specimen of Gonoptera libat?'ix.
September 12th.
Leek to Cheddleton.
— 
Limax arborum, type.
Helix hispida.
H. caperata (very abundant on a wall, as also the variety ornata.
One of the 
latter belonged to Locard's sub-var.
ditmortieria, which has only one band, 
and that above the periphery).
Limax arborum var.
appeared quite unicolorous, except on careful 
examination.
The shield is brown, with the bands almost invisible, 
the body purplish brown, with a light dorsal line, but otherwise almost 
unicolorous.
This variety, which was found on the wall with H.
caperata f 
approaches var.
alpestris Less.
& Poll., but is not quite identical with it.
I took a specimen of Xylina ornithopus Rott.
( = X.
rhizolitha Fab.) 
on a wall about three miles from Leek.
Cheddleton to Kingsley.— Mollusca : — 
Helix nemoralis v.
rubella 00300.
Pisidinm pusillum.
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Arion hortensis v.
grisea.
Helix hispida.
Limax agrestis, type.
Hyalina nitidula.
A. hortensis v.
fasciata.
Euphrasia officinalis was very common by the road at one place* 
Kingsley to Froghall Railway Station.— 
Cochlicopa lubrica.
Hyalina radiatula.
Arion flavus.
Hyalina nitidula.
A. hortensis v .
fasciata.
Limax agrestis v.
sylvatica.
Helix rotundata.
Helix pulchella, type.
Limax arborum (keel lighter, and bands Hyalina cellaria v.
albida Jeff.
less distinct than in the Cheshire Helix nemoralis.
(An extremely young 
one).
one, with a formula 00300.) 
Hyalina cellaria.
Conultis fulvus (one).
Helix concinna.
Naturalist, 
NOTES MOLLUSCA AND PLANTS.
59 
The 1 Arion flavus'' appears to be identical with the form described 
under this name.
Whether it is distinct from A.
hortensis is quite 
another matter.
It was, however, found within a foot of a very 
characteristic example of A.
hortensis v.fasciata.
Neuroptera.
— By way of postscript I may add that I took two 
species when in Lancashire, for the names of which I am indebted to 
Mr. McLachlan.
They are Hemerobius nervosus from Rainhill, and 
Limnophilus lunatus from the side of a pond between Rainhill and 
Warrington.
They are, he says, 'both very common; ' but as so little 
has been done in recording the geographical distribution of these 
insects, it will be well to record them.
NOTE— MOLL USCA .
Achatina acicuia (the Needle Agate Shell).— I read with much 
pleasure the notes on Achatina acicuia by Mr. J.
Emmet, in the Naturalist, and 
noted his quotation from Gray : ' Found in stone coffins of the Saxon period.' 
Concerning this quotation, the following remarks may be of interest.
During 
August I visited Bath, and spent a couple of hours in the very excellent museum 
of the Literary and Scientific Society, in which there is much to interest con- 
chologists.
Amongst other things I saw some ' Powdered quartz from two stone 
coffins (Saxon ?) found in Bathwick Hill, 12 feet below the surface.'' Accompanying 
this powdered quartz were the following objects taken from it, arranged and named.
It will be noticed what an extraordinary assemblage of remains was present.
The 
list includes Fossil Shells and Echinoderms, a Sea Lily, Marine and Land Shells, 
&c.:— Serpula (Fossil), oolite ; Terebratula (Fossil), oolite ; Echinus spines (Fossil); 
Haematite Iron-ore; Pentacrinites (Fossil); Achatina acicuia, 50 specimens ; Zua 
(Cochlicopa) lubrica, 25 ; Anomia ephippium ; Limax ( ?
species) ; Helix 
rufescens, 1 ; Helix pulchella, 12 ; Helix concinna, 1 ; Helix virgata, 1 ; Zonites 
cellarius, I.
Can any reader of the Naturalist say whether this was the instance 
upon which Gray's remark was based?
(It maybe worth while noting that in 
another case there were man) 7 recent Land and Freshwater Shells, of several species, 
extracted from the head of a Goat, taken from 14 feet below the surface in the Bath 
Valley* Also there is a Dinornis bone from New Zealand, from the hollow of 
which were taken many shells, Hydrobia ?, Flelix ?, &c.) — C.
T. Musson, 
Nottingham, October 5th, 1885.
NOTES— BOTANY.
Araucaria producing Seed in East Yorkshire.— There are two 
very fine Araucarias in Burton Constable Park, near Hull, and last autumn I 
observed on many of the branches clusters of long narrow cones, which I sub- 
sequently discovered to be the male cones.
On the nth October last I observed 
two very large fuzzy masses on one of the trees at the end of the branches, high up.
I thought these must be female cones, but could not then get at them.
On the 
25th October, being very anxious to examine them, I borrowed an old coat from a 
gamekeeper who lived near, and, at the expense of a few scratches, climbed the 
tree.
On touching one of the cones in question it fell to pieces, and I discovered 
that it consisted of a great number of long seeds, narrowing to a point at one end, 
and attached to a tough white cone-shaped substance by their pointed ends.
There must have been over fifty of them.
The other cone had produced no seeds.
I gathered up as many of the seeds as I could find, and intend to have them 
planted.
I presume the cone must have been produced last year, and attained 
maturity this summer, though I did not observe it last year.— E.
W. Wade, Hull, 
November 3rd, 1885.
Feb. 1886.
NOTES BOTANY.
Trientalis europea in Nidderdale.— On page 160 of the last part 
of the Transactions of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, I see Trientalis europcea 
is ' said to grow near Brimham Rocks.
' As Mrs. Clark and myself picked it on 
the right bank slopes opposite Pateley Bridge in some abundance in 1882, I can 
confirm it.— J.
E. Clark, York, September 24th, 1885.
Manchester Cryptogamie Society, September 21st, 1885.- 
Mr. Thomas Rogers, secretary, exhibited two rare mosses gathered a few days 
previously at Mere, Cheshire, Gymhostomum rostellatum and Physcomitrium 
sphcericum.
Mr. Burgess showed specimens of mosses from Knutsford bog.
Mr.
Forster exhibited a striking variety of Lastrea fiiix-mas — belonging to the section 
propinqua^ which he had found a fortnight ago in the neighbourhood of Patterdale.
Bradford Naturalists' Society— A Year's Botanical Work.— 
Five years ago the Bradford Naturalists' Society mapped out a large portion of 
Mid-West Yorkshire, for the purpose of investigating its fauna and flora.
Recorders were appointed for the different sections, and the work commenced 
in good earnest, and has been unremittingly carried on to the present time.
At 
the close of each year, the recorders give an account of the progress made in their 
respective departments during the year.
Botany, perhaps, receives the lion's 
share of attention, but only those plants are placed on record which have been 
gathered by members of the society ; by this plan it is hoped that in a few years a 
practical knowledge will be obtained of the flora of the district.
During the 
past year enthusiasm has run very high, and never before have the results, so far 
as botany is concerned, been so satisfactory.
Of Flowering Plants 36 species have been added to the list, some of which, 
however, such as Bupleurum rotundifolium L.
, Lathy rus hirsuius L., Medicago 
falcata L.
, Agrostis spica-venti Beauv.
, &c.
, are not indigenous to the district.
The following are amongst the principal additions: — Ranunculus sceleratus L., 
from Frizinghall ; Colchicum autumnale L.
, Grassington ; Calainintha acinos 
•Clairv.
, Gordale ; Listera cordata Br.
, Penyghent ; Scirpns sylvaticus L.
, near 
Keighley ; Juncus compressus Jacq., Kilnsey ; Carex ampullacea Good., near 
Keighley; Carex rigida Good., Penyghent; Melica nutans L.
, Bolton Woods, 
Ribblehead, &c.
The total number of Phanerogams now known to occur in the 
society's district is 698, 632 of which have been found in Upper Airedale.
Of Mosses 8 species have been added to the list, including Te'trodontium 
brownianum, from Harden ; Atrichum crispum, Newsome Dean ; and Splachnum 
ampirilaceum, from Malham Tarn.
Three additional Hepaticse have been found, amongst which are Trichocolea 
tomentella, from Shipley Glen and Holden Gill ; and Jitngermannia capitata, from 
near Horton-in-Ribblesdale.
The past year has been remarkable for the abundance of esculent fungi, which 
made their appearance in great profusion during the autumn months.
Many stones 
in weight of Coprimis cornatus and C.
atramentarius have been consumed and 
appreciated by many members and friends, and large quantities have been gathered 
of Peziza venosa (a most delicious species), Hygrophorus virgineus, H.
pratensis, 
and Marasmias oreades.
Amongst the 85 additions of fungi are -.—Coprimis hemerobius, from Hawk- 
sworth ; Lentinus cochleatus.
Heaton ; Panus torulosus, Hawksworth ; Hygro- 
phorus ovinus, Hawksworth ; Schizophyllum commune, Steeton ; Boletus rubinus, 
Bolton Woods ; Cynophallus caninus, Saltaire ; Chondrioderma umbilicatum, near 
Keighley ; Puccinia baryi, Bolton Woods ; Peziza leporina, Heaton.
During the spring and summer months, a series of experiments with the 
Uredines was successfully conducted, and clearly demonstrated the hetercecismal 
nature of some of these curious parasites.
Of Lichens, 7 species have been met with, including Stigonema saxicola, from 
Ingleton ; Calicium citrinum, Clapham ; Urceolaria scruposa, Ingleton ; Amphi- 
loma lanuginosum, Malham, Clapham, &c.
Of Freshwater Algae 26 additional species have been found, amongst which 
are : — Palmodactylon subramosum, from Newsome Dean ; Horniscia moniliformis, 
Cullingworth ; Dictyosphceriuni ehrenbergii, near Bradford ; Chroococcus turgidus, 
Cullingworth ; Cyhndrocystis diplospora, Cullingworth.
— H.
T. Soppitt and 
W. West, Bradford, December 1885.
Naturalist 
6i 
BOOK NOTICES.
Proceedings of the Chester Society of Natural Science.
No. 3.
Chester, 1885, 8vo, 133 pages and nine plates.
Price 2s.
6d.
It is a pleasure to be able to congratulate a local society upon the production 
of work of" the stamp of the part now before us, and the pleasure is enhanced in 
this case by the fact that the publication is strictly confined to l'ocal work.
The 
papers in the present part are fifteen in number, and embrace a varied range of 
subject.
The president of the society (Prof.
T. McKenny Hughes) leads off with 
' Notes on the Geology of the Vale of Clwyd,' which are illustrated by means of 
eight plates.
This is followed by a lecture on ' The Denudations of North Wales,' 
by Mr. Aubrey„Strahan, M.A., F.G.S., and this again by the abstract of a paper en- 
titled 'A Problem for Cheshire Geologists,' by Prof.
John W.
Judd, F.R.S.
The next paper is by Mr. D.
Mackintosh, F.G.S., upon ' Traces of an Interglacial 
Land-Surface at Crewe.' Mr. W.
Shone, F.G.S., then investigates 'The Silting 
up of the Dee: its Cause,' after which Mr. A.
O. Walker, F.L.S., discusses the 
'Climatic Causes affecting the distribution of Lepidoptera in Great Britain,' 
pointing out that the diminution of the number of species is N.
W. rather than N., 
and attributing a large amount of unfavourable influence to an abnormally damp 
climate.
The same writer gives a useful list of the ' Macro-lepidoptera of the 
Chester District,' for which the Diurni number 37, the Sphingina 18, the 
Bombycina 56, the Noctuina 184, the Geometrina 165, and the Pyralidina 69, 
making a total of 529 species.
There is yet another paper by Mr. Walker, in 
which ' The. Climate of the Chester District (including Denbighshire and Flint- 
shire), [is] considered in relation to Fruit Growing.' The succeeding paper is by 
the Scientific Secretary of the society, Dr. H.
Stolterfoth, M.A., who deals with 
' Surface Dredging on the Dee,' and notices the various forms of life met with.
A 'Note on Glauconome disticha, from the Bala Beds of Glyn Ceiriog,' by 
Mr. George W.
Shrubsole, is of interest to palaeontologists, and ' A List of the 
Land and Freshwater Shells of the District,' by the same writer, equally so to 
conchologists, although the latter list would be improved by a more copious cita- 
tion of localities or definition of range and habitat.
Another palseontological paper 
from Mr. Shrubsole's pen is 'On the Occurrence of Calcisphcera (Williamson) in the 
Mountain" Limestone of the Eglwyseg Rocks, near Llangollen,' and he chronicles 
the failure of an attempt at acclimatisation in a note ' On the Occurrence of Venus 
mercenaria (L.) in the Estuary of the Dee.' Next follows a ' List of Caradoc or 
Bala Fossils found in the Neighbourhood of Bala, Corwen, and Glyn Ceiriog,' by 
Mr. Thomas Ruddy, of Pale, Corwen, which is given in a succinct and tabulated 
form.
The last paper in the part is by Mr. J.
D. Siddall, upon 'The American 
Water Weed, Anacharis alsinastrum Bab.: its Structure and Habit; with some 
Notes on its introduction into Great Britain, and the causes affecting its rapid 
spread at first and apparent present diminution,' and is illustrated by a plate.
The 
whole of the papers are of high interest and of much value, and we congratulate 
the society upon so creditable a volume, and still more so that they resist the 
temptation to print papers which have no relation to the area of their investigations.
The Vertebrate Fauna of Sutherlandshire.— By T.
E. Buckley, 
B.A., F.Z.S., &c, and J.
A. Harvie Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., &c.
Being 
an appendix to Saint John's Tour in Sutherland, new edition, pp.
291-374.
This is one of the most important and useful papers of its kind that we have 
seen, and affords a fit model for anyone who feels impelled to construct a local 
catalogue.
The thoroughness with which it is done, the care and detailed accuracy 
with which the records are given, the adequacy with which the introductory matter 
is framed so as to afford the reader a clear comprehension of the physical aspects 
and general appearance of the county as a field for natural history observation, all 
entitle the work to our warmest praise.
So also does the copious list of the books 
and memoranda which constitute the ' sources of information,' and the fact that it 
is a ' vertebrate ' fauna, the mammals, reptiles, and fishes receiving their fair share 
of attention instead of the customary neglect.
The authors -divide the county 
between them, Mr. Buckley being responsible for the eastern, and Mr. Harvie 
Brown for the western portion of the county, the high road from Lairg to Tongue 
serving as the line of demarcation.
To descend to details, the list includes 
Feb. 1886.
62 
BOOK NOTICES : NOTES AND NEWS.
32 mammals, 8 reptiles and amphibians, and 179 birds, besides which certain 
records are mentioned which are either extinctions, errors, escapes, or otherwise 
doubtful.
The fish-list is for ' Sutherland and the Moray Firth,' 113 species being 
enumerated.
To save misconception we may say that the appendix is not published 
separately, and would add that any one desiring it would do well to possess them- 
selves of the charmingly-written and classical work to which it is appended.
Transactions of the Leeds Geological Association, containing 
abstracts of papers read and reports of field excursions, during sessions 1883-4-5.
Part I.
— Edited by the Hon. Secretary, Leeds, 1885, pp.
48.
The vigour and life which now characterises the Association's operations, and 
the success which has attended the labours of Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., as 
honorary secretary, are well exemplified by the contents of the present part.
The 
abstracts (pity 'tis they are so short) show that the field of view of the Association 
is not limited by local considerations, inasmuch as the subjects range so far afield 
as Canadian plumbago mines and Australian gold fields, Cornish granite and the 
Channel Tunnel.
We understand with pleasure that future parts will include 
original papers at length, and we wish all prosperity to the Association.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The annual meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, which was originally 
fixed for the 3rd of March, is now postponed to Monday, the 22nd of that month.
The meeting will be held at Beverley, and the president, the Rev. W.
H. Dallinger, 
LL.D., F.R.S., etc., will deliver the annual address.
XXX 
At a recent meeting of the Linnean Society, Messrs.
S. J.
Capper of Liverpool, 
and C.
T. Musson of Nottingham, were elected Fellows.
— x>x 
By the last list of the Fellows and Associates of the Linnean Society, we note 
that there are 68 in the northern counties, distributed as follows : — in Cheshire, 
.seven ; in Cumberland, one ; in Durham, five ; in Lancashire, thirty, inclusive of 
eight in Liverpool and seven in Manchester ; in Lincolnshire, three ; in Northum- 
berland and Notts, one each ; in Yorkshire, twenty, six of whom are in Leeds ; 
and none at all in Derbyshire, Westmoreland, and the Isle of Man.
— — xjx 
W T e are glad to see the issue of the second part of Dr. Spruce's Memoir on the 
Hepaticae of the Amazon and of the Andes of Peru and Ecuador, which is published 
as part of the Transactions of the Edinburgh Botanical Society.
The descriptive 
part of the work is now finished, and the work itself may be regarded as being — 
to use the author's words— technically complete.
Illness (we are sorry to learn) 
has hitherto prevented Dr. Spruce from finishing his projected introductory portion, 
dealing with the physical features of the regions explored, their connection with the 
vegetation, and other like topics.
It is hoped, however, to issue it hereafter as a 
Supplement to the work — a work which Yorkshiremen will regard' as a monument 
of the industry of one of the ablest botanists their county has produced.
xxx 
Under the title of ' A Nomenclature of Colours for the use of Naturalists, and 
a Compendium of useful Knowledge for Ornithologists ' will shortly be issued from 
the pen of Mr. Robert Ridgway, C.M.Z.S., of the Smithsonian Institution, a work 
of great importance to all naturalists, and one that must be hailed as a boon, as it 
will supply what is admittedly a most distinct want.
It will consist of two parts, 
the first of which is to be devoted to the Nomenclature of Colours, and embraces a 
general dissertation on the principles of colour, a chapter on the technique of the 
subject, and an extensive vocabulary of tints.
The plates to this portion of the 
subject represent, with their names, nearly 200 more or less distinct tints, and 
indicate the outlines of the principal forms of colour marking.
Part II is devoted 
to the ornithological aspect of the subject, and to the terms used and the measure- 
ments adopted by ornithologists.
The work is the result of years of labour on the 
part of a naturalist eminently qualified to undertake the task, since he is well 
known both as a skilful artist and a talented ornithologist.
. 
Naturalist, 
NOTES AND NEWS.
63 
We are pleased to learn that our old friend Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., B.Sc, 
of Harrogate, has been appointed assistant to Prof.
Williamson, in the Owens 
College, Manchester, in succession to Mr. Marshall Ward.
>co< 
The first winter meeting of the Hull Field Naturalists' Society was held on 
the 19th November, the president (Mr. N.
F. Dobree) in the chair.
The reports 
of the various sections for the summer season were handed in.
In ornithology 
the Grasshopper Warbler was reported as having been as usual heard once or 
twice.
An abnormal number of eggs in the nests of the Blue Tit and Robin was 
also recorded.
A greater number than of late years, of the once numerous 
Dotterel, were also seen on the Flamborough Heights during the spring migration.
Of lepidoptera the same paucity as in other parts of the country was noted.
The re-occurrence of Hadena occulta after an interval of five years, and the 
capture of a specimen of Sphinx convolvuli were the only noteworthy records.
In botany, 16 additions had been made to the local list, the most prominent being 
Villarsia nymphceoides, Hellebores fatidus, Catabrosa aquatica, Hyoscyamus niger, 
Linaria elatine, and the Wall Rue Fern.
The complete list was ordered to be sent 
to the secretary of the botanical section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
Of 
micro-fungi a satisfactory list was returned, the /Ecidia alone numbering 14, the 
most noteworthy being : JEcidium pimpinellce var.
apii and iridium primula.
The tenth annual meeting of the Bradford Naturalists' Society was held on the 
7th December.
The report showed that the Society had not only maintained but 
materially improved upon its past prosperity.
Reference was made to the new 
arrangement by which the various Scientific Societies in the town were affiliated 
for certain purposes, but without prejudice to their independent existence.
Under 
this arrangement all meetings are to be held in the rooms of the Bradford 
Philosophical Society.
The election of officers for 1886 resulted in the selection 
of Mr. H.
T. Soppitt for president, and Messrs.
John Eastwood and E.
Robinson 
as secretaries.
In addition to vice-presidents, council, and other officers, the follow- 
ing recorders were also chosen : — Botany, Messrs.
W. West and the president ; 
Entomology and Vertebrate Zoology, Mr. J.
W. Carter ; Invertebrate Zoology, 
Mr. A.
I. Kershaw ; Geology, Mr. Allan ; and Conchology, the president.
XxX 
The Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association held its sixteenth 
annual meeting on the nth December.
The principal feature of the report was a 
reference to the change of domicile to be effected with the new year.
The 
increasing number of engagements for which the rooms of the Leeds Philosophical 
Society are now in demand having interfered seriously with the convenience of the 
club, which has met there for the past two years, arrangements have been made 
with the Leeds Corporation, whereby a room in the Municipal Buildings is placed 
at the club's disposal.
Another feature greatly to the advantage of the club is 
that henceforth their library will be placed in charge of the Public Librarian, and 
the books thereby rendered accessible to the members at all times, while the 
valuable stores of the Public Reference Library will be accessible to the members 
during the club's meetings.
The approaching publication of a Fauna and Flora of 
the Leeds District was announced, and the report generally was of a satisfactory 
nature.
Afterwards the club proceeded to the election of officers, most of whom 
were re-elected, the most important change being the election of Mr. J.
W. Addy- 
man, B.A., as joint-secretary with Mr. T.
W. Cox.
>oo< 
At the 24th annual meeting of the Heckmondwike Naturalists' Society, Jan. 2nd, 
1886, the following office-bearers were elected : — President, J.
A. Erskine 
Stuart, L.R.C.S. E.
; vice-presidents, Messrs.
J. M.
Barber and Walter Exley ; 
secretary, Mr. R.
Renton ; librarian, Mr. T.
Allatt ; treasurer, Mr. Thos.
Exley ; 
representative to Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, Mr. J.
M. Barber.
The funds are 
in good condition, and although the Society is weak in numbers, the excellent 
library helps to keep it together.
It is hoped that the delivery of the Gilchrist 
Lectures in Heckmondwike during this winter will help the Naturalists' Society, 
by stirring up an interest in natural science throughout the district.
Feb. 1886.
6 4 
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR NOVEMBER 1885.
Edited by GEORGE PAUL, F.G.S., F.R.Met.S., Moortown, Leeds.
Name of Station ; 
its height above sea-level \ 
AND 
Name of Observer.
ISLE OF MAN: 
Cronkbourne (140ft.)..
.. ) 
A. W.
Moore, F.M.S ) 
Barrow-in-Furness ( — ).
W. S.
Whitworth ....
Liverpool (Bidston)( — ) 
J. Hartnup, jun 
Newton-Reigny (Penrith) ) 
( 577 ft.)T.G.Benn, F.M.S. j 
Hawes Junction (1,135 ft.) \ 
Station-master ) 
Stonyhurst (381 ft.) ) 
Rev. S.
J. Perry, F.R.S. J 
North Shields (— ) .
. .
J. W.
Irvine 
Scarborough (120 ft.) ....
Allan Rowntree, F.M.S.
York Museum (— ) 
The Curator 
Moortown, Leeds (500 ft.) 
G. Paul, F.G.S., F.M.S.
Hull, Derringham (10ft.) 
Wm. Lawton 
Spurn Point (19 ft.) 
J. B.
Smith 
Louth, Lincs.
(111 ft.)....
T. W.
Wallis 
Boston, Lincs.
(24 ft.) ....
W.H.Wheeler,M.In.C.E.
Loughborough (— ) 
W. Berridge, F.M.S 
Atmos 
pheric' 
pres- 
sure.
TEMPERATURE (IN SHADE).
RAINFALL.
inch 
29-844 
29-859 
29*867 
29-878 
28- 619 
2 9 - 9 IT 
29*869 
2 9 -: 
29 ' 1 
29-898 
deg.
44'79 
42 4 
43'i 
39 '1 
37*9 
46'5 
42*60 
43'98 
42-30 
40-87 
30" 020 41*50 
29*877: 43*6° 
29-810!
42-5 
29-905!
42*0 
Extremes.
Highest 
Maximum 
registered.
deg.
54*2 
53 o 
59'° 
57-0 
52*0 
56-0 
59 'o 
56-5 
59 'o 
56*0 
57 o 
54'o 
56*0 
57*o 
7 th 
3rd 
3rd 
3rd 
3rd 
3rd 
3rd 
2nd 
3rd 
3 rd 
28th 
28th 
28th 
( 2nd I 
lx 9 th I 
Lowest 
Minimum 
registered.
deg.
31 *o 
30*0 
20 "o 
23*0 
26*9 
26*0 
33*7 
24*0 
27*8 
27-0 
35 *o 
15th 
ji 5 th 
( 24th 
]i5th 
1 16th 
16th 
16th 
22nd 
18th 
6th 
18th 
18th 
( 18th I 
(19th S 
15th 
1 6th 
ti8th r 
o o 
Greatest Fall 
Single Day.
inch 
4*35o 
2*760 
2*180 
4*530 
3*825 
1 530 
1*490 
1*940 15 
2*500 
970 
960 
3* 080 
2*35o 
inch 
0*836 
1-390 
0*630 
r 130 
1*290 
o-836 
o*55o 
0*420 
o*55<> 
0*570 
0*580 
0*560 
0*900 
0*470 
10th 
2nd 
26th 
26th 
2nd 
26th 
26th 
26th 
26th 
24th 
24th 
3rd 
24th 
London 29-909 44*0 
59 *o 
28th 
30 'o 
1 6th 
2'3io 16 0*530 24th 
* Not reduced to sea-level.
Wind.— 1st Division (Isle of Man) N.
1, N.E. 2, E.
25, S.E. 7 , S.
6, S.W. 10, W.
6, N.W. 2, calm 1 day.
2nd Division : N.
2, N.E. 6%, E.
7, S.E. 3, S.
2^, S.W. 4 K, W.
2, N.W. 2^, calm o day.
3rd Division : N.
1, N.E. 4, E.
5, S.E. 4%, S.
3, S.W. 4, W.
5 %, N.W.
%, calm 2 days.
4 th Division: N.
1%, N.E. 2^, E.
5%, S.E. 6, S.
2^, S.W. 6y 2 ,W.
4, N.W. 2, calm o day.
London : N.
2, N.E. 4, E.
7. S.E. 3, S.
2, S.W. 5, W.
2, N.W. 1, calm 4 days.
Gales.
— Isle of Man 5 days; 2nd Division, 2 days; 3rd Division, 3 days; 4th Division, 17 days; and 
London 4 days.
Snow.
— On 1 day at Hull and York, and 1 day at Hawes.
Bright Sunshine.
— Isle of Man, 52-5 hours; Newton-Reigny, 39 hours 55 minutes; Stonyhurst, 
37*9 hours ; and Hull, 31*3 hours.
Highest Temperature in Sun — Isle of Man, 94*2* on 4th ; Newton-Reigny, 93*2° on 2nd ; 
Stonyhurst, 98*5° on 1st ; Leeds (Moortown) 94*6° on 1st ; and Hull, 77*0° on 1st.
Naturalist, 
% FEB 1886 
Now ready, 8w, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
The list contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of 
macro- and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local 
variation in species ; with all other necessary information connected with the 
subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, 
Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 
18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
—Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London: D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I., II., & III.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to he addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
'The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have givei a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The 1 ittle 
book is a most valuable contribution to Britisli zoological literature.' — Attn.
&> Mag.
.Vat. Hist.
"The work is an excellent one of its kind.'— Athcturum.
THE NATUEALI8T.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within tlie next fezv months : — • 
Moss- flora of Asiaton-under-Lyne District— John Whitehead.
Contributions to Phenology--R.
Rosenstock, b.a.
The Migrations of the Salmonidse (Part 2)— Francis Day, CLE., F.Z.S., &c.
Notes on Solway Birds— J.
J. Armistead (Conclusion).
Notes on Birds of High Peak— F.
B. Whitlock.
List of Wensleydale Birds— John Percival.
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire & Cheshire (Part 3, Bombyces)— Dr. Ellis.
Hymenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson.
Liverpool Coleoptera (Parts 7, 8, 9, 10)— J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., &c.
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.
— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnibh notes.
Short Not^S.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Nahiralist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, will be Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
The purpose of this Monthly Magazine is to afford to the Scientific Enquirer a medium through 
which he may ask for and obtain information on every Scientific Subject.
It will be divided into 
the following sections — viz., Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, 
Sale, and Exchange Column.
. 
FIFTH YEAR OF PUBLICATION.
THE JOURML OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6, 
Is the recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, and contains a number 
of valuable and interesting articles relating to every department of Microscopy and the allied 
Sciences, written by experienced Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by a number of 
Lithographic Plates.
It is not only one of the largest and cheapest, but also one of the most widely 
circulated Journals of its class.
Other special features of the Journal are "Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen 
West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., etc.;" " Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of 
new books relating to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Micro- 
scopic or Scientific interest.
There is also a section devoted to " Current Notes and Memoranda," 
"Exchanges," &c.
Both journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
of the Postal 
Microscopical Society.
^ 
London : BATLLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
And all Booksellers.
FIVE GUINEAS IN PRIZES.
2d.] THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
[2d.
A Monthly Illustrated Magazine of Natural History.
£1 Is. for best Essay on life of ROBERT DICK.
£1 Is. for best collection of 100 SHORT SAYINGS from 
well-known Natural History Writers.
£1 Is. for best account of a NATURAL HISTORY RAMBLE.
£1 is.
for best photograph of BRITISH SCENERY.
£1 Is. for best collection of 12 SPRING FLOWERS.
Specimen copy of The Naturalist's World, with full particulars of competitions, 
post-free 2%d.
from PERCY LUND & CO., ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNKNSCHEIN & CO.
Ok all Booksellers.
No. 128.
3 MAR ; 386 
MARCH, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Wh^j^ AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
©onfents : 
PAGE 
Harpalus calceatus (Sturm) at Bridlington Quay — Rev. W.
W. Fozvler, M.A.
F.L.S. F.E.S '..
.'.
65, 66 
Notes on some of the Birds occurring in the Solway District (conclusion)- - 
J. J.
Armistead .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. 69 — 78 
Mosses of Ashton-under-Lyne District — John Whitehead ..
.. ..
.. 85 — 96 
Notes— Mammalia : ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. 67 
Weasel's method of carrying its Young — James Ingleby; Additional Records of 
Captures of the Badger in Yorkshire — George Roberts, M.C.S.
Notes -Birds : 67,68 
Flocks of Skylarks on the Durham Coast — J.
T. T.
Reed ; Leicestershire Bird-notes 
--F.B. Whitlock; Corn Bunting — Diversity of Eges — George Roberts; Grouse 
and the Weather— J.
T. T.
Reed, Rev. J.
Chaloner.
E. T.
Baldwin, T.
H. Nelson, 
and W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., M.B.O.U.
Note— Reptiles : 81 
Reptiles of Warrington District — L.
Greening.
Notes — Fishes: ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. , 81 
Goole Fish-notes — Thomas Bunker ; Whitby Fish-notes — Thos.
Stephenson ; Vendace 
and Gwiniad in the English Lakes — Francis Day , CLE., F.L.S.
Notes — Mollusca:..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. 78 — 8c 
Marine Shells at Whitby — T.
D. A.
Cockereil, M.C.S.
; Varieties of Bythinia 
tentaculata, Zonites excavatns, and Cochlicopa lubrica in N.E. Cheshire — 
J. G.
Milne ; Limnsea peregra m.
decollatum and Bythinia tentaculata m.
decol- 
latum in Cheshire — J.
R. Brockton Tomliti, M.C.S.; Pupa marginata v.
brevis 
in Yorkshire — J.
IV.
Taylor, M.C.S.; Mollusca at Louth, North Lincolnshire— 
H. Wallis Kew ; Lancashire Helices — Robert Standen ; Scarcity of Helices in 
N.E. Cheshire-- J.
G. Milne ; Shells at Millom, Cumberland— J.
W. Taylor; 
Testacella haliotidea v.
scutulum at Chester — W.
Denisoii Roeb?ick, F.L.S.
Notes— Lepidoptera : _ ..
66,67 
Oncocera ahenella and Catoptria expallidana in Yorkshire — G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S..
F.E.S.
; Melanippe unangulata at Bradford and Barden -y.
IV.
Carter.
Note -Palaeontology : ..
.. ..
81 
Palseontological Notes from the British Museum Collections —T.
D. A.
Cockereil.
M.C.S.
Book Notices:— 82 
Clement Reid on the Geology of Holderness ; A.
Somerville's List of Britigh 
Marine Shells ; Botanical Exchange Club Reports for 1883-4.
Notes and News ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. 83 
Meteorological Returns for December 1885— (Edited by Geo. Paul, F.G.S., F.R.Met.S.) 84 
LONDON: 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET.
EUSTON : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghai.l Street.
May also be had of G.
E. East, jun., 241, Evering Road, Upper Clapton, London, E.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 5s., post free 
The NATURALIST.
>C3< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4'-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra' 
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, jd.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Journal of New York Microscopical Society, November 1885.
[Society.
'Manx Note Book for January 1886.
[A.
W. Moore, Editor.
Journal of Conchology for January 1886.
[J.
W. Taylor, Editor.
Royal Dublin Society's Scientific Transactions — Vol. II (in 3 parts), 1879-80 
[mostly devoted to Dr. Sharp's Monograph of the Dytiscidae].
[Society.
Midland Naturalist for February 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for February 1886.
[T.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for February 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for February 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for February 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Natural History Journal for February 1886.
[J.
E. Clarke, Editor.
EXCHANGES.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Ewald's 'Life and Times of Lord Beaconsfield,' 5 volumes, plates, new; 
' Roxburghe Ballads,' 2 volumes ; and Forrest's Third Ramble on Rombalds Moor, 
pamphlet, rare ; for Natural History books or cash.
— Geo. Roberts, Lofthouse, 
Wakefield.
THE BIRDS OF YORKSHIRE.
Information is desired at once on the IVarblers, their distribution, nidification, 
and local names, together with full details of the occurrence of rare species, for 
use in preparing the next portion of this work, which appears in the Transactions 
of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
— W.
Eagle Clarke, 18, Claremont Road, 
Headingley, Leeds.
IMPORTANT NOTICE.— On the 19th September the Editors received 
a communication post-marked ' York,' and directed in a lady's hand, enclosing 
2s.
6d.
postal order, but with no clue as to the sender.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
^;;|7 6 5 
HARPALUS CALCEATUS Sturm AT 
BRIDLINGTON QUAY.
Rev. W.
W. FOWLER, M.A., F.L.S., 
Lincoln ; Secretary to the Entojnological Society of London, and one of the Editors of the 
Entomologists' Monthly Magazine.
While collecting at Bridlington Quay, in August 1879, I turned a 
large Harpalus out of a sandy place on the cliffs, in a place where 
Nebria livida occurred rather freely.
For a long time I had it in my 
collection as my sole representative of H.
tenebrosus, which it much 
resembles in general appearance.
A short while ago I had occasion 
to work the Harpalus group more particularly, and at once saw that 
it was a new species.
This opinion was endorsed by Dr. Sharp, and 
Mr. C.
O. Waterhouse, on comparing it for me with the European 
Harpali in the British Museum, found that it was H.
calceatus Sturm, 
a species that has not occurred for fifty years, and that has long been 
erased from the British lists.
The capture is very interesting, as the species is recorded by 
Dawson as British in the Entomologists' Annual for 1857, p.
66, 
where he says : ' A single female example was captured near Swansea 
as long ago as 1830, by the Rev. C.
Kuper.
I am surprised that 
the species should not be common with us, and that its claim to be 
recorded should even now rest on a solitary individual.
It is plentiful 
in France, and occasionally enters lighted apartments in the summer 
evenings ; moreover, it is a large and conspicuous insect, and very 
unlikely to be overlooked.' 
The following is a description of the insect : — 
Black, or pitchy black, underside sometimes pitchy brown ; antennae 
and palpi- clear red; thorax much broader than long, with sides feebly 
rounded in front, and very slightly contracted, almost straight, towards 
base ; posterior angles right angles ; the entire base is coarsely and 
rugosely punctured, and is depressed on each side, but with no 
evident basal foveae ; elytra rather long, broader in front than base of 
thorax, with deep impunctate striae ; interstices somewhat convex, the 
space between the eighth stria and the margin densely and finely 
punctured, beside the usual marginal row of large pores; metasternum 
rather strongly punctured ; legs black or pitchy black ; tarsi clear red.
Length 11-13 mm.
(5J-6J lin.).
Although I have collected in the locality since, I have never found 
another specimen.
The spot is on the south side of the town, about 
half a mile or three-quarters of a mile along the shore.
Should any 
collector work the place, there is no reason why he should not find 
the beetle, and he will be pretty sure to find some insects that are 
worth having.
Nebria livida is sometimes found abundantly by 
splitting open the clay crevices of the cliffs.
A small and curious 
March 1886.
• F 
66 
NOTE LEPIDOPTERA.
variety of Dyschirtus polities occurs rarely, and a good Bledius, 
which appears to be crassicollis, but concerning the identity of which 
there appears to be some doubt, may be taken in any quantity, if its 
casts on the clay cliffs are discovered.
It must be either erraticus or 
crassicollis (these being the only two in the group of Bledius to which 
it belongs), if it is not a new species to Britain ; it certainly is not 
the former, and in some points differs from Dr. Power's specimens of 
the latter, but I believe that they are really identical.
Dyschirius 
thoracicus, accompanied by Bledius arenarius and Stenus melauopus, 
occurs in great numbers, and Stenus guttula is also very plentiful.
I have taken one specimen of Amara consularis in a sandy place 
near the town.
Several Bembidia (saxatile, tibiale, affine, &c.) are not 
uncommon, and in damp places some little way up the cliffs I have 
found Georyssus pygmceus, looking like little animated balls of mud.
I have no doubt that many others might be found, but as I was 
searching for two or three species particularly, I only observed those 
that came in my way.
The grassy sides of the cliffs near Filey are exceedingly produc- 
tive.
I never found beetles more plentifully by swe'eping than on 
one occasion on a strip of grass on the top of the cliff, at the edge of 
a cornfield not far from the town ; the best beetle I took near Filey 
was Cassida hemisphcerica (the only other specimen I have ever seen 
alive was one that I found last summer at Tenby) ; but some very 
good Hemiptera, notably the very rare Derceocoris seticornis, well 
repaid me for my trouble.
— 
LEPIDOPTERA.
Oncocera ahenella and Oatoptria expallidana in York- 
shire.
— The claim of Oncocera ahenella to be regarded as a Yorkshire insect 
rests on the recorded occurrence of the species at Huddersfield.
In the 'Yorkshire 
List of Lepidoptera,' p.
ill, I expressed the opinion that the specimen had 
somehow got there accidentally, but I am now compelled to believe otherwise.
And, indeed, on the first appearance of the Yorkshire List, Mr. Peter Inchbald, 
F.L.S.
(who formerly resided at Huddersfield), wrote me I might rest perfectly- 
satisfied as to the capture and the correct determination of the species at the time.
I have now further and very strong confirmation that such was the case, as will be 
felt from what follows : — Recently I purchased the cabinet and collection of 
lepidoptera formed by the late Mr. George Liversedge, who was for so many 
years treasurer to the Huddersfield Naturalists' Society.
Mr. Liversedge professed 
no knowledge of the smaller species of lepidoptera, and had not in any way attempted 
to arrange or even name them.
But for some years, as I well knew at the time, he 
collected a good many micro-lepidoptera ; which he set and put away in some of 
the unarranged drawers of the cabinet.
Scattered among these, in different 
drawers, I found five specimens of Oncocera ahenella, all evidently set in the 
same manner, and by the same person, as the many surrounding well-known 
Huddersfield micros.
As Mr. Liversedge collected a great deal in the vicinity, 
and probably on the same ground the original specimen or specimens were 
supposed to have been taken, there can, I think, now be no reasonable doubt that he 
actually took them there.
Among the micros, too, I picked -out a single specimen 
of Catoptria expallidana, the only previous record for Yorkshire being the one 
taken by myself in my own garden, but near which Sonchus arve?isis grew freely 
(See 'Yorkshire List,' p.
129).
— Geo. T.
Porritt, Huddersfield, Jan. 2 7th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
NOTES LEPIDOPTERA, MAMMALIA, BIRDS.
6 7 
Melanippe unangulata at Bradford and Barden.
— Last July 
my late friend, Mr. John Firth, intimated to me with his usual enthusiasm that 
he had just seen on the setting board what he thought to be a specimen of 
M. unangulata, but was not quite sure, and requested me to see it.
It had been 
taken about the end of June, resting on a wall at Girlington, by Mr. W.
Hodgson, 
a local collector of lepidoptera.
I have seen the specimen, and am very pleased 
indeed to be able to confirm Mr. Firth's suspicions, for it is a genuine M.
unan- 
gulata, and an interesting addition to our local fauna, and, indeed, a very recent 
addition to the county list.
On looking over Mr. Butterfield's collection, more 
recently, I was glad to detect another, which he had placed doubtfully under the 
name M.
rivata, and which he had taken at Barden two or three years ago.
— 
J. W.
Carter, Bradford, February 1st, 1886.
MAMMALIA.
Weasel's Method of Carrying its Young.— In reference to Mr.
Oldfield's note at page 202 of the Naturalist for 1885, how can the Squirrel carry its 
young but in its mouth ?
I have seen the Weasel carrying its young in its mouth on 
different occasions.
The young are helpless things ; where the old one drops them 
there they remain in a helpless condition even when they appear to be almost as large 
as the mother.
I have taken up the young Weasel and carried it a short distance 
and put it down, and stood aside, when the old one would return to the place 
where the young one was put and run off with it.
I then frightened the old one ; 
she dropped it again.
I put it in a fresh place, stood aside ; the mother returned, 
going almost straight to its young one as if it was the spot where it had been left.
— 
Jas. Ingleby, Eavestone, near Ripon.
Additional Records of Captures of the Badger (Meles taxus) 
in Yorkshire.— 
One captured near Doncaster, June 1865.
Weighed 20 lbs.
Doncaster Gazette, 
June 29th, 1865.
One seen near Masham, December 5th, 1883.
Mr. Carter in Rural Notes for 1883.
One captured at Wortley, near Barnsley, April 22nd, 1884.
W. E.
Brady in 
Nat., September 1884, p.
34.
One captured at Ingleby, North Riding, February 3rd, 1885.
Mr. Lofthouse 
in Rural Notes for 1885.
One captured at Brimham Rocks, about February 1885.
W. Storey in Nat., 
April 1885, p.
202.
One captured at North Stainley in the winter of 1883-4.
R. A.
Summerfield in 
Nat., May 1885, p.
228.
George Roberts, Lofthouse, Wakefield.
ORNITHOLOGY.
Flocks of Skylarks on the Durham Coast.— Feb. 6th, immense 
flocks of Larks {Alauda arvensis) made their appearance between Ryhope and 
Seaham.
The fields were absolutely alive with them.
On the 8th a thaw set in, 
and they immediately left.
No other kind of birds were to be seen amongst them.
— James T.
T. Reed, Ryhope, near Sunderland.
Leicestershire Bird-notes.
— The Red-backed Shrike {Lanius collurio) 
bred at Loughborough last year.
A clutch of five eggs, now in my collection, was 
taken on 26th May.
The Hoopoe ( Upupa epops) also occurred in the same neighbourhood.
A pair 
were seen by my friend, Mr. Wieldt, at the end of April.
Both these birds are 
very rare in that part.
— F.
B. Whitlock, Nottingham, February 6th, 1886.
Corn Bunting— Diversity of Eggs.— On the 26th of June, 1884, 
I found a nest of the Corn Bunting {Emberiza miliaria), which contained 
three eggs all different in size and colour.
The largest egg is 1 inch in length, 
and I inch in breadth, and is coloured and streaked in the usual way.
The smallest 
is f inch in length, and slightly over half an inch in breadth, and is blotched and 
streaked with light brown, not black like the normal egg.
The other is 
intermediate in size, but approaches the smaller one in ground colour and 
markings.
— Geo. Roberts.
March 1886.
68 
NOTES ORNITHOLOGY.
Grouse and the Weather.
— I was out shooting yesterday with Mr. J.
Hatfield, at Walton, near Boston Spa, and in one of the woods the keeper picked 
up a hen grouse.
I never saw a bird fatter, or in finer plumage, and by the 
freshness of its eyes it had evidently been dead only a very short time.
Starvation 
had certainly nothing to do with its death, therefore I conclude that it had killed 
itself against a tree.
I have since heard from Mr. Hatfield that he had had the 
grouse opened, and found the liver black and the crop full of yewberries, which 
will probably account for its death.
Sand is quite as essential as food, and the 
want of it becomes another cause of death.
The last I saw in this district got up 
under my feet, behind my house here, in the winter of 1856.
— J.
Chaloner, 
Newton Kyirie, Tadcaster, February 2nd, 1886.
Judging from the reports which have lately appeared in the northern news- 
papers, the protracted severe weather has compelled large numbers of grouse to 
leave the Yorkshire and Durham moors, and to seek their sustenance in lowland 
districts.
It is to be hoped that correspondents living in such localities as they 
have been observed in will communicate to the Naturalist whether, now that the 
weather has become milder, they appear to possess anything of the ' homing 
instinct.' I rather doubt it myself, for I remember to have heard some years ago, 
during a similar winter to the present, large packs of grouse were seen flying out 
in the North Sea, off the coast of Caithness, by the crews of different fishing smacks.
This would appear to show that the migration was haphazard, and without any 
definite idea of terminus.
I notice in the Naturalist for February the occurrence in 
Nidderdale of a brood of light-coloured grouse.
For two or three years an albino 
grouse was observed on a moss near Holker, the seat of the Duke of Devonshire 
in North .Lancashire, and it was shot, I think, in the autumn of 1884.— 
Edward T.
Baldwin, Woodcroft, Ul version, February 1886.
Large flocks of grouse forced down from the moors by the storm were daily seen 
during the recent heavy falls of snow to the east of Richmond, where there was 
scarcely any snow.
A large covey paid a visit to Richmond Parish Church, and 
many flew over the town, and sought refuge in the woods southwards, while others 
sat in the hedgerows, almost as tame as farmyard hens.
A flock of twelve were 
seen about three weeks ago, hovering near Ferryhill, a sight not remembered by 
the oldest inhabitant of that village ; and near He worth, in the grounds at North 
Learn, a hen grouse was seen resting on the lawn, the cock being put up next day 
in the adjoining field.
— T.
H. Nelson, Bishop Auckland, February 21st, 1886.
On the 1st of February a fine specimen of the Red Grouse {Lagopus scoticus) 
was picked up near Seaham by the Marquis of Londonderry's keeper.
It had, no 
doubt, been compelled to leave the moors by the severe weather.
— James T.
T. 
Reed, Ryhope, Sunderland.
In addition to the above, I may state on the authority of numerous informants 
that immense numbers of grouse have been observed in and around the borough of 
Leeds, about twenty miles from the nearest moors on which they occur in any 
quantity, one informant alone having seen as many as five hundred in one day, and 
numerous other instances are given in the local newspapers.
This remarkable emigration on the part of these most sedentary of birds is 
not in any way attributable to the severity of the season, but simply to a most 
unusual succession of meteorological conditions.
We had first a heavy snow-storm 
on the 24th of January, followed by a rapid partial thaw, accompanied by rain, 
which in its turn was followed by a keen frost.
The effect of this was to glaze the 
snow-clad moorlands with an impenetrable coating of ice, and so totally prevent 
the birds from reaching their food.
This contingency does not occur to any extent 
in ordinary severe seasons, or even in the extreme — almost Arctic — winters of 
1878-9 and 1879-80.
In such seasons the birds may leave the high moors and seek 
the immediately contiguous lowlands, but seldom or never wander so far from their 
habitat as upon the present occasion.
It is to be feared that many of the birds will 
not be able again to find their accustomed moorlands.
Many have died of starvation, 
and not a few, I regret to say, have been shot.
— W.
Eagle Clarke, Leeds, 
February 20th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
6 9 
NOTES ON SOME OF THE BIRDS OCCURRING IN 
THE SOLWAY DISTRICT.
By J.
J. ARMISTEAD, 
Solway Fishery, D7im fries, N.B.
(Continued from the Naturalist for 1&85, page 298.) 
Wren.
Troglodytes parvulus.
Common.
Swallow.
Hirundo rustica.
Common.
Martin.
Chelidon urbica.
Common.
Sand Martin.
Cotile riparia.
Common in suitable localities.
Creeper.
Certhia familiaris.
Not uncommon in some places, breeding annually.
Linnet.
Linota cannabina.
Common.
Lesser Redpoll.
Linota rufescens.
Not uncommon.
Mountain Linnet.
Linota flavirostris.
This bird has not come much under my notice, but is 
probably not uncommon in suitable localities.
Bullfinch.
Pyrrhula europsea.
Occurs sparingly on both sides of the Solway.
Crossbill.
Loxia curvirostra.
As far as I have observed, this bird is only a winter visitor, 
occurring during some winters only at irregular intervals, and 
when it does occur frequenting pine woods.
Starling.
Sturnus vulgaris.
Plentiful in some cultivated districts.
Chough.
Pyrrhocorax graculus.
I have never seen this bird in the district, but am led to 
include it, as it is one that I have watched very closely for.
Old 
inhabitants have given me undoubted evidence of its formerly 
breeding in our cliffs, but of late years the Jackdaws (C.
moneduld) inhabiting the same cliffs have become much more 
numerous, and I have reason to fear they have driven it away.
It certainly has not been persecuted by man.
Jay. Garrulus glandarius.
Extinct in many places where it is said to have bred formerly, 
and very rare throughout the district, though it is still to be 
found in one or two localities.
March 1886.
7° 
ARMISTEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
Magpie.
Pica rustica.
Very rare on the northern side of the Firth, but commoner 
in Cumberland, where, however, it is well persecuted.
I have 
seen it nest in very low trees.
Jackdaw.
Corvus monedula.
Common.
Carrion Crow.
Corvus corone.
Common, breeding in trees and cliffs.
Rook.
Corvus frugilegus.
Common.
Raven.
Corvus corax.
Still holds its own in a few places, and breeds annually.
The 
young are, I am sorry to say, usually destroyed by the shepherds.
Swift.
Cypselus apus.
Not near so plentiful as the sand-martin, but is common in 
localities where it breeds.
Why it should only frequent certain 
places and hardly ever be seen at others which are apparently 
quite as well suited to its habits is a puzzle.
Nightjar.
Caprimulgus europaeus.
Generally dispersed, occurring wherever the ground is suitable, 
but nowhere very abundant.
Lesser Spotted Woodpecker.
Dendrocopus minor.
I have seen only one specimen of this bird in the district.
Kingfisher.
Alcedo ispida.
Occurs on some streams, and 1 have often met with it close 
on the sea coast, frequenting ditches and drains, as well as the 
brackish waters of rivulets.
Hoopoe.
TJpupa epops.
A specimen of this bird was shot in Cumberland to my 
knowledge about twenty years ago, but was unfortunately 
allowed to rot and then thrown out by the man who shot it.
Cuckoo.
Cuculus canorus.
Plentiful in the breeding season.
Cormorant.
Phalacrocorax carbo.
Common ; breeds.
Shag.
Phalacrocorax graculus.
Rare, and I have not found it breeding here, but once shot a 
very young bird which could only just fly well.
It was 
commoner fifty years ago.
Gannet.
Sula bassana.
Occurs at uncertain intervals, sometimes in considerable 
numbers, when following the herring and mackerel shoals.
Naturalist, 
ARMISTEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
71 
Heron.
Ardea cinerea.
Common; breeds.
Frequents the smallest rivulets at the 
time trout are spawning and makes havoc amongst them.
I 
have shot them at my trout ponds close to the house, and only 
a few weeks ago I missed several thousand yearling trout from 
a nursery pond, and set three or four traps, and next morning 
had the thief, which proved to be one of these birds.
Uight Heron.
Uycticorax griseus.
Has occurred once in Cumberland to my knowledge.
Bittern.
Botaurus stellaris.
Has occurred once in Cumberland to my knowledge.
Bean Goose.
Anser segetum.
Occurs sparingly in winter.
Pink-footed Goose.
Anser brachyrhyneims.
Occurs sparingly in winter.
Brent Goose.
Bernicla brenta.
Much less plentiful than the next species, and only found in 
one or two localities.
Barnacle Goose.
Bernicla leucopsis.
Plentiful in some localities, and often gathering into large 
flocks; arrives about the end of October and remains all winter.
Swar.
Cygnus musicus.
Occurs on the Frith sparingly in winter, being mostly 
observed during very severe weather.
Bewick's Swan.
Cygnus bewicki.
Same as the last species.
Eleven of these birds passed close 
over my head during the winter of 1880, but not having a gun 
I could not secure a specimen.
It is difficult to distinguish 
from C.
musicus, its smaller size being the chief guide.
In very 
severe weather tame Swans are often driven off the fresh-water 
and betake themselves to the sea and mouths of rivers.
Shieldrake.
Tadorna cornnta.
Common during the breeding season, but as soon as the 
young are able to fly these birds leave our coasts and do not 
appear again in any numbers until January and February, when 
they arrive again near their breeding grounds.
I have found the 
nests of these birds several miles inland, and they do not by any 
means confine themselves to the seashore or its immediate 
neighbourhood for breeding purposes.
A few are occasionally 
seen between August and January, mostly on the sea.
Widgeon.
Mareca penelope.
Plentiful in winter.
A straggler may be got occasionally in 
September, but the main body puts in an appearance in October, 
March 1886.
72 
ARMISTEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
and in November, the numbers still increase.
I cannot ascertain 
that it breeds with us.
Pintail.
Dafila acuta.
A rare bird with us, but occurs most winters on the sea.
Wild Duck.
Anas boscas.
Common in winter, and a fair number remain to breed.
Teal.
Querquedula crecca.
Common in some localities at times, the numbers being 
increased by migrants in autumn and through the winter.
It 
breeds with us.
Shoveller.
Spatula clypeata.
Occurs very sparingly indeed on the Solway in winter or late 
in the autumn.
Tufted Duck.
Fuligula cristata.
I have seen two specimens killed on the Frith, but it is 
decidedly rare.
Scaup.
Fuligula marila.
Plentiful on the Frith, but very seldom seen on inland waters 
in proportion to its numbers on the coast.
I have shot the 
Scaup in September, but from November to April is the time 
they occur in numbers.
Pochard.
Fuligula ferina.
Not a common bird, but is to be found every winter on fresh- 
water ; and I have seen them in May, but have not ascertained 
that they breed with us.
Goldeneye.
Clangula glaucion.
I have several times shot the Goldeneye, and it occurs as 
a regular winter visitor, but in very small numbers.
Scoter.
(Edemia nigra.
Very abundant at times, but very local.
I have seen hundreds 
of these birds on the Frith in June and July, and indeed every 
month of the year, yet it does not breed here.
Velvet Scoter.
(Edemia fusca.
Very much less plentiful than the last, but I have occasionally 
seen a fair number of these birds, usually in company with 
(E.
nigra.
Goosander.
Mergus merganser.
Much scarcer than the next species.
A straggler sometimes 
puts in an appearance in winter.
Redbreasted Merganser.
Mergus serrator.
Decidedly rare, but occurs every winter.
. 
Smew.
Mergus albellus.
Once only have I seen this bird on the Frith in winter.
Naturalist, 
ARM I STEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT 
73 
Ringdove.
Columba palumbus.
Generally dispersed, and common in wooded districts.
Stock Dove.
Columba oenas.
This bird I have found breeding on the Scotch side of the 
Frith, an occurrence worth noting, as it is said only to have 
bred in one other locality in Scotland.
I have met with this 
bird in Cumberland, but not so plentifully as in one locality on 
the northern shore (see p.
293).
Rock Dove.
Columba livia.
Although I have been told this bird breeds with us and have 
reason to believe it has done so, yet I have never seen a single 
example, although I have looked for it frequently.
Some of our 
sea caves are full of pigeons that breed there, and are quite 
wild, and these are called Rock Doves by the inhabitants, but 
out of a score or more 1 have shot no two are alike in colour.
They are brown, white, buff, blue, &c, <Is:c., but no true Rock 
Doves among them.
Pheasant.
Phasianus colchicus.
Plentiful in preserved districts where well wooded.
Partridge.
Perdix cinerea.
Generally dispersed, and common.
Quail.
Coturnix communis.
Rare, but breeds in the cultivated parts of the district 
occasionally.
I know one locality in Cumberland where I 
remember it as common, and have seen several nests in a 
season ; but being for a season or two much persecuted it has, I 
believe, never regained its original numbers.
Virginian Quail.
Ortyx virginianus.
I have come across two instances in which this bird has been 
shot, one at Allonby in Cumberland, and the other in Col vend, 
Kirkcudbrightshire, both occurring about the same time.
I 
have ascertained that some of these birds were prior to this 
turned out by the Duke of Buccleuch at Drumlanrig, in 
Drumfriesshire, but whether this accounts for the individuals 
shot will never be known.
Red Grouse.
Lagopus scoticus.
Common on moorlands and on some mosses that are preserved.
Black Grouse.
Tetrao tetrix.
Common in suitable localities.
I have seen as many as sixty 
to eighty of these birds together at times in winter.
Water Rail.
Rallus aquaticus.
Tolerably common in some localities, frequenting ditches and 
sedgy places.
March 1886.
74 
ARMISTEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
Spotted Crake.
Porzana maruetta.
Probably commoner than is supposed.
I have come across 
several examples.
Corncrake.
Crex pratensis 
Common in summer in suitable localities.
Moorhen.
Gallinula chloropus.
Common ; breeds.
Coot.
Fulica atra.
Common ; breeds.
Common Crane.
Grus communis.
I have never seen this bird, but one was once seen in Cum- 
berland by my friend Mr. T.
Mann of Aigle Gill.
Golden Plover.
Charadrius pluvialis.
Common ; breeds on our moorlands, and in autumn gathers 
into flocks, frequenting the fields and the seashore.
After a few 
days of intense frost I have seen many thousands of these birds 
passing overhead continually by day for several days, all going 
south, and flying high.
Only occasionally have they been 
within gunshot.
A week later not one was to be seen in the 
district.
Grey Plover.
Squatarola helvetica.
Occurs sparingly as a winter migrant, usually during frosty 
weather.
Ringed Plover.
iEgialitis hiaticula.
Common, but rather local.
Dotterel.
Eudromias morinellus.
Occurs sparingly on our coasts and pasture lands, occasionally 
as a spring migrant.
Lapwing.
Vanellus vulgaris.
Abundant.
Turnstone.
Strepsilas interpres.
Arrives in August, and is to be found sparingly all through 
the winter frequenting places where there is a mixture of ooze 
and shingle.
Oyster catcher.
Hsematopus ostralegus.
Very abundant in autumn, and more or less so through the 
winter and into early spring, when the main body leaves us, a 
few, however, remaining to breed.
Red-necked Phalarope.
Phalaropus hyperboreus.
A rare visitor on the autumnal migration.
Gray Phalarope.
Phalaropus fulicarius.
I have only once met with this bird as an autumnal 
migrant.
Naturalist, 
ARM I STEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
75 
Woodcock.
Scolopax rusticula.
A good many breed on the Scotch side of the Frith, and in 
November the migrants arrive sometimes in considerable 
numbers.
I never found these birds on the seashore here, 
except occasionally during intense frost in winter.
Snipe.
Gallinago coelestis.
Generally distributed, and breeds with us.
Jack Snipe.
Limnocryptes gallinula.
Common in winter in some localities, but I have never met 
with it on the Saltings, where I have occasionally flushed the 
last species.
Dunlin.
Tringa alpina.
Abundant in autumn and winter.
A few remain to breed.
Little Stint.
Tringa minnta.
I have only twice seen one of these birds on the Solway, in 
autumn.
Curlew Sandpiper.
Tringa subarquata.
Occurs occasionally on the autumnal migration in September.
Knot.
Tringa canutus.
Arrives in October, and is often abundant during winter.
I 
have never met with it in full summer plumage, but have seen 
a specimen with a good deal of red about it.
Ruff.
Machetes pugnax.
A rare occasional autumnal visitor.
Sanderling.
Calidris arenaria.
Same as the Turnstone, but of much rarer occurrence.
Common Sandpiper.
Tringoides hypoleucus.
Common as a summer migrant, appearing in June ; breeding 
on the margins of rivers and lakes, and leaving in September.
Green Sandpiper.
Helodromas ochropus.
Occurs as an occasional straggler in September.
Redshank.
Totanus calidris.
Common in autumn and winter, and a few remain to breed.
Greenshank.
Totanus canescens.
I have shot very young birds early in August with down still 
adhering to the feathers.
It occurs regularly as an autumn 
migrant, but is not at all plentiful, and is decidedly local, 
frequenting muddy creeks and estuaries, where I have shot it 
several times in December and January during very severe 
weather.
A few spend the winter with us regularly.
Bar-tailed Godwit.
Limosa lapponica.
A regular visitor in autumn, a few arriving in August and 
September, but the main body does not appear until the end of 
March 1886.
7^> 
ARM I STEAD : BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
the month or in October, when they are sometimes very 
abundant.
They remain in diminished numbers into winter, 
but as soon as hard frost occurs they usually depart, though I 
have shot them in January during severe weather, and occasion- 
ally seen a good flock of them at that time of year.
Black-tailed Godwit.
Limosa segocephala.
A very rare visitor to the Solway during the autumnal 
migration.
I have only seen three in five years.
Curlew.
Numenius arquata.
Breeds in some numbers on the moorlands, and at other 
times frequents the seashore.
I have seen them very badly 
off in severe frost.
On one occasion I passed within easy 
gunshot of several poking their bills into a lot of stable manure 
just outside a farm yard.
Whimbrel.
Kumenius phseopus.
Occurs in small numbers in August and September, and 
occasionally later in the season, but I have not met with it in 
winter.
In May it often appears in large flocks.
Arctic Tern.
Sterna ma crura.
An occasional visitor as an autumn migrant.
Common Tern.
Sterna fluviatilis.
Common, but very local ; breeds.
Lesser Tern.
Sterna minuta.
An occasional straggler.
Have not found the eggs in the 
district, but have been informed that it has been known to breed.
Sandwich Tern.
Sterna cantiaca.
Rare, but I usually see a few in August.
I have not found 
it breeding in the district.
Black Tern.
Hydrochelidon nigra.
I have a specimen shot along with some others of the same 
species some years ago, when I believe a colony of these birds 
would have been established, but they were so persecuted as to 
be either shot or driven off.
Ivory Gull.
Pagophila eburnea.
A bird supposed to be this species I once saw on the Cum- 
berland coast about 25 years ago.
I was then but a schoolboy, 
and not sufficiently well up in the gulls to be absolutely 
certain, but I believe I am right as to the species.
Kittiwake.
Rissa tridactyla.
I have often seen these birds in spring and autumn, but they 
do not breed with us.
Glaucous Gull.
Larus glaucus.
I have only once seen a specimen on the Frith.
Naturalist, 
ARMISTEAD I BIRDS OF SOLWAY DISTRICT.
77 
Herring Gull.
Larus argentatus.
Common ; breeds.
Lesser Black-backed Gull.
Larus fuscus.
Common ; breeds.
Common Gull.
Larus canus.
Very common in winter; less so in summer, but breeds in 
fair numbers.
Great Black-backed Gull.
Larus marinus.
A fair number of these birds frequent the Frith in winter, but 
it does not breed here.
Black headed Guli.
Larus ridibundus.
Plentiful ; breeds.
Pomarine Skua.
Stercorarius pomatorhinus.
An autumnal visitor, occasionally plentiful, but most seasons 
decidedly rare.
Richardson's Skua.
Stercorarius crepidatus.
Much commoner than the last, in autumn.
I have seen it on 
the Frith in May.
Buffon's Skua.
Stercorarius parasiticus.
An individual was killed at Allonby in Cumberland, in 
October, some years ago.
Storm Petrel Proceilaria pelagica.
An occasional storm-struck specimen is to be met with.
Fork-tailed Petrel.
Proceilaria leucorrhoa.
One individual I picked up in Sandy Hills Bay, after a heavy 
gale from the westward, in winter.
Manx Shearwater.
Puffinus anglorum.
Often seen on the Frith, and I fancy it may breed sparingly, 
but have never found its nest.
From the cunning manner in 
which it approaches and leaves its nesting-places it might easily 
be overlooked.
Great Northern Diver.
Colymbus glacialis.
I have frequently seen this bird in winter and late in 
spring, once as late as June and apparently in full summer 
plumage.
Eed-throated Diver.
Colymbus septentrionalis.
Fairly common on the Frith in winter.
Sclavonian Grebe.
Podiceps auritus.
I record this bird having once only met with a drowned 
specimen at sea during very severe frost.
Little Grebe.
Tachybaptes fluviatilis.
Resident : rare ; breeds.
March 1886.
7 ; > 
NOTES MOLLUSCA.
Razorbill.
Alca torda.
Common ; breeds.
Occurs in diminished numbers all winter, 
as well as the Guillemot.
Guillemot.
Lomvia troile.
Common on the Frith ; breeds.
A great many of these 
birds, as well as Razorbills, are cast ashore after winter storms.
Ringed Guillemot.
Lomvia la cry mans.
i have seen an occasional example.
It probably occurs 
wherever the last named is common.
Little Auk. Mergulus alle.
Very rare.
I have seen two of these birds only in winter.
Puffin.
Fratercula arctica.
Decidedly a rare bird on the Solway, and only occurring well 
out at sea.
I have not met with it breeding.
A specimen 
occurs in winter occasionally, as well as a few in summer.
Probably there are many birds that have occurred, some of them 
perhaps frequently, but which are not reported in the foregoing list.
It must be remembered in cases of this kind that I have, as a rule, 
only recorded what I have seen.
MOLL USC A.
Marine Shells at Whitby.
— In the Naturalist, p.
349, I see it recorded 
that the Rev. W.
C. Hey found Trochus cinereus at Whitby.
Should this not 
rather be T.
cinerarius, a common littoral shell ?
T. cinereus is in fact only known 
as British as a fossil, except that a single specimen was dredged in 1,230 fathoms 
off Galway, Ireland, with Trochus minutissimus and Area glacialis.
Very many 
species of shells have been recorded for Yorkshire that are not mentioned in 
Mr. Hey's list of Yorkshire marine shells — for instance, Odostomia nitidissima, 
Bulla utriculus, and among the Nudibranchs Doris depressa.
— T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
[It should not be forgotten that Mr. Hey's paper was simply a record of his 
own captures and of notes from private collections, and did not profess to include 
all the Yorkshire marine shells.
As to the Trochus, Mr. Hey tells, us that if he 
erred he did so on good authority, for in Sowerby's British Shells, in the explana- 
tion of plate xi., we read : ' Fig. 17, T.
cinereus Linn.
— T.
lineatus, T.
perforatus, 
etc.
— -Brit.
co.
generally, C.
Littoral, small umbilicus.' — Eds.] - 
Varieties of Bythinia tentaeulata, Zonites exeavatus, and 
Goehlieopa lubrica in N.E. Cheshire.— The three following varieties 
I have recently obtained in this part of Cheshire : — Bythinia tentaculaia var.
decollata at Lostock Gralam, in a small pond full of cinders ; Zonites exeavatus 
var.
vitrina at Northwich ; and Cochlicopa lubrica var.
hyalina at Ashley Hall, 
where I found it hybernating in a ditch full of dead leaves.
In all three cases the 
species was plentiful, and only in the last accompanied by the typical form.
— 
J. G.
Milne, Bowdon, 14th February, 1886.
Shells at Millom, Cumberland.
— Among the numerous shells which 
Mr. C.
T. Musson has allowed me to inspect are a few collected at Millom, Sept.
1882, viz.: — Helix rufescens, H.
aspersa, H.
rotundata, Pupa u'mbilicata, CI.
rugosa, 
and Balia perversa (with v.
simplex), all common ; H.
rupestris, fine ; Zonites 
cellaruis, Z.fiilvus, and Z, radiatulus.
— J.
W. TAYLOR.
Naturalist, 
NOTES — MOLLUSCA.
79 
L. peregra m.
decollatuni and Bythinia tentaculata 
m. decollatum in Cheshire.— I noted the occurrence of L.
peregra m.
decollatuni about April last, in a pond near Chester Canal.
The form was small,, 
elongated, and rather thin.
Apparently feeding on the thick green growth which 
half choked the pond.
Later on I found Bythinia tentaculata m.
decollatuni in a ditch, which, though 
near this pond, had no communication with it ; while it was accompanied by 
ordinary sized L.
peregra, slightly inclined perhaps to var.
ovata, but not decollate.
What I wish to note is the occurrence of these two species decollate in neighbour- 
ing pools, while on the other hand the L.
peregra occurring with B.
tentaculata 
were of normal growth.
— Brockton Tomlin, Pembroke College, Cambridge, 
November 15th, 1885.
Pupa marginata var.
brevis (Baudon) in Yorkshire.— Amongst 
some shells collected by Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck on June 27th, 1885, at Runs- 
wick Bay, near Whitby, I found a very characteristic specimen of this variety, 
which has not previously been recorded as British.
It is described by Baudon as 
' Tres raccourcie, robuste, bourrelet epais, blanc au peristome.' The average size 
of the type as given by Dr. Jeffreys is o'i33, or about 3% mm., and breadth o*6, 
the latter presumably an error for 0*06 which is equal to about 1 14 mm.
The 
specimen of var.
brez'is is 2 mm.
long and about i^mm.
broad, is composed of a 
whorl less than usual, and the mouth being perfectly finished shows it to belong to 
the edentate form of the species.
— J.
W. Taylor, Leeds.
Mollusea at Louth, North Lincolnshire.
— In September last I 
began to work at the mollusea of this district, and since then have found 31 
species ; 9 of which were not recorded for North Lincolnshire (vice-county 54) in 
the 'census" published in the Journal of Conchology in 1885.
H. rufescens is the commonest Helix here.
Sphcerium corneum, Planorbis 
spirorbis, Planorbis vortex, Physa fontinalis, Limncea peregra var.
ovata, Aricn 
ater, Arion hortensis and var.
grisea, Li max agrestis and var.
sylvatica, Limax 
arborum (mostly on beeches' 1 , Helix aspersa, H.
nemoralis, H.
hispida, and 
H. rotundata are common and generally distributed throughout the district.
Bythinia tentaculata, Valvaia piscinalis, Planorbis cariuatus, and Planorbis 
contortus are found in the Louth Canal.
Anodotita cygnea is common in the 
canal, and in a large sheet of water known as Burwell fish-pond ; 5% inches is 
the largest measurement found as yet.
Ail the specimens of Limncea peregra, both 
from ponds and streams, are.
referable to var.
ovata, with the exception of some 
from a brick-pit in the village of South Reston, which are Limticea peregra 
proper.
Mr. Cockerell of Bedford Park returns one specimen from a quick- 
running stream as Lim. peregra var.
(not ovata).
Full-grown specimens of 
Limncea stagnalis swarm in a little stream known as Monk's Dyke; most of these 
on being lifted out of the water discharged their violet-coloured liquid.
This 
species is also found in the canal.
Limncea palustris is plentiful in water which 
collects under some willow trees during the winter months, and is also found in 
the canal.
Ancylus fluviatilis adheres to the stones in clear quick-running 
streams.
Zonites cellarius, Z.
glaber, and Z.
nitidulus are not uncommon.
Helix arbusto7-um has been found in several situations in this neighbourhood, but 
is most plentiful on a hedge-bank in the village of Hallington.
Helix ericetorum 
has been found in four places, and swarms on a certain chalky bank, where also 
Helix caperata is abundant.
Bulimus obscurus occurs on the trunks of trees, and 
under moss.
Balea perversa I have as yet only found on ash.
Clausilia rugosa 
is very abundant, and appears to be commonest on the trunks of beech and 
hawthorn.
The following varieties have also been found, and kindly named for me by 
Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell of Bedford Park.
Arion ater var.
bicolor, immature 
(among Tussilago farfara in a chalk pit) ; Limax arborum var.
bettouii, Helix 
aspersa var.
minor, Hdix nemoralis vars.
libellula and rubella (with various band, 
formulce), Helix arbustorum var.
conoidea and var.
approaching marmorata.
Helix 
hispida var.
subrufa and var.
nana, Helix caperata var.
major and var.
oruata- 
and Helix ericetorum, var.
approaching alba.
— H.
WALLIS Kew, Louth.
February 1886.
March 1886.
8.o 
NOTES MOLLUSCA.
Lancashire Helices.
— I was very pleased with Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell's 
account of his September walk, especially the part relating to his progress through 
my native county, but his remarks upon the scarcity of the Helices rather surprised 
me, for the fact does not at all apply to those portions over which my own con- 
chological researches have extended, and a few notes on the subject may perhaps 
interest him and other conchologists.
I have searched the coast line from Formby to 
Blackpool, and find that H.
nemoralis is very common on most of the sandhills.
Near Blackpool it is so abundant that it is almost impossible to walk along in some 
places without treading the shells underfoot.
Close to the town little heaps of 
broken shells may frequently be observed, where some busy thrush has been 
at work, hammering them to pieces on some convenient stone to get at the contents.
In some of the sand drifts I have seen dead shells blown together by the wind in 
such numbers that they could be gathered by the handful.
These dead shells are 
collected by the town's children, and threaded alternately with Turritella com- 
munis in long strings, and hawked about the streets for sale.
I find that after the.
type, v.
hbelhda ooooo and v.
rubella 00300 are the most common forms found on 
the sandhills.
Var. rubella 00345, (12)3(45), and v.
libellula 00300, 00345, 10345, 
(123X45), and several others occur more sparingly.
H. horiensis is not so common 
here, and I have only found the type and v.
lutea ooooo.
All the above-mentioned 
vars.
occur pretty plentifully about Goosnargh and Newsham, and the neighbour- 
hood of Preston, and from these localities I have collected v.
casianea ooooo and 
v. olivacea (123X45), of nemoralis; and H.
hortensis v.
incarnala ooooo and 
v. lilacina ooooo.
Just outside Southport, H.
caperata — and, sparingly, its var.
omata — is abundant.
H. ericetorum and H.
virgata also occur there in limited 
numbers.
,H.
aspersa occurs at Walton-le-dale, Newsham, near Glasson Dock, 
and by the Wyre, at Preesall, in abundance.
At the latter place I may safely 
say it might be collected by the wheelbarrow/til^ especially at this season of the 
year, when large congregated masses of from a dozen to fifty shells, firmly cemented 
together, may be picked up from the hedge banks ; and after a shower in spring or 
summer, they may here be seen swarming upon the thorn bushes, which they climb 
even to the topmost twigs, and present a curious spectacle.
H. rufescens is the 
most common land shell about Goosnargh, and its var.
rubens is also plentiful 
there.
H. rotundata I have found common wherever I have collected, except 
along the coast.
H. arbustorum (type and v.
flavescens) is found along the banks 
of the Brock, and H.
hispida at Farrington and Leyland.
My own somewhat 
limited experiences are embraced in these notes, in which I have quoted localities 
where I have found the species most numerous, leaving unmentioned many others 
where I have found various specimens in limited numbers.
I am looking forward 
to the discovery of many more localities during the coming season, when I purpose 
to prosecute my researches in places perhaps hitherto unexplored.
— R.
Standen, 
Swinton, Manchester, February 9th, 1886.
Scarcity of Helices in W.E. Cheshire.— In reference to Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell's note on the scarcity of Helices in Lancashire, a few remarks on their 
corresponding scarcity in north-east Cheshire may be of interest.
In the plain of 
red marl which stretches across the county southward from Runcorn and 
Stockport, the only Helix that is generally distributed is H.
rotundata.
H. nemoralis is found sparingly about the Bollin and Mersey valleys ; but all the 
remaining species I have found north of the Weaver live where the marl is 
overlaid with other deposits — H, aculeata in the marshes at Ashley Hall ; 
H. aspersa on the sand at Bowdon ; H.
hispida in the Rollin and Weaver valleys, 
on alluvial soil ; H.
pulchella in * the Bollin valley and on Hale Moss ; and 
//.
pygma>a in Knutsford Bog. On the carboniferous rocks, east of Stockport to 
the county border, Helices are much more numerous.
The distribution of Zonites 
is very different ; all the British species are found in the north-east part of the 
county, most o f them being common everywhere ; and all but Z.
radialulus and .
Z. glaber are to be found within three miles of Bowdon Church.
— J.
G. Milne, 
Bowdon, 14th February, 1886.
Testacella haliotidea v.
scutulum at Chester.— Mr. G.
W. 
Shrubsole informs us that this occurs in the green lanes near some nursery gardens, 
but not in them.
Mr. Taylor and I have seen the fine specimen he is keeping in 
captivity.— W.
Dexisox Roebuck, Sunny Bank, Leeds, February 1886.
Naturalist, 
NOTES — PALEONTOLOGY, REPTILES, FISHES.
8 1 
PALsEONTOLOG Y.
Palseontological !N"otes from the British Museum Collec- 
tions.
— A day or two ago, when in the fossil department at the British Museum 
in Cromwell Road, I jotted down a few notes concerning North of England 
specimens, which it may be of interest to record.
They are as follows: — 
Fishes.
— Dermal tubercles of Gyracanthus, from the coal measures, New- 
castle ; Carcharopsis prototypus Ag., Pateley Bridge, Yorkshire; Petalodus 
hastingsice Owen, carboniferous limestone, Derbyshire ; and Janassa {Climadoxus) 
Mnguceformis Atthey, coal measures, Newsham, near Newcastle.
MoLLUSCA.
— Astarte Levis Phil., Tellina minuscula Bean, Pholadidea con- 
stricta Phil., Nucula cordifarmis Bean, Isoeardia angulata, Trochus antiquus, 
Cerithium acirieatum, Trochus pulcherrimus, Panopeea speetoneusis, Nucula subro- 
tunda, Inoceramus venusiulus, and Pinna gracilis, all from the Speeton clay, 
Speeton, Yorkshire ; Placunopsis jurensis and Nerita costulata Desh.
, from Scar- 
borough ; ' Jurbo' mancuniensis Brown, Manchester ; Area tu?nida Sby.
, 
A. speluncaria Schl., and A.
striata Schl., all three from Durham ; Axinus trun- 
eatus King, Durham and Manchester ; Mytilus squamosus, Sby.
, Durham ; Rissoa 
gibsoni Br., Manchester ; and Rhynchonella acuminata var.
plicatu la Dav.
, Derby- 
shire.
Echinodermata.
— Ophioderma milleri Phill.j lias, Robin Hood's Bay, York- 
shire, and from Staithes, Yorkshire ; and Platyerinus mega stylus Ph., Lancashire.
— Theo.
D. A.
Cockerell, London, December 31st, 1885.
REPTILES.
Reptiles Of Warrington District.— We have been favoured with 
reprints of two papers — one on British Snakes and another on British Lizards — 
by Mr. Linnaeus Greening, which have been read by him at a meeting of the 
Warrington Field Club.
The papers are of an exhaustive character, and, among 
other things, include some local notes, which we judge will be of sufficient interest 
to our readers for reproduction here.
The Viper (Pelias berus) is spoken of as being found in Delamere Forest, 
'Cheshire, where it is apparently not uncommon.
The Ring Snake ( Tropidonotus natrix) is found round about Warrington, Harford 
being a place where Mr. Greening has seen it frequently.
The Sand Lizard (Lacerta agilis) is common on the sandhills at Southport, and 
report has it that it was once common on the Overton hills, though, so far as 
Mr. Greening knows, it has not been found there within the last fifteen years.
The Common or Viviparous Lizard {Zootoca vivipara) occurs locally in the 
neighbourhood of Birkenhead and Liverpool, also at Weston (Cheshire), where 
they are known as ' Swifts,' and are to be found in the cuttings running down from 
the quarries to the river.
The Slow-worm (Auguis fragilis) is reported to have been found locally in the 
Frodsham district.
It is not uncommon in Mid -Cheshire, and is often found by 
the platelayers on the railway between Knutsford and Chester.
FISHES.
Whitby Fish-notes.
— Three Grey Mullets were caught in the salmon nets 
off Whitby, 12th August last.— Thos.
Stephenson, Whitby, 25th September, 1885.
G-OOle Fish-notes.
— The Salmon-fishery here has been very good this 
season.
Several Sturgeons {Acipenscr sturio) have been taken, also an Angler- 
fish {Lophius piscatorius), and some Shad {Chipea alosa), or as they are called here, 
Scad.
— Thomas Bunker, Goole, September 2nd, 1885.
Vendace and Gwiniad in the English Lakes.— At the Zoo- 
logical Society, 19th May. 1885.
Mr. Francis Day exhibited a specimen of the Vendace 
{Coregonus vandesius) which, he observed, was one of three received from Mr. W.
Kimsey Dover that had been taken in Derwentwater and Bassenthwaite Lakes, 
where Dr. Davy had recorded their occurrence in 1858, but whose statement had 
been generally overlooked.
Mr. Day also remarked that the Gwiniad ( C.
corego- 
noides) would seem to be restricted in the Lake District to Haweswater and the 
lake system that joins the Eden.
March 1886.
. c.
82 
BOOK NOTICES.
The Geology of Holderness and the adjoining parts of 
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire.— By Clement Reid, F.G.S.
(Memoirs 
of the Geological Survey of England and Wales).
8vo, 170 pp., with wood- 
cuts and a plate of charts.
This memoir is a most valuable contribution to the Glacial and Post-glacial 
geology of the country, and will be a useful work of reference for local geologists.
After a preliminary chapter on the origin and physical features of the district, the 
author proceeds to describe the ' Basement ' Boulder-Clay, and to give a resume of 
the discoveries of the fossiliferous patches known as the 'Bridlington Crag.' 
With reference to the latter, he adopts Mr. Lamplugh's view, that these shell- 
bearing masses have been bodily transported to their present position.
The 
Boulder-Clays above the Basement Clay are described together, being; scarcely 
distinguishable and not always separable ; the red colour and absence of chalk in 
some parts are ascribed to the effects of weathering.
Chapter IV is devoted to 
the Stratified Glacial Beds, and chapters V and VI to the Interglacial beds, 
including the Mammaliferous Gravels of Bridlington and Hessle, and the 
Marine Gravels.
of Kelsey Hill, etc.; of these full descriptions are given, with 
lists of fossils.
Chapters VII and VIII treat of the Post-glacial deposits, 
especially of the ancient meres.
The next chapter, headed ' Changes now in 
progress,' summarises the evidence for the rapid waste of the Holderness coast, 
which averages about 2% yards yearly.
The last chapter deals with Economic 
Geology, and in two appendices are given the particulars of nearly 200 well -sections 
and borings, and a list of 150 works bearing on the geology of the district.
The 
changes in .the Humber since 1684 are illustrated by charts.
[List of] British Marine Shells, comprising those of the 
Braehiopoda and Mollusca (Proper).
4 pp., printed for A.
Somerville, B.Sc, F.L.S., Glasgow, January 1886.
(To be had of A.
Sten- 
house, bookseller, University Avenue, Glasgow, price 3d.
each, or 2s.
6d.
per 
dozen, post free).
A list of this kind was much wanted, and we cordially welcome the appearance 
of the present one, which is well and clearly printed, and calculated to be very 
useful.
The arrangement is that of Jeffreys' 'British Conchology,' with additions 
to 1885, and excluding three species which that author included in his book on the 
strength of dead shells, viz.: — Area obliqua, Necera rostrata, and Torellia vestita.
There are certain other species omitted which Jeffreys (in his appendix) 
recommended to be taken into the British lists.
The deep-sea species of the 
' Lightning ' and ' Porcupine ' expeditions are also excluded.
But these are none 
of them strictly British species, unless British seas are to be taken as extending 
into mid-ocean, and the species which Mr. Somerville includes are alone those 
which are likely to fall into the hands of ordinary collectors.
Mr. Somerville 
includes varieties, distinguishing them by the use of smaller type, and we do not 
think he is far wrong in discarding the use of the word ' var.' or letter 'v.' The 
authorities are correctly given, and bracketed in accordance with the British 
Association Rules.
We would suggest that in future editions the author should 
set back the names of the varieties, and also that the useless comma which is 
interposed between the name of a species and the authority for it should be 
omitted.
Botanical Exchange Club of the British Isles.— Reports for 
1883 and 1884, 8vo, pp.
83-100 and 101-120.
These two pamphlets comprise valuable information on the critical plants sent 
in by the various members during the above years, and also lists of many new 
county records.
The club is certainly doing good work, and no practical botanist 
can fail to be instructed with the very careful criticisms on the many doubtful 
plants that have been sent in, especially as the critics are themselves well-known 
field-botanists.
The remarks on the Rubi and Rosa: are particularly interesting 
and consoling to those who have had the satisfaction (?) of labouring at these 
groups, and we shall look forward with interest to any future reports on the 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES : NOTES AND NEWS.
83 
former, following as they will Mr. Baker's present article in the Journal of Botany .
We are afraid that these reports show that the genus Potamogeton is going to be 
more of a puzzle than ever for some time, except perhaps to practised specialists.
The genus Carex also comes in for a fair share of attention, and there is a very 
interesting account of the recently found Carex salina Wg. We should have been 
glad to have noticed many things in detail, but must forbear, as it would be 
almost impossible to select a few when there are so many that we should gladly 
touch upon did space permit.
Above 8,000 plants have been distributed to the 
members during the two years.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The Bibliography for 1885 is in course of preparation, and its publication will 
shortly be commenced.
We shall be pleased to enlist the co-operation of all who 
are interested in making it a complete reflex of what has been published for the 
North of England during the year ; and we have pleasure in announcing that 
Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., has kindly undertaken the charge of the geological 
portion of it.
>ccx 
The Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., of St. Olave's Vicarage, York, would be pleased 
to enlist the co-operation of Yorkshire coleopterists in preparing a full catalogue of 
the Beetles of Yorkshire, which he intends for publication in the Transactions of 
the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
He would be glad to receive lists of captures — 
with detailed localities — of Yorkshire species, and where doubt or uncertainty 
exists, he would be pleased to have the opportunity of seeing specimens.
XXX 
Dr. M.
C. Cooke announces that he has determined to issue a work on ' British 
Desmids,' as a supplement to and uniform with his 'British Freshwater Alga?,' 
with coloured plates, in about 10 parts, octavo, containing 8 plates each, with 
descriptive letterpress, at the uniform rate of Five Shillings per part, provided a 
sufficient number of subscribers send in their names before the 1st of March to 
warrant the undertaking.
A reduction of 20 per cent, will be allowed as discount 
to subscribers on advance, or immediate, payment.
XX 
At the anniversary meeting of the Entomological Society of London, January 
20th, Mr. R.
McLachlan, F.R.S., president, in the chair, an abstract of the 
Treasurer's accounts was read by Mr. H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., one of the auditors, 
and the Secretary read the report of the Council.
The following were elected 
as the Council for 1886 :— President, R.
McLachlan, F.R.S.; Treasurer, 
E. Saunders, F.L.S.; Secretaries, H.
Goss, F.L.S., and the Rev. W.
W. 
Fowler, M.A., F.L.S.; Librarian, F.
Grut, F.L.S.; other members of council: 
T. R.
Billups, E.
A. Fitch, F.L.S., F.
Du Cane Godman, M.A., F.R.S., 
W. F.
Kirby, E.
B. Poulton, M.A., F.G.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., S.
Stevens, 
F. L.S., and J.
Jenner Weir, F.L.S. The president then delivered an address, 
for which the thanks of the society were voted to him.
XXX 
The annual meeting of the Hull Field Naturalists' Society was held on the 
2 1 st of January.
The report bore testimony to the flourishing state of the society, 
and referred to the establishment of sections and appointment of Sectional 
Recorders (so far five in number, for Botany, Entomology, Conchology, Geology, 
and Ornithology), and to the affiliation which had been effected with the Hull 
Literary and Philosophical Society, who had kindly granted the use of their 
museum for reference, and of a room in the Royal Institution for meetings.
Numerous excursions, general and sectional, had been made, and the winter 
evening meetings well attended.
The election of officers resulted in the appoint- 
ment of Mr. N.
F. Dobree as president, Mr. W.
L. Shooter as secretary, Mr. T.
Dennis as treasurer, Mr. F.
F. Walton as librarian, together with vice-presidents 
and a committee, and the following recorders of sections: — Botany, Messrs.
E. A.
Peak and T.
Birks, jun.
; Entomology, Mr. J.
W r .
Boult ; Conchology, Mr. H.
L. 
Duncum ; Geology, Mr. J.
Stears ; and Ornithology, Mr. E.
W. Wade.
March 1886.
8 4 
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR DECEMBER 1885.
Edited by GEORGE PAUL, F.G.S., F.R.Met.S., Moortown, Leeds.
Atmos 
pheric 
pres- 
sure.
TEMPERATURE (IN SHADE).
RAINFALL.
Name of Station ; 
its height above sea-level ; 
AND 
Name of Observer.
Mean Height of Barometer 
(reduced to zero and to sea-level).
Mean Temperature for Month.
H 
Ma 
reg 
5 
0 
<| 
EXTR 
ghest 
ximum 
stered.
a 
Q 
EMES.
L 
Mir 
reg 
0 
< 
Dwest 
limum 
stered.
6 
Q 
Total Rain Collected.
Number of Days on which 
there fell o'oi inch or more.
Great 
ii 
Singl 
0 
< 
est Fall 
1 a 
e Day.
Q 
ISLE OF MAN: 
Cronkbourne (140ft.)..
.. ) 
A. W.
Moore, F.M.S |" 
inch 
3o - i36 
deg.
41 '3 2 
deg.
53'5 
16th 
3rd 
3rd 
deg.
25-0 
8th 
inch 
1-928 
13 
inch 
0*515 
30th 
30th 
30th 
28th 
30th 
30th 
CENTRAL HILL REG.
: W.
COAST: | 
Barrow-in-Furness ( — )..
) 
W. S.
Whitworth ....
( 
Liverpool (Bidston)(— ) 1 
30-138 
30' 164 
39 '90 
40-40 
5i '0 
5.3 "o 
25-0 
27*0 
1 8th ) 
( 1 1 tli f 
( 8th |_ 
1 qth j 
8th 
nth 
10th 
1*410 
i'55o 
1 75° 
3 'Ho 
2-697 
15 
1 4 
15 
14 
0*410 
0*370 
0-330 
o" 490 
0-988 
0' 150 
0*270 
0*280 
o* 125 
0' 180 
0*200 
0*300 
O* 330 
o* 210 
Newton-Reigny (Penrith) ) 
(S7 7 ft.)T.G. Benn, F.M.S.
| 
Havves Junction (1,135ft.) ) 
Rev. S.
J. Perry, F.R.S. I 
30 129 
28-864 
30' t8o 
34'30 
44-10 
53"7 
50 '0 
56*3 
16th 
18th 
22nd 
i3-8 
15-0 
16*1 
EASTERN LOWLAND REGION : 
North Shields (— ) .
.. ) 
J. W.
Irvine ~\ 
Scarborough (120 ft.) ....
) 
Allan Rowntree, F.M.S.
» 
York Museum (— ) ) 
Moortown, Leeds (500 ft.) ) 
G. Paul, F.G.S., F.M.S. j 
Hull, Derringham (10ft.) ) 
J. B.
Smith j 
Louth, Lincs.
(in ft.).
. .
. ) 
T. W.
Wallis \ 
Boston, Lincs.
(24 ft.) ....
\ 
W.H.Wheeler,M.In.C.E. j 
W. Berridge, F.M.S j 
30*078 
30*109 
30' 144 
30" 162 
30-190 
30*126 
30' 150 
3o'i5o 
30-187 
38-90 
38*81 
37 '60 
36-63 
38*20 
38*80 
36-61 
36-06 
38-3 
57'o 
5i"3 
53'o 
5i "i 
5i '5 
52*0 
5.0 
j 5°'° 
52-o 
16th 
17th 
I 3rd ) 
( 16th ) 
16th 
(3rd ) 
(17th j 
3rd 
16th 
1 6th 
( 1 6th I 
"(17th 1 
20'0 
25'0 
i6'o 
19-0 
21 '5 
27-0 
22 '0 
17*0 
21 '0 
nth 
nth 
nth 
nth 
nth 
j 9th | 
( nth | 
nth 
nth 
8th 
0' 640 
1*090 
0*840 
0*610 
0*700 
0*790 
0*910 
0*930 
0*500 
12 
.7 
12 
" 
12 
13 
7 
8 
IT 
30th 
30th 
9th 
28th 
30th 
30th 
30th 
30th 
28th 
30'222 
39' 1 
52*0 
(i5?h } 
22*0 
(nth ) 
( 1 2th ( 
i* 220 
II 
0*360 
5th 
* Not reduced to sea-level.
IVind.—ist Division (Isle of Man) N.
8, N.E. 5, E.
3, S.E. 2, S.
7, S.W. 14, W.
14, N.W. 6, calm 3 days.
2nd Division : N.
3, N.E. 4%, E.
1%, S.E. 3, S.
3, S.W. 6, W.
$%, N.W. 4^, calm o day.
3rd Division : N.
3, N.E. 3, E.
1%, S.E. 1%, S.
1, S.W. 6, W.
10, N.W. 2, calm 4 days.
4 th Division : N.
3, N.E. E.
%, S.E. 1%, S.
3^, S.W. 8, W.
7 %, N.W. 5%, calm o day.
London: N.
3, N.E. 2, E.
r. S.E. 2, S.
5, S.W. 8, W.
5,.
N.W. 2, calm 3 days.
Gales.
— Isle of Man, 3 days; 2nd Division, 5 days; 3rd Division, 8 days; 4th Division, 18 days ; and 
London, 2 days.
Snow.
— Isle of Man on 3 days; 3rd Division, 7 days; 4th Division, 3 days; London, 3 days.
Bright Sunshine.
— Newton-Reigny, 31*55 hours; Stonyhurst, 36*8 hours ; and Hull, 27*9 hours.
Higiiest Temperature in Sun — Isle of Man, 85*0° on 26th ; Newton-Reigny, 75*2° on 1st ; 
Stonyhurst, 92*9° on 5th ; Leeds (Moortown) 88*5° on 10th ; and Hull, 64*5° on 17th.
Naturalist, 
*5 
MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
JOHN WHITEHEAD, 
Oldham ; Honorary Member of the Manchester Cryfttogamic Society.
The following list is presented to the readers of the Naturalist as a 
pretty full account of the Mosses known to occur within a radius of 
ten miles of Ashton.
The district extends into the counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, 
Yorkshire, and Derbyshire, and includes some favourable habitats 
reaching an altitude of 1,980 feet on Kinder Scout, thus accounting 
for the occurrence of several alpine or sub-alpine species.
The initial letter after each locality represents the county in 
which such locality is situated.
The geological formation of the district is chiefly millstone grit, 
coal measures, and new red sandstone.
My thanks are especially due to Mr. G.
A. Holt, of Manchester, 
for his valuable assistance.
ACROCARPI.
SPHAGNACEAl.
Sphagnum acutifolium Ehrh.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; 
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum, acutifolium b.
deflexum Schpr.
Kinder Scout (IX), 
barren, G.
A. Holt.
Sphagnum acutifolium 1.
lsetevirens Braithw.
Kinder Scout (D.), 
barren, G.
A. Holt.
Sphagnum acutifolium m.
patulum Schpr.
Kinder Scout (D.)> 
barren, G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum fimbriatum Wils.
Ogden Clough, Hollingworth (C), 
in fruit; Reddish (L.), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum strictum Lind.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, G.
A. Holt 
and John Whitehead.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum squarrosum Pers.
Near Middleton (L.), in fruit; 
Hattersley (C), in fruit; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum intermedium Hoffm.
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), 
barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum cuspidatum Ehrh.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in July.
March 1886.
86 WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
Sphagnum rigidum b.
compactum Brid.
Kinder Scout (D.), 
barren, J.
Whitehead.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum rigidum c.
squarrosulum Russ.
Kinder Scout (I).), 
barren, Whitehead and Holt.
Sphagnum subsecundum Nees.
Carr Brook (C.), barren ; Stayley 
Brushes (C), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum subsecundum b.
contortum Schultz.
StayleyBrushes(C), 
barren; Greenfield (Y.), barren; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), 
barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Sphagnum papillosum Lindb.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, White- 
head and Holt.
Fruits in August.
Sphagnum cymbifolium Ehrh.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; 
Greenfield (Y.), barren ; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in August.
Sphagnum cymbifolium c.
squarrosulum Nees.
Stayley Brushes (C), 
barren.
ANDREsEA CEAL.
Andreaea petrophila Ehrh.
Greenfield ( Y.), barren, R.
B,uxton; Charles- 
worth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in May.
Andreaea rothii W T .
& M.
Stayley Brushes (C), fruit.
Fruits in 
May.
Andreeea crassinervis Bruch.
Crowden (C), fruit, Jno. Whitehead ; 
Woodhead (D.), fruit, John Whitehead; Kinder Scout (D.), 
West.
Fruits in May.
WEISSIA CEsE.
Gymnostomum tenue Schrad.
Park Lane, Broughton (L.), barren, 
Holt and Wilde.
Fruits in July.
Gymnostomum rupestre Schwg.
Bamford Wood (L.), fruit; Marple 
(C), fruit.
Fruits in September.
Gymnostomum curvirostrum Ehrh.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, 
Whitehead and Holt.
Fruits in September.
Gymnostomum squarrosum N.
and H.
Hattersley (C), fruit, White- 
head and Schofield.
Fruits in April.
Weissia viridula Brid.
Near Oldham (L.), in fruit ; Bamford 
Wood (L.), in fruit; Romiley (C), in fruit; Marple (C), in 
fruit.
Fruits in April.
Weissia mucronata Bruch.
Hattersley (C), in fruit, Whitehead 
and Schofield.
Fruits in April.
Weissia cirrhata Hedw.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; Mellor (D.), 
in fruit; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit; Kinder Scout 
(D.), in fruit ; Bamford Wood (L.) 5 in fruit.
Fruits in February.
Naturalist, 
WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
87 
Dichodontium pellucidum Linn.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit; 
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; Ogden Clough, Hollingworth (C), 
in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Dichodontium pellucidum b.
serratum Schpr.
Stayley Brushes (C), 
barren; Marple (C), in fruit, Jno. Whitehead.
Dichodontium pellucidum c.
fagimontanum Brid.
Clifton Junction 
(L.), barren, G.
A. Holt.
Dicranella crispa Hedw.
Near Oldham (L.), in fruit, L.
Tetlow ; 
Sailor's Shore (L.), in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Dicranella schreberi Hedw.
Rochdale (L.J, in fruit, G.
A. Holt.
Dicranella schreberi b.
leata Schpr.
Rochdale (L.), in fruit; 
between Stretford and Sale (C.), in fruit, G.
A. Holt ; Stirrup 
Wood (D.), in fruit, John Whitehead ; Kersal Moor (L.), barren, 
C. J.
Wilde; Bamford Wood (L.), barren, G.
A. Holt.
Fruits 
in October.
Dicranella squarrosa Schrad.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren; 
Stayley Brushes (C.), in fruit ; Crowden (C), in fruit ; Greenfield 
(Y.), barren; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout 
(D.) in fruit.
Fruits in September.
Dicranella cerviculata Hedw.
Ashton Moss (L.), in fruit; Cheet- 
ham Hill (L.), in fruit; Kersal Moor (L.), in fruit; Rochdale 
(L.), in fruit; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit; Kinder 
Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Dicranella varia Hedw.
Common in fruit on clay banks.
Fruits 
in December.
Dicranella varia b.
tenuifolia Bruch.
Marple (C), J.
Whitehead.
Dicranella varia s.
callistoma Dicks.
Near Assize Courts, Man- 
chester (L.), in fruit, G.
A. Holt.
Dicranella rufescens Turn.
Mossley (L.), in fruit; Sailors' Shore (L.), 
in fruit ; Boggart Hole Clough (L.), in fruit; Stayley Brushes (C), 
in fruit; Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit ; Hayfield (D.), in fruit; Prest- 
wich (L.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Dicranella subulata Hedw.
Formerly at Stayley Brushes (C).
in fruit, J.
Tinker; Boggart Hole Clough (L.), in fruit, W.
Kent.
Fruits in November.
Dicranella heteromalla Hedw.
Common in fruit.
Fruits in 
December.
Dicranum fuscescens Turn.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Charles- 
worth Coombs (D.), in fruit ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in August.
Dicranum scoparium (Linn.).
Ogden Clough, Hollingworth (C), 
in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit; Kinder Scout (1).), barren; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren.
Fruits in August.
March 1886.
88 WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
Dicranum majus Turn.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in 
August.
Dicranum palustre Brid.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Green- 
field (Y.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren ; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), barren.
Fruits in September.
Dicranodontium longirostrum Web. and Mohr.
Stayley Brushes (C), 
barren ; Stirrup Wood (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in October.
Campylopus atrovirens Ue Not. Kinder Scout (I).), barren, 
Robert Gordon.
Campylopus flexuosus Brid.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren ; Stayley 
Brushes (C), barren; Marple (C), in fruit; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in 
November.
Campylopus paradoxus Wils.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, John 
Whitehead.
Campylopus fragilis B.
and S.
Stayley Brushes ,(C.) barren; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren ; 
Mellor (D.), barren.
Fruits in December.
Campylopus pyriformis Brid.
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit, G.
E. Hunt; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in October.
LE UCOBR YA CEsE.
Leucobryum glaucum Linn.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren; Charles- 
worth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout (D,), barren.
Fruits 
in December.
BRUCHIACE^E.
Archidium phascoides Brid.
Hyde Road, Manchester (L.), in fruit, 
G. E.
Hunt.
Fruits in March.
Pleuridium nitidum Hedw.
Daisy Nook, Ashton (L.), in fruit ; 
Dukinfield (C), in fruit; near Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit; 
Werneth Low (C), in fruit.
Fruits in March.
Pleuridium subulatum Linn.
Godley (C), in fruit ; Marple (C), 
in fruit; Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in March.
Pleuridium alternifolium B.
and S.
Hattersley (C), in fruit, White- 
head and Schofield.
Fruits in March.
SELIGERIA CEAl.
, 
Seligeria recurvata Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit ; Green- 
field (Y.), in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), 
in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Naturalist, 
WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
89 
Campylostelium saxicolum W.
and M.
Romiley (C), in fruit, White- 
head and Holt.
Fruits in December.
Blindia acuta Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren, G.
A. Holt ; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, Holt and Whitehead.
Fruits in June.
POTTIACESE.
Sphaerangium muticum Schreb.
Near Stirrup Wood (D.), John 
Whitehead.
Fruits in March.
Phascum cuspidatum Schreb.
Hattersley (C), in fruit, John 
Whitehead.
Fruits in March.
Pottia minutula Schwg.
Marple (C), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in January.
Pottia truncata Linn.
Daisy Nook, Ashton (L.).
in fruit ; Roch- 
dale (L.), in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit; near Stirrup Wood 
(D.), in fruit.
Fruits in February.
Pottia intermedia Turn.
Hatherlow (C), in fruit; Marple (C), 
in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in February.
Pottia lanceolata Dicks.
Hatherlow (C), in fruit, R.
Buxton, 
Fruits in March.
Didymodon rubellus B.
and S.
Common about Marple (C.) and 
Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Didymodon flexifolius Dicks.
Buckton Castle (C), in fruit, Jethro 
Tinker ; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit ; Kinder Scout, 
(D.), in fruit.
Fruits in January.
Eucladium verticillatum Linn.
Romiley (C), barren, John White- 
head.
Fruits in July.
Ditrichum homomallum Hedw.
Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit ; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), in 
fruit.
Fruits in November.
Trichostomum tophaceum Brid.
Newton Heath (L.), in fruit, 
Robert Lees; Kersal Moor (L.), in fruit; Clifton Junction (L.), 
in fruit; Hattersley (C.) in fruit ; Marple (C), in fruit ; Kinder 
Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Barbula rigida Schultz.
Roe Cross (C), in fruit; Hyde (C), in 
fruit ; Romiley (C), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Barbula ambigua B.
and S.
Romiley (C), in fruit, John White- 
head.
Fruits in December.
Barbula aloides Koch.
Hattersley (C), in fruit ; Romiley (C), in 
fruit ; near Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Barbula muralis Linn.
Common.
Fruits in May.
Barbula muralis c.
rupestris Schultz.
Mellor (1).), in fruit.
Barbula unguiculata Dill.
Bardsley (L.), in fruit ; Marple (C), in 
fruit .
Fruits in December.
March 1886.
WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
Barbula fallax Hedw.
Bardsley (L.), in fruit; Daisy Nook, Ashton 
(L.), in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Barbula rigidula Dicks.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; Marple (C), 
in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Barbula revoluta Schwg.
Mellor (D.), barren, Fruits in April.
Barbula convoluta Hedw.
Marple (C), in fruit; Disley (C), in 
fruit; Mellor .(D.), in fruit.
Fruits in April.
Barbula tortuosa Linn.
Greenfield (Y.), barren; Stirrup Wood (D.), 
barren.
Fruits in July.
Barbula subulata Linn.
Romiley (C), in fruit; Marple (C), in 
fruit; Matley (C), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Barbula ruralis Linn.
Marple (C), barren.
Fruits in April.
Ceratodon purpureus Linn.
Common.
Fruits in April.
CAL YMPERA CEsE.
Encalypta streptocarpa Hedw.
Romiley (C), barren; Mellor (D.), 
barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren; Greenfield (Y.), barren.
Fruits in August.
GRIM MIA CEAi.
Grimmia apocarpa Linn.
Romiley (C), in fruit; Ermcrift Wood (I).), 
in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Grimmia apocarpa b.
rivularis Brid.
Romiley (C), in fruit, John 
Whitehead.
Grimmia pulvinata Dill.
Hattersley (C.), in fruit ; Marple (C.), in 
fruit ; Mellor (I).), in fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in 
April.
Grimmia doniana Sm. Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in December.
Hhacomitrium aciculare Linn.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; 
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit; 
Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Bhacomitrium fasciculare Schrad.
Apethorn (C), in fruit; Ogden 
Clough (C), in fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in March.
Bhacomitrium lanuginosum Hedw.
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit ; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in March.
Ptychomitrium polyphyllum Dicks.
Romiley (C), in fruit ; Marple 
(C), in fruit ; Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit.
Fruits in March.
Orthotrichum saxatile Brid.
Hatherlow (C), in fruit ; Marple (C), 
in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Naturalist, 
whitehead: mosses of ashton-under-lyne district.
91 
SPLA CHNA CEjE.
Tetraplodon mnioides Linn.
fil.
Near Tintwistle (C), in fruit, 
Whitehead and Schofield.
Fruits in June.
Splaennum sphaericum L.
fil.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; Kinder 
Scout (D.), in fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Splaehnum ampullaceum Linn.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; 
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in July.
FUNARIACEAL.
Discelium nudum Dicks.
Boggart Hole Clough (L.), in fruit ; 
Haughton Dale (L.), in fruit; Sailors' Shore (L.), in fruit; 
Marple (C.), in fruit ; Ram's Clough, Delph (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits 
in March.
Ephemerum serratum Schreb.
Near Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit, 
John Whitehead; Marple (C.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Physcomitrium pyriforme Linn.
Near Taunton (L.), in fruit; 
Matley Wood (C.), in fruit; Marple (C.), in fruit; near Stirrup 
Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Entosthodon ericetorum Bals.
Ogden Clough (C), in fruit, A.
Wood; Crowden (C), in fruit, John Whitehead; Greenfield 
(Y), in fruit, Hobson.
Fruits in April.
Funaria hygrometrica Linn.
Common.
Fruits in June.
BAR TRAM I A CEJE.
Amblyodon dealbatus Dicks.
Marple (C), in fruit, G.
E. Hunt.
Fruits in June.
Bartramia pomiformis Linn.
Stirrup Wood (D.), barren; Charles- 
worth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in May.
Philonotis fontana Linn.
Near Ashton (L.), barren; Stayley Brushes 
(C), barren; Ogden (C), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Philonotis calcarea B.
and S.
Ram's Clough, Delph (Y.), barren ; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Breutelia arcuata Dicks.
Formerly at Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit, 
J. Tinker; Kinder Scout (D.), barren, John Whitehead.
Fruits 
in December.
BRYACE^.
Leptobryum pyriforme Linn.
Frequent in greenhouses throughout 
the district ; Clifton Junction (L.), G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in June.
Webera polymorpha Hoppe.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, Robert 
Go rdon.
Fruits in July.
March 1886.
Q2 WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
Webera nutans Schreb.
Taunton (L.), in fruit; Stayley Brushes (C), 
in fruit; Ernicroft (D.), in fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Webera annotina Heclw.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit; Bam- 
ford Wood (L.), in fruit; Clifton Junction (L.), in fruit ; Ogden 
Clough (C.), barren ; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder 
Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Webera carnea Linn.
Arden Hall (C), in fruit; Clifton Junction (L.), 
in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit ; Hattersley (C), in fruit ; Stirrup 
Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in April.
Webera albicans Wahl.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit ; Arden 
Hall (C), in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit; Charlesworth (D.), in 
fruit.
Fruits in May.
Bryum pendulum Hornsch.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit ; 
Matley (C), in fruit ; Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Bryum inclinatum Swartz.
Dukinfield (C), in fruit; Mellor (I).), 
in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Bryum warneum Bland.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit, White- 
head and Schofield.
Fruits in August.
Bryum lacustre Brid.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit, Prof.
Schimper.
Fruits in June.
Bryum calophyllum R.
Br. Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit, 
Robert Gordon.
Fruits in August.
Bryum uliginosum Bruch.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit, 
G. E.
Hunt ; Hattersley (C), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits 
in August.
Bryum intermedium W.
and M.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit ; 
Romiley (C), in fruit ; Marple (C), in fruit ; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in October.
Bryum bimum Schreb.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit ; Clifton 
Junction (L.), in fruit; Marple Aqueduct (C), barren.
Fruits 
in June.
Bryum bimum b.
cuspidatum Bry. Eur.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), 
in fruit ; Romiley (C), in fruit.
Bryum atropurpureum W.
and M.
Cheetham Hill (L.), in fruit ; 
Clifton Junction (L.), in fruit; Dukinfield (C), in fruit; 
Hattersley (C), in fruit; Compstall Bridge (C), in fruit.
Fruits 
in May.
Bryum csespiticium Linn.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit ; Stretford 
(L.), in fruit; Dukinfield (C), in fruit; Godley (C), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Bryum argenteum Linn.
Common.
Fruits in November.
Naturalist, 
WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
93 
Bryum argenteum b.
majus Schpr.
Romiley (C), barren, John 
Whitehead and G.
A. Holt.
Bryum capillare Linn.
Marple (C), in fruit; Romiley (C), in 
fruit; Charlesworth (D.), in fruit; Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits 
in June.
Bryum pallens Swartz.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit ; Boggart 
Hole Clough (L.).
in fruit; Sailor's Shore (L.), in fruit; Ogden 
Clough (C), in fruit.
Fruits in July.
Bryum pseudo-triquetrum Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit ; 
Stirrup Wood (D.) 3 barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in July.
Bryum turbinatum Hedw.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit, 
Robert Gordon ; Marple (C ), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits 
in June.
Bryum roseum Schreb.
Marple (C), barren.
Fruits in December.
MN1ACEAL.
Mnium affine Bland.
Medlock Vale (L.), barren; Reddish (L.), in 
fruit, John Whitehead and Schofield ; Hazel Grove (C.), barren.
Fruits in May.
Milium undulatum Hedw.
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit, A.
Wood ; 
frequently barren.
Fruits in April.
Milium rostratum Schrad.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit; Marple (C), 
in fruit ; Stirrup and Whitebottom Woods (D.), in fruit.
Fruits 
in April.
Mnium hornum Linn.
Common, abundant in fruit in Stirrup and 
Ernicroft Woods (D.).
Fruits in May.
Mnium serratum Schrad.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit, G.
A. Holt ; 
Clifton Junction (L.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Mnium punctatum Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit ; Marple (C), 
in fruit; Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; Stirrup Wood (D.), in 
fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in February.
Muium subglobosum B.
and S.
Near Ashton (L.), in fruit ; Stayley 
Brushes (C), in fruit ; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit ; 
Hayfield (D.), in fruit; Carr Meadow (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in 
February.
Aulacomnium androgynum Linn.
Near Stockport (C), barren, 
John Whitehead.
Fruits in June.
Aulacomnium palustre Linn.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), barren ; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
March 1886.
94 WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
TE TEA PHIDA CEAl.
Tetraphis pellucida Linn.
Common, barren ; Stirrup and White- 
bottom Woods (D.), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in August.
Tetrodontium browniaimm Dicks.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit • 
Hattersley (C), in fruit ; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
POL YTRICHA CE/E.
Oligotrichum hercynicum Ehrh.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in July.
Atrichum undulatum Linn.
Common.
Fruits in November.
Atrichum crispum James.
Rochdale (L.), barren ; Cheetham Hill 
(L.), barren ; Prestwich Clough (L.), barren; Stayley Brushes (C.
), 
barren ; Greenfield (Y.), barren.
Fruit unknown in Britain.
Pogonatum nanum Neck.
Near Stirrup (D.), in fruit, E.
Clough and 
Robert Gordon.
Fruits in November.
Pogonatum aloides Hedw.
Frequent on clay banks.
Fruits in 
November.
Pogonatum urnigerum Linn.
Marple (C), in fruit ; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in 
November.
Pogonatum alpinum Linn.
Kinder Scout (P.), in fruit, E.
Clough.
Fruits in June.
Polytrichum gracila Menz.
Ashton Moss (L.), in fruit ; Cheetham 
Hill (L.), in fruit; Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Polytrichum piliferum Schreb.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; Ogden 
Clough (C), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit ; Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Polytrichum juniperinum Willd.
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren, 
John Whitehead.
Fruits in May.
Polytrichum strictum Banks.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, John 
Whitehead and G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in June.
Polytrichum commune Linn.
Common on the hills.
Fruits in June.
Dinhyscium foliosum Linn.
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit, Hobson.
Fruits in August.
B UXBA UMLA CEAL.
Buxbaumia aphylla Hall.
Ogden Clough (C), in fruit, Hannan, 
Wood, and Whitehead.
Fruits in February.
AMPHOCARPI.
FISSIDENTA CEAZ.
Fissidens bryoides Hedw.
Frequent in woods and on hedge-banks.
Fruits in December.
Fissidens exilis Hedw.
Daisy Nook (L.), in fruit; Romiley (C), in 
fruit ; near Stirrup Wood (D.),in fruit.
Fruits in February.
Naturalist, 
WHITEHEAD I MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
95 
Fissidens incurvus W.
and M.
Daisy Nook (L.), in fruit ; Man- 
kum Wood (C), in fruit; Oak Wood (C); near Stirrup Wood (D.), 
in fruit.
Fruits in February.
Fissidens viridulus Wils.
Tintwistle (C), in fruit, A.
Wood; 
Woodley (C), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in November.
Fissidens pusillus Wils.
Near Marple Hall (C), in fruit; Mankum 
Wood (C), in fruit; Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in 
September.
Fissidens osmnndoides Hedw.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Ogden 
Clough (C), in fruit ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in 
December.
Fissidens adiantoides Hedw.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit; 
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit ; Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; 
Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits 
in December.
Fissidens taxifolins Linn.
Frequent on clay banks.
Fruits in 
December.
SCHISTOSTEGA CE^E.
Schistostega osmundacea Dicks.
Charlesworth (D.), in fruit ; New 
Mills (D.), in fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in March.
CLADOCARPI.
RIP ARIA CEAL.
Cinclidotn fontinaloides Hedw.
River Goyt, Marple Aqueduct (C), 
in fruit, Jethro Tinker ; probably extinct.
Fruits in March.
Fontinalis antipyretica Linn.
W^aterhouses (L.), in fruit ; Newton 
Moor (C.), in fruit ;• Hatherlow (G.), in fruit; Hollingworth (C), 
in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Fontinalis antipyretica c.
gracilis Lindb.
Charlesworth Coombs 
(D.), barren, John Whitehead; Carr Meadow (D.), barren, 
G. A.
Holt.
Fontinalis squamosa Linn.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Holling- 
worth (C), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in June.
CRYPHAiACEsE.
Hedwigia ciliata Dicks.
Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit, John White- 
head.
Fruits in March.
PLEUROCARPI.
NECKERACEAi.
Neckera complanata Linn.
Arden Hall (C), barren ; St. Chad's 
Well, Chadkirk (C), barren ; Mellor (D.), barren.
Fruits in 
December.
Homalia trichomanoides Schrad.
Marple (C), in fruit.
Fruits in 
December.
March 1886.
g6 WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
110 OKERIA CEsE.
Pterygopliyllum lucens Sm. Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; Marple 
(C), in fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit; Stirrup Wood (D.), in 
fruit.
Fruits in December.
Uyrinia pulviuata Wahl.
Formerly on trees, Jackson's Boat, but 
now lost through the trees being cut down (L.), R.
Buxton.
Fruits in June.
Leskea polyearpa Ehrh.
Jackson's Boat (L.), in fruit, G.
E. Hunt.
Fruits in May.
Heterocladium heteropterum Bruch.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren ; 
Marple (C.), barren; Mellor (D.), barren; Stirrup Wood (D.), 
barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in December.
Thuidium tamariscinum Hedw.
Marple (C.), barren ; Mellor (D.), 
barren ; Stirrup Wood (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in November.
Thamnium alopecunim Linn.
Whitebottom Wood (D.), in fruit; 
Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Climacium dendroides Linn.
Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit; Marple 
(C.), in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Homalothecium sericeum Linn.
Arden Hall (C.), barren ; Hather- 
low (C.), barren; Mellor (D.), barren.
Fruits in December.
Camptothecium iutescens Huds.
Kersal Moor (L), barren, 
G. A.
Holt uits in December.
Brachythecium g are o sum B.
and S.
Kersal Moor (L.), G.
A. Holt ; 
Romiley (C.), barren, John Whitehead.
Fruits in December.
Brachythecium velutinum Linn.
Cheetham Hill (L.), in fruit; 
Reddish (L.), in fruit; Marple (C.), in fruit; Werneth Low (C.), 
in fruit; Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Brachythecium rutabulum Linn.
Frequent in the Marple district.
Fruits in December.
Brachythecium rivulare B.
and S.
Reddish (L.), barren; Mellor 
(D)., barren; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder 
Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in December.
Brachythecium populeum Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit; 
Hollingworth (C.), in fruit; Marple (C.), in fruit; Mellor (D.), 
in fruit ; Charlesworth (D.), in fruit; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
EABRONIA CE.E.
LESKEA CE^E.
II YPN A CE~ E.
Naturalist, 
"INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London: D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I , II., III., & IV.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire scries.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have givei a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The 1 ittle 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann.
&* Mag. Nat.
Hist.
' The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athefia-um.
Noiv ready, 8vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
nd micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
1 
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
THE NATUEALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the followi7ig papers within the next few months: — 
The Migrations of the Salmoni dse (Part 2)— Francis Day, CLE., F.Z.S., &c.
Contributions to Phenology — R.
Rosenstock, B.a.
Notes on Birds of High Peak— F.
B. Whitlock.
List of Wensleydale Birds— John Percival.
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire & Cheshire (Part 3.
Bowbvces)— Dr. Ellis.
Hymenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson.
Liverpool Coleoptera (Parts 7, 8, 9, 10)— J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., &c.
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.
— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeauxv Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Notes.- — It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end the}' 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN 
The Chapter on Coleoptera^ by Edtvard Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching: boxing female moths 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larval by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae 
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa-digging ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupa;.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light ; grouting ; smoking ; killing ; relaxing ; setting ; grease ; mites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes : painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera; Hymenoptera; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Fhes.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
"Every page is interesting." Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2M.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
6d.
post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all Booksellers.
No. 129.
1 APR ^386 
APRIL, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S.
, 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
§onfents 
Mosses of Ashton-under-Lyne District (concluded) — John Whitehead 
Descriptions of New British Lichens — Translated by Joseph A.
Martindale 
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire (Part iii, Bombyces) — 
John W.
Ellis, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S 
Migration of the Salmonidae (Part ii, Periods of Migration) — 
Francis Day, CLE ., F.L.S ', etc.
Notes— Mammalia : ..." 
The Badger on the Yorkshire Wolds — Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A.; Badgers in Durham 
and -Northumberland — J.
W. L.
M. T.
Fawcett ; Otters in Durham — Idem ; 
Records of Captures of Badgers in Yorkshire — R.
Lofthouse ; Badger in Lincoln- 
shire — J.
N. Dufty, F.G.S.; Large Stoat near Boroughbridge — R.
Paver- 
Crow, J.
P.', Foumarts near Huddersfield — C.
C. Hanson ; Whiskered Bat in 
Cheshire, and Noctule in Durham — W.
De?iison Roebuck, F.L.S.
Ornithological Notes:— 
Migration of Birds on the West Coast of England and Wales — W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.; 
Flamborough Notes — Matthew Bailey; Lapwing — Diversity of Eggs — Charles 
Ashford; Eagle Owl near Huddersfield — C.
C. Hanson and J.
H. Gurney, 
F.L.S., F.Z.S, 
Botanical Notes : — 
Rosa lucida in Westmoreland — Herbert Goss, F.L.S., F.E.S.; Additions to the Hull 
Flora — Ed. Peak ; Manchester Cryptogamic Society's Proceedings.
Geological land Paleeontological Notes :— 
Jointing in the Magnesian Limestone of the Austwick District — Alfred Harker, 
M.A., F.G.S.; Joints Cutting through Pebbles — Idem; Asteracanthus ornatissimus 
in the Middle Oolites near Mai ton— S.
Chadwick.
Notes and News 
PAGE 
97 — ioo 
103 — in 
[15—126 
112, 113 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.G.
McCORQUODALE & CO.
LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghai.l Street.
May also be had of G.
E. East, jun., 241, Evering Road, Ui'per Clapton, London, E.
All Communications should be Addressed: — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by 
Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 
5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
->co<- 
lT being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
x,^ 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short ]5ToteS of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, yd.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Journal of New York Microscopical Society, November 1885.
[Society.
Midland Naturalist for March 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for March 1886.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for March 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for March 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for March 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Natural History Journal for March 1886.
[J.
E. Clarke, Editor.
Revue Bryologique, 13th Annee, 1886, No. 2.
[T.
Husnot, Editor.
Notarisia, commentarium phycologicum ; Rivista trimestrale consacrata alio 
studio delle alghe, Anno 1, No. 1, Gennaio 1886.
[Signori G.
B. de Toni e David Levi, Redattori.
A British Moss new to Science — 8vo reprint.
[Mr. G.
A. Holt, Author.
Natural History Teacher, vol.
ii, No. 15.
March 1886.— Edited by S.
L. Mosley.
[Mr. G.
T. Porritt.
Bot. Soc.
of Edinburgh.
— Trans, and Proceed., vol.
xvi, part 2.
[The Society.
New York Microscopical Society.
— Journal, vol i, No. 9 — Dec. 1885.
[Society.
Occurrence of Sowerby's Whale on the Yorkshire Coast, by T.
Southwell and 
W. Eagle Clarke, 8vo reprint.
[Authors.
Notes on Australian Lepidoptera, with Descriptions of new Species, by Rudolph 
Rosenstock, B.A., two 8vo reprints, 1885.
[Author.
Essex Field Club.
— Transactions, vol.
iv, part I, June 1885, and Proceedings, 
vol.
iv, part 1, June 1885.
[The Club.
The Garner, and Science Recorder's Journal, Nos. I and 2, October and Novem- 
ber, 1885.
[A.
Ramsay, Editor.
Grevillea, No. 71, March 1886.
[Dr. M.
C. Cooke, Editor.
Note on the Habit of the young Cuckoo in ejecting eggs, &c, by John Hancock, 
8vo reprint, 1885.
[The Author.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Soc.
— Trans., vol.
iii, part 7, Dec. 1885.
[Society.
Societe Royale Malacologique de Belgique.
— Proces-verbaux, 1883-4-5.
[La Societe.
THE BIRDS OF YORKSHIRE.
Information is desired at once on the Warblers, their distribution, nidification, 
and local names, together with full details of the occurrence of rare species, for 
use in preparing the next portion of this work, which appears in the Transactions 
of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
— W.
Eagle Clarke, 18, Claremont Road, 
Headingley, Leeds.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
97 
Brachythecium plumosum Swartz.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit ; 
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; Marple (G), in fruit ; Mellor (D.), 
in fruit ; Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Eurhynchium myosuroides Linn.
Mellor (D.), barren, Stirrup 
Wood (D.), barren.
Fruits in November.
Eurhynchium striatum Schreb.
Mellor (D.), barren, Mr. John 
Whitehead.
Fruits in December.
Eurhynchium piliferum Schreb.
Dan Bank (C.), in fruit, White- 
head and Schofield ; Whitebottom Wood (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in November.
Eurhynchium swartzii Turn.
Marple (C), in fruit ; Mellor (D.), 
in fruit ; Stirrup and Whitebottom Woods (D.), in fruit.
Fruits 
in December.
Eurhynchium prselongum Dill.
Marple (€.), in fruit; Mellor (D.), 
in fruit; Stirrup and Whitebottom Woods (D.), in fruit.
Fruits 
in November.
Eurhynchium pumilum Wils.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren, G.
A. 
Holt; Marple (C), barren ; Stirrup Wood (D.), barren.
Fruits 
in December.
Hyocomium fiagellare Dicks.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; 
Hollingworth (C), in fruit ; Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren ; Greenfield (Y.), barren.
Fruits in 
December.
Rhynchostegium tenellum Dicks.
Mellor (D.), in fruit, John 
Whitehead.
Fruits in November.
Rhynchostegium depressum Bruch.
Marple (C.), in fruit, R.
Gordon 
and J.
Whitehead.
Fruits in October.
Rhynchostegium confertum Dicks.
Frequent in Marple (C.) and 
Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Rhynchostegium murale Hedw.
Marple (C.) and Mellor (D.), in 
fruit, John Whitehead.
Fruits in December.
Rhynchostegium ruscifolium Neck.
Common in streams, in fruit.
Fruits in November.
Plagiothecium latebricola Wils.
Hattersley (C), barren, Roger 
Schofield.
Fruits in December.
Plagiothecium denticulatum Linn.
Stirrup Wood (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Plagiothecium denticulatum b.
sulcatum Spruce.
Common in 
woods, in fruit.
Fruits in June.
Plagiothecium borrerianum Spruce.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren ; 
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Stirrup Wood (D.), barren ; Kinder 
Scout (D.), barren; Mellor (D.), barren ; Ernicroft Wood (D.), 
in fruit, Ashton and Nield.
Fruits in April.
April 1886.
H 
98 WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
Plagiothecium sylvaticum Linn.
Marple (C), in fruit, John 
Whitehead; Mellor (D.), barren, John Whitehead.
Fruits in 
September.
Plagiothecium undulatum Linn.
Stay ley Brushes (C), in fruit ; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in May.
Amblystegium serpens Linn.
W T aterhouses (L.), in fruit ; Dukin- 
field (€.), in fruit; Marple (C), in fruit; Stirrup Wood (D.), in 
fruit.
Fruits in May.
Amblystegium radicale P.Beauv.
Marple (C), in fruit, White- 
head and Holt.
Fruits in May.
Amblystegium irriguum Wils.
Hazel Grove (€.), in fruit ; Mellor 
(D.), in fruit, G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in May.
Amblystegium fluviatile Swartz.
Marple (C.), John Whitehead.
Fruits in May.
Amblystegium riparium Linn.
Bamford Wood (L), in fruit; 
Kersal Moor (L.), in fruit ; Clifton Junction (L.), in fruit ; 
Dukinfield (C), in fruit ; Mellor (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum aduncum b.
kneiffii Bry. Eur.
Ashton Moss (L.), barren, 
G. E.
Hunt.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum exannulatum Giimb.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), barren ; 
Greenfield (Y.), fruit.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum vernicosum Lindb.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, Whitehead 
and Holt.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum sendtneri Schpr.
Kinder Scout (D.), barren, Whitehead 
and Holt ; Carr Meadow (D.), barren, G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum revolvens Swartz.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit ; Carr 
Meadow (D.), in fruit; Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum fluitans Linn.
Clifton Junction (L.), in fruit; Stayley 
Brushes (C), in fruit; Hollingworth (C), in fruit; Kinder 
Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum uncinatum Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit; Hatherlow 
(C), barren; Hattersley (C), barren; Stirrup Wood (D.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Hypnum filicinum Linn.
Medlock Vale (L.), in fruit; Dukin- 
field (C), in fruit ; Marple (C), in fruit.
Fruit in May.
Hypnum commutatum Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit; 
Romiley (C), barren; Marple (C), in fruit; Whitebottom 
Wood (D.), in fruit ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum falcatum Brid.
Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit, John White- 
head ; Greenfield (Y.), in fruit, Roger Schofield.
Fruits in May.
Naturalist, 
WHITEHEAD : MOSSES OF ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE DISTRICT.
Hypnum cupressiforme Linn.
Frequent in the Marple district 
in Fruit.
Fruits in November.
Hypnum cupressiforme d.
ericetorum Bry. Eur.
Charlesworth 
Coombs (D.), in fruit; Marple (C), John Whitehead.
Hypnum resupinatum Wils.
Marple (C), in fruit, John Whitehead ; 
Carr Meadow (D.), in fruit, G.
A. Holt.
Fruits in November.
Hypnum patientiae Lindb.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Holling- 
worth (C.)j barren; Romiley (C), barren; Stirrup Wood (D.)^ 
barren.
Fruits in June.
Hypnum molluscum Hedw.
Bamford Wood (L.), barren ; Roch- 
dale (L.), barren ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in 
December.
Hypnum palustre Linn.
Bamford Wood (L.), in fruit; Rochdale (L.) 5 
barren; Marple (C), in fruit; Hyde (C), in fruit.
Fruits in 
June.
Hypnum ochraceum Turn.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit;.
Holling- 
worth (C), in fruit ; Little Hayfield (D.), in fruit, G.
A. Holt ; 
Diggle (Y.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Hypnum chrysophyllum Brid.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit 
John Whitehead.
Fruits in June.
Hypnum polygamum B.
and S.
Gravel Pit, Taunton (L.), in fruit, 
Robert Gordon ; Rochdale (L.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Hypnum stellatum Schreb.
Waterhouses (L.), barren; Marple 
Aqueduct (C.), barren ; Mellor (D.), barren.
Fruits in June.
Hypnum cordifolium Hedw.
Reddish (L.), in fruit ; Werneth Low 
(C.), in fruit; near Mottram (C.), in fruit ; Mellor (D.), barren.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum cuspidatum Linn.
Common in boggy places, but rather 
rare in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum schreberi Ehrh.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren ; Charles- 
worth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren; 
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit, Jethro Tinker.
Fruits in December.
Hypnum purum Linn.
Marple (C), barren; Mellor (D.), barren.
Fruits in October.
Hypnum stramineum Dicks.
Stayley Brushes (C), in fruit; Charles- 
worth Coombs (D.), barren; Kinder Scout (D.), barren; 
Greenfield (Y.), in fruit.
Fruits in May.
Hypnum scorpioides Linn.
Near Glossop (D.), barren, John 
Whitehead.
Fruits in May.
Hylocomium splendens Dill.
Marple (C), barren, John Whitehead.
Fruits in April.
Hylocomium brevirostrum Ehrh.
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), 
barr en, Whitehead and Schofield.
Fruits in December.
April 1886.
IOO 
BOTANICAL NOTES.
Hylocommm squarrosum Linn.
Stayley Brushes (C), barren; 
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), in fruit ; Kinder Scout (D.), in fruit.
Fruits in December.
Hylocomium squarrosum b.
calvescens Wils.
Mellor (D.), barren, 
John Whitehead.
Hylocomium loreum Linn.
Charlesworth Coombs (D.), barren ; 
Kinder Scout (D.), barren.
Fruits in December.
Hylocomium triquetrum Linn.
Marple (C), barren; Disley (C.), 
barren.
Fruits in December.
BOTANICAL NOTES.
Rosa lucida (Ehrh.) in Westmoreland.— I noticed several bushes 
of this handsome species last August, in a thicket near the southern end of 
Meathop Moss.
I am indebted to Mr. Baker for the determination of the species, 
for which only one locality (in Cumberland) is given in his ' Flora of the Lake 
District.' It seems difficult to account for the occurrence of an American species 
in such a locality as Meathop Moss.
— H.
Goss, Surbiton Hill, Surrey, March 
17th, 1886.
Additions to the Flora of the Hull District.— During the past 
year the following plants have been added to the list of plants of the Hull 
district : — Helleborus viridis, Kilnwick ; H.
fcetidus.
Melton, Mrs. Wilson ; 
Nymphcca alba, Hornsea Mere ; Cochlearia danica, Hornsea, the coast ; Capsella 
bursa-pastoris ; Senebiera coronopus, common ; Silene maritimd, Hornsea ; Montia 
fontana, Swine Moor ; Geranium lucidnm, Brough, Mr. Kingston ; Eroaium 
maritiuium, Spurn ; Ilex aquifolhim ; Acer campestre, Risby ; Sarothamnus 
scoparius, Risby ; Trifolium medium, Willoughby Lane ; Loins major, Marfleet 
Lane ; Orobus tuberosus, Willerby Lane ; Rubus rhamnifolius, Willerby Lane ; 
Rosa mollissima, South Cave, Mr. Birks ; Pyrus aria, Spring Head ; Cornus 
sanguinea, Willerby Lane ; Aspemla odorata, Beverley Westwood ; Fraxinus 
excelsior ; Limnanthemiim nymphteoides, near Cave Castle, may have been planted 
there ; Cuscuta trifolii, near Hull Bank House and Spurn ; Orobanche major, near 
keeper's cottage, Brantingham ; Beta maritima, Hornsea, Mr. Dennis ; Parietaria 
diffusa, Cottingham Church ; Pinus sylvestris ; Luzula sylvatica, Bentley Woods ; 
Asplenium ruta,-muraria, Cottingham Church.
— Ed. Peak, Hull Park, Hull, 
March 1st, 1886.
Manchester Cryptogamic Society, January 18th, 1886.— 
A communication from Mr. G.
A. Holt on Thamnium angustifolhim (Holt) was 
read, wherein he described the characters of this new British species which he dis- 
covered a few years ago in the neighbourhood of Miller's Dale.
For several years 
after its discovery in 1879, Mr. Holt and other bryologists in Britain considered it 
a variety of Thamnium alopecurnm, its nearest ally, and with which it is associated 
in its habitat of growth.
Mr. Holt, when finding better specimens during May of 
last year, came to the conclusion that it had sufficiently distinct characters to justify 
its rank as a species, and having sent specimens to Dr. Kindberg, a Swedish 
botanist in Linkoping, he unhesitatingly confirmed Mr. Holt's views, and published 
it shortly afterwards in his ' Critical Revision of European Pleurocarps.' Mr. Holt 
exhibited the two species and drawings of the dissections of each species.
He also 
said that he had received a letter last month from the eminent Swedish bryologist, 
Prof.
Lindberg, who said, 'Your Thamnium is new and an excellent species.' 
Mr. J.
E. Sunderland sent specimens of the rare Coscinodon cribosus which he had 
gathered at Coniston on the second of January last.
Manchester Cryptogamic Society, March 15th, 1886.- 
Mr. Holt distributed copies of reprints from the Journal of Botany describing his 
new Thamnium atigustifolium from Miller's Dale.
The reprints were accompanied 
with drawings from the pencil of Dr. Braithwaite.
Naturalist, 
DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW BRITISH LICHENS.
TRANSLATED BY JOSEPH A.
MARTINDALE.
Dr. Nylander has recently given, in the current volume of the 
' Flora,' p.
100, excellent descriptions of the two new species of 
Lecidea, whose occurrence in Westmoreland was recorded on p.
49 
of the present volume of the Naturalist.
The following is a translation: — 
LECIDEA OBTURBANS Nyl.
Thallus cinereous rugose unequal (0-2—0-5 mm - m thickness), 
limited by the black hypothallus ; apothecia blackish or black, dull, 
pale within, immarginate convex (0*5 -0-9 mm.
diam.), the younger 
ones margined; spores 8 colourless oblong i-septate, *oio- 11 mm.
long by "0035 mm.
broad ; paraphyses hardly discrete, epithecium 
and perithecium dark (nigricant).
Hymenial gelatine turning first 
blue, then vinous red with iodine.
On clay slate in England, at Winster, not far from Kendal 
(Martindale).
A species belonging to a new group, approaching, it would seem, 
L. bahusiensis Blomb.
Spermatia oblong or shortly cylindrical 
•004 - '0045 mm.
long and *ooo6 - 7 mm.
thick.
Thallus rather 
loosely affixed, turning yellow both without and within with hyd.
of 
potash.
Nitric acid does not change the colour of the epithecium.
LECIDEA ACUTULA Nyl.
Thallus cinereo-virescent or cinereo-fuscescent, thin, granuloso- 
squamulose, squamules minute, subimbricate rather convex, of various 
shapes; apothecia black, slight (-5 mm.
or less in breadth) margined, 
margin thin, somewhat acute, often angularly subplicate ; spores 
8 colourless fusiform simple "012-15 mm.
long -0025-35 mm.
broad; paraphyses free, epithecium, perithecium and hypothecium 
slightly obscured (fusco-nigrous).
Thecae turning vinous red with 
iodine.
On fir bark at Staveley, near Kendal, in Western England 
(Martindale).
A species belonging to the ostreata group, easily recognised by the 
above characters.
Thallus K - The dark perithecium becomes 
slightly purpled with hyd.
of potash.
April 1886.
102 
GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY.
Jointing in the Mountain Limestone of the Austwick 
District.— In respect of the jointing of rocks, the Mountain Limestone district 
of West Yorkshire is classic ground.
Prof.
Phillips' observations, published fifty 
years ago, are still the chief source of information on the subject.
The following 
notes were made last autumn, during a visit to the neighbourhood of Austwick, 
near Settle.
It will be seen that, despite local variations, the joints maybe divided 
into two sets, A and B, approximately at right angles to one another.
The beds 
are mostly horizontal, or dip at low angles.
Strike.
Distance Apart.
Locality.
A. N.
30 0 or 40 0 W.
) r r.
/Bottom of basement conglomerate, Nor- 
B. N.
60° E.
.../ 6 1U 10 5 n : \ ber Brow ; beds 2% ft.
to 4 ft.
thick.
A. N.
62° W.
r. .
r. /Upper part of basement conglomerate, 
B. N.
45° E.
.../ 2 IC ' 10 4 \ Norber Brow ; beds 1 ft.
to 2 ft.
thick.
A. N.
6o° W.
lff r • fA -r f fBase of Limestone proper, Norber 
B. N.
30 0 E.
.../ ' I Brow ; beds 4 in.
to 2 ft.
thick.
A. N.
54° W.
...\ .
'« /Limestone, top of Norber Brow: beds 
B. N.
32° E.
.../ lrre 2 ular - { 8 in.
to 2 ft.
thick.
A. N.
6o° W, ...
Limestone, N.E. of Ingleborough Cave.
B* N* 67 0 fJ 1 ft.
to 3 ft.
Limestone, E.
of Gaping Gill.
A. N.
43 0 or 50 0 W.
\ .
fi .
. fi .
f Limestone, near Gaping Gill; beds 
B. N.
6o° E.
.../ 2 or 4 j 1 ft, or 3 ^t.
thick.
A. N.
55° W.
...
6 in.
to 2 ft.
) T .
, T , .
_ ,.
B. N.
35 0 E.
...
2 ft.
to 3 ft.
| Limestone on Moughton Fell.
The average direction of the A series is thus about N.
50 0 W.
; that of the B 
series, N.
47 0 E.
— Alfred Harker, St. John's College, Cambridge, March 1st, 1886.
Joints Cutting through Pebbles.— The base of the Mountain Lime- 
stone in West Yorkshire is often conglomeratic, consisting of a hard limestone 
matrix, containing pebbles of quartz, slate, and other materials.
There may be 
noticed a peculiarity sometimes seen in other conglomerates.
The joints by which 
the rock is intersected often cut quite cleanly and without interruption through the 
included pebbles, even those of quartz.
This is well seen on a joint-face that has 
been weathered, the pebbles standing out in relief for perhaps half an inch, but all cut 
sharply off at the same level.
Good localities for observing these joints are at the 
mouth of Crummack Dale, just below Norber Brow, where the conglomerate is 
40 ft.
thick ; and higher up the dale, at Crummack Beck Head.
We may notice, 
too, the fact, which is true of many basement conglomerates, that the very base 
(about 5 ft.
at Norber Brow) is often almost or entirely devoid of pebbles.
In the 
Eden Valley there is often a considerable thickness of sandstone without pebbles 
at the base of the conglomerate which forms the lowest member of the Car- 
boniferous.
— Alfred Harker, St. John's College, Cambridge, March 1st, 18S6.
Asteracanthus ornatissimus in the Middle Oolites near 
Malton.
— During the past month the members of the geological section of the 
Malton Naturalists' Society had the pleasure of examining an exceptionally rare 
fossil.
One of the members, a short time ago, had the good fortune to secure a 
remarkably fine fossil spine, supposed to belong to the dorsal fin of an ancient Shark.
This peculiar form was described some years ago by Prof.
Agassiz, and named by him 
Asteracanthus ornatissimus.
The principal source from which they have been 
derived is the formation known as the Kimmeridge Clay in the Upper Oolites.
This is the only authenticated specimen that has ever been found so low down in 
the Middle Oolites before in England.
Mr. W.
H. Hudleston, F.R.S., F.G.S., 
in a paper read before the Geologists' Association in 1878, mentions the fact of 
having a specimen in his collection, which he queries as from the Lower Calcareous 
Grit, but there being no locality, it is open to doubt as to where it came from.
The specimen found here has just been presented to the Society's museum.
It is 
as near perfect as possible, showing a very fine section of the tubercles and hooked 
barks on the lateral surface.
It will materially help to enhance the value of the 
already very complete collection of fossils gathered from the Middle Oolites of this 
neighbourhood.
— S.
Chadwick, Norton, Malton, May 5th, 1885.
Naturalist, 
103 
LEPIDOPTEROUS FAUNA OF LANCASHIRE 
AND CHESHIRE.
JOHN W.
ELLIS, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.E., 
Liverpool; Honorary Secretary, Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society.
PART III:-BOMBYCES.
(Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, June 29th, 1885.) 
Fam. LITHOSIIDM.
NUDARIA, Steph.
Nudaria mundana, L.
Local, but abundant where it does occur.
Lane— Preston district (J.B.H.), and Silverdale (J.C.M.).
Chesh.
— Chester Society's district (A.O.W.) ; Eastham Wood 
(W.J.); Prenton, near Birkenhead (C.S.G.); Wirral (J.F.B.).
SETINA, Schrank.
Setina mesomella, L.
Apparently confined to the moss-lands of both 
counties.
Mr. Hodgkinson informs me that the male flies about 
7 p.m. in search of the female.
Chat Moss and all the other Lancashire mosses (J.B.H.) ; 
Chat Moss and Risley Moss, not common (J.C.) ; Simmonswood 
Moss (C.S.G.).
East Cheshire (A.O.W.).
LITHOSIA, Fab.
Lithosia griseola, Hiib.
Wallasey and Bidston, scarce (J.F.B.).
The variety flava, Haw.
« stramineola, Doub., is recorded 
from Dunham-on-the-Hill by Mr. A.
O. Walker.
Lithosia lurid eola, Zinck.
= complanula, Boisd.
Generally distri- 
buted throughout Cheshire and South Lancashire, but apparently 
scarce in the north.
Localities recorded are : — 
Lane — Grange (J.B.H.); Prestwich district, common (J.C.M.); 
West Derby (C.S.G.).
Chesh.— Bromborough (W.G.); Bidston Hill (W.J.) ; Chester 
(A.O.W.) ; Delamere Forest (A.O.W. J.C); West Kirby (F.N.P.); 
throughout Wirral, scarce (J.F.B.).
Lithosia sericea, Gregs.
= molybdeola, Guen.
Found only on the 
moss-lands, as Chat Moss (J.B.H., J.C, W.J.) ; Rixton Moss 
(N.C); Simmonswood Moss (C.S.G.).
GNOPHRIA, Steph.
Gnophria rubricollis, L.
Recorded only from Delamere Forest 
(N.C, J.C.) and P:ast Cheshire (A.O.W.).
April 1886.
104 J.
W. ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
Fam. ARCTIID^.
DEIOPEIA, Curt.
Deiopeia pulchella, L.
Only two specimens of this very scarce species 
have been recorded from the district.
One of these, a female, 
was taken in the railway coal-yard at Middleton Station, Sep- 
tember 8th, 187 1 (J.
Thorpe, Ent. Mo.
Mag., viii, xn, and 
Ent., v, 412), and Mr. Hodgkinson records a specimen in his 
collection taken at Marple.
EUCHELIA, Boisd.
Enchelia jacobsese, L.
Occurs in profusion all along the Lancashire 
coast sandhills, where the plants of ragwort are often eaten to 
the root by the swarms of larvae.
It occurs occasionally on the 
Cheshire sandhills, as at Wallasey (W.G., J.
CM.), and more 
rarely still, inland, as Delamere (J.C.) and Chester (A.O.W.).
In the collection of the late Alfred Owen, of Maghull, is a 
specimen of the very rare aberration in which the crimson colour 
is replaced by yellow.
The specimen is probably a Lancashire 
one.
NEMEOPHILA, Steph.
Nemeophila russula, L.
Almost confined to moss and moor-lands.
Chat Moss (J.B.H., W.J.) ; Rixton Moss (N.C.)   Carrington 
Moss (J.C, J.C.M.) ; Barton Moss (J.C): Delamere and East 
Cheshire (A.O.W.); Hale (C.S.G.) ; Silverdale (J.C.M.).
Nemeophila plantaginis L.
Occurs on the Lancashire heaths and 
mosses.
I have no record of its occurrence in Cheshire.
Blackstone Edge, Staleybridge, Rudd Heath (J.C); Chat 
Moss (W.J.); Longridge, near Preston (J.B.H.) ; Silverdale, 
common (J.C.M., J.B.H.).
ARCTIA, Schrank.
Arctia caja, L.
Abundant everywhere.
Many interesting aberrations have been obtained in the 
district, and are in local collections.
Among these may be 
mentioned a specimen in the cabinet of Mr. S.
J, Capper, 
which was bred by Mr. Lello, in which the fore-wings are nearly 
unicolorous cream ; and a specimen in the collection of Mr. W.
Johnson, in which the fore-wings are suffused with brown, and 
the scarlet of the hind-wings becomes replaced by tawny yellow.
Both these are figured in Mosley's Varieties, Arctia, pi.
ii.
Mr. Gregson's collection is singularly rich in varieties of this 
species.
Naturalist 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
105 
Arctia villica, L.
Recorded only from Cheshire, viz., Bowdon 
(J.C.M.) and Delamere (A.O.W.).
SPILOSOMA, Steph, 
Spilosoma lubricipeda, Fab. Abundant over the whole of both 
counties.
Spilosoma menthastri, W.V. Abundant throughout both counties.
In collection C.S.G. is a beautiful aberration, taken in the 
neighbourhood of Liverpool, in which the spots have become so 
elongated as to form distinct rays.
Spilosoma mendica, L.
Local.
Preston, Chorley, and Bolton (J.B.H.); Chorley (W.J.); War- 
rington (N.C); Blackpool, Bucklow Hill, and Withington (J.C.); 
Tranmere (J.F.B.) ; about old gardens in Wirral (C.S.G.) ; East 
Cheshire (A.O.W.) ; Warrington (N.C.).
In Mr. Gregson's collection is a peculiar variety of the male, 
captured at Bolton, with the ground colour of all the wings 
smoky, but with dark costae and cilia.
PHRAGMATOBIA, Steph.
Phragmatobia fuliginosa, L.
Common throughout both counties 
on heaths and mosses, and especially abundant on the coast 
sandhills.
Kara.
L1PARIDAL.
ORGYIA, Ochs.
Orgyia antiqua, L.
Abundant everywhere ; often seen flying in the 
streets of the larger towns.
DASYCHIRA, Steph.
Dasychira fascelina, L.
Common all along the Lancashire coast, 
from Lytham and Blackpool to Crosby.
On the Cheshire sand- 
hills it also occurs, but not so frequently.
In Mr. Johnson's collection is a male specimen which has a 
large black patch on the costa of each fore-wing.
Dasychira pudibunda, L.
Generally distributed, but nowhere 
common.
Lane.
— Chat Moss, rare (J.C.); Lytham (W.J.); Preston, rare 
(J.B.H.).
Chesh.
— Chester district, but not common (A.O.W.) ; Dela- 
mere (N.C.) ; Eastham Wood (R.
Wilding) ; Rock Ferry (W.G.).
April 1886.
Io6 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
LEUCOMA, Steph.
Leucoma salicis, L.
Very abundant all along the Lancashire coast ; 
less frequently on the Cheshire coast, at Wallasey and Hoylake.
OCNERIA, Herr.-Schaef.
Ocneria dispar, L.
A specimen of this species (a male, in the col- 
lection of Mr. Hodgkinson), was taken near Warrington forty 
years ago.
Recorded from Staley Brushes by J.
CM.
PORTHESIA, Steph.
Porthesia anriflua, W.
V. Common all over both counties ; 
occasionally abundant.
In Mr. Gregson's collection is a remarkable aberration of this 
usually constant species, a male, taken near Manchester, which 
has the black spot at the apex of the fore-wing joined to the one 
at the anal angle by a curved black line.
L/ELIA, Steph.
Lselia csenosa, Hiib.
' My friend, T.
Townley, first discovered this 
species at Altcar, and afterwards on Bidston Marsh' (C.S.G.).
Earn.
COSSIDsE.
COSSUS, Fab.
Cossus ligniperda, Fab. Generally distributed throughout the 
wooded portions of the counties.
ZEUZERA, Latr.
Zeuzera aesculi L.
The only notice of its occurrence is in a letter 
from the Rev. H.
H. Higgins, who mentions having seen one 
many years ago at Rainhill.
Fam. HE PI A LI DAL.
HEPIALUS, Fab.
Hepialus humuli, L.
Abundant throughout the district.
Mr. C.
S. Gregson informs me that on the moss-lands of North 
Lancashire, where the species is extremely abundant, and where, 
at the time of its emergence it forms a favourite food of the 
Black-headed Gull, a variety of the female is of very frequent 
occurrence in which the usual red markings are entirely absent, 
all the wings being of a unicolorous pale buff colour.
Hepialus velieda, Esp. Generally distributed.
Lane.
— Bolton (W.J.) • Chat Moss (J.C.) > moors in North 
Lancashire, common (J.B.H.) ; Simmonswood Moss (C.S.G.).
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
107 
Chesh.— Delamere Forest (N.C., F.N. P.); Eastham Wood 
(J.F.B.).
The variety gallicus, Led.
(usually known as carpus, Esp., 
but which is exclusively a scarce alpine species) occurs in 
Delamere Forest (S.J.C.).
Hepialus sylvinus, L.
Generally distributed through both counties.
Hepialus lupulinus, L.
Common throughout the whole of the 
district, but not so abundant now as formerly, according to 
Mr. Hodgkinson.
Hepialus hectus, L.
More local than either of the two preceding 
species, though common where it does occur.
Localities 
recorded are as follows : — 
Lane.
— Aigburth, near Liverpool (J.W.E.) ; Bolton (W.J.); 
Croxteth and Hale (C.S.G.) ; Huyton (SJ.C); abundant near 
Preston (J.B.H., E.S.) ; Prestwich (J.C.M.).
Chesh.
— Alderley and Bowdon (J.C.) ; Chester district, 
common (A.O.W.); Bromborough (C.S.G.) ; Delamere Forest 
(F.N.P.); Wirral (J.F.B.).
Fam. PSYCHID^.
FUME A, Haw.
Fumea nitidella, Hub. Recorded from the Preston neighbourhood 
by Mr. Hodgkinson ; and by J.
F. Brockholes as having been 
taken in Patrick Wood, near Lower Bebington, by Mr. F.
Archer.
Fumea roboricolella, Bruand.
The only records I have of its 
occurrence in the district are the following Lancashire locali- 
ties :— Pilling Moss (J.B.H., Ent. Mo.
Mag., ii, 186); Stayley 
Brushes and Chat Moss (J.C).
Fam. DREPA NULIDJE.
CILIX, Leach.
Cilix spinula, W.V.
(glaucata Scop.).
Common throughout both 
counties, occasionally abundant.
PLATYPTERYX, Lasp.
Platypteryx lacertinaria, L.
Common among birch on all the 
mosses of Lancashire, and in similar localities — Delamere, for 
instance, in Cheshire.
Platypteryx falcataria, L.
Commoner than the preceding species, 
and in the same localities.
April 1886.
ToS J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
Fam. SA TURNIDAL.
SATURNIA, Schrank.
Saturnia carpini, W.V. Common on mosses and heaths both in 
Lancashire and Cheshire.
I have known as many as 70 males 
taken in one day with a single female by the process of 'calling.' 
In Mr. Gregson's collection is a splendid aberration of this 
species, taken at Bolton ; it is a male, in which the whole of the 
markings are so suffused with the dark ground colour that the 
insect appears nearly black.
Fam. LAS 10 CAM PI DM.
LASIOCAMPA, Schrank.
Lasiocampa potatoria, L.
Abundant throughout the two counties.
In Mr. Gregson's rich collection is a peculiar variety of the 
female, which has the wings coloured like the male, and the 
thorax with a dense black tuft, which gives the individual a 
strange appearance.
It was captured in the vicinity of Liverpool.
Lasiocampa trifolii, W.V. Occurs on all the coast sandhills from 
Blackpool and Lytham to Wallasey, but is not nearly so plentiful 
as formerly.
Within the last few years the species has been 
nearly exterminated at Crosby owing to the cupidity of collectors 
for exchange.
Lasiocampa quercus, L.
Abundant on the mosses, heaths, and coast 
sandhills of both counties.
I believe all our specimens belong 
to the race callunce, but Mr. Joseph Chappell, after referring to 
callunce as common on all the mosses, records quercus as not 
uncommon at Bowdon (Cheshire) and Moss-side, near Man- 
chester.
Lasiocampa rubi, L.
Abundant on heaths, mosses, sandhills, and 
waste lands.
CLISIOCAMPA, Steph.
Clisiocampa cratsegi, L.
Scarce.
The only records of its occurrence 
that I possess are: — 
Silverdale, rare (J.
CM.); 'Reared from larvae found at Saighton 
by Miss H.
Smith, Hampton Lodge, Chester' (A.O.W.).
Stainton refers (Manual, p.
155) to its occurrence in the Preston 
district.
Clisiocampa populi, L.
Generally distributed, but nowhere common.
Lane.
— Bolton (W.J.); sparingly around Liverpool (F.N.P.); 
throughout the Manchester district, but not common (J.C); 
Preston (J.B.H.); Warrington (N.C.); West Derby (C.S.G.).
Chesh.
— Bidston and Birkenhead (J.F.B.) ; Bidston Light- 
house (C.S.G.) ; East Cheshire (A.O.W.).
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
1 09 
Clisiocampa neustria, L.
Local, but tolerably common where it 
does occur.
Lane.
— Blackpool and Lytham (J.C.).
Chesh.— Hoylake (W.
J.) ; West Kirby (C.S.G.); Upton 
Valley (J.F.B., C.S.G.).
ERIOGASTER, Germ.
Eriogaster lanestris, L.
Of more frequent occurrence than the 
preceding.
Lane.
— Arnside near Silverdale (E.S.) ; between Grange and 
Carnforth (S.L.M.) ; Blackpool and Morecambe (J.C.) ; common 
all over the Fylde district from Preston to Fleetwood (J.B.H.).
Chesh.
— Chester and West Kirby (A.O.W.); Tranmere, 
Prenton, and Parkgate (W.G.) ; Upton Valley (J.F.B.).
Fam. NO TOD ON TIDAL.
PYG.ERA, Ochs.
Pygaera pigra, Hum.
(reclusa, W.V.).
The only record I have of 
the occurrence of this species in either county is found in the 
addenda to Mr. Gregson's list of Liverpool lepidoptera: 'A single 
specimen in an old wood at Kirkby ' (Lancashire).
PHALERA, Hiib.
Phalera bucephala, L.
Common throughout the whole of both 
counties.
CERURA, Schrank.
Cerura vinula, L.
Common, and generally distributed throughout 
the district, being rather more abundant near the coast.
Cerura bifida, Hiib.
The commonest of the 'Kittens' in our district.
I have records of its occurrence in the following localities : — 
Lane.; — Generally distributed (J.C.) ; Crosby, scarce (G.
A. 
Harker and F.N.P.) • Preston district (J.B.H.).
Chesh.
— Wirral, Chester, and East Cheshire (A.O.W.); Prenton 
and Wallasey (C.S.G.).
Cerura furcula, L.
All round the Preston district (J.
B.H.) ; Chat 
Moss and Delamere Forest, rare (J.C.) ; East Cheshire (A.O.W.) ; 
Wirral, scarce (J.F.B.).
Cerura bicuspis, Borkh.
This scarce species was first taken in 
England by James Cooper, on an alder near Preston, in 1847 
(Zool., v, 1863).
Since that time its occurrence all round Preston 
has been occasional, in some years as many as eight or nine 
specimens being taken in a week by Mr. Hodgkinson.
Also 
recorded from near Stoneyhurst (J.B.H., Ent, xiii, 204).
April 1886.
IIO J.
W. ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
PTEROSTOMA, Germ.
Pterostoma palpina, L.
A single specimen at Puddington in 1864 
(J.F.R).
LOPHOPTERYX, Steph.
Lophopteryx camelina, L.
Fairly common throughout both counties, 
especially on the ' mosses,' where the larva feeds upon the stunted 
birch trees.
LEIOCAMPA, Steph.
Leiocampa dictaea, L.
Generally distributed, but nowhere common.
Localities noted are : — 
Preston district (J.B.H.) ; near Ribchester (J.B.H., Ent, xiii, 
105); Liverpool district (C.S.G.) ; Crosby, Wallasey, and West 
Kirby (F.N.P.); Wirral and East Cheshire (A.O.W.); Chat 
Moss, Bowdon, Pendleton, Withington, Barton, Stretford, 
Knutsford, &c.
(J.C.).
Leiocampa dictseoides, Esp. Of frequent occurrence on the moss- 
lands, but only occasional elsewhere.
Lane— Chat Moss, Carrington Moss, Risley Moss (J.G.J ; 
Crosby (F.N.P.); Simmonswood Moss (J.W.E.); near Long- 
ridge (J.B.H.).
Chesh.
— Bidston Lighthouse (C.S.G., Z00L, 1850, 2898) ; 
Bidston, scarce (J.F.B.) ; Delamere Forest (C.S.G.
, Zool., 1850, 
2898) ; East Cheshire (A.O.W.) ; Wallasey and West Kirby 
(F.N.P.).
DRYMONIA, Hiib.
Drymonia chaonia, W.V. So far as I know, this species has only 
occurred in Cheshire, viz.
: — 
Dunham Park, rare, and Timperley, a single specimen (J.C.); 
a specimen captured by the late Benjamin Cooke in Eastham 
Wood (J.F.B., C.S.G.); two at Hooton, by T.
Harris (C.S.G.).
Drymonia dodonsea, W.V. Recorded from East Cheshire by 
Mr. Alfred O.
Walker, on the authority of the late Noah Greening.
PERIDEA, Steph.
Peridea trepida, Fab. Recorded only from Delamere Forest 
(S.J.C., J.C.M., E.
C. Buxton in Zool., ix, 3181).
NOTODONTA, Ochs.
Notodonta dromedarius, L.
Common on all the mosses, especially 
in the larval condition.
Preston district, not rare (J.B.H.) ; 
Bidston and Rock Ferry, not common (J.F.B.) • Bidston (J.W.E.).
' On the mosses this species is deep rich brown, the variety 
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE BOMBYCES.
Ill 
subfuscata of authors, not deep red as in the typical form ' 
(C.S.G., Ent, iv, 491).
Notodonta ziczac, L.
Generally distributed.
Lane.
— Crosby, common (G.
A. Harker and F.N. P.); Chat 
Moss, Barton Moss, and Kenyon, rare (J.C.) ; Preston district, 
not rare (J.B.H.) ; Simmonswood Moss (F.N.P., J.W.E.).
Chesh.
— Wirral and Delamere (A.O.W.) ; Wallasey sandhills 
(J.W.E.).
Fam .
C YMA TO PHORIDJE.
GONOPHORA, Bruand.
Gonophora derasa, L.
Generally distributed.
Lane.
— Huyton and Hale (S.J.C); Hale and the Dingle, 
near Liverpool (C.S.G.) ; Preston, common (J.B.H., E.S.).
Chesh.
— Bowdon, Delamere, &c.
(J.C.) ; Bidston, common 
(C.S.G.) ; Chester Society's district, not uncommon (A.O.W.) ; 
Lymm (J.C.M.) ; West Kirby (F.N.P.) ; Wirral (J.F.B.).
THYATIRA, Ochs.
Thyatira batis, L.
Generally distributed and fairly common 
throughout the whole of both counties.
CYMATOPHORA, Tr.
Cymatophora or, W.V. Occurs occasionally about Preston (J.B.H.) ; 
near Ribchester (J.B.H., Ent, xiii, 105).
Cymatophora duplaris, L.
Between Roby and Huyton Quarry 
(C.S.G.) ; not rare among birch in the Preston district (J.B.H.) ; 
Chat Moss and Worsley, not common (J.C.) ; Prenton Wood, 
scarce (J.F.B.).
ASPHALIA, Hub.
Asphalia diluta, W.V. Very local.
Oak Woods at Hale, abundant 
(C.S.G.); Mere Clough, Bury, uncommon (J.C); Eastham, 
occasionally (C.S.G.).
Asphalia flavicornis, L.
Common on all the mosses, and occasionally 
found elsewhere.
Lane.
— Chat, Risley, and Carrington Mosses (J.C); all round 
the Liverpool district (C.S.G.) ; Longridge (J.B.H.); Simmons- 
wood Moss, common (F.N. P., J.W.E.).
Chesh.— Bidston (J.F.B.); East Cheshire (A.O.W.); Hartford 
(F.N.P., G.
A. Harker); Bowdon (J.C, J.C.M.); Wallasey and 
Eastham Wood (J.C.M.).
Asphalia ridens, Fab.
' One specimen taken in the Boor's Wood, 
Hale, by Frederick Hitchmough ' (C.S.G.); on the Lancashire 
side of Windermere (J.B.H.); rare at Staley Brushes (J.C).
April 1 386.
112 
MAMMALIA.
The Badger on the Yorkshire Wolds.— Records have lately been 
published in the Naturalist of captures of Badgers in Yorkshire.
So far the fringe 
only has been touched.
You must go to the Wolds to learn about Badgers, and 
more especially to Fimber.
Fimber is a small village in the parish of Wetwang.
To the antiquary it is a place of great interest, as it probably marks the site of the 
long-lost Delgovitia mentioned in Antonine's Itinerary.
It is surrounded by mas- 
sive entrenchments, and a mile from the village two Roman roads intersect, viz., 
the one from Malton, by Wharram-le- Street, to Beverley, and the one from York, 
by Stamford Bridge and Garrowby Street, to Bridlington.
Near the cross-roads is 
a chalk promontory called Fimber Nab, projecting from a network of dales.
There is a railway station there now, and you can get your London paper at 
1 1.20 a.m.; but formerly it was considered, and was, a terribly out-of-the-way 
place, and a threat of sending anyone to Fimber Nab implied much the same thing 
as sending a person to Coventry.
Possibly, in consequence of the retired nature of 
the place, it was selected as a fitting home by a gentleman badger and his wife ; 
and here they bred and multiplied, and, as their sons and daughters grew up and 
settled in life, colonized the neighbouring woods and dales.
Indeed, one of the 
principal seats of the family is still known as Badger Wood.
But an evil time was 
at hand.
The records of the family do not go back as far as the Norman Conquest, 
though doubtless their ancestors did live then, and probably occupied large 
territories ; so we pass to their descendants, who flourished and smelt in the 
year 1830.
The first raid made upon them in that year was rewarded with the 
capture of three fine Badgers in one night, two 'greyhounds' and a 'pig.' You 
must know that a ' greyhound ' Badger has fine hair, and a smart head, and was 
probably a sort of ' masher ' in his day ; whereas a ' pig ' Badger' has strong coarse 
hair, short legs, and a heavy cast of countenance.
He is heavy in other respects, 
too, weighing upwards of two stone.
The Badger's hole is good to tell, because he 
or she is partial to a comfortable bed of grass, and as the grass has to be obtained 
at some little distance, there is a regular trail of it leading to the hole, and 
inside.
The hole itself is sometimes 5 ft.
deep, and extends, with numerous ramifica- 
tions, for several score yards.
A man engaged once in digging out a Badger, had 
himself to be dug out, for the earth fell in and buried him up to his neck ; mean- 
while Mr. Badger, with a complacent smirk on his countenance, calmly walked 
out at a hole 40 yards off.
For years together, after the date above mentioned, 
seven or eight badgers were regularly secured every year.
In i860 two Badgers 
a night were twice obtained, and for the next twenty years one or more were sure 
to be caught annually.
The last of the family was captured in a chalk pit in the 
daytime in 1880; but though the holes are still numerous, they are, alas !
tenantless, 
and nothing remains but the smell to prove the glory that has been.
Sic transit gloria mundi.
On the whole it is clear that something like a hundred Badgers have been caught 
on the Wolds during the last half-century.
— E.
Maule Cole, Vicar of Wetwang, 
March 18th, 1886.
Badgers in Durham.
— The following are some of the dates of the captures 
of Badgers in the county of Durham : — 
In 1840, one was captured at Eastgate, Weardale.
In 1880, one was caught in Castle Eden Dene.
In the summer of 1883, two young ones were caught by cur dogs in the Wear 
Valley, below Wolsingham.
One was caught in a gamekeeper's trap (date and situation unknown).
One was seen in the spring of 1885, in a railway cutting between Tow Law and 
Crook.
— J.
W. Linnaeus M.
Tristram Fawcett, The Grange, Satley, 
March 4th, 1886.
Badgers in Northumberland.— On May 15th, 1885, a Badger was 
seen by Mr. W.
White, Low Staples, to enter a stone drain near that place.
It was taken from the drain, after much labour, and weighed 22 lbs.
The 
Badger was preserved, and is now in the possession of Mr. Stobbs, Dalton.
— 
J. W.
Linnaeus M.
Tristram Fawcett, Satley Grange, March 22nd, 1885.
Naturalist, 
NOTES — MAMMALIA.
Records of Captures of Badgers in Yorkshire.— As a supple- 
ment to Mr. Robert's list of Badgers taken in Yorkshire, the following may be 
interesting to some of your readers.
One was caught by the Cleveland fox hounds at Marton, in the late autumn of 
1876 or 1877.
I saw it in the flesh, and considered it a very large one.
I 
remember another being exhibited in the market at Middlesbrough, previous to 
this, but I cannot remember the year.
Two were caught alive near Thirsk, in February 1881, and two days afterwards 
the female gave birth to two young.
I saw the four alive on the 23rd of April 
following.
One was exhibited in the market at Middlesbrough, on the 4th of March, 1882.
A female, which weighed about 30 lbs., was caught near Ormesby, on the 6th 
of March, 1882.
I saw this ; it was not a very large one.
One was found in a small building in the Middlesbrough Cricket Field, in the 
beginning of May 1 882, and escaped.
One was caught at Ingleby, on the 3rd of February 1885.
There is a stuffed 
specimen in Ingleby Manor House, which was also probably caught here.
One was caught at Guisborough in the spring of last year, 1885.
I have a note of one caught at Crathorne, near Yarm, about the end of January 
1882, which weighed about 30 lbs.
This, I presume, is the same as that mentioned 
by Mr. Roberts as caught near Yarm about the same date.
— R.
Lofthouse, 
Middlesbrough, February 22nd, 1886.
Badger in Lincolnshire.
— A very fine Badger, weighing 38 lbs., was 
found on the M.
S. and L.
Railway, near Housham Station, on Sunday, the 
16th January, 1886.
It was splendidly marked, and probably one of the finest 
caught in this county for many years.
It was dead when found, having apparently 
been caught by a late special from Lincoln to Hull.
It was found by Mr. John 
Sanderson, foreman on the railway, and is now in his possession.
In the neigh- 
bourhood of Somerby several young Badgers have lately appeared.
— J.
N. Dufty, 
Grammar School, Tuxford, Notts., February nth, 1886.
Captures of Otters in County Durham.— One was found dead on 
the banks of the Wear at Bortley, near Bishop Auckland (date unknown).
One 
about three parts grown was killed on February 3rd, 1884, on the Linburn, an 
affluent of the Wear, about one mile above Wetton Bridge, by two collie dogs.
— 
J. W.
Linn^us M.
Tristram Favvcett, Satley Grange, March 22nd, 1886.
Large Stoat near Boroughbridge.— A Stoat (Mustela erminea) 
weighing 12^ ozs., was trapped a few days ago.
He seemed much larger than 
usual.
— Rd. Paver-Crow, Ornhams Hall, Boroughbridge, 5th March, 1886.
Foumarts near Huddersfield.
— A fine pair of Foumarts were 
trapped on Marsden Moors, the male in February, the female in March 1884.
— 
C C.
Hanson, West Vale, Halifax, November 19th, 1885.
Whiskered Bat in Cheshire.— Although this species {Vespertilio 
mystaciniis) is by no means an uncommon one, animals of this group are so seldom 
definitely and precisely determined, that it will be of interest to record one sent 
me for inspection by Mr. C.
Oldham, of Sale, who found it at Fermlee, near 
Whaley Bridge, Cheshire, on a stone wall, right on the top of the wall, in broad 
daylight, asleep, the 30th May, 1885.
Mr. Oldham took it home, and tried to 
feed it with raw shredded meat, but it refused to eat, and died next day.
— 
Wm. Denison Roebuck, Leeds, March 1st, 1886.
Noctule in County Durham.
— The following item from the Durham 
County Advertiser, February 26th, 1886, evidently refers to this species ( Vesperugo 
nocttila), and is therefore of interest in view of the fact that Durham county forms 
the north limit of its range.
' In the Duke of Cleveland's timber yard in Winston 
Lane, near Barnard Castle, squeaks were heard while a workman was cross-cutting 
the trunk of a large oak, near the roots.
On the crevice being opened, twenty- 
five ' rat-bats ' were found in a cluster.
The species is the largest known in this country.
These measured, from tip to tip of the wings, from eight to ten inches, and the 
only sign of life was the exhibition of formidable teeth.
Put into a cage and 
warmed they became animated, and were set at liberty.'— Wm. Denison Roebuck, 
Leeds.
1 
H4 
• ORNITHOLOGY.
Migration of Birds on the West Coast of England and 
Wales.
— As the member of the British Association Committee in charge of the 
above section of the migration report, I shall be pleased to receive from 
ornithologists and others, as early as possible, observations on the migratory move- 
ments of all species, and on the occurrence of rare and uncommon ones, within the 
region (inclusive of inland localities) during the spring, summer, autumn, and 
winter of 1885.
When possible, the notes should be accompanied by observations 
on the direction of the wind and state of the weather at the time.
By such 
assistance it is hoped to make the report more complete.
All co-operation will be 
duly acknowledged.
— Wm. Eagle Clarke, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, 
Leeds.
FlamborOUgh Notes.
— I have to inform you of a rare visitor, the Shore- 
lark ( Otocorys alpestris) being shot at Flarnborough, south of the headland, on or 
about January 4th, 1886, by Mr. Christopher Forge.
It is now in the possession 
of Mr. Thomas Machin, Bridlington Quay.
I remember shooting two out of a 
flock in February 1865.
In last week's issue of Land and Water, a gentleman 
writes about the scarcity of land birds.
Had he been with me to-day he would 
have seen the turnip fields and stubbles literally covered with Rockdoves, Field- 
fares, Redwings, Lapwings, Golden Plovers, Starlings, Larks, Thrushes, Black- 
birds, &c.
— Matthew Bailey, Flarnborough, March 3rd, 1886.
Lapwing — Diversity Of Eggs.
— The note by Mr. Roberts, in your 
issue for March, on the varying size of eggs of the Corn Bunting, induced me to 
take the measurements of two abnormally small eggs of the Lapwing in the collec- 
tion of my brother, J.
FI.
Ashford.
The smallest measures 26 by 20 mm., nearly 
elliptical in shape, ground colour dark olive, relieved by a few small blackish spots 
and two large black blotches ; taken on Flixton Moor, near Scarborough, April 187 1 ; 
weight 102 grs.
unblown.
This egg is about the size of that of the Corn Bunting, 
but rather broader.
Another is a little larger than the preceding, 27*5 by 22*5, 
broadly oval, the dark olive ground colour about half concealed by very numerous 
blackish dots and spots, pretty evenly distributed ; from Flixton Moor, April 1869.
The usual size of the Lapwing's egg is about 45 by 33 mm., and weight, with con- 
tents, 450 grains more or less.
A third egg from the same locality makes a striking 
contrast in size, shape, and distribution of markings.
It is 60*5 by 33 mm., 
remarkably produced towards the smaller end ; spots small, and scattered on one 
side, but on the other larger, more numerous, and tending to condense into an un- 
completed oval ring.
— C.
Ashford, Christchurch, Hants, March 15th, 1886.
Eagle Owl near Huddersfleld.
— On the 1st of January, 1885, 
Mr. Joseph Firth, while standing near a bushy place at Fixby, saw a big brown 
bird flying rapidly from him, which he shot at, but failed to stop.
After con- 
siderable search he found it sitting in a large tree, close to the trunk, and a second 
shot secured it.
It was a beautiful specimen of the Eagle Owl, in perfect plumage, 
and showing no signs whatever of having been in captivity.
It is now in Mr. Firth's 
possession at the Shepherd's Rest Inn, Cowcliffe, where it may be seen.
It is a 
male specimen.
In length, from the tip of the beak to the end of the tail it is two 
feet, and four feet four inches in expanse of wing ; in weight, a little over 4 lbs.
In my opinion, which is shared by Mr. Goff, taxidermist, Huddersfield, it is a 
specimen of the Virginian Great Horned Owl {Bubo virgiilianus), being less in size 
and finer in markings than the European Eagle Owl (B.
maximus).
— C.
C. HANSON, 
Greetland, Halifax, December 9th, 1885.
[We asked the opinion of Mr. J.
H. Gurney, who is the recognised authority 
on the Owls, and have been favoured with the following reply : — ] 
I do not think it is possible from the information submitted to me to say whether 
the Owl in question should be referred to B.
ignavus or to B.
virgiuianus, 
especially as the latter is a very variable species.
If I could see the bird I could 
readily determine the question, but not otherwise.
If the bird be an escaped one 
it may possibly not belong to either of the above, but to some other species of the 
genus Bubo ; but I doubt whether any reliable opinion could be given without 
personal inspection of the specimen.
— J.
H. Gurney, 9th February, 1886.
Naturalist, 
n5 
MIGRATION OP THE SALMONIDiE.
Part II.
PERIODS OP MIGRATION.
By FRANCIS DAY, C.I.E., F.L.S., &c, 
President Cheltenham Nahcral Science Society; Author of a 1 History of the Fishes 
of Great Britain and Irelaitd,' &c.
In the first portion of this paper I discussed the question of ' early ' 
and ' late ' salmon rivers, and have now to consider the migrations of 
the salmon during different periods of the year, as well as some of 
the numerous statements that have been advanced.
These fish, as 
we know, are 'anadromous,' being forms which enter our rivers chiefly 
to perpetuate their race ; for this purpose they select suitable spots 
wherein to deposit their eggs ; here the young are hatched, while they 
remain in.
the stream for the first years of their existence.
Conse- 
quently, during their youth they live and feed in fresh water ; as they 
grow older they descend to the sea, from whence, after a time, they 
return to the rivers ; thus the waters they select for their residence 
differ from each other in their specific gravity, taste, temperature, and 
products.
I do not intend following out the life history of these fishes from 
the rivers where they were born and the fresh waters which they as 
smolts deserted for the ocean, returning again as breeding grilse, which 
again descended to the sea after they had propagated their kind, but 
I propose offering a few remarks as to how they subsequently migrate 
to our coasts and to our rivers.
For where they pass their sojourn 
in the deep does not at present much concern the practical fisherman, 
who only troubles himself as to how he can capture them, while the 
fish-culturist is aware that their eggs will not hatch if deposited in 
salt water.
These migrations from the sea are, broadly speaking, of two kinds : 
firsts what may be generally described as the great autumn and winter 
one, for the purpose of spawning ; and secondly, much more irregular 
ascents, consisting of a few or many fish, occurring throughout the 
year, or restricted to certain months.
This inquiry would embrace 
several considerations, such as the following: — How do salmon return 
from the sea to our coasts ?
How do they enter and continue in 
estuaries prior to their ascent into the stream ?
How do they ascend 
rivers ?
How do they return to the sea ?
As a general rule, as I have observed when under the head of 
' early and late salmon rivers,' these fish migrate towards rivers sooner 
from cold seas, as the German Ocean on the east coast of the British 
April 1886.
n6 f.
day: periods of migration.
Isles, than they do along the west coast, presumably because the Atlantic 
is warmer than the German Ocean ; while among the latest rivers 
they ascend are those of Devonshire and Cornwall, where the tempera- 
ture of the sea is the highest.
With the object of attaining the estuaries or mouths of rivers up 
which they purpose ascending, salmon in small assemblages or schools 
keep along the shore, only a short distance from land, swimming 
rather high in the water, and betraying their presence by occasionally 
leaping out of the sea as if they were endeavouring to reconnoitre 
their way, or else they throw off a ripple in a calm as they move along 
the surface ; while, as Mr. Sinclair remarks, their tracks are as well 
known as those of cattle returning to the farmyard.
Mr. D.
Mackenzie 
has also observed that along the coasts of Scotland salmon shoals 
pass a short distance from the land, and 1 when a shoal meets with a 
stake net some of the fish are caught in the traps or cruives, or what 
are called its chambers, others start off; in short, the shoal is broken 
and dispersed.
The scattered fish, however, always guided by their 
instincts, gather in again to the land, singly or in groups, and continue 
their course with the tides, until they meet with another similar 
engine, when the same capture and dispersion is repeated.' While 
packs of Seals, Porpoises, Grampuses, and other enemies have been 
observed to deter salmon from entering rivers, and also to break up 
and scatter the shoals of fish.
Salmon appear to possess a homeing instinct which induces them 
to endeavour to return to the river where they were originally reared, 
but instances are occasionally brought to notice when such could 
not have been the case.
Thus almost yearly we hear of a grilse or 
of a salmon being captured off the mouth of the Thames or Medway, 
sometimes even attempting to ascend, but from which localities all 
these fish have long since been destroyed ; consequently they could 
not be descended from eggs hatched in those rivers.
Buckland recorded how a friend of his, who owned a well-known 
island on the west coast of Scotland, netted a certain pool in his 
fishery, and out of a number of fish which he captured he marked 
twenty or thirty.
He then put them on board his yacht, where they 
were kept alive,' and he sailed with them almost round his island, 
then up a creek to the mouth of a river, and turned them into a lake 
about half a mile from the source of the stream from which they had 
been originally captured, but with which it was in no way connected, 
the two rising from different watersheds.
It was as though the 
salmon had been carried from one heel of an enormous horse-shoe 
round to the other heel, and then taken right into the middle of the 
horse-shoe, and there let loose.
During the same season some of 
Naturalist, 
F. DAY: PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
117 
these marked fish were caught in or near their own pool, to do which 
they must have come back a circuit of at least forty miles, and passed 
by six or seven tributaries.
Were the homeing instinct in these fishes very strongly marked, 
such as were hatched from eggs brought from a certain river might 
(like the Blue-rock Pigeons reared from eggs obtained from another 
dovecote) return to the locality where the ova were originally deposited.
But if such were an invariable rule, the re-stocking of salmonless 
rivers from distant sources would be useless, while experiments have 
demonstrated the procedure to be almost invariably satisfactory.
Still a very strong opinion exists, and which observations have 
proved to be to a certain extent correct, that salmon return to the 
river they were originally reared in.
Some have imagined that they 
select the purest waters, or recognise the taste or smell of their native 
stream • but, on the other hand, it has been asked, how could the 
purity of the water induce salmon to enter certain rivers, for they 
generally ascend during a flood, when they are most full of mud, but 
at which times the fish are keenest to pass up.
Mr. D.
Milne Home, when writing about the Tweed, observed 
that marked fish from that river had been taken in the Frith of Forth, 
the Don, and Dee, while to the south at Holy Island, the Tyne, 
Shields, and even Yarmouth.
This last was a so-called ' Bull Trout,' 
caught in the Whitadder, a tributary of the Tweed, on March 29th, 
1852 ; it was netted at Winteston, near Yarmouth, April 2nd, 1852, 
or nearly 300 miles distant, within four days.
A second, marked in 
the Whitadder, March 10th, i860, was taken at Yarmouth, May 5th, 
i860.
He considered it certain that salmon, after having frequented 
particular rivers from time immemorial, have abandoned them ; and 
the inference is that they betake themselves to other rivers which they 
deem preferable.
As an example of this, the Whitadder may be 
referred to : it has a course of about forty miles from the Lammer- 
muir Hills.
This river joins the Tweed at a distance from its mouth 
of about three miles, so that all the salmon caught in the higher waters 
of the Tweed must have passed the Whitadder.
The tide flows into 
it as well as into the Tweed, going up the latter for six or seven miles.
Formerly the true Salmo salar frequented the Whitadder, but during 
the last thirty years none of that species has been seen in it.
It is 
now only frequented by ' Bull Trout.' In the Midlothian Esk, he 
also remarked, that about fifty years ago he had seen hundreds of true 
salmon wriggling up over the mill weirs ; but for the last twenty years 
there has been no such fish in that river.
In the Coquet the salmon were similarly observed to have become 
scarce, a nd it was suggested by H.M. Inspectors of Fisheries that 
April 1886.
n8 
F. DAY : PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
such was owing to the presence of 'Bull Trout'; consequently, if 
these latter were destroyed salmon would again flourish !
From 1868 
to 1872 the annual close time for migratory trout was suspended, and 
the destruction of these anadromous forms ruthlessly carried on.
The 
amount of trout was soon reduced, their stock was rapidly diminished, 
but the salmon would not increase, so the massacre was stopped.
And now again, in 1885, the Inspector observes of the Coquet that it 
' is a much later river than any of its neighbours in the east, but this 
may be accounted for by the fact that that river is infested by 
Bull Trout,* whose habits are different from those of the true 
salmon.' 
The foregoing are instances in which salmon have deserted certain 
rivers, and which desertion cannot be ascribed to pollution or artificial 
impediments to ascent, but owing to some as yet unascertained cause.
Possibly the numerous drainage works in the agricultural country 
through which these rivers pass have had some effect in rendering 
them less suitable than formerly for the residence of these fish, as the 
surface.
water, instead of gradually percolating through the soil, and 
so by degrees obtaining access to the main stream, is now rapidly 
carried off in a short period by means of drainage works ; while 
I have previously alluded to an 'early' river having changed to a 
' late ' one, possibly from this cause.
It has been suggested that along the colder seas of our eastern 
coast salmon do not remain in the ocean, but ascend the warmer 
rivers, and consequently do not hang about the rivers' mouths; while, 
on the contrary, they behave differently along the Atlantic, or on our 
southern shores.
Thus, off the ' late ' river Fowey, Buckland remarked 
that a larger number of salmon than are due leave the sea and play 
about the mouth of the river.
These fish come in from the north, south, 
east, and west.
They are big fish, from 25 lb.
to 30 lb.
in weight.
They come late in the year.
They are very fat, and greatly different 
in every way from the native salmon of the Fowey.
In these warmer 
seas, with abundance of food, these fish may continue in the sea until 
compelled by the near approach of the reproductive period to ascend 
rivers towards their spawning beds, or they may be fish which are 
sterile for the season.
None seem to have been examined on this 
point, and only vague surmises have been offered.
* Buckland refers to the Sea Trout of the Coquet as the Bull Trout or Salmo 
eriox ; from that river I have not as yet obtained a specimen, but presume it must 
be identical with Salmo trutta, found in all the contiguous rivers ; while this seems 
the first time that it has been assumed that the presence of migratory Sea Trout in 
a river occasions it to be a late salmon river !
Naturalist, 
F. day: periods of migration.
119 
It has long been a vexed question as to the manner in which 
salmon enter estuaries and ascend rivers on their arrival from the sea, 
and although doubtless local circumstances may occasion certain 
differences, still the mode of migration would probably in all places 
be somewhat similar were it unchecked.
Mackenzie remarked of the 
Scottish rivers that ' the salmon proceed with the flood tide, and rest 
during the ebb in eddies and in easy water, hence great numbers are 
always caught in the flood traps of the stake nets placed in their 
course, while comparatively few are got in the ebb traps.
If the ebb 
sets in, and the water becomes shallow from the receding of the tide, 
they drop down with the tide into deeper water, until the return of the 
flood tide enables them to continue their course, and in this dropping 
down some fall within the range and are caught in the ebb traps of 
the engines in question ; but it is in the summer season, in dry 
weather, that by far the greatest number are so caught.' At this 
period the water in the rivers is so low that they swim about with the 
tide, awaiting a flood.
Admitting that the foregoing distinctly proves that in some 
localities at least, large numbers of fish ascend with the flood tide, it 
does not disprove that a great many also descend with the ebb, and 
that in times or places when the very low condition of the water 
could hardly be deemed a sufficient cause to obstruct ascent.
In the 
Severn, in the stretch of tidal water from Newnham to the railway 
bridge, there are about seven sets of puts and putchers on the right 
bank, all being fixed with their mouths up stream.
On May 26th, 
1885, 1 visited two of these sets of engines, and saw seven fish taken, 
all with their heads fixed in the puts and putchers, and directed down 
stream, and when captured they must have been descending the river 
with the ebb tide.
The stop-net fishermen carry on their occupation 
during the ebb tide, more especially in the slack water, rendering it 
evident that in this river these fish both ascend and descend in tidal 
waters.* 
In the Severn these fish are observed to swim up with the tide, 
which regulates their pace, as they rarely get in advance of it, and 
follow a fixed track, probably the channel of the river; but as the tide 
turns they leave the track by which they ascended, and are found in 
the shallows.
If once disturbed or frightened from their regular 
* Three views concerning these migrations were held at a meeting of the Dee 
Conservators at Chester, in December 1884: — (1) That salmon run up with the 
flood-tide ; (2) That they rest during the flood tide, and run up with the ebb ; 
(3) That they allow themselves to be carried up with the stream of the flood tide, 
with their heads towards the sea, and that when the tide begins to ebb they turn, 
and continue their upward course against it.
April 1886.
120 F.
DAY: PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
course, they would appear to be slow to again return to it ; thus 
Mr. Willis Bund remarks that there used to be a good fishery just 
above the place where the tunnel passes under the river Severn.
In 
consequence of the boring operations, chiefly the blasting, the fish 
have left that part of the river, and the fishery is almost worthless ; 
and although the blasting has now (October 1885) ceased for some 
time, the fish do not return.
In the McCloud River the blasting 
operations of the Constructive Corps of the Central Pacific Railway 
Company prevented the parent salmon ascending the river as usual 
(Livingston-Stone: Bull.
U.S. Fish.
Comm., 1885).
But the remarks 
of Sir W.
Jardine and others must not be overlooked, that temperature 
in estuaries is occasionally, at least, a cause as to the side they select 
when migrating, for they have been observed to select the sunny side 
during the cold months, and the shady during the warmer portions 
of the year.
But the period arrives when these fish consider it necessary to 
migrate from the tidal portions of a river and ascend into the fresh 
waters, where, instead of going with the tide, they have to pass on 
against the stream ; and fishermen, at least in the Wye, appear to 
consider that it is a rule, excepting during a fresh, that these migra- 
tions take place chiefly during the night-time — in fact, so strong on 
this point is the opinion of some, that they do not hesitate to say that, 
were night-fishing in this river to be put an end to, their occupa- 
tion would be gone.
It may be worthy of investigation, whether the 
constant netting to which these fishes are subjected is not one cause 
of their selecting to ascend during the night-time.
The salmon in the sea having stored up fat, especially on and 
around its pyloric appendages, and possibly, especially if in the 
autumn, being in such a condition that within a definite period its 
roe or milt must be deposited, commences its migrations towards its 
inland breeding-ground.
Buckland remarked that when examining 
spring fresh-run fish, he found the amount of fat on the pylorics less 
than what is present on one entering rivers for immediate breeding 
purposes.
His investigations seemed to indicate that the fat in both 
instances might serve as nutriment to them while they resided in 
fresh water • and the reason why the fish maturing its eggs has an 
excess of fat over one not so engaged, is supposed to be due to the 
great amount of nourishment which is required by the females while 
the eggs are rapidly maturing.
In November 1885, being with Sir J.
Gibson-Maitland searching 
for salmon eggs at the Teith, near Stirling, we took a female, 15 lbs.
weight, so injured by seals that it succumbed.
It was a clean silvery 
Naturalist, 
F. DAY: PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
121 
fish,* with ovaries 47 inches in length, the two weighing 2^ ounces, 
and each egg being o*i inch in diameter.
It is clear that a salmon 
having eggs one-tenth of an inch in diameter at the end of November, 
could not have its ova sufficiently ripe to spawn within the next two 
months, while experience tells us that no other period for depositing 
eggs will normally come round before this time the succeeding year.
It has long been accepted as a physiological necessity that a female 
smolt must descend to the sea before it can develop eggs, the reason 
advanced being that the development of ova requires far more 
nourishment than that of milt ; that in the ovary of the female the 
eggs are formed nearly simultaneously, and their development is 
uniform, one being enveloped in as large an amount of albumen as 
another.
But in order to produce this albumen, a far greater quantity 
of food is needed than the fish can normally procure in freshwater 
rivers.
On the other hand, grilse at Howietoun, both last year and 
during the present season, have given eggs without going to the sea ; 
and also the land-locked salmon breeds in fresh water without 
descending to the ocean.
I think that the explanation of these apparently contradictory facts 
is possible.
Thus, it is generally admitted that salmon, while residing 
in rivers, do not increase in weight, but rather fall off the longer they 
are absent from the sea, existing as they mainly do upon the fat which 
they have accumulated while feeding in the salt water, and such food 
as they can procure sufficient for nutrition of the body, but insufficient 
in females for breeding purposes.
If this is so (and of it I think there 
can be no reasonable doubt), they would be unable to obtain enough 
nourishment wherewith to develop eggs so long as they continued in 
the river, that, in short, they could not do so without another visit to 
the sea ; consequently these early-ascending salmon, until they have 
again descended to the salt water, cannot be those fish from which 
we have to expect ova for replenishing the stock in our rivers.
Knox, 
in 1854, observed that a smolt, after first descending to the ocean 
and tasting its marine food, never again resorts to its infantile food as 
a constant mode of nourishment.
This brings me to the question of how it is possible to prove that 
insufficient nourishment can impede or prevent spawning among the 
* Three similar ones were likewise captured that clay, but being uninjured were 
at once returned to the Teith.
This must not be considered an exceptional 
occurrence, as clean fish at this time are invariably netted when seeking for gravid 
salmon.
In the Rhine, Barfurth observed in 1874, that spawners ascend from 
September to November, while there is likewise a barren winter variety coming 
sporadically and for a brief season from September until Ma)'.
April 1886.
122 
F. day: periods of migration.
Salmonidse, or, in fact, render a fish temporarily sterile.
At Howie- 
toun it wasobserved in 1884, that the American Char (Salmo fontinalis) 
suffered a good deal from fungus, owing, it was believed, to their 
over-feeding.
Consequently, in 1885 their diet was reduced, and 
that with the best results as regards fungus ; but when the breeding 
season came round it was found that large numbers were sterile.
That this is solely a question of food a most interesting instance in 
pond No. 5 may be quoted.
Here the hybrids were kept and fully 
fed, and one female fontinalis was placed along with them.
She 
attained to a large size, and in November 1885 was found to be full 
of eggs.
Deficiency of food may, therefore, occasion sterility by an 
arrest of development in the ova, or, should the eggs be formed in 
the ovaries, it may arrest (possibly not entirely) their further augmenta- 
tion in size, as cold will retard the development of the embryo in eggs 
that have been deposited, as has been abundantly proved by trans- 
mitting them to distant countries by the assistance of ice.
Possibly 
in some few instances these early-ascending fish may find a locality 
where food from some cause is unusually abundant, allowing the ova 
to augment in size, and that this is the explanation of occasionally a 
female salmon with large eggs being captured at the end of the 
summer ; but normally these fish will be sterile during the year of 
their ascent in the condition described, at least until after they have 
revisited the sea.
But it may be advanced, if this is so, how do land-locked 
salmon breed ?
Here we have an entirely different set of circum- 
stances to deal with.
The fish have never been to the sea-feeding 
grounds, but have been compelled to adapt themselves to local 
conditions.
Thus, in large lakes, as Wenern and other suitable 
places, where food abounds, they breed, or else they may become 
' demoralised salmon,' as Agassiz remarked ; or, finally, they may 
die out, due to sterility, the nourishment which they are able to 
obtain being insufficient or unsuited to allow them to perpetuate 
their race.
The foregoing makes me think that Mr. George was in error when 
he reported to the Severn Fishery Board in 1885, that, due to a long 
series of dry weather, no run of spawning salmon occurred until the 
beginning of December.
The first salmon spawned in the Barrow, 
November 12th, 1884, and in the Verniew on the 15th.
These were 
fish that had been in the fresh water all the summer.
Without being 
marked, it is difficult to be sure on such a subject, and I would rather 
hold to the opinion that these were fish lately ascended from the 
sea.
Naturalist, 
F. DAY: PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
I23 
There is hardly a month in the year when fresh-run salmon may 
not be found in our rivers,* but the main run for spawning purposes 
occurs as a rule from October to January, or even later.
Some of 
the December and January fish, however, are in that condition, as I 
have shown, that they could not spawn for many months to come , 
and I am disposed to think that it is only autumn and winter 
ascending ones that breed, but experiments are much needed to test 
this.
I now propose adverting to such facts as have been recorded 
respecting the various runs of salmon which ascend our rivers.
Mr. Willis-Bund, in his account of the Severn ('Salmon Problems'), 
shows at least eight distinct runs during the year.
They may be 
summarised as follows : — End of December or January, the 
largest run of the season, and spawning fish.
(2) End of January 
or February, or later ; spawning fish fewer in number, but generally 
large in size.
(3) A run in February of large clean fish, but at the 
end of the month of gillings.t (4) February and March, a spring 
run of gillings, which press up to the head-waters of the river, and 
are the early spawners for the next season.
(5) A small run of 
grilse, and some small salmon, during April.
(6) June and July, the 
main run of grilse.
(7) Autumn run of Michaelmas gillings.
(8) Great run of spawning fish, in October and November.
But it 
must be noted that all of the foregoing do not take place invariably 
every year — thus grilse or gillings may be absent ; but there are, as a 
rule, three distinct runs of spawning fish, and five runs of clean fish, 
and, irrespective of the foregoing, there are individuals moving about.
Fish which are ascending alone do not appear to be so eager to press 
up, but stop at the foot of weirs in the pools ; while the largest run 
of salmon is on a spring tide.
Possibly male fish pass up sooner 
than do the females, for at certain times in the Usk the higher up the 
* Dr. Frie came to the following conclusions respecting the migrations of the 
Bavarian salmon (he omits the grilse), among which he observed three distinct 
times of ascent from the sea.
A. Not ready for spawning when ascending: (1) At 
the end of February under the ice, or March until May. Large and strong fish 
from 25 lbs.
to 50 lbs.
(avoirdupois), famous as 'violet salmon.' (2) From the 
middle of June till August, if the rivers are not too low.
From 12% lbs.
to 
22% lbs.
Flesh reddish, and known as 'rose salmon.' B.
Ready to spawn 011 
arrival : (3) First half of September until the end of November, and in mild 
winters until December.
Weak fish from 3 lbs.
to 10 lbs., or even 15 lbs.
Flesh 
pale, and known as 'silver salmon' (U.S. Fishery Reports, 1876, p.
607).
f ' Gillings ' is a local term for salmon from 8 lbs.
to 15 lbs.
weight, or after it 
has ceased to be considered a grilse, and fish of this size are supposed to be in their 
second breeding year, and to migrate together, and not along with other salmon, 
while grilse or botchers are fish up to 8 lbs.
weight.
April 1886.
124 
F. DAY : PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
river the netting takes place, the greater is the percentage of males 
to females which are caught.
Mr. Anderson writes to me respecting the Forth, and the 
migrations of salmon and grilse therein, remarking that his 
observations extend over a period of 50 years.
(1) The first run 
of salmon, the beginning of December till nearly the end of 
February, should there be a fresh in the river; they are coarse- 
looking fish, from 16 lbs.
to 30 lbs.
(2) About the middle or 
second spring tide in February, clean spring-run fish ; the fish 3 lbs.
or 4 lbs.
in weight, increasing in weight every week until the end of 
April, when some are from 8 lbs.
to 10 lbs.
(3) The summer 
salmon enters with the first spring tide in May, or earlier should the 
river be in flood ; they are from 12 lbs.
to 20 lbs.
(4) The first run of 
grilse, from ij lbs.
to 3 lbs., enters the river in May: in 1881, the 
first were recorded on June 28th, and in 1882, a week later.
(5) The 
second run of grilse ascends about the middle of June, or during 
the second spring tide ; they are from 3 lbs.
to 5 lbs.
(6) The 
'autumn salmon ' ascend at the end of June; are from 16 lbs.
to 
40 lbs.
(7) With the first spring tide in July, quantities of grilse 
ascend.
(8) With the first spring tide in August, grilse from 8 lbs.
to 16 lbs.
ascend in shoals, and many are heavy in spawn.
(9) The 
• grey schule salmon,' or the regular breeders, ascend with the first 
spring tide in September, or later if the water is low.
Many are 
from 20 lbs.
to 50 lbs.; some are very dark, others very red.
(10) There is also the 'grey schule grilse'; the most are ugly looking 
fish, dark red and grey, very coarse made fish ; the males with long 
snouts, and very shiny all over their scales.
Russel (The Salmon, 1864) remarked that the reason salmon 
ascend rivers more or less every month of the year, while grilse only 
do so at certain periods, or so to speak come all at once, must be 
owing to one being an adult form capable of ascending at any time,, 
while the other is a young fish which first attains to that capacity at 
that season when its ascent is practically bound to begin.
The 
following return shows the proportions of salmon, grilse, and trout 
to every 1,000 of each kind caught on an average of years in the net 
fisheries of the river Tweed : — 
Salmon.
Grilse.
Trout.
February (2nd half of) 
22 
0 
8 
March 
- 56 .
0 
7 
April ...
...
.. 89 .
0 
23 
May 
.. 128 ..
1 
.. 56 
June 
..-.i 3 8 ..
13 • 
•• i73 
Naturalist, 
F. day: periods of migration.
125 
July 
August 
September 
Salmon.
233 
113 
Grilse.
371 
408 
154 
Trout.
254 
164 
1 29 
October ( 1 st half of) ...
71 ...
53 ...
186 
Salmon ascend in every month of the year, in numbers com- 
paratively not very unequal.
Grilse, speaking roundly, do not 
ascend in the first half of the year, and all but a fraction within two 
consecutive months in the middle of the year; subsequently, their 
ascent is checked.
Forms ascending throughout the year being 
adults ; those coming in shoals being the young of the same species.
That this is so, is further borne out by the trout column, wherein are 
comprised both old and young, and in June they suddenly increase 
by 300 per cent, and another 50 per cent, in July, during which 
month a fourth of the whole of the year's captures were recorded, 
while the average weight falls off during the months when the young 
appear to be ascending.
The increase in trout in October is due to 
fishes ascending to spawn, when the average weight of the fish 
increases.
Russel has also shown that in examining some returns 
of takes of grilse and salmon from the Tweed, he found that the 
proportion which the grilse of any one year bore to the average 
number of grilse, was found to have been just about the proportion 
which the salmon of the following year bore to the average number 
of salmon.
Taking a series of years, the average weight of grilse 
captured in the Tweed was found to be in June, 3 lbs.
11 J ozs.
; 
July, 4 lbs.
5 J ozs.; August, 4 lbs.
15 ozs.; September, 5 lbs.
12 J ozs.; 
October,.
6 lbs.
nf ozs: the late comers having been longest in 
the sea.
During their migrations up river these fish have to overcome many 
obstructions, whether natural obstacles or artificial impediments, as 
weirs, and frequently these can only be surmounted during a heavy 
flood.
If the water in any river is very low, possibly the pools would 
contain no safe resting places for ascending salmon, and spring fish 
would be very unlikely to accomplish their ascent, for they would 
most probably be captured by man or destroyed by vermin.
Mr. Stephen deposed, before the Committee on the Salmon 
Fisheries in 1824, that, 'Our cruives in the river Don are so constructed 
that salmon of 10 lbs.
weight can at all times go up, but none can 
descend past the cruives.
We fish generally in the pools above the 
cruives, and if the unspawned salmon returned again down the river 
we would undoubtedly catch them there, which is never the case.
They are never seen to descend the river, except as kelts, after having 
spawned.' 
April 1886.
126 
F. day: periods of migration.
James Halliday deposed that salmon which enter rivers at any 
period, but not for spawning, would return again to the sea* at times, 
were such return not cut off by want of water on the shallows ; but if 
floods occur, they descend.
He continued, respecting the Sand Pool 
in the Annan : ' Although we had fished this pool quite clean of fish 
before the rain came on, yet whenever the rain did come on we then 
continued fishing constantly, until the water rose so high that we could 
not manage it, and we got the salmon and grilses coming down the 
river all the time into the pool ; some of them had the appearance of 
having lain long in the water, and were very much exhausted — quite 
changed in the colour, as if they had hung in a smoky chimney for 
some time ; others were very red in the skin, by having been in the 
fresh water for some time.
I have known us take 103 fish in one 
night in that pool after the rain commenced, although we had fished 
it clean immediately before.
Our opinion was that the fish came 
down from the river above, out of the rocky waters of the Bridekirk, 
Loos, and Hoddam.
The reason for fishing the pool at that particular 
time, was that the river at the foot of it parted into three small 
branches, and the pool itself was very deep.
When the water was 
rising the fish could not find their way so readily down there, and 
they turned into the deep pool, and we kept drawing constantly as 
long as we could manage the water.' 
Mr. Willis-Bund (' Salmon Problems ') has advanced reasons for 
supposing that were a clean fish interrupted in its journey up stream 
in fresh water, it drops back.
Thus, he remarked that a poacher who 
has missed gaffing a fish, first looks for his lost game in the pool 
below, not in the one above.
It has also been observed of the 
Californian salmon, that when a rack is placed across a river the 
unripe fish drop back.
In November 1885 we proposed to investigate 
this on a small scale in theTeith,and when netting salmon for the purpose 
of obtaining ova, so far as was practicable each fish, on being 
returned into the river, had an elastic band slipped over its tail ; and 
out of eight shots with the net, and a total take of 43 fish, three of 
which were clean, we only recaptured one marked specimen.
We 
worked down stream, except for the last two shots, and it was at shot 
No. 7 that the marked fish was taken.
During their ascent these fish must keep to the middle, or deepest 
and safest part of a river, where, however, they are constantly 
pursued by the netter, and this causes them to become shy.
They 
will not lie up, but seem more disposed to push on to their breeding 
* Dr. Gunther observed that a salmon changing from salt to fresh water, and 
vice versa, several times in the year, Only occurs in rivers falling into the Moray 
Firth.
Naturalist, 
F. DAY: PERIODS OF MIGRATION.
127 
grounds.
This question of rapidity of ascent is one by no means 
settled, while it is of the greatest consequence to the upper riparian 
proprietors.
Mr. Willis-Bund considers that in the Severn they go 
up stream very leisurely, as two or three miles an hour ; consequently, 
in a river having a long course, the weekly close time merely changes 
the locality where they are captured, for he believes none attain to 
the upper waters during the netting season.
As a corroboration of 
this, it is observed that, except under exceptional conditions, it is 
some days after the nets are off rivers before the upper proprietors 
have much chance of hooking a fish.
Livingston-Stone remarked that 'it frequently happened that a 
whole run of salmon for several days will be composed almost entirely 
of males, the effect of which, of course, is to leave the females 
together by themselves, whether they take an active part or not in 
bringing about the separation.
In fact, in hauling a seine frequently 
in a river for some time, it is generally very noticeable that the sexes 
alternate in running up the river about the spawning season, a large 
body of males being followed by a large body of females, and these 
by a run of males again, and so on through the season ' (Bull ; 
U.S. Fish.
Com., 1885, p.
468).
Mr. Willis-Bund has also observed 
' that the male fish swims up the river more quickly than the female ; 
at all events, the higher up the river the netting takes place, the 
greater percentage of males to females caught' ('Salmon Problems,' 
page 156).
In their course up stream it is very remarkable what difficulties they 
will overcome.
Fleming asserted that he had known a salmon leap up 
over a fall of 30 ft., but probably he intended to mean in a succession 
of jumps from one pool or resting-place to another.
Twiss ('Travels in 
Iceland ') declared that from personal observation he knew they were 
able to dart themselves nearly 14 ft.
perpendicularly out of the water.
Professor Landmark has stated {Nature, August 6th, 1885) that be 
had witnessed their jumping 16 ft.
perpendicularly, but continued, 
'Such jumps are rare.' Scrope, after making a number of observations, 
came to the conclusion that 6 ft.
or 7 ft.
came nearer the truth.
At 
impassable cascades they have been observed to die, consequent upon 
repeated but fruitless exertions in attempting to ascend.
In the Severn it has been observed that after the exertion of 
crossing a weir or ascending a rapid, they take a rest ; for the best 
draught of these fish are captured above the obstruction in the dead- 
water.
Kelts, when obstructed in their course down a river, strike 
up stream ; thus, we are told that at Powick weir, which solely 
captures ascending fish, kelts are often taken in the spring, and 
usually when there is a slight fresh in the river.
April 1886.
128 
NOTES AND NEWS.
When descending seawards, it would appear that the salmon 
usually pass gradually into the salt water, but a heavy flood some- 
times carries weak fish down stream.
The pinks or smolts keep to 
the sides of the river, but having once arrived at the ocean would 
seem to seek the deep water, to return again as breeding grilse.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Dr. Dallinger, F.R.S., has been elected president of the Royal Microscopical 
Society for a third time, the bye-law providing that a Fellow should not be elected 
for more than two years being set aside by a special vote.
>co< 
The annual meeting of the Manchester Scientific Students' Association was 
held on the 20th of January.
The 25th annual report stated that the work of the 
past year embraced fourteen winter evening meetings, at which papers were read 
and discussed ; nine Saturday afternoon excursions ; one whole day excursion ; an 
excursion at Whitsuntide ; six evening rambles ; and four visits to institutions and 
works.
The number of members on the roll for 1885 is 297.
The council invited 
the attention of the members to an important feature in its organisation.
The pro- 
posed creation of an astronomical section will, it is hoped, lead the way to the 
formation of other sections for the study of those branches of science which still 
remain unrepresented in this great industrial centre.
The library was removed 
during the autumn from Bridge Street to the space set apart for it on the basement 
floor of the rooms of the Literaiy and Scientific Society.
The, year started with a 
favourable balance of ^26, and ended with a balance of £11 7s.
3d.
The officers 
and members of the Council were elected for the coming year.
Prof.
Williamson, 
F.R.S., is again the president; Messrs.
Alfred Brothers, R.
T. Burnett, Samuel 
Okell, and John Plant are the vice-presidents ; Dr. C.
P. Bahin, honorary secretary; 
Mr. Samuel Massey, treasurer.
>«X 
An open meeting of the Microscopical and Natural History Section of the 
Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester, was held on the 7th of 
December, 1885, when Prof.
Herdman, of University College, Liverpool, delivered 
an address, in which he described the results of the work undertaken by the Liver- 
pool Marine Biology Committee.
A large number of exhibits were made by 
members and associates, including Messrs.
R. D.
Darbishire (marine and land and 
freshwater shells, and in conjunction with L.
E. Adams, characteristic British 
Stalk-eyed Crustacea, mainly from Penmaenmaur and the Irish Sea), Dr. x\lcock, 
F. Nicholson, F.Z.S., Thomas Rogers, H.
Hyde, Mark Stirrup, F.G.S., Prof.
Williamson, F.R.S., Prof.
A. Milnes Marshall, F.R S., Prof.
Boyd Dawkins, F.R.S., 
J. R.
Hardy, Peter Cameron, J.
Cosmo Melvill, F.L.S.
(a most extensive series 
of exhibits, viz.: — Selected Foreign Mollusca from his collection, including 
29 original types of Conus, 19 of them being unique specimens, and fine rare and 
unique forms of Voluta, Mitra, Marginella, Cyprsea, Bullia, Pseudoliva, Rostellaria, 
Murex, an almost complete set of the genus Typhis, a selection of the genus 
Pecten, etc.
; exotic Coleoptera, of the families Cetoniadae and Rutelida?
; selected 
drawers of exotic Rhopalocera of the orders Papilionidte, Nymphalidse, and 
Lycaenida; ; and a few insects exhibited together to exemplify mimicry amongst 
Lepidoptera of widely differing orders), Hastings C.
Dent, F.L.S., Charles Bailey, 
F.L.S.
(numerous rare and critical plants, including the principal forms of aquatic 
Buttercups growingin Britain, the Hieracia of Middle Europe, belonging exclusively to 
one section, the Piloselloidea, and a set of British Erythrcea), T.
Sington, F.
A. Huet, 
L.D.S.,R.C.S., J.
Barrow, A.
Brothers, F.R.A.S., Blackburn, F.R. M.S., John 
Boyd, Pettigrew, Dr. Tatham, and Wilde.
The gathering constituted one of the 
most interesting meetings that has taken place in Manchester within the historic walls 
of the Literary and Philosophical Society ; and was one to which ladies were, for 
the first time in the annals of the Society, admitted, upon the occasion of the 
reopening of the rooms at 36, George Street, after the very extensive alterations and 
rebuilding there.
1 APR 1886 Naturalist, 
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENT S AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London : D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I., II., III., & IV.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
Now ready ) Sz>o, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
. 
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S.
, F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; .
Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P. M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C 
THE NATUKALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Contributions to Phenology — R.
Rosenstock, b.a.
Flora of Strensall and District, York— A.
R. Waller.
Notes on Birds of High Peak— F.
B. Whitlock.
List of Wensleydale Birds— John Percival.
Hymenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson.
Liverpool Coleoptera (Parts 7, 8, 9, 10)— J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., &c.
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.
— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Notes.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST^ 
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching; boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating; the Bignell tray; sweeping; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvge ; 
parasites ; preserving larvse.
Pupa-digging ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light ; grouting ; smoking ; killing ; relaxing ; setting ; grease ; mites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera; Hymenoptera; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
"Every page is interesting." .
. .
. .
Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2£d.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
6d.
post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of alt.
Bookselle 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS* UNION.
^ PAGE 
The Raven in Bowland — F.
S. Mitchell, M.B.O.U 129 
Birds of the Derbyshire Peak— F.
B. Whitlock 130—132 
Flora of Strensall and District, York— A.
R. Waller 133 — 143 
Bibliography: Mollusca, 1884-5 144—149 
Contributions to Phaenology (Giessen 1884) — Translated by Rudolph Rosenstock, B.A. 151— 156 
Note — Mammalia: — 143 
Badgers in North-East Yorkshire— T.
H. Nelson, M.B.O. U.
Notes — Ornithology: — 150 
Hawfinch near Boroughbridge — Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A.; Cormorant and Green 
Woodpecker in Nidderdale — W .
Storey; Solway Bird-notes- -R ev.
H. A.
Mac- 
pherson, M.A.; Flamborough Bird-notes — Mat thezv Bailey ; Discovery of the 
Nest of Ross's Gull— J.
J. Dalgleish, F.L.S.
Note— Mollusca :— 
Helix arbustorum v.
cincta and Limnaea glabra near Lincoln — Rev. W.
IV.
Fowler, M.A., F.L.S.
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union— Annual Meeting at Beverley 156, 157 
Notes and News ...
158, 159 
In Memoriam -W.
W. Newbould, M.A., F.L.S 159, 160 
LONDON: 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.C.
McCorquodale & Co. Limited, Cardington Street, Euston : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
May also be had of G.
E. East, jun., 241, Eveking Road, Upper Clapton, London, E.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
x<x.
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof : 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7cl.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
The Auk — a quarterly journal of Ornithology — April, 1886.
[The Am. O.
U. 
The A.
O. U.
List of American Birds and Code of Nomenclature.
[The A.
O. U.
Midland Naturalist for April 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for April 1886.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
Tne Naturalist's World for April 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for April 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for April 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Natural History Journal for April 1886.
[J.
E. Clarke, Editor.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Society.
— Transactions, vol.
iii, parts 8 and 9, February 
and March 1886.
[The Society.
The Native States of India.
— By the Marquis of Ripon.
8vo, 30 pages, 1886.
Journal of Microscopy and Natural Science — April 1886.
[Alfred Allen, Editor.
New York Microscopical Society — Journal, January 1886.
[The Society.
A Short Trip to Eastern Iceland.
— By James Backhouse, jun.
8vo reprint, 1885, 
1 5 pages.
[The Author.
•On the Bones of the Lynx from Teesdale.
— -By Wm. Davies, F.G.S. 8vo reprint, 
1880, 4 pages and 2 plates.
[J.
Backhouse.
Workmen and Museums.
— By 'R.
M.' 8vo reprint, 1886, 28 pages.
[Mr. J.
L. Denson.
History of Botany.
— By John Clayton.
8vo, 16 pages.
[Bradford Nat. Society.
A Tourist's View of Ireland.
8vo, 55 pages.
[H.
Speight.
The Birds of Cumberland.— By Macpherson and Duckworth.
8vo, 206 pages, 
with map and plate.
[The Authors.
THE BIRDS OF YORKSHIRE.
Information is desired at once on the Warblers, their distribution, nidification, 
and local names, together with full details of the occurrence of rare species, for 
use in preparing the next portion of this work, which appeai-s in the Transactions 
of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
— W.
Eagi.k Clarke, 18, Claremont Road, 
lieadingley, Leeds.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
129 
THE RAVEN IN BOWLAND.
F. S.
MITCHELL, M.B.O.U., 
Clitheroe', Author of ' The Birds of Lancashire?
On the hills of Bowland, across which runs the boundary of Lanca- 
shire and Yorkshire, and east and west from which flow the Hodder, 
the Wyre, and some of the tributaries of the Lune, the Raven (Corvus 
corax) has often been seen, and but for the scurvy reception it has 
met with, would no doubt have remained a regular inhabitant.
In 1885, however, a pair contrived to keep their whereabouts a 
secret until they had almost brought their young to maturity, and it 
was only in the second week of April that the nest was discovered 
and poked down, two of the contained birds being killed and the 
remaining two haled off into captivity.
Hearing not long ago that the birds had been again seen about 
the place, a visit was paid on the 7th of March, and in exactly the 
same spot as last year a big nest had been constructed, the situation 
being a recess protected by an overhanging rock and about 20 feet 
from the foot of the crag.
A good deal of snow was on the ground 
and footing thereby treacherous, but by the aid of a rope and a small 
mountain-ash which happily grew in a crevice near, it was ascertained 
that only one egg had been laid, and this was completely covered up by 
the thick sheeps-wool of the lining.
The birds were exceedingly wary, 
and could only be seen hovering at a great height, and heard to give 
an occasional croak.
A second visit was paid on March 14th, and on approaching the 
sitting bird was seen to leave the nest, being immediately joined by 
her mate, who had evidently been perching near.
By mounting on 
each other's shoulders the climbers obtained a view of the inside of 
the nest before disturbance, and the four eggs it contained were seen 
to be lying with no sort of symmetry, and all at some little distance 
from each other.
The nest was about two feet thick, and had an 
inside diameter of ten inches.
The birds showed rather more anxiety than on the previous 
occasion, and came once near enough to have been shot, but as it is 
beginning to be believed that they do not do much damage to the 
game, and that a dead sheep is far more agreeable to them than any 
amount of grouse, it may be hoped they will be allowed to remain 
unmolested.
May 1886.
K 
130 
BIRDS OF THE DERBYSHIRE PEAK.
F. B.
WHITLOCK, 
Nottingham.
Having repeatedly visited various parts of the Peak during the last 
four or five years, for the purpose of observing its birds, I think I can 
lay before the readers of the Naturalist a fair account of what species 
are to be found there.
In general appearance, with the exception of the Buxton and 
Kinder Scout mosses, all parts of the Peak have much in common — 
high rolling moorlands covered with heather, bilberry, and cloudberry, 
or steep green hills with narrow, rocky, and wooded valleys lying 
between them, most of the valleys, or dales as they are usually 
called, having pretty trout streams flowing through them ; large 
woods are the exception, but in parts, as at Buxton, there are a good 
many smaller plantations, usually of a mixed growth.
Kinder Scout, about 2,100 feet high, is the principal mountain; 
it consists of a large table-land, the surface of which is covered with 
very spongy peat, into which one sinks to the knees.
The peat 
through the action of rain-water is cut up into innumerable islands, 
on which heather and a little bilberry struggle for existence.
Bird 
life on this wide stretch of country is extremely scarce, the only 
species I noticed being one or two Meadow Pipits and a solitary 
Swift and Swallow.
On the steep sides of the Scout, however, the 
heather and bilberry and various ferns and plants flourish ; here bird 
life is more common, the Red Grouse, Ring Ousel, and a few smaller 
birds being frequently seen.
The Buxton mosses are similar to the summit of Kinder Scout, 
but have not such a barren or dead-level appearance.
The heather 
is more luxuriant, and Grouse and Ring Ousels may be found on any 
part of them.
Having said so much of the general appearance of 
the Peak, I will commence my list with the 
Merlin.
Several pairs of Merlins breed in the neighbourhood of the 
Scout, but I think the young seldom get off.
Peregrine Falcon.
A gentleman described to me a large hawk 
which he killed while Grouse shooting, which I have little doubt 
was of this species.
Kestrel.
Fairly common ; breeds both in trees and on rocks 
throughout the Peak.
Sparrowhawk.
Not so common as the Kestrel, but may be found 
wherever there are woods.
Rough-legged Buzzard.
Occasionally occurs.
A gamekeeper told 
me he shot one not long since.
According to Mr. Seebohm 
they pass over this part of Derbyshire pretty regularly.
Naturalist, 
whitlock: birds of Derbyshire peak.
131 
Song Thrush.
Common ; where trees and bushes are scarce I have 
found it breeding on brook sides like a Blackbird.
Redwing.
Occurs in the dales in winter.
Fieldfare.
Occurs in fair numbers; I found a dead one on 19th 
May last year, somewhat decomposed, on the summit of the 
Scout.
Missel Thrush.
Common in all parts ; I have found it breeding on 
the rocks.
Blackbird.
Common ; breeds in the stone walls where no bushes 
and trees are to be found.
Ring Ousel.
Common.
Arrives about 28th March; seems to be 
most abundant where the bilberry and cloudberry are found in 
greatest profusion.
The earliest young I saw were on 19th May, 
just hatched.
Dipper.
Not common ; I have seen its nests near Hayfield and in 
Miller's Dale.
Redbreast.
Common, except on the wildest moors.
Redstart.
Fair numbers.
Breeds in the stone walls.
Wheatear.
Breeds in scattered pairs on the hill sides.
Whinchat.
Same as last ; rather commoner near Hayfield.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Occurs near woods.
Blackcap.
Rather rare.
Whitethroat.
Owing to the absence of hedge-rows this familiar bird 
is only found in such places as Edale.
Wood Wren.
I have heard this bird near Hayfield.
Willow Wren.
Common in all the dales; seems to be fond of 
frequenting the stones in brooks.
Ooldcrest.
Occurs in the fir plantations.
Great Titmouse.
Common near and in woods.
Blue Titmouse.
Common near and in woods.
Marsh Titmouse.
I have seen this species in the autumn in Ash- 
wood Dale and near Ashover.
Hedge Accentor.
Common.
I have seen it amongst the large 
boulders that lie all over the sides of Kinder Scout.
Wren.
Common in all parts.
Carrion Crow.
A few are to be seen; they breed in the larger 
woods and forage on the adjacent moorlands.
Rook.
Not so common as in more cultivated parts.
Flocks pass 
the Dympus at Hayfield very regularly every day.
Jackdaw.
Common ; breeds in many of the dales.
Magpie.
Scattered pairs breed where there is shelter.
Starling.
Fairly common.
May 1886.
I 3 2 
WHITLOCK : BIRDS OF DERBYSHIRE PEAK.
Bullfinch.
Uncommon, but is found in the more wooded dales.
Greenfinch.
Breeds in the more cultivated parts.
Chaffinch.
Common everywhere.
Linnet.
Breeds on some of the moors, but is commonest in the 
autumn.
Snow Bunting.
Occurs near Hayfield most winters.
Reed Bunting.
Occurs in Edale.
Yellow Bunting.
Occurs in Edale.
Common Bunting.
Occurs in the more cultivated parts.
Swallow.
Common.
House Martin.
Common ; breeds on the rocks in Ashwood Dale.
Sand Martin.
Rather local.
Pied Wagtail.
Common, especially in Ashwood and Miller's Dale.
Grey Wagtail.
Breeds in Miller's Dale, and a few also winter there.
Yellow Wagtail.
Fairly common.
Tree Pipit.
Common.
Meadow Pipit.
Very common.
Skylark.
• Fairly common.
Swift.
Rather rare.
Kingfisher.
Occurs on the larger streams.
Cuckoo.
Very common on the moorlands.
Ringdove.
Fair numbers in the woods.
Red Grouse.
Common on all the moors.
Black Grouse.
A few are to be found near Hayfield.
Pheasant.
Uncommon in the wild state.
Partridge.
Uncommon in the higher parts of the Peak.
Common Heron.
Occurs, but I know of no breeding place in the 
Peak.
Land Rail.
Occurs in the broader dales.
Moorhen.
Breeds on the larger streams ; I saw a nest with eggs on 
4th August last year.
Golden Plover.
Breeds all over the Hayfield moors in scattered 
pairs.
Lapwing.
Very common on the hill sides.
Leaves early in August.
Curlew.
A few pairs breed near Hayfield.
Common Sandpiper.
Common where it occurs.
The only place I 
know of where it breeds is near Hayfield.
Woodcock.
Has been known to breed near Hayfield.
Common Snipe.
Fair numbers breed all over the district.
I saw 
four or five on the wing near Mam Tor in April last.
Jack Snipe.
Occurs regularly in the winter.
Black-headed Gull.
Often to be seen flying overhead.
Naturalist, 
133 
FLORA OP STRENSALL AND DISTRICT, YORK.
ALFRED RAINEY WALLER, 
Secretary of the Watson Botanical Exchange Club.
In drawing up the following list of Strensall plants, I have been 
materially helped by the late Mr. H.
Ibbotson, who very kindly placed 
all his notes on York plants at my disposal.
My thanks are also due 
to Miss Milner, of York, Mr. Le Tall, M.A., of York, and Miss G.
Horner, of Earswick, for information with regard to plants seen in 
the district.
The ground covered by this paper includes Strensall Village and 
Common, Stockton Forest and its Common, Towthorpe Common, 
Sandburn Woods, Hazel Bush, the Malton Road in the near vicinity, 
and part of the river Foss.
I have not yet sufficiently examined the Rubi, Rosse, and Salices 
of the district to enable me to give a satisfactory list of these genera, 
and have therefore decided not to include them in this paper.
The 
list of Ferns is taken largely from Mr. Ibbotson's ' Ferns of York,' 
edited, in 1884, by Mr. Le Tall and myself.
Anemone nemorosa L.
Ranunculus trichophyllus Chaix.
In one or two ponds on Strensall 
Common.
Ranunculus heterophyllus Fries.
Much commoner than the above.
Ranunculus hederaceus L.
Very plentiful about the middle of the 
Common, and in ditches by the first lane leading off the Common 
towards Strensall.
Ranunculus sceleratus I,.
R. flammula L.
Ranunculus lingua L.
One or two plants at Stockton Forest.
Ranunculus auricomus L.
Not at all common.
In shady places 
at Sandburn.
Ranunculus repens L.
R. acrisL.
R. bulbosus L.
Ranunculus hirsutus Curt.
Very rare.
One or two plants at Sand- 
burn.
Ranunculus arvensis L.
Ficaria verna Huds.
Caltha palustris L.
[I have a specimen of Aquilegia vulgaris L.
from Stockton, 
but it is undoubtedly an escape there.
Mr. Ibbotson informs 
me he has seen it on the Malton Road, but not recently.] 
Nymphaea alba L.
In the river Foss.
Nuphar luteum Sm. In the river Foss.
Papaver rhoeas L.
P. dubium L.
Chelidonium majus L.
Walls at Stockton Forest.
An escape ?
May 1886.
134 WALLER I FLORA OF STRENSALL AND DISTRICT.
Fumaria pallidiflora Jord.
Rare.
In hedges about Strensall.
Fumaria officinalis L.
Raphanus raphanistrum L.
Barbarea vulgaris Br. By the Foss.
Nasturtium officinale Br. N.
palustre DC.
Card amine pratensis L.
C. sylvatica Lk. C.
hirsuta L.
Alliaria officinalis Andrz.
Sisymbrium officinale Sep.
Sisymbrium thalianum Gay. Brassica campestris L.
Sinapis arvensis L.
Draba verna L.
Teesdalia nudicaulis Br.
Lepidium draba L.
Colonist at Strensall, B.
B. Le Tall.
Lepidium campestre Br. Fields at Stockton Forest, but not at all 
common.
Coronopus procumbens Gil.
(-C.
Ruellii All.).
By damp roadsides 
near Strensall Common, and at Stockton Forest.
Capsella bursa-pastoris Mch.
Viola sylvatica Fr.
(both vars.).
Viola canina L.
var.
flavicornis Sm. On the Common in one or 
two places.
Viola odorata L.
V. tricolor L.
(and var.
arvensis Murr.).
Drosera intermedia Hay. D.
rotundifolia L.
Poly gala vulgaris L.
Githago segetum Dsf. Lychnis flos-cuculi L.
Lychnis diurna Sibth.
L. vespertina Sibth.
Silene inflata Sm.
Silene anglica L.
Very plentiful in cornfields by the railway across 
Strensall Common.
Silene noctiflora L.
Very rare.
In fields near Strensall Common.
[Silene armeria L.
' Once gathered at Stockton Forest.' II Ibbotson.
A casual.] 
Saponaria officinalis L.
« Hedge bank near the Lobster House, on 
the Malton Road.' H.
Ibbotson.
Malachium aquaticum Fr. Banks of the Foss.
Cerastium vulgatum L.
( = C.
triviale Lk.).
Cerastium semidecandrum L.
C. viscosum L.
( = C.
glomeratum Th.).
Stellaria media Cyr. S.
holostea L.
Stellaria palustris Ehrh.
( = S.
glauca With.).
S. graminea L.
Stellaria uliginosa Murr.
Arenaria trinervis L.
A. serpyllifolia L.
Sagina nodosa Fzl. S.
procumbens L.
Spergula arvensis L.
Spergularia rubra P.
At Sandburn, and on sandy roads across 
Strensall Common, but very scarce.
[Linum angustifolium Huds.
A few plants at Stockton Forest in 
1 88 1.
Probably an escape.] 
Linum catharticum L.
Badiola linoides R.th.
Malva rotundifolia L.
Hypericum pulchrum L.
Hypericum tetrapterum Fr. H.
perforatum L.
H. humifusum L.
Naturalist, 
waller: flora of strensall and district.
135 
Hypericum elodes L.
Plentiful in pools and marshy places on 
Strensall Common, and at Stockton Forest.
Acer pseudo-platanus L.
(planted).
A. campestre L.
Geranium phaeum L.
Three or four plants in a ditch between 
Stockton and Strensall, in 1882.
Miss G.
Horner.
'Walls at 
Stockton Forest.
No doubt introduced.' H.
Ibbotson.
Geranium dissectum L.
G. molle L.
G. pusillum L.
Geranium robertianum L.
Erodium cicutarium l'Her.
Oxalis acetosella L.
Ilex aquifolium L.
Rhamnus frangula L.
Rhamnus catharticus L.
Hedges near Strensall, especially towards 
Sheriff Hutton.
TJlex europaeus L.
Sarothamnus vulgarius Wimm.
( = S.
scoparius K.) 
Genista anglica L.
Genista tinctoria L.
In a lane between Strensall Common and 
Thornton.
Ononis campestris K.Z.
( = 0.
spinosa L.).
Common.
[Ononis arvensis L.
is conspicuous by its absence.] 
Anthyllis vulneraria L.
Medicago lupulina L.
Melilotus altissima Th.
( = M.
officinalis W., non M.
officinalis Desr.).
Melilotus alba Desr.
Mr. Ibbotson informs me he has seen this by 
the railway near the saw-mill (formerly Mr. Pearson's), between 
Warthill and Holtby Stations, but he has not seen it recently.
Trifolium pratense L.
T. medium L.
T. striatum L.
Trifolium repens L.
T. procumbens L.
T. minus Sm.
Trifolium filiforme L.
Lotus uliginosus Schk.
( = L.
major Sm.).
Lotus corniculatus L.
Lotus tenuis Kit. A little occurs in the railway cutting between 
Warthill and Holtby, between Strensall and Sutton, and in fields 
near Rufforth.
Ornithopus perpusillus L.
Plentiful on Strensall Common, and in 
sandy fields near.
Lathyrus pratensis L.
Orobus tuberosus L.
and var.
tenuifolius Rth.
Vicia cracca L.
V. sepium L.
V. sativa L.
V. hirsuta K.
Vicia tetrasperma Moench.
Prunus avium L.
' I have seen the wild cherry in hedges in this 
district, but do not at present recollect where.' H.
Ibbotson.
Prunus insititia L.
P. spinosa L.
Spiraea salicifolia L.
'There is a little in a plantation near the 
Malton Road, but it has probably been planted there.' 
H. Ibbotson.
Spiraea ulmaria L.
May 1886.
136 
waller: flora of strensall and district.
Spiraea filipendula L.
In very small quantity at Hazel Bush, 
near Towthorpe Common.
Eragaria vesca L.
Comarum palustre L.
Potentilla anserina L.
P. reptans L.
P. tormentilla Sep.
Potentilla fragariastrum Ehrh.
Plentiful in the ditches across 
Strensall Common.
Geum urbanum L.
G. rivale L.
Agrimonia eupatoria L.
Alchemilla arvensis Sep. Sanguisorba officinalis L.
Pyrus mains L.
Pyrns commnnis L.
Rare.
In a hedge by the roadside at Stockton 
Forest.
Pyrns ancuparia L.
Crataegus oxyacantha L.
Crataegus monogyna Jacq.
Bryonia dioica Jacq.
Epilobinm angustifolium L.
Not uncommon.
Stockton Common 
(a part of Strensall Common).
Wood at Hazel Bush, etc.
Epilobinm hirsutum L.
E. parviflornm Schreb.
Epilobinm tetragonnm L.
E. montannm L.
E. palustre L.
Epilobinm rosenm Schreb.
At Stockton Forest.
On the banks of 
the Foss.
[Myriophyllum spicatnm L.
Reported from Stockton Common, 
but neither I nor Mr. Ibbotson have seen it] 
Myriophyllum verticillatum L.
Myriophyllum alterniflorum DC.
Stockton Forest.
Callitriche verna Kiitz.
Ceratophyllum demersnm L.
In the Foss.
Lythrnm salicaria L.
In a lane leading to Strensall Common from 
the Malton Road.
Peplis portnla L.
Montia fontana L.
Scleranthns annnns L.
Sedum vnlgare Lk.
( = S.
telephium auct mult).
Rare.
Fields 
near Stockton and Strensall.
Sedum acre L.
In rather considerable quantity in one or two road- 
sides near Strensall Common.
Saxifraga tridactylites L.
Walls about Strensall Common.
Dancns carota L.
Torilis anthriscus Gm. Angelica sylvestris L.
Pastinaca sativa L.
In small quantity near the railway at Strensall.
Heraclenm sphondylium L.
Silans pratensis Bess.
jEthusa cynapium L.
(Enanthe phellandrium Lam. Banks of the Foss.
(Enanthe fistnlosa L.
Anthriscus sylvestris Hfn.
Chaerophyllum temnlum L.
Scandix pecten-veneris L.
Conopodium denndatum K.
( = Buninm flexnosnm With.).
Sinm latifolinm L.
Banks of the Foss.
Naturalist, 
waller: flora of strensall and district.
137 
Sium angustifolium L.
JEgopodium podagraria L.
Pimpinella magna L.
Pimpinella saxifraga L.
Much rarer than P.
magna.
Hazel Bush, 
Towthorpe, Stockton Forest.
In small quantity at all these 
places.
Helosciadium nodiflorum K.
H. inundatum L.
Conium maculatum L.
On the banks of the Foss, near Strensall 
Bridge.
Sanicula europsea L.
In woods in the neighbourhood, but not 
plentiful.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris L.
Hedera helix L.
Cornus sanguinea L.
Sambucus nigra L.
Viburnum opulus L.
lonicera periclymenum L.
Galium saxatile L.
Galium uliginosum L.
G. palustre L.
G. verum L.
Galium aparine L.
G. cruciata Sep. Sherardia arvensis L.
Valeriana officinalis L.
V. dioica L.
Valerianella olitoria Poll.
Valerianella dentata Poll.
Not uncommon in cornfields at Stren- 
sall ; scarce elsewhere.
Scabiosa succisa L.
S. arvensis L.
Bidens cernua L.
Doronicum pardalianches L.
£ Near Stockton Forest.' B.
Ibbotson.
Scarcely naturalised.
Senecio aquaticus Huds.
S. jacobsea L.
Senecio erucifolius L.
In many places close to the Malton Road, 
and also at Hazel Bush.
Nearly as common as S.
sylvaticus L.
[Senecio viscosus L.
and S.
lividus Sm. I have specimens in my 
herbarium of these two, gathered at Stockton Forest by a York 
gentleman, in i860.
I have not seen them there, nor has 
Mr. Ibbotson.] 
Senecio sylvaticus L.
S. vulgaris L.
Anthemis arvensis L.
Anthemis cotula L.
Achillea ptarmica L.
A. millefolium L.
Chrysanthemum segetum L.
C. leucantaemum L.
Matricaria inodora L.
Tanacetum vulgare L.
Scarce.
Only at Towthorpe, I think.
Artemisia vulgaris L.
Gnaphalium uliginosum L.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum L.
Not common.
In sandy fields near 
Sandburn and Strensall.
Filago germanica L.
F. minima Fr.
Solidago virgaurea L.
Very scarce.
One or two plants at Sand- 
burn, and also near Strensall.
Bellis perennis L.
Pulicaria dysenterica C.
( = Inula dysenterica L.).
Tussilago farfara L.
Arctium minus Schk.
Cirsium ( = Carduus) lanceolatum L.
May 1886.
138 WALLER: FLORA OF STRENSALL AND DISTRICT.
Cirsium palustre Sep. C.
arvense Sep.
Cirsium anglicum DC.
(^Carduus pratensis Huds.).
In a lane 
from Towthorpe to Hazel Bush.
Centaurea nigra L.
Sonchus arvensis L.
S. asper All.
Sonchus oleraceus L.
p.p. Taraxacum officinale Web.
Hieracium boreale Fr. Strensall.
Hieracium umbellatum L.
Not uncommon at Strensall, and also 
near Stockton Forest.
Hieracium vulgatum Fr. In small quantity on Strensall Common 
and in the lanes leading off the Common.
Hieracium pilosella L.
Crepis virens L.
Tragopogon minus Fr.
Leontodon autumnalis L.
Thrincia hirta Rth.
Hypochseris radicata L.
Cichorium intybus L.
Lapsana communis L.
Campanula rotundifolia L.
Jasione montana L.
Rather plentiful in lanes about Strensall 
Common, and on the paths across it.
Scarce elsewhere.
Erica cinerea L.
At Sandburn, and also on the Malton Road.
I have never seen it on Strensall Common, nor has Mr. Ibbotson.
Erica tetralix L.
Calluna vulgaris Slsb.
Vaccinium myrtillus L.
Oxycoccus palustris P.
Rather plentiful amongst Sphagnum and 
Erica tetralix on the east side of Strensall Common.
Andromeda polifolia L.
Found very sparingly some years ago by 
Mr. Le Tall, amongst Sphagnum and Aulacomnium palustre on 
Strensall Common.
Notseen since, althoughrepeatedly looked for.
[Pyrola media Sw.
'Crompton's Cover, near Stockton Forest/ 
Barnes's ''Flora of Yorkshire." Mr. Ibbotson has never seen 
this plant at the above locality, nor have I.] 
Pyrola minor L.
Rather plentiful at Strensall.
' In July 1883, plenty 
in a cornfield near the Common.
Hardly any to be found in 
1884.' E.
Milner.
Ligustrum vulgar e L.
(planted).
Fraxinus excelsior L.
Vinca minor L.
Several plants in a wood close to Strensall 
Common.
Gentiana pneumonanthe L.
Plentiful on Strensall Common, and 
on one or two small adjacent Commons.
Gentiana amarella L.
At Stockton Forest, in small quantity.
Gentiana campestris L.
At Stockton forest, in small quantity.
Erythraea centaurium P.
Menyanthes trifoliata L.
Calystegia sepium Br.
( = Convolvulus sepium L.).
Convolvulus arvensis L.
Cuscuta europsea L.
Cuscuta epithymum L.
Stockton Forest.
Baker's ' North Yorkshire.' 
Naturalist, 
waller: flora of strensall and district.
139 
Anchusa sempervirens L.
Nearly naturalised in two woods close 
to the borders of Strensall Common.
Lycopsis arvensis L.
Lithospermum officinale L.
Lithospermum arvense L.
In cornfields at Strensall.
Myosotis palustris Rth. M.
caespitosa K.
F. Schultz.
Myosotis collina Ehrh.
M. versicolor Sm.
Myosotis intermedia Lk.
( = M.
arvensis auct.).
Solanum dulcamara L.
[Solanum nigrum L.
Probably extinct at Stockton Forest, where it 
grew some time since.] 
Scrophularia aquatica L.
S. nodosa L.
Digitalis purpurea L.
' In small quantity near Mr. Wilberforce's 
farm, close to the Malton Road.' H.
Ibbotson.
Linaria vulgaris Mill.
Linaria minor Dsf. Found sparingly in cornfields.
Veronica officinalis L.
V. chamsedrys L.
V. beccabunga L.
Veronica anagailis L.
V. serpyllifolia L.
V. arvensis L.
Veronica agrestis L.
V. polita Fr. V.
scutellata L.
Veronica hedersefolia L.
Veronica buxbaumii Ten. In cultivated fields at Towthorpe.
A colonist.
Odontites serotina Rchb.
( = 0.
rubra P.
p.p.).
Euphrasia officinalis L.
Rhinanthus major Ehrh.
Occurs occasionally at Strensall.
It is 
never constant for very long to one locality.
Rhinanthus minor Ehrh.
Pedicular is palustris L.
P. sylvatica L.
Melampyrum pratense L.
Orobanche rapum Th.
Verbena officinalis L.
Teucrium scorodonia L.
Ajuga reptans L.
Scutellaria galericulata L.
Plentiful on Strensall Common.
Scutellaria minor L.
Abundant amongst dead furze bushes by the 
road leading across Strensall Common to Flaxton.
Prunella vulgaris L.
Lamium album L.
Lamium maculatum L.
An escape at Stockton Forest.
Lamium purpureum L.
Galeopsis versicolor Curt.
G. tetrahit L.
Betonica officinalis L.
Stachys sylvatica L.
S. palustris L.
Stachys arvensis L.
Ballota alba L.
Marrubium vulgare L.
Glechoma hederacea L.
Clinopodium vulgare L.
Scarce.
In a lane near Strensall Common.
Origanum vulgare L.
Thymus serpyllum L.
Mentha viridis L.
Not uncommon at Stockton Forest, Strensall, 
and Hazel Bush.
Mentha piperita Huds.
On Strensall Common, and also in ditches 
betw een the Common and Warthill.
May 1886.
140 waller: flora of strensall and district.
Mentha aquatica L.
Very common.
Var. sub-glabra also occurs.
Mentha sativa L.
Mentha arvensis L.
Plentiful.
Var. agrestis is by far the 
commonest form.
Mentha pulegium L.
Very scarce.
Only in one place on Strensall 
Common, and in very small quantity.
Lycopus europseus L.
Pinguicula vulgaris L.
Utricularia vulgaris L.
Plentiful in two ponds west of Strensall.
[Utricnlaria minor L.
Formerly grew in a pond at Stockton.
I 
think it is now extinct.] 
Lysimachia nummularia L.
Samolus valerandi L.
In a ditch near Sandburn, and also on 
Strensall Common.
Anagallis arvensis L.
A. tenella L.
Centunculus minimus L.
Mostly in cart ruts on both sides of the 
railway across Strensall Common.
Hottonia palustris L.
Primula vulgaris Huds.
P. officinalis L.
Plantago coronopus L.
Plentiful in a few places on Strensall 
Common.
Plantago lanceolata L.
P. media L.
P. major L.
Littorella lacustris L.
Chenopodium rubrnm L.
Chenopodium bonus-henricus L.
C. album L.
Atriplex angustifolia Sm.
Rumex hydrolapathum Huds.
In the Foss, near Huntington.
Bum ex crispus L.
R. obtusifolius L.
R. conglomeratus Murr.
Rumex acetosa L.
R. acetosella L.
Polygonum convolvulus L.
Polygonum amphibium L.
In the Foss.
Polygonum lapathifolium L.
p.p. P.
persicaria L.
p.p.
Polygonum hydropiper L.
Polygonum mite Schrk.
In the Foss.
Polygonum minus Huds.
In the Foss.
Polygonum aviculare L.
Daphne laureola L.
In hedges on both sides of the railway across 
Strensall Common.
[Daphne mezereum L.
In a plantation near the Malton Road.
Undoubtedly planted.] 
Mercurialis perennis L.
Euphorbia helioscopia L.
In cultivated fields at Strensall.
Euphorbia peplus L.
E. exigua L.
Urtica dioica L.
XT.
urens L.
Ulmus montana With.
Fagus sylvatica L.
Quercus pedunculata Ehrh.
Q. sessiliflora Slsb.
Corylus avellana L.
Populus tremula L.
Naturalist, 
WALLER I FLORA OF STRENSALL AND DISTRICT.
141 
[Pinus sylvestris L.
Planted].
Auacharis alsinastrum Bab.
Butomus umbellatus L.
In the Foss.
Alisma plantago aquatica L.
A. ranunculoides L.
Sagittaria sagittifolia L.
In the Foss.
Triglochin palustre L.
Potamogeton natans L.
Potamogeton lucens L.
Abundant in the Foss.
Potamogeton crispus L.
P. densus L.
Potamogeton pusillus L.
Plentiful in the Foss.
Potamogeton pectinatus L.
Potamogeton heterophyllus Schreb.
In the Foss.
Epipactis latifolia All. In a small plantation near the Malton 
Road.
Listera ovata Br.
Listera cordata Br. Very scarce.
At Stockton Forest.
Orchis morio L.
0. latifolia L.
0. maculata L.
0. mascula L.
Gymnadenia conopsea Br. Near Towthorpe Common.
Habenaria chlorantha Bab. On Strensall and Towthorpe Commons.
Habenaria bifolia Bab. On Strensall and Towthorpe Commons.
Occurs more frequently than H.
chlorantha.
Habenaria viridis Br. In a lane leading from Strensall Common 
to the Malton Road.
Iris pseudacorus L.
Endymion nutans Dmrt.
( = Scilla nutans Sm.).
Narthecium ossifragum Huds.
Juncus conglomeratus L.
Juncus effusus L.
J. glaucus Ehrh.
J. sylvaticus Reich.
( = Juncus acutiflorus Ehrh.).
J. lamprocarpus Ehrh.
Juncus squamosus L.
J. bufonius L.
[Luzula congesta Lej. Is reported from Sandburn Woods and 
Strensall.
I have not seen it at either locality, nor has 
Mr. Ibbotson].
Luzula campestris DC.
Luzula vernalis DC.
( = L.
pilosa W.) At Sandburn, and also by 
ditch sides on Strensall Common, near Hazel Bush.
Arum maculatum L.
Lemna polyrhiza L.
At Stockton Forest ; in the Foss.
Lemna trisulca L.
L. minor L.
Lemna gibba L.
In the Foss.
Typha latifolia L.
Typha angustifolia L.
In some brick ponds at Strensall.
Sparganium ramosum Huds.
S. simplex Huds.
Sparganium minimum Fr. Very scarce.
In a pond at Strensall.
May 1886.
142 waller: flora of strensall and district.
Rhynchospora alba Vahl.
In small quantity on Strensall Common.
Eriophorum angustifolium Rth. E.
vaginatum L.
Scirpus lacustris L.
Scirpus tabernsemontani Gm. In brick ponds near Strensall with 
Typha angustifolia.
Scirpus caespitosus L.
S. setaceus L.
Scirpus fluitans L.
Stockton Forest ; Strensall Common.
Scirpus palustris L.
Scirpus acicularis L.
Stockton Forest • Strensall Common.
Carex riparia Curt.
Carex ampullacea Good.
Ponds on Strensall Common.
Carex filiformis L.
Scarce.
On the eastern part of Strensall 
Common.
Carex binervis Sin. C.
flava L.
and var.
minor Townsd.
Carex pilulifera L.
C. glauca Murr.
C. panicea L.
Carex vulgaris Fr. C.
leporina L.
( = C.
ovalis Good.).
Carex echinata Murr.
( = C.
stellulata Good.).
C. remota L.
Carex vulpina L.
C. muricata L.
C. disticha Huds.
Carex pulicaris L.
C. dioica L.
Anthoxanthum odoratum L.
Baldingera aruudinacea Dmrt.
( = Phalaris arundinacea L.).
[Phalaris canariensis L.
Stockton Forest.
A casual.] 
Phleum pratense L.
Alopecurus pratensis L.
A. agrestis L.
Alopecurus geniculatus L.
Cynosurus cristatus L.
Phragmites communis Trin.
Calamagrostis lanceolata Rth. Stockton Forest.
Agrostis alba L.
A. vulgaris With.
Aira csespitosa L.
Aira flexuosa L.
Holcus mollis L.
H. lanatus L.
Arrhenatherum avenaceum PB.
Avena fatua L.
A. pubescens Huds.
A. flavescens L.
Avena caryophyllea L.
Avena prsecox L.
Often found in places where furze bushes have 
been cleared away.
Triodia decumbens PB.
Molinia caerulea Mch.
Dactylis glomerata L.
Bromus sterilis L.
B. asper Murr.
Bromus erectus Huds.
By the sides of the railway across Strensall 
Common.
Bromus racemosus L.
B. mollis L.
Festuca gigantea Vill.
Festuca elatior L.
( = F.
pratensis Huds.).
F. sciuroides Rth.
Festuca glauca Lam. F.
ovina L.
Glyceria aquatica Wahlb.
Glyceria fluitans Br.
Glyceria distans Wahlb.
Near Stockton Forest.
Briza media L.
Poa pratensis L.
P. trivialis L.
P. annua L.
Naturalist, 
NOTE — MAMMALIA.
143 
Catabrosa aquatica PB.
Triticum repens L.
Triticum caninum L.
Plentiful in several places on Strensall 
Common.
Brachypodium sylvaticum R.S. Lolium perenne L.
Nardus stricta L.
Pteris aquilina L.
' It has measured 11 ft.
6 in.
high at Strensall.' 
Ferns of York.
B lech num.
spicant Rth. Frequent.
'On Strensall Common, 19 
inches long, September 14th, 1872.' B.
B. Le Tall.
Bifid and 
serrate forms also occur.
Scolopendrium vulgare Symons.
Athyrium filix-foemina Bernh.
and var.
rhseticum.
Aspidium aculeatum Sw. Rare.
' Near Strensall.' R.
M. Christy.
Nephrodium filix-mas Rich.
Nephrodium uliginosum.
'On the edge of Strensall Common.' 
B. B.
Le Tall.
' In Stockton Woods.' R.
M. Christy.
Nephrodium spinulosum Desv.
N. dilatatum Desv.
Nephrodium semulum Baker.
' Near Strensall.' Miss Milner.
'Ferns of York?
Nephrodium oreopteris Desv.
Stockton, Sandburn, and Strensall 
Common.
Polypodium vulgare L.
Ophioglossum vulgatum L.
Botrychium lunaria Sw. On Strensall Common, plentiful.
Lycopodium clavatum L.
Strensall Common, and at Stockton 
Forest.
Lycopodium inuudatum L.
With the above.
Lycopodium selago L.
On Strensall Common, scarce.
Selaginella selaginoides Gray.
On Towthorpe Common.
Pilularia globulifera L.
On Strensall Common, and at Stockton 
Forest.
Equisetum arvense L.
E. palustre L.
and var.
subnudum.
Equisetum limosum L.
and var.
fluviatile.
Equisetum hyemale L.
Near Hazel Bush.
MAMMALIA.
Badgers in North Yorkshire.— Referring to the notices of the occur- 
rence of Badgers in North Yorkshire, Naturalist, pp.
36, 67, and 113, it may not 
be out of place to remark that a few years ago several of these animals were turned 
out in the woods surrounding Hutton Hall, near Guisbro', the seat of Sir J.
W. 
Pease, Bart., and it is not at all improbable that some of the individuals whose 
capture is recorded, or their descendants, may have strayed from Hutton and been 
killed in different parts of the district.
One, in the possession of a friend of mine, 
was found dead on Lord de Lisle's estate at Ingleby about a year ago, and is 
probably the same as is referred to on pp.
67 and 113, — T.
H. Nelson, Bishop 
Auckland, 8th April, 1886.
May 1886.
144 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural 
history and physical features of the North of England.
MOLLUSCA, 1884-5.
The present instalment covers the molluscan bibliography of two 
years.
An inspection of it will show that the great mass of the 
work done has reference solely to the land and freshwater species, 
there being only four titles (those by G.
Brook, R.
D. Darbishire, 
G. H.
Parke, and G.
W. Shrubsole) which refer to marine species.
The most important contribution to the marine molluscan fauna 
of the North published during the two years is the Rev. W.
C. Hey's 
list of Yorkshire species published in the Naturalist.
Papers 
published in this journal are, however, not included in the biblio- 
graphy, inasmuch as it is devoted entirely to the North of England, 
and it would be undesirable to occupy space by an enumeration of 
their titles ; and naturalists using these bibliographical papers must 
do so in conjunction with the index to the Naturalist.
Yorkshire, Notts, Lincolnshire.
Anonymous (no signature) [W.
Eagle Clarke, W.
Denison Roebuck, 
J. W.
Taylor, and W.
Nelson].
Conchological Notes from the Neighbourhood of Hatfield Chase [Field notes 
of land and freshwater mollusca collected in a couple of days' investigation of 
the borders of Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Nottinghamshire].
Nat., February 
1884, ix, 115-116.
Anonymous (no signature).
Yorkshire.
Achatina acicula [copied from the Naturalist].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., September 
15th, 1885, p.
122.
Anonymous [The Recorder of the Conchological Society], All the Counties.
The Present State of Knowledge of the Distribution of Land and Freshwater 
Mollusca in Britain [A list of the counties and vice-counties of the 
British Isles, showing the number of species authenticated for each by passing 
under the eyes of the Conchological Society's referees.
The total number of 
species so authenticated for the counties and vice-counties in the North of 
England are as follows: — No. 53, Lincolnshire South, 1 ; No. 54, Lincoln- 
shire North, 22 ; No. 56, Nottinghamshire, 3 ; No. 57, Derbyshire, 14 ; 
No. 58, Cheshire, 14 ; No. 59, Lancashire South, 14 ; No. 60, Lancashire 
West, 19; No. 61, Yorkshire South-East, 63; No. 62, Yorkshire North- 
East, 65 ; No. 63, Yorkshire South-West, 78 ; No. 64, Yorkshire Mid- 
West, 96 ; No. 65, Yorkshire North-West, 61 ; No. 66, Durham, 7 ; No. 67, 
Northumberland South, 4; No. 68, Cheviotland, 1 ; No. 69, Westmoreland, 
with Lake Lancashire, 20 ; No. 70, Cumberland, I ; No. 71, Isle of Man, 21].
Journ.
of Conch., April 1884, iv, 174-184.
Anonymous [Recorder of the Conchological Society].
Yorkshire.
Authenticated Materials for a List of the Land and Freshwater Mollusca of 
Mid- West Yorkshire.
Part I : Freshwater Shells [37 species and several 
varieties are included in this enumeration], Journ.
of Conch., April and 
July 1884, iv, 188-194.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: mollusca, 1884-5.
145 
Yorkshire.
Ackworth Boys' Essay and Natural History Societies' Reports.
[Conchological Notes; several shells noted.] Nat. Hist.
Journ., September 
15th, 1885, pp.
117-118.
Charles Ashford.
Yorkshire, Durham.
The Darts of British Helicidse [those of H nemoralis and H.fusca (pp.
164-170) 
and of H.
arbustoj-um (p.
195) are figured and described from Scarborough 
examples, and those of H.
hispida from Stockton-on-Tees specimens ; of the 
latter Wakefield examples are also referred to].
Journ.
of Conch., 1884, 
April, iv, 164-170, with pi.
vii, July, iv., 195-202, with pi.
viii, and October, iv, 
239-244, with pi.
ix.
Westmoreland, Yorkshire.
Birmingham Microscopists' and Naturalists' Union.
[Reports of meetings, January 21st (Mr. Madison showed Westmoreland speci- 
mens of Limncea peregra v.
albida and Ancylns fluviatilis v.
albidd) ; and 
March 10th, 1884 (he showed large Planorbis corneus from Strensall 
Common)].
Midi.
Nat., March 1884, vii, 90; and April 1884, vii, 118.
Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Yorkshire.
Diary of Natural History Ohservations for 1884, pp.
28.
Numerous notes on 
mollusca observed in the Bradford district and other parts of West Yorkshire 
during 1884.
Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Yorkshire.
[Reports of meetings ; the occurrence of Limax cinereo-niger at Shipley Glen, 
and of other land and freshwater shells in Yorkshire being referred to].
Nat., 
January, April, and June, 1884, ix, 106, 154, 196.
George Brook.
Yorkshire.
Rarities from the Yorkshire Coast.
\Eolis peachii A.
and H.
(one) and 
E. exigua A.
and H.
(several) found at Redcar in August 1883, are compared 
with descriptions.] Notes from my Aquarium, 1884, pp.
7-8.
E. I.
J. Browell.
Northumberland.
Address to .
. the Tyneside Naturalists' Field Cluh .
. May 11th, 
1882.
[Helix lamellosa [sic] and Azeca iridens collected near Bellingham, 
Northumberland, 'unusual in such high situations.' Clausilia dubia very 
abundant on the Roman Wall at Greathead, Northumberland.] Nat. Hist.
Trans, Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle, viii (1884), p.
164 and 166.
T. D.
A. Cockerell.
Lincolnshire.
The Mollusca of Louth, Lincolnshire [24 land and freshwater species enumer- 
ated, with localities].
Nat. World, December 1885, pp.
221-223.
Edward Collier.
Cheshire, Isle of Man.
Specimens exhihited [to Conchological Society, October 24th, 1883, Cheshire 
specimens of Sphccrium rivicola, Pisidium amnicum and var.
flavescens, and 
Sphcerium coriieitm v.
scaldiana ; Manx examples of Helix rotundata, Zonites 
cellarius, Z.
alliarizts and v.
viridula\ Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1884, iv, 153.
E. Collier.
Lancashire.
Planorhis dilatatus Gould [considered to be now naturalised in its Lancashire 
locality ; the disappearance of Sph&riion ovale from one of its Lancashire 
stations is also noted].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1884, iv, 217.
Yorksh., Durham, Lincolnsh., Chesh., Notts, Lancash.
Conchological Society.
[Reports of meetings; numerous species of shells exhibited, from Yorkshire, 
Durham, Lincolnshire, Cheshire, Notts, and Lancashire].
Journ.
of Conch., 
October 1885, iv, 356-365.
John Cordeaux.
Northumberland.
In Upper Coquetdale [At the Lady's Well, close to Holystone, numerous shells 
of Ancyhis fluviatilis and Physa fontinalis ; specimens of these shells being 
May 1886.
L 
146 BIBLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1 884-5.
afterwards sent to Mr. J.
W. Taylor — th« latter proved to be Limncea peregra 
-var.
ovata, and not Physa.
— Ed. J.
Field, 1884, August 2nd, p.
152.
R. D.
Darbishire.
Northumberland.
Astarte borealis [at Warkworth].
Sci. Goss., May 1885, p.
115 (from 
Journ.
of Conch., January 1 885).
[Miss] J.
Donald.
Cumberland, Westmoreland.
Some additional notes on Land and Freshwater Shells of Cumberland and 
Westmoreland [Notes on 21 forms are given : of these 3 species and 5 varieties 
are additional to Miss Donald's former list.
The list of Cumberland and 
Westmoreland species now amounts to 78, of which 6 are found in the latter 
county only].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, ix, 217-218.
Gustave F.
Dollfuss.
Lincolnshire, Yorkshire.
Le Terrain quaternaire d'Ostende et le Corbicula fluminalis [at p.
36 Cyrena 
fluminalis is recorded as occurring in various fluviatile deposits near the 
Humber estuary, which separates Lincolnshire from Yorkshire].
Annales de 
la Societe Royale Malacologique de Belgique, tome xix, 1884, pp.
28-54.
Ernest J.
Dufty.
Notts.
Large Anodonta cygnea [in Ossington Lake, Notts; 7 T 5 g x 3±\ X 2 T 7 S inches; 
var.
radiata].
Nat. World, September 1885, p.
180.
W. Gain.
Notts.
Large Unios [At Ossington Lake, Notts., were found a number of fine speci- 
mens of Unio pictorum, the largest measuring 4^!
inches in length, i.e.
, width.] 
Science Gossip, November 1884, p.
261.
Large Unios and Anodons [in Ossington Lake].
Sci. Goss., May 1885, p.
118.
S. E.
Gill.
Yorkshire.
N. H.
Society, Ackworth [Achatina mcicula reported as found in Primrose 
Vale].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1884, viii, 134.
Ackworth [re-discovery of Achatina acicala in Primrose Vale].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., February 15th, 1885, p.
9. 
R. W.
Goulding.
Lincolnshire.
Freshwater Shells [Cyclas lacustris recorded as plentiful in ponds near Louth; 
afterwards proved to be Sphcerium cornenm\ Sci. Goss., October 1885, 
pp.
238-9.
James Hardy.
Northumberland.
Report of the meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club for the year 
1883.
[List of 8 shells found in an accumulation of marl in Cresswell Moss, 
North Northumberland.] Proc.
Berwickshire Nat. Club, x, 281-282.
W. C.
Hey. Yorkshire.
The Forms of Pond-Snails in Yorkshire [deals with the variation of Limncea 
glabra, L.
palustris, L.
peregra, and L.
stagnalis].
Ann. Rep.
Yorkshire 
Phil.
Soc. for mdccclxxxiii, 1884, pp.
32-35.
Baker Hudson.
Yorkshire, Durham.
Association of Helix nemoralis and H.
hortensis [in North-east Yorkshire and 
Durham].
Sci. Goss., January 1884, p.
18.
Baker Hudson.
Durham.
Specimens exhibited [to Conchological Society, January 31st, 1884 ; H.
nemor- 
alis from Durham ; and H.
cantiana from Billingham, Co. Durham ; note on 
the introduction of the latter in ballast].
Journ.
of Conch., April 1884, i v ?
I 7 I - 
B. Hudson.
Yorkshire.
Conchological Notes [on miscellaneous species in North-East Yorkshire].
Sci.
Goss., April 1884, p.
91.
Baker Hudson.
Yorkshire.
Bivalves out of their Element [Sphcerium corneum, from a pond near Middles- 
brough, lived seven weeks out of water].
Sci. Goss., April 1884, p.
91.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: mollusca, 1884-5.
i47 
Baker Hudson.
Yorkshire, Durham.
Land and Freshwater Shells in the Middlesbrough District.
[Supplementary 
list of 19 species and varieties.] Sci. Goss., April 1884, p.
91.
Baker Hudson.
Durham, N.E. Yorkshire.
Land and Freshwater Mollusca of the Middlesbrough District [notes 7 species 
and numerous varieties, mostly of slugs, additional to former list].
Sci.
Goss., March 1885, p.
67.
Percy Lund.
Yorkshire.
Calcareous Jottings [five species of mollusca mentioned as particularly abundant 
at Thorpe near Cracoe].
Nat. World, January 1885, ii, 8-10.
[J.] Moore.
Isle of Man.
[Pupa umbilicata var.
alba and Helix rupestris from the Isle of Man.] Midi.
Nat., October 1885, p.
299.
C. T.
Musson.
Notts.
Subfossil Shell Deposits in Nottinghamshire [notices — with lists of species found 
— of deposits at Bingham, Gotham, Scarthingmoor, Fairholm Brook, Egman- 
ton, and Grassthorpe].
Journ.
of Conch., April 1884, iv, 161-163.
Chas.
T. Musson.
Notts, Lincolnshire.
Carnivorous Water Voles [Anodonta cygnea, Unio tumidus and pictorum, and 
Dreissena, preyed on near Nottingham, Sutton-in-Ashtield, and Lincoln].
Sci. Goss., March 1885, p.
69.
Wm. Nelson.
Yorkshire.
Faludina contecta in Yorkshire [the species is confirmed as a Yorkshire one from 
specimens found at Wressle, East Riding], J.
of Conch., July 1884, iv, 214.
Zonites radiatulus var.
viridescenti-alba [the Yorkshire occurrences are enu- 
merated and Crossgates, near Leeds, added as a new one.] Journ.
of Conch., 
July 1884, iv, 223.
William Nelson and John W.
Taylor.
Yorkshire.
Annotated List of the Land and Freshwater Mollusca known to inhabit 
Yorkshire [sheet C 3, dealing with Valvata piscinalis, V.
cristata, Planorbis 
lineatus, PL nitidus, PL nautileus, PL albus, PL parvus, PL spirorbis, and 
PL vortex ; the distribution being treated in a full and exhaustive fashion].
Trans.
Yorksh.
Nat. Union, Part 8, sheet C 3, pp.
33-48.
A. M.
Norman.
Northumberland.
Address to .
. the Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club .
. May 27th, 1881.
{ Vertigo pusilla found at Corbridge-on-Tyne, June 6th, 1880].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle, viii, 68, (1884).
C. Oldham.
Cheshire.
Paludina vivipara near Manchester [wrongly named, the species being P.
con- 
tecta ; Planorbis corneus, Limncea peregra, L.
auricularia, Bithinia tentaculata, 
Planorbis carinatus, Cyclas lacustris, and Anodonta cygnea, also found ; all in 
a pond at Baguley, Cheshire].
Sci. Goss., September 1884, p.
213.
Geo. H.
Parke.
Yorkshire, Isle of Man.
Tectura testudinalis, Muller, in Yorkshire [referring to Mr. Crowther's 
Whitby records, the writer notes that living specimens are to be found at 
Flamborough, and in 20 fathoms water off the Isle of Man].
Nat., April 
1884, ix, 151-152.
Edgar Pickard.
Notts, Derbyshire.
Specimens exhibited [to Conchological Society, January 31st and February 28th, 
1884].
[Various species from Notts and Derbyshire.] Jour, of Conch., April 
1884, iv, 171-2 and 173.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire, Durham.
Conchological Notes {Helix lamellata, southern limit in Yorkshire ; H.
ru/escens, 
northern limit in Durham; H.
cantiana, northern limit in Yorkshire; habits 
May 1886.
148 
bibliography: mollusca, 1884-5.
of H.
aspersa ; white-lipped H.
nemoralis ; Sphcerium lacustre fed on by 
shrews ; Zua hibrica and Helix hispida by sparrows ; //.
caperata by ringdove ; 
and H.
cantiana by black ants].
Sci. Goss., January 1884, p.
3. 
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood [etc.].
Vol. II.
Leeds: printed for the author, 1885 [pp.
viii, 258].
Lofthouse 
district compared with others (p.
26) ; captures at Malham, ten species 
(p.
99); Limax agrestis abundant (p.
113) ; captures at Arncliffe, ten species 
(p.
136) ; at Castleford and Ledsham, ten species (p.
175) ; at South Milford, 
eight species (p.
182); at Scarthingwell, three species (p.
183); Molluscan 
fauna of Lofthouse and District (pp.
236-241, seven species and 62 varieties 
cited) ; comparative aggregates for four districts (Wakefield, York, Bradford, 
and Huddersfield) (p.
242); remarks on the northern distribution of certain 
[11] species (pp.
242-244).
George Roberts.
S. W.
Yorkshire.
Achatina acicula [found abundantly in the town of Wakefield].
Sci. Goss., 
• October 1885..
p. 239.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Notes on Land Mollusca occurring in the neighbourhood of Pontefract 
[a detailed enumeration of 39 species and numerous varieties].
Zool., 
November 1885, pp.
423-429.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Notes on Aquatic Mollusca occurring in the neighbourhood of Pontefract 
[detailed enumeration, with localities, of 39 species and numerous varieties].
Zool., December 1885, pp.
470-475.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Helix cantiana [abundant on railway banks near Hartlepool ; may have been 
introduced in ballast].
Young Nat., Tuly 1 884, v, 192.
W. D.
Roebuck.
Conchological Society .
. .
October 24th, 1883 .
. .
Specimens 
exhibited {Limax cinereo-niger (Wolf) found at Shipley Glen].
Journ.
of 
Conch., January 1884, iv, 152.
Wm. Denison Roebuck.
Yorkshire.
Limnaea stagnalis var.
fragilis-variegata at Malham Tarn [very abundant on 
Potamogeton lucens in the Tarn, which is 1,250 feet above sea-level].
Journ.
of Conch., January 1884, iv, 149.
W. D.
Roebuck.
Yorkshire.
New variety of Arion ater [var.
plumbea — founded on a specimen from near 
Otley, Yorkshire].
Journ.
of Conch., January 1884, iv, 146.
W. D.
Roebuck.
Yorkshire, Westmoreland.
[Specimens exhibited to Conchological Society: Yorkshire Limax maximus, 
and 14 Westmoreland species enumerated].
J. of Conch., April 1885, P- 3 l 4- 
Wm. Denison Roebuck.
Notts.
Specimens exhibited [to Conchological Society, May 29th, 1884 ; Testacella 
haliotidea var.
scutulum from Welbeck Abbey, Notts.].
Journ.
of Conch., 
July 1884, iv, 216.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Out of its latitude [a specimen of the Mediterranean Helix lactea, with the 
recently dead animal in it, picked up on Filey sands, August 5th].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., December 15th, 1885, p.
187.
George W.
Shrubsole.
Cheshire.
A list of the Land and Freshwater Shells of the District [Chester, = the 
western half of Cheshire, Flintshire and Denbighshire ; 93 species and 19 
varieties enumerated, with localities and indications of commonness or rarity].
Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 1885, PP- 101-105.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Naturalist, 
NOTE — MOLLUSCA.
149 
George W.
Shrubsole.
Cheshire.
On the occurrence of Venus mercenaria (Lin.) in the Estuary of the Dee [this 
North American species, the 4 Wampum-Clam,' successfully introduced at 
Hilbre Island].
Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 1885, pp.
111-112.
R. Standen.
(?) Lancashire.
Fresh-water Shells [Sphcerium corneum adhering to toes of newts ; Limncea 
peregra on a toad's back ; Spkcerium corneam clinging to the foot of a water- 
beetle].
Sci. Goss., December 1885, pp.
281-282.
R. Standen.
Lancashire.
Paper-eating Molluscs [in a sheet of water near Prestwich : five species].
Sci. Goss., October 1885, p.
238.
A. H.
Taylor.
Yorkshire.
Conchological [Report ; describes six-banded examples of Helix nemoralis 
from Settrington Lane, Norton, and of H.
horlensis, from road between 
Old and New Malton].
Malton Nat. Society's Annual Report for 1884-5, 
PP.
36-37- 
J. W.
Taylor.
Derbyshire.
Valvata piscinalis monst.
sinistrorsum in Derbyshire [two found amongst a 
number of more or less scalariform examples at Cresswell Crags, by Mr. Edgar 
Pickard].
Journ.
of Ccnch., January 1884, iv, 145.
J. W.
Taylor.
Notts.
Valvata piscinalis v.
albina in England [found at Clumber Lake, Notts, by 
C. T.
Musson].
Journ.
of Conch., April 1884, iv, 173.
J. W.
Taylor.
Durham.
Specimens exhibited [to Conchological Society, February 28th, 1884 ; Testacella 
haliotidea var.
scutulnm from Gateshead, Co. Durham].
Journ.
of Conch., 
April 1884, iv, 173.
J. W.
Taylor.
Yorkshire.
Planorbis contortus v.
albida at York [found in 1865 by W.
Whitwell in a 
ditch near the Ouse ; second known Yorkshire station].
Journ.
of Conch.
, 
July 1884, iv, 224.
J. W.
Taylor.
Notts.
Unusually large Unio pictorum (L.) [found at Ossington, Notts, by W.
Gain — 
and attaining about 124 mm.
in length, and 55 mm.
in breadth].
Journ.
of 
Conch., July 1884, iv, 224.
J. W.
Taylor.
Yorkshire.
Pupa marginata var.
brevis Baudon in Britain [at Runswick Bay, Yorkshire ; 
new to Britain].
Journ.
of Conch., October 1885, iv, 376.
I. of Man, Cumb., Westm., Northumb., Durh., Yorksh., Lancash., Chesh., 
John \V.
Taylor and W.
Denison Roebuck.
Derbysh., Notts, Lincolnsh.
Census of the Authenticated distribution of British Land and Freshwater 
Mollusca.
Journ.
of Conch., April and July 1885, pp.
319-336.
MOLLUSCA.
Helix arbustorum v.
cincta and Limnsea glabra near 
Lincoln.
— At the side of one particular road near Lincoln, the variety cincta 
of H.
arbustorum is exceedingly common ; this shell is usually somewhat rare, so 
that its occurrence in large numbers may be worth recording.
The only other 
shell hitherto found near Lincoln that appears worthy of notice is Limncea glabra, of 
which I have taken several specimens in a pond to the south of the town, which 
has been recently ruined as a collecting ground by a new railway.
[This locality is 
in ' South Lincolnshire,' and the first-mentioned one is in ' North Lincolnshire,' of 
the Conchological Society's record -scheme].
— W.
W. Fowler, Lincoln, March 
10th, 1886.
May 1886.
ISO 
ORNITHOLOGY.
Occurrence of the Hawfinch near Boroughbridge.— A female 
Hawfinch ( Coccathraustes vulgaris) spent a few hours at Staveley on the iothof March.
This is the second recorded occurrence in this district.
On the 2 1st I noticed a 
Ring Ousel {Turdus torquatus) feeding in a meadow.
This bird has not been 
noticed in this neighbourhood before.
The first Wheatears occurred here on the 
6th of April.
On that day I saw a pair ; one was a handsome male, but I could 
not be certain of the sex of the other.
— E.
P. Knubley, Rector of Staveley, 
April 7th, 1886.
Cormorant and Green Woodpecker in Nidderdale.— On 
October 17th, 1885, a fine specimen of the Cormorant {Phalacrocorax carbo) was 
shot near Middlesmoor, by Mr. Littlewood, of Huddersfield.
This is the first 
occurrence in Nidderdale, as far as I can glean.
On October 27th, 1885, a Green Woodpecker ( Gecinus viridis) was caught in 
a beech tree, asleep in a decayed hole in the trunk of the tree.
This specimen was 
caught by Mr. F.
Robinson, of Dougill Hall, near Pateley Bridge.
— Wm. Storey, 
Pateley Bridge, Leeds, December 14th, 1885.
Solway Bird-notes.
— The following remarks suggest themselves as a 
corollary to Mr. Armistead's paper.
The Short-eared Owl, Crossbill, and Great 
Black -backed Gull all breed on the English side of the Solway, but the Common 
Gull does not, and the Pied Flycatcher does not breed within a dozen miles of the 
Solway.
The Lesser Tern ceased to breed on the English side in 1882, though, as 
some were seen about the old station in 1885, it is possible that they may re-establish 
their colony.
The Lesser Spotted Woodpecker does duty in 'Mr. Armistead's 
catalogue for the Greater Spotted.
The Tufted Duck is fairly common on the 
upper parts of the Solway ; the Goosander is commoner on the upper parts of the 
Firth than the Merganser.
The Common Sandpiper arrives, not in June, but in 
April.
There are other points which need expansion, but, on the whole, 
Mr. Armistead's views agree with the conclusions which I have already expressed 
elsewhere.
— H.
A. Macpherson.
Flamborough Bird-notes.— On March 20th I saw the Pied Wagtail 
and also heard of the Grey Wagtail being seen the same date.
March 28th, saw 
several Hooded Crows taking their departure, steering direct south from the Head- 
land.
The other day one of our farmer's sons brought me for preservation a very 
fine specimen of the Pink-footed Goose, and also a splendid specimen of the 
Garganey ; both males in full plumage.
April 2nd, the first Wheatear seen.
April nth, saw the Lesser White-throat.
April 13th, more Hooded Crows taking 
their departure.
The Swallows have not arrived yet.
— Matthew Bailey, 
Flamborough, April 16th.
Discovery of the Nest of Ross's Gull (Rhodostethia rosea).
— Slowly but surely the mystery enshrouding the nidification of certain British 
birds is being solved, and now the nest and eggs of that particularly interesting 
circumpolar species, Ross's Gull (or Cuneate-tailed Gull), are no longer to be 
ranked with those of the Knot and the Curlew Sandpiper as things unknown.
In the Auk for April (vol.
iii, p.
273) Mr. John J.
Dalgleish informs us that 
' Mr. Paul Muller, son of Herr Sysselmand Miiller, the Faroe ornithologist and 
assistant at the Danish Government establishment of Christianshaab, Greenland, 
has been fortunate enough to discover a nest of the above rare species.
It was 
found on June 15th last at Ekomiut, in the district of Christianshaab, and was 
situated in the midst of the nests of a colony of Sterna macroura [Arctic Terns].
The female bird was shot off the nest, which, when found, contained two eggs.
Of these one was unfortunately broken, and the other, which was also damaged, 
is now in the possession of Herr Weller of Copenhagen.
It is in colour and 
appearance very similar to the egg of Larus minutus, is of a pyriform shape, and 
measures 44 mm.
x 33 mm.
This discovery is of some interest, the species, as is 
well known, having been hitherto of rare occurrence and the breeding habitat 
unknown.
' — W.
E. C.
Naturalist, 
*5* 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO PHENOLOGY (GIESSEN 1884).
Translated By RUDOLPH ROSENSTOCK, B.A.Oxon.
Under the above title are published two papers by Drs. Ihne and 
Hoffmann, of Giessen, the former giving a historical review of the 
progress of vegeto-phsenological observation in Europe, the latter a 
scheme for making and recording such observations, together with a 
detailed list of results obtained by this method from different 
localities in Europe.
In Dr. Ihne's paper each country is reviewed separately, and in 
each case a complete bibliography of the subject is appended.
As 
some account of what has been done in our own country in this branch 
of plant science, may be of interest to many readers of the Naturalist, 
I have taken leave to make a brief abstract of Dr. Ihne's review.
The earliest observations on record are those carried on by 
Marsham at Stratton in Norfolk, from 1735 t0 I 797> some of which 
were first published in the Transactions of the Royal Society for 
1735.
They are, however, unimportant.
In 1762 Stillingfleet, a 
direct follower of Linnaeus, the founder of phonological science, 
published in the second edition of his micellaneous tracts a series 
of valuable observations from the same locality.
The observations 
of Gilbert White, of Selborne fame, extend over 25 years (1768- 
1 793)5 an d were published in 1795, after his death, by Aikin, in the 
Naturalist's Calender.
In the case of some species, average data of 
the various phases of plant-life are recorded ; with others, only extreme 
data are noticed.
They were all republished under the title of 
Naturalist's Calendar, in Markwick's edition of White's works, 1804, 
in which were also included the editor's own observations at Catsfield.
In Bell's edition of the Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne, 
London, 1877, the Naturalist's Calendar forms a special section of the 
first volume.
From 1780 to 18 10 T.
F. Forster made observations at Wal- 
thamstow, near London.
These were continued until 1830 by his 
son, T.
Forster.
They are referred to by the latter in several of his 
publications, and were published in a collected form in 1838, under 
the title of 'Calendrier des Moyens Temps de la Floraison, in 
Quetelet's Correspondence Mathematique et Physique de l'Observa- 
toire Royale de Bruxelles.' 
In 1828 the Magazine of Natural History, then conducted by 
Loudon, issued a scheme for taking phaenological observations ; and 
to the agency of this journal we owe the institution of regular 
May 1886.
152 ROSENSTOCK : CONTRIBUTIONS TO PHRENOLOGY.
phaenological observatories.
Only ten stations, however, were 
established, and their activity extended over but five years — 1828 
to 1833.
In 1845, at tne instigation of the British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, Quetelet's scheme of observation was 
adopted, and a translation of it distributed throughout the country.
No great results, however, accrued from this effort, only a few stations 
being established, the observations of which are recorded in the 
reports of the Association until 1856.
The general spread of 
phaenological observation in England is of as recent a date as 1875.
In Scotland, on the other hand, observations have been systemati- 
cally carried out since 1856, and were published annually from 1856 
to 1862 in the Report of Scotch Meteorology, and from 1863 to the 
present time in the Journal of the Scotch Meteorological Society.
In the scheme of 1863, five cultivated herbs and fifteen of the most 
widely distributed trees and shrubs are selected ; the first appearance 
of leaf, flower, and fruit, and the beginning of defoliation being noted 
in the case of the latter.
There are about 100 stations, many of 
long standing.
At Edinburgh observations, almost exclusively on 
early-blooming herbs, were carried out by M'Nab from 1858 to 1878, 
and, continued from 1879 to 1882 by Sadler, are published in the 
Transactions of the Edinburgh Botanical Society.
They extend back 
to 1850.
We must here notice a few other localities from which observa- 
tions generally comprehensive, and extending over many years, are 
recorded.
Such are those of Jenyns (' Observations in Natural History,' 
London, 1846) from Swaffham Bulbeck in Cambridgeshire, 1820 — 
183 1, and also for 1845.
Both average and earliest and latest data 
of the various phases are noted.
Miss Molesworth's observations at Cobham, 1825 to 1850, and those 
of Roberts at Lofthouse, from 1862 to 1875, were not published till 
1880 and 1882 respectively.
A portion of the latter's appeared 
annually since 1876 in one or more numbers of the Yorkshire Post.
A comprehensive series of observations is also contained in the 
Reports of the Marlborough College Natural History Society.
They 
were commenced in 1865 at the instigation of the Rev. T.
A. Preston, 
the President of the Society, and have been regularly continued since.
In 1867 Rugby followed the example of Marlborough, and observa- 
tions are recorded in the reports of the School Natural History 
Society till 1872.
What may be termed the Renascence of Vegeto-Phaenology in 
England dates, as already stated, from 1875.
In that year the 
Naturalist, 
ROSENSTOCK : CONTRIBUTIONS TO PHRENOLOGY.
T53 
Meteorological Society of London resolved to include phaenological 
observations in its programme, and a conference of delegates 
appointed in the same year, chiefly through the agency of the 
Rev. T.
A. Preston, set forth a scheme for the observation of 
phaenological phenomena.
This scheme is distinguished from all 
others in that it limits itself almost exclusively to wild-growing 
herbs, only six of the twenty-one species comprised being woods, 
and in the case of these the commencement of inflorescence is almost 
the only phase recommended for observation.
From 1875 to 1880 
notes from about 180 localities were forthcoming, and were annually 
published by Preston in a special report of the Journal of the Meteoro- 
logical Society.
The observations for 1883 are based on another 
scheme, formulated by Preston in 1883, which, inasmuch as it includes 
in addition to many herbs at least also the most widely distributed 
wood-plants, is a decided improvement on the earlier one.
The 
example of the Meteorological Society soon proved a stimulus to 
other scientific bodies.
In 1877 the Natural History Journal 
published numerous notes from England and Ireland, similar ones 
from the Midland Counties appeared in the Midland Naturalist for 
1879, and from Hertfordshire in the Transactions of the Watford and 
Hertford Natural History Societies since 1875.
All these societies follow explicitly the scheme of the Meteoro- 
logical Society, or the later one of Preston, so that observations cm 
wood-plants, and of phases other than that of inflorescence, are 
scanty.
There are at present in Great Britain 315 stations for the observa- 
tion of phaenological phenomena.
Unfortunately, the limitation both 
of species and phases in the English scheme, renders comparison with 
those of other countries difficult, inasmuch as early-flowering herbs 
furnish material of little value.
It is earnestly to be hoped that a 
more extended and comprehensive scheme may soon be adopted in 
this country, and I cannot perhaps here do better than subjoin as a 
model Hoffmann's scheme, adopted after forty years' continued 
personal observation in the same locality (Giessen, Hesse).
It is 
specially suitable for international comparative study, inasmuch as 
the species selected are widely distributed and easily identified, and 
are moreover for the most part perennial ; more especially such the 
development of which is not, as is the case with annuals and Taraxacum, 
influenced by all sorts of accidental circumstances.
Further, the 
whole period of vegetation is represented, a fact which renders the 
scheme particularly useful for the consideration of related biological 
questions, such as the duration of vegetation, time of maturation, etc.
May 1886.
154 
ROSENSTOCK : CONTRIBUTIONS TO PHRENOLOGY.
Fl. i.
Fr. i.
E. 
The following abbreviations are adopted : — 
L. i.
First leaf surface visible ; first leaves unfolded ; commencement of 
foliation.
Efflorescence ; opening of the first flowers.
Ripening of the first fruit ; with (soft) fruits ; a complete and 
definite change of colour of certain normal fruits — in the case 
of capsuled fruits, the spontaneous bursting of the capsules.
General leaf discolouration (etiolation) ; more than half the leaves 
etiolated.
The numbers preceding the names of the plants are the average 
dates for Giessen (5o°35' N.
lat.
26°2o' E.
long, from Ferro?
= about 
8°45' E.
of Greenwich.
160 metres above sea level.
Mean tem- 
perature 8*4° C).
Month.
Day. Name of Plant.
February ...
10 Corylus avellana 
April ...
...
10 ^Esculus hippocastanum 
1 3 Ribes rubrum ...
17 Ribes aureum...
17 Betula alba 
18 Prunus avium...
...
...
— 
19 Prunus spinosa ...
...
— 
—19 Betula alba ...
...
...
L. 
22 Prunus cerasus ...
...
— 
23 Prunus padus ...
.. ...
— 
23 Pyrus communis ...
...
— 
25 Fagus sylvatica ...
...
L. 
28 Pyrus malus ...
...
...
— 
May ...
...
1 Quercus pedunculata ...
...
L. 
3 Lonicera tatarica ...
...
— 
4 Syringa vulgaris 
< 4 Fagus sylvatica 
June 
July 
L.i. Fl.i. Fr.i 
Pollen scattered.
L. — — 
F. — 
— F.
Pollen scattered.
— F.
— 
F. — 
L. — 
. y.
— p!
— F.
— 
F. — 
F. — 
F. — 
4 Narcissus poeticus 
7 iEsculus hippocastanum 
9 Crataegus oxyacantha...
12 Spartium scoparium ...
14 Quercus pedunculata...
14 Cytisus laburnum 
16 Cydonia vulgaris 
16 Sorbus aucuparia 
28 Sambucus nigra 
28 Secale cereale hibern.
28 Atropa belladonna ...
1 Symphoricarpos racemosa 
2 Rubus idseus ...
...
2 Salvia officinalis 
5 Cornus sanguinea 
14 Vitis vinifera ...
20 Ribes rubrum ...
21 Ligustrum vulgare 
22 Tilia grandifolia 
26 Lonicera tatarica ...
30 Lilium candidum 
- 4 Rubus idseus ...
5 Ribes aureum ...
19 Secale cereale hibern.
30 Sorbus aucuparia 
30 Symphoricarpos racemosa 
Beech forest green, general 
foliation.
— F.
— 
— F.
— — 
— F.
— — 
— F.
— ' — 
Oak forest green, general 
foliation.
— F.
— — 
— F.
— — 
— F.
— — 
_ F.
— F.
— — 
— F.
— 
F. — — 
— F.
— — 
— F.
— — 
— F.
— — 
— F.
— — 
— — Fr.
— F.
— 
— F.
— — 
— — Fr. i — 
— F.
— — 
— — Fr. i — 
— ' — Fr. i — 
Harvest begins.
_ _ Fr. i — 
— — Fr. i — 
Naturalist, 
ROSENSTOCK : CONTRIBUTIONS TO PHRENOLOGY.
1 55 
Month.
Day. Name of Plant.
L.i. Fl.i. Fr.i. E.
August ...
I Atropa belladonna ...
...
— — Fr.
— 
1 1 Sambucus nigra ...
...
— — Fr.
24 Cornus sanguinea ...
...
— — Fr.
September ...
9 Ligustrum vulgare ...
...
- — — Fr.
— 
16 /Esculus hippocastanum ...
— — Fr.
— 
October ...
10 /Esculus hippocastanum ...
— — — E.
13 Betula alba — — — E.
15 Fagu» sylvatica ...
...
— — — E.
20 Quercus pedunculata ...
...
— — - — E.
Or, in order to see the various phases of a species at a glance, the 
table may be arranged thus : — 
L. F.
Fr. E.
Quercus pedunculata ...
May 1 ...
— ...
— ...
Oct. 20 
JEsculus hippocastanum April 10 ...
May 7 ...
Sept.
16 ...
O&kttO 
and so on.
The following instructions are added: — 
Observations to be confined to freely-exposed specimens; wall- 
grown (espalier) plants, as well as exceptionally early or late 
individuals, are inadmissible, since the object in view is to ascertain 
for any particular station, mean average, and hence climatologically 
characteristic data.
The locality selected for observation must be a 
normal one, neither exceptionally protected or exposed, and should be 
visited daily.
In the list of data received from various localities throughout 
Europe, Dr. Hoffmann adds at the end of each report what he terms 
the mean April reduction, i.e.
— he calculates the average number of 
days by which the April blossoms of a given number of species in a 
particular locality open sooner or later than those of the same species 
in a given locality taken as a standard of comparison.
The appended 
table will serve to convey a clear idea of the term and the method, 
Giessen being taken as the standard locality : — 
Mean.
1881.
Giessen.
S. Paul (Carinthia) Days.
(Iat. 46°43',long.
I5°i2').
Betula alba 
...
17 
18 
1 
Prunus avium 
...
18 
19 
1 - 
Prunus cerasus 
...
22 
26 
4 
Prunus padus 
...
23 
28 
5 
Prunus spinosa 
...
I 9 
19 
o ; /  r, < ' 
Pyrus communis 
...
23 
27 
4 
Pyrus malus 
...
28 
...
2 May ...
4 
Ribes aureum 
...
17 
Ribes rubrum 
13 
17 
4 
220 
3 days later than Giessen 
In another similar table for Berleburg (o°28' N.
o°2o' W.
of 
Giessen) for 1882, in which the data are much earlier, the average 
number of days of the April blossoms for the same species is 19 days 
later than Giessen.
To select, a few characteristic localities from the list : thus, at 
St. Petersburg (lat.
59°5o' N., long.
3o°i9' E.) the number is 42 days 
May 1886.
156 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT BEVERLEY.
later; at Coimbra (lat.
40°i3' N., long.
8° 25' W.) the number is 21 
before Giessen; Edinburgh, 36 days after Giessen; Sparham (Norfolk), 
1 day after Giessen ; Wisbeach (Cambridge), 6 days before Giessen.
As will be noticed from the table the average number deviates 
but slightly from that of the individual species, a fact which goes far 
towards proving the correctness of the method.
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION: 
ANNUAL MEETING AT BEVERLEY.
The twenty-fourth annual meeting of the Y.N. U.
, which was held at Beverley on 
Monday the 22nd of March, was in every respect a thorough success.
Every atten- 
tion had been paid by the officers and members of the Beverley Field Naturalists' and 
Scientific Society to secure the comfort of their visitors, and the exhibition (open 
for the whole week) which they had organised was a most admirable one, including 
as it did contributions from the collections of most of the East Yorkshire naturalists.
There was a large attendance of members from all parts of Yorkshire, representa- 
tives of more than twenty societies being present.
The proceedings commenced 
at 4.15 in the afternoon, when the General Committee of the Union assembled at 
the Town Hall (kindly lent by the Mayor) to transact the business of the annual 
meeting.
Dr. Dallinger, F.R.S., the president of the Union, presided.
The 
minutes having — from lack of time — been taken as read, Mr. R.
C. Chaytor, of 
Scrafton Lodge, Middleham, and Mrs. L.
Gaunt, of Laisterdyke, were elected 
members.
The power which the General Committee possesses of electing additional 
permanent members of itself was then exercised — Messrs.
James Backhouse, F.L.S., 
York, J.
E. Bedford, Leeds, J.
W. Dunning, M.A., F.L.S., London, J.
Ray 
Eddy, F.G.S., Skipton, Leonard Gaunt, Laisterdyke, Wilfrid H.
Hudlestone, 
F.R.S., Weybridge, Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A., Staveley, George Roberts, 
Lofthouse, and Rev. R.
A. Summerfield, North Stainley, being chosen.
The 
Annual Report of the Executive was then read.
It stated that the Union was in 
a most satisfactory condition and had enjoyed a year of marked prosperity, as 
evidenced by the interest which the members and associates displayed in its work 
and the good attendance at the meetings.
The five meetings of the year were then 
passed in review, special note being taken of the joint meeting with the Nottingham 
Naturalists' Society at Anston Crags as being a precedent worthy of future repeti- 
tion, and of the occasion of meeting in Washburndale as the specially invited 
guests of Lord Walsingham, a much-valued ex-president.
The Societies in Union 
had decreased from 39 to 34.
The Huddersfield Naturalists' Society had with- 
drawn, and four other Societies had become defunct, viz.
: — The Doncaster Juvenile 
Scientific Society, the Holmfirth Botanical Society, the Huddersfield Literary and 
Scientific Society, and the Ilkley Scientific Club.
The names of one of the York 
and one of the Hull Societies disappeared from the list as the result of amalgama- 
tion with other Societies in those places.
It is to be regretted that the name of 
Huddersfield (where the Union originated) now disappears from the list.
Two 
Societies had been admitted during the year — the Scholes Botanical and Naturalists' 
Society, and the Practical Naturalists' Society (Yorkshire members).
Statistics 
were next given to the effect that the Union included 371 members and 1,939 
associates — being 2,310 altogether.
Reference having been made to the number 
of subscribing members and a hope expressed that associates would consider the 
claims the Union had upon their direct support, the services of the local treasurers 
were acknowledged as being of much value.
The transactions having been referred 
to, announcement was made of the approaching completion of the MS.
of Mr.
F. Arnold Lees' ' West Riding Flora.' The library had received considerable 
accessions during the year, including 63 volumes of the Annals and Magazine of 
Natural History, and expression was given to a hope that members and others 
would present useful works.
The report announced that an insurance had been 
effected on the Union's library and stock of unissued publications, and reference 
was then made to the honour which Dr. Dallinger had conferred upon the Union 
by his tenure of the presidency.
In conclusion the Executive congratulated 
Yorkshire naturalists generally upon the large amount and sound val ue of the 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT BEVERLEY.
157 
natural history work which they have accomplished of late years, and which is in 
no small degree due to the stimulus given by the regular periodical visits of the 
Union to all parts of the great county which constitutes the area of their investiga- 
tions.
The Report and Balance-sheet having been adopted by an unanimous vote, 
the excursion programme for 1886 was arranged as follows: — -Askern, Thursday, 
20th May; Flamborough, Whit-Monday, 14th June; Pateley Bridge for Upper 
Nidderdale, Saturday, 10th July; Pickering, Bank-holiday Monday, 2nd August; 
and a Fungus Foray to finish the season, with the meetings and a Fungus Show 
at Leeds, the date being left for after-arrangement.
For the Annual Meeting of 
1887 invitations were presented by deputations from Dewsbury and Driffield, and 
for 1888 from Malton.
Dewsbury was selected for the meeting in March 1887, 
after which the election of Officers was proceeded with.
The retiring Secretaries 
— Messrs.
W. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., and W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., of Leeds, 
were re-elected.
For the Executive Council the Revs.
W. Fowler, M.A.
(Liversedge), and W.
C. Hey, M.A.
(York), and Messrs.
J. W.
Davis, F.S.A.
(Halifax), G.
C. Dennis (York), John Emmet, F.L.S.
(Boston Spa), C.
P. Hobkirk, 
F. L.S.
(Dewsbury), B.
Holgate, F.G.S.
(Leeds), Geo. T.
Porritt, F.L.S.
(Hud- 
dersfield), H.
T. Soppitt (Bradford), and J.
J. Stead (Liversedge), were chosen.
Messrs.
Adamson and Bedford were re-appointed auditors.
The next business 
was a recommendation from the Executive that a new section be instituted, whose 
field should be Micro-zoology and Micro-botany.
The adoption of this recommen- 
dation was unanimously voted, on the proposition of Dr. H.
C. Sorby, F.R.S., 
and the President pointed out that it was not to be a ' microscopical ' section, 
inasmuch as it was not in any way concerned with the microscope as an instrument, 
but simply with the investigation of the microscopical fauna and flora of the county, 
and that it would be a section for which much valuable work could be done.
The 
section was next constituted by a resolution electing Dr. Sorby as its first President, 
and Messrs.
J. M.
Kirk, of Doncaster, and W.
Barwell Turner, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., 
of Leeds, as Secretaries.
It was resolved that the Union subscribe for the 
Zoological Record, after which the General Committee adjourned.
The various 
sections then met to elect their officers, the results being as follows: — Section B— 
Vertebrate Zoology, Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey, Bt., M.B.O.U., Thirkleby Park, 
president, and Mr. James Backhouse, jun , M.B.O.U., York, secretary (re-elected) ; 
C — -Conchology, Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., York, president, and Messrs.
J. Darker 
Butterell, Beverley, and John Emmet, F.L.S., Boston Spa, secretaries (all three 
re-elected) ; D — Entomology, Mr. N.
F. Dobree, Beverley, president, and Messrs.
G. C.
Dennis, York, and E.
B. Wrigglesworth, Wakefield (the latter re-elected) ; 
E — Botany, Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A., Liversedge, president, and Messrs.
P. 
F. Lee, Dewsbury (re-elected), and M.
B. Slater, Malton, secretaries; F — Geology, 
Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., Wetwang, president (re-elected), and Messrs.
S. A.
Adamson, F.G.S., Leeds (re-elected), and S.
Chadwick, Malton, secretaries.
The annual public meeting was held in the evening, in the Assembly Rooms, 
the Rev. W.
H. Dallinger, LL.D., F.R.S., president, in the chair.
Time did 
not permit of the customary re-reading of the annual report and the announcement 
of the excursion programme, and the chair was taken by the Mayor of Beverley 
(Mr. Tom Turner, J.
P.), and the president then delivered the address which 
forms the prominent feature of the annual gathering.
The subject of the address 
(which will be printed in extenso in the Transactions of the Union) was "The 
Infusoria and Allied Organisations on a Field for Research ?' It was illustrated by 
lantern diagrams — and in the course of his discourse Dr. Dallinger described his 
important experiments upon change of environment.
Although space permits not 
of any reproduction of the address itself, the concluding remarks, in which it 
was stated that much information is wanting as to distribution, are of great 
importance.
The geographical distribution so far as England is concerned of 
many leading forms is in a very unsatisfactory state.
Locality and habitat are 
most important factors in our knowledge of the true habits of an organism, and 
there are few things that would quietly aid some branches of true scientific enquiry 
so much as an exhaustive study with this end in view of the ponds, ditches, and 
minor streams of Yorkshire.
After votes of thanks — to the President for his address, and to the Beverley 
Society for their kind and hospitable reception, and the Mayor for occupying the 
chair — the remainder of the evening was occupied with the conversazione inaugu- 
rative of the exhibition, upon which the local Society are heartily to be congratulated.
May 1886.
i 5 8 
NOTES AND NEWS.
At the March meeting of the Entomological Society of London, Mr. E.
B. 
Poulton, M.A., F.Z.S., read 'Further Notes upon Lepidopterous Larvae and 
Pupae, including an account of the loss of weight in the freshly-formed pupa.' 
He noted points in the ontogeny of Smerinthus larvae, and gave a description 
and figure of the bifid and hairy caudal horn in the newly-hatched Smerinthus 
popidi.
The adult larva of Acherontia atropos was compared with that of Sphinx 
ligustri, and the as yet unknown appearance of the former in earlier stages was 
predicted.
Hitherto unnoticed eye-like marks were pointed out in the terrifying 
attitude of Chcerocampa elpenor, and the terrifying attitude of Dicranura vinula was 
described, and its defensive fluid shown to be strong formic acid.
An eversible 
gland was described in Orgyia pudibnnda, and the protection of Acronycta 
leporina was explained by its resemblance to a cocoon, and the darkening of its 
hairs when full-fed.
A valvular aperture in the cocoons of Chloephora prasinana, 
&c, was described, enabling the imagos to emerge.
There were also notes upon 
Paniscus cephalotes parasitic on the larva of D.
vinula, and tables showing the 
immense loss of weight in newly-exposed lepidopterous pupae, due to evaporation 
from the moist skin.
Xx>< 
At the April meeting of the Entomological Society of London J.
W. Ellis, 
L.R.C.P., was elected Fellow of the Society.
Dr. Sharp read a paper ' On some 
proposed transfers of generic names,' calling attention to a practise advocated by 
M. Des Gozis, which was apparently extending on the Continent, of transferring 
the names of some of the commonest genera to other genera.
The extreme con- 
fusion caused by the practice was pointed out, and the author showed briefly that 
the theory on which M.
Des Gozis's system was based was as unsound as the 
practice itself was objectionable.
Considerable discussion followed, in which the 
project was unanimously condemned.
XxX 
The annual meeting of the Manchester Field Naturalists' and Archaeologists' 
Society was held on the 29th January.
The report stated that the customary 
number of ordinary Saturday afternoon trips and summer evening walks had taken 
place, the arrangements being attended with agreeable success.
The soirees during 
the year had also been successful.
There are 188 members now on the books of 
the Society.
The election resulted as follows : — Mr. Leo H.
Grindon, president 
(re-elected); Messrs.
John Angell, F.C.S., William Carr, David Fielden, and 
John Plant, F.G.S., vice-presidents; Mr. Benjamin O'Connor, treasurer; botanical 
referee, Mr. Grindon ; and secretary, Mr. Alfred Griffiths.
xxx 
The sixth annual soiree of the Manchester Microscopical Society was held on 
the 30th January and was largely attended.
There was a large collection of 
microscopes ; the exhibitors, Messrs.
William Blackburn, R.
Graham, E.
J. Bles, 
Henry Hyde, H.
C. Chad wick, D.
Alston, J.
B. Pettigrew, G.
Burgess, G.
H. 
Fitzbrown, M.
Sykes, J.
Fleming, John Eastwood, William Stanley, J.
L. Fletcher, 
J. Elliott, F.
W. Lean, H.
Astley, C.
Numeaux, S.
Hilton, A.
Hay, W.
Astley, 
J. Duncan, E.
C. Stirrup, E.
W. Napper, and E.
Ward.
Mr. Ward contributed two 
cases of collecting and mounting materials and apparatus.
Prof.
A. M.
Marshall, 
F.R.S., of Owens College, delivered an address on Seaside Animals.
A vote of 
thanks was passed to him.
In reply, he said he had not been in Manchester many 
years, but he had been here long enough to know that a closer bond might exist 
between societies such as this and Owens College.
All naturalists had only a 
common object to work for, and he told the audience candidly that gentlemen in 
his position had a great deal to learn from members of such associations.
Members 
took up individual groups of animals, and knew a great deal more about them than 
he did himself, or, probably, ever hoped to know.
Therefore they could be of 
great use to professors, who in their turn could aid the members.
Owens College 
owed a debt to this neighbourhood, and if it in any way could assist in promoting 
the efficiency and aid the work of Manchester societies, he was quite sure it would 
do so.
Naturalist, 
IN MEMORIAM W.
W. NEWBOULD.
1 59 
Can any reader say what has become of the Rev. Leonard Rudd's Yorkshire 
collections ?
He flourished during the early years of the present century, and it is 
believed he resided in the north-east of Yorkshire.
XxX 
A subscription has been opened in Liverpool for the purpose of doing honour 
to a fellow townsman, and it is proposed to present a testimonial to the Rev. H.
H. 
Higgins, M.A., as a recognition of" his long services in the cause of Literature, 
Science, and Education in Liverpool, to which he came in 1842.
His services in 
connection with the Free Public Museum, the Naturalists' Field Club, the Micros- 
copical Society, the Literary and Philosophical Society, and other scientific bodies 
in the city are eminently worthy of recognition.
*ocx 
The annual meeting of the Manchester Microscopical Society was held on 
February 25th.
The sixth annual report congratulated the members on the 
continued prosperity of the Society.
Thirty-four new members have joined during 
the year, leaving the number now on the books 21 1.
The mounting section 
continues its prosperous career, and is steadily growing in importance and size.
The whole range of practical microscopy is now included in the syllabus of the 
section.
The financial statement showed a balance due to the treasurer of £4 7s.
Mr. J.
L. W.
Miles was appointed president ; Messrs.
H. C.
Chadwick, William 
Stanley, Dr. Tatham, and T.
W. Lofthouse, vice-presidents ; Mr. W.
W. Dawson, 
re-appointed treasurer ; Mr. Wilks, secretary ; and Mr. R.
Sowood, librarian and 
curator.
' 
W. W.
NEWBOULD.
At Montagu House, Kew, on April 16th, at the ripe age of 76, in 
half-conscious contentedness, there passed to his rest one of the 
foremost, if not the very first of the older school of British critical 
botanists — the Rev. W.
Williamson Newbould, M.A., F.L.S.
With a decided aversion to figuring in print, the botanical work 
published over his name is scanty, and reflects very inadequately the 
breadth and profundity of his botanical knowledge.
Those who were 
privileged to know him as a companion in the field (and at one time 
or another he has been the mentor— the 'guide, philosopher, and 
friend ' of, probably, three-fourths of the middle-aged men who are 
now eminent in botanical science) know that his self-depreciating 
modesty was but the cloak of a quite unrivalled acquaintance with 
the faces and characters of British Phanerogams.
From the rich 
stores of his knowledge he was ever eager, almost with child-like 
readiness, to impart the fullest information to all seeking it.
In 
matters botanical — as well as in others of which it is not our province 
to speak — his powers of apprehension were well nigh as needle- 
like in their acuteness as they were to the point and sound (almost 
intuitively as it seemed) in their conclusions.
Space will not serve for even a bare enumeration of the ways in 
which in matters connected with the literature of botany, the history 
and distribution of British plants, &c, he was facile princeps.
No 
botanist ever had more varied claims to recognition, none ever sought 
to secure the recognition less.
His published writings are confined 
May 1886.
i6o 
IN MEMORIAM W.
W. NEWBOULD.
to a notice of the reported Huichinsia alpina on Ingleborough, in 
the first volume of Seemann's Journal of Botany, and two or three 
other bare records in that journal ; but he so constantly — ever 
working con amore — gave assistance of the most thorough and 
pains-taking kind to flora compilers, content with the most meagre 
acknowledgment, and often disclaiming even so much of thanks, 
that it would be difficult to over-estimate his share in the advancement 
of British Botany during the last thirty-five years.
His contemporaries, 
Prof.
C. C.
Babington, of Cambridge, and the late H.
C. Watson, 
have testified to this ; the former, in his Preface to the ' Flora of 
Cambridgeshire,' wrote (in i860): 'Mr. Newbould has given me the 
greatest possible assistance .
. .
indeed, without his help I could 
not have ventured to offer this book to botanists.
The appearance 
of his initials upon nearly every page will shew the great extent and 
value of his contributions.' Mr. Watson, in ' Topographical Botany,' 
page 530 (1874), wrote: 'In various modes I have been assisted by 
Mr. Newbould while writing this and former works.
Indeed that 
gentleman's ever-readiness to take trouble on behalf of other botanists 
is too well known to need eulogy from my pen ; though it may be 
allowable here to record an expression of my own grateful sense of 
his indefatigable and disinterested zeal in the promotion of botanical 
knowledge.' At the foot of the Preface to the second edition of 
'Topographical Botany' (issued in 1883, after Mr. Watson's death), 
Mr. Newbould's name appears together with that of Mr. J.
G. Baker, 
as a co-editor of the work ; although we believe, with his usual 
modesty, he disclaimed the honour afterwards.
A native of the Sheffield neighbourhood, the botany of his native 
county, and especially of the West Riding, was a subject in which he 
ever took the keenest interest.
Removed early from Sheffield, he 
had not the opportunity of observing and collecting within its limits 
so much as he would have done ; but he added Epipactis media 
{violaced) and one or two other species to its flora ; and from the 
moment that a complete historical Flora of the Riding was projected 
(in 1876) we have reason to know that by researches into old or 
scarce books at the British Museum, by examination of little-accessible 
herbaria, and in many other ways, he rendered every assistance in his 
power to Mr. F.
Arnold Lees.
The issue has an unusually sad side 
in connection with that very Flora.
A portion of its completed 
sheets were the last thing his eyes consciously rested upon !
He had 
keenly desired its completion, so many of his own conclusions were 
embodied in its pages, and he had more than once chafed somewhat 
at the delayed performance of a work in which he was, in one sense, a 
collaborateur.
5 MAY " S&6 Naturalist, 
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London: D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I., II., III., & IV.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of— 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
" Every, page is interesting." .
. .
. .
Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2p.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
6d.
post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London: W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all Booksellers.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London: JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.P».
— Communications, &c, should be sent-to the Editors nt the above address.
THE 2ST A T I J H AJLTS T.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next feiv months: — 
Hymenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson-.
Liverpool Coleoptera (Parts 7, 8, 9, 10)— J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., &c.
List of Wensleydale Birds— John Percival.
A Lincolnshire Coast Ramble— H.
Wallis Kew.
Marfield Pond — Thomas Carter.
Flamborough Head— Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A.
Bibliography for 1885.
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Notes.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching; boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larv/e by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae; sleeving;- hybernating larvae; 
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa-digging ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light ; grouting ; smoking ; killing ; relaxing ; setting ; grease ; mites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera; Hymenoptera; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY ADD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, "Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C 
NOW READY, Demy &vo, with Map and Coloured Plate.
Price 7s.
6d.
Postage 6d.
pl.
xx and 200.
THE BIRDS OP CUMBERLAND, 
Including some notes on the BIRDS OF WESTMORELAND.
By Rev. H.
A. MACPHERSON, M.A., and WILLIAM DUCKWORTH.
The object of this work is to furnish a succinct account of the Avi-fauna of Cumberland, 
a County but little known to the majority of British Ornithologists.
The habits of all 
characteristic Cumbrian Birds will be fully described from the Authors' voluminous field notes.
The scattered literature of the subject has been carefully explored.
Copies may be ordered of 
Mr. W.
DUCKWORTH, 8a, George Street, CARLISLE.
No. 131.
% J UN 
JUNE, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
T M.
EAG1E CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
viii, Malacodermi : and 
Contents : 
Flam borough Head— Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A.
.. ..
Coleoptera of the Liverpool District (Parts vii, Sternox 
ix, Heteromera)— John IV.
Ellis, F.E.S.
A Half-day's Ramble on the Lincolnshire Coast — H.
Wallis Kexv 
Bibliography: Botany, Phanerogamic and Cryptogamic, for 1885 
List of Wensleydale Birds— E.
Chapman 
Notes — Mammalia: — 
Noctule in Durham— T.
H. Nelson, M.B.O.U.
; Otters in Durham—/^.
Notes — Ornithology: — ..
.. 
The Weather and the Swallows— T.
Carter, T.
H. Nelson, M.B.O.U., and Eds.
; 
Arrival of Summer Birds at Flamborough — Matthew Bailey; Woodcock, Wryneck, 
and Hawfinch in Nidderdale — William Storey, How to form a Rookery — H.
G. 
Tomlinson ; Notes on the Birds of the Derbyshire Peak — Johnson Wilkinson ; 
Hawks mobbed by Small Birds — H.
T. Archer.
Notes — Conchology :— 
Lancashire Helices — George Roberts, M.C.S.; Mollusca from Seaton Carew, co.
Durham— J.
D. A.
Cockerell, M.C.S.; Shells in Coverdale and near Markington, 
N.W. Yorkshire— Idem.
Note— Arachnida : — 
Spiders at Louth, Lincolnshire—//", Wallis Kew.
Note— Botany : — 
Flora of Strensall and District (additions) — H.
J. Wilkinson.
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Askern, May 20th ..
Book Notices : — 
(Geology of Hull and Barnsley Railway, by Rev. E.
Maule Cole; the Birds of 
Cumberland, by Rev. H.
A. Macpherson, M.A., and William Duckworth, &c.) 
Notes and News 
•AGE 
, 162 
164- 
171- 
r 74- 
81, 182 & 188 
163 
170 
173 
189, 
190 
191 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
May also be had of.
G. E.
East, jun;, 241, Evering Road, Upper Clapton, London, E.
All Communications should be Addressed: — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION 
5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
>co< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.
— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Midland Naturalist for May 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for May 1886.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for May 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for May 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for May 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Natural History Journal for May 1886.
[J.
E. Clarke, Editor.
The Manx Note Book for April 1886.
[A.
W. Moore, Editor.
Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences.
— Proceedings — 1885.
Part iii, Aug.
— 
Dec.
[The Academy.
Vierundzwanzigster Bericht der Oberhessischen Gesellschaft fiir Natur und 
Heilkunde.
Giessen, Marz 1886.
[Herr H.
Hoffmann.
Journal of Conchology for April 1886.
[Mr. J.
W. Taylor, Editor.
New York Microscopical Society — -Journal for February 1886.
[The Society.
Notes on the Geology of the Hull and Barnsley Railway.
— By Rev. E.
M. Cole, M.A., 
8vo, 60 pages, with map and plates.
[Author.
Societe Royal e Malacologique de Bel^lque.
Proces- verbaux, Aout a Decembre 1885.
[La Societe.
Botany of the Eastern Borders.
— By P.
Fox Lee. The Author.
Natural History Society of Glasgow — Transactions and Proceedings, vol.
i, part 2, 
1884-5.
[The Society.
Do.
— Iiidex to the Proceedings, vol.
i-v, 1857-1883.
[The Society.
Dictionary of the Names of British Plants.
— By. H.
Purefoy Fitzgerald.
Small 
8vo, cloth, 90 pages.
[Author.
Second Annual Report of the Watson Botanical Exchange Club, 1885-6.
[The Club.
The London Catalogue of British Plants — Eighth Edition.
[George Bell & Sons, 
Publishers.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
4 Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
i6i 
FLAMBOROUGH HEAD.
Rev. W.
C. HEY, M.A., 
St. Ola-tie's Vicarage, York; President of the Conchological Section of the Yorkshire 
Natiiralists' Union.
The Flamborough Head of sunny August is familiar to thousands of 
visitors.
They love to loiter on its breezy cliffs, to peer into the 
long recesses of its shadowy caves, or simply to sit and gaze on the 
rich tints of emerald and purple which are so eminently characteristic 
of these pure waters, where the foam of the breaking waves vies in 
whiteness with the snowy front of the chalk cliff.
On the other 
hand, the Flamborough Head of the storm is a thing shunned and 
solitary.
The ships that almost grazed the cliff where in summer the 
water lay calm and deep, are hiding themselves now from their 
notorious foe in the safe recess of Bridlington Bay. Not a solitary 
figure walks the cliff, and only in some lonely cove may you perchance 
descry a fisherman, watching the waves for wreckage — for this raging 
sea often casts up strange things upon the beach, like trophies of her 
victorious prowess.
Let us face the cutting wind and the blinding rain, and descend 
towards the Great Thornwick, a cove where the north-west gale hurls 
the sea against the cliffs with terrific violence.
Long before we come 
in view of the waves, foam flakes are blown into our faces, and in 
some spots the grass is so thickly strewn with them that one might 
fancy snow lay on the ground.
As the bay opens before us, a strange 
chorus of different sounds bursts upon the ear.
We can distinguish 
a constant sullen roar that never ceases — the perpetual breaking of 
the waves among the rocks at the foot of the cliff.
Frequently, a 
horrible grating noise is heard, that seems to come from the very 
bowels of the sea.
It is the reflux of ther waves carrying back a mass 
of great rounded stones, and sounds like the death-rattle of some 
grim sea monster.
Now and again, a grand boom appals the ear as 
some billow of extravagant dimensions has dashed down its • whole 
bulk in one colossal cataract.
Anon, we notice strange seething noises 
in narrow gullies, where the water has been churned and churned till 
it is simply a mass of creamy foam, while from the network of caves 
hat perforates the cliff, thud and bang and splash, with their echoes, 
maintain a perpetual and awful concert.
It is under such circumstances that two features of the Head, 
little observed in fine weather, come into prominence, the "blow- 
holes" and the "creux." The blowhole of Kynance Cove, in 
June 1886.
m 
162 
w. c.
hey: flamborough head.
Cornwall, is celebrated, and similar phenomena may be observed in 
rough weather at Flamborough Head, both at Breil Point and Little 
Thornwick.
The water is seen to be violently ejected from crevices 
in the cliffs by the compression of the air, and flies out in the form 
of fine spray at right angles to the rock.
A creux is a funnel-shaped hollow near the edge of the cliff.
The most celebrated is in the island of Sark.
Flamborough Head 
presents two such creux, both situated in the neighbourhood of the 
Lighthouse, one of them very large.
Their formation is no doubt to 
be accounted for in this manner.
The sea enters the cliff at some 
weak point and gradually hollows out a cave.
The heightening of 
the cave does not cease at high-water mark, for the rise and fall of 
the waves create such strong powers of suction in the air that slab 
after slab is gradually loosened and torn from the roof.
The famous 
Robin Lythe's Hole shows us a cave of extreme loftiness, but I 
venture to predict that another generation will see Robin Lythe's 
Hole becoming a creux.
The chalk roof must already be very 
nearly torn away ; the coating of boulder clay will then prove but a 
very insecure ceiling, and soon an opening will be made in the cave 
where the roof is now loftiest.
When this opening has been widened, 
the cave will have passed into a creux.
Such seems to be a common 
system of cliff destruction at Flamborough.
The smaller creux, 
referred to above, has only assumed that form within late years.
To 
gaze into such a creux in storm-time, with the sea raging in its pot- 
like hollow, gives one a very graphic idea of a witch's storm-brewing, 
and may have suggested the idea to a primitive people.
Sometimes it happens that a very heavy sea may be witnessed at 
Flamborough in fine weather, namely, when a storm which has raged 
out at sea "comes to shore" (to quote the Flamborough expression), 
next day, after the weather has cleared and the wind fallen.
Then 
one may select some sunny nook in the cliffs, and watch a storm 
luxuriously.
At such times, particularly in Little Thornwick, the 
splendour of the scene is intensified by the appearance of rainbows 
in the spray, and the contrast between the raging waves below and 
the smiling heavens above is highly impressive and suggestive.
I 
was watching the sea one day under such circumstances, when I saw 
a wave dash a piece of chalk (weighing apparently some half-a-ton) 
clean out of the cliff, and bear it off as easily as if it had been a piece 
of paper.
At such times, instead of wondering how the waves have 
worn the cliffs into such mighty caves and arches, one rather marvels 
how the cliffs can possibly resist the impact of the sea as successfully 
as they do.
Naturalist, 
163 
NOTES— CONCHOLOG h 
Lancashire Helices.- — As I am particularly interested in the distribution 
of the mollusca of the North of England, I wish some one could be induced to give 
us a more complete account than has yet appeared of the land and freshwater 
molluscs of Lancashire.
Judging from recent notes, shells must be scarce in 
Lancashire, or otherwise the county has not been well searched.
Mr. Cockerell 
only mentions three species of Helix : — H.
rotundata, H.
hispida, and H.
concinna, 
in the account of his walk in Lancashire in February number of Naturalist, and 
Mr. Standen, a resident in the county, only mentions ten species in March number.
The dearth of shells seems to extend also into Cheshire.
In Mr. David Dyson's 
' Shells of the Manchester District,' published in book form in 1850, a rather fuller 
list is given, but some that we have common in Yorkshire, on the eastern side of 
the mountains, are described as rare in Lancashire.
No Lancashire localities are 
given for Helix ericetorum, H concinna, H.
lapicida, H.
virgata, H.
cantiana, 
H. pulchella, or H.
rupestris.
These, however, may have been found since.
Helix caperata is entered for one locality only.
The rarer species mentioned by 
Mr. Dyson for Manchester district, are Helix aculeata, H.
pygmcea, H.
fusca, and 
H. sericea, with Zonites fulea, and Z.
excavatus.
Information respecting the 
special distribution of species is much wanted, as certain species, supposed to be 
everywhere common, may be found to be absent from large areas.
Especially is 
information wanted on Helix virgata, H.
caperata, H.
lapicida, H arbustortim, 
and H.
cantiana, shells which are all easy to find if they occur at all.
Our various 
hand-books of British mollusca, copied one from another, are out of date, or too 
general to be of much use on geographical distribution.
— Geo. Roberts, Lofthouse, 
March 3rd, 1886.
Mollusca from Seaton Carew, Co. Durham.— The Rev. J.
W. 
Pattison has recently sent me a number of shells collected in the neighbourhood 
of Seaton Carew for identification.
As a contribution to the local fauna it may 
be well to give the list, which is as follows : — Pecten pusio, P.
tigrinus (a small 
single valve), Mactra stultornm var.
cinerea, M.
solida var.
elliptica, Cardinm 
echinatum, Tellina dalt/iica, Solen ensis, Lucinopsis tmdata, Mya tmncata, 
Saxicava rtigosa, Tapes pnllastra and var.
perforans, Lutraria elliptica, Vemts 
lincta, Capuhis hungaricus, Emarginida fissnra.
Patella vulgata, Helcioti pelltc- 
cidnm and var.
Icevis, Littorina rudis, L.
obtusata and var.
lutea, L.
littoralis, 
Lacuna crassior, L.
divaricata and var.
canalis, Trochus ttimidus, T.
cinerarucs, 
Hydrobia ulva, Natica catena, N.
alderi, Buccinum undatwu, Purpura lapilhts, 
Nassa incrassata, Melampits myosotis var.
ringens, Bythinia ientaailata, Planorbis 
spirorbis, Limncea peregra vars.
ovata and intermedia, Helix nemoralis vars.
libellula 00300 and 123(45)1 an d Helix aspersa.
— T.
D. A.
Cockerell, Bedford 
Park, Chiswick, May 1886.
Shells in Coverdale and near Markington, N.W. Yorkshire.
— Mr. R.
C. Chaytor, of Scrafton Lodge, near Middleham, has, from time to 
time, sent me boxes of shells collected in Coverdale, from the examination of 
which I have drawn up the following list of the mollusca of that district : — Vitrina 
pellucida, Hyalina callaria (a few of the type, and several of the transparent 
greenish variety 'albida' of Jeffreys), //.
crystallina, H.
alliaria Jeff., H radmtula, 
PI.
pura, type and var.
margaritacea, Helix arbustorum, type, var.
cincta, and 
several var.
alpestris, H.
concinna, H.
rupestris, H rufescens and var.
rubens, 
H. hortensis var.
lutea 12345, H.
rotundata, Pupa umbilicata, Balea perversa, 
Clausilia rugosa, C.
laminata, Bulimus obscurus, Cochlicopa hibrica, and one of 
var.
ovata, C.
tridens, Carychium minimum, Conulus fulvus, and Li/uncea 
truncatula, var.
resembling minor Jeff., but 6 mm.
long.
In addition to the 
above the following were sent from near Markington : — Anodonta anatina (a 
young one), Sphosrium corneum, S.
lacustre, Pisidium pulchellum, Bythinia 
tentaculata, Physa hypuorum, Limiuza trunca'ula, and Aucylus fluviatilis.
Mr.
Chaytor also sent two very large specimens of Succinea putris, measuring respec- 
tively 22 and 21 mm.
in length, but he had not collected them himself, and was 
uncertain as to the locality, though believing them to be Yorkshire specimens.
— 
T. D.
A. Cockerell, Bedford Park, Chiswick, May 1886.
June 1886.
164 
COLEOPTERA OP THE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT.
JOHN W.
ELLIS, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.E., F.E.S., 
Liverpool; Honorary Secretary, Lancashire and Cheshire Entoi7iological Society.
PART VII :-STERNOXI.
(Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, November 30th, 1885.) 
The British insects comprised in this group of Beetles are few in 
number (about 75 species), and many of them are very scarce.
Of 
these by far the greater number belong to the family Elaterida, the 
members of which are known as 'skip-jacks,' from their habit when 
placed on their backs of throwing themselves into the air by means 
of a structural arrangement of the pro- and meso-thorax, by which 
gymnastic exercise they soon recover their natural position.
The 
larvae of several of the species, the members of the genus Agriotes 
principally, known from their appearance as 'wire-worms,' occa- 
sionally' prove very destructive to field produce, by devouring the 
roots of cereal and other plants.
Of the 7 5 British species I am able to record only about one-fifth 
as inhabitants of our neighbourhood, though probably, by carefully 
working such districts as the Simmonswood and Kirby Mosses, this 
number will be extended.
Fam. EL A TERIDJE.
LACON, Lap.
Lacon murinus, L.
A common species under dried patches of dung 
on the bare sandhills at Wallasey.
ELATER, L.
Elater balteatus, L.
Simmonswood Moss.
Common in June and 
July.
CRYPTOHYPNUS, Esch.
Cryptohypnus riparius, F, Common throughout the district.
Cryptohypnus quadri-pustulatus, F.
I captured a single specimen 
of this species by sweeping the herbage by the canal bank at 
Maghull, in May.
MELANOTUS, Esch.
Melanotus rufipes, Herbst.
A single specimen of this usually 
common species taken in Eastham Wood, in February 1884, 
is all I have seen in the district.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
1 65 
LIMONIUS, Esch.
Limonius cylindricus, Payk.
Abundant on the sandhills in early 
summer.
ATHOUS, Esch.
Athous niger.
L. Mr. J.
H. Smedley took this species on a single 
occasion, flying abundantly in the sunshine round an old tree at 
Tranmere.
Athous hsemorrhoidalis, F.
Generally distributed throughout the 
district ; very common on oak in Eastham Wood.
CORYMBITES, Latr.
(Corymbites pectinicornis, L., C.
cupreus, R, and C.
qnercus, Gyll., 
I have in my collection from Chat Moss, which is outside our 
district, but I think they will probably be found at Simmons- 
wood, if looked for.) 
Corymbites metallicus, Payk.
I took this species commonly by 
sweeping at Spital two years ago, in July, but I have not met 
with it since.
AGRIOTES, Esch.
Agriotes sputator, L.
Common, and generally distributed.
Agriotes lineatus, L.
Tolerably common.
Agriotes obscurus, L.
Very abundant.
Agriotes pallidulus, 111.
Common, especially on nettles.
DOLOPIUS, Esch.
Dolopius marginatum, L.
Abundant on oak during the summer in 
Eastham Wood.
ADRASTUS, Esch.
Adrastus limbatus, F.
Tolerably common on low herbage, 
nettles, &c.
CAMPYLUS, Fisch.
Campylus linearis, L.
I have only once met with this species in 
the district, at Simmonswood Moss, in June of this year, when 
Mr. Wilding and myself took it in fair numbers.
PART VIII :-MALACODEEMI.
A group of beetles containing about 149 British representatives, 
which derives its name from the soft leathery texture of the elytra in 
the typical species.
This group includes the only two British insects 
June 1886.
i66 
J. W.
ELLIS!
LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
known to be luminous, viz., the very scarce Phosphanus hemipterus, 
recently re-discovered at Lewes by Mr. C.
H. Morris, and the com- 
mon Glow-worm (Lampyris noctilucd), which, however, so far as my 
observation goes, is not an inhabitant of our district, though one of 
the luminous centipedes is sometimes mistaken for it.
HELODES, Latr.
Helodes minuta, I,.
Common in places where reeds grow, and 
obtained chiefly by sweeping.
CYPHON, Payk.
Cyphon coarctatus, Pk. Recorded from Rock Ferry in May 1862, 
by Mr. Archer.
Cyphon variabilis, Thunb.
A single specimen obtained by beating, 
at Simmonswood, in June 1885.
TELEPliORUS, Schaff.
Telephorus fuscus, L.
Occurs occasionally.
Telephorus rusticus, Fall.
Common.
Telephorus lividus, L.
Abundant.
Telephorus lituratus, Fall.
Tolerably common.
Telephorus pellucidus, F.
Mr. Wilding has taken this species 
commonly about West Derby.
Telephorus nigricans, Mull.
I have only seen this species at 
Wallasey, and then not commonly.
Telephorus bicolor, Fab. Common.
Telephorus iUvilabris, Fall.
I have occasionally seen this species 
inland, but have taken it most abundantly by sweeping herbage 
on the banks of the river Alt, near Hightown.
Telephorus fulvus, Scop, (melanurus, 01.).
Very abundant.
Telephorus testaceus, L.
Common.
Telephorus lixnbatus, Thunb.
Common.
Telephorus pallidus, F.
Common.
MALTHODES, Kies.
Malthodes marginatus, Latr.
I have taken a single specimen in 
Eastham Wood (June 1885), and Mr. Wilding has also once 
taken what he believes to be this species in the same locality.
MALACHIUS, Fabr.
Malachius bipustulatus, L.
Taken commonly -in the flowers of 
Cardamine pratensis at Bromborough, in May, by Mr. Wilding.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
167 
CORYNETES, Herbst.
(NECROBIA, Latr.) 
Corynetes rufipes, F.
Common in decaying animal matters.
Corynetes violaceus, L.
I once took several of this species in a 
dead gull on the shore at Aigburth.
The following species of the group are frequently separated as 
distinct, under the title of Teredilia — the habits of the members 
being essentially to bore holes in dead or living wood.
Some of 
them, the ' death-watch ' (Anobium domesticum), for instance, 
often do great damage to wood-work, the result of their drilling 
habits causing the well-known * worm-eaten ' appearance fre- 
quently seen in old articles of furniture.
The ticking sound, 
from which the insect has received its popular name, and which 
has caused it to be a terror to the midnight watcher by the 
sick bed, is believed to be a signal or call to its mate, produced 
by striking the head against the timber floor of its ' run.' 
PTINUS, L.
Ptinus fur, L.
I have only once taken this species, among rubbish 
from a garden, at Wallasey.
NIPTUS, Boield.
Niptus hololeucus, Fald.
A common insect in cupboards, where 
when seen, generally in glass vessels into which it has fallen, it is 
frequently mistaken for a golden spider.
PRIOEIUM, Mots.
Priobium castaneum, F.
Once taken by Mr. Wilding in dead 
timber in Eastham Wood.
ANOBIUM, Fab.
Anobium domesticum, Four.
Common in houses, where it lives in 
wood-work.
Anobium paniceum, L.
Common in druggists' shops in the neigh- 
bourhood, where it lives on dried roots, &c.
No matter how 
poisonous to man — belladonna and hellebore, for instance — no 
root comes amiss to this marauder.
CIS, Latr.
Cis boleti, Scop.
Abundant under bark, and in fungi, and often so 
variable in size and colour as to lead one to believe one has 
taken several species of the genus.
Cis villosulus, Marsh.
Taken near Child wall, in November 1862, 
by Mr. F.
Archer (Diary).
June 1886.
i68 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
OCTOTEMNUS, Mel.
Octotemnus glabriculus, Gyll.
I have frequently met with this 
species, always in abundance where it does occur, in fungi 
(Boleti).
PART IX :-HETEROMERA.
A group of Beetles of most variable appearance and habits, but 
all characterised by having five joints to the anterior and middle 
tarsi, with only four to the hinder pair.
The British species, 
scattered through about a dozen families, number about 120, 
and of these I am able to record 27 as having occurred in our 
district.
BLAPS, Fab.
Blaps mucronata, Latr.
Abundant in cellars.
HELIOPATHES, Muls.
Heliopathes gibbus, F.
Common on the sandhills on both sides of 
the Mersey.
HOPATRUM, Fab.
Hopatrum sabulosum, L.
Recorded from New Brighton by Mr. F.
Archer.
MICROZOUM, Redt.
Microzoum tibiale, F.
Frequent on the Crosby and Wallasey 
sandhills.
GNATHOCERUS, Thunb.
Gnathocerus cornntus, F.
The late Mr. F.
Kinder used to take 
this species freely in some of the Liverpool warehouses.
HYPOPHLCEUS, Hellw.
Hypophlceus depressus, F.
With the preceding species.
ALPHITOBIUS, Steph.
Alphitobius piceus, 01.
Frequent in bakehouses and cellars.
TENEBRIO, L.
Tenebrio obscurus, F.
Frequent, but not nearly so abundant as 
the following species.
Tenebrio molitor, L.
A very abundant insect in bakehouses.
The 
larvas of this and the preceding species are the ' meal-worms ' so 
well known to bird-fanciers.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
169 
HELOPS, Fab.
Helops pallidus, Curt.
Taken at New Brighton, September 26th, 
1858, by the late Mr. Benjamin Cooke.
Helops striatus, Fourc.
Abundant under loose bark during the 
winter months, especially around Bidston.
CISTELA, Fab.
Cistela murina, L.
Common on the sandhills, especially in the 
flowers of Rosa spinosissi?na.
SALPINGUS, Gyll.
Salpingus ater, Payk.
I took about half-a-dozen specimens of this 
species by sweeping near Bromborough, in July 1882.
RHINOSIMUS, Latr.
Rhino simus viridipennis, Steph.
Under bark at West Derby 
(R.
Wilding); under bark at Aigburth (J.W.E.).
Rhinosinms planirostris, F.
Frequent under bark.
MELANDRYA, Fab.
Melandrya caraboides, L.
Taken at Crosby by Mr. Archer, in 
June 1862.
LAGRIA, Fab.
Lagria hirta, L.
Sometimes common among the dwarf sallows on 
the sandhills at Crosby and Wallasey, but very uncertain in 
its appearance.
NOTOXUS, Geoff.
I? otoxus monoceros, L.
Common on the coast sandhills.
ANTHICUS, Payk.
Anthicns bimaculatus, 111.
A very scarce British species which has 
occurred occasionally in our district.
Single specimens have 
occurred to Mr. Kinder, Mr. R.
Wilding, and to myself at 
Crosby ; it has also been recorded from near Southport in June 
1867, by Mr. Broadhurst (Ent. Mo.
Mag., iv, 232), and from 
New Brighton in 1878, by Mr. J.
T. Harris, of Burton-on-Trent 
(lb.
xiv, 238).
Anthicus floralis, L.
Frequent upon flowers.
June 1886.
170 NOTE — ARACHNIDA.
PYRGCHROA, Geoff.
Pyrochroa serraticornis, Scop, (rubens, F.).
This species, the 
commonest of the 'cardinal-beetles," was bred freely in 1884, 
by Mr. Smedley, Mr. Wilding, and myself, from larvae and pupse 
dug out of a dead poplar at Wallasey.
We also captured the 
imagines in the same locality.
MORDELLA, L.
Mordella fasciata, F.
A specimen of this species, captured at Rain- 
hill by the Rev. H.
H. Higgins, is in the Derby Museum, Liver- 
pool.
ANASPIS, Geoff.
Anaspis frontalis, L.
Anaspis ruficollis, F.
Anaspis melanopa, Forst.
All three species are common on haw- 
thorn blossom in May, and on the flowers of the mountain-ash 
in June.
MELOE, L.
Meloe proscarabseus, L.
Very common in spring on dry sandy 
roadsides, where there are burrows of wild-bees (Anrfrenidce).
Meloe violaceus, Marsh.
I have a single specimen taken some 
years ago, but not recognised as distinct at the time of capture.
Probably from Bidston Hill.
NACERDES, Schmidt.
Nacerdes melanura, L.
I have twice met with this species, on both 
occasions in the immediate vicinity of salt water, once at Brom- 
borough Pool and once on the Aigburth shore.
About twelve 
months ago Mr. W.
Johnson sent me a large number, which had 
been obtained from under the floor of a workshop in the south 
end of Liverpool.
NOTE—ARA CHNIDA.
Spiders at Louth, Lincolnshire.— A short time ago I sent Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell four spiders which I caught near Louth in December 1885 ; he 
has obtained their names, through the kindness of the Rev. O.
P. Cambridge, as 
follows : — 
Epeira umbratica Clk. Found under the loose bark of an aspen tree.
Clubiona brevipes Bl. About half a dozen found in silken tents under the bark 
of a dead ash tree.
Trochosa ruricola DG.
Found in a little cell under the bark of an old stump.
Amaurobius fenestralis Stroem.
Caught while running over 'the stump on 
which the last species was taken.
Concerning this species Mr. Cambridge, in his 
' Spiders of Dorset,' says : — ' Found but rarely at Bloxworth [Dorsetshire], under 
stones and brickbats.
It is much more abundant in the North of England.' — H.
Wallis Kew, Louth, April 1886.
Naturalist, 
A HALF-DAY'S RAMBLE ON THE LINCOLNSHIRE 
COAST.
H. WALLIS KEW, 
Louth, Liticobishire.
At three o'clock on the afternoon of Saturday, the 3rd of April, a 
ticket for Mablethorpe was taken at Louth Station, and in the course 
of half an hour I found myself upon the line where the North Sea 
meets the eastern border of Lincolnshire, with just three hours to 
spend in making observations.
First of all the broad sandhills were searched ; these hills are 
covered with strong grasses, particularly the marram-grass (Ammo- 
phila arundinacea), without the widely-creeping roots of which much 
of the sand would be blown away by the winter gales ; and in some 
places the sallow-thorn or sea-buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides) is 
very abundant, forming tangled thickets which cannot be passed 
through.
The shells found during the afternoon here were Helix aspersa 
Mull., H.
nemoralis L., H.
hispida L., H.
caperata Mont, and var.
ornata Pic, H.
pulchella Mull., Pupa umbilicata var.
alba, P.
mar- 
ginata Drap., Cochlicopa lubrica Mull, and var.
minor Fisch.
On the sandhills hard substances on which birds can break shells 
are often few and far between, and when a stone or piece of broken 
pot was come across it was sure to be surrounded by large numbers 
of Helix aspersa and Helix nemoralis, which had been dragged 
from their hiding places and preyed upon by the birds.
There 
were literally hundreds of shells round some of the stones noticed.
On the hills south of Mablethorpe the most plentiful variety of 
Helix nemoralis was rubella 00000 ; but on the north side of the 
village vars.
libellula and rubella, with three to five bands, were most 
abundant.
Six specimens of libellula which I took home exhibited 
the following band-variation: — 12345, (12345), (12)3(45) two speci- 
mens, 023(45) two specimens.
Three examples of var.
castanea 00000 
were noticed.
Only two species of Spiders were observed j one was a dark- 
brown species, which I failed to capture, and the other was the Tibellus 
oblongus Bl. It was named by the Rev. O.
P. Cambridge, who says 
it is ' an abundant marsh species.' 
Of Coleoptera the following were noticed : — 
Dromius melanocephalus L.
At the roots of grass.
Calathus melanocephalus Dej. At the roots of Senecio Jacobaa.
Tachyporus solutus Er. Very common at the roots of grass, &c.
June 1886.
172 
H. WALLIS KEW: A HALF-DAY'S RAMBLE.
Cneorhinus geminatus Fab. One specimen seen endeavouring to 
ascend a steep slope of loose sand.
Rhizobius litura Fab. At the roots of Senecio Jacobean.
This 
beetle was kindly named for me by the Rev. W.
W. Fowler.
Lagria hirta L.
The abdomen of a dead specimen found upon the 
sand.
This beetle was very plentiful on the sandhills during a short 
stay made at Mablethorpe in August last, swarming on Galium verum.
Agelastica halensis L.
was also then very abundant on the stems of 
grasses; Coccinella 2 2 -punctata L.
and Cleonus sulcirostris L.
were 
taken, and Hypera punctata Fab. swarmed on the sands.
The 
sallows and willows behind the hills produce Cryptorhynckus lapathi^L.
and the larvae of the Satin Moth (Leucoma salicis L.).
The only insect seen on the wing during the afternoon was an 
ichneumon (Ophion luteus L.).
It settled on the leafless twig of a 
sallow-thorn bush, and was captured between the fingers just as it 
took wing again.
Mr. E.
A. Fitch named this specimen.
The only flowers which were plentiful on the sandhills were the 
Bitter-cress (Cardamine hirsutd), the Vernal Whitlow-grass (Erophila 
vulgaris) and the Chickweed {Stellaria media).
On the beach various ' common objects of the sea-shore,' such as 
sea urchins, skates' eggs, and the empty egg-clusters of the whelk, 
were of course abundant.
A single sea anemone was picked up at 
high-water mark.
It is a variety of Tealia crassicornis , but does 
not agree with any of the four varieties mentioned by Mr. Gosse.
Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell, to whom I submitted the specimen, describes 
it as follows : — 
1 Tealia crassicornis Miiller, colour variety subobscura.
Column dull brownish-green, tentacles dull pinkish above and dull 
greenish below the central band, which is ill marked; disc dull greenish, 
with a few reddish streaks radiating from the mouth.' 
The Tealia was attached to a fragment of Flustra foliacea L.
The tide being high during the whole of the three hours, I was 
unable to procure many marine shells.
But among the dead shells 
to be found near high-water mark were Pholas Candida, My a truncata, 
Solen siliqua, Mactra siultdrum, Tellina balthica and var.
rosea, Scrobicu- 
laria piperata, Cardium edule, Mytilus modiolus, Pecte?i opercitlaris, 
Ostrea edulis, Patella vulgata var.
intermedia, Trochus cinerarius , 
Hydrobia ulvce, and Buccinum undatum.
Tellina balthica L.
is in great 
favour with children, who make ' neck-laces ' by threading large 
numbers of the shells, passing the string through the holes which the 
whelks have drilled.
Most of the above have been kindly named 
for me by Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Naturalist, 
NOTES BOTANY, MAMMALIA.
173 
Washed up at high-water mark also were numerous freshwater 
shells, which are carried down from the ditches which drain the 
marshes, into the sea, and are then thrown up by the high tides 
upon the sand.
The following freshwater shells were found in this 
situation : — 
Sphcerium corneum L.
One small specimen seen.
Bytlmiia tentaculata L.
A few noticed.
Valvata piscinalis Mull.
Not very plentiful.
Planorbis spirorbis Mull.
Very plentiful.
Planorbis vortex L.
Abundant.
Planorbis carinatus Mull.
Fairly common.
Planorbis complanatus L.
Large numbers seen.
Planorbis cor?ieus L.
Six specimens seen.
Planorbis con tortus L.
A few seen.
Physa fontinalis L.
One specimen observed.
Limncea peregra var.
ovata Drap.
One noticed.
Of aquatic Beetles, Helophorus aquaticus L., Gyrinus natator L., 
and Ilybius fuliginosns L.
were observed, the Helophorus and Ilybius 
being still alive.
A case of Limnephilus flavicomis, a water-boat- 
man (Notonecta glauca), and a Water Scorpion (Nepa dnerea) were 
also found upon the sand.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Flora Of Strensall and District.— In addition to the plants enume- 
rated by Mr. A.
R. Waller, at pp.
133-145 of the Naturalist, permit me to record 
the following (from personal observation) : — 
Thalictrum flavum L., Alchemilla vulgaris L., Poterium sanguisorba L.
Strensall Village and Common.
Geraniiim pyrenaicum L.
, Vicia bobartii Forst.
Near Towthorpe.
Potamogeion compresstis Sm.
, Barbarea stricta Andrz.
By the river Foss.
Salix alba, S.
caprcea L.
, S.
aurita L.
Rubus idcezis L., R.
affinis, R.
rhamnifolhis, R.
discolor (W.
and N.
). 
Rosa mollis Sm., R.
tomentosa Sm. and var.
subglobosa, R.
rubiginosa L., 
R. arvensis Huds., and the following forms of Rosa canina, lutetiana, dumalis, 
arvatica, tomentilla, subcristata, watsoni, blondtzana (Ripart) from Hazel Bush 
and Malton Road.
— H.
J. Wilkinson, York, May 13th, 1886.
NO TES— MAMMALIA.
Noctule in Durham.
— Supplementing the notice in April Naturalist, 
I may mention that Mr. C.
E. Morgan, of the Flatts, near Bishop Auckland, 
shot a Noctule flying over the pond at the Flatts last summer.
— T.
H. Nelson, 
Bishop Auckland, April 17th 1886.
Otters in Durham.
— Several were seen up the Bedburn, a tributary of 
the Wear, in the spring and summer of 1884, and one was killed near Hamsterley 
(this probably is the one noticed by Mr. Fawcett, in the Naturalist for April).
I 
have occasionally observed the footprints of Otters by the side of the Bedburn 
during the past two or three years.
— T.
H. Nelson, Bishop Auckland, 17th 
April, 1886.
June 1886.
174 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural 
history and physical features of the Worth of England.
BOTANY, 1885.
The titles relating to Botany are, as usual, separated into two parts, 
the first of which includes the flowering plants and vascular crypto- 
gams of the ' London Catalogue,' and the second includes the 
remainder of the cryptogams.
PSAUEROGAMIA AND VASCULAR CRYPTOGAMIA.
C. Bailey.
S. Lancashire.
[South Lancashire Plants; living specimens shown of Canlinia alaganensisVoW., 
and Chora [coronata) braunii Gm., from Reddish].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and 
Phil.
Soc, October 8th, 1883, xxiii, 72.
Charles Bailey.
S. Lancashire.
Egypt in Lancashire [occurrence of Naias graminea].
Rep. Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc.
for 1884 [pub.
January 1885] p.
49.
Charles Bailey.
S. Lancashire.
Obituary .
. .
John Hardy [with notices of his connection with the occur- 
rence of Barbarea intermedia Bor. and Epilobium lingulatnm Baker, near 
Manchester].
Rep. Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc.
for 1884 [publ.
Jan. 1885] p.
75.
John Gilbert Baker.
Yorkshire.
The Fathers of Yorkshire Botany [notices of the biography and works of the 
principal men who were botanically connected with the County].
Trans.
Yorksh.
Nat. Union, Part 8 [publ.
1885], Sheet E 13, pp.
185-200.
J. G.
Baker.
Cumberland, N.
Yorkshire, Cheshire, Derbyshire.
On the relation of the British Forms of Rubi to the Continental Types.
[Critical notes on various North Country forms.
At the end is a readjustment 
of the British list of Rubi.] Journ.
Bot., March 1886, xxiv, 71-77 (concluded 
from 47).
Arthur Bennett.
N. Lincoln.
New British and Irish Carices [C.
Goodenovii Gay, var.
juhcella Fr. North 
Lincoln, H.
Searle, 1882, determined by Dr. Almquist, of Stockholm].
Journ.
of Bot., February 1885, xxiii, 50-51.
N.E.York., Northumberland, Cheviotland, Slid W.York., 
Arthur Bennett.
Derbyshire, S.Lancashire, Cheshire.
The Botanical Exchange Club of the British Isles — Report for 1884.
Pp. 101- 
120 [numerous records of critical plants for the counties enumerated above].
W. D.
B[raith\vaite].
Yorkshire.
Ack worth \_Chlora perfoliata, Verbascum schraderi, and Silene noctiflora in 
Went Vale].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
143.
James Britten.
Cumberland, Yorkshire.
[Cumberland and Yorkshire folk-names and folk-lore concerning Lychnis 
diurna and Veronica chamadrys.
] Proc.
Essex Field Club, vol.
4, pt.
I (June 
1885), page xvii.
Robert Brown.
Cheshire, Lancashire.
Botanical Resume [of observations made at Liverpool N.
F. C.
excursions to 
Overton Hills, Cheshire, May 3rd; Speke and Hale; Ledsham, &c, Cheshire, 
July I2th ; Hightown, &c, Lancashire, August 16th ; Capenhurst, &c, 
Cheshire, September 20th ; and Lymm, Cheshire, October 4th].
Proc.
Liverp.
N. F.
Club, 1884-5, PP- 2 $-37 anc ^ 4 2 45- 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: botany, 1885.
i75 
G. H.
Bryan.
Cumberland, Westmoreland.
The Carices of the Lake District [enumerated, with localities ; 19 species ; also 6 
Cyperaceae].
Nat. World, July 1885, p.
131.
G. C.
Druce.
Westmoreland, Cumberland, Northumberland.
Notes on Scottish Plants.
\Melampyrum pratense var.
hiaus, found in West- 
moreland and Cumberland, and by Rev. H.
P. Reader 'this year' in 
Northumberland.] Scott.
Nat., April 1885, viii, 76-77.
W. Duckworth.
Cumberland.
Wild Flowers around Carlisle.
Part I.
[An enumeration in popular style 
of the flora ; extending from Ranunculaceae to Ericaceae.] Trans.
Cumb.
& Westm.
Assoc., 1884-85, ix, 83-95.
W. Duckworth and P.
Shepherd.
Cumberland.
Additions to the Published Lists of Cumberland Plants [Ranunculus Jluitans, 
Myriophyllum spicatum y Stachys ambigua, Rumex nemorosus v.
sanguineus, 
R. hydrolapalhum, Valeriana pyrenaica (alien), Habenaria albida, and a 
new station for Cephalanthera eusi/olia].
Trans.
Cumb.
& Westm.
Assoc., 
1883-4, p.
212.
[Editor of Nat. Hist.
Journal.] Derbyshire.
Flora of Matlock.
[Record of Adder's Tongue (Ophioglossum vulgatum) 
between Whatstandwell and Cromford, August 8th, 1874.] Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 15th, 1 885, ix, 35.
[Editor of Nat. Hist.
Journal.] N.
W. Yorkshire, Westmoreland.
Sedbergh : a few notes on its Flora.
[Notice of the principal plants noted in a 
pamphlet on this subject by Mr. John Handley.] Nat. Hist.
Journ., April 
15th, 1885, ix, 59.
[Editor of Nat. Hist.
Journal.] Yorkshire.
Floral Calendar, 1885 [dates of flowering of 31 plants at Cotherstone-in-Tees- 
dale, Northallerton, Thirsk, Scarbro', York, Birstwith-in-Nidderdale, Settle, 
Rawdon, and Ackworth].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
142.
H. Leaton Edwards.
S. Lancashire.
[Plants observed at] evening excursion to Formby — July 4th, 1884 [Bartsia 
viscosa, Epipactis latifolia, E.
palustris, Pyrola rotuudtfolia, Parnassia 
palustris, and (Enothera biennis].
Proc.
Liverp.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc., 1884-85, 
p. II.
G. Fisher.
Yorkshire.
Rawdon [ Verbascum saponaria, Geranium sylvaticum, CEnothcra\ Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
143.
W. W.
Fowler.
Cheshire.
Tachys parvulus, Dej., a species new to Britain.
[Mentions Parnassia 
palustris on the Wallasey Sandhills.] Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1885, xxii, 44.
W. W.
Fowler.
Lincolnshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire.
The Nitidulidae of Great Britain [Polentilla tormentilla, Langworth Wood, 
Lincoln ; Galeobdolon luteum at Castle Mill, near Manchester (69) ; Heli- 
anthemum vulgare at Scarborough (70)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., August 1885, xxii, 
69-70.
H. E.
Fox. Northumberland.
New Kecords for Northumberland [as given in the Naturalist, January 1885, p.
139, but curter].
Journ.
of Bot., January 1885, xxiii, 26.
Derbsh., N.W.Yorks., I.
of Man, Chesh., Westm., S.Lancsh., 
Henry and James Groves.
N.Lincsh., Mid.W.Yorksh.
Notes on the British Characeae for 1884 [CAara fragilis Desv.
— Derby, 18S3, 
C. Bailey ; Lancashire S., 1882, H.
Searle (Hb. Arthur Bennett).
C. aspera 
Willd.
— York N.W., Wensley Dale, 1884, J.
Percival, comm.
C. Bailey.
Isle of Man, 1881, R.
Wood (Hb. Bennett).
C. coniraria Kuetz.— Cheshire, 
June 1886.
176 
bibliography: botany, 1885.
New Brighton, 1884, Hb. Searle.
Westmoreland, 1863, W.
M. Hind (in Hb.
Trin.
Coll.
Dub.); var.
hispidula Braun.
— Cheshire, New Brighton, 1884, H.
vSearle.
C. hispida L.
— Lancashire S., 1884, H.
Searle.
C. vulgaris L.
— 
Lincoln N., 1884, H.
Searle (Hb. Bennett); var.
longibracteata — Lancashire 
S., 1882, H.
Searle, York M.W., 1884, T.
Hebden; v.
papillata— Lancashire 
S., 1883, H.
Searle; var.
crassicanlis — Derby, Monsal Dale, 1884, W.
Pullinger.
Tolypella glomerata Leonh.
— Cheshire, New Brighton, 1884, H.
Searle — a form with extremely long sterile branchlets ; and Nitella opaca Agardh.
— Westmoreland (Lake Lancashire), 1884, T.
Hebden].
Journ.
of Bot., 
March 1885, xxiii, 81-83.
Allan B.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Thirsk [Helleborus (both), Spircea filipendula, Chrysosplenium a Iterni folium, 
Anthemis tinctoria, Vaceinium vitis-idcea, Pole?nonium, Prim, farinosa, 
Carpi mis betulus, and Orchis ustulata\ Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 
[Wanton destruction of Fritillaria meleagris near Burton-on-Trent].
Nat.
World, December 1885, p.
235.
Brigflatts, near Sedbergh [Adonis autumnalis\ Helleborus viridis, Nasturtium 
amphibium, Saponaria vaccaria (the former records were an error, based on 
North Wales examples), Silene noctiflora, Althcea, Meliloiris officinalis, 
M. alba, Rubus chamcemorus, Saxifraga aizoides, Cichorium, Helminthia 
echioides, Trientalis, Anagallis ccerulea, Polygonztjn viviparum].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
143.
John Handley.
N.W.York, Westmoreland.
Sedbergh : a few notes on its Flora.
Sedbergh : Jackson & Son, 1885.
8 pages 
small 8vo [the numerous species mentioned are for stations in two counties, 
Westmoreland and North-West York], 
James Hardy.
Northumberland.
Carex divisa Huds.
[at Whitley, found by W.
H. Brown].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat.
Club, Vol. x, pt.
ii, p.
610.
J. T.
Harris.
Lancashire, Yorkshire.
Bootham Holiday Earities [Atropa belladonna near Arnside ; Trientalis, Goath- 
land].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
144.
[Henry Hyde.] Cheshire, Derbyshire.
[Excursion-notes for 1884; numerous notes on plants observed at meetings at 
Chelford, May 17th ; Norcliffe, May 31st ; Halton Castle, July 12th ; Monsal 
Dale, August 4th ; Holmes Castle, August 9th ; Vale Royal, August 23rd ; 
Marple, September 20th.] Rep. Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc.
for 1884 [publ.
January 1885], pp.
20, 25, 35, 37, 40, 43, 45.
R. G.
and E.
Jackson.
Yorkshire.
Cotherstone, Teesdale [Helleborus viridis, Vicia lathyroides, Veronica scutellata, 
Myosotis sylvatica, and Gagea luted].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Oct. 15th, 1885, p.
143.
W. Jesper.
Cumberland.
Seascale, Cumberland [Geranium sangumeum, Eryngium maritimujn, and 
Euphorbia paralias], Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
143.
W. Jesper.
Westmoreland.
Levens, South Westmoreland [Rubus saxatilis, Aquilegia, Andromeda, Pri- 
mula farinosa, Fly Orchis, Epipdctis palustris, Polygonatum mttltiflorum, 
P. officinale, Convallaria majalis, Lastrcea rigida, and Polypodium calcareum\ 
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
143.
W. Jesper.
Westmoreland.
Nuts [abundant near levens, near Kendal].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., November 
15th, 1885, p.
163.
1885, p.
143.
S. R.
Hallam.
Derbyshire.
John Handley.
Yorkshire, Westmoreland.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: botany, 1885.
177 
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
The Sea Banks of the Lincolnshire Coast [Four maritime plants cited for 
Mablethorpe — Hippopha'e rhamnoides, Cynoglossum officinale, Cakile mari- 
tima, Plantago coronopus\ Nat. World, January 1885, ii, 10.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Nature near Louth, East Lincolnshire [Several plants are cited and localities 
specified].
Nat. World* February 1885, "> 24-25.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Tree [Beech, Fagus sylvatica] standing after a fall of many feet [in Hubbard's 
Valley, near Louth].
N. World, April 1885, ii, 80; Sci. Goss., June 1885, p.
142.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Mahlethorpe [5 plants mentioned], Nat. World, July 1885, p.
137.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Louth Naturalists' Society [station in Bur well Wood for Paris quadrifolia\ 
Nat. World, August 1885, p.
155.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Kambles near the Coast [of Lincolnshire : at Mablethorpe, notices of the plants, 
17 species].
Nat. World, October 1885, pp.
188-190.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
[Medicago maculata near Louth].
Nat. World, December 1885, p.
221.
P. H.
Lockwood.
Westmoreland.
Yellow Star cf Bethlehem, Gagea lutea, near Kendal, April 16th.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May 15th, 1885, p.
77.
Percy Lund.
Yorkshire.
Calcareous Jottings [a few plants mentioned as occurring on the limestone near 
Cracoe].
Nat. World, January 1885, ii, 8-10.
P. W.
Maclagan.
Northumberland.
Notices of Localities for Kare Plants [Corallorh'za innala, Radiola millegrana, 
Centuncuhcs minimus, Althcea officinalis, Fumaria confusa and F.
7nicrantha, 
Rumex maritimus and Melilotus arvensis in North Northumberland ; localities 
stated].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, p.
ii (1885), p.
593.
J. Cosmo Melville.
Lancashire.
Crocus nudiflorus [abundant and quite wild in several specified localities near 
Manchester and Bury].' Sci. Goss., December 1885, p.
280.
[J.
Morley].
Lake District.
[Lastraea remota and two varieties of L.
filix-mas recorded (with stations) 
for the English Lake-district.] Midi.
Nat., December 1885, viii, 353.
C. T.
Musson.
• Notts.
Double Primrose {{Primula vulgaris) at Gedling, Notts.].
Sci. Goss., March 
1885, p.
68.
C. T.
Musson.
Notts.
Teratological Notes.
Dactylis glomerata [abnormally developed at Bramcote, 
Notts.].
Sci. Goss., April 1885, p.
92.
C. A.
Newdigate.
W. and S.
Lancashire.
Pimpinella magna in West Lancashire [for which it is not recorded in Top.
Bot., ed.
2. One of the commonest Stonyhurst plants, on both sides of the 
Ribble, much commoner than P.
saxifraga ; the two often grow together, 
P. saxifraga on dry slopes, P.
magna where it can obtain more moisture.
The 
note concludes by asking for assistance in working out the Stonyhurst flora].
Journ.
of Bot., October 1885, xxiii, 313.
S.Lancashire, Durham, Northumberland, Derbyshire, Mid-W.
York, 
George Nicholson.
S.W.York, S.E.York, Cheshire, S.Lincolnshire.
The Botanical Exchange Club of the British Isles— Report for 1883.
Pp. 83- 
100 [notes on numerous critical species for the' counties mentioned ; and for 
South Lincoln are given 14 new county records].
June 1886.
N 
i 7 8 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BOTANY, 1885.
[Francis Martin Norman.] Northumberland.
Report of Meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club for the year 1884 
[notes on plants observed at Cornhill, May 29th ; at the Fame Islands, June 
25th].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, Vol. x, No. ii (1885), pp.
439-460.
J. Pumphrey.
Lake District.
[The Lancashire Asphodel {Narthecium ossifragum]].
Midi.
Nat., August 
1885, p.
239.
Lucy M.
Reynolds.
Yorkshire.
Late Sweet Violets [white, picked September 29th, near Northallerton].
Nat.
Hist.
Journ., November 15th, 1885, p.
163 {Viola odor at a).
L. R[ichardson] and B.
B. L.
T[all].
Yorkshire.
York : Bootham School News [Excursion to Whitby, June 4th : several plants 
named].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1885, p.
95.
H. N.
Ridley.
Lake District.
Notes on British Rubi [Speaks of R.
rhamnifolius occurring at Watermillock 
and near Ulleswater and Haweswater].
Journ.
of Bot., December 1885, 
xxiii, 370.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire, Notts.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood ; with 
the Diary of a Naturalist and Rural Notes.
Vol. II.
Leeds : Printed for the 
Author.
1885 [pp.
viii + 258].
Remarks on the flora (pp.
6-13) ; seasonal observations (pp.
89-193) ; 
Crocus nudiflorus in Notts, (p.
110) ; Ledsham plants (pp.
173-180) ; Sherburn 
plants (p.
184) ; the Cowthorpe Oak (p.
185) ; the Tockwith Oak (p.
187) ; 
plants at Tockwith (p.
187) ; a list of the rarer flowering plants and ferns [85 
species] of the Lofthouse district (pp.
226-236).
C. E.
Robson.
Yorkshire.
Curious Orchis [0.
mascula with double perianths, Kirkham Abbey].
Nat.
Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1885, p.
98.
W. Moyle Rogers.
Derbyshire.
Notes on the Flora of Buxton [Detailed notes, supplementary to those given 
by Mr. J.
G. Baker (1884) and the Rev. W.
H. Painter (1881)].
Journ.
of 
Bot., March 1885, xxiii, 76-80.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Sea Spleenwort (Asplenium marinum) [and Jew's Ear Fungus {Hirneola 
auricula-judo) , both near Scarborough].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May 15th, 1885, 
P- 77- 
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Scarbro' {Astragalus hypoglottis, Vaccinium oxycoccos, Bolrychium and Malva 
moschata recorded, and stations given].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 
1885, p.
143.
W. Sessions.
Yorkshire.
Dog Violets in September [on the 1.7th ; Kirkham Abbey].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
November 15th, 1885, p.
163 (?
Viola canina).
J. D.
Siddall.
Cheshire, Notts., Derbyshire.
The American Water Weed, Anacharis alsinastrum, Bab.
; its Structure and 
Habit ; with some Notes on its introduction into Great Britain, and the causes 
affecting its rapid spread at first, and its apparent present diminution [chro- 
nology given of occurrences; Notts., 1847; Derbyshire, 1849 an d 185 1 ; 
Cheshire, 1867 to 1884].
Pro. Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 1885, pp.
125- 
134, with plate.
Rev. H.
H. Slater.
Yorkshire.
The Flora of Bipon and Neighbourhood [conclusion,, extending from Pole- 
tnonium to the end].
Trans.
Yorksh.
Nat. Union, Part 8 [publ.
1885], Sheets 
E 11 and E 12, pp.
153-184.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BOTANY, 1885.
179 
M. B.
Slater.
Yorkshire.
Botanical [Report ; numerous species mentioned, with localities].
Malton Nat.
Society's Annual Report for 1884-5, PP- 34-3^.
j. G.
Smith.
Cumberland.
Contribution towards a list of plants found in the Penrith neighbourhood 
[130 species cited, with localities].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 
1884-85, pp.
1 21 -126.
C. C.
Smith.
Yorkshire.
At Skipton- in -Craven [Popular plant • notes].
Nat. World, August 1885, 
pp.
149-151- 
B. B.
Le Tall.
Yorkshire.
White Bugle [Ajuga reptans; found at Helmsley, June 4th, 1872, by J.
E. Clark].
Sci. Goss., September 1885, p.
215.
B. B.
Le T[all].
Yorkshire.
York [notes on Primula veris, Geum rivale, Solatium nigrum, Verbascum pul- 
verulentum, and Spircea idmaria\ Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. 15th, 1885, p.
160.
B. B.
Le Tall.
Lancashire.
Crocus nudiflorus [grows by the Mersey, in meadows between Northenden and 
Didsbury, near Manchester].
Sci. Goss., December 1885, p.
283.
B. B.
Le T[all].
Yorkshire.
York.
Bootham Natural History and Scientific Club.
[Plants reported: 
Samolus valerandi on Tilmire, Saponaria and Stellar ia aquatica by the Ouse, 
and Utricularia at Askham.] Nat. Hist.
Journ., October 15th, 1885, p.
137.
Frances P.
Thompson.
Mid-W.
Yorkshire.
Monstrosities of Hair-bell [Campanula rotundifolia] and Clover [found near 
Giggleswick, September 13th, 1884].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 15th, 1885, 
ix, 35- 
R. F.
and F.
P. Thompson.
Yorkshire.
Settle [discovery of Ornithogalum umbellatum\ Nat. Hist.
Journ.
, October 
15th, 1885, p.
143- 
John Vicars.
Cheshire.
Botanical Resume [of observations made at excursions to North Rode, 
Cheshire, June 26th ; and Peckforton and Beeston Castles, September 3rd].
Proc.
Liverp.
N. F.
Club, 1884-5, PP- 38-45- 
John Woodland.
Lancashire.
Wood [referring incidentally to the Birch twigs in the peat bogs of the North 
and round Manchester, indicating that the tree is aboriginally British].
Illust.
Sci. Monthly, June 1885, pp.
189 190.
Charles S.
Wilson.
Cumberland.
Lake District [plants ; several enumerated from Seascale, Wastdale Head, and 
Eskdale].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1885, p.
97.
Charles S.
Wilson.
Yorkshire.
West Yorkshire [plants; Saxifraga oppositifolia in flower on Ingleborough, 
May nth; early Mushrooms, &c.].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1885, p.
97-98.
Charles S Wilson.
Yorkshire.
Baugh Fell, near Sedbergh [Cowberry ( Vaccinium oxycoccos) and Rtibus 
chamcemorus in abundance but not below 1,900 feet].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
October 15th, 1885, p.
143.
Wm. West.
Yorkshire, Westmoreland.
Plant Gossip [Primula farinosa in Yorkshire and Westmoreland].
Nat.
World, May 1885, pp.
81-83.
June 1886.
180 bibliography: botany, 1885.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
Andrew Amory.
Northumberland.
Alnmouth List of Marine Algae [enumerated only: 14 chlorosperms, 31 melanos- 
perms, and 43 rhodosperms].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii (1885), p.
539- 
Edward A.
L. Batters.
Northumberland.
Notes on the Marine Algae of Berwick-on-Tweed [18 species, of which most are 
Northumbrian, and 3 are new to Britain, viz., Elachista areschougii, Cladophora 
arciiuscula, and Codiolum longipes].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii 
(1885), pp.
535-538.
M. J.
Berkeley and C.
E. Broome.
Cumberland, Durham, Yorkshire.
Notices of British Fungi \_Urocystis primulcecola Mag. on Primula farinosa, 
found in Teesdale in 1867 by C.
E. Broome, and sent to him in abundance 
from the Cumberland lakes].
Annals and Mag. Nat.
Hist., April 1885, (5) xv, 
342-345- 
M. C.
Cooke.
Yorkshire.
New British Fungi [Agaricus {Leptonia) formosus var.
suavis Lasch.
, and Ag.
{Naucoria) myosotis Fr., from Scarboro'].
Grevillea, March 1885, xiii, 57-61.
M. C.
Cooke.
Yorkshire.
New British Fungi [Agaricus {Pluteus) semibulbosits Fr., Scarboro'; Ag.
{PL) 
violarius Massee, Scarboro'; Ag.
{PL) ephebius Fr.
, Helmsley; Ag. Unocybe) 
perbrevis Weinm., Scarboro'; and Ag.
{Panceolus) egregius Massee, Scarboro'].
Grevillea, June 1885, xiii, 89-100.
M. C.
Cooke.
Westmoreland, Yorkshire, Cumberland.
New British Fungi \ALcidium convallarice Schum., Bowness, Windermere; 
AL.
pimpinellce var.
apii, near Hull ; Rhinotrichum decipiens Cooke, Carlisle].
Grevillea, September 1885, xiv, 1-7.
M. C.
Cooke.
Lancashire, Northumberland, Yorkshire.
British Sphseropideae.
Provisional list cf Species hitherto found in the Britis 1 '.
Islands [Photua sorbi Lasch., Lancashire ; P.
lon°issima Fries., Berwick ; /'.
asteriscus Berk., Thirsk ; P.
nebulosa Pers., Thirsk and Berwick ; P.
samaro- 
runi Desm., Thirsk ; and Vermicularia eryngii Desm., Fleetwood].
Grevillea, 
September 1885, xiv, 25-36.
M. C.
Cooke.
Yorkshire.
New British Fungi [Agaricus {Pluteus) pellitus Pers., Ag.
{Plammula) ochro- 
chlorus Fr.
, Ag.
{Stropharia) Iiypsipus Fr.
, all from Scarboro'].
Grevillea, 
December 1885, xiv, 37-41.
[M.
C. Cooke.] Yorkshire.
New British Fresh-water Algae [Palmodictyon subramosum Nag.
= a condition 
of Hydrurus penicellatus, Yorkshire, Hebden].
Grevillea, December 1885, 
xiv, 57.
W. B.
Grove.
Yorkshire, Westmoreland.
New or Noteworthy Fungi:— Part II.
[CEcidiuw grevillei Grove, Grassington 
(H.
T. Soppitt) ; (Ecidium iaraxaci K.
and Schm., on Taraxacum ojfi inale, 
Grange (H.
T. Soppitt) ; (E.
prenanthis Pers., on Lactuca muralis, Malham 
(H.
T. Soppitt), are cited among others.
Equivalent to stages of Pucciitia 
variabilis Grev., P.
sylvatica Schrot., and P.
chondrilhv Corda].
Journ.
of 
Bot., May 1885, xxiii, 129 to 134.
W. B.
Grove.
Northumberland.
[Rhabdospora pleosporoides (new to Great Britain) on stems of Sorrel, taken 
from a nest of the Common Tern, from the West Wide Opens, one of the 
Fame Islands].
Midi.
Nat., October 1885, p.
298.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: CRYPTOGAMIC BOTANY, 1 885.
l8l 
E. M.
Holmes.
Northumberland.
Algae britannicae rariores exsiccatae [Calothrix Crustacea Thur., Cladophora 
arctiuscula Crn., Codiohim longipes Foslie, Euthora cristata J.Ag., Phyllitis 
fascia Kiitz., and Sphacelaria cccspitula Lyngb., all from Berwick-on-Tweecl, 
are cited, with details].
Grevillea, June 1885, xiii, 109-110.
[Henry Hyde.] Cheshire.
[Excursion-notes for 1884 ; notes on cryptogams observed at meeting at Ros- 
therne, May 3rd].
Rep. Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc., for 1884 [publ.
January 
1885], p.
20.
G. Massee.
Yorkshire.
New British micro-fungi \Didymium hypnophilum sp.
nov., Stilbum flexuosum 
sp.
nov., Helminthosporhim pumilum sp.
nov., H.
stemphylioides Corda, 
Arthrobotrys rosea sp.
nov., Gonatobotrys simplex Corda, Corepthoris paradox a 
Corda, Ascobohis saccharinus B.
& C, Corepthoris epimyces sp.
nov., Agaricus 
{Mycena) pitrtis P., and Mucor fusiger Link, all from Scarborough].
Journ.
R. Micr.
Soc, October 1885, v, 757-760.
W. Phillips and Charles B.
Plowright.
Yorkshire.
New and Bare British Fungi [Peziza {Dasyscypha) scrupulosa Karst., Scar- 
borough].
Grevillea, March 1885, xiii, 73-74.
Charles B.
Plowright.
Lincolnshire.
On the Life-History of certain British Heteraecismal Uredines (the Ranunculi 
^Ecidia and Puccinia Schoeleriana).
[Puccinia Schceleriana n.
sp.
, is recorded 
as occurring as sEciditim jacobcece on Senecio jacobaa at Skegness, in the spring 
of 1882, and in the Puccinia stage on Carex armaria L.] Quart.
Journ.
of 
Micr.
Sci., January 1885, xxv > I 5 I " I 7 2 - 
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood [etc.].
Vol. II.
Leeds: printed for the Author.
1885 [pp.
viii + 258].
\Russula 
virescens (p.
109) ; Boletus edulis and Helvetia crispa (p.
138)].
[Thomas] Rogers.
S. Lancashire.
[Moss new to Lancashire ; A mblystegium porphyrrhizum L.
, collected on the 
sandhills at Southport in 1875, ^ ts ^ rst occurrence in England].
Proc Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, February nth, 1884, xxiii, 76.
H. Stolterfoth.
Cheshire.
Surface Dredging on the Dee [notes on numerous species of diatoms obtained 
in- three dredgings].
Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 1885, pp.
93-97.
W. Barwell Turner.
Yorkshire, Westmoreland, &c.
On some new and rare Desmids {Onychonema nordsledtiana sp.
nov., Strensall 
Common, N.E.Yorks.
; Micrasterias crux-melitensis Ralfs, var.
nov.
superfliia, 
near Bowness, Windermere ; and M.
brachyptera Lundell, var.
nov.
bispinata, 
same place].
Journ.
R. Micr.
Soc, December 1885, v, 933-940 ; and plates 
xv and xvi.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Hawks mobbed by Small birds.— I have noticed that Sparrow Hawks 
are more subject to being mobbed by small birds than Kestrels.
This, no doubt, 
is partly owing to the fact that Sparrow Hawks fly nearer to the ground than 
Kestrels, but may also be accounted by the fact Kestrels do not prey on small 
birds as Sparrow Hawks do.
Water Wagtails seem to have an especial antipathy 
to Hawks.
One day last year I flew a Merlin at a Wagtail, and in a moment the 
'pursuer' became the 'pursued,' for, from all sides, Wagtails congregated and 
chased the Merlin backwards and forwards, much to the amusement of myself and 
some friends.
My Merlin at length took refuge in a tree, and.
I think, was well 
pleased when I called it down to lure.
Last Saturday I saw a Sparrow Hawk 
mobbed by Wagtails in the most persistent manner ; they flew close to its head, 
and seemed not to have the least fear of it.
— H.
T. Archer, Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
nth Decem ber, 1885.
June 1886.
l82 
NOTES ORNITHOLOGY.
The Weather and the Swallows.— The weather during the first week in 
May was much as we usually experience.
On the 8th a sudden change set in, the 
wind veering into the N.E., and it grew colder and wilder until the 1 2th, when a 
perfect gale blew, accompanied with heavy driving rain and sleet in the valleys, 
and dry drifting snow on the moors.
It was easy to foretell what would be the 
effect upon the Swallows and other migrants if such wintry blasts continued.
On 
the willow bushes by the river side Swallows and Sand Martins perched and 
fluttered in a most helpless way, and any number could have been knocked down 
with a stick or caught in the hand.
On the 13th — when the weather was, if any- 
thing, worse, the thermometer standing only at 38 0 F.
in the open at noon — 
Swallows and Sand Martins were laid dead in hundreds over the country.
One 
could not walk far before finding victims to our treacherous climate.
In one small 
paddock thirteen were picked up, and altogether, hundreds of thousands must have 
perished.
All this tribe were unusually numerous before this dreadful storm, but 
when the sun shone again a little on the 16th we noticed the destruction that had 
been wrought among them.
Now, in the course of a morning's walk, half-a-dozen 
will be as many as will be seen.
House Martins, too, have almost quite dis- 
appeared, though very few of this species were picked up.
Swifts did not suffer 
nearly so much, but still felt the cold and want of food very much, as was evident 
from their tameness and weak mode of flying.
Many of the other migrants suffered 
very severely.
Since last week I have not seen or heard either Wood Wren or 
Spotted Flycatcher ; and Willow Wrens are decidedly less in number.
The down- 
fall was very heavy, being greatest on the 12th, for which day my gauge showed a 
fall of 1*50 in.
The snow on the moors was six inches in depth above the heather, 
and for three days extended low down in the valleys.
Farmers generally agree 
that more sheep were drifted over than was the case in the late tremendous snows 
in the earlier part of the year.
As far as I can learn from the keepers, the Grouse 
will not have suffered much, as the hens were all sitting closely, and only a brood 
or two of young birds had been seen.
A large tract of marshy ground near here 
called Snape Mires, on which in wet seasons is formed an extensive sheet of water, 
filled to a great size in one day ; and I was told by farmers residing there that 
on the 14th considerable numbers of ducks and sea-birds were seen.
There were 
different sorts and sizes of Gulls ; as far as I could learn from my informant, the 
Black-headed being there in some numbers.
As I write the weather is more genial, 
but very unsettled.
Unless fresh flocks of the Swallow tribe come over (which is 
scarcely probable now) we shall sadly miss their pleasant company this summer.
— 
T. Carter, Masham, May 17th, 1886.
During the past week we have had a sharp reminder that 
Winter, lingering-, chills the lap of May.
On Wednesday and Thursday, the 12th and 13th last, a strong N.
E. gale was 
blowing, accompanied on the first-named day with a drenching rain.
In the 
western part of the county there was a heavy downfall of snow, the hills in Wear- 
dale being covered to a depth of several inches.
As a consequence of this severe 
weather, the summer migrants, and especially the Swallow tribe, have suffered 
greatly.
At Flatts Farm, near Bishop Auckland, twelve Swallow's and two Sand 
Martins were picked up dead on Friday last ; several others were found in a half 
starved state, and were taken into the house, but died in the course of the day.
All these birds were in plump condition, so that it is evident they had succumbed 
to the severe cold.
In the streets of Durham many Swallows were found dead on 
Friday ; and I notice, by the daily papers, that in other parts of the north country, 
and particularly in the lake district, hundreds of Swallows have been found lying 
dead in the fields and on the roads.
— T.
H. Nelson, Bishop Auckland, 17.V.86.
From many districts around Leeds we have heard of Martins and Swallows 
being found dead ' in hundreds ' on the 13th and 14th of May ; and there can be 
no doubt in Yorkshire alone many thousands have perished, resulting in a marked 
diminution in their numbers.
The House Martins seems to have succumbed in 
much the greatest numbers, and then the Swallows, while only a few Sand Martins 
and Swifts have been picked up.
We are of opinion, so far as this district is con- 
cerned, that death has been caused by want of sufficient food to enable the birds to 
withstand the prolonged inclemency of the weather.
There would be no insects on 
the wing for the greater part of the period between the 8th and 13th.
But on no 
occasion did the thermometer register a remarkably low degree of temperature, the 
lowest, 37 0 , being registered early on the 13th.
— Eds. Nato-alisT 
i8 3 
LIST OF WENSLEYDALE BIRDS.
E. CHAPMAN.
Carperby, Wensleydale, North Yorkshire.
The following is a list of birds I have personally observed in 
Wensleydale, or that have been shot in the dale, and passed 
through my hands for preservation, within the last thirty years.
Buzzard.
Casual ; was common about forty years ago ; rarely 
seen now.
Rough-legged Buzzard.
Casual, though not unfrequently met with.
Three shot in 1883.
Peregrine.
Casual ; very rare.
A male shot on Dod Fell, above 
Hawes, in 1873.
Merlin.
Resident ; frequent on the moors.
Kestrel.
Resident ; common.
Sparrowhawk.
Resident; frequent.
Hen Harrier.
Casual.
One shot in Bolton Gill, 1870, by Captain 
Other, Elm House, Redmire ; another in Howdah Wood, Bain- 
bridge, about the same time.
Both were females.
Short-eared Owl. Casual ; frequent among the heather in the 
breeding season, but I have never seen a nest.
Long-eared Owl. Casual; rare.
Tawny Owl. Resident ; common in the woods in the lower part of 
the valley.
Barn Owl. Resident.
This bird is becoming rare ; ten years ago 
it was abundant.
Great Grey Shrike.
Casual.
One shot in Freeholders' Wood, 
Carperby, 1865; another on Woodhall Scar in 1866; one shot 
by the Hon. W.
T. O.
Powlett, Wensley Hall, in Bolton Hall 
Wood, 1883.
Red-backed Shrike.
Casual ; very rare.
A pair seen near Eastholme 
Bridge, 1882, and a male shot near Carperby in 1872.
Great Titmouse.
Resident; common.
Cole Titmouse.
Resident ; not common.
Blue Titmouse.
Resident; common.
Marsh Titmouse.
Resident; common.
Long-tailed Titmouse.
Resident ; pretty abundant in the lower 
part of the dale.
Pied Flycatcher.
Summer resident ; comparatively rare.
A pair 
usually breed about Bear Park.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Summer resident ; common.
Kingfisher.
Resident ; frequent.
June 1886.
184 E.
CHAPMAN: LIST OF WENSLEYDALE BIRDS.
Raven.
Resident; breeds at Raven Scar, Walden Head, and 
occasionally at Ellerkin, near Askrigg.
Carrion Crow.
Resident ; common on the moors.
Hooded Crow.
Occasional visitor.
Book.
Resident; abundant.
Jackdaw.
Resident; abundant.
Magpie.
Resident ; common.
Last year a curious albino was shot 
near West Burton — the parts which are normally black were 
of a faint rusty-brown colour.
Jay. Very rare.
One seen in Freeholders' Wood about 1865.
Not 
known to breed in the dale.
Waxwing.
Rare visitor.
In the winter of 1869 they were tolerably 
common.
Creeper.
Resident ; pretty abundant in the woods of the lower part 
of the valley.
Green Woodpecker.
Not unfrequent ; breeds.
Two shot last year 
in Woodhall Scar Wood.
Great Spotted Woodpecker.
Occasionally seen in Pass Wood, near 
Redmire, and in Bear Park Wood, Carperby ; one shot in 
Rabbit Warren plantation, by Mr. John Waller, in 1878.
Cuckoo.
Summer resident ; common.
Night-jar.
Resident ; frequently seen about Freeholders' and Haw- 
bank Woods, Carperby, and Leyburn Shawl Wood.
Swift.
Summer visitant ; common ; breeds at Bolton and Middleham 
Castles.
Swallow.
Summer visitant ; common.
House Martin.
Summer visitant ; common.
Sand Martin.
Summer visitant ; common.
Pied Wagtail.
Summer visitant ; common.
Grey Wagtail.
Summer visitant ; common.
Yellow Wagtail.
Summer visitant ; common.
Meadow Pipit.
Summer visitant ; abundant.
Tree Pipit.
Summer visitant ; common.
Skylark.
Resident; abundant.
Snow Bunting.
Winter visitant; sometimes plentiful, though very 
irregular in its appearance.
Common Bunting.
Resident; common.
Black-headed Bunting.
Summer visitant ; not common, but breeds 
every year near Carperby.
Yellow Bunting.
Resident; common.
Chaffinch.
Resident; abundant.
Mountain Finch.
Frequent in autumn in the larch plantations.
Naturalist, 
E. CHAPMAN: LIST OF WENSLEYDALE BIRDS.
Cirl Bunting.
Rare visitant.
I saw two in 1883 in Mr. R.
Willis' 
farmyard, Carperby, and another about in the same place in 
1870.
They were in company with Chaffinches and Yellow 
Buntings.
Greenfinch.
Resident ; abundant.
Goldfinch.
Twenty years ago were pretty abundant, but now rare.
This disappearance is puzzling, as we have no bird-catchers in 
the neighbourhood.
Siskin.
Frequent in winter.
Linnet.
Rare.
Lesser Redpoll.
Resident ; common.
Mountain Linnet.
Resident ; pretty common, and breeds among 
the heather on the moors.
Bullfinch.
Resident; common.
Crossbill.
Winter visitant.
In 1867 were very abundant in all parts 
of the valley.
Thirty were killed at one shot by Mr. J.
Cockburn, 
near Thornton Rust.
Starling.
Resident; common.
Dipper.
Resident; common.
Missel Thrush.
Resident ; common.
Fieldfare.
Winter visitant.
Redwing.
Winter visitant.
Thrush.
Resident; common.
Blackbird.
Resident ; common.
Ring Ouzel.
Summer visitant ; common on the moors.
Hedge Sparrow.
Resident; common.
Redbreast.
Resident ; common.
Redstart.
Summer visitant ; common.
Stonechat.
Visitant ; comparatively rare.
I have known but one 
nest.
Whinchat.
Summer visitant ; common.
Wheatear.
Summer visitant ; common.
Grasshopper Warbler.
Summer visitant; breeds in the heather 
about Locker Tarn, near Carperby.
Rarely met with in any 
other part of the district.
Sedge Warbler.
Summer resident; common.
Reed Warbler.
Summer visitant ; rare.
Occasionally met with in 
Freeholders' Wood, Carperby, and at the Woodhall Pond.
Blackcap Warbler.
Summer visitant ; not unfrequent a few years 
ago, but rarely met with now.
Garden Warbler.
Summer resident ; breeds frequently, but is very 
uncertain in its appearance.
June 1886.
1 86 E.
CHAPMAN : LIST OF WENSLEYDALE BIRDS.
White throat.
Summer resident ; common.
Lesser Whitethroat.
Summer resident, but rather rare ; breeds 
occasionally in Freeholders' Wood, Carperby.
Wood Warbler.
Summer resident ; frequent.
Willow Warbler.
Summer resident ; common.
Chiffchaff.
Summer resident, but rather rare and uncertain in its 
appearance.
Wren.
Resident.
Goldcrest.
Resident • frequent, breeding in many larch plantations, 
especially in the upper part of the dale.
Ringdove.
Resident ; common.
Stockdove.
Resident ; frequent ; breeding in the scars of Ox-close, 
Carperby.
Pheasant.
Resident ; common.
Black Grouse.
Rare.
A female shot in High Gill, near Aysgarth, 
by W.
H. Tomlinson, Esq., in 1880.
Occasionally seen on the 
Greets Moor, above Woodhall.
Not known to breed in the 
district.
Red Grouse.
Resident ; common.
Partridge.
Resident; common.
Quail.
One obtained in 1884, on a nest of ten eggs, in a meadow 
field near Carperby.
Golden Plover.
Resident ; common.
Dotterel.
Now rare, but fifteen or twenty years ago used to breed 
on High Stake.
I have never seen the eggs myself, but I am 
told by Mr. Arthur Sayer, who was shepherd seventeen years on 
the moor, that he used to search for them in company with the 
keepers, who sold the eggs to collectors.
The last he saw was 
about fourteen years ago.
Mr. H.
Hopper, of Raydaleside, went 
every year to shoot these birds for their feathers, which are highly 
prized by anglers.
I shot a young one in 1865, on Scarrowfells, 
Carperby ; it was among a flock of Golden Plovers.
Lapwing.
Summer resident ; common.
Oyster catcher.
Casual.
One shot in Bishopdale in 1881.
Seen 
nearly every year by the river, above Carperby, and about 
Middleham.
Heron.
Frequently visit Locker Tarn, Carperby, and Semerwater, 
and various parts of the Yore.
Bittern.
Very rare.
One shot at Semerwater in 1869, by Mr. P.
Beresford, and another shot on Preston Moor, by Lord Bolton 
about 1879.
Curlew.
Resident ; common on the moors.
Naturalist, 
E. CHAPMAN : LIST OF WENSLEYDALE BIRDS.
187 
Whimbrel.
One shot on Stake Moor, by Mr. F.
Chapman, Thornton 
Rust, about 1874.
Sandpiper.
Summer resident; common, ascending the small streams 
to over 1,500 feet on Carperby Moor.
Green Sandpiper.
Casual.
One shot about Preston by one of Lord 
Bolton's keepers in 1883.
Bar-tailed Godwit.
Casual.
Three shot out of a flock on Scarrow- 
fell Moor, Carperby, in 1872.
Ruff.
Female shot at pond, Carperby, in 1873.
I saw the male 
at the same time, but did not obtain it.
Woodcock.
Winter visitant ; not known to breed.
Snipe.
Resident ; common.
Jack Snipe.
Winter visitant ; not common.
Little Stint.
Casual.
Several have been met with at various times 
on Thornton Rust Moor.
Schinz's Sandpiper.
One obtained at Wensley, by the Hon. T.
O. 
Powlett, in 1883, and now in the collection of the Hon. W.
T. O.
Powlett, Wensley Hall.
[Schinz's Sandpiper is only a small 
Dunlin to which this name was given by Brelun.
— Ed.] 
Dunlin.
Rare.
Used to visit the pond (now drained) at Carperby 
in spring.
Breeds about Summer Lodge Tarn, Askrigg Moor.
Corncrake.
Summer resident ; common, especially in the lower part 
of the dale.
Spotted Crake.
One shot near Hawes, 1868, by Captain Metcalfe, 
Ings House, Hawes • two shot on Thornton Moor, by Mr. F.
Chapman, about 1873.
Water Rail.
Not uhfrequent in winter in Freeholder's Wood, 
Carperby.
Moorhen.
Resident ; common.
Coot.
Resident; breeds at Locker Tarn, Carperby, and at Semerwater.
Bean Goose.
Winter visitant.
Swans.
Visit Semerwater occasionally, and various parts of the Yore.
I am unable to say to which species they belong.
Shieldrake.
Visits Semerwater occasionally.
Shoveller.
Casual.
A pair were shot by Mr. J.
Lodge, the Rookery, 
Bishopdale, and are now in his possession.
Wild Duck.
Resident; frequent.
Teal.
Resident ; breeds near Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Widgeon.
Rare winter visitant.
Scoter.
Casual.
Visits Semerwater occasionally ; one shot there by 
Mr. P.
Beresford in 1868.
Pochard.
Occasional winter visitant.
June 1886.
i88 
NOTES ORNITHOLOGY.
Tufted Duck.
Rare.
One shot in 1878 on the river, above Yore 
Mills, Aysgarth.
Golden-eye.
Occasionally visits Semerwater.
Goosander.
Casual at Semerwater.
Red-throated Diver.
Rare.
One was shot on Semerwater in 1869, 
by Mr. P.
Beresford.
Gannet.
A young one in first year's plumage was caught in Bishop- 
dale, in 1873.
Common Tern Casual.
Black-headed Gull.
Occasional visitor.
One shot at Woodhall, 1879.
Common Gull.
Occasional visitor.
Lesser Black-backed Gull.
Casual.
Kittiwake.
Casual.
Storm Petrel.
One was picked up alive in Leyburn Railway Station, 
by Mr. F.
Chapman, Thornton Rust, and is now in his possession.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Arrival of Summer Birds at Flamborough.
— April 24th, three 
Swallows seen.
April 26th, several Redstarts and Pied Flycatqhers.
May nth, 
Turtle Dove seen.
May 13th, 14th, and 15th, great arrivals of the above, with 
the wind north-east ; never saw more.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough.
Woodcock, "Wryneck, and Hawfinch in Nidderdale.— I have 
just had brought me a nest of Woodcock's {Scolopax riisticula) eggs taken near Pateley 
by a friend, who also saw a brood of young ones near the same place on May 7th.
I have also seen a Wryneck ( Yunx torquil/a), which was caught at Fellbeck on 
May 3rd.
It is the only one I ever saw in Nidderdale.
There has been for several days past [April 15th] now, a Hawfinch \Cocco- 
thraustes vulgaris'] flying about Harefield.
Several persons have seen it.
I have 
never seen one here before.— Wm. Storey, Pateley Bridge, May 13th, 1886.
HOW to form a Rookery.
— Wishing to form a rookery in a plantation 
of poplars and Spanish chestnuts which joins my garden, I had some baskets of 
the shape of nests put at the top of the chestnuts.
The rooks came and looked at 
these, and sat upon them every spring, but never seemed inclined to stay and nest.
Two years ago, knowing rooks were very fond of the yellow grease used on 
railways, I had the basket nests filled with it.
It soon attracted them in great 
numbers, and as they consumed the grease, I replenished the nests, taking care 
they were never without.
The result was, sixteen pairs nested, choosing, however, 
what is rather odd, the tall poplars, which are very difficult for them to build in, 
owing to the branches being so open, in preference to the chestnuts.
— H.
G. 
Tomlinson, The Woodlands, Burton-on-Trent, March 8th, 1886.
ISTotes on the Birds of the Derbyshire Peak.— I can confirm 
Mr. Whitlock, in his Birds of the Derbyshire Peak, as to the Peregrine Falcon 
being found there.
A few years ago, when shooting on Kinder Scout, I saw 
five Grouse fly from the end of the Scout, when a Peregrine came out from the 
middle of the rocks, and fastened itself on one of the Grouse, and the two birds 
came tumbling down one over the other into the hollow below.
I made all speed 
possible with the man who was with me, but the Falcon was away before I could 
get within 100 yards of them, although they fell in deep bracken.
I was about to 
gather the Grouse when away it flew, but fortunately I stopped it, and on close 
examination the only mark I could find was the flesh on the right leg considerably 
torn.— Johnson Wilkinson, Huddersfield, May 3rd, 1886.
Naturalist, 
189 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT ASKERN.
The opening meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union for the season was 
again held in the Doncaster district, Askern Spa being the rendezvous, on Thurs- 
day, the 20th May. Meteorological conditions were not very propitious, much of 
the country proposed for investigation being flooded, a consequence of the exces- 
sive rainfall of the previous week or two ; and rain falling at times on the day itself.
Notwithstanding this, fifteen societies were represented, the Union being especially 
well supported by its South Yorkshire constituents.
Permission had been kindly 
granted by the landowners of the district, including Captain Anne, Burghwallis 
Hall, Messrs.
F. Bacon Frank, Campsall Hall, G.
B. C.
Yarborough, Camps Mount, 
P. S.
Neville, Skelbrooke Park, and E.
Ripley, Owston Hall, for members to visit 
their estates.
It had been intended to investigate two lines of route, but the mem- 
bers, on assembling at 10 a.m. at Askern Station, finding that one of them was 
almost entirely submerged, united upon the one which included the higher ground — 
viz., by way of Campsall Park, Camps Mount, and Burghwallis, and thence to 
Askern.
In this they had the benefit of the guidance of the Rev. F.
H. Allen, Vicar 
of Moss, himself an accomplished microscopist.
Mr. F.
Bacon Frank did the 
members the honour to show a personal interest in their investigations in his park 
at Campsall, and Captain Anne in his at Burghwallis.
The tea and meetings were held at the Swan Hotel, Askern, at an earlier hour 
than that mentioned in the circular, to enable members to leave by the earlier trains.
The chair of the general meeting was occupied by the Rev. Wm, Fowler, M.A., 
of Liversedge, an ex-president, iu the absence of the president, Dr. Dallinger, 
whose health did not permit him to face the inclemency of the weather.
The 
minutes having been taken as read, the list of societies was read over, when it was 
found that the following were represented : — Barnsley, Dewsbury, Doncaster, 
Elland-cum-Greetland, Leeds (3), Liversedge, Malton, Rotherham, Scarborough, 
Sheffield, Wakefield, York, and the Practical Naturalists' Society, the individual 
attendance being about thirty or forty.
The following new members were then 
elected: — Rev. E.
H. Smart, Kirby-in-Cleveland, and Captain Anne, Burghwallis 
Flail, Doncaster.
A vote of thanks to the gentlemen who had given permission 
for the Union to visit their estates, and to Rev. F.
H. Allen for acting as 
guide, was then adopted, on the motion of Messrs.
Turner and Emmet.
The 
Sectional Reports were then taken.
In the absence of the officers of the Vertebrate section, Mr. Leonard Gaunt, of 
Farsley, reported that but very few observations had been made, and these not of great 
moment, he being the only member of the section present.
As regards the mammalia, 
the only species noted was the Mole, although it was reported that the Water Shrew 
had again occurred after an absence of eight or nine years.
Of birds 31 species 
were noted, 12 summer visitants and 19 residents.
The former were the Willow 
Wren, Redstart, Tree Pipit, Swallow, House and Sand Martins, Swift, Chiffchaff, 
Sedge Warbler, Whitethroat, Spotted Flycatcher, and Whinchat.
The residents 
were the Rook (breeding, young fledged), Carrion Crow, Starling (nesting), Black- 
bird (nesting), Song Thrush (nesting), Missel Thrush, Great and Blue Tits, Wren, 
Hedge Sparrow (nesting), Redbreast (nesting), Goldfinch (nesting), Chaffinch, 
Yellowhammer, House Sparrow, Skylark, Meadow Pipit, and Pied Wagtail.
A 
Gull was observed, mobbed by Rooks.
Of amphibians and fishes were noted two 
each — the Frog, Toad, Pike, and Eel. Mr.
Gaunt added that he had been 
informed that the Little Grebe had been caught this year, and the Rev. W.
Fowler 
that the nest of the Song Thrush had been noticed on the ground in Campsall 
Park during the day.
For the Conchological section Mr. John Emmet, F.L.S., one of its secretaries, 
reported that the section had done fairly well, although the season was early and 
the weather not very agreeable.
In all, 35 species and one good variety had been 
collected.
The 13 water shells, most of which were obtained by searching the 
heaps of debris by the ditch-sides, were Sphcerium cornewn, Bythinia icnlaculata, 
Planorbis complanatus, P.
carinatus, Limncea peregra var.
ovala, L.
auriczu'aria, 
all plentiful in ditches about Campsall, a few each of Valvata piscinalis and 
Limncea tnincahda and one of Planorbis albns with them ; Unio tumidus and 
June 1886.
190 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT ASKERN.
Anodonta cyguea, numerous in Campsall Lake; and numerous examples 'of 
Limtuza staghalis and Planorbis corneus, collected by Mr. S.
H. Bennett, of 
Rotherham.
The 6 slugs were Avion ater, scarce, a few at Burghwallis ; A.
hortensis and A.
bourguignali, a few at Burghwallis and Campsall ; Limax 
viaximus, one at Burghwallis ; L.
/avis, one on the edge of Campsall Lake ; and 
L. agreslis, common everywhere.
Of the 16 land shells there were a few examples 
of Sticcinea putris in Burghwallis Woods and a few of S.
elegans at Campsall Park ; 
a few Vitrina pellucida at Burghwallis, &c; a few Zonites cellarius and Z.
nitidulus 
in Campsall Park, and one Z.
crystalliniis in Burghwallis Wood ; one Helix aspcrsa 
at Campsall Village ; several H.
nemoralis at Campsall and Burghwallis ; two or 
three H.
cantiaua collected by Mr. Rushforth, of Horbury ; plenty of H.
hispida 
and H.
rotundata in Campsall and Burghwallis Woods, and a single example of 
the var.
alba of the latter ; a single Bidimits obscurus in Campsall Park ; a single 
/ upa iwibilicata found by Mr. Rushforth ; numerous specimens of Clausilia rugosa 
and a few of Cochhcopa lubrica at both Campsall and Burghwallis ; and a single 
example of Carychinm minimum in Burghwallis Woods.
The Entomological section was represented by its secretaries, Mr. G.
C. 
Dennis, York, and Mr. E.
B. Wrigglesworth, Wakefield, who reported one larva 
which Mr. Dennis recognised as Leucania imptcra.
The almost too-abundant 
rainfall had prevented this section from carrying out its work.
The season had 
opened with a fair prospect, but this day the members of the section were com- 
pelled in consequence of the excessive moisture to abandon the woods altogether, 
and their limited examination of the immediate locality of Askern between the 
showers was almost nil.
For the Botanical section its president, the Rev. Wm.
Fowler, M.A., reported 
that owing to the unfavourable state of the weather and the lateness of the season 
comparatively few plants were observed (only 89 in all, and of these nearly all 
were common ones).
The best, perhaps, were Geurn intermedium and Veronica 
montana.
A few Morells {Morchella esculenta) were found, but no Truffles, 
though the latter are known to occur both at Owston and Burghwallis.
In a wood 
at the last-named place Plnteus chrysophoeus and other more common Fungi were 
observed.
The report on mosses was given by Mr. M.
B. Slater, of Malton, 
Cryptogamic secretary to the section, and will be printed next month.
For the Geological section Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., Leeds, one of its secre- 
taries, reported that from the inclement weather, and perhaps still more from an un- 
accountable reluctance on the part of many geologists to investigate the Permian 
strata, there was but a meagre attendance of the knights of the hammer.
The 
ground was traversed from Askern to Campsall without any object of geological 
interest being noted, when on arrival at the Hall, Mr. Bacon Frank most kindly 
gave minute particulars where several quarries might be visited.
The way was 
now taken in the direction of Barnsdale, where on the roadside two quarries 
excavated in the Lower Magnesian Limestone were visited.
These unfortunately 
were not newly made nor in work, therefore the sections were much weathered and 
in many parts overgrown by vegetation.
Enough could be seen, however, of the 
variable character and stratification of the limestone, flaggy in some places, thick 
and irregularly bedded in others.
The characteristic cavities in this limestone, so 
beautifully lined with calc-spar were often seen, but no fossils were obtained, time 
not permitting of a lengthened search.
Taking the road from Barnsdale to 
Skelbrooke a detour was made to Burghwallis, where an opportunity was given of 
noticing the extreme durability of this limestone for building purposes when 
favourable circumstances offer.
In the outer walls of this venerable church good 
specimens of herring-bone masonry are seen, which indicate a very high antiquity, 
still the angles of the magnesian limestone are comparatively sharp after the lapse 
of so many centuries.
Near Sutton a quarry in the Upper Magnesian Limestone 
was visited, but this, too, from being long out of use, proved unproductive of 
practical results.
For the newly-formed section for Micro-Zoology and Botany both its secretaries, 
Mr. W.
Barwell Turner, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., Leeds, and Mr. J.
M. Kirk, 
Doncaster, spoke, but, as might well be anticipated, it was not possible for them to 
give any idea of the results achieved in their department, inasmuch as this could 
not be done till after careful study of their gatherings at home.
A vote of thanks 
to the chairman concluded the business.
— W.D.R r; r 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES.
Geology of the Hull, Barnsley, and West Riding Junction 
Railway and Dock.
— By the Rev. Edward Maule Cole, M.A., Vicar 
of Wetwang, York.
Privately printed by Peck & Son, Hull ; pp.
60, with 
index, frontispiece, plates of sections, and geological map.
The construction of a new railway is a rare opportunity for geologists to increase 
their practical knowledge by careful examination of the various sections revealed, 
and one, too, which is ever eagerly grasped.
As the Hull and Barnsley line cuts 
across, almost at right angles, the series of beds from the Coal Measures to the 
Post-Tertiary Boulder Clays, the engineer of the line, Mr. George Bohn, rightly 
considered that the opportunity of a careful record was in this case too good a one 
to be lost, and he accordingly obtained the services of the able geologist above 
named, the President of the Geological Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
To Mr. Cole this was indeed a labour of love, and the result is the present volume, 
which is indispensable to all students of Yorkshire geology.
The many readers of 
Mr. Cole's scientific works will remember how he can clothe the driest geological 
facts in charming language, and still retain that accuracy of detail so necessary in 
works of this character.
In this new work the author has adhered to his happy 
style, and sections are described, theories examined, hypotheses started, and 
suggestions offered in a manner which will not only secure the close attention of the 
scientific reader, but also attract the notice of those whose reading is more general.
The work is divided into six chapters or divisions, the first giving a brief resume 
of the geology of the Millstone Grit and Lower Coal Measures of North- West and 
Central Yorkshire.
Coming to the Middle Coal Measures, Mr. Cole commences 
his real work, and reviews the various beds met with on the line, giving in this 
part a good section well shown in a cutting at Upton, where the Magnesian Lime- 
stone is seen resting unconformably on the Coal Measures.
Chapter II is devoted 
to the Permian and Triassic formations ; a plate is here given of the stratification 
in South Kirkby Tunnel, where the Lower Magnesian Limestone has been cut 
through.
From Great to Little Heck the Bunter of the Trias shows a good section, 
as is seen in the third plate.
In Chapter III we come to the Lias; the Lower Lias 
is not touched by the railway, which passes through a depression or synclinal taken 
advantage of by the engineer, but the foundations of the occupation bridge to the 
west of the signal cabin of North Cave Station were excavated in the Ammonites 
Bucklandi beds ; a plate in this division shows the railway cutting through a series 
of minor escarpments belonging to the Liassic and Oolitic series, till it reaches the 
loftier escarpment of the Chalk.
In Chapter IV we pass to the Oolites, in which 
Mr. Cole is specially at home ; after mentioning an excavation in the Millepore 
beds of the .Lower Oolites, we come to the splendid section at Drewton, of which 
a plate is given, exposing finely the Kellaways Rock and Oxford Clay, capped by 
recent Boulder Clay and Chalk Gravel.
Chapter V is devoted to the Upper 
Oolites and Chalk ; in this part is described the celebrated St. Austin's Stone (the 
subject of the frontispiece), a mass of Flint breccia, left standing out by atmos- 
pheric denudation.
Chapter VI commences with a description of Drewton Tunnel, 
a mile and a quarter long and entirely excavated in the lower beds of the White 
Chalk ; on reaching Anlaby the chalk dips under the Hessle Boulder Clay, which 
forms the surface of a great part of Holderness.
Several good tables of borings 
are given, so necessary to geologists, amongst which may be noted those at 
Barmby-on-the- Marsh and in the construction of the Alexander Dock at Hull.
A 
geological sketch map of East Yorkshire in colours, with the route of the line 
marked upon it, enables the reader at a glance to note the formations met with 
and materially adds to the value of the volume.
We certainly must congratulate 
Mr. Cole on his valuable contribution to the geological literature of Yorkshire, and 
upon the ability and care bestowed upon the production of the volume.
Sections 
made in the cutting of railways are often imperfectly studied and seldom accurately 
recorded, and in this case the thanks of all geologists are due also to Mr. Bohn for his 
forethought in thus securing a permanent record of these interesting and valuable 
sections.
x»< 
Under the title ' A Tourist's View of Ireland, by Johnnie Gray ' — one of our 
Yorkshire Naturalists, Mr. H.
Speight, of Bradford, has published a readable and 
interesting account of a tour in that island, referring in one or two places to the 
botany of the western districts.
June 1886.
IQ2 
BOOK NOTICES : NOTES AND NEWS.
The Birds of Cumberland critically studied, including some 
Notes on the Birds of Westmoreland.— By the Rev. H.
A. 
Macpherson, M.A., and William Duckworth.
Carlisle : Chas.
Thurman & 
Sons, 1886.
It is again a pleasant duty to bring under the notice of our readers another 
important faunal work, relating not only to the region in which we are specially in- 
terested, but to the north-western portion, which, strange to say, has so long wanted 
a monographer or monographers.
We cannot fail to notice at the outset, that our 
authors have had a district to deal with which has claims beyond even residents in 
the British Isles.
Indeed, we take it, there are few spots more cherished than our 
lovely lake-country.
As we should naturally expect, the avi-fauna of Cumberland 
is a rich one, its strength lying mainly in the number of breeding species, for 
which its diversified surface affords suitable habitats ; the lowlands, mountains, 
moors, woodlands, lakes, and coast affording a nursery for no less than 1 16 species, 
as against 120 for Yorkshire and 114 for Lancashire respectively.
The total 
avi-fauna of the county is given at 250 species, of which 84 are residents, 81 
periodic visitants, and 85 casual visitants.
The weakness of the list, so to speak, 
is to be found in the small numbers of the casual and accidental visitants from the 
European continent, which are such an important feature in all east-coast lists.
Indeed not only are the interesting eastern forms, such as White's Thrush, &c, 
absent, but such comparatively familiar species as the Shore Lark, Mealy Redpoll, 
Hooded Crow, and others of frequent occurrence on the other side of England, are 
more or less rare or uncommon visitants.
It is to be regretted that the authors 
have given such prominence to Westmoreland in their title, since the information 
relating to that county is meagre, and not only so, but when given is unfortunately 
mixed' up with the matter relating to their premier county, without that ready 
distinction which is so very desirable.
The treatment of the information given is 
somewhat uneven as regards the space devoted to the different species, some being 
treated of at length, while others of equal interest are somewhat briefly discussed.
In this work, as in Mr. Mitchell's Birds of Lancashire, it has been thought well 
to make the initial letter of all specific names a capital.
On this departure we 
would remark that such a proceeding is against all the recognised canons relating 
to zoological nomenclature, and hence the practice lacks that scientific precision 
which all modern naturalists aim at maintaining.
These are however small, very 
small, defects, and happy are the authors against whom greater faults cannot be 
urged.
Indeed we regard the book as a valuable contribution to the geographical 
distribution of our British birds, carried out on the lines on which a modern faunal 
work should be shaped ; and the authors are to be congratulated upon, and may 
take justifiable pride in, their work, which bears evidence of being the production 
of painstaking and conscientious naturalists.
The book is well got up, and is 
embellished with a coloured map and an admirable coloured plate by Mr.
Keulemans, of that interesting bird the Dotterel, and we gladly recommend it to 
our readers as in every way a creditable and satisfactory production.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The name of Prof.
A. H.
Green, M.A., is in this year's list of fifteen selected 
candidates for the Fellowship of the Royal Society, as also are those of P.
II.
Pye- 
Smith, M.D., of Sheffield, and Henry Wilde, the electrician, of Manchester.
><xx 
All our readers will hear with regret that the cause of the discontinuance of the 
page of meteorological information which it was our custom to give, is that_Mr.
George Paul, F.G.S., who has so ably and kindly edited it, is leaving Shadwell, 
which of necessity terminates the series of records which he has kept at that place.
>oo< 
Members of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union who had the pleasure of the 
acquaintance of Mr. S.
D. Bairstow, F.L.S., formerly of Huddersfield, will be 
pleased to learn that he has this year been chosen President of the Eastern 
Province Naturalists' Society at Port Elizabeth, Cape -Colony, a society which 
he founded and acted as secretary to during the past few years.
It is gratifying to 
find — from a perusal of the annual report — how vigorously natural science is being 
prosecuted in that part of the Colony against numerous adverse circumstances with 
which home naturalists have jcp^eac^Qg 
Naturalist, 
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. EL1SHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." .
...
. Bradford Observer.
"Every page is interesting." ...
. .
Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2M.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
6d.
post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all" Booksellers.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E, Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching: boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae ; 
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa- digging ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light ; grouting ; smoking ; killing ; relaxing ; setting ; grease ; mites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera ; Hymenoptera ; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
THE NATUEALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Hymenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson-.
Liverpool Coleoptera (Part io)~-J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., &c.
Mariield Pond— Thomas Carter.
Bibliograpby for 1885.
Natural History of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to '^J^.
one willing to furnish notes.
Short Not p -S.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Concho logy, &c, are particularly desired.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. 1, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained; Itj 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
. • 
THE JOUMAL OF MICROSCOPY AHD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S.., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C 
Now ready, &vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
NOW READY, Demy Svo, with Map and Coloured Plate.
Price 7s.
6d.
Postage 6d.
pl.
xx and 200.
THE BIRDS OF CUMBERLAND 
Including some notes on the BIRDS OF WESTMORELAND.
By Rev. H.
A. MACPHERSON, M.A., and WILLIAM DUCKWORTH.
The object of this work is to furnish a succinct account of the Avi-fauna of Cumberland 
a County but little known to the majority of British Ornithologists.
The habits of al 
characteristic Cumbrian Birds will be fully described from the Authors' voluminous field notes 
The scattered literature of the subject has been carefully explored.
Copies may be ordered of 
Mr. W.
DUCKWORTH, 8a, George Street, CARLISLE.
No. 132.
JULY, 1886.
yam.
-NinillL 'iiiiiilli.
^iiii 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
^I^VM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S 
AND 
O^M.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S.
, 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
Upper Nidderdale and its Fauna— W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., W.
Denison Roebuck, 
F.L.S.
, and William Storey .
. ..
.. ..
. .
Notes— Botany :— ..
.. 
Flora of Strensall and District — P.
F. Lee; Manchester Cryptogamic Society; 
Mosses and Hepatics at Askern— Matthew B.
Slater.
Note— Mollusca : — 
Paludina contecta in Notts.
— W.
A. Gain, M.C.S.
Note — Micro-Zoology and Botany : — «.
.. ..
.. 
Microscopic life at Askern — J.
M. Kirk.
Note — Lepidoptera: — 
Variation in the Genus Cidaria — ff, Goss.
Sec. F.S.
Note— Hymenoptera:— 
Pteromalus puparum near Louth — H.
Wallis Kezv, F.E.S.
Notes — Ornithology: — 
Swallows and the late Storm — John Emmet, F.L.S., y.
Backhouse, j'unr., M.B.O. U., 
and C.
Oldham ; Jackdaw and Young Birds — H.
T. Archer', Birds deserting their 
Nests — Idem ; Thrush laying in a Blackbird's nest, and late stay of Redwing — y.
Backhouse, junr., M.B.O. U.; Dunlins and Black Tern near Nottingham — F.
B. 
Whitlock ; Pied Flycatcher in North Lincolnshire — y.
E. Mason.
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Flamborough Head ..' 
Book Notices :— 
(London Catalogue of British Plants, eighth edition ; 2nd Annual Report of Watson 
Botanical Exchange Club.) 
Notes and News .
. „ 
193— 211 
212 
213 
213 
213 
213 
214, 215 
216 — 219 
219—223 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CaRDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
All Communications should be Addressed:— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
>co< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
>od< 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6"; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Midland Naturalist for June 1886.
- [The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for June 1886.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for June 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for June 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for June 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Natural History Journal for June 1886.
[J.
E. Clarke, Editor.
New York Microscopical Society — Journal for March 1886.
[From the Society.
Royal Dublin Society.
— Scientific Proceedings, vol.
4, parts 7, 8, 9 ; vol.
5, parts 
1 and 2.
[Society.
Notes on the Aspect of the Planet Mars in 1884 — Otto Bceddicker.
[Royal Dublin Society.
Geological Age of North Atlantic Ocean — Edwd.
Hull.
[Royal Dublin Society.
Fossil Mammalia of Ireland — Valentine Ball.
[Royal Dublin Society.
Changes of Radiation of Heat from the Moon — Otto Bceddicker.
[Royal Dublin Society.
Revue Bryologique, 13c Annee, 1886, No. 3.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
The late Mr. William Wilson.
— James Cash.
8vo, 22 pages.
[Warrington Field Club.
Grevillea.
a quarterlv record of Cryptogamic Botany — Vol. 14, No. 72, June 1886.
[Dr. Cooke, Editor.
Nottingham Naturalists' Society — Transactions and 33rd Report, 1885.
[The Society.
Lord Lilford's Coloured Figures of British Birds — Part 2.
[Lord Lilford.
ACKWOETH SHELLS.
— It is proposed to publish in the Natural 
History Journal a list of the Land and Freshwater Shells found near Ackworth.
Ack worth lies in the Went Vale district of Nelson and Taylor's Yorkshire 
Mollusca.
Any help will be very welcome.
Address : — W.
D. Bratthwaite, 
Ackworth School, near Pontefract; or, Hugh Richardson, The Gables, Elswick 
Road, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
•etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
193 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., Leeds.
W. DENIS0N ROEBUCK, F.L.S., Leeds.
WILLIAM STOREY, Pateley Bridge.
In view of the forthcoming visit of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union to Upper Nidderdale, the 
following account of it from a zoological point of view will not be without interest.
Upper Nidderdale shares with Upper Swaledale the character of 
being the most unsophisticated, the most secluded and sequestered 
of the Yorkshire dales, and in each case the cause is the same.
Closed in at the dale-head by a long and semicircular sweep of moun- 
tain wall which for nearly forty miles attains a continuous and un- 
broken elevation of more than a thousand feet, and on Great Whern- 
side reaches its maximum altitude of 2,310 feet, the dale is clearly 
and sharply cut off from the neighbouring areas by a physical barrier 
which, far from easy to traverse in summer, becomes practically im- 
passable in the winter.
As a natural consequence of their isolation 
from this cause, the people of the dale retain to a greater extent than 
elsewhere their primitive manners and customs, their vernacular 
speech, and their old-world superstitions.
The fauna and flora of the 
dale, too, are more secure here than elsewhere from the inroads of 
the vandals and philistines at whose hands the districts which are 
more easily reached by railway have suffered to so large — not to say 
alarming — an extent, and consequently retain their native luxuriance 
and -variety to an unusual degree.
The total drainage area or catchment basin of the river Nidd, from 
its origin on the flank of Great Whernside to its junction with the Ouse 
at Nun Monkton, is given at 260 square miles.
Of this, however, what 
is called i Nidderdale' covers only about a hundred square miles, 
and may be said to terminate at about Ripley, where the hills rapidly 
decline and the basin of Nidd becomes merged in that of its main 
stream.
Eastward of Ripley the many windings of the river, whether 
it flows beneath the historic castle of Knaresborough or meanders 
lazily through the pleasant meadows of Ribston, past the gigantic old 
oak of Cowthorpe and by the once blood-stained field of Marston 
Moor, are through the level alluvial flats of the great central plain or 
vale of York.
The physical configuration of the dale shares the general uniformity 
of its geological structure, which is for the most part millstone grit, 
except for the very limited tracts where the most easterly outcrops of 
July 1886.
O 
194 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
the mountain limestones occur.
At the dale-head the mountain 
pastures sweep down in broad grassy declivities or slopes from the 
summit ridge to the river banks, and some portion of the watershed 
is capped by undulating plateaux of heatherland much broken up 
by peat-ravines.
Down the mountain pastures trickle the innumer- 
able rills which by their union form the head-waters of Nidd and 
its tributaries.
The river, which rapidly acquires force and volume 
from the numerous tributary streams which feed it, runs a course due 
east for about six miles before turning southward.
About Angram it 
is margined by numerous escarpments of shale of considerable height, 
and fringed by a slight growth of wood and coppice.
The outcrop 
of mountain limestone above Lofthouse is the cause of beauty and 
picturesqueness in the scenery of the dale and of its chief tributary, 
the How Stean Beck, the lower part of whose course lies through a 
deep and imposing gorge in the limestone, the remarkable scenery of 
which can hardly be excelled for grandeur and interest.
Two miles 
above Lofthouse the river Nidd disappears entirely, precipitating 
itself into the pot-holes called Manchester Hole and Goyden Pot, to 
reappear in volume below Lofthouse after a subterranean course of 
a couple of miles in extent.
Not that the visible bed of the stream is 
dry throughout, for the feeders from the mountain slopes are sufficient 
to keep the stream running above ground as well as below.
At its 
reappearance the Nidd enters upon the more sober formation of the 
millstone grit, and, leaving behind it the tinge of romance which 
attends its disappearance in the permeable limestones, from hence- 
forth pursues the even tenor of its way in the full light of day.
Below Lofthouse the dale becomes irregular in surface, and it is 
moderately well wooded about and below Pateley Bridge, while at 
Brimham rocks and Guyscliffe the skyline is diversified by crags of 
the most extraordinary conformation.
Concerning the geology of the district it is not our province to 
speak ; and as to its botany, we must refer to the various floras and 
other works which include Nidderdale in their scope.
Nor in respect of zoology does this paper profess to embody more 
than the original and unpublished observations made by ourselves and 
a few others during the past few years.
Had we taken cognizance of 
the whole bibliography of the subject, the present paper might have 
grown to the dimensions of a volume, and we will therefore here 
content ourselves by merely referring to Mr. Joseph Lucas' ' Studies 
in Nidderdale' as containing much information on the natural history 
of the whole district, which, when added to our own, will make a 
tolerably complete account of what is at present known on the 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
195 
MAMMALS.
The mammalian fauna has been well worked out, and there are 
not many local catalogues which can show a better list of bats, 
one of which — the Lesser Horse-shoe Bat — here reaches its northern- 
most limit in Britain.
It would be of interest to confirm or dis- 
prove the existence of the Harvest-mouse, and to study the 
specific distinctions of the Shrews.
The following notes refer to 
30 species, of which about 25 may be taken as constituting the 
present fauna.
Lesser Horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus hipposideros.
Two specimens 
were at different times within three days taken in Smelthouse 
Wood, near Pateley.
Long-eared Bat. Plecotus auritus.
A common species, occurring 
throughout the district, from Darley to as high up the dale as 
Lofthouse Common.
Storey has found it under stones in the 
quarries, and it is found beneath ivy in trees and old buildings ; 
15 at one time at Dowgill.
This species is a familiar one, and 
regarded not only as a hybrid between a mouse and a bird, but 
also as an omen of ill luck.
Noctule.
Vesperugo noctula.
Occasionally about Bewerley Hall 
and at Glasshouses, where a dozen were observed on one sum- 
mer evening in 1885.
Has been taken hybernating in winter.
Pipistrelle.
Vesperugo pipistrellus.
Very common.
In ivy, in 
roofs ; many a score found at a time at Glasshouses.
Natterer's Bat. Vespertilio nattereri.
Occasionally found near 
Pateley Bridge, Glasshouses, Gowthwaite Hall, &c.
Whiskered Bat. Vespertilio mystacinus.
Nearly as common as 
the Pipistrelle, and occurs as high up the dale as Lofthouse.
Hedgehog.
Erinaceus europseus.
Called ' Otchon' about Pateley, 
pronounced 1 urchen ' lower down the dale.
Common every- 
where, and found as high as Angram and Greenhow Hill.
As elsewhere, this animal is vulgarly accused of sucking cows.
A friend of Storey's, upon whom reliance can be placed, 
took a light one summer's night in a lane near Pateley, thought 
he saw a rabbit, but found it was a Hedgehog, which was in a 
a humble-bee's nest, the bees buzzing about.
Mole.
Talpa europsea.
Local names : 1 Mowdy,' * Mowdywarp.' 
Very common in the dale, and on Pateley Moor and Greenhow 
Hill.
White examples have already been recorded in the 
Naturalist.
Shrew.
Sorex tetragontmis.
Local name : 4 The Little Shrew 
Mouse.' Common.
July 1886.
196 UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Water Shrew.
Crossopus fodiens.
Rather common in the little 
streams in Smelthouse Wood.
Fox. Canis vulpes.
Local names : 'Renny' or 'Fox.' Its favourite 
haunts are Brimham and Guyscliffe, particularly the latter.
Marten.
Martes sylvestris.
Local name : ' Sweet Mart.' This 
rare animal has occurred at Ripley and other places.
Weasel.
Mustela vulgaris.
Local names : * Mouse-hunter/ 
' Mouse- Weasel.' Common.
Stoat.
Mustela erminea.
Local name :' Powcat' Not so common 
as the Weasel.
Polecat.
Mustela putorius.
Local name : ' Powcat.' Formerly 
common.
Probably still lingers in Guyscliffe, Helksgill, and 
Ramsgill, but none have been noticed of late years.
Otter.
Lutra vulgaris.
Extremely rare in Nidderdale.
Has 
occurred as high up as Ramsgill, but most of the occurrences 
have been about Pateley.
Badger.
Meles taxus.
Local name : ' Pate ' [hence Pateley = the 
badgers' field].
Used within living memory to be rather 
common, but recent occurrences are only few in number.
Red Deer.
Cervus elaphus.
A note on the occurrence of escaped 
deer from Studley appeared in the present volume of the 
Naturalist, p.
36.
Fallow Deer.
Cervus dama.
One was killed in How Stean several 
years ago, having probably escaped from Bolton or Studley 
Park.
Squirrel.
Sciurus vulgaris.
Common, but not so much so as 
before the very hard winters of five or six years ago, when great 
numbers perished.
Dormouse.
Muscardinus avellanarius.
Not common, but occurs 
sparingly in most of the woods.
Harvest Mouse.
Mus minutus.
George Charlton describes his 
having seen this species nesting in a corn-field.
We have not, 
however, seen specimens, and cannot vouch for this species 
being a member of the Nidderdale fauna.
Long-tailed Field Mouse.
Mus sylvaticus.
Not so common as 
the Field Vole.
House Mouse.
Mus musculus.
Common in all houses.
Brown Rat. Mus decumanus.
Local name : ' Ratten.' A great 
pest.
Water Vole.
Arvicola amphibia.
Local name : ' Water Ratten.' 
Common in the streams.
Field Vole.
Arvicola agrestis.
Locally called ' Short-tailed Field 
Mouse.' Common ; may be easily caught in hedge-bottoms.
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
197 
Red Field Vole.
Arvicola glareolus.
Common.
Usually looked 
upon not as a mouse, but a small rat.
Hare.
Lepus europseus.
Common ; occurs on the moors right up 
to Great and Little Whernside.
Rabbit.
Lepus cuniculus.
Abundant.
Silver-grey rabbits have 
been turned down by Messrs.
Yorke and Harker.
BIRDS.
The avifauna of Upper Nidderdale is singularly rich in residents 
and summer visitants, no less than 90 species breeding annually 
within its limits — a census which it would be perhaps difficult to 
surpass in any similar area in the county.
This special feature of 
true ornithic wealth is no doubt due to the great diversity of habitat 
afforded.
The river Nidd furnishes and traverses a variety of haunts, 
from alpine moorlands, shaley bluffs, many of them clothed with 
hanging vegetation, and is margined with a luxurious growth of 
timber, brake, and pasture, while its many feeders flow down deep, 
rocky, picturesque, and secluded dells.
The woodlands and coppices 
are numerous, and but seldom trodden.
The grasslands are exten- 
sive and varied.
The moorlands encircle the entire district, while 
at Guyscliffe and Brimham are to be found bold cliffs.
We must 
remember, too, since it is an important item, the secluded nature of 
the entire district, which has already been mentioned.
But while the 
region thus affords such an extensive range of physical feature, yet it 
lacks the lake and the tarn, and thus it is not visited by some of the 
numerous species of migratory waders during the spring and autumn 
movements, nor by the many members of the Duck family, which in 
winter are so numerous on such waters.
The total avifauna of Upper Nidderdale, so far as it is known at 
present, comprises 123 species.
Of these 62 are Residents, 28 are 
Summer Visitants, 1 1 Winter Visitants, and 23 are Casual or Periodic 
Visitants and more or less rare.
It is amongst this latter division that 
the future additions to the list will, we venture to say, be made.
Among the Resident species the most interesting are — Goldfinch, 
a very local Yorkshire bird ; the Hawfinch, which has only recently 
extended its range hither ; the Crossbill, also only recently detected ; 
the Lesser Spotted Woodpecker, another uncommon county species ; 
the Heron, which nests singly in the woods ; the Teal, nesting on the 
moorlands ; the Woodcock, whose eggs and chicks have more than 
once been found; while the Dipper, the Grey Wagtail, and the Grouse 
are characteristic of the subalpine nature of the district.
July 1886.
I98 UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Among the Summer Visitants may be mentioned the local Black- 
cap ; the Wood Wren, becoming common; the pretty and erratically 
distributed Pied Flycatcher ; that most local of Yorkshire birds, the 
Wryneck, which there is reason to think is, perhaps, an annual 
visitor; the Dunlin, which breeds annually on some of the moorlands ; 
while the Ring Ouzel, the Wheatear, and the Sandpiper are typical 
The Winter and the Casual and Periodic Visitants do not demand 
special notice, and they are treated of sufficiently in the subjoined 
annotated list ; but, nevertheless, the occurrence of the Skua (Sterco- 
rarws caiarrhactes) is somewhat remarkable.
Of the former bird-life of the Upper Nidd but little can be gleaned, 
and nothing concerning it appears to have been placed on record.
It is, however, within the memory of natives now living when the 
Raven and the Buzzard were to be classed among the indigenous 
species ; and when the Starling, now to be voted a nuisance by the 
ornithologist, since it ousts better things, was a very uncommon bird 
indeed.
The heights to which some of the species are stated to ascend 
apply in all cases, except in those of the Golden Plover and the 
Grouse, to observations taken in the valley by the river-side, and above 
and about Angram, where the river runs through a particularly wild 
country, destitute of all cover save of the most stunted description, 
and have been determined by the aneroid.
It would be interesting 
to ascertain to what height in the valley other species ascend, and we 
hope to devote further attention to this phase in the ornithology of 
Upper Nidderdale.
Missel Thrush.
Turdus viscivorus.
Resident, and common 
throughout the dale below Lofthouse.
Song Thrush.
Turdus musicus.
Common, but not so numerous 
as it was a few years ago.
Redwing.
Turdus iliacus.
A common winter visitant ; often 
confounded with the Fieldfare by the natives.
Fieldfare.
Turdus pilaris.
A common winter visitant.
Local 
names : ' chocker,' ' felfer.' 
Blackbird.
Turdus merula.
Common resident up to Whernside.
King Ouzel.
Turdus torquatus.
A common summer visitant to 
the dale above Brimham, nesting on the moorlands and the 
margins of the Nidd above • Goydon Pot.' 
Dipper.
Cinclus aquaticus.
A fairly common resident ; observed 
to be more numerous below Pateley.
Wheatear.
Saxicola oenanthe.
A summer visitor, common, and 
generally distributed up to, and perhaps above, 1,200 feet.
Locally known as the ' Stonechat.' 
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
1 99 
Whinchat.
Pratincola rubetra.
A common summer visitant, 
occurring in the valley up to 1,000 feet.
Stonechat.
Pratincola rubicola.
Rare; nested at Guyscliffe in 1884, 
and at Fellbeck in 1885.
Redstart.
Ruticilla phcenicurus.
A fairly common summer 
visitant, occurring as high up the dale as Lofthouse.
Local 
names : ' wrenny,' i wrenny redtail.' 
Redbreast.
Erithacus rubecula.
A common resident.
Whitethroat.
Sylvia cinerea.
A summer visitant, and common.
Locally called ' big peggy,' and ' big peggy whitethroat.' 
Lesser Whitethroat.
Sylvia curruca.
A summer visitant ; not so 
common as the last named.
Blackcap.
Sylvia atricapilla.
A summer visitant, occurring 
sparingly in the wooded portions of the dale.
Garden Warbler.
Sylvia hortensis.
A common summer visitant.
Locally known as the 'hairtail.' 
Goldcrest.
Regulus cristatus.
A resident, breeding sparingly ; 
more numerous in winter.
Chiffchaff.
Phylloscopus rufus.
A summer visitor to the woodlands.
Willow Wren.
Phylloscopus trochilus.
A common summer 
visitant ; and, along with the last, confounded with the Lesser 
Whitethroat.
Wood Wren.
Phylloscopus sibilatrix.
A summer visitant, not 
uncommon in the woodlands below Ramsgill.
Sedge Warbler.
Acrocephalus phragmitis.
A pretty generally 
distributed summer visitant.
Grasshopper Warbler.
Locustella naevia.
A summer visitant, 
occurring sparingly as high as Lofthouse.
Hedge Accentor.
Accentor modularis.
A common resident.
Long-tailed Titmouse.
Acredula rosea.
A common resident in 
the wooded portions of the dale.
Great Titmouse.
Parus major.
A common resident, locally called 
' great billy bluecap.' 
Coal Titmouse.
Parus britannicus.
A fairly common resident.
Marsh Titmouse.
Parus palustris.
A fairly common resident.
Blue Titmouse.
Parus cseruleus.
A common resident, and locally 
known as ' billy blue-cap.' 
Creeper.
Certhia familiaris.
A resident ; fairly common.
Wren.
Troglodytes parvulus.
A common resident, occurring in 
the valley as high as 1,100 feet.
Local names: 'tommy tit,' 
* jenny wren.' 
Pied Wagtail.
Motacilla lugubris.
A common resident, and 
local ly known as the ' water wagtail,' and ' waggy.' 
July 1886.
200 UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Grey "Wagtail.
Motacilla melanope.
Fairly common in summer, 
much less so in winter.
Yellow Wagtail.
Motacilla raii.
A summer visitant, but not 
common.
Meadow Pipit.
Anthus pratensis.
A common resident, occurring 
to a great elevation on the grassy hills.
Local names : ' titling/ 
' moor pout.' 
Tree Pipit.
Anthus trivialis.
A fairly common summer visitant.
Great Grey Shrike.
Lanius excuhitor.
An occasional winter 
visitant.
One shot at Wilsill in 1884, another in 1885.
Waxwing.
Ampelis garrulus.
An irregular winter visitant.
A 
pair in Mr. Yorke's collection were shot in the Bewerley 
Woods.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Muscicapa grisola.
A common summer 
visitant.
Pied Flycatcher.
Muscicapa atricapilla.
A local and not 
numerous summer visitant, breeding at Brimham, Guyscliffe, 
Pateley, Wath, Ramsgill, and as high as Lofthouse.
Swallow.
Hirundo rustiea.
A common summer visitant, observed 
above Angram, and as high up the dale as 1,100 feet.
Martin.
Chelidon urbica.
A common summer visitant, observed 
above Angram, and up to 1,150 feet.
Sand Martin.
Cotile riparia.
A common summer visitant, 
occurring to 1,100 feet above Angram, and on Greenhow Hill, 
1,400 feet.
Goldfinch.
Carduelis elegans.
Not very uncommon in winter ; has 
twice nested in the dale.
Locally called ' redcap.' 
Siskin.
Chrysomitris spinus.
A winter visitant.
During the winter 
of 1885-6 a large flock frequented the alders bordering the Nidd, 
near Pateley, 
Greenfinch.
Ligurinus chloris.
A common resident.
Hawfinch.
Coccothraustes vulgaris.
An uncommon resident.
Only lately detected in the dale.
Sparrow.
Passer domesticus.
An abundant resident up to Angram.
Tree Sparrow.
Passer montanus.
A resident, but not common, 
and much overlooked.
Chaffinch.
Fringilla ccelebs.
A common resident.
Locally known 
as the 'bullspink.' Observed above Angram, at 1,050 feet.
Brambling.
Fringilla montifringilla.
A winter visitant, noted in 
small flocks during the seasons of 1884 and 1885.
Linnet.
Linota cannabina.
A resident, but not.
so common as 
formerly, owing to the numbers captured for sale.
Local names : 
'robin linnet,' 'grey linnet.' 
, Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
20I 
Lesser Bedpoll.
Linota rufescens.
A resident, breeding sparingly 
at Brimham and Guyscliffe.
Common in winter, when large 
flocks may be seen feeding on the alders fringing the Nidd.
Local name : 'chevy linnet.' 
Twite.
Linota flavirostris.
A resident, breeding sparingly on the 
moorlands.
Large flocks visit the lower lands in the autumn 
and winter.
Bullfinch.
Pyrrhnla europsea.
A resident, but not common.
Crossbill.
Loxia curvirostra.
Probably a resident.
A few have 
been noted in recent years in the fir woods near Pateley ; 
several observed there during the winter of 1885, again in 
January 1886.
Common Bunting.
Emberiza miliaria.
A common resident.
Yellow Bunting.
Emberiza citrinella.
A very common resident.
Beed Bunting.
Emberiza schceniclus.
Resident, but not common.
Snow Bunting.
Plectrophanes nivalis.
A common winter visitant, 
chiefly to the moorlands, where large flocks, composed mostly 
of young birds, are observed.
Skylark.
Alauda arvensis.
A common resident; observed at 
Angram, at 1,000 feet, and on Greenhow, 1,400 feet.
Starling.
Sturnus vulgaris.
A common resident.
John Sinclair, 
aged 76, remembers when there were only one or two pairs of 
this now most numerous species in and around Pateley.
Local 
name : ' sheep starling.' 
Jay. Garrulus glandarius.
Resident, but in limited numbers, and 
fast becoming rarer, owing to persecution by the gamekeepers.
. Its haunts are chiefly the woods at Brimham and Guyscliffe.
Not 
known to nest above Ramsgill.
Local name : 'jinny jay.' 
Magpie.
Pica caudata.
Resident, and subject to the same remarks 
as the Jay. Local name : ' nanpie.' 
Jackdaw.
Corvus monedula.
Resident and common, especially at 
Guyscliffe.
Carrion Crow.
Corvus corone.
Resident in limited numbers through- 
out the dale.
Locally known as the ' ket crow.' 
Hooded Crow.
Corvus cornix.
A common winter visitant, locally 
known as the 'Norway crow.' 
Book.
Corvus frugilegus.
A very common resident, known as 
the 'crow.' 
Baven.
Corvus corax.
A rare visitor.
Formerly resident, and 
breeding.
A pied specimen, in the collection at Bevverley Hall, 
was shot in the dale several years ago.
Swift.
Cypselus apus.
A common summer visitant, but not occur- 
ring above Ramsgill.
Local name : ' devil screamer.' 
July 1886.
202 UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Night-jar.
Caprimulgus europseus.
A common summer visitant.
Local names : ' night crow,' ' night hawk.' 
Great Spotted Woodpecker.
Dendrocopus major.
A resident, 
breeding sparingly at Guyscliffe and Brimham.
Lesser Spotted Woodpecker.
Dendrocopus minor.
An uncommon 
resident.
Several pairs nesting in the dale.
Green Woodpecker.
Gecinus viridis.
Resident and fairly common ; 
breeding in most of the woods.
Wryneck.
Yunx torquilla.
An uncommon summer visitant.
One 
caught on the 3rd of May, 1886, at Fell Beck.
Kingfisher.
Alcedo ispida.
A resident in limited and decreasing 
numbers, nesting up to Lofthouse.
Cuckoo.
Cuculus canorus.
A common summer visitant.
Storey 
has only found the eggs in the Meadow Pipit's nest.
Observed 
as high as 1,150 feet above Angram.
White Owl. Strix flammea.
A very uncommon resident, locally 
known as ' ullat.' 
Long-eared Owl. Asio otus.
A not uncommon resident, locally 
known as the ' long-horned ullat.' 
Short-eared Owl. Asio accipitrinus.
A winter visitant Abundant 
in 1883-4.
Local name : 4 short-horned ullat' 
Tawny Owl. Syrnium aluco.
A common resident, locally known 
as the ' wood ullat.' 
Common Buzzard.
Buteo vulgaris.
Doubtless once common ; now 
seldom seen.
One in the collection at Bewerley Hall was 
obtained in the dale several years ago, by Mr. T.
E. Yorke.
Kough-legged Buzzard.
Archibuteo lagopus.
One trapped near 
Ramsgill, in the winter of 1883.
Sparrowhawk.
Accipiter nisus.
Common resident.
Peregrine Falcon.
Falco peregrinus.
A pair shot in the dale in 
1846, by Mr. Christopher Woodhead.
Merlin.
Falco sesalon.
A resident in limited numbers, nesting on 
the moorlands.
Kestrel.
Tinnunculus alaudarius.
A common resident.
Osprey.
Pandion haliaetus.
One shot by Mr. Thomas Joy, on 
Whernside, several years ago.
Cormorant.
Phalacrocorax carbo.
One shot at Middlesmoor, in 
the autumn of 1885.
Common Heron.
Ardea cinerea.
A resident, nests being noted 
every year in Ruddingsgill and other suitable places.
There 
are small Heronries at Ripley Park and Bishop Thornton.
Local name : 'heronsew.' 
Wild Goose.
Flocks noted every winter.
Species not ascertained.
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
203 
Sheldrake.
Tadorna vulpanser.
A male shot, out of a party of four, 
on Hayshaw Moor, near Pateley, on the 6th December, 1884.
Mallard.
Anas boscas.
Resident in limited numbers ; common in 
winter.
Teal.
Querquedula crecca.
Resident; breeding on the moors, and 
in 1885 on the lakes at Eagle Hall, the residence of the 
Hon. H.
E. Butler.
Wigeon.
Mareca penelope.
A common winter visitant.
Pochard.
Fuligula ferina.
Several have been shot in the dale, 
one of which is in the Bewerley collection.
Scaup.
Fuligula marila.
A male caught on the Nidd at Pateley, 
on the 30th of January, 1885, is now in the possession of Mr. L 
Sinclair.
Common Scoter.
(Edemia nigra.
A casual visitant on migration.
Several specimens have been obtained.
Ring Dove.
Columba palumbus.
A common resident, locally 
known as the 'cooshat' 
Stock Dove.
Columba cenas.
Resident, and rather common at 
Guyscliffe.
Often called the ' rock dove.' 
Pheasant.
Phasianus colchicus.
Common resident.
Partridge.
Perdix cinerea.
A resident, common in the lowlands 
and occurring sparingly on the moors.
Common Quail.
Coturnix communis.
Mr. Smith Metcalf found a 
nest in a field at Fellbeck, in the summer of 1870.
One shot at 
North Oaks, on the 7th of September, 1885, by Mr. C.
T. Naylor.
Red Grouse.
Lagopus scoticus.
A common resident on the 
• moorlands.
A cream-coloured variety shot in the dale, is 
described in the Naturalist for January 1886.
Black Grouse.
Tetrao tetrix.
Many were turned down a few 
years ago by the late Mr. John Yorke, but soon disappeared, 
though several have been shot during recent years.
Water Rail.
Rallus aquations.
Three specimens have been 
obtained, one on October 30th, 1884, on Hardcastle Moor, and 
the last was shot on the 21st of October, 1885, at Wilsill, near 
Pateley.
Land Rail.
Crex pratensis.
A common summer visitant, locally 
known as the ' daker hen.' Has nested on Greenhow Hill 
(1,400 feet).
Moorhen.
Gallinula chloropus.
A rather common resident, and 
known here, as elsewhere in Yorkshire, as the 'water-hen.' 
Coot.
Fulica atra.
A casual visitant, only once known to have 
occurred, at Middlesmoor, where one was captured in autumn 
of 1884.
July 1886.
204 UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Golden Plover.
Charadrius pluvialis.
A summer visitant, breeding 
on the moors up to 2,500 feet.
Occasionally seen in winter.
Ringed Plover.
iEgialitis hiaticula.
One shot on the Nidd at 
Pateley several years ago, by Mr. Horner.
Dotterel.
Eudromias morinellus.
One shot on Pateley Moor 
several years ago, by Mr. Wm.
Thorpe, and another by Mr. C.
Beck, on Pateley Moor, in the autumn of 1884.
Lapwing.
Vanellus vulgaris.
A common resident, locally known 
as the ' tewitt,' ' pewitt,' ' teafitt ' (pronounced ' tearnt ').
Qystercatcher.
Hsematopus ostralegus.
A pair observed on 
Greenhow Hill, in May 1880.
Woodcock.
Scolopax rusticula.
A resident, breeding in very limited 
numbers.
Not uncommon in winter.
Common Snipe.
Gallinago ccelestis.
A common resident.
Jack Snipe.
Lymnocryptes gallinula.
A common winter visitant.
Dunlin.
Tringa alpina.
A summer visitant ; a few pairs nesting 
annually on the moorlands.
Common Sandpiper.
Tringoides hypoleucus.
A common summer 
visitant, occurring up to the source of the Nidd.
Green Sandpiper.
Helodromas ochropus.
One shot in September 
1885, on Heathfield Moor, near Pateley, by Mr. E.
Yorke.
Curlew.
Numenius arquata.
A common summer visitant to the 
moorlands.
Common Gull.
Larus canus.
A spring and autumn visitant to the dale.
Lesser Black-backed Gull.
Larus fuscus.
Like the last, a spring 
and autumn visitant.
Skua.
Stercorarius catarrhactes.
Caught near Pateley in 1864, 
and now in the Bewerley Hall collection, 
Storm Petrel.
Procellaria pelagica.
One found dead at Dacre 
Banks, by Mr. J.
W. Whitley, in the winter of 1865.
Little Grebe.
Tachybaptes fluviatilis.
Resident; breeding at 
Fellback ; often seen in winter.
REPTILES AND AMPHIBIANS.
The list of reptiles and amphibians is somewhat meagre, and when 
further attention is paid to these animals we may expect to include 
the Great Warty Newt, which has never yet been reported.
Viper.
Vipera berus.
Local name : ' hag-worm.' Common on 
the moors.
Common Lizard.
Lacerta vivipara.
Local names 1 'askerd,' 'asker/ 
'aask.' Common in old stone heaps, old walls, in woods, and 
wherever a lot of rubbish has accumulated.
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
205 
Slow-worm.
Anguis fragilis.
Local name: 'sleerworm.' Common 
in hedge-bottoms and woods.
Smooth Newt.
Triton tseniatus.
Local names: ' watter-askerd,' 
* watter-asker,' ' watter-aask.' Common in stagnant waters.
Toad.
Bufo vulgaris.
Local name : 'te-ad.' Common.
Frog.
Rana temporaria.
Common.
FISHES.
The ichthyology of Nidderdale is not very rich.
The physical 
character of the district precludes the occurrence of many kinds of 
fish, and consequently we have but seven to record.
Fish have been 
introduced into the Nidd at various times.
Mr. Yorke, some six or 
seven years ago, introduced some thousands of the Neuchatel trout, 
both above and below Ramsgill.
None appear to have been taken 
by anglers since, so that the introduction appears not to have in- 
creased the fish found in the river.
Storey has never met with any 
fish but trout in the river or streams above Lofthouse, and it becomes 
a question for consideration whether the two-mile subterranean course 
of the river is a bar to the ascent of fish.
River Bullhead.
Cottus gobio.
Local name: 'bullhead.' Very 
numerous in the Nidd, somewhat less so in the streamlets.
Minnow.
Leuciscus phoxinus.
Local name: 'minnerd.' Occurs 
in little shoals, common in the Nidd below Lofthouse, but not 
so in the tributaries.
Loach.
Nemachilus barbatulus.
Local name: 'pottle.' Common 
.in places where the lampern is found; very numerous in the 
Nidd, somewhat less so in the streamlets.
Trout.
Salmo fario.
Very numerous, particularly near the source 
of the river.
They are, however, here much smaller and much 
darker in colour than in the lower and more open parts of the 
stream.
In some of the deeper chasms of How Stean Beck, 
into which the sun's rays never penetrate, the trout are extremely 
dark, almost black.
Grayling.
Thymallus vulgaris.
By no means numerous, and 
occurs almost entirely in the Nidd itself, being more frequently 
met with near Pateley than elsewhere.
Eel. Anguilla vulgaris.
Comparatively numerous, especially where 
there are sandbanks or congenial mud.
Seldom found in any 
of the tributaries.
Lampern.
Petromyzon fluviatilis.
Local name : 1 little lamp eel.' 
Met with very commonly in shallow places, where considerable 
deposits of sand and shingle have been left by the river.
July 1886.
2o6 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
MOLLUSCA.
The most striking characteristic of the molluscan fauna of Nidder- 
dale, imperfectly studied as it has been, is the almost total absence 
from it of freshwater species, the ubiquitous Limncea peregra being 
the only one as yet recorded for the dale.
Nor can we expect 
more than, say, half a dozen species to be found, for the Nidderdale 
area is one of rapid and impetuous streams, and hardly offers scope 
anywhere for standing waters of sufficient permanence to attract many 
species.
Of land shells 32 species, and of slugs seven species have 
been noted, and there are doubtless various forms still to reward 
further investigation.
Not that much variety of station is afforded 
by the district generally, the almost uniform geological structure of 
which does not tend to the nourishment of molluscan life, save 
where the limited outcrops of mountain limestone at How Stean and 
on Greenhow Hill impart a new element to the district, the effect of 
which is seen in the presence of such species as Helix lapidda, 
H. rupestris, Balea, and Clausilia lamtnata, all of which, as well 
as other species, are in Nidderdale confined to the calcareous 
element in the soil.
The observations embodied iri the list which 
follows are mainly the result of the investigations of Mr. Storey, 
about Pateley, and of Mr. F.
T. Walker, about Birstwith, and also 
include scattered observations made by other naturalists.
For the 
determination of all Mr. Storey's and many of Mr. Walker's speci- 
mens we have been indebted to Mr. J.
W. Taylor.
It may be added 
that the list should include another species of slug, which, however, 
has not yet been formally proclaimed as a member of the British 
fauna, and is, therefore, for the present omitted.
Arion ater.
Abundant throughout the dale, from 1,500 feet 
elevation on the slopes of Great Whernside downwards.
Arion hortensis.
Birstwith, Ramsgill, Pateley, etc.
Common in 
cultivated tracts.
Amalia marginata.
Has been reported as occurring at Pateley 
Bridge, but the record is open to grave doubt.
Limax maximus.
Near Pateley Bridge and Goydon Pot ; very 
common at Birstwith.
Limax arborum.
An abundant species in the dale ; has been noted 
at Pateley Bridge, near Gouthwaite, at Glasshouses, and near 
Ripley.
Limax flavus.
Rennie Crags, near Birstwith (F.
T. Walker).
Limax agrestis and vars.
sylvatica and tristis.
Very abundant 
throughout the dale, from 1,200 feet elevation downwards.
Vitrina pellucida.
Very common in damp woods ; Birstwith, 
Ripley, Pateley Bridge, Ramsgill, etc.
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
207 
Zonites cellarius.
Common ; Birstwith, Ripley, Dacre Banks, Rams- 
gill, Greenhow Hill, Lofthouse, How Stean, Goydon Pot, etc.
Zonites alliarius.
Harefield and Guyscliffe Woods, Pateley Bridge, 
Ripley, Hartwith, etc.
Zonites nitidulns.
Very common at Ripley and Birstwith.
var.
nitens.
Birstwith.
Zonites purus.
Pateley Bridge and Birstwith, in limited numbers.
var.
margaritacea.
Plentiful on a bank near Nidd Bridge.
Zonites radiatulus.
Common at Birstwith.
Zonites excavatus.
Guyscliffe Wood, Pateley.
Zonites crystallinus.
Greenhow Hill, Ripley, marshy field near 
Darley, and very common at Birstwith.
Zonites fulvus.
Birstwith, found in a damp beech wood, under 
decayed leaves.
Helix nemoralis.
How Stean, Pateley, etc., but does not appear to 
be plentiful.
Helix hortensis.
Near Pateley Bridge, Goydon Pot, Harefield 
Wood, Glasshouses, How Stean, Lofthouse, Ramsgill, etc., very 
numerous.
The var.
lutea 00000 appears to be a prevalent one, 
and roseolabiate forms have occurred..
Helix arbustorum.
Pateley Bridge, How Stean, etc.
The only 
Birstwith example was a broken one found by Mr. Walker on a 
stone heap, where it had been dropped by a bird.
Helix rufescens.
A very abundant species about Pateley, Middles- 
moor, Ramsgill, Gouthwaite, Harefield Wood, Bewerley Park, 
Glasshouses, Birstwith, Ripley, and near Hartwith Dam.
Helix concinna.
Birstwith, very common.
Helix hispida.
How Stean, Lofthouse, Goydon Pot, Greenhow 
Hill, Ripley, Birstwith, etc., common, 
var.
snbrufa.
Near Ripley Station.
Helix sericea.
Near Hartwith Dam, August 4th, 1883, on nettles 
and ivy (F.
T. Walker).
Helix virgata.
A single example sent from Glasshouses in 1882, 
by W.
Storey.
Helix lactea.
A living example of this Mediterranean species 
occurred on the railway at Pateley Bridge.
Helix caperata.
Very common at Birstwith.
Helix ericetorum and var.
instabilis.
Found near Birstwith, but 
rare.
Helix rotundata.
Very abundant throughout the dale, occurring on 
the top of Greenhow Hill, and as far as Goydon Pot.
Helix rupestris.
Very abundant on Greenhow Hill.
Helix pygmaea.
Nidd Bridge.
July 1886.
208 UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Helix pulchella.
Nidd Bridge.
Helix lapicida.
Abundant on a wall near How Stean, and found 
amongst some nettles at Birstwith.
Bulimus obscurus.
Near How Stean.
Pupa umbilicata.
Plentiful on Greenhow Hill, and near How 
Stean ; found on a wall near Hartwith Dam.
var.
alba.
Several examples found near Pateley Bridge, by 
Mr. Lister Peace.
Probably the precise locality was Greenhow 
Hill.
Balea perversa.
Pateley Bridge, May 1874, Lister Peace.
Clausilia rugosa.
A common species at How Stean, Lofthouse, 
Greenhow Hill, Ramsgill, Pateley, near Ripley Station, and 
Hartwith Dam.
var.
albida.
Two found in 1874, near Pateley Bridge 
(Lister Peace).
Clausilia laminata.
How Stean.
Cochlicopa tridens.
Plentiful on a bank between Ripley and Nidd 
Bridge.
Cochlicopa lubrica.
A widely distributed and common species, 
occurring at Goydon Pot, How Stean, Ramsgill, Pateley, Hare- 
field Wood, and near Ripley, Hartwith, and Birstwith.
Limn sea peregra.
Plentiful at Shaw Mill, Ripley.
Has not been 
reported higher up the dale.
LEPIDOPTEKA.
Nidderdale still awaits its entomological investigator, who, when 
forthcoming, will doubtless find a good field for investigation in the 
woods and on the moors, and certainly has full scope for increasing 
the meagre list of 169 species we are able to cite.
Such as we are 
able to cite are those which have been collected about Pateley by 
Mr. Storey, or about Birstwith by Mr. F.
T. Walker.
Those which 
have occurred about Pateley are : — 
Pieris brassicae.
Pieris rapae.
Pieris napi.
Anthocharis cardamines.
Vanessa urticse.
Vanessa cardui.
Satyrus janira.
*Chortobius davus (on the moors).
Chortobius pamphilus.
*Lycaena argiolus (one at Guyscliffe, 
May 17th, 1884).
*Acherontia atropos (several in- 
stances).
*Hepialus sylvinus.
Hepialus velleda.
Hepialus humuli.
Chelonia caja.
Arctia lubricipeda.
Arctia menthastri.
Poecilocampa populi.
Bombyx rubi (very common on the 
moors).
Bombyx caliunas (on the moors).
Saturnia carpini (common on Heath- 
field, Pateley, and Brimham 
Moors).
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
209 
Rumia cratasgata.
Metrocampa margaritata.
Amphidasis betularia.
*Fidonia atomaria (abundant on the 
moors).
*Himera pennaria.
Abraxas grossulariata.
Hybernia progemmaria.
*Hybernia aurantiaria (Guyscliffe 
Wood).
*Hybernia defoliaria.
Cheimatobia brumata.
*Cheimatobia boreata.
Oporabia dilutata.
Larentia didymata.
Larentia caesiata (Pateley Moors and 
Brimham Rocks).
*Emmelesia decolorata.
Melanippe montanata.
Tanagra chaerophyllata.
*Acronycta rumicis.
Xylophasia rurea.
Xylophasia polyodon.
Charseas graminis.
Mamestra brassicse.
Caradrina cubicularis.
Triphaena pronuba.
Noctua brunnea (Guyscliffe).
Noctua xanthographa.
Polia chi.
Phlogophora meticulosa.
Anarta myrtilli (abundant 
moors).
Abrostola urticas.
Plusia iota.
Plusia gamma.
Mania typica.
'Hypena proboscidalis.
on the 
Cidaria populata.
Of these, all have been found by Mr. Walker about Birstwith, except 
the few marked with the asterisk.
Of these it would be interesting to 
confirm the reported occurrence of Chortobius davus on the moors.
Other insects whose capture would repay the investigator are the 
very scarce Gastropacha ilicifolia, which once occurred on the 
Dallowgill Moors, part of the Nidderdale watershed, and Dasypolia 
templi, which it is surmised from circumstantial evidence has 
occurred, or may occur, in the Scotgate Ash or other quarries in the 
neighbourhood of Pateley.
In addition to the species starred above, Mr. F.
T. Walker has 
found the following species near Birstwith : — 
Colias edusa (has occurred at Ripley), 
Vanessa io.
Vanessa atalanta.
Polyommatus phlseas.
Lycsena alexis.
Macroglossa stellatarum.
Sesia bembeciformis (reported as S.
apiformis).
Hepialus hectus (in a larch wood).
Hepialus lupulinus (rarer than the 
other 1 Swifts ').
Nudaria mundana.
Lithosia griseola.
Chelonia plantaginis (Wilson's Wood).
Odonestis potatoria.
Lasiocampa quercifolia.
Ourapteryx sambucata.
Ellopia fasciaria.
Selenia lunaria.
Odontopera bidentata.
Crocallis elinguaria.
Boarmia rhomboidaria.
Tephrosia punctulata.
Iodis vernaria.
Asthena candidata.
Venusia cambricaria.
Acidalia aversata.
Cabera pusaria.
Macaria liturata.
Halia wavaria.
Panagra petraria.
Fidonia piniaria (Wilson's Wood).
Abraxas ulmata.
Hybernia rupicapraria.
Larentia salicata.
Larentia olivata.
July 1886.
2IO 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
Larentia pectinitaria.
Eupithecia pygmaeata.
Eupithecia castigata.
Eupithecia vulgata.
Eupithecia abbreviata.
Eupithecia exiguata.
Eupithecia rectangulata.
Thera juniperata.
Thera firmata (Wilson's Wood).
Ypsipetes elutata.
Melanthia rubiginata.
Melanthia ocellata.
Melanthia albicillata.
Melanippe sociata.
Melanippe galiata.
Melanippe fluctuata.
Anticlea badiata.
Coremia propugnata.
Camptogramma bilineata.
Phibalapteryx lignata.
Cidaria miata.
Cidaria immanata.
Cidaria silaceata.
Cidaria prunata.
Cidaria testata (Reynard Crags).
Cidaria fulvata.
Cidaria pyraliata.
Cidaria dotata.
Eubolia cervinaria.
Eubolia mensuraria.
Eubolia palumbaria.
Anaitis plagiata.
Cilix spinula.
Pygaera bucephala.
Diloba caeruleocephala, larvae com- 
mon on laurels, doing great 
damage (F.
T. Walker, 1881).
Thyatira batis.
Bryophila perla.
Acronycta psi.
Leucania comma.
Leucania pallens.
Nonagria fulva (Reynard Crags).
Hydraecia nictitans.
Axylia putris.
Xylophasia lithoxylea.
Mamestra persicariae.
Apamea oculea.
Agrotis segetum.
Agrotis porphyrea.
Triphaena janthina.
Triphaena orbona.
Noctua augur.
Noctua plecta.
Noctua festiva.
Noctua umbrosa (Ripley).
Taeniocampa gothica.
Orthosia lota.
Orthosia macilenta.
Xanthia ferruginea.
Tethea subtusa.
Tethea retusa.
Cosmia trapezina.
Dianthaecia cucubali.
Miselia oxyacanthae.
Agriopis aprilina.
Euplexia lucipara.
Aplecta herbida.
Hadena adusta.
Hadena thalassina.
Cucullia umbratica.
Abrostola triplasia.
Plusia chrysitis.
Plusia v-aureum.
Gonoptera libatrix.
Amphipyra tragopogonis.
Mania maura.
Phytometra aenea.
HYMEUOPTERA.
Vespa vulgaris.
' Common Wasp.' Pateley Bridge, Dacre Banks, 
Birstwith, &c.
Vespa germanica.
Pateley Bridge.
Vespa rufa.
Guyscliffe Wood.
Vespa sylvestris.
A nest noted on the moors near Pateley Bridge, 
in 1864 (E.
Foxton Firby, Nat, 1866, iii, 81).
Naturalist, 
UPPER NIDDERDALE AND ITS FAUNA.
211 
Andrena fulva.
Pateley Bridge.
Bombus lapponicus.
This scarce species occurs on the Pateley and 
Brimham Moors.
Bombus lapidarius.
Pateley Bridge.
Bombus lucorum.
Pateley Bridge.
Bombus virginalis.
Pateley Bridge.
Apis mellifica.
Hive-bee.
Sirex gigas.
Pateley Bridge.
DIPTERA.
Hsematopota pluvialis.
' Cleg.' Pateley Bridge.
OETHOPTERA.
Forficula auricularia.
Earwigs are locally known as ' twitchbell ' at 
Harefield, near Pateley.
COLEOPTEKA.
Cicindela campestris.
'Tiger beetle.' Brimham Rocks, Pateley 
Moors, &c.
Common.
Carabus violaceus.
Pateley Bridge.
Oeypus olens.
' Devil's coach-horse.' Pateley Bridge.
Aphodius fimetarius.
Pateley Moor.
Melolontha vulgaris.
' Cockchafer.' Pateley Bridge.
CRUSTACEA.
Crayfish.
Astacus fluyiatilis.
Local name: 'Crawfish.' Found 
only in Fell Beck, where it is common, and into which it was 
accidentally introduced between forty and fifty years ago, by a 
person named Swales, who, having some in his care when stay- 
ing over night at Fell Beck, deposited the vessel containing them 
in the stream.
Some escaped, established themselves in the 
beck, and propagated their species.
No attention has been paid to any of the other orders of insects, 
nor to any of the more obscure groups of animal life, so that the 
investigators of them will find in the dale ample scope for their 
researches.
July 1886.
212 
NOTES— BOTANY.
Flora of Strensall and District.— Permit me to add the following 
three plants, as well as an extra locality for another, to my friend A.
R. Waller's 
list at pp.
133 — 145, and to H.
J. Wilkinson's supplementary one at p.
173 of the 
Naturalist : — Poly gala serpyllacea Weihe, Carex fulva Good., Agrostis canina L., 
Strensall Common.
Cirsium anglicum Lamk, on the Common.
I observed these 
at the excursion of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union to Strensall Common, on July 
14th, 1883.
I also noted Rubies carpinifolius W.
and N.
in a hedgerow near the 
Common, which might be added to Mr. Wilkinson's list of Rubi previously referred 
to.
In fairness to Mr. Waller it should be stated, as he himself says at the 
commencement of his paper — ' I have not yet sufficiently examined the Rubi, 
Rosae, and Salices of the district to enable me to give a satisfactory list of these 
genera.' These can hardly be given as ' additions ' to a section of the Phanerogams 
he leaves for future consideration.
— P.
F. Lee, Dewsbury, June 5th, 1886.
Manchester Cryptogamic Society, February 15th, 1886.— 
Mr. Pearson read a translation from Limpricht's Deutschlands Kryptogamen-flora 
of the description therein given of Andrecea huntii — previously described under the 
name of A.
commntata.
This Andrecea was first gathered by the late Mr. G.
E. 
Hunt, of Manchester, near B-raemar, and (the name commutata being pre-occupied) 
Herr Limpricht had dedicated it to the memory of Mr. Hunt, ' whose too early 
death,' he wrote, 'is deeply lamented by all bryologists.' Mr. John Whitehead, 
of Ashton, was unanimously elected an honorary member of the Society.
Manchester Cryptogamic Society, April 19th, 1886.— Mr. G.
A. Holt exhibited Thuidium recognition and Trichostomum crispulum var.
nigro- 
viride, from Monk's Dale, Derbyshire, the latter moss being new to the county.
Barbula hornschuchiana was also one of his interesting finds in the neighbourhood 
of Miller's Dale.
He read a paper on the three closely allied mosses Thuidium 
tamariscifoliiim, T.
recognition, and T.
delicatulum, explaining the critical charac- 
ters of each species.
His paper was illustrated with drawings of the dissections of 
their essential characters.
He also showed British specimens of Thuidium delicatu- 
lum, which he had recently discovered in the neighbourhood of Dolgelly.
The moss 
hitherto collected in Britain as T.
delicalulum proves to belong to T.
recognition.
Hence Mr. Holt's discovery now establishes the fact that T.
delicatulum is a truly 
British species.
Mosses and Hepatics gathered on the Askern Excursion, 
May 20th, 1886.
— I beg to hand you the list of mosses, &c, gathered on the 
Askern excursion, so far as made out.
Upon the whole an interesting gathering.
At this season the genus A mblystegium was in the best condition, and I got two or 
three very interesting forms.
The Amblystegium radicale was a very good find, 
and one I have not previously gathered.
Mosses : Barbula mnralis L.
var.
incana, in dry situations, on walls, &c.
Barbula ambigua B.
& S., on mortar 
crevices of an old wall, in old fruit.
Funaria hygrometrica L., got in fine 
fruit ; a common and widely distributed moss.
Webera nutans Schreb., on stones 
in an old quarry, sterile.
Mnium rostratum Schrad., Mnium punctatum, Hedw., 
both without fruit, on stones in old quarry.
Homalothecium sericeum L.
, Campto- 
thecium lutescens Huds., Eurhynchium prcclongum Dill.
The above three all 
being autumn fruiting species, were found only without fruit.
Rhyncostegium 
murale Hedw., got with old fruit.
Amblystegium serpens L.
vars.
tenue, majus, 
and pinnatum were all got in fruit.
Amblystegium radicale P.
Beauv., was 
perhaps the rarest moss gathered, and a small patch of it was got in fine fruit in a 
very characteristic condition.
Campylium chrysophyllum Brid., only in sterile 
state.
Cratoneuron filicinum L., also sterile.
Hepatics: Lunularia vulgaris 
Mich.
This plant is commonly found growing on pots in greenhouses, often 
covering the pots to the detriment of their other occupants, and rarely found truly 
wild.
A small patch of it was gathered off a gravel walk with its distinctive 
gemmae.
Lophocolea heterophylla Schrad., Lophocolea bidentata L.
These two 
plants are common and widely distributed.
— M.
B. Slater, Malton, May 28th, 
1886.
Naturalist, 
NOTE— MOLL USCA.
213 
Paludina contecta in Nottinghamshire.— During a conchological 
ramble with my friend Mr. Musson, of Nottingham, this species was found in 
tolerable abundance in a dyke on the Nottingham side of the river Idle, near 
Bawtry.
On the Yorkshire side we found several shells among the rejectamenta 
of a small stream.
On a previous excursion we collected a number of Balia 
perversa beneath the loose bark of willow trees growing near the junction and 
within each of the parishes of Darlton, East Markham, and East Drayton.
— W.
A. Gain, Tuxford.
NOTE— MICRO-ZOOLOGY AND BOTANY.
Microscopic life at Askern, May 20th, 1886.— I forward a list of 
the organisms found in the waters about Askern during the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union excursion, as determined after careful examination.
Most of the species are 
common, but of course the state of the water prevented any better kinds being 
found.
Rotatoria: Hydatina senta, Lepadella emarginata, Lindia torulosa, 
Rotifer vulgaris.
Rhizopoda: Amceba diffluens.
Entomostraca: Branchipus 
stagnalis, Canthocamptus minutus, Cyclops quadricomis, Daphnia pulex.
Arach- 
NIDA: Milnesium tardigrada.
Hydra : Hydra fusca.
Diatomace^: Frustiilia 
saxonica, Piadesmis confervacea, Diatoma vulgare, Nitzschia sigmoidea, Cymato- 
pleitra solea, Cocconema lanceolatum, Pragilaria capucina, Gomphonema acuminatum.
DesmiDS : Varieties of Closterium, Cosmarium, and Pediastrum.
INFUSORIA : 
Aspidisca lynceus, Amphileptus fasciolus, Coleps hirtus, Dileptus folium, Himanto- 
phorus charon, Kerona mylitus, Loxodes bursaria, Paramecium aureiia, Sientor 
mulleri, Trachelocera viridis, Urostyla grandis, Vorticella nebulifera.
— J.
M. KlRK, 
Doncaster, May 29th, 1886.
NO TE — LEPID OPTERA .
Variation in the Genus Cidaria.— At the meeting of the Entomo- 
logical Society of London, on May 5th, 1886, Mr. Howard Vaughan exhibited 
a long series of Cidaria immanata from Kent, Surrey, and other southern counties, 
Perthshire, Isle of Man, Isle of Arran, the Orkneys, and Shetlands.
He also 
exhibited C.
russata from various localities in the South of England, and from 
Perthshire, Argyllshire, and the Islands of Arran, Lewis, and Hoy. Mr.
Vaughan further exhibited varieties of C.
suffumata from Dover and Darlington.
Prof.
Westwood commented on the interesting nature of the exhibition of C.
immanata, and stated that he had never before seen such a wonderful collection 
of varieties of a single species.
— Herbert Goss.
NOTE—HYMENOPTERA.
Pteromalus puparum near Louth.— In December last I found a 
chrysalis of Vanessa atalanta on a dead stem of Ballota nigra, by the side of the 
road at Cawthorpe, near Louth, the inside of which was full of the larvae of a small 
parasite.
These larvae were placed in a chip-box, and on looking at them on 22nd 
May I found that a large number had become imagines, some of which I sent to 
Mr. E.
A. Fitch, who identified them as Pteromalus puparum.
The larvae, which 
were very inactive, were about ^ of an inch in length and of a dirty white or grey 
colour.
The pupae were about the same length as the larvae, and pale yellowish- 
brown in colour.
Under a low power of the microscope the various parts of the 
future fly, including the legs, antennas, and wings, could be made out, the segments 
of the abdomen being marked by lines of a darker colour.
One larva, which was 
kept in a box by itself, pupated on 9th June and remained in that state about 12 
days.
— H.
Wallis Kew, Louth, June 22nd, 1886.
July 1886.
214 
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Swallows and the late Storm.— The awful weather of the middle of 
May— the gales, the rain, and the disastrous, unprecedented floods played havoc 
amongst the newly-arrived and beautiful summer visitants— the Swallows — in some 
parts of Yorkshire and other counties.
Mr. Slater, of Malton, tells me that a score 
flew into his warehouse completely exhausted and allowed themselves to be handled; 
others were found dead.
The Swifts {Cypselus apus) had arrived only a few days 
before the storm occurred.
I have heard of several House Martins ( Chelidon 
urbica) and Chimney Swallows {Hirundo rustica) being picked up dead at this 
place, also at Newton Kyme, and no doubt other records will show the same 
fatality elsewhere.
The Standard of May 15th says that a very remarkable effect 
of the recent gale is the wholesale destruction of Swallows and other small birds 
in the northern counties.
In Cumberland and Westmoreland the slaughter was 
terrible.
In the gravels of Bassenthwaite station, says the same authority, 200 
Swallows and Sand Martins {Cotile riparia) have been picked up dead, and at 
Appleby, Windermere, and other places in the Lake District Swallows have been 
found dead in scores.
A Sheffield paper, describing the floods about Mexborough, 
states that Swallows in hundreds have been picked up starved to death by the 
severe weather.
What with the rain, the inclement, unseasonable cold, the icy 
wind and the want of insect food, which could not be got at, the poor birds have 
almost been decimated, being starved to death, almost frozen, and pitilessly 
drowned into the bargain.
Anyone looking over the fields covered with water to 
the tops of the hedges in the neighbourhood of Arksey, and Doncaster, and Askern, 
at our excursion on May 20th, will form some idea of the destruction to bird-life 
which must have taken place ; not only swallows, but all others that build their 
nests in hedgerows and ditches and fields must have suffered in immense numbers, 
as will probably be found when the water subsides.
Perhaps such a case in May 
has not been known within living memory, and it is worth while making a note of 
it.
— John Emmet, Boston Spa, May 28th, 1886.
A fortnight ago we had a sad week ornithologically in this neighbourhood.
Owing to the unusual cold which prevailed, the insects upon which the Swallows 
and Martins are accustomed to feed were unable to come out, and in consequence 
these little spring visitors died by scores and hundreds, only the strongest and 
possibly oldest birds being able to survive ; and even these might be seen sitting 
helplessly in rows — a hundred or more together upon window-sills or the ironwork 
beneath bridges, and I noticed some myself (I think Martins), which could fly a 
little, sitting by the river-side upon the ground, every now and then making a feeble 
attempt to seize some stray fly or gnat, but apparently quite unable to fly more 
than a yard or two at a time.
Great quantities were picked up in a dead or dying 
condition both in fields, in gardens, and by the river-side near to the city, whilst 
numbers of carcasses were to be seen floating down the river Ouse, plainly in- 
dicating that elsewhere also the destruction had been severe.
Many other birds 
have, I believe, been considerably affected by the cold and nidification is in conse- 
quence much retarded.
Numbers of eggs were laid early in May and afterwards 
deserted, the parent birds being unable to sit upon them during the cold, rainy 
weather.
— J.
Backhouse, junr., West Bank, York, May 27th, 1886.
From a nesting-hole in the bank of the Mersey I have just taken the remains 
of fifteen Sand Martins ; there may possibly have been more, but that was the 
number of skulls I counted in the putrefying mass.
The bodies of the birds were 
huddled together with some broken egg-shells on a nest about 3 feet from the 
mouth of the hole.
From the highly decomposed state of the birds, I am inclined 
to think that they perished during the severe weather we experienced about the ' 
middle of May, but they may possibly have been drowned by the flooded river, 
which rose considerably above the nesting-hole about a fortnight ago.
In either 
case, is it not a curious fact for so many birds to resort for shelter to a hole in 
which a pair of their own species was nesting?
(The broken egg-shells show that 
nesting operations were going on).
On the 16th of May I had two Swallows 
brought to me.
They were picked up on the 13th, in a stable, where they had 
retreated with several others, and subsequently died from cold and hunger.
— 
Chas.
Oldham, Sale, Cheshire, June 14th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES.
2I 5 
Jackdaw and Young Birds.
— I witnessed a freak this evening which, 
though perhaps usual enough, may not be known to many of your readers.
On 
returning home I saw a Jackdaw (Corvus moneduld) on the roof of a friend's 
house, peering down into the ivy in a somewhat suspicious manner.
A number 
of Sparrows were on a tree close by, making a most vociferous outcry.
Presently 
the Jackdaw dropped down into the ivy, put his head into a sparrow's nest, pulled 
out a half-fledged young one, flew back on to the roof, and there and then calmly 
' ate iV — H.
T. Archer, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Birds deserting their Nests.
— A neighbour tells me that in his garden 
some of the Blackbirds ( Turdus meruld), Thrushes (T.
musicus), a Hedge Accentor 
{Accentor modularis), and a Robin {Erythacus rubecula) have deserted their nests 
— the latter all containing eggs.
At Easter I stayed with a friend on one of our 
Northumbrian moors for a week's fishing.
In our evening rambles after the day's 
fishing was over we found many nests of the Missel Thrush ( Turdtis viscivortis), 
Song Thrush ( T.
musicus), Blackbird ( T.
merula), Water Ouzel {Cinclus aquaticus), 
Red Grouse {Lagopus scoticus), Curlew {Numenius arquata), Snipe {Gallinago 
ccelestis), Green Plover ( Vanellus vulgaris), &c.
Nearly all of these contained eggs.
My friend was back at the moor again last week and reports that many of the 
nests of the Thrushes and Blackbirds have been deserted, some of them even con- 
taining young.
As there is no one within many miles to meddle with them I think 
the desertion must have been caused by the heavy rains which have occurred, 
especially as at Easter, when there were eggs in most of the nests, there was very 
little foliage to shelter them.
The Carrion Crows {Corvus corone) and Lesser Black-backed Gulls {Larus 
fuscus) rob the nests of the ground-building birds unmercifully.
The shepherd 
found a Snipe's nest with four eggs, but the next day they had a hole pecked through 
them and the contents sucked out.
I brought nest and the remains of the eggs 
away as they were, and while doing so came across a pair of Black-backed Gulls 
quartering the moor like pointers.
— H.
T. Archer, Newcastle-on-Tyne, June 9th.
Thrush laying in a Blackbird's nest.
Late stay of the 
Redwing.
— Early this spring a Blackbird ( Turdus merula) built its nest in a 
stunted bush of the famous North American ' Red Wood ' ( Taxodiuni sempervirens) 
in one of our plantations and subsequently laid in it the full complement of eggs, 
which, however, were soon stolen by one of the ubiquitous birds-nesting boys and 
for a while the nest remained empty ; not for long, however, for on May 4th I 
happened to pass the bush and, out of mere curiosity, looked into the nest, when 
I was a little astonished to find that a Thrush ( T.
musicus) had taken possession, 
and after plastering the inside with mud had laid her four eggs, being too lazy, one 
might suppose, to construct a nest for herself.
On the same date (May 4th) a Redwing {T.
iliacus) was seen here.
The 
individual who observed it knows the species well and reports that he had been 
very close to the bird in question and had specially noticed its well-marked eye- 
stripe.
— James Backhouse, junr., West Bank, York, May 27th, 1886.
Dunlins and Black Tern near Nottingham.— On April 4th and 
again on 25th I had glimpses of small parties of Sandpipers with dark underparts 
which I was unable to identify.
On May 9th, however, I had a better opportunity.
A friend called to tell me that a flock of about 30 Sandpipers were flying up and 
down the river about a mile away.
I was fortunate enough to catch up a straggler 
from the flock which was obligingly tame.
I found it to be a Dunlin ( Tringa 
alpina) in full breeding plumage.
To-day, May nth, a Black Tern {Hydro- 
chelidon nigra) passed and re-passed me several times whilst rowing in a boat on 
the Trent.
I finally saw it within a few feet of me perched on a stone in the 
river.
— F.
B. Whitlock, Nottingham, May nth, 1886.
Pied Flycatcher in North Lincolnshire.— Yesterday a strange 
bird was reported to me as frequenting a garden in Bourne Road, Alford.
To-day 
I have seen it.
It is a male Pied Flycatcher {Muscicapa atricapilla) without doubt.
I had not time to wait to see if a female be also in company.
I have, from reports 
in previous years, suspected it in the Alford district ; it is now a certainty.
The 
occupier has been requested to protect it, and I hope it may nest.
— Jas. Eardley 
Mason, The Sycamores, Alford, 16th May, 1886.
July 1886.
2l6 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION" 
AT FLAMBOROUGH HEAD.
Those -members of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union who travelled from Leeds 
to Hull by the 2.14 a.m. mail train on Whit -Monday, the 14th of June, judging 
from the sunrise which they witnessed, anticipated a fine, not to say broiling day.
Their expectations were not, however, realized, and about mid-day and throughout 
the afternoon storms of wind and rain marred to some extent the success of the 
excursion, so far as its thorough and complete enjoyment was concerned.
The 
Union were particularly fortunate in the kindness which they experienced at the 
hands of the resident land-owners, Mrs. Cottrell-Dormer and the Rev. Yarburgh 
Lloyd Greame, who granted full leave to members to visit every part of their 
extensive properties, and added the offer of further hospitalities which the day's 
arrangements prevented the acceptance of.
Three main lines of routes were 
planned, and duly carried out.
A couple of waggonettes conveyed members to 
the lighthouses, where Mr. William Crowe, junr., of Flamborough, had made 
preparations to enable them to witness the cliff-climbing, having had ropes fixed 
along the cliffs to enable visitors to station themselves at the very cliff edge, and 
so better observe the climbers.
Facilities, of which one member availed himself 
several times, were given for practical experience of the cliff-climbing.
Thanks to 
Mr. Crowe's kindness the members of this party passed an enjoyable morning.
Others of a different turn of mind devoted the day to a minute and leisurely 
investigation of the Dane's Dyke, and the geologists, more prone to active and 
prolonged exertions, ' braced themselves up for a quiet, gentle amble ' which 
extended to fourteen miles, finishing up with a run to catch the .3.15 train at 
Bempton station.
All parties converged by four o'clock on the North Shore 
Refreshment Pavilion, where an admirably provided tea awaited them, and where 
the meetings were afterwards held.
The chair of the general meeting was occupied — in the absence of the president 
— by the Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., of York, a vice-president.
There were about 
sixty or seventy members present, representing thirteen societies, viz.: — Beverley, 
Bradford (2), Dewsbury, Doncaster, Driffield, Hull, Leeds (3), Malton, Rother- 
ham, and York.
The minutes having been taken as read, Messrs.
Chas.
Brownridge, F.G.S., Horsforth, Jesse Oliver, Leeds, • — .
Thirkettle, Leeds, and 
the Rev. W.
Thompson, M.A., J.
P., Guldrey Lodge, Sedbergh, were elected 
members.
The Cleveland Naturalists' Field Club (Middlesbrough, 62 members), 
of which several members were present, and whose accession will prove a source 
of increased strength to the Union, was unanimously admitted into union.
Thanks were then voted to Mrs. Dormer and the Rev. Y.
L. Greame, to the Rev.
E. M.
Cole and Messrs.
G. W.
Lamplugh and W.
Crowe, for the benefits received 
at their hands, after which the sectional reports were given.
For the Vertebrate section its secretary, Mr. James Backhouse, junr., 
M.B.O. U., York, reported that 25 residents and 12 summer visitants among the 
birds had been noted, as follows: — Residents: Thrush, Blackbird, Missel Thrush 
(nesting), Robin, Rook, House Sparrow (nesting), Skylark, Greenfinch, Yellow 
Bunting, Jackdaw, Common Bunting, Meadow Pipit, Starling, Hedge Sparrow, 
Wren, Rock Pipit, Rock Dove (nesting), Herring Gull, Kittiwake (nesting), Puffin 
(nesting), Razorbill (nesting), Guillemot (nesting), Hooded Crow, Common Gull, 
Pied Wagtail (nesting).
Migrants : Willow Wren, Chiffchaff, Blackcap, Swallow, 
Martin, Swift, Sand Martin, Spotted Flycatcher, Sedge Warbler, Tree Pipit, 
Cuckoo, Corncrake.
In other departments the only species reported were the 
Smooth Newt and the Great Warty Newt, both at Dane's Dyke.
For the Conchological section, its president, Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., of York, 
reported.
He and the senior secretary of the section, Mr. J.
D. Butterell, with 
Mr. H.
T. Soppitt, of Bradford, and others had investigated the neighbourhood 
of Bridlington and Dane's Dyke.
The total number of species observed was 31, 
including ten water shells, six slugs, and fifteen land shells.
The list is as follows : 
— Sphcerinm lacustre (a remarkable variety), Pisidhtm pnsilhim, P.
nitidum, P.
fontinale, Limncea peregra, L.
palustris, L.
truncatulus, and Planorbis nautileus 
from a pond near Dane's Dyke House ; P.
complanatus and Physa fontinalis from 
a pond by the railway at Bridlington ; Arion ater and v.
albolateralis, A .
hortensi s 
Naturalist 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT FLAMBOROUGH HEAD.
217 
and another species, Limax agrestis, L.
lavis, L.
maximus, Succinea pzrtris, Zonites 
cellarius, Z.
nitidulus, Z.
aystdllinus, Z.
fulvus, all from Dane's Dyke ; Helix 
aspersa and v.
exalbida from the old locality at Bridlington ; H.
nemoralis in 
various interesting varieties, including albolabiata, and H.
cantiana from the same 
place ; H.
rnfescens, H.
hispida and var.
stibrufa, Dane's Dyke ; H.
virgata and 
H. caperata', Bridlington Cliffs ; Clausilia rugosa, Zua lubrica, and Caryckium 
minimum, Dane's Dyke.
For the Entomological section Mr. G.
C. Dennis, York, secretary of the section, 
stated that Eupithecia lariciata was the only lepidopteron of note that had been 
reported, the rain having put a stop to entomological work.
For the Botanical section its secretary, Mr. M.
B. Slater, stated that the 
district around Bridlington and the promontory of Flamborough is geologically on 
the chalk, having on its surface a covering of boulder drift clay, the soil of which 
is generally fertile, and around Bridlington well cultivated, the corn growing 
luxuriantly in some places almost to the extreme edge of the sea cliff.
Under such 
circumstances it is fair to assume that many of the indigenous plants of the district 
have been eradicated by cultivation.
The wild ravine of Dane's Dyke affords, 
however, a locality where the native plants may still be found, and the sea cliffs 
also have their wild denizens — only such, however, as can bear the exposure to the 
salt spray during the driving storms which occur at times on this coast.
The 
botanists confined their explorations mainly to Dane's Dyke and the coast cliffs.
A ramble, however, of four or five hours is quite inadequate to give more than a 
general glance ac the vegetation then growing, and a more detailed list of the flora 
of the district would require to be done by more permanently resident botanists.
During the few hours of the ramble 163 flowering plants were noted, including 6 
Ferns and 3 Equisetums.
The general character of the flora is similar to that of 
limestone and chalk districts, with the addition of some few maritime plants not 
often met with in more inland places.
Vegetation is unusually late, the fact of the 
common Hawthorn {Cratcegtis oxyacantha) being only in young bloom well indi- 
cating the general lateness of the season.
The plants seen in flower were mostly 
late spring flowering kinds, very few of the summer flowering plants were met with.
The following list comprises a few of the most interesting of our native plants which 
were seen: — Aquilegia vulgaris L., Cochlearia officinalis L., Spircea filipendula 
L., Campanula glomerata L., Myositis sylvatica Ehrh., Plantago maritima L., 
P. coronopus L., Armeria maritima Willd., the normal red-flowered form and 
also a white-flowered form, Orchis morio L., O.
mascula L., O.
mactilata L., 
Fritillaria meleagris L.
The Rev. E.
M. Cole noted a plant of Saxifraga granulata 
which had been found at Towthorpe-on-the-Wokls, about 20 miles north-west of 
Bridlington ; this locality is on the same chalk formation which extends to 
Flamborough Head.
For the Geological section, all the officers of which were present, its president, 
Rev. E.
M. Cole, M.A.
(Wetwang), and its senior secretary, Mr. S.
A. Adamson, 
F.G.S.
(Leeds), reported.
The geological party had been during the day in charge 
of Mr. Cole and of Mr. G.
W. Lamplugh, who is so well known on account of his 
researches in Yorkshire coast geology.
The programme set out was ambitious, 
extending from Bridlington along the coast to Flamborough Head, then along the 
cliffs to Bempton, and inland to Bempton station, a total distance of about fourteen 
miles, faithfully carried out, despite the heavy rain which fell at intervals.
The 
boulder clay of" Holderness has long been minutely studied by Mr. Lamplugh, and 
his discoveries, particularly in the neighbourhood of Bridlington, have been so 
valuable, that no work upon geology is complete without an account of them.
It 
has now been classified in four divisions, the top being, at present, correlated with 
the Hessle clay, succeeded by the upper and lower purple clays, these overlying 
the basement clay.
In the last-named division occur those transported masses of 
sand and clay full of mollusca, so well known to geologists as the ' Bridlington 
Crag.' There are also beds of gravel, sand, or clay, parting the four divisions 
named, which, no doubt, represent inter-glacial periods.
A short distance along 
the beach at Bridlington, Mr. Lamplugh pointed out in the cliffs a fine section 
showing the upper and lower purple and basement clays ; here and there, in the 
latter, occurred those fossiliferous patches already named.
Proceeding farther, a 
bed of inter-glacial clay on the beach was noted.
Mr. Lamplugh also directed 
July 1886.
2l8 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT FLAMBOROUGH HEAD.
attention to those beds of sand and gravel and laminated clay which rest upon the 
upper purple clay, more particularly in the cliffs opposite Sewerby, and known as 
the ' Sewerby Gravels.' Proceeding, the ancient chalk cliff which runs inland was 
seen, evidence that previous to the great ice age the sea covered Holderness, the 
line of coast being in the direction of Burton Agnes, Craike Hill, and Hessle.
Some pre-glacial beds of sand and chalk debris were noted.
Then evidence of the 
great pre-glacial valley was seen, filled up during the glacial period and since, at 
Dane's Dyke, partially re-excavated by denudation.
The fine cliffs of the upper 
chalk were now passed, exhibiting in some places fine examples of contortion, the 
result of lateral pressure.
At South Landing the cliffs were ascended, and the 
way taken across the fields to the lighthouses and to that beautiful bay known as 
Selwick's Bay, although on the Ordnance map it is erroneously named Silex Bay.
Here were some special matters of interest ; in the centre of the bay a fault occurs, 
the strata being much bent and broken, and from this cause the sea has been 
enabled to make an inroad and form Selwick's Bay. The fissures of the broken 
chalk have since been beautifully filled by calc spar.
It might have been stated 
that on nearing the extreme corner of Flamborough Head on the south side, flints, 
both nodular and tabular, begin to appear, and on the south side of Selwick's Bay 
they were seen in vast numbers.
Mr. Lamplugh proved the existence of this fault 
by showing that the chalk on the north side of the slip contains no flints whatever, 
and they do not re-appear till a little distance to the north.
A very curious matter 
was pointed out here — a mass of blue Speeton clay, stranded on the top of the 
chalk, which contains many of the characteristic Neocomian fossils.
Here, too, 
were a couple of isolated pinnacles of white chalk standing out like sentinels.
They have not yet been named, and it was humorously suggested that in honour of 
the leaders of the party, they should henceforward be known as the ' Cole and 
Lamplugh , Rocks.
' Keeping the edge of the cliff, splendid opportunities were 
afforded of observing the beautiful effects of the erosion of the chalk cliffs by the 
waves.
Here were arches, caves, and miniature bays in abundance ; pillars and 
pinnacles in other places, as in the case of the King and Queen Rocks.
The latter 
were formerly the supports of gigantic sea caves, but since the falling in of the roof 
they stand out in melancholy isolation, destined in their turn, before the ceaseless 
attacks of the waves, to finally disappear.
At Breil Point was noticed a ' blow- 
hole,' where the water is violently ejected from the force of the compressed air, and 
flies in fine spray at right angles to the rock.
These ' blow-holes ' will eventually 
become caves — thus the work of denudation actively goes on.
The cliffs are here 
capped with boulder clay, which weathers most curiously, as in Filey Bay, into 
knife-shaped edges.
The party now arrived at Thornwick Bay, where, after a 
short stay, the way was taken along the cliffs once more — arriving at length at the 
wonderful earthwork known as Dane's Dyke.
This great defensive work runs 
north and south, a distance of two and a half miles from cliff to cliff, and is of 
nearly uniform height all along, being about 18 feet above the level of the ground, 
and having a ditch 60 feet wide on the outside.
Although the name ' Dane's 
Dyke ' is used when speaking of this earthwork, it is evidently a misnomer, as 
excavations carried on systematically by competent archaeologists, have discovered 
weapons and other relics of a higher antiquity than the Danish invasions of 
England.
When standing upon the summit of this mighty rampart, one could not 
but muse and conjecture who were its builders, and who were the fierce invaders 
who rushed up its slopes engaged in deadly combat with its defenders.
The page 
of history is silent as to those tremendous Yorkshire battles ; tradition is very 
obscure ; but it must be admitted that the people who constructed this rampart 
must have been well advanced in their ideas of military defence, and they must 
have had also great method and discipline in constructing it.
This was, most 
certainly, a very impressive sight.
Farther on, near Scale Nab, were seen some 
extraordinary contortions in the chalk cliffs, the strata being bent and folded most 
remarkably.
The explanation for this must be the same as accounts for the con- 
torted limestone at Draughton, that is, immense lateral pressure long after the 
strata were deposited, and when they were covered by an immense thickness of 
over-lying rocks.
The train was now taken at Bempton for Bridlington.
Other 
members of the section had worked independently.
Mr. S.
Chadwick (Malton), 
junior secretary of the section, had worked assiduously for fossils near the south 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES.
219 
end of Dane's Dyke, and found, in addition to some shells (e.g., Cyprina islandica 
and Tellina balthica), the following fossils : — Pachastrella convoluta, Seliscothon 
planus, S.
capitata, Thecosiphonia turbusata, Verruailina pustulosa, V.
cribrosa, 
V. miliaria, V.
radiata, V.
plicata, V.
papillata, Scytalia fastigiata, Phymatella 
reticulata, Siphonia, Bolaspongia globata, Ventriculites infundibuliformis, V.
cribrosus, V.
angustatus, V.
radiatus, V.
striatus, Pachimon scriptum, Coscinopora, 
Spongia plana, S.
paradoxica, S.
convoluta, Belemnites nmcronata, lerebratula 
biplicata, Ananchytes ovatus, Marsupites ornatus, Inocerami, and Rhynchonellce.
Mr. C.
Brownridge, F.G.S., examined the boulder clay for travelled rocks, finding 
grits and sandstones, mountain limestone, mica schist, conglomerate, quartzite, 
granites, &c.
For the section for Micro-Zoology and Botany Mr. J.
M. Kirk, one of its 
secretaries, gave a negative report, the nature of the ground not being such as to 
repay investigation.
A vote of thanks to the chair concluded the meeting.
BOOK NOTICES.
The London Catalogue of British Plants.
Part I.
8th Edition.
40 pp., 8vo, 6d.
Geo. Bell & Sons.
The appearance of a new edition of this time-honoured catalogue has always 
been an event of the first interest to British botanists, inasmuch as it is a sort of 
botanical milestone, by which our progress in the local .
insular relations of the 
science can be roughly registered.
The first edition with which, alas !
the name 
of the great master, H.
C. Watson, is unassociated, marking as it does a new and 
significant departure from that master's uniform and consistent method, is trebly 
eventful.
It is easy to predict the public verdict, that of the rank and file of botanists who 
seek to see their way through its bewildering erudition ; unprepared as it will find 
them, and assuredly without the means— in the shape of descriptive manuals con- 
forming to its nomenclature — of educating themselves up to its standard : that 
verdict will be shown in an aversion from making use of it which will result in 
something akin to ' boycotting ; ' but it is not so easy to criticise it in detail, to 
point out its many minor errors, its few but undoubted merits, and its great amaz- 
ing inconsistency, without conveying a false impression.
As usual, a conflict of 
the claims of Authority, Utility, Expediency, has resulted in a somewhat lame 
compromise.
The catalogue proper now covers thirty-three and a half pages, affixing a 
number to 1,858 species, and a letter to some 700 varieties, ' authorities ' being 
affixed to all these names, but none to the genera — which, numbered consecutively 
also, reach 542.
A lengthy apologetic Preface, acknowledging assistance from, 
and giving somewhat fulsome praise to, certain botanists ; whilst (according to a 
review in the Journal of Botany, which we note) making no mention of indebted- 
ness to the researches of others — e.g., J.
Britten and the late R.
A. Pryor, without 
whose work in the direction of a correct nomenclature, the catalogue could not 
4 have assumed its present appearance ' — is signed by the editor, Mr. F.
J. 
Hanbury.
In this preface we are told that the great aim of the catalogue has 
been 1 utility rather than authority'' — an aim that, we are sorry to say, falls wofully 
short of the mark in the matter of attainment.
It will puzzle most people to say 
how a catalogue can be useful (except to a dozen or so of our best critical botanists, 
who work by continental authors) in which the school of botanical body-snatchers 
have disinterred so very many of truly earliest, but none the less unfamiliar, corpora 
vili, reinstating them without (in numerous instances) giving as synonyms the 
better known names, and which do not agree altogether either with those of 
Babington's or Hooker's well-known floras.
The catalogue, as it stands, apart 
from all its errors of detail, is either too much or too little ; and, seeing that a 
catalogue is an ever-pressing want, if the present one does not speedily see a second 
amended issue, the wants of the great bulk of collectors will assuredly be supplied 
from a source more conservative and less subversive of accepted nomenclature.
So much for the main feature of the catalogue ; as to details, it is of course a 
point capable of argument, that since every name (aliens mainly) in the ' excluded ' 
lists of the old editions could not be inserted, some latitude for various experience 
July 1886.
220 
BOOK NOTICES.
must be allowed as to the species now left out of the catalogue altogether.
We 
missed at the first glance the increasingly common aliens of our cornfields and 
wastes near mills — Silene dichotoma, Amsinckia lycopsoides, Luzula albida, and 
others ; but, broadly speaking, the comparative fulness of the lists is one of the 
catalogue's not too numerous merits.
The sequence of the orders and genera is that of the ' Genera Plantarum ' — a 
noble work but inaccessible to ninety-nine out of a hundred botanists.
The 
' authorities ' attached to the specific names are in many instances incorrect, 
' Linn.' standing in place of Hudson, in the cases of Trifolium medium, T.
ochro- 
leucon, Mentha rotundifolia, M.
hirsuta, and Scutellaria minor; whilst ' Gouan ' 
(1765) wrongly appears for 'Huds.' under Alopecunts bulbosus.
On the other 
hand, Hypericum elodes quoted as of 'Huds.' should be of Grufberg (following 
Pryor's researches as found in the Journal of Botany, p.
75, N.
S., vol.
10, 1881), 
and Mentha longifolia Huds.
must replace M.
sylvestris L.
; and Agrostis palushis 
Huds.
stand as the type of the Marsh Fiorin, instead of A.
alba Linn.
Were it 
not that Hudson himself withdrew (in his 2nd Ed.) several of the names he had 
given in the first edition, upon ascertaining their identity with others previously 
given, Geranium pe7-enne Huds.
would have to be retained in place of G.
pyrena- 
icum (rightly quoted in the catalogue as of ' Burm.
fil,' N.
L. Burman, whose 4to 
'Spec.
Bot. de Ger.' was issued in 1759); and Alopecurus myosutoides be read 
instead of the familiar A.
agrestis L.
The catalogue before us appears to have 
adopted some of Hudson's earlier names, though evidently not directly from Pryor's 
paper, for we have Slum erectum taking the place of the Linnean S.
angustifolium, 
Avena pubescens Huds., etc.; although, whilst we are glad to see under Epipactis 
an indication of the specific distinctness of 'E.
media Fr.,' as regards two other 
forms with which it has been confused — we are surprised that^ such a grave error 
should have been committed as to sink the name violacea Boreau.
in ' piirpurata 
Smith.' Pryor pointed out that Smith's plant had nothing to do with it, as it was 
founded ' on a deformation in an immature state.' 
Again, if strict ' observance of the law of priority, as the only possible way of 
obtaining finality ' lead, as in this catalogue, to replacing Ranuncuhis hirsutus by 
R. sardous Cr.
(spelled without a capital in the original) ; Ficaria verna Huds.
by 
Ran. Jic aria.
L. ; Sinapis arvensis L.
by ' Brassica sinapis Visiani ' ; Helianthemum 
vulgare Gaert.
by H.
Chamcecistus Mill.; Arenaria rubella Hook, by A.
sulcata 
Schlect.
; Tilia grandifolia Ehrh.
by T.
platyphyllos Scop.; T.
parvifolia Ehrh.
by 
T. cordata Mill.; Lotus uliginosus Schkuhr by L.
pilosus Beeke; Physospermum 
coniubiense DC.
by P.
commutatum Spreng.
; Pimpinella magna L.
by P.
major 
Huds.
; Torilis infesta Spreng.
by Caucalis arvensis Huds.
; Calluna vulgaris Hull, 
by C.
Erica DC.
; Statice bahusiensis Fr. by S.
rariflora Drej.
; Linaria minor Desf.
by L.
viscida Moench.
; Calamintha Acinos Clairv.
by C.
arvensis Lam.
; Polygonum 
Raii Bab. by P.
Roberti Lois.
; Riwiex pratensis by R.
acutus Linn.
; Smilacina 
bifolia by Maianthemum Convallaria Web.; Gagea lutea Ker. by G.
fascicularis 
Salisb.
; Cladium Mariscus by C.
germanicum Schrad.; Blysmus compressus by 
Scirpus Caricis Retz.
; Carex amptdlacea by C.
rostrata Stokes.
; Phleu??i Boehmeri 
by P.
phalaroides Koeler.
; Digitaria htimifusa Pers.
by Panicu?n glabrum Gaud.
; 
Knappia agrostidca by Mibora verna Adanson ; Calamagrostis stricta Nutt.
by 
Deyeuxia neglecta Kunth.
; Cynodon Dactylon Pers.
by Fibichia umbellata Koch.
; 
Festuca pratensis by ' F.
fallax Th.' with a species ' F.
dumetonmi Linn.' of which 
we are not ashamed to confess we do not know the familiar British counterpart or 
synonym — if there is one ; Polypodium Phegopteris by Phegopteris polypodioides 
Fee., which are the most prominent and likely to prove (to average intellects) the 
most puzzling of the alterations in this new edition ; if, we repeat, priority warrants 
the changes mentioned, consistency also calls for others which are not made.
Arabis sagittata DC.
(No. 88) should be A.
hirsuta Scopoli (a.D. 1760) as in 
Nyman's Conspectus ; and Oxycoccus pahistris Pers.
must stand in the place of 
Vaccinium oxycoccos L.
; Statice reticulata Sm. should be S.
bellidifolia Gouan 
(1765), but even if reticulata were retained, Linnaeus, not Smith, is the authority; 
and we think Hypericum dubium Leers, is preferable to the old aggregate Linnean 
term quadranguhim, which only represented it inclusively.
- H.
quadratum Stokes 
rightly takes precedence of the Friesian tetrapterum.
Salix holosericea Willd., 
again, should replace (1292) S.
ferruginea Anders.
Stokes, too, should be the 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES.
221 
authority for Ulmus montana, not Smith ; and Stokes's name surculosa supersede 
U. campestris as Smith defined it.
It is not necessary, however, to here point out 
all of them, the numerous examples of the alterations made we have given, 
advisedly, in order that local users of the catalogue may correlate them to the 
names in the floras they make use of.
But we may point out in passing, that to 
reduce the large Thalictrum well enough known as majus Sm., our commonest 
inland species, to a variety of T.
minus as 'c.
flexuosum (Reichb.)' seems to us 
an unwarranted proceeding.
As Pryor said, there is little doubt that it is identical 
with T.
jacquinianum Koch, which name it should bear : to tear the Friesian 
Kochii away from it and give that as a var.
of the De Candollean saxatile, which 
(if distinct) it is extremely doubtful whether it occurs in Britain at all, is quite 
inadmissible.
And what, pray, can be said for the cool suppression of the 
universally-adopted Habenaria chlorantha Bab. in favour of Habenaria chloroleuca 
Ridley?
The Platanthera chlorantha Cust.
of Nyman, etc., Babington adopted 
the specific title more than 30 years ago in re-defining it, sub Habenaria, as distinct 
from bifolia, and we fail to see the reason why it should be superseded now.
Neither is it legitimate procedure on the part of an editor of a bare non-descriptive 
catalogue in which several men have collaborated, to enter Aira setacea Huds.
{A.
uliginosa Weihe), because (following 'Genera Plantarum') ranging under the genus 
Deschampia, as '1675 setacea, Mihi.' Who is the me, meant?
It maybe Mr.
Hanbury, or it may be Dr. Boswell, for anything stated to the contrary, seeing 
that his ' own corrected copy of the seventh edition ' forming the basis of the new 
catalogue was ' largely used.' 
The 'pater' of Stellaria palustris (glauca, With.) should have Retz.
appended.
We suppose that '523 sewpervirens L.' under Rosa refers to the non-indigenous 
stray Mr. Towndrow christened Melvini.
CEnanthe ' peucedanifolia, "Pole" may 
be the English plant with oblong tubers we have known so long as CE.
silaifolia, 
but its resuscitation is likely to prove confusing, the plant under that name in our 
older floras being almost universally CE.
lachenalii.
Should not Valeriana 
i 7nikanii (Wats.) ' be procurrens, Wallr.
? We note the insertion of a var.Jlosculoszis 
Jord.
of the common Ragwort, but find no recognition of the fact (although in other 
genera great prominence is given to the result of like intercourse) that the Senecios 
hybridize freely, S.
vulgaris with S.
squalidus, and S.
erucifolius with S.
jacobcea 
especially.
The genus Rubiis, ' revised carefully ' by Prof.
Babington, presents the 
unfortunate student with quite a host of new names, intelligible doubtless to one or 
two botanists, but to everyone else quite unusable unless the Professor gives us a 
revised edition of his 'British Rubi.' We fear, however, the mere sight of the list 
of 61 in some cases quite crack-jaw names {e.g., Schlickumi, etc.) will more than 
ever deter many from tackling the race.
How is it that the genus Rosa, mono- 
graphed by Baker as Rubus has been by Babington, has undergone no such start- 
ling transformation — were its forms marshalled so much more thoroughly at the 
outset ?
Neither have the Hieracia nor the Salices undergone much change from 
the seventh edition ; the latter too little, if anything, seeing that to approximate 
uniformity and truth, many more of the names than the solitary one {cnspidata) 
indicated, should have been marked as hybrids.
We have it on high authority 
that in a multitude of counsellors there is wisdom, but to our mind this catalogue 
offers a much better example of the slang phrase ' too many cooks spoil the broth ; ' 
the coadjutors in the task of remoulding this simulacrum of our British flora were 
doubtless able individually, but a real or supposed necessity for respecting their 
differing botanical idiosyncrasies and methods, has deprived the result of consistency 
and due proportion.
Some species names in the list are quite new to us : 1002 Myosotis Balbisiana 
Jord., and the hybrid Irish fern, 1774 Asplenium clermontce Syme, have surely no 
right to figure as ver-species, whilst what is meant by ' 181,0 (lanceolatum 
Angstrom) ?
' we cannot make out clearly.
The Characeae (the work of Messrs.
Groves) are, as was to be expected, well and carefully arranged ; we are glad to 
note that Chara papulosa Kuetz, and Nitella capitata Agardh, are decisively 
entered as integers of our flora.
As for minor errors : the orthography of several names with a Greek origin 
is inexcusably faulty.
When under Ajuga the word Chamaipitys (ground-pine, 
from TiTvs a pine tree) can be rightly spelled, it is ridiculous to insert the second 
July 1886.
222 
BOOK NOTICES.
h in 'Hypopithys' where no h ever was — surely the misprint in Hooker's Student's 
Flora was not slavishly, deliberately copied?
— and inconsistent indeed to omit the 
like letter, and write ' omiophylhis ' (sub Ranunculus hederaceus, 22b) in place of 
homiophy litis.
Lapsana may pass, although Lampsana.
is the more classically 
correct; but 'Laestid.' for Laestad.
is wrong.
It is mystifying, too, to find, in- 
stead of the usual contracted indication of the authority for the name, such a 
negative barbarity as ' Agropyron acutum, non R.
and S.', — meant, we presume, 
to give the direct denial to Hooker (Stud.
Flo., p.
504), albeit unable to set him 
right by stating who is the authority.
' Rumex hybridi, teste Trimen ' is another 
funny appellation for a group of species !
Stranger still is Silene gallica L.
variety ' C.
anglico X quinquevulnera, Melvill ' — a hybrid admittedly, yet not 
accorded the same express treatment as other hybrids in the catalogue.
Some 
few names have no paternity indicated at all ; and the several variations in the 
citation of authorities are not precisely defined.
In the next edition it is to be 
hoped the genera will be followed by the names of those who erected them.
Although technically admissible (owing to a lapsus calami, or inadvertent omission 
of Salisbury's), Calluna Erica DC.
will puzzle not a few ; and all the more those 
who know Salisbury defined the genus, and must therefore have had at least one 
plant on which to found it.
Ranunculus 6 pseudo-fluitans Bab.' (No. 14) is the 
same thing as R.
peltatus var.
'penicillatus Hiern,' (No. i8d) — a state merely 
without floating leaves, yet it is lined as a species, presumably quite another thing.
This Batrachium section of the genus is very indifferently catalogued, without 
any evidence of an attempt to educe method out of chaos, in accordance with the 
natural facts.
The county census numbers after most of the species-names are said to have 
been taken from a posted-up copy of the second edition of Topographical Botany ; 
and it is claimed as a merit that their being so taken 'alone rendered it possible' 
for this 8th Ed.
' to be ahead of any work yet published ' on the subject.
Now 
it seems to us to be a vicious precedent to seek to establish the private working- 
copy of any individual, and that individual himself, as a responsible authority, 
accredited with later or fuller information than anyone else.
If the being thus 
ahead were a fact — which we doubt — it is no distinct advantage, since there is 
nothing to compensate for the arbitrary indefiniteness, the numbers may be in 
some cases ahead (or they may not), but how far and in respect to what species no 
one has the means of ascertaining.
It must all be taken on trust, the numbers can- 
not be verified, nor can those who wish ascertain (since the posted-up copy is 
private and so far inaccessible) what counties are meant in any case.
Take, for 
example, the seven divisions in which Rynchospora fusca is stated to have occurred, 
as an instance capable of brief analysis, and therefore, by so much, not likely to 
bear unfairly on the census compiler.
The 2nd Ed. of Topographical Botany 
gives ' Cornw e.
? Som. n., Dorset, Hants s., and Glamorgan' with ' S.
Wales 
Henslow sp.,' and ' [42, 62, both errors?]' Surrey has been published since that 
work was issued, and its occurrence in Cardigan (Co. 46) by the Dyfi estuary; but 
one is left to guess whether the seven areas actually refer to Cornwall, Somerset, 
Hants, Surrey, Glamorgan, and Cardigan, or to Brecon vice the queried E.
Corn- 
wall.
The census numbers, too, are in many instances omitted ; none at all are 
affixed to the species of Adonis, Rcemeria, to Orobanche minor, to any of the 
species of Ajuga, nor yet to Atriplices patula, hastata, and deltoidea, nor to Ulmus 
campestris, nor to Ceratophyllum either as aggregate or segregates ; nor to Thalic- 
trum flexuosum, Lathyrus tuberosus, Agrimonia (both species), Ribes petr&um, 
Epilobium lanceolatum, Glaux maritima, Corylus avellana, Bromus racemosus, 
Lastrea remota, or Equisetum trachyodon ; whilst Asplenium Clermonta and Eqtii- 
setum moorei should have ' I ' for Ireland only, affixed.
The census-number (one) given for Arenaria uliginosa, Sisymbrium irio, Slum 
repens, and Alliicm sibiricum is in every case too low.
The first named has been 
published for two, the second in several (but, perhaps, usually as a casual), the 
third in four, and the Allium in two divisions at least.
On the other hand the 
numbers affixed to Campanula Rapuncuhis, Pyrola rotundifolia, Epipactis ( pur- 
purata Sm.' — if meaning violacea — and Scirpus rufus are all too high.
We notice some other strange errors, but they are possibly inadvertencies: 
Primus avium is given (without any *) as a true native in 90 division s, which is 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES : NOTES AND NEWS.
223 
absurd ; Linaria supina Desf.
likewise appears as a true wilding, unasterisked, 
but uncensussed.
It should have been in italic type.
Campanula Rapunculus, 
too, has no asterisk.
The catalogue is nicely printed, with few typographical errors, but on the 
whole must be pronounced eminently unsatisfactory.
Second Annual Report of the Watson Botanical Exchange 
Club, 1885-6.
— 8vo., pp.
16.
For private distribution.
We are glad to note an improvement in this latest medium of exchange.
It 
will doubtless do something toward furthering that critical study of genera which 
is the outcome of the growing tendency to correlate British with Continental 
forms, and subordinate our island flora to the larger one of Western Europe.
In 
the present report, however, some rather useless particulars are given concerning 
a Dumfriesshire waterlily, and an evergreen cluster-styled Worcestershire rose, the 
fault of which is that they state nothing definite, and do not, therefore, settle 
anything.
Mr. A.
Bennett furnishes the sole (two) paragraphs that really inform 
or explain.
A good many new vice-county records are registered, though what 
these have to do with the purposes for which the club exists is not very clear.
So far the report trenches upon the ground (of adding to our knowledge of distri- 
bution by means of voucher-specimens deposited at South Kensington) occupied 
by the Botanical Record Club since 1873.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Amongst recent elections to the Fellowship of the Geological Society of London, 
occur the names of Messrs.
Matthew Heckels (Walker-on-Tyne, near Newcastle), 
R. Mountford Deeley (Derby), Samuel Learoyd (Huddersfield), M.
H. Mills 
(Chesterfield), James Radcliffe (Dukinfield), Robert Law (Walsden, Todmorden), 
Edward J.
Silcock (Leeds), H.
M. Platnauer (York), Henry Fisher (Blackpool), 
and Charles Brownridge (Horsforth).
>oo< 
Many readers will learn with regret that another famous collection has gone to 
the hammer, and will wonder what, has induced the Jardine family to dispose of 
the well-known collection made by their distinguished ancestor.
The sale of it 
took place at Messrs.
Puttick and Simpson's gallery on June 17th, but owing to 
the date being known to few, there was a very meagre attendance of ornithologists.
Considerable interest attached to many specimens as the types described, notably 
the early ones of Dr. Smith, the African collector.
With the exception of the 
Anatidse, the specimens were in fair preservation, but the lots were too large for 
ornithologists, and the prices consequently poor.
Of European forms, the Madeiran 
variety of the Blackcap Warbler, with black cap extended to the throat (the 
Heineken var.), attracted interest, and the lot, No. 154, which contained some 
thirty other Warblers of no particular value, sold for £7.
Among the Fringillidse, 
lot 247, containing 43 bkds, and including some Algerian Chaffinches, sold for 
^ 3 17s.
6d.; lot 251 composed of Buntings, sold for £3 ; lot 253, containing Cross- 
bills and a fine Madeiran skin of the Wild Canary, fetched us.
Among the more 
interesting British forms should be mentioned Pomatorhine and Richardson's 
Skuas and Little Auk, all from the Forth ; a Dotterel killed in Dumfriesshire in 
the early month of March ; and a fine adult Ivory Gull, obtained by Mr. Shearer 
in Caithness.
A Red-breasted Snipe from ' Fifeshire ' appears in the catalogue, 
but was not apparently in the sale.
The type specimen of Bulwer's Petrel was 
overlooked until the end of the sale.
Lot 305 contained a Pallas' Sandgrouse from 
Berwick.
Lot 303 contained an exceptionally perfect specimen of the female 
Pheasant, ring-necked, in nearly complete male plumage, though devoid of spurs.
Very few British specimens appeared in the sale, and those were generally common 
birds, obtained near Jardine Hall.
Lot 303 fetched 13s.; the female Pheasant 
just alluded to is labelled 'Jardine Hall, 1858.' Among the few Mammalia 
offered were a fine Felts calus (no locality) ; and several examples of the Red Bank 
Vole, one of these bearing a locality in Dumfriesshire on its label.
July 1886.
224 
NOTES AND NEWS.
We are pleased to learn that Lincolnshire can now boast of a third Naturalists' 
Society, one having been founded at Great Grimsby, under the presidency of our 
old friend Mr. John Cordeaux.
At a meeting held at Thirsk, on the 5th April, it was resolved to re-establish the 
Naturalists' Club which existed in the town several years ago.
The Rev. Canon 
Camidge was unanimously elected president for the ensuing year ; Mr. J.
B. Foggitt 
was elected secretary and treasurer.
XxX 
The annual meeting of the Ripon Naturalists' Club was held on February 9th, 
1886, a satisfactory report being presented by the secretary (Mr. B.
M. Smith).
The Marquis of Ripon was re-elected president ; the Rev. A.
B. Haslam and Dr.
Crow, vice-presidents ; treasurer, Mr. W.
S. Snow ; secretary, Mr. B.
M. Smith.
Curators were also appointed.
x>:x 
A meeting was held at Harrogate on the 25th February at which it was resolved 
that a Naturalists' Society be formed for Harrogate and District.
After the rules 
had been drawn up, the following officers were elected : — President, Mr. W.
Story (Pateley Bridge) ; Vice-president, Mr. R.
Fortune (Harrogate) ; Hon.
Secretary and Treasurer, Mr. F.
R. Fitzgerald (Harrogate) ; Committee, Messrs.
W. H.
Turner, J.
Lund, and R.
Barber.
>oo< 
The vacant curatorship of the Nottingham Natural History Museum has been 
filled up by the appointment of Mr. J.
W. Carr, from the Woodwardian Museum, 
at Cambridge.
>co< 
We note among the recent elections to the Fellowship of the Entomological 
Society of London, the names of Mr. H.
Wallis Kew, of Louth, and Mr. William 
Warren, formerly of Doncaster.
>oo< 
We have received the prospectus of the new and important work on the 
Coleoptera of the British Islands, which it is known that the Rev. W.
W. 
Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., has for some time had in preparation.
This work is 
intended to supply a want that is much felt by British Coleopterists, and will 
include a descriptive account of the families, genera, and species indigenous to 
Great Britain and Ireland, with notes as to localities, habitats, etc., and in some 
cases will give brief life-histories of the species, especially of those that in the larval 
or perfect state are in any way injurious.
Mr. Fowler has undertaken the work 
with the sanction and assistance of the leading British Coleopterists.
Dr. Sharp, 
Dr. Power, Mr. Champion, and Mr. Mason (owner of Mr. Rye's collection) have 
allowed the use of their collections, and given very valuable assistance as regards 
localities and other information.
It is intended to issue the work in five, or at most, 
six sections, which will, as far as possible, be complete in themselves.
Section I 
is already in the press : this contains the Adephaga (Cicindelidse, Carabidae, and 
Dytiscidae) and the Hydrophilidae.
Section II will contain the Staphylinidae.
The 
first section will contain two or three structural plates, and, if sufficient support is 
accorded to the work, it is hoped that one or two more may be added in each of 
the succeeding sections.
As the sections will probably vary in extent, it is impossible 
to fix a price, but the work will form, when complete, two vols.
8vo, of about 600 
pages each.
It is further proposed, if adequate support can be obtained, to issue 
simultaneously with the above, a large paper edition, super-royal 8vo, with a 
series of new and original plates carefully coloured by hand : in monthy parts, 
each containing 4 coloured plates, figuring from 50 to 70 species, and 32 pages of 
descriptive letterpress; price to subscribers only 5s.
each part, or 54s- for 12 parts, 
if paid in advance.
This edition may possibly extend to 30 or 36 parts, according 
to the number of species that may be considered worth figuring.
No effort or 
expense is to be spared to render the work, in completeness and execution, far in 
advance of any existing work on the subject.
Messrs.
L. Reeve & Co. are the 
publishers.
3 {JUL 1886 Naturalist, 
NO W ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
" Every page is interesting." ......
Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2£d.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
6d.
post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all Booksellers.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with- Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers, of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London: JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address 
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching: boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae ; 
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa-digging ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; hone)^dew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light ; grouting ; smoking ; killing ; relaxing ; setting ; grease ; mites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary ; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera ; Hymenoptera ; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;".
"Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c 
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P. M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
THE NATUEALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the folloxving papers "Within the next few months'.
— 
Hymenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson.
Liverpool Coleoptera (Part 10)— J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., &c.
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire (JSToctuae)— J.
W. Ellis, 
F.E.S.,&c.
Marfleld Pond— Thomas Carter.
Notes on the Cuckoo — A.
C. Chapman.
Nesting of the Shoveller in Cumberland— H.
A. Macpherson, M.A., and W.
Duckworth.
The Anthropology of Yorkshire— C.
Staniland Wake, M.A.I.
Bibliography for 1885.
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short NoteS.^It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, ConcholOgy, &c, are particularly desired.
Now ready, Svo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
In Preparation.
A Monograph of the Land and Fresh -Water Mollusca 
of the British Fauna.
The work is intended to be full, detailed, and exhaustive, and adequately 
illustrative of Variation, Development, and Geographical Distribution.
Co-operation is invited from all interested, and any information or specimens 
(the common species of every district are particularly desired) will be welcomed 
and carefully acknowledged.
The Authors may be addressed — c/o Mr. John W.
Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Hunslet New Road, Leeds.
Information is at present specially required on the Slugs ( Testacella, Limax, and 
Arion), of which living specimens from every district are desired.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have givei a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann.
&* Mag. Nat.
Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athenceum.
No. 133.
AUGUST, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH OK N ITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
fonfents : 
The Anthropology of Yorkshire — C.
Staniland Wake, M.A.I.
.. ..
.. ..
225 — 230 
Notes — Botany:— 230 
Botanical Notes from the Solway — W.
Hodgson, A.L.S.; Impatiens noli-me-tangere 
at Stock Ghyll Force — G.
W. Oldfield, M.A., F.L.S.
Marfield Pond, Masham, and Its Bird-life — Thomas Carter ..
.. ..
.. 231 — 234 
Nesting of the Shoveller in Cumberland— Rev. H.
A. Macpherson, M.A., and W.
Duckworth ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. 235, 236 
Notes on the Cuckoo - Alfred Crawhall Chapman ..
237, 238 
Bibliography:— ..
.. 239—244 
Mammalia, 239 — 241; Reptiles and Amphibians, 241, 242; Fishes, 242 — 244.
Coleoptera of the Liverpool District (Part x, Rhynchophora)— 
John W.
Ellis, F.E.S., etc 245—251 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Upper Nidderdale 253 — 255 
Notes— Mammalia : — 238 
Badger in North Lincolnshire — Edward T.
Baldwin ; Badgers in North Yorkshire — 
T. H.
Nelson, M.B.O.U.; Captures of the Badger in Yorkshire— T.
W. Brewis; 
The Marten in Northumberland — William Yellowley.
Note— Ornithology :— 
Brent Geese and Great Grey Shrike in Nidderdale — William Storey.
Note— Fishes :— ..
.. ..
Occurrence of the Sting-Ray at Redcar — T.
H. Nelson.
Notes — Conchology: — 
Helix cantiana in Notts.
— C.
T. Miisson, F.L.S., M.C.S.; Estuarine Shells at Salt- 
fleet, Lincolnshire— H.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S.; Helix lactea in Yorkshire— John 
W. Taylor, M.C.S.
Notes— Entomology :— ..
.. 
Scoria dealbata at Whitby — Joseph T.
Sewell; Triecphora vulnerata in Edlington 
Wood — George T.
Porritt, F.L.S.
, F".E.S.; Megachile ligniseca and Halictus rubi- 
cundus at Mablethorpe, Lincolnshire — H.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S.
Note — Palaeontology: — ..
Remarkable geological discovery at Clayton — 6\ A.
A damson, F.G.S.
Book Notice :— .
. 
(Fitzgerald's Dictionary of the names of British Plnnts.) 
236 
252 
251 
251 
252 
255, 256 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
McCorquodale & Co. Limited, Cardington Street, Euston : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghaix Street.
All Communications should be Addressed : — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
IICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 
5s., post free.
The NATURALIST 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
AdyertisementS.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
, 
Midland Naturalist for July 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for July 1886.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for July 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for July 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for July 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Natural History Journal for July 1886.
[].
E. Clarke, Editor.
New York Microscopical Society — Journal for April 1886.
[From the Society.
Manchester Microscopical Society — Annual Report, 1885, etc., 32 pages, 8vo.
[The Society.
The Journal of Conchology.
[Mr. John W.
Taylor, Editor.
Journal of Microscopy and Natural Science — July 1886.
[Mr. A.
Allen, Editor.
The Zoologist, 1843— 1868 > set of the first 26 vols - [Mr. Basil T.
Woodd.
Report on the Actiniaria of the L.M.B.C. District— By John W.
Ellis, L.R.C.P.
, 
F.E.S., 8vo, 8 pp.
and plate.
[The Author.
Smithsonian Institution — Annual Report for 1884.
[The Institution.
The Naturalist's Diary: a day-book of Meteorology, Phenology, and Rural Biology.
By Chas.
Roberts.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
Sea- Weeds, Shells, and Fossils — -By Peter Gray and B.
B. Woodward.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
Handbook of Mosses — By J.
E. Bagnall.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
British Fungi, Lichens, etc.
— By E.
M. Holmes and Peter Gray.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
English Coins and Tokens — By LI.
Jewitt and Barclay V.
Head.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
_ ACKWORTH SHELLS.
— It is proposed to publish in the Natural 
History Journal a list of the Land and Freshwater Shells found near Ackworth.
Ackworth lies in the Went Vale district of Nelson and Taylor's Yorkshire 
Mollusca.
Any help will be very welcome.
Address : — W.
D. Braithwaite, 
Ackworth School, near Pontefract; or, Hugh Richardson, The Gables, Elswick 
Road, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
225 
THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF YORKSHIRE.
C. STANILAND WAKE, M.A.I., 
Welton, near Brougk, East Yorkshire.
In a work dedicated to Rudolf Virchow and Paul Topinard, two 
living masters in Anthropology, and to the memory of the late 
Paul Broca and Joseph Barnard Davis, Dr. John Beddoe has 
recently published the results of upwards- of thirty years' laborious 
leisure devoted to the 'application of the numerical and inductive 
method to the ethnology of Britain and of Western Europe.' The 
work in question ('The Races of Britain: a Contribution to the 
Anthropology of Western Europe.' By John Beddoe, M.D., F.R.S., 
&c.
1885.
Triibner & Co.) is to a great extent, as the author informs 
us, an extension of a manuscript essay which, in 1868, carried off 
the great prize of the Welsh National Eisteddfod.
The observations 
on which the conclusions of that essay were based have, however, 
since been largely added to, and those relating purely to stature and 
bulk formed a valuable contribution to the third volume of the Memoirs 
of the Anthropological Society of London, published in 1870.
The 
method of investigation pursued by Dr. Beddoe is now universally 
recognised as one which gives most important results, and as he states 
that his observations are not likely to be increased, I propose to 
embody the conclusions arrived at, so far as they relate to Yorkshire, 
in the present paper, for the information of the members of the 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
First, as to Dr. Beddoe's method.
The uncertainty which 
existed as to the external physical characters of the British and 
other European peoples having forcibly struck him, Dr. Beddoe 
determined to begin 'systematic numerical observations' on the 
colours of hair and eyes.
The first step was to establish a scale of 
colour which would be generally applicable, and finally he arranged 
all eyes into three classes, distinguished by shade as much as by 
colour, light, intermediate or ?ientral, and dark.
To the first class 
were assigned all blue, bluish-gray, and light-gray eyes ; to the third 
class, the so-called black eyes, and those usually described as brown 
and dark hazel.
In the second or neutral division, Dr. Beddoe in- 
cluded dark grey, brownish gray, very light hazel, or yellow-hazel 
gray, formed by streaks of orange radiating into a bluish-gray field, 
and most shades of green, together with all the eyes of whose colour 
he remained uncertain after an ordinarily close inspection.
Each 
class of eyes was sub-divided into five, in accordance with the arrange- 
ment of hair-colour.
Thus, Class R includes hair of all shades which 
Aug. 1886.
Q 
2 26 WAKE: ANTHROPOLOGY OF YORKSHIRE.
approach more nearly to red than to brown, yellow or flaxen ; Class F 
(fair) includes flaxen, yellow, and golden, with some of the light shades 
of brown, and of the pale auburns ; Class B includes numerous 
shades of brown ; Class D the remaining shades of brown up to 
Class N (niger), 'which includes not only the jet black, which has 
retained the same colour from childhood, and is generally very coarse 
and hard, but also that very intense brown which occurs in people 
who in childhood have had dark brown (or in some cases deep red) 
hair, but which in the adult cannot be distinguished from coal-black, 
except in a very good light.' 
The possession of a scale of colour is indispensable, but it is 
hardly less important to know how best to make the desired obser- 
vations.
On this point it will be well to let Dr. Beddoe speak for 
himself.
He says : ' When engaged on this work I set down in his 
proper place on my card of observations every person (with the ex- 
ceptions to be mentioned presently) whom I meet, or who passes me 
within a short distance, say from one to three yards.
As a rule, I take 
no note of persons who apparently belong to the upper classes, as 
these are more migratory, and more often mixed in blood.
I neglect 
those whom I suppose to be under age — fixing the point roughly at 
1 8 or 20 for men, 17 or 18 for women — as well as all those whose 
hair has begun to grizzle.
Thus I get a fairly uniform material to 
work upon, though doubtless the hair of most people does darken 
considerably between 20 and 40 or 50.
In order to preserve perfect 
fairness, I always examine first, out of any group of persons, the one 
who is nearest, rather than the one to whom my attention is most 
drawn.
Certain colours of the hair — such as red— certain shades of 
the eye — such as light gray — can be discerned at a very considerable 
distance ; but I take no note of anyone who does not approach me 
so nearly that I cannot recognise the more obscure colours.
Much 
allowance needs to be made for the varying effects of light.
Direct 
sunlight is better avoided when possible ; I always choose the shady 
side of a street on a sunny day.' 
The colours of the hair and eyes were not the only data collected 
by Dr. Beddoe for the purpose of ascertaining the types to which the 
races of Britain are referable.
He found that little was known as to 
the form and size of the skull of the modern Briton, and it was 
necessary to make his own observations, which he did by measuring 
a considerable number of living heads.
In order to avoid fatiguing 
or irritating the subjects, Dr. Beddoe restricted himself to the use of 
the index callipers and graduated tape.
A description of the kind of 
measurements taken by him need not be given here, but an anecdote 
may be related to show how head-measurements may sometimes be 
Naturalist, 
wake: anthropology of Yorkshire.
227 
obtained, although probably not in Yorkshire.
Dr. Beddoe was 
travelling in Kerry with Dr. Barnard Davis and two archaeological 
friends, and relates that ' whenever a likely little squad of natives 
was encountered, the two archaeologists got up a dispute about the 
relative size and shape of their own heads,' which he was called in to 
settle with the callipers.
The unsuspecting Irishmen ' usually entered 
keenly into the debate, and before the little drama had been finished 
were eagerly betting on the size of their own heads, and begging to 
have their wagers determined in the same manner.' The valuable 
aid of photography has not been neglected by Dr. Beddoe.
Among 
the cleverly-drawn heads depicted in his work, however, the only 
Yorkshire types given are two found in the West Riding ; although 
he figures a Scandinavian type from the Hebrides which resembles, 
as we shall find, the North Riding type of which Captain Cook 
was a representative.
Let us now see what Dr. Beddoe's statistics show to be the 
prevailing type, judging from the colour of the hair and of the eyes, 
in certain parts of Yorkshire.
The following results are extracted 
from Dr. Beddoe's Table of Colour of Hair and Eyes from Personal 
Observation.
Eyes 
Hair.
Eyes Light.
Intermediate 
Eyes Dark.
Index of 
or Neuter.
Nigrescence.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
West Riding — 
Settle .
53*4 
21*7 
24-8 
16 
Skipton-in-Craven 
57 
16-8 
26'l 
I3'2 
Haworth ...
4 8-6 
26'6 , ..
247 
1-4 
Keighley ...
56-5 
I7-5 
26 
3-2 
Farnley Ironworks 
52-6 
I7'3 
30 
2'6 
Bradford ...
56-1 ..
.. i6-s ..
27-4 
10-5 
Leeds 
52-8 .
.. 15-6 ..
31'5 
8-5 
Ripon 
55-8 ..
n-6 
32'5 
2-5 
North Riding — 
Thirsk 
56-9 
14-6 
28-4 
77 
Whitby 
657 
• 9"4 
24-9 
12 
Maltoa 
60 
18* 
22 
20 
York City 
5i 
19-1 ., 
297 
8-6 
East Riding — 
Bridlington Quay 
60 
18 
22 
13 
Bridlington Town 
12 
18 
3'5 
Beverley ...
65 
IO'2 
247 
12 
Hull 
58 
12 
30 
20*2 
It is necessary to explain what is meant by the Index of Nigrescence.
The gross index is obtained by subtracting the number of red and 
fair-haired persons from that of the dark-haired, together with twice 
* I have added one-third to Dr. Beddoe's figure to make up the full number of observations.
.Aug. 1886.
228 
WAKE: ANTHROPOLOGY OF YORKSHIRE.
the black-haired.
The black is doubled ' to give its proper value to 
the greater tendency to melanosity shown thereby'; while brown 
(chestnut) hair is regarded as neutral, although most of the persons 
placed in Dr. Beddoe's Class B are fair-skinned.
From the gross 
index the percentage index is readily obtained.
Dr. Beddoe judges from the above statistics that the fair type 
largely predominates throughout Yorkshire, and that it is more pro- 
nounced in the Eastern districts than in the Western districts.
As to 
the Yorkshire skull-form, it need be said only that while the East of 
England heads are short but not narrow, Dr. Beddoe infers from the 
proportion borne by this circumference to the other dimensions that 
the Yorkshire heads are more inclined to be oblong.
The conclusions arrived at by Dr. Beddoe as to the races repre- 
sented in Yorkshire agree with the teachings of history.
He says, the 
North and East Ridings ' have an Anglo-Danish population, in which 
there are probably but scanty remains of the primitive races.
It is 
likely enough, however, that the descendants of the citizens of York 
and Catterick survived to amalgamate with the earlier swarm of 
conquerors ; and that a considerable number of Norman invaders — 
rather Norman in this case than French — settled here after the 
ravages of the great Bastard.
The prevailing types are certainly 
Anglian and Danish ; the chief one is thus described by the late 
Professor Phillips, than whom no man knew the county better : — 
' Tall, large-boned, muscular persons ; visage long, angular ; com- 
plexion fair or florid ; eyes blue or gray ; hair light brown or reddish.' 
The local variations are considerable, and some of them may date from 
the Conquest.
The features of the famous Captain Cook, who was 
a Whitby man, are frequently reproduced ; they resemble those of a 
Scandinavian type, found in the Lewis.
. .
. The average stature 
and weight are apparently the largest in England;' the Anthropo- 
metric Committee of the British Association give the height as 
5 feet 9 inches, and the weight 164 lbs.
The inhabitants of Flam- 
borough are said to differ remarkably from the general population of 
the East Riding.
According to General Pitt- Rivers, they have either 
dark or red hair, and they exceed in size the natives of the neigh- 
bouring district, although the men have actually the same average 
stature as that just mentioned for Yorkshiremen in general.
In the 
level lands south of York, and in the Vale of the Derwent, there is a 
race of small, round-faced, brown, dark-haired men, with almond- 
shaped eyes, which Professor Phillips thought to be of a Romano- 
British or Iberian origin, but which Dr. Beddoe thinks may be partly 
at least of French extraction.
He supposes them to be descended 
from the immigrants who settled in the North and East of Yorkshire 
Naturalist, 
wake: anthropology of Yorkshire.
229 
after the devastation of the region by the Conqueror.
The new 
comers doubtless resembled the majority of the modern inhabitants 
of the north of France, that is, ' in the main a mixture of the square- 
browed, long-faced type which the French ethnologists call Kimric, 
with the short, swarthy, round-headed type of Broca's Kelts or Kelti- 
Ligurian.' 
Professor Phillips found in the elevated districts of the West 
Riding another type, which he considered Norwegian.
It is described 
as * person robust, visage oval, full, and rounded ; nose often slightly 
aquiline ; complexion somewhat embrowned, florid ; eyes brown or 
gray ; hair brown or reddish.' On the other hand, Dr. Beddoe 
believes this type to be a variety of the Anglian, as it abounds in 
Staffordshire, a very Anglian county, and has eyes of a neutral tint, 
between light and dark green, brown, and gray, known as the ' Wilt- 
shire eye.' He adds that in Craven the Brigantian or Romano- 
Briton survives in some force; the hair is often dark, and the features 
high.
Moreover, in the ancient kingdom of Loidis and Elmet, from 
Tadcaster and Leeds westward, up Airedale and the Worth Valley, 
to the Lancastrian frontier, the fair race ' predominates to a remark- 
able degree.' This, Dr. Beddoe thinks, may be accounted for on the 
supposition that when Edwin of Deira conquered that British King- 
dom, he drove its inhabitants across the mountains, and that the 
Angles of the plain of York took refuge there from the subsequent 
invasion of the Danes.
Still another type occurs, especially in the 
South- Western part of the West Riding, which Dr. Beddoe believes 
to be descended from an ancient race.
Dr. Beddoe remarks that in few parts of Britain does there exist 
a more clearly-marked moral type than in Yorkshire.
He says : — 
' To that of the Irish it has no affinity ; but the Scotchman and the 
Southern Englishman alike recognise the differences which distinguish 
the Yorkshire character from their own, but are not so apt to appre- 
hend the numerous respective points of resemblance.
The character 
is essentially Teutonic, including the shrewdness, the truthfulness 
without candour, the perseverance, energy, and industry of the Low- 
land Scotch, but little of their frugality, or of the theological instinct 
common to the Welsh and Scotch, or of the imaginative genius, or 
the more brilliant qualities which sometimes light up the Scottish 
character.
The sound judgment, the spirit of fair-play, the love of 
comfort, order, and cleanliness, and the fondness for heavy feeding, 
are shared with the Saxon Englishman ; but some of them are still 
more strongly marked in the Yorkshireman, as is also the bluff in- 
dependence — a very fine quality when it does not degenerate into 
selfish rudeness.
The aptitude for music was remarked by Giraldus 
Aug. 1886.
230 
BOTANICAL NOTES.
Cambrensis seven centuries ago, and the taste for horseflesh seems 
to have descended from the old Northmen, though it may have been 
fostered by local circumstances.
The mind, like the body, is generally 
very vigorous and energetic, and extremely well adapted to com- 
mercial and industrial pursuits, as well as to the cultivation of the 
exact sciences ; but a certain defect in imaginative power must be 
admitted, and is probably one reason, though obviously not the only 
one, why Yorkshire, until quite modern times, was generally behind- 
hand in politics and religion.' 
It would be almost impertinent in me to criticise Dr. Beddoe's 
conclusions, but I would point out that they are necessarily based on 
a comparatively small number of observations.
Bradford forms an 
exception, as 1,400 persons were there observed.
I do not wish it to 
be inferred, however, that therefore the conclusions are not reliable.
My object in bringing them before the members of the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union is to lead some of them to follow in the path 
Dr. Beddoe has marked out, and to supplement his observations by 
others which will be equally valuable, if made according to his 
method, whether they support his views or require them to be in any 
way modified.
NOTES— BOTANY.
Botanical Notes from the Solway.— During the season of 1885 and 
the spring of the present year, I have been fortunate enough to discover a number 
of plants not generally reckoned as indigenous to the neighbourhood of Maryport 
and Workington, on the Cumberland shore of the Solway Firth.
The majority of 
them were found growing upon heaps of household refuse ' shot ' upon the beach, 
apparently from the workmen's cottages connected with the iron furnaces immedi- 
ately to the south of Maryport Harbour.
From the constant occurrence of hemp 
and canary grass upon these mounds, I infer that the exotic plants have found their 
way to their present stations among impure or mixed samples of the seeds in use 
by bird fanciers.
Among other and better-known plants I have found the following, 
viz: — Adonis autumnalis, Fumaria confusa, Rap h anus maritimus, Sinapis alba, 
Rapistrutn rugosum, Sisymbrium Sophia, S.
pannonicum, Camelina saliva, Thlaspi 
arvense, Lepidium draba, Senebiera Cordnopus, Saponaria Vaccaria, Chrysanthe- 
mum coronaria, Anthemis cotula, Echium vulgare, Echinospermum lappula, 
Asperugo prociwibens, Anagallis cosmlea, Cannabis saliva, Phalaris canariensis, 
Tritiaun acutum, Lolium perenne v.
ramosum (a splendid example) Hordeum 
maritimum, and Avena fatua.
In addition to these are two or three other plants 
whose growth is hardly sufficiently matured for correct identification, but which 
may be treated of hereafter.
I may add that I have been indebted to Mr. J.
G. 
Baker, of the Herbarium, Kew, for the diagnosis of some of the above-mentioned 
exotics that were entirely new to me, and acknowledge gratefully his courteous 
help.— W.
Hodgson, A.L.S., Flimby, July 5th, 1886.
Impatiens noli-me-tangere at Stock Ghyll Force.— In Septem- 
ber 1883, I found Impatiens noli-me-tangere growing in some profusion up the side 
of the stream which forms Stock Ghyll Force, near Ambleside, Westmoreland.
Withering's Botany (1796) says: ' Near the footpath going from the Inn at Amble- 
side up the brook, towards the cascade, Mrs. Watt.' I suppose it has grown there 
ever since.
Earuassia palustris—3.s might be expected — is found in profusion in 
the Lake district.
— Geo. W.
Oldfield, London.
Naturalist, 
2 3 r 
MARFIELD POND, MASHAM, AND ITS BIRD-LIFE.
THOMAS CARTER, 
Burton House, Masham, Yorkshire.
Marfield Pond is, or rather was, for unfortunately there is no 
longer such a place, a natural sheet of water of several acres in 
extent, situated one mile north of Masham, in a large open piece of 
land to which it has evidently given the name of Marfield (Mere- 
field).
It was 300 feet above sea-level and within 300 yards of the 
River Yore.
Round the margin, in an average dry season, was open 
water for several yards, where sprung up in summer masses of Persi- 
caria, Ranunculus, and Water Plantain ; beyond this grew a mass of 
thick reeds occupying all the centre of the pond, and within which 
any ordinary number of birds could be perfectly concealed.
Being 
the only natural sheet of water of any size in the neighbourhood, the 
nearest lakes being Semerwater, 30 miles up the dale, and Gormire, 
nearly 20 miles east, and being in a somewhat exposed situation, it 
was the constant haunt of wild-fowl ; but the Swinton estate having 
recently changed hands, and the present owner being very partial to 
coursing, has caused it to be drained this summer, in order to give 
him greater facilities for his favourite amusement.
For the same 
reason the beautiful wild bog occupying the lower part of Marfield, 
where the Shoveller Duck reared a brood of young in 1869, has been 
carefully drained and fenced round to form a sort of hare warren, 
and in course of time all or most of the interesting flowers growing 
there will gradually disappear.
The single patches of Great Sundew 
and of Great Meadow Rue (the only habitat in the neighbourhood) 
are already things of the past, by reason of being directly in the way 
of main trenches ; and so, I fear, will soon be the Marsh Cinquefoil, 
Bog Asphodel and Pimpernel, Marsh Pennywort, Grass of Parnassus, 
Marsh and White Helleborine, Globe Flower, Bird's-eye Primrose, 
Butterwort, and other flowers which grew there in abundance.
A 
list of the birds which have come under my observation during the 
last few years may not be uninteresting.
Doubtless wild-fowl which 
have been in the habit of visiting Marfield will continue to come for 
a few years, but finding their old retreat miserably dry, and the abode 
of hares, they will gradually cease coming, and as they are killed or 
die from natural causes, the next generation of birds will never know 
what a charming spot their ancestors used to visit here, and will not 
come this way.
Only last July 29th a flock of 25 Geese came crying 
out from the north-east and went straight to the pond, but finding it 
Aug. 1886.
23 2 CARTER: MARFIELD POND.
occupied by a gang of drainers they alighted in confusion within a 
couple of hundred yards, and soon after took their departure with 
loud cries.
This is a most unusual date for Geese, and last week a 
flock of ten flew over, and another was seen on the river.
Moorhens 
and Dabchicks were to be found on the pond all the year round, 
unless frozen hard in winter, when they took up temporary quarters 
on the river.
Coots were regular spring visitors, arriving usually in 
February and leaving in October.
In very mild seasons an odd one 
or two might be seen at intervals throughout the winter.
Although 
great numbers of these birds were hatched and reared in safety every 
year, still only a limited number came to breed the following season, 
generally seven pairs.
Reckoning each pair to rear six young every 
year, which is a low average, this gives 56 birds in all; but the next 
year only seven pairs or so were to be seen.
I presume, being such 
quarrelsome birds, a greater number could not live together on it ; 
perhaps, also, the food supply was not sufficient for more.
In my 
earlier nesting days I used to walk round and round the pond vainly 
trying to.
find a Coot's or Dabchick's nest which I could reach, but 
the bottom was so soft and the reeds so thick that both wading and 
swimming were out of the question, and if a too-confiding bird did 
chance to make a nest on the margin, somehow the boys from 
Masham generally found the eggs first, and, of course, took them.
After trying sundry barrels and washing-tubs in the river (which 
only separates Marfield from Burton House), for I was determined 
not to be beaten, I hit on the plan of turning a kitchen table of fair 
size upside down, and, with a little putty in the cracks, I had a very 
serviceable punt, though somewhat difficult to push through the 
reeds on account of its square end.
In this improvised craft my 
younger brother and myself used to visit all the nests two or three 
times a season, for three years, and mark the progress of the eggs 
and young, until, after standing a great deal of banter from friends, 
we built a small punt — which served our purpose until recently, when 
we attained the dignity of a canoe, but fear we have made our last 
voyages in the reedy recesses.
In wet or snowy winters the ordinary 
outlet was insufficient to run off the accumulating waters, and the 
pond would increase largely in size, backing underground through 
rabbit holes and drain pipes (for an attempt has been made a great 
while since to drain it, but fortunately unsuccessfully) and forming 
two or more adjacent sheets of water, one as large or larger than 
itself.
When keeping full, late in spring, the Coots, &c, would not 
build until most of the rushes had grown through the greater depth 
of water, and consequently they had much later broods.
There 
might be a nest or two made in the bushes on the margin, but the 
Naturalist, 
CARTER : MARFIELD POND.
2 33 
majority of the birds waited for the rushes appearing.
I have known 
Coots' and Waterhens' eggs laid in the same nest in one of these late 
seasons.
One year an impatient pair of birds, or perhaps more than 
one pair, built a nest on the bare grassy bank of the largest overflow, 
under the shade of a large oak tree.
It was a ridiculously exposed 
situation, and, as I expected, the eggs were very soon taken.
It was 
this overflow which attracted a pair of Redshanks in 1883.
They 
were first seen on April 8th, and fed on the margin and at the pond 
itself until the water had partially subsided, when they laid their eggs 
in a tussock in the marshy ground.
A pair of Dunlins, sometimes 
more, usually rested a day or two in spring when migrating to the 
higher grounds to breed, and in autumn Green Sandpipers (T.
ochropus) frequently stayed some time when migrating southwards.
A Stormy Petrel, blown inland during severe weather, may be included 
in the list of visitors, as may also Herons, Curlews, Golden Plover, 
Black-headed, Herring, and Lesser Black-backed Gulls, Jack Snipe, 
and Woodcock.
The Common Snipe nested in some numbers in 
the bog, and in 1879 I saw a Woodcock there as late as May 6th.
The severe winter of 1879-80 was a great season for Woodcock.
Numbers came to this bog to feed, as it abounds in fine warm springs 
which do not freeze in the hardest weather.
Water Rails were often 
seen in the winter months, but have never been known to breed in 
this locality.
On the 14th January, 1869, two Brent Geese were seen on the 
pond.
One was shot by the Swinton keeper and is now in my 
father's collection.
February 7th, 1876.
One Black-tufted Duck on the pond.
February 12th, 1879.
One Bewick's Swan on the river by the 
edge of the bog.
This bird stayed some days and finally took its 
departure without being shot.
January 22nd, 1881.
A pair of Red-breasted Mergansers, one of 
which was shot.
April 5th, 1882.
A Pochard appeared on the pond, where it 
stayed some days.
This species must build somewhere in the neigh- 
bourhood, as on the 1st March, 1884, a female Pochard was on the 
pond, and on November 25th, 1884, I noted a pair.
I have seen 
one bird or a pair on the pond on several occasions in spring, but 
have not always made a note of the date.
April 22nd, 1882.
A male and female Shoveller took up their 
quarters on the pond, and would, I think, have bred, for they stayed 
ten days, but the water being unusually high there was no cover for 
them, and attracting the attention of all passers-by they were at 
length fr ightened away.
In 1869 a brood was reared in the bog, as 
Aug. 1886.
234 
CARTER : MARFIELD POND.
already mentioned, and in August 1881 an immature bird was shot 
a few miles further up the river, by S.
T. Scrope, Esq., of Danby-on- 
Yore.
January 13th, 1883.
Eight Wild Swans circled round the pond 
and the overflow, but seeing someone there they went away without 
alighting.
February 5th, 1883.
A female Red-breasted Merganser, which 
had been staying on the river near the bog at least a fortnight, was 
shot by my father.
August 4th, 1883.
A brood of Wild Ducks hatched out in the 
bog.
This is a late date.
August 27th, 1883.
A Scoter was seen.
August 30th, 1883.
A Kittiwake fed about the bog all day.
It 
was either remarkably tame or stupid.
February 2nd, 1883.
After a heavy gale from the north-east a 
pair of Oyster Catchers alighted on the edge of the bog near the 
river and fed there for some days.
October 10th, 1884.
A flock of 18 Tufted Duck seen.
The above are only birds which I have myself noted.
Many 
more would visit the pond or bog and escape notice.
Of course the 
common ducks, Widgeon, Mallard, Teal, and Golden- eye, were 
frequently seen, and occasionally Scaup ; their frequent occurrences 
do not need particulars.
Among other visitors I may mention that a 
pair of Nightjars on three occasions stayed at the pond on their 
arrival in spring, and before going to the moors fed a few evenings 
about the pond.
They fleAv close above the water, beating from end 
to end of the surface in search of insects with quite a slow, flapping 
flight.
The occurrence of a Chough in such an inland locality is 
worth recording.
In the winter of 1876 one of these birds was seen 
by Mr. Wra.
Todd, our local taxidermist, feeding in the Marfield in 
company with some Rooks.
There being a deep cover of snow at 
the time, its red legs and beak showed very plainly against the white 
surface.
P.S.
(May 15th, 1886).
— Since the above was written (October 
1885) the pond has again filled to its old size, owing to the feeding 
springs being so large with the melting of the late heavy snows that 
the drain pipes cannot take all the water.
This, however, will be 
only temporary ; as soon as drier weather comes the springs will get 
lower.
Anyway the pond is doomed, as the lord of the manor has 
stated his intention of putting in larger pipes if the present ones 
prove of insufficient size.
Naturalist, 
235 
NESTING OF THE SHOVELLER IN CUMBERLAND.
Rev. H.
A. MACPHERSON, M.A., and WM.
DUCKWORTH, 
A itthors of 1 The Birds of Cumberland.
' 
When drawing up his standard paper on the Distribution of Birds 
in Great Britain during the nesting season (Ibis.
1865), Mr. A.
G. 
More recorded the Shoveller {Spatula dypeata) as having nested in 
seven English counties — viz., Dorset, Kent, Staffs., Norfolk, Yorks.,, 
Durham, and Northumberland.
In his recently published History 
of British Birds, Mr. Seebohm states (vol.
iii, p.
554), that the 
Shoveller now nests in Herts., Cambs., and Huntingdonshire, as 
also in the counties enumerated by Mr. More.
Mr. H.
Saunders, 
in his text of Yarrell (4th ed.), refers to two more counties, Lincoln- 
shire and Notts, on the respective authority of Mr. J.
Cordeaux and 
Mr. J.
Whitaker.
In Messrs.
Sterland and Whitaker's descriptive 
list of the Birds of Notts.
(1879), the authors record that a pair of 
Shovellers bred at Rainworth in 1874; Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Aplirn 
inform the writers that, on a recent occasion, they observed no less than 
fourteen pairs of breeding Shovellers in the same locality.
Neither 
Mr. Saunders nor Mr. Seebohm record the Shoveller as nesting 
in Suffolk, but Mr. Rope attests to its breeding at Leiston (Z00L 
1883, p.
496) ; it nests also in the neighbourhood of Aldeburgh.
The thirteen counties thus recorded as holding breeding 
Shovellers vary widely in character, the localities favoured being 
in some cases the meres of inland counties, in others semi-tidal 
waters, such as the ' fleets ' of Romney Marsh.
They include most 
of the maritime counties on the south and east of England, but bear 
no reference to the north-ow/ portion of ' Southern Britain.' In 
? The Birds of Lancashire,' Mr. Mitchell states that Shovellers of both 
sexes have been shot in Lancashire in the breeding season (p.
146) ; 
and the present writers point to the Shoveller probably nesting in 
Cumberland on similar grounds (their views being tersely stated at 
p. 105 of 'The Birds of Cumberland').
Thanks to the observations of one of those working-men naturalists 
who have done so much to investigate the zoology of the northern 
counties, all doubt as to the Shoveller nesting in Cumberland has 
now been dispelled.
On May 8th, 1886, a Shoveller's nest, containing nine eggs, was 
found in a tussock of rushes upon one of the salt marshes of the 
Solway, on the English side of the estuary.
Mr. Smith, the finder, 
forwarded to the writers a portion of the down, which Mr. Seebohm 
kindly pronounced to be identical with the down of the Shoveller.
Aug. 1886.
236 
PRESERVATION OF NATIVE PLANTS.
The eggs were placed under a hen.
Two of them proved to be 
unfertile ; a third contained a dead chick, but the other six eggs 
hatched out on May 26th; the first chick to hatch breaking the 
shell in the presence of Mr. W.
Duckworth.
Considering the in.
clement character of the spring of 1886, the date of May 8th may be 
considered early for the north of England.
Mr. Seebohm states that 
'eggs are seldom found in this country before the middle of May' 
(B.B. iii, 556).
Dr. Sclater gives the dates of June 2nd, gth t 
24th, 30///; July 4I/1, $th, 8th, gth, iot/1, nth, and 20th, for 
Shovellers hatching out in the Zoological Gardens (P.Z.S., 1880, 
p. 523).
It may be interesting to remark in passing, that a female 
Shoveller in that collection began to sit upon seven eggs on June 4th 
of the present year (1886); the nest being partially concealed by 
brushwood, and in close contiguity to the water, as also to a much 
frequented footpath.
The pinioned Shoveller drakes of this collection 
begin to show the first signs of ' eclipse,' at the beginning of June, 
the crown of the head assuming the brown female feathers.
In his 
recent list of Irish Birds, Mr. More refers to a male Shoveller shot 
on July 24th 4 in the brown summer plumage' ; but in this species, 
as in the Mallard, it is probable that the date of the assumption of 
eclipse plumage varies somewhat in individual males.
The young Shoveller in down does not differ widely in appearance 
from other Anatidae at the same stage, the upper parts being dark 
brown with a white spot behind each pinion, and another on each 
flank.
The lower parts vary from buffish on the throat to white on 
the abdomen.
An eye stripe is also present.
As some difference of 
opinion exists, or has existed, as to the development of the bill in the 
young of 5.
clypeata, it may be well to remark that of two young a 
week old (hatched out, as related, on May 28th), the one possesses a 
narrow bill, such as Mr. Yarrell described as characteristic of young 
Shovellers bred at the Zoological Gardens; the bill of the second 
nestling is proportionately shorter and broader than that of its fellow, 
and suggests an early lateral expansion of its surface.
Preservation Of Native Plants.
— This subject was carefully discussed 
by the committee of section D (Biology) at the Aberdeen Meeting of the British 
Association, and by them referred to the Conference of Delegates to be reported 
on at the Birmingham Meeting.
In furtherance of these views it is desirable that 
answers to the following questions should be given by as many members as can 
report thereon.
The answers may be sent, before Mid August if possible, either 
to the undersigned or to Prof.
W. Hillhouse, Mason Science College, Birmingham.
Queries.
— 1.
Have any plants of comparative rarity or otherwise disappeared 
from your local flora in recent years ?
if so, kindly enumerate them, specifying the 
original habitat of each and giving the cause or probable cause of extirpation, so far 
as known to you.
2. To what extent do you think such disappearance was subject 
to public control ?
If you have any suggestions to offer under this head be so good 
as to name them.
3. If you know personally of any cases of extirpation in 
localities other than your own, please furnish particulars as above.
— Chas.
P. 
HOBKIRK, Dewsbury.
Naturalist, 
237 
NOTES ON THE CUCKOO.
ALFRED CRAWHALL CHAPMAN.
As information is still required concerning some of the habits of the 
Cuckoo (Cuculus canoriis), perhaps the following particulars may be 
of interest : — In the year 1874, I used often to explore the reed-beds 
on the side of the river Avon, in Warwickshire, where Reed Warblers 
bred in considerable numbers.
The patches of reeds were only of 
limited area, and it was not difficult to find the Warbler's nest.
One 
day we found a Cuckoo's egg in one of the nests, and the next day 
we found another.
These two eggs were precisely alike, both in size, 
outline, and colour.
We took them both.
When passing the place 
about a week after, we again looked into the reed-beds and found a 
third Cuckoo's egg, an exact fac simile of the two already obtained.
We took this egg, and in another nest of the Reed Warbler, contain- 
ing only one of its own eggs, we substitued an egg of the Sedge 
Warbler, taking that of the Reed Warbler away with us.
The next 
morning I went to see if the bird had forsaken, and was astonished 
to find a fourth egg of the Cuckoo placed alongside the single Sedge 
Warbler's egg in the Reed Warbler's nest.
This egg also exactly 
resembled the three already obtained, and it should be mentioned 
that all these four eggs of the Cuckoo were deposited within a space 
of about 200 yards.
Without rushing to any conclusions, I think we have here pretty 
strong, though purely circumstantial, evidence that the Cuckoo lays 
more than one egg during the season, and it would also appear, 
unless evidence to the contrary is forthcoming, that the eggs forming 
the Cuckoo's clutch resemble each other, as is generally the case in 
most clutches of other birds'* eggs.
It is well known that Reed 
Warblers lay two distinct types of egg, a dark variety and a light 
variety; the former by far the most common, being thickly blotched 
with a dull green on a white ground, the latter, which I think is rare, 
having very pale purple blotches on the white ground.
I have only 
seen two nests of the Reed Warbler containing the latter type of egg, 
and, strange to say, two out of the four Cuckoo's eggs obtained were 
deposited alongside these pale varieties.
From this, it might appear 
that the Cuckoo selected these nests purposely, in order to assimilate 
as much as possible her egg with those already in the nest.
I might 
mention that the four Cuckoo's eggs were all very light coloured, not 
unlike those of the Pied Wagtail, but essentially differing from the 
first mentioned dark variety of the Reed Warbler.
Aug. 1886.
NOTES — MAMMALIA.
With regard to the time when the young Cuckoo moults : on 
August 6th, 1885, I got a young bird in the usual dull-red and 
barred plumage.
It had flown against the light at the Souter Point 
(Electric) Lighthouse, at 2 a.m. that morning, and had killed itself.
What was it doing there at that time of the day, if not migrating ?
The man at the Lighthouse said it was a Sparrow Hawk.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Badger in North Lancashire.— Some years ago it was said that a 
badger was run over by a train on the Furness Railway between Broughton-in- 
Furness and Foxfield.
I do not recall any other instance in this part of North 
Lancashire.
— Edward T.
Baldwin, Woodcroft, Ulverston, April 5th, 1886.
Badgers in North Yorkshire.— Four Badgers, an old female and three 
young ones, were captured at Ingleby, in Cleveland, last month.
See my note on 
'Badgers in North Yorkshire,' in the Natiwalist for May, p.
143.
— T.
H. Nelson, 
190, High Street, Redcar, June nth, 1886.
Captures of the Badger (Meles taxus) in Yorkshire.— 
Mr. F.
Bartlett, of the Kennels, Wentworth, has kindly favoured me with the 
following additional records: — 
One captured at the Mausoleum, while drawing for a fox, Nov. 19th, 1884.
One dug out in Rainborough Park, Nov. 19th, 1884.
One caught by the hounds at the Mausoleum, Dec. 19th, 1884.
One in Cartworth Planting, Sept.
25th, 1885.
The above are all on Earl Fitzwilliam's estate.
— T.
W. Brewis, June 2nd, 1885.
The Marten in Northumberland.— A beautiful example of the 
Yellow-breasted Marten {Mitstela martes) was captured by Mr. Tait, coachman to 
Mr. J.
Hedley, in that gentleman's grounds at West Chirten House, near North 
Shields, on May 23rd, 1883, and came into my possession within a few days of its 
capture.
At first it was very fierce and intractable, burying itself among the hay 
of its bed and refusing any food if looked at.
It would generally lie curled up in a 
corner of the cage during the day, but would become very active and restless at 
night.
However, after a few weeks' confinement it became more reconciled to its 
captivity.
Having kept this animal a while, I sent it to Mr. Bostock (Bostock 
and Wombwell's menagerie) where it would be better taken care of than with me, 
with the proviso that if it should die it was to be forwarded to me.
After living 
in the collection about a year and a half, its body was sent me the day after its 
death.
It is now stuffed and forms part of my small mammalian collection.
This 
animal was caught on May 23rd, 1883.
The Alnwick Mercury of June 9th the 
same year (or a fortnight later) contained the following: — 'A fine specimen of the 
Yellow-breasted Marten, measuring 30 inches from nose to tail end, was captured 
at Harehope, Alnwick, last week.
This species has not been seen or heard of in 
this district for at least 50 years.
It is now in the possession of Mr. A.
Hall, 
Percy Cross, for preservation.
' These two animals, which were caught in North- 
umberland within a week of each other, must have strayed away from their native 
haunts, for, as far as I can learn, this species has not been seen in the county for 
60 years at least, when a specimen had been killed in the neighbourhood of 
Rothbury.
A few still linger among the wild and mountainous parts of Cumberland, 
and a chance pair or two may still exist among the rocky wilds of the Cheviot range, 
but in these places the Marten is on the verge of extinction.
They are yet to be 
met with in the wilder districts of Ross, Sutherland, Inverness, and other parts of 
the North-west Highlands, and also in Carmarthen, Merioneth, and other counties 
of Wales ; and, according to Mr. John Cordeaux, in Lincolnshire, but now in 
greatly reduced numbers.' — Wm. Yellowley, South Shields, May 25th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
2 39 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural 
history and physical features of the North of England.
MAMMALIA, 1885.
The present instalment includes a few notes for 1884 which were 
accidentally overlooked when the bibliography for that year was 
published.
The numerous references to sporting matters, fox-hunt- 
ing, etc., which appear in ; The Field,' 'Land and Water,' etc., do 
not find a place in these papers.
Various Writers.
Lancashire, Cumberland, Westmoreland.
[Eecords of Otters — Lutra vulgaris — and accounts of Otter-hunting ; Otters 
seen in the Wyre — Field, August 8th, 1885, p.
215.
Hunting records for 
Cumberland, Lancashire, and Westmoreland, Field, July nth, p.
61; 
August 15th, p.
267; August 22nd, p.
314; August 29th, p.
349; and 
Land and Water, July 25th, p.
88; August 22nd, p.
178; September 5th, 
p. 226; and October 3rd, 1885, p.
322].
Anon, [no signature].
Lancashire.
[Otters — Lutra vulgaris — catching Eels in the river Lune].
Nat. World, Nov.
1885, p.
211.
Anon, [no signature].
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire.
Exportation of Vermin to the Colonies.
[Discusses the exportation of Lincoln- 
shire Stoats and Weasels to New Zealand, and states that ' in the parish of 
Bolton Percy, Yorkshire, the chuchwardens' book which commences in 1788 
contains between that date and 1830 such entries as the following : — In 1788 
"four foxes and a foulmart, 4s.
2d."; 1789, "four foulmarts, 8d.'' ; "paid 
for a fox's head, is.
; for a bever ditto, 2d." For "bever" we should prob- 
ably read "otter," since the parish is near the river Wharfe, and an otter's 
head is entered further on.
Payments for foxes and foulmarts occur annually 
till 1798, when two foulmarts cost " 4d.
each ; three foxes, 3s.
; one otter, is.
— 
total, 4s.
8d."] Field, April 4th, 1885, p.
454.
Anon, [no signature].
Yorkshire.
Gisburne Park [giving the old particulars as to the herd of wild cattle and their 
extinction in 1859].
Land and Water, January 17th, 1885, p.
64.
Anon, [no signature].
Westmoreland.
Interesting discovery in Westmoreland [a bone-cave at Helsfell near Kendal : 
list of species given].
Land and Water, October 31st, 1885, p.
413.
Oliver V.
Aplin.
Notts.
Period of Activity of the Noctule [ Vesperugo noctula ; giving dimensions and 
weight of two Nottinghamshire specimens].
. .
. Z00L, September 1885, 
p. 344.
Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Yorkshire.
Diary of Natural History Observations for 1884, pp.
28 [includes various 
observations on mammals about Bradford, and in other parts of the West 
Riding].
John Cordeaux.
Northumberland.
4 Cheviot's Mountains Lone ' [and their Mammalia ; the Badger {Meles taxus), 
Otter {Lutra vulgaris), Polecat (Mustela putoria) and others referred to].
Field, October 3rd, 1885, p.
499.
Aug, 1886.
240 
bibliography: mammalia, 1885.
John Cordeaux.
Northumberland.
Place Names in Coquetdale having reference to Animals [includes extracts 
from Rothbury Church Registers, 1677 — for killing Foxes {Vulpes vulgaris)].
Field, October 24th, 1885, p.
607.
W. H.
Flower.
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire.
On a specimen of a Whale (Rudolphi's Rorqual (Balcenoptera borealis Lesson, 
Sibbaldius laticeps Gray) lately taken in the river Crouch, Essex [refers in 
postscript to the example of the same species taken near Goole, and now in 
the British Museum].
Trans.
Essex Field Club, June 1885, iv, m-115.
W. Gain.
Notts.
Rats [(Mus decumanus) instances of ferocity at Tuxford].
Nat. World, June 
1885, p.
120.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Louth Naturalists' Society.
[Hedgehog (Erinaceus europceus) noted May 25th 
in Muckton, Burwell, and Haugham Woods.] Nat. World, August 1885, 
p- 154.
Thomas Lister.
Yorkshire.
The Vertebrate Animals of the Mammalian Families in the Barnsley District 
[A list, with notes, of 25 species known for the district, and mentioning 
5 species of extinct mammals].
Quart.
Trans.
Barnsley Nat. Soc, 1884, iv, 
17-18.
R. Lofthouse.
Durham, Yorkshire.
Notes, from the Tees [young female Seal {Phoca vitulina) caught — and another 
seen — near Eston Jetty, October 25th.].
Field, October 31st, 1885, P- 640.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Dormouse [Muscardinus avellanarius] in Cumberland [citing several additional 
instances, old and new].
Zool., July 1885, p.
257.
T. H.
Miller.
Lancashire.
A White Weasel [{Mustela vulgaris) shot ' last week ' at Singleton Park, 
Poulton-le-Fylde].
Field, October 31st, 1885, p.
640.
Chas.
T. Musson.
Notts., Lincolnshire.
Carnivorous Water Voles [{Arvicola amphibia) preying upon bivalve shells, at 
Nottingham, Sutton-in-Ashfield, and Lincoln].
Sci. Goss., March 1885, p.
69.
J. Parker.
Strength of the Mole [( Talpa europcea) ; in the writer's house cellar the tiles 
were thrown up in one corner and by the side was a mound of earth.
A trap 
was set and a mole of extraordinary size caught].
Field, December 6, 1884, 
p. 771.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood [etc.], 
vol.
ii.
Leeds: printed for the author.
1885 [pp.
viii + 258], 
Remarks on the quadrupeds (p.
14) ; list of 29 species with details concern- 
ing 8 of them (pp.
16-18); churchwarden's accounts (pp.
18-19); Otters — 
Lutra vulgaris (p.
94); Badger — Meles iaxus (p.
96); Bats (p.
100); Water 
Rats — Arvicola amphibia (p.
101); Shrew — Sorexremifer (p.
i'oi); Fox — Vulpes 
vulgaris (p.
104); Fin-whale at Grimsby (p.
no); Shrew (p.
131); Water 
Shrew — Crossopus fodiens (p.
132); Rat — Mus decumanus (p.
138); Short- 
tailed Vole — Arvicola agrestis (p.
149); Stoat (p.
150); Badger (p.
159); 
Mole (p.
161); Seal (p.
161); Oared Shrew (p.
161); Water Voles and Water 
Shrews (p.
174); Squirrel (p.
176-178); Deer (p.
176).
William Denison Roebuck.
Yorkshire.
The Greater Horse-shoe Bat not a Yorkshire species.
[The Carperby specimen 
recorded as this being a Noctule {Vesperugo noctula)\ Zool., January 1885, 
P- 2 4.
' 
Naturalist, 
bibliography; reptiles and amphibians, 1885.
241 
Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, Notts., Cheshire, 
G. T.
Rope.
Lancashire, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumherland.
On the Range of the Dormouse [Myoxus avellanarius\ in England and Wales.
[This article contains numerous and detailed notes for most of the northern 
counties, Derbyshire and Northumberland being mentioned negatively.] 
Zool., June 1885, pp.
201-213, 
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Audacity of the Stoat [Mustela erminea — stalking Herons near Scarborough, 
close to low tide mark].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., December 1885, p.
188.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Census of a Gamekeeper's Museum [at Irton, near Scarborough ; Stoats (Mustela 
erminea), Weasels (M.
vulgaris), Hedgehog (Erinaceus europceus), Domestic 
Cats (Felts domestica), and Rats (A/us decumanus)].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
December 15th, 1885, p.
187.
Thomas Southwell.
Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham.
British Animals [a criticism of a paper by the Rev. F.
O. Morris ; includes 
mentions of the Hairy-armed Bat ( Vespertilio leisleri), Bechstein's Bat ( V.
bechsteinii), Serotine ( V.
serotinus), Noctule ( V.
noclula), and Whiskered Bat 
( V.
mystacinus), in the North of England].
Land and Water, January 3rd, 
1885, p.
12.
Thomas Southwell.
Lincolnshire ; Lancashire or Westmoreland.
Notes on British Mammals [continuation of his former notes.
Refers to the 
Lincolnshire Wild Cat (Felts catus) : and to the Greenland or Harp Seal 
(Phoca grcenlandica), to which Prof.
Turner in 1 874 referred a specimen taken 
in 1868 near the viaduct of the Lancashire and Ulverstone Railway; the 
only instance in Britain of the actual capture of a specimen].
Land and 
Water, March 7th, 1885, p.
224-5.
M. G.
Watkins.
Lincolnshire.
The Keeper's Gihhet [refers to a Lincolnshire wood which was one of the last 
English resorts of the Wild Boar (Sus scrofa), and gives particulars of it ; also 
refers to the last Wild Cat (Felts catus) killed in Lincolnshire].
Longman's 
Mag., February 1885, vii, 430-438.
REPTILES AND AMPHIBIANS, 1885.
Anon, [no signature].
Yorkshire.
Ackworth Boys' Essay and Natural History Societies' Reports.
[Viper (Pelias 
berus), Ringed Snake (Tropidonotus natrix), and Slow-worm (Anguis fragilis) 
noted at Brockerdale.] Nat. Hist.
Journ., September 15, 1885, p.
118.
G. A.
BoulEnger.
Notts 
On the occurrence of the Palmated Newt \Moige palmatd] in Oxfordshire.
[An error of locality corrected ; Nottingham having been given in the British 
Museum catalogues for specimens which really came from Bridgewater and 
Scotland.] Zool., July 1885, p.
266.
Linnaeus Greening.
Cheshire, Lancashire.
British Lizards : a paper read before the Warrington Field Club, 30th October, 
1885 [including notes on the species found in the district].
8vo, 1885, 20 pages.
Linn^us Greening.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
British Snakes : a paper read at a meeting of the Warrington Field Club [in- 
cluding notes on the species of the Warrington district].
8vo, 1885, 19 pages.
Geo. A.
Harker.
Lancashire or Cheshire.
Lizard {Zootoca vivipard\ with two tails [near Liverpool].
Young Nat., April 
1885, vi, 87.
Aug. 1 886.
R 
242 
bibliography: fishes, 1885.
J. E.
Kelsall.
Yorkshire.
The distribution of British Batrachians.
[The Palmate Newt— Mo & palmata 
— is 'reported from Yorkshire.'] Zool., September 1885, p.
351.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
The Sea Banks of the Lincolnshire Coast.
[The Natterjack {Bufo calamita) 
cited as being tolerably common at Mablethorpe.] Nat. World, January 
1885, ii, 10.
R. Morton Middleton, Junr.
Yorkshire.
The Viper (Vipera berus L.), [at Howlsike, near Lealholm, North Yorkshire ; 
anecdote of young Vipers gliding into the mother's mouth].
Nature, Decem- 
ber 24th, 1885, xxxiii, 176.
F. M.
Norman.
Northumberland, Durham.
Embedded Reptiles, with special reference to the discovery of a Live Frog in 
the Carboniferous Limestone at Scremerstone [and notes on the famed Chill- 
ingham Toad ; and other similar records from both Durham and Northumber- 
land].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii (1885), pp.
491-505.
F. N.
Pierce.
Cheshire, &c.
Natter Jack [Bufo calamita : occurs very freely on the Wallasey Sandhills ; also 
reported for Cumberland and Lincolnshire, but no particulars given].
Nat.
World, July 1885, p.
138.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood [etc.
]. 
Vol. ii.
Leeds : printed for the author, 1885 [pp.
viii + 258].
[Notes on 
the Adder (Pelias berus), and Blindworm {Anguis fragilis), (p.
27) ; Toad 
{Bufo vulgaris) (p.
150)].
Charles Robson.
Northumberland.
Natural History Jottings.
A Lizard [Zootoca vivipara] throws off its Tail ; 
. .
. Sci. Goss., October 1885, pp.
230-231.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
An Adder's [Pelias berus] Bath [at Goathland].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., December 
15th, 1885, p.
187.
The late George Tate.
Northumberland.
On a Toad [Bufo vulgaris] in a Limestone Rock at Whittle [parish of Shilbottle].
Proc.
Berw." Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii (1885), pp.
505-6.
W. E.
Ward.
Yorkshire.
The Natter Jack [Bufo calamita — in Yorkshire ; copied from the Handbook of 
Yorkshire Vertebrata].
Nat. World, August 1885, p.
159.
FISHES, 1885.
A few of the more important only have been here noticed of the 
multitudinous notes on angling which have appeard regularly through- 
out the year in the columns of ' Land and Water ' and ' The Field ' ; 
to which reference should be made for any desired information on 
that head.
Anon, [no signature].
Isle of Man.
Loss of the Herring Fleet, 1787 [mentions the great take of Herrings ( Clupea 
harengus) in September, upwards of 7,000 maze being brought into Douglas 
in one morning].
Manx Note Book, July 1885, i, 116.
Anon.
[Black Gnat].
Salmon [Salmo salar] in Lake Windermere.
[It was long a question whether 
Salmon were ever found in Windermere ; of late years they have been 
frequently taken].
Field, September 12th, 1885, p.
399.
. 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: fishes, 1885.
243 
Anon.
[Teeside].
Durham, Yorkshire.
Extraordinary Run of Salmon [Salmo sa/ar] in the Tees.
[The river was swarm- 
ing with fish near Dimsdale about a fortnight ago ; 65 were counted getting 
over the Dam in 15 minutes.] Field, October 3rd, 1885, P- 4^5- 
Anon.
[W.
(Whalley)].
Lancashire.
The Kibble and Hodder [one of the fishermen got a 40-lb.
Salmon — the heaviest 
thus far reported].
Field, July 4th, 1885, p.
21.
Anon.
[Your Derwent Correspondent].
Cumberland.
Large Salmon [Salmo sa/ar] captured by Rod and Line [comments upon the 
Cumberland Derwent records of large fish, and gives instances].
Field, 
December 5th, 1885, p.
799.
Anon.
[' Xingu '].
Lancashire, Westmoreland.
The Pike [Esox lucius] and Perch [Perca fluviatilis\ of Windermere [on their 
habits and their seeking deeper water in autumn].
Field, January 3rd, 1885, 
pp.
20-21.
George Bolam.
Northumberland.
Variation in Colour in the Common Dab [{Pleuronedes limanda).
One captured 
in the salmon nets at the mouth of the Tweed on the 3rd instant was of the 
same colour (brown) on both sides].
Field, March 7th, 1885, p.
307.
John Cordeaux.
Northumberland.
'Cheviot's Mountains Lone' [and their Natural History; brief passing 
references to the fish].
Field, October 3rd, 1885, p.
499.
F. Day. Cumberland.
[Vendaee (Coregonus vandesius) and Gwiniad (C.
coregonoides) in the English 
Lakes].
Proc.
Zool.
Soc, May 19th, 1885, p.
483.
Francis Day. Isle of Man.
Flat Fishes.
— The Gar and the Basking Shark.
[Patterson alludes to a story 
which passes current ...
in the Isle of Man, and is supposed to account 
for how it was that the mouths of fiat fishes became twisted to one side, etc.].
Land and Water, May 23rd, 1885, p.
526.
Francis Day. Yorkshire.
The Ancestry of our Salmonidse [incidentally quotes Meynell's success in 
retaining Smelts {Osmerus eperlanus) in a fresh-water pond at Yarm].
Field, 
July 4th, 1885, p.
33.
Francis Day. Cumberland.
The Whitling, Whiting, Herling, or Phinock of the [Cumberland] Esk.
[Remarks upon a disputed form of the Salmonidse, 8 specimens of which 
captured at Carlisle were sent to Dr. Day, and considered by him as 4 un- 
doubtedly belonging to the Sea Trout race ' and ' in their second or third 
year.' 'All would probably have bred during 1885.'] Field, August 8th, 
1885, P- 2I 4- 
Francis Day. Durham, Yorkshire.
The ' Scurf of the Tees, or the Salmon Trout [remarks on a specimen of the 
Salmon Trout {Salmo trutta) captured at Darlington and locally known as a 
'Scurf'].
Field, September 5th, 1885, p.
369.
Francis Day. Durham, Yorkshire.
The 'Scurf Trout of the Tees ['a short history of the names which have at 
various times been bestowed on the " Scurf," ' as well as a brief allusion ' to 
the two races of Sea Trout which appear to frequent our coasts '].
Field, 
October 17th, 1885, p.
558.
Francis Day. Cumberland.
Is there an autumn migration of Smolts ?
[gives an extract showing the capture 
of Salmon Smolts {Salmo salar) in the Cumberland Esk in August].
Field, 
November 14th, 1885, p.
688.
Aug. 1886.
244 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: FISHES, 1 885.
Francis Day. Westmoreland, Cumberland.
Fish and Fisheries of 1885 : a Retrospect [refers to the Vendace ( Coregonus 
vandesius) and Gwiniad (C.
coregonoides) and their distribution in the Lake 
district].
Field, December 26th, 1885, P- 896.
Henry Ffennell.
Northumberland % Cumberland.
Large Salmon [Salmo salar] captured by rod and line [one of 53^ lbs.
in the 
Tweed in 1874 ; one of 51 lbs.
in 1872, and one of 55^ lbs.
in 1884, both in 
the Cumberland Derwent ; are cited].
Field, November 28th, 1885, p.
765.
Thomas Ford.
Yorkshire.
The Fell Becks of the Swale.
[Two columns, in which the fish are dealt with 
at length, but mostly from an angling point of view.] Field, January 10th, 
1885, pp.
48-49.
T. E.
Gunn.
Northumberland.
Bay's Sea Bream [Brama rail] on the Norfolk Coast.
[Refers incidentally to 
the weight of the Alnwick example received by Buckland.] Zool., December 
1885, p.
484.
H. Holden.
Yorkshire.
Grayling [ Thymallus vulgaris'] wounded by pea rifle.
[One caught with fly in 
April 1885 which had been wounded by shot fired at it from a pea rifle in 
August 1884, in the Wharfe.] Field, April 18th, 1885, P- 495- 
E. W.
Jesper.
Yorkshire.
A Stranded Salmon [Salmo salar; Clifton Ings, York, January 31st].
Nat.
Hist: Journ.
, February 15th, 1885, p.
13.
R. Lofthouse.
Durham, Yorkshire.
Notes from the Tees [Ray's Bream {Brama rati) taken at Redcar, October 6th.
Extreme length 23 in., breadth 85 in., over dorsal fin 10 in., of a bluish 
silvery colour].
Field, October 31st, 1885, p.
640.
J. J.
M. Nottingham.
Trent and Thames : a comparison [Recapitulates Drayton's list of 30 fish found 
in Trent, in his spelling, and compares present state of the fauna].
Field, 
December 25th, 1885, P- 894.
J. Osborne.
Durham, Yorkshire.
The Herring [{Clupea harengus) : refers incidentally to its time of appearance 
off the North-east coast].
Young Nat., March 1885, pp.
65-69.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood [etc.].
Vol. ii.
Leeds: printed for the author.
1885 [pp.
viii + 258].
[Goldfish 
(Cyprinus auratus) in engine-ponds (p.
27); Viviparous Blenny — Zoarcesvivi- 
pants (p.
161).] 
John Sim. Northumberland.
Objects of interest in our pit district [of Northumberland: Anecdote of 
a Stickleback].
Sci. Goss., February 1885, P- 3 J -3 2 - 
Scott Surtees.
Durham, Yorkshire.
Scurf on the Tees [Frank Buckland's opinions stated].
Field, September 19th, 
1885, p.
437- 
C. J.
T. Isle of Man.
Spearing a Large Sole [{Solea vulgaris) speared in Peel Bay, Isle of Man; 
it measured 21% in.
long x 8*4 m - broad ; an Eel {Anguilla vulgaris) was 
caught same day in a neighbouring glen].
Field, August 8th, 1885, p.
216.
Naturalist, 
245 
COLEOPTERA OP THE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT.
JOHN W.
ELLIS, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.E., F.E.S., 
Liverpool; Honorary Secretary, Lancashire ana Cheshire Entomological Society.
PART X :-EH YNCHOPH OKA.
(Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, November 30th, 1885.) 
The group of Beetles, the individual members of which are known 
commonly as ' weevils/ to which the term Rhynchophora is applied, 
are distinguished by the prolongation of the head into a distinct, and 
often long and slender, snout or rostrum.
Next to the Brachelytra 
and Clavicornia, this is the largest group of British Beetles, the 
species known to inhabit our islands being about 530 in number.
Owing to the paucity of workers at these insects in our district, partly 
perhaps due to the difficulty in many cases of discriminating between 
allied species, I am only able to record about 100 species as in- 
habitants of our own neighbourhood.
I feel confident that careful 
work at the group — sweeping and beating — will speedily cause an 
increase in this number.
Fam. C UR C ULIONIDsE.
OTIORHYNCHUS, Germ.
Otiorhynchus scabrosus, Marsh.
Wallasey (R.
Wilding) • Aigburth 
(J.W.E.).
Otiorhynchus ligneus, 01.
Occasionally at Leasowe, Wallasey, and 
Bidston.
Otiorhynchus picipes, F.
Abundant in hawthorn hedges throughout 
the district.
Otiorhynchus sulcatus, F.
Common around West Derby (R.
Wilding) ; 
Wavertree (J.W.E.).
Otiorhynchus ovatus, L.
Common on the coast sandhills, and occa- 
sionally inland.
PLATYTARSUS, Schon.
Platytarsus echinatus, Bons.
An interesting little hedgehog-like 
species, of which I took a single specimen at Aigburth, in May 
1883, by sweeping.
PHYLLOBIUS, Schon.
Phyllobius alneti, F.
Abundant among nettles in early summer.
Phyllobius pyri, L.
Common in July, on oak, in Eastham Wood.
Phyllobius argentatus, L.
Abundant on hedges.
Aug. 1886.
246 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
Phyllobius oblongns, L.
Common on dwarf sallows on the sand- 
hills.
Phyllobius pomonse, 01.
Abundant on the coast sandhills during 
the summer.
Phyllobius uniformis, Marsh.
I have taken this species freely in 
the neighbourhood of Spital, in July.
TROPIPHORUS, Schon.
Tropiphorus mercurialis, F.
The late Mr. Kinder used to take this 
species freely on the wall surrounding the Anfield Cemetery.
CNEORHINUS, Schon.
Cneorhinus geminatus, F.
Very abundant in spring and summer 
on the bare sandhills.
BARYNOTUS, Germ.
Barynotus obscurus, F.
Frequently taken by sweeping, and some- 
times found beneath stones in spring.
STROPHOSOMUS, Bill.
Strophosomus coryli, F.
Common where hazel grows, as about 
Raby Mere and Dibbin's Dale.
Strophosomus limbatus, F.
Frequent about Bidston Hill on furze, 
and among the dead leaves of heather.
SITONES, Schon.
Sitones griseus, F.
Abundant on the Wallasey sandhills.
Sitones flavescens, Marsh.
Frequent on marshy ground.
The var.
(by some authors considered a distinct species) longicollis, F., I 
have taken at Spital, in May 1883.
Sitones sulcifrons, Thunb.
Common.
Sitones regensteinensis, Herbst.
Abundant on furze on Bidston 
Hill, and at Prenton in spring.
Sitones puncticollis, Steph.
I have a specimen of this species which 
I recently captured by the sweeping-net, near Formby.
Sitones lineatus, L.
Abundant.
Sitones hispidulus, F.
Frequent.
POLYDRUSUS, Germ.
Polydrusus cervinus, L.
Abundant during summer on the dwarf 
willows, on the coast sandhills.
Polydrusns confluens, Steph.
I have swept a few of this species 
from heather on Bidston Hill, in July.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
247 
SCIAPHILUS, Schon.
Sciaphilus muricatus, F.
Rock Ferry (F.
Archer) ; Aigburth and 
Raby Mere, not common (J.W.E.).
LIOSOMUS, Steph.
Liosomus ovatulus, Clair.
Frequently taken by nocturnal sweeping.
ALOPHUS, Schon.
Alophus triguttatus, F.
Mr. Wilding has captured a single speci- 
men of this species at Heswall.
HYPERA, Germ.
Hypera punctata, F.
Occasionally occurs both on the coast sand- 
hills and inland.
Hypera plantaginis, De G.
Common on the Wallasey sandhills.
Hypera variabilis, Herbst Common on the Wallasey sandhills.
Hypera polygoni, L.
A handsome species which does not occur 
freely in this district.
Mr. Wilding has taken it at Wallasey, and 
I have met with it on the Aigburth shore and at Formby.
Hypera mele*.
F. I have a single specimen which I obtained at 
Wallasey, in March 1883.
Hypera nigrirostris, F.
Abundant on the Wallasey sandhills.
Hypera trilineata, Marsh.
I have a pair which I captured at 
Wallasey among II.
plantaginis.
CLEONUS, Schon.
Cleorius sulcirostris, L.
Abundant on the Hightown and Crosby 
sandhills.
HYLOBIUS, Schon.
Hylobius abietis, L.
Abundant on firs at Bidston Hill.
GRYPIDIUS, Schon.
Grypidius equiseti, F.
Common on the Wallasey sandhills.
ERIRHINUS, Schon.
Erirhinus bimaculatus, F.
Occasionally found among rubbish 
washed down by the river Alt, at Hightown.
Erirhinus acridulus, L.
Frequent in the same situation as the last 
species.
MECINUS, Germ.
Mecinus pyraster, Herbst.
Occurs sparingly.
New Brighton 
(B.
Cooke) ; Aigburth and Wallasey (J.W.E.).
Aug. 1886.
248 
J. W.
ELLIS : LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
HYDRONOMUS, Schon.
Hydronomus alismatis, Marsh.
Mr. F.
Kinder used to take this 
species freely in pits in the neighbourhood of Kirkdale.
BALANINUS, Germ.
Balaninus glandium, Marsh.
Frequent in the neighbourhood of 
Eastham Wood, where the larva feeds on acorns, and is fre- 
quently mistaken for that of the lepidopterous Carpocapsa 
sphndana by collectors.
ANTHONOMUS, Germ.
Anthonomus ulmi, De G.
I have a specimen of this species, which 
I captured at Wavertree some years ago.
Anthonomus pomorum, L.
Frequent on hawthorn blossom at Brom- 
borough, in May.
Anthonomus rubi, Herbst.
Common on the sandhills on ragwort, 
and occasionally inland.
ORCHESTES, 111.
Orchestes stigma, Germ.
I took a single specimen at Simmons- 
wood, last June.
Orchestes salicis, L.
Frequent on sallows on the coast, as well as 
inland.
RHAMPUS, Clair.
Rhampus flavicornis, Clair.
Common on the sandhills in spring, 
but much easier to see in the sweeping net than to bottle.
OROBITIS, Mann.
Orobitis cyaneus, L.
Mr. Wilding took this species on the South- 
port sandhills, on violets, and I have swept the species on the 
Hightown sandhills.
CCELIODES, Schon.
Cceliodes quadrimaculatus, L.
Abundant on nettles.
CEUTHORHYNCHUS, Germ.
Ceuthorhynchus assimilis, Payk.
Common.
Ceuthorhynchus erysimi, F.
Common.
Ceuthorhynchus contractus, Marsh.
Common.
Ceuthorhynchus cochlearise, Gyll.
I took this species on the Aigburth 
shore, in May 1883.
Ceuthorhynchus ericse, Gyll.
Frequent on heather on Bidston Hill 
and Simmonswood Moss.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
249 
Ceuthorhynchus litura, F.
I took a specimen of this species among 
my earliest captures, in 1874, at Wavertree.
Ceuthorhynchus asperifoliarum, Gyll.
Southport, May 3rd, 1858 
(B.
Cooke).
Ceuthorhynchus pollinarius, Forst.
Abundant on nettles.
Ceuthorhynchus sulcicollis, Gyll.
Southport, Sept.
1864 (B.
Cooke).
CEUTHORHYNCHIDEUS, Duval.
Ceuthorhynchideus floralis, Pk. Common.
Ceuthorhynchideus pyrrorhynchus, Marsh.
I took this species for 
the first time about a month ago, but then freely, by beating the 
nearly bare stalks of Sisy?nbrium officinale, near Leasowe.
Ceuthorhynchideus troglodytes, F.
Common, by sweeping, at 
Aigburth, in May 1883.
I have since taken a single specimen 
at Formby.
PHYTOBIUS, Schon.
Phytobius leucogaster, Marsh.
Bidston Marsh, May 1862 (F.Archer).
Phytobius quadri-tuberculatus, F.
Occasionally on the Hightown 
sandhills.
Phytobius comari, Herbst.
A specimen captured at Hale by Mr. J.
Kidson Taylor is recorded (Ent. Mo.
Mag., v, 201).
RHINONCHUS, Schon.
Rhinonchus pericarpius, F.
Frequent at Wallasey and Spital.
Rhinonchus subfasciatus, Gyll.
Generally distributed.
Rhinonchus castor, F.
Occasionally at Crosby and Hightown.
Southport (B.
Cooke).
BARIS, Germ.
Baris chlorizans, Germ.
Bidston Marsh, a single specimen in March 
1883.
CALANDRA, Clair.
Calandra granaria, L.
Common in corn warehouses in the city 
(R.
Wilding).
Calandra orizse, L.
Common in rice warehouses in the city 
(R.
Wilding).
APION, Herbst.
Apion carduorum, Kirby.
Common at Wallasey.
Apion ulicis, Forst.
Abundant on furze on Bidston Hill, and at 
Prenton, 
Apion striatum, Kirby.
Common.
Apion immune, Kirby.
Wallasey, frequent.
Aug. 1886.
250 J.
W. ELLIS: LIVERPOOL COLEOPTERA.
Apion seniculum, Kirby.
A single specimen taken at Wallasey last 
September.
Apion ononidis, Germ.
Generally distributed; abundant on the 
sandhills.
Apion trifolii, L.
Two specimens from Bidston Hill, in August 1883.
Apion flavipes, F.
Spital, May 1885.
Apion nigritarse, Kirby.
Generally distributed, but apparently not 
common.
Apion virens, Herbst.
Abundant at Spital, in July.
Apion ervi, Kirby.
Several specimens taken in the neighbourhood 
of Spital, in July.
Apion ononis, Kirby.
Common at Wallasey.
Apion pisi, Fab. Common.
Apion loti, Kirby.
Wallasey, in September 1885 (three specimens).
Apion vorax, Herbst.
Common.
Apion livescerum, Gyll.
Occasionally at Bidston, in July, on 
heather.
Apion miniatum, Germ.
Generally distributed, sometimes common.
Apion crnentatum, Walt.
One at Wavertree, in 1874.
Apion frumentarium, L.
Occasional.
Apion violaceum, Kirby.
Abundant.
Apion marchicum, Herbst.
Frequent at Bidston.
Apion humile, Germ.
Abundant.
RHYNCHITES, Herbst.
Rhynchites germanicus, Herbst.
Frequently taken' by beating and 
sweeping.
Rhynchites nanns, Payk.
Recorded from Southport, in July 1864, 
by B.
Cooke.
Rhynchites uncinates, Thorns.
I took a pair of this species at 
Hightown, in July 1883.
Fam. SCOLYTID&.
PHLCEOPHTHORUS, Woll.
Phloeophthorus rhododactylus, Marsh.
Bidston Marsh, April 1862, 
(F.
Archer).
I took several specimens of this species a few 
years ago, by beating dead furze at Bidston.
HYLESINUS, Fab.
Hylesinus ater, Payk.
Rock Ferry, May 1862 (F.
Archer).
Naturalist, 
NOTES : ENTOMOLOGY AND CONCHOLOGY.
SCOLYTUS, Geoff.
Scolytus destructor, 01.
I once found an elm mined by this beetle 
at Wavertree Nook, the species of bark-miner being verified by 
a dead specimen found in one of the burrows.
DRYOC^ETES, Eich.
Dryocaetes villosus, F.
I have taken this species very freely in the 
bark on the roots of a tree (species ?) at Spital.
TOMICUS, Latr.
Tomicus laricis, F.
My wife found a specimen of this species blow- 
ing about on the Hightown sandhills, last September.
NOTES— ENTOMOLOG Y 
Scoria dealbata at Whitby.— Both Mr. Lister (Whitby) and myself 
have taken the Black-veined Moth {Scoria dealbata) here.
This does not appear 
in the list of Yorkshire Lepidoptera as being found in the county.
I think we 
shall have at least two other fresh county species not there recorded.
— Joseph T.
Sewell, Whitby, June 30th, 1886.
Triecphora vulnerata in Edlington Wood, Yorkshire.— On 
the 1 2th June of this year I took a homopterous insect in abundance in the lane 
adjoining Edlington Wood, Doncaster.
I sent some to Mr. J.
E. Mason, who 
obtained the name for me from Mr. J.
W. Douglas, who states that the species is 
somewhat local, but gregarious and common where it occurs.
— Geo. T.
Porritt, 
Greenfield House, Huddersfield, June 25th, 1886.
Megachile ligniseca and Halietus rubieundus at Mable- 
thorpe, Lincolnshire.— In June I took the rather local insect Megachile 
ligniseca on the coast sand-hills at Mablethorpe.
Seven specimens were found 
clustered together in the corner of a box which happened to be lying on the sand- 
hills ; others were also seen in a chink of an old post.
Halietus rubieundus was 
flying about plentifully near a sandy bank by the side of the road at Mablethorpe, 
in which were large numbers of its burrows.
It may, perhaps, be well to state 
that my specimens of the above were identified at the British Museum by Mr.
Cockerell, with the kind help of Mr. Kirby.
— H.
Wallis Kew, Louth, July 1886.
NOTES— CONCHOLOG Y 
Helix Cantiana in !N"otts.
— I succeeded in adding this species to our 
local list on June 3rd, found plentiful on herbage by road side (Lias Clay) at 
Staunton, S.E. Notts., all immature, but fine, white colour predominating.
— 
C. T.
Musson, Nottingham, June 5th, 1886.
Helix lactea in Yorkshire.
— At the beginning of August 1884,- Mr.
W. Storey, of Pateley Bridge, sent to Leeds a specimen of this fine Mediterranean 
shell, which had been found alive in a field near the railway at Pateley, some time 
before, by Mr. O.
Kindon.
No doubt it had been conveyed with the shingle 
which is Drought to Pateley by rail from the coast.
— John W.
Taylor, Horsforth.
Estuarine shells at Saltfleet, Lincolnshire.— On 16th June I 
visited the saltmarsh near Saltfleet Haven, and found Melampus myosotis 
(Drap.) plentiful in the higher parts of the marsh where Junctis was growing 
plentifully.
Hydrobia ulvee (Penn.) positively swarmed in all parts of the salt- 
marsh, not only in the pools and runs of water, but also on the mud, and on stems 
and blades of grass.
A single specimen of Littorina littorea (L.
) was taken.
Littorina rudis vars.
tenebrosa (Mont.) and similis (Jeff.) were very plentiful in the 
muddy po ols.
— H.
Wallis Kew, Louth.
Aug. 1886.
252 
NOTES— PAL^ONTOLOG Y.
Remarkable Geological Discovery at Clayton.— Yorkshire has 
long been well known to geologists to present, for its area, a most remarkable 
opportunity to prosecute the study of geology, from the completeness of its 
structure and the variety of its physical features.
Accordingly, from the rich- 
ness of the geological field, and the assiduity and watchfulness of its many devoted 
students, added to a general' sympathy from many not strictly scientific, many 
notable discoveries of fossil flora and fauna have been made, advancing materially 
our knowledge of the former conditions of life on our earth.
Thus, a little while 
ago, was discovered at Idle a magnificent specimen of a large ganoid fish in the 
lower coal measures ; and now at Clayton, near Bradford, has been found one of 
the grandest examples yet seen of a fossil tree.
Messrs.
John Murgatroyd and 
Sons, of Fall Top Quarry, Clayton, are deserving of thanks for the care they have 
shown in baring this remarkable fossil, and allowing it to be inspected.
The 
quarry is not far from the edge of a bold escarpment overlooking the Thornton 
Valley, and the well-known Elland flagstone is worked here for landings, flags, &c.
A fault cuts off the flagstone in a very marked manner, but it reappears in the 
bottom of the valley.
Between the better-bed coal and the flagstone there is a 
great thickness of shales, sandstones, &c, of various characters and thickness, and 
it was in these measures that the fossil tree was discovered about 20 feet below the 
surface.
The marketable flagstone is at a considerable depth, hence the overlying 
strata must be first removed.
It was during the process of this excavation that the 
fossil was bared.
Ever since the researches of the late Mr. Binney in the flora of 
the carboniferous period, great attention has been paid to this branch of geological 
study.
He first discovered the trunk of a fossil tree known by the name of 
Sigillaria, standing erect as it grew, and still connected with its roots, named 
Stigmaria.
Here, at Clayton, we have a splendid example of a similar nature.
A stump of Sigillaria is seen sending out its forked Stigmarian roots.
Six of the 
roots are quite undisturbed, the remaining two being accidentally broken, but as 
the fragments have been carefully preserved, it can soon be restored to its original 
state.
In Stigmaria are placed the roots of Sigillaria and Lepidodendron and 
perhaps other plants ; but an examination of the markings on the surface of the 
present example proved it to be a Sigillaria.
The Stigmarian roots presented very 
finely the characteristic pits or scars from which the rootlets or filaments formerly 
ran out in all directions.
Some idea of the magnitude of this fossil may be 
gathered from the following dimensions : the diameter of the trunk is 3 ft.
9 in.
; 
the circumference of the largest root near the trunk 6 ft.
6 in., others being from 
6 ft.
down to 4 ft.
6 in.; the longest root extends about 15 ft., the others varying 
from 2 ft.
to 3 ft.
shorter, whilst the ramifications of the roots extend over an area 
of from So ft.
to 90 ft.
These roots can be seen from the trunk to their extremities 
in all their windings and sharp outline, and certainly constitute a most impressive 
sight.
The trunk of the tree was in a bed of soft, sandy shale, called locally 
'yellow loam,' the roots resting on a bed of soft blue shale, which they penetrate.
So remarkable a fossil as this should be procured at once for one of our museums ; 
it would be an unrivalled example for geological students, and a splendid demon- 
stration in the study of fossil botany.
To allow it to meet the too common fate 
of many fine fossils — namely, that of being broken up for rockeries or gardens, 
would be an act of inexcusable and gross scientific vandalism.
Mr. E.
Wormald, 
of Great George Street, Leeds, has obtained a fine photograph of the fossil.
— 
S. A.
Adamson, Leeds, July 24th, 1886.
NOTES— FISHES.
Occurrence of the Sting-Ray at Redcar.— A Skate, about twice 
as thick as the ordinary kind, was caught at Redcar on the 5th September, 1885, 
and was exhibited in a fishmonger's shop.
It is a dirty, sandy colour, but the 
peculiarity is in the tail — it is about 15 inches long and branches off into two whip- 
like forks, one longer than the other, each running to a fine point.
This animal, 
which puzzles the fishermen, turned out to be the Sting-Ray {Trygon pastinaca).
— 
T. H.
Nelson.
Naturalist, 
253 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
IN UPPER NIDDERDALE.
The sixty-third meeting was planned for the investigation of the upper part of 
the lovely valley of the Nidd, including the uniquely picturesque and interesting 
scenery of the How Stean Beck.
Every facility was afforded by Mr. George 
Metcalfe, Mr. T.
E. Yorke, and Mr. W.
Harker for members to visit their estates, 
and the first-named gentleman and a number of other Pateley Bridge friends 
favoured the Union with their presence and co-operation during the day.
The 
scene of the excursion being eight miles from Pateley Bridge, the nearest railway 
station, waggonettes were engaged to convey the party, which was about fifty in 
number.
The weather was fine throughout the day, and the excursion most 
enjoyable.
The main body of the members explored the valleys of How Stean 
and the Blayshaw Beck, while a small party, ignoring the latter, passed through 
How Stean and went forward to Goydon Pot and Manchester Hole, and found 
that the latter was capacious enough to swallow up the whole of the waters of 
Nidd, leaving none to go down Goydon Pot, which could in consequence be 
entered for some distance.
All the parties returned to Pateley Bridge in the 
afternoon for the.
tea and meetings, which were held at the King's Arms Inn.
Full justice was done to a most excellently provided meal, after which the sections 
dispatched their business.
The general meeting was held at 5.15 p.m. In the absence of the president, 
who had fully intended being present, the Rev. William Fowler, M.A., an ex- 
president, occupied the chair.
The minutes having been accepted as read, several 
new members were elected, viz : — Mr. George Metcalfe, J.P., Castlestead, Mr.W. C.
Clarkson, Pateley Bridge, Mr. R.
Whincup, Pateley Bridge, Mr. John Trickett, 
Dacre Banks, and Mr. Naughton, Harrogate.
The Harrogate and District Naturalists' 
Society was then admitted into the Union, after which the roll-call showed that nine 
societies were represented, viz: — Bradford (Nat. Soc), Dewsbury, Leeds (3), 
Liversedge, Ripon, Harrogate, and the Practical Naturalists' Society.
The 
election of a delegate to the British Association meeting was then made : it was 
resolved to elect Mr. C.
P. Hobkirk, F.
L. S.
, and in the event of his inability to 
attend, that the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A., be appointed.
Thanks were then 
voted unanimously to the gentlemen of the district who had so generously co- 
operated in the excursion, on the motion of the Rev. R.
A. Summerfield, seconded 
by Mr. A.
Craig-Christie, F.L.S., of Edinburgh, secretary to the Scottish Natural 
History Club, by whose presence during the day the Botanical section had greatly 
profited.
Mr. Metcalfe responded to the vote.
The sectional reports were then taken.
In the absence of the secretary (Mr. J.
Backhouse) the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, 
M.A., presented the report of the Vertebrate section.
During the afternoon 4 
mammals were observed, including the Long-tailed Field Mouse and the Red 
Field Vole.
The members of this section had no opportunity of observing the 
various species of Bats in which the valley is so rich.
Of the 90 species of birds 
which breed annually within its limits no less than 56 were observed by different 
members of the section.
Of these, 32 were residents, and included the Goldcrest, 
Long-tailed Tit, Creeper, Grey Wagtail, Lesser Redpoll, and Kingfisher ; and 24 
were summer visitants, among which were the Ring Ousel, Dipper, Wheat ear, 
Redstart (common), Chiffchaff, Willow Wren, Wood Wren, Grasshopper Warbler, 
Yellow Wagtail, Pied Flycatcher, Sand Martin (in far greater abundance than 
either the Swallow or Martin), Swift, Land Rail (nesting near Pateley Bridge), 
Golden Plover, Common Sandpiper, and Curlew.
Of reptiles only the Slow-worm 
was noted ; and 5 of the 7 species of fish known to occur in Nidderdale were 
added to the list.
These together made a total of 66 vertebrate animals observed 
during the day, not including Homo sapiens ; who seemed to have enjoyed himself 
very much.
Mr. Knubley added that so admirably complete a list had been framed 
from the researches of Mr. Storey, that the section entirely failed to add any species 
to it, in pursuance of what is always their laudable endeavour.
For the Conchological section its secretary, Mr. John Emmet, F.L.S., reported 
that only about a dozen species had been found during the day, owing to the dry- 
ness of the season.
One of these was, however, a very good addition to the 
published list, Azeca tridens, a species which is partial to limestone soils.
This 
Aug. 1886.
254 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IN UPPER NIDDERDALE.
had been found on the limestone slopes near Manchester Hole, along with Zonites 
radiatnlus (also an addition to the list for Upper Nidderdale), Z.
crystallinns^ 
Z. cellarius, Z.
nitidulus, Clausilia I'ngosa, Helix hispida, H.
rotundata, Avion 
ater, and Limax agrestis, the var.
nigra of the latter being noted.
For the Entomological section its secretary, Mr. G.
C. Dennis, of York, 
reported.
Only ten species of Lepidoptera, viz.: — Acidalia remutata.
Cabera 
pusaria, Emmelesia alchemillata, E.
albulata, Enpithecia minutata, Melanippe 
mo7itanaia, Tana 6 ra chcerophyllata, Epunda viminalis, Anarta myrtilli, and 
Tortrix viburnana, and a few insects of other orders, had been observed.
For the Botanical section its president, the Rev. William Fowler, M.A., 
reported that of flowering plants and ferns 146 were noted, the most interesting 
being Stellaria nemorum, Carduus heterophylhis, Habenaria chlorantha, and 
Stackys ambi^ua, a hybrid between S.
sylvatica and S.
palustris.
It approaches 
the former in its reddish-purple flowers, and the latter in its hollow stem, the 
shortly-stalked leaves being intermediate between the two.
The Geological section report was submitted by its secretary, Mr. S.
A. 
Adamson, F.G.S. There was a large attendance of geologists, who were guided 
by Mr. Storey, and Mr. Whincup, of the Scotgate Ash Quarries.
In addition, 
Professor A.
H. Green, M.
A., F.R.S., was present.
On the journey many hummocks 
or mounds in the valley were noted, probably being composed of" drift or morainic 
matter left by the glaciers as they receded at the close of the glacial period.
No 
sections were, however, observed to render this conclusive.
A short distance 
before entering the village of Lofthouse a halt was made to note the phenomenon 
of the Nidd issuing from its underground course, into which it enters about two 
miles higher up, at Goydon Pot Hole.
Of course, the visible bed of the stream is 
not dry throughout, for it receives the drainage of the mountain sides ; and again, 
after heavy rainfalls, when the underground channel cannot carry off the water, 
then the surplus rushes down the old river bed on the surface.
Alighting from the 
waggonettes at Lofthouse, the way was taken up the Blayshaw Gill or Beck among 
exquisite scenery.
Passing up the bed of the stream, the members had an oppor- 
tunity of seeing one of the finest examples of a fault possible to be seen.
By a 
throw to the south the gritstone is brought against the limestone, and the beck for 
some distance runs along the line of fault.
Some fine specimens of encrinital 
limestone were here obtained, the weathering having brought the fossil encrinites 
into sharp relief in every variety of position.
Some black shales were examined, 
which were thought to belong to the Yoredale series.
It will be remembered that 
at Hawes, in Wensleydale, the shales, sandstones, and limestones named by Phillips 
the Yoredale series attain a thickness of nearly 800 feet ; coming to the south and 
south-east they gradually diminish at Great Whernside to 150 feet, until above 
Lofthouse there are only about 20 feet of shales and dark-coloured limestone 
between the lower scar limestone and the millstone grit.
This brings out forcibly 
the different circumstances under which these strata were deposited, the thick 
limestone being an oceanic deposit, the shales and sandstones being littoral in their 
character.
Still the beds are very irregular, some going out and others coming in, 
so that any definite classification is very difficult ; and, indeed, in this district, no 
absolute horizon can be defined at present, or any arbitrary rule laid down.
Mr.
Storey pointed out on the bank of the stream the entrance to a cave which he had 
discovered and had for some distance explored.
It may be mentioned that the 
encrinital limestone in the bed of the beck was intensely hard.
A little distance 
from the beck a quarry of very fossiliferous limestone was examined.
This will 
take a polish, and is sawn into slabs for mantels and other purposes.
At a 
quarry a little farther on, the limestone was of a different character — black, com- 
pact, and very hard.
This is used for roadstone, indeed it most closely resembles 
the Harrogate roadstone.
How Stean Beck, thrown unreservedly open to the 
visitors by the kindness of Mr. G.
Metcalfe, was next visited.
Here the beck 
rushes impetuously through a ravine with vertical walls rising to the height of 
70 feet or more, whilst the foliage on all sides is superb.
This is a very good 
example of the manner in which a stream running through the limestone and form- 
ing in some places waterfalls or rapids, is a more powerful agent in denudation 
that the ordinary action of weathering.
Professor Green drew special attention 
to this, and said that as an example of a canon or ravine, excavated by the grinding 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES.
255 
action of running water, it was not equalled in England.
The Professor also said 
the canon of flow Stean might owe its initial character to a natural crack or joint 
in the strata ; but may not the How Stean Beck have once pursued an underground 
course as the Nidd does at present, and the roof of the excavation by gradual wear 
have since fallen in ?
There were here some caves, varying in size, the largest, 
known as Eglin's Hole, being explored by the bulk of the party.
Time had been 
so well and fully spent in observations that it was impossible on the present 
occasion to visit Goydon Pot Hole, and the direction was therefore taken towards 
Lofthouse.
Under the bridge the river bed was examined, and some intensely 
hard black limestone, full of producti, noted.
Professor Green stated that the 
wonderful scenery around Pateley which had been just visited was due, in the 
opinions of some, to some great convulsion of nature.
This was not the case, much 
of it being owing to the action of water, twofold in its nature, mechanical in carry- 
ing away obstacles which impeded its progress, and chemical in dissolving the 
carbonate of lime contained in the limestone.
Referring to the ravine at How 
Stean, he said all present had heard of the wonderful canons of Colorado, in some 
parts over a mile in depth, and yet all cut out by the action of running water ; 
well, here we have an example of precisely the same character, arising from the 
same cause, and although, of course, on a much smaller scale, yet as perfect in its 
way.
He had had much pleasure in visiting this neighbourhood, not only from 
the beautiful scenery he had beheld, but also from the variety of the physical 
geology of the district, so unique in its character.
He also suggested that a special 
study should be made of these curious mounds or hummocks in the valley, which 
might either be composed of morainic matter or torrential river gravels ; by obser- 
tion of sections, their true composition and origin might be ascertained.
None of the officers of the section for Micro-Zoology and Botany were present, 
and therefore no report could be submitted, and the meeting concluded with a vote 
of thanks to the chairman.
.— 
BOOK NOTICES.
A Dictionary of the names of British Plants, for the use of amateurs 
and beginners as a help to the knowledge of the meaning and pronunciation 
of the scientific names of British wild flowers, by H.
Purefoy Fitzgerald.
London : Bailliere, Tindall & Cox.
, sm.
8vo, pp.
96.
No date on title.
Price, 2s.
6d.
We regret to have vainly sought anything to praise, except it be the laudable 
aim of the author, in this little work, issued in the early autumn of 1885.
In 
spite of the modest deprecatory appeal against ' harsh criticism ' in the preface, a 
work of this sort must always stand or fall upon its actual merits, and if the ' help' it 
offers is a delusion and a snare (through inaccuracy), nothing but disparagement 
is possible.
To begin with, the work supplies no want, a cheap and much ampler 
book (Alcock's Botanical Names for English Readers ; Reeve, 1876) covering the 
same ground is already in existence, and Mr. Fitzgerald's seeming ignorance of the 
fact is the sole raison d'etre his later work can lay claim to.
Apart from very 
doubtful, if not absolutely false statements as regards names and derivations, 
affording incontestible internal evidence of imperfect knowledge of botanists and 
botanical literature, this petite book is well enough so far as it goes, and where it 
deals with such simple words as acris, apifera, Linna>a> lutea, etc.
, may safely be 
accepted as reliable, if in places amusingly simple ; but outside very narrow limits 
the information it affords is so meagre, not to say embryonic, as to leave quite 
unsatisfied all save the humblest and most superficial aspirations after ' light, more 
light.' For example, to put off the mass of the amateur botanists of 1886 — to 
whom the bewildering erudition of the recent 8th Ed. of the London Catalogue of 
Plants is seriously offered as none too strong meat — with the statement that a 
species or variety is named Bakeri 'after Mr. Baker, a botanist,' 'Briggsi' (it 
should be Briggsii) 'after a Mr. Briggs,' Gibsoni 'after a Mr. Gibson,' ' Hailstoni 
after a Mr. Hailston ' (whose name had an e at the end), is worse than puerile in 
its affected, witless brevity.
One is thankful, after the foregoing, that the great 
Hooker, and the equally great Watson (although their names have been com- 
memorated in species and varieties as well) have been mercifully omitted altogether 
— Watson i ' after a Mr.' Watson would have been the acme of mockery.
Aug. 1 886.
256 
BOOK NOTICES.
Our author is even more unfortunate with the less evident etymologies.
On 
the first page under Acanthium we read, ' Lat., acanthus, the name of a thorny 
Egyptian plant.
Onoperdon acanthium is probably named after it, on account of 
the prickles on the leaves.' In which three lines we have three distinct errors, and 
the meaning or derivation of Acanthium (from acus, a needle) is not even attempted!
The same, on page 6, with regard to Aconitum — we are told it is from the 
S Greek akoniton, a ranunculaceous plant, greatly used in medical practice, and 
very poisonous,' without any indication of the probable etymology, which is 
classical, according to Pliny deduced from Acone, a district in Pontus famous for 
poisonous herbs — 'loco ubi nascitur'; whilst other old writers have suggested that 
it is essentially the same word as Conium, a variant of it preceded by the alpha.
Again, on page 7, we have the painful shuffle-off instead of an explanation — 
' Aizoides {i-zei-dees) — oidcs in all words = like; resembling aiz,' i.e., resembling 
' always ' — a muddle for which ' amateurs ' would be no better even if they looked 
for the meaning of an 'ait' in their Greek dictionary !
Will it be news useful for 
a 2nd edition (?) if we point out that the specific name aizoides is that of a Draba 
as well as a Saxifrage, and was bestowed upon the former because of its compactly 
rosetted tufts of ciliated hard-margined leaves, resembling those of Saxifraga 
Aizoon ; whilst both it and the Saxifrage with the same specific name derive that 
appellation — essentially a contracted form of aizoon-oides — from Aizoon, the Greek 
term for the evergreen Houseleek (a genus of the Ficoidese has the same name, and is 
also evergreen), the word being compounded of del., always, and faou alive, such as 
we have it in zoology, the rosette even of the Draba, along with the leaves of both 
Saxifrages, persisting throughout the winter.
Again, to tell us that Lemna — the 
Duckweed inseparably associated with ponds, is 'probably connected with the 
island Lemnos,' when on the opposite page the Greek limne — of which it is a 
variant, the substitution of ' e ' for ' i ' occurring in many other words of old Greek— is 
correctly given as meaning a pond (as in Limnaa a pond'snail) is wild work 
indeed ; but to pass over the very curious and interesting derivation of Lapsana, 
or more correctly Lampsana, the Nipplewort, as if the fact of its being ' of 
Grecian origin ' was quite enough to know, is inexcusable except on one not very 
flattering supposition.
The method tried of expressing pronunciation is, perhaps, less faulty, although 
somewhat grotesque, and in a few instances either insufficient or wrong.
We have 
examples of both mistakes in the direction to pronounce Rhynchospora, ' rhine-co- 
spor-rah ' ; Ranunculus, ' ray-nun-q-lus ' ; Serotina, ' se-ro-ti-nah ' {not, by-the-bye, 
from ' sero, I scatter,' as we are actually told, but simply the Latin word for late — 
i.e., late-blooming, as in Bartsia serotina, the autumn-flowering form) ; ustulati, 
' us-teu-lay-ti ' (should be ustulata) ; truly, from Latin ustulatus, burnt — e.g., Carex 
ustulata, the glumes of which are of a burnt-brown hue, and Orchis ustulata, the 
perianth of which has a similarly brown colour as if scorched, but not at all, as we 
are informed, on account of ' having a hot, burning taste ' !
Nor are the names 
Aquilina, Aster, Aristolochia, Bufonius, Ochroleucum, Rosa, Trolhus (fancifully 
named by Linnaeus after the wicked yellow-haired Scanian trolls or gnomes, 
supposed to haunt the water-sides and cascades by which it loves to grow) 
pronounced ' aquel-ly-nah,' 4 astir,' ' a-riste-loc-ke-ah,' ' boo-foe-ne-us,' 'ok-crow- 
lew-cum,' 'roe-sah,' ' trole-le-us,' respectively!
More than all, we are told 
that the specific name torminalis of an austere-fruited, wild sort of Pear (Pyrus) 
derives its name from ' tormina, dysentery, for which illness ' the tree ' was thought 
to be a remedy,' whereas the meaning of torminalis given in our Latin dictionaries 
as 'causing the gripes,' points at once to the origin of the application to the colic 
producing fruit, without the necessity for any fanciful or false supposition at all.
A still more ridiculous theory is under Centunculus — a name anciently connected 
with the Cudweeds, Gnaphalium {vide Turner, etc., 1548) — twisted into having an 
applicability to the minute Primulaceous Chaffweed whose inconspicuous ' crimson 
blossoms ' are declared to make ' the little plant look like a piece of patch-work ' : 
fancy could no further go, but a poet, whatever the strength of his imagination, 
clearly misses his vocation in the scientific role of an expounder of etymology.
The foregoing samples are not odd errors picked out of this little book for the 
purpose of conveying an unwarrantable impression — they are but selections at 
random almost from many dozens that could be cited ; indeed we do not remember 
having ever seen in a work of its size so many astounding postulates so c onfidently 
advanced as ascertained truths.
Naturalist 
3 AUG 1886 
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional Illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address 
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching: boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larwe by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae ; 
parasites; preserving larvae.
Pupa digging ; preserving pupae; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes : painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera; Hymenoptera ; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject maybe obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
— : 
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AMD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" " Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c 
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
Now ready, Svo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
THE NATUEALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Hyrnenoptera near York in 1885— Thos.
Wilson.
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire (Noctuee)— J.
W. Ellis, 
F.E.S.,&c.
Notes on Birds of Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Furness.— John Watson.
Bibliography for 1885.
_Z^^Z^ 
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.
— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Notes.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL', REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have givei a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann. Mag.
Nat. Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athenceum.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENT S AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London: D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I., II., III., & IV.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
Now ready, price 2/- (postage 2 1 / 2 a 7 .J.
Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring- and 
Autumn of 1885.
By J.
A. HARVIE-BROWN, J.
CORDEAUX, R.
M. BARRINGTON, 
A. G.
MORE, and W.
EAGLE CLARKE ; 
Members of the British Association Migration Coi7imittee.
To be had of W.
Eagle Clarke, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds; 
or any Member of the Committee.
No. 134.
SEPTEMBER, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MRER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION.
Contents : 
- PAGE 
Hymenoptera captured near York in 1883 and 1884 ..
.. ..
.. ..257 — 259 
Bibliography :— (Birds, I885) ..
.. ..
.. ..
. .
260—272 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Pickering ..
.. 273—275 
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire— John W.
Ellis, L.R.C.P., &>c.
285—288 
New British Lichens — Joseph A.
Mar tindale ..
.. ,.
279 
Notes— Entomology :— ..
.. 276 
Diptera and Hymenoptera near Louth, Lincolnshire — H.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S.; 
Spilodes palealis near Whitby — Joseph T.
Sewell.
Notes — Ornithology:— , 277,278 
Reed Warbler nesting near Ripdn — R.
A .
Summerfield; The Hawfinch nesting at Boston 
Spa— J.
Emmet ; Departure of Hooded Crows from England — J.
H. Gumey, Jim.
; 
Quail nesting in Lincolnshire — Jas. Eardley Mason ; Little Grebe in Wensleydale — 
E. Chapman ; Bird-notes from Thorpe, near Halifax — F.
G. S.
Rawson ; Bird-notes 
from Whitby — Thomas Stephenson; Notes on Notts.
Birds — J.
Whitaker; Brent 
Geese (Bernicla brenta) and Great Grey Shrike (Lanius excubitor) in Nidderdale — 
Wm. Storey.
Note— Zoophytes : — 
Plumatella repens near Leeds — W.
Chapman.
Notes — Mammalia: — 
The Marten in Northumberland — E.Anne; Porpoise near Whitby — T.
Stephenson 
Note — Fishes : — 
Doree (Zeus faberL.)at Flamborough — M.Bailey; Whitby Fish-notes— T.Stephenson, 
Note — Palaeontology : — .
. .
. 
Fossil Tree at Clayton — J?.
A. A damson, F.G.S.
Microscopic Life near Askern — W.
Barwell Turner, F.C.S., F.R. M.S.
., 
Spurn Head — Lewis L.
Kropf 
Book Notices :— 
(The Book of Duck Decoys, by Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey, Bart.; Lord Lilford's 
Coloured Figures of British Birds ; Report on the Migration of Birds in 1885 ; Code 
of Nomenclature and Check-List of North American Birds.) 
Notes and News ..
283,284 
276 
278 
278 
2S4 
279 
276 
.280—283 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
McCorquodale & Co. Limited, Cardington Street, Euston : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
All Communications should be Addressed: — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
>ccX 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Midland Naturalist for August 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for August 1886.
[f.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for August 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Illustrated Science Monthly for August 1886.
[Bogue, Publisher.
Science Gossip for August 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Scottish Naturalist for Jan., April, and July 1886.
[Prof.
J. W.
H. Trail, Editor.
Notarisia, commentarium phycologicum — N.
3 — Luglio 1886.
[G.
B. de Toni e David Levi, Redattori.
Revue Bryologique, 13c Annee, No. 4, 1886.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
Northamptonshire Natural History Society.
— Journal, Nos. 24, 25, 26, November 
1885, March and June 1886.
[The Society.
Penzance Natural History and Antiquarian Society — Report and Transactions, 
1885-86.
[The Society.
Cumberland and Westmorland Association — Transactions, No. 10, 1884-85.
[The Association.
Notes on the Sub-genus Cylinder (Montfort) of Conus.
— 8vo reprint, 1886, 16 pp.
and plate.
Q. C.
Melvill, Author.
Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club— Proceedings, 1885-86.
[The Club.
Report on the Migration of Birds — Seventh Report, 1885.
[Bird Migration Committee.
New York Microscopical Society — Journal for May 1886.
[The Society.
The Manx Note Book, No. 7, July 1886.
[A.
W. Moore, Editor.
The Book of Duck Decoys.
— By Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey, Bart.
[The Author.
Pond Life : Insects.
— By A.
Butler.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
ACKWORTH SHELLS.— It is proposed to publish in the Natural 
History Journal a list of the Land and Freshwater Shells found near Ackworth.
Ackworth lies in the Went Vale district of Nelson and Taylor's Yorkshire 
Mollusca.
Any help will be very welcome.
Address : — W.
D. Bratthwaite, 
Ackworth School, near Pontefract; or, Hugh Richardson, The Gables, Elswick 
Road, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvse, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c.
, sent out ' on approval.
' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
257 
HYMENOPTERA CAPTURED NEAR YORK 
IN 1883 AND 1884.
THOMAS WILSON, 
York, 
The following are additions to my previous list of Sawflies taken in 
this neighbourhood in 1883 and 1884.
To Mr. Cameron I am 
indebted for their names.
TENTHREDINIDES.
*Tenthredopsis cordata.
A species new to Yorkshire.
I have taken 
two examples (females) amongst oak.
It is not in Mr. Cameron's 
1878 catalogue, and as I have not seen his monograph of these 
insects, I am not certain whether it has been taken before or 
not in England.
The following is a description of the perfect insect : — 
Head and ocellus black ; eyes black, surrounded with a white 
ring; antennae black, with nine joints; clypeus and labrum white; 
mandibles red, with the tips black.
Meta- and mesothorax black; 
scutellum white, heart-shaped.
Abdomen : four first segments 
black, the remainder bright red.
Ventral surface black to the 
third segment of the abdomen, the fourth having the centre red, 
the remaining segments being entirely red.
Legs : coxae and 
trochanters black ; front legs— the base of the femora blacky 
the posterior portion red ; the central and hind legs have the 
femora black, of which colour also are the tibiae ; the tarsi in 
the front and central, legs are pale brown, and those of the hind 
ones black.
Wings : costal nervure pale brown as far as the 
stigma ; the stigma black ; the other nervures dark brown.
I should say that the colour of the legs is liable to vary, as in 
the other example I have they are all alike.
At first sight this insect much resembles T.
dimidiata, which 
has the penultimate joints of the antennse white.
It has also 
two white basal abdominal spots, and black scutellum.
*Athalia lugens Klug.
Taken in Askham Bogs, 1884.
EMPHYTIDES.
*Emphytus serotinus Klug.
One example found in the Nurseries, 
York, 1884.
SELANDRI ADES.
*Bleimocampa fuliginosa Schr.
This species was found by me flying 
amongst smooth -leaved willows, evidently a willow-feeder, 
although I have not been able to find the larva as yet.
The 
Nurseries, York.
Sept.
1880.
s 
258 WILSON : HYMENOPTERA NEAR YORK.
NEMATIDES.
^Hemichroa rufa Pz. I found the larvae of this insect on Alnus 
glutinosa var.
laciniata, in September 1883.
The female lays 
her eggs on the underside of the leaves, along the midrib and 
lateral ribs.
They are oval in shape, though somewhat pointed, 
and are placed end to end, thus resembling a miniature watch 
chain.
There are fifteen or twenty placed on each leaf, in 
strings of four or five on the lateral and eight or ten on the mid- 
rib.
When the eggs are hatched the little larvae move restlessly 
about for some time, and then proceed to the edges of the leaves 
and commence the business of life.
Feeding gregariously, they 
soon demolish the leaves, leaving nothing but the ribs.
In this 
way whole branches are stripped.
The sides of a tree then 
present a very naked appearance.
However, the sight of such 
as this is very pleasing to an entomologist, whose delight is in 
finding something fresh or rare.
The colour of the adult larvae 
is greyish green, with a double row of dark spots on each side of 
the dorsal line.
There are also some dark spots along the 
spiracles.
Like many more species of Sawflies, they have the 
peculiarity of taking fast hold with their prolegs, and coiling up 
the anal segments.
When full fed they enter the earth to undergo 
their transformations.
The perfect insect I will thus describe : — Head and face pale 
red ; eyes and ocellus black ; mandibles black tipped ; the 
other parts of the mouth red, with slight touches of black on 
them ; antennae black, nine-jointed ; mesothorax and scutellum 
red; the first segments of the abdomen suffused with black, 
the remaining ones pale red.
Front wings : costal nervure, the 
anterior half pale red, becoming darker towards the stigma ; 
stigma reddish, suffused with black; the basal half of the wings 
clouded with grey.
Legs : coxae and trochanters black, the 
joints showing paler; femora black; tibiae and tarsi, the anterior 
parts pale red, the posterior dark grey.
^Cladius eradiatus Htg. Examples found in this neighbourhood, 1884.
^Nematus croceus Fall.
Captured at Holgate, on the wing, 1884.
^Nematus cseruleocarpus Htg. I met with larvae of this species in 
the autumn of 1883, upon smooth-leaved willows, and reared 
three examples.
The larvae are dark green, like the leaves on 
which they feed, and are scarcely to be distinguished from them 
without spots or lines, their distinctness from most other SawfTy 
larvae being in their manner of carriage during feeding.
They lie 
along the edges of the leaves in a very straight manner, clasping 
Naturalist, 
WILSON : HYMENOPTERA NEAR YORK.
2 59 
them with all their feet excepting the last pair, the last segment 
being pointed and raised.
Imago : head, antennae, and the whole 
upper surface of the body black; the legs uniformly pale red, 
except the bases of the coxae, and the two hind legs having the 
posterior portion of the tibiae and tarsi black.
Wings : costal 
nervure to the stigma pale red ; the other basal nervures to the 
centre of each wing are pale red ; stigma black ; the marginal 
nervures from the centre black.
CIMBICIDES.
€imbex sylvarum Fab. I had the pleasure of beating a larva of 
this insect from birch in the autumn of 1884.
It fed up, and 
then made itself a leathery cocoon amongst dead leaves at the 
bottom of the jar in which I had placed it, and went snugly into 
its winter quarters.
It remained there until the following June.
I was then expecting it coming out a fine imago, when lo !
out of 
the leathery case emerged some ten or a dozen small Ichneumons 
belonging to the Cryptidiae group, the name of which I have not 
yet made out.
These were not to be despised, though I should 
have preferred the former.
I went again this autumn, my object 
being to secure more larvae, and, I am glad to say, was successful.
This time I beat five nearly full-fed ones, after four hours' beating, 
which shows that they are not very plentiful.
They are beautiful 
fellows, an inch and a half long, with smooth white heads, and 
small black eyes placed low down near the mouth, and a beautiful 
blue line running down the centre of the back.
This line begins 
about the end of the second segment, and ends on the beginning 
of the eleventh.
Alongside this is another of a pale yellow 
colour, which merges into the greener portion of the larvae.
The sides above the spiracles are studded over irregularly with 
white spines or raised spots, the spiracles themselves being 
black.
Trichiosoma lucorum L.
The larvae of this insect I found in some 
numbers in Askham Bogs, on birches.
It differs from T.
sylvarum 
in not having a blue dorsal line.
In place of this a dark line 
shows through the skin in some examples ; others are a regular 
dark green, the upper surface of the head being brown.
[Those species hitherto unrecorded for the Yorkshire fauna are 
— as in former lists — marked with the asterisk (*).
The list of 
Yorkshire Sawflies, inclusive of the additions given above, now 
amounts to 119 species.
— W.D.R.] 
Sept.
1886.
260 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural 
history and physical features of the North of England.
BIKDS, 1885.
The scientific names inserted are in accordance with the B.O.U.
List of British Birds.
The present bibliography is for 1885, although 
a few titles accidentally omitted for 1884 are given.
Reference should be made to the columns of ' The Field,' ' Land 
and Water,' and to sporting papers generally, for information as to 
the shooting of grouse and of other game-birds, but it is not thought 
desirable to occupy space with it here.
Various Writers.
Yorkshire, Notts, Lincolnshire, Cumberland.
Arrival of Summer Birds [in Yorkshire, P.
Inchbald, T.
Carter, E.
W. West, 
T. Lister ; in Notts, J.
Whitaker ; in Lincolnshire, J.
F. Bacon ; in Cumber- 
land, T.
Duckworth].
Field, April 4th, 1885, p.
454 ; April nth, p.
477;.
April 25th, p.
524 ; and May 2nd, p.
581.
Various Writers.
Notts, Yorkshire, Cumberland.
Migrant Table, 1885 [E.
Pickard, T.
Lister, W.
H. B'rown, H.
Smith,, 
T. Watson, Edith and L.
M. Reynolds, J.
H. Salter, W.
Peill, F.
Carr].
N. H.
Journ., September 15th, 1885, pp.
121-122.
Anon.
[' B.A.Oxon '].
Yorkshire.
A Cream-coloured Robin \_Erythacus rubecula : one creamy-white, with breast 
red, shot in the East Riding, near Malton, January 5th].
Field, Tanuary 17th, 
1885, p.
65.
Anon, [no signature].
Lincolnshire.
Nightingale [Daulias luscinia] near Grimsby [at Cleethorpes, quite close to the 
" sea].
Land and Water, May 30th, 1885, P- 55 2 - 
Anon, [no signature].
Lancashire.
The 'Birds of Lancashire' [reviewed; with copious quotations].
Nature,, 
July 16th, 1885, xxxii, 241-242.
Anon, [no signature].
Yorkshire.
Great Grey Shrike [Lanius excubitor, near Leeds] ; Little Auk \_Mergulus alle, 
found near Tadcaster in July : both copied from the Naturalist].
Sci. Goss., 
September 1885, p.
215.
Anon, [no signature].
Yorkshire.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union [at Blubberhouses ; during the ramble such 
birds as the Goldeneye {Clangula glaucion), the Greenshank {Tot amis glottis), 
and the Ring Dotterel {sEgialitis hiaticuia) were noted].
Land and Water, 
October 3rd, 1885, p.
315.
Anon, [no signature].
Cumberland.
A [Peregrine] Falcon [Falco peregrinus] shot in Cumberland [near Dalstone].
Land and Water, December 26th, 1885, p.
606.
Anon, [no signature].
Northumberland.
The Birds and the Cold [a Woodcock {Scolopax riisticnla), a Thrush ( Ttirdus 
muszcus), a Blackbird ( 7\ merula), Sparrows {Passer domestiais) Robins 
{Erythacus rubecula), and last year a Kingfisher {Alcedo ispida) took shelter 
in the Blaydon Iron Foundry during severe weather].
Land and Water, 
December 26th, 1885, p.
606.
Naturalist.
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1885.
261 
Ackworth Boys' Essay and Natural History Societies' Reports 
[reviewed].
Yorkshire.
[Bird-notes].
N. H.
Journ., September 15th, 1885, pp.
117-118.
John Aitchison.
Northumberland.
[Tabulated dates of] Arrival and Departure of [34] Migratory Birds in the 
Belford District, during the year 1883 [followed by numerous notes for 1884; 
records of Hoopoe {Upnpa epops), Wax wings {Ampelis garruius), Squacco 
Heron (Ardea comata), Bittern {Botaiints ste/laris), etc.].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat.
Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii (1885), pp.
579-581.
William Craibe Angus.
Yorkshire.
Common Bittern, Botaurus stellaris, shot near Leeds, Yorkshire [this is no 
doubt Mr. J.
W. Addyman's Knaresborough specimen], Proc.
N. H.
Soc.
Glasgow, March 25th, 1884 [pub.
1885], vol.
i, p.
xxvi.
H. T.
Archer.
Northumberland.
Spotted Eagle [Aqui/a ncevid\ in Northumberland [same record in substance as 
given in the Naturalist].
Field, November 14th, 1885, p.
708.
Hubert D.
Astley.
Yorkshire.
Pied Flycatcher \_Muscicapa atricapilla] and other Birds at Bolton.
Zool , 
August 1885, p.
304.
J. C.
Atkinson.
Yorkshire.
Ring Ouzel {Turdiis torqtiatus] feeding on Cherries [at Danby-in-Cleveland].
Zool., October 1885, p.
387.
R. J.
Attye.
Cumberland.
Ravens [Corvus corax] in Cumberland [in Lake District.
Mentions also 
Heronries and the breeding of Woodcock {Scolopax rusticula), Peregrine 
{Falco peregrinics), Buzzard [Buteo vulgaris), Ring Ouzel {Turdus torquatus), 
notes on the Dotterel {Eudroinias morinellus), Snipe {Gallinago cczlestis), 
Teal {Querquedirfa crecca), Wild Duck {Anas boscas), and Rock Dove 
{Columba livia)\ Zool., March 1885, pp.
109-110.
B. B.
H. B.
Yorkshire.
Reed Warbler {Acrocephahis streperus\ nesting at a distance from water [The 
reeds in a large pond being very backward, a nest was built in a black 
currant bush in 1885 — and in a yew tree, some years before — at Hullbank, 
Inver Hull, East Yorkshire].
Field, June 27th, 1885, p.
843.
Matthew Bailey.
Yorkshire.
Notes from Flamborough [The Guillemots [Lomvia troile) have arrived in large 
numbers on the cliffs.
They are being shot for food ; as such, some people 
prefer them to hare].
Land and Water, February 21st, 1885, p.
171.
Matthew Bailey.
Yorkshire.
Arrival of Summer Visitors [several species ; also departure of Hooded Crows 
{Corvus comix)].
Land and Water, April 25th, 1885, p.
404, and May 2nd, 
p. 447.
Matthew Bailey.
Yorkshire.
Departure of Migratory Birds [notes on the autumnal migration at Flamborough.
Also records capture on September 9th, of a Wryneck ( Yunx torqitilla) at 
Sewerby].
Land and Water, September 26th, 1885, p.
295.
Matthew Bailey.
Yorkshire.
Bird Departures and Arrivals [at Flamborough ; numerous species cited].
Land and Water, October 31st, 1885, p.
413.
F. J.
Bamford.
Derbyshire.
Hoopoe \U pupa epops] in Derbyshire [shot near Ashborne ; September 30th].
Nat. World, December 1885, p.
235.
A. D.
Barber.
Yorkshire.
York [< Horned Owl' at].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., April 15th, 1885, ix, 60.
Sept.
1886.
262 bibliography: birds, 1885.
H, Barber.
? Lincolnshire, 
Early nesting of the Long-eared Owl [Asia otits.
Nesting early in February.
Locality not stated, presumably in Lincolnshire].
Zool., March 1885, p.
112.
J. C.
Bates.
Derhyshire.
Longevity of a Bean Goose [A?iser segeium; two 'winged' about 26 years 
ago, were kept alive in the Buxton Gardens.
One died 16 years, and 
the other, a female, 26 years after].
Field, September 19th, 1885, P- 4 2 3- 
W. Becher.
? Notts.
Curious death of Partridge [Perdix cinerea.
Young bird with bill sealed with 
thick clay.
Locality uncertain].
Zool., September 1885, p.
347.
W. Becher.
Notts.
Food of the Hobby [Falco subbuteo.
Stomach of one shot at Caunton in 
.September last contained principally coleopterous insects and the bodies of 
5 or 6 large moths {Triphccna pronubd)\.
Zool., November 1885, p.
434.
Frank Besant.
Lincolnshire.
Swallows [Hirundo rustica] nesting in a tree [about 20 feet from ground on a 
small branch of a tree in Sibsey Vicarage garden, near Boston].
Field, Sep- 
tember 5th, 1885, p.
359.
H. M.
Birkdale.
Yorkshire.
Unrecognised Birds [seen on a Yorkshire moor, August 4th, 1884; the game- 
keeper called it a 'Stone-snatch': inquiry what it was].
Sci. Goss., March 
1885, P.
69.
George Bolam.
'Northumberland, 
Ornithological Notes [Squacco Heron {Aidea comata Pall.) shot at Ho wick, 
May 28th, 1884; numerous records of Land-rails (Crex pratensis Bechst.)].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii (1885), pp.
589-590.
George Bolam.
Northumberland.
[Tabulated] Notes of Arrivals and Departures of Birds [near Berwick-on- 
Tweed ; 20 in 1882; 33 in 1883; and 26 in 1884; details given].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii (1885), pp.
581-589.
G. C.
Bompas.
Yorkshire.
'Life of Frank Buckland,' London 1885 [p.
353.
Royston Crows {Corvus 
comix), Blackbirds {Turdus meruld), Thrushes (T.
musicus), Crested Wrens 
{Regtilus cristatus), Woodcocks {Scolopax rusticola), and Owls {Strix flammed!) 
at Flamborough Head, and concerning their migration].
J. Bowman.
Northumberland, 
The Water Ouzel [Cinclus aquaticus] in Northumberland.
Sci. Goss., June 
1885, p.
142.
L. B[rigg].
Yorkshire, 
Temerity in Birds [September 26th, a Sparrowhawk (Accipiier nisus) perched 
on gun-barrels].
Field, October 10th, 1885, p.
533.
Mary Briggs.
Westmoreland, 
A White Swallow [(Hirundo rtistica) near Heversham, Westmoreland, Sep- 
tember 4th, 1885].
Nature, September 24th, 1885, xxxii, 500.
W. Fitzherbert Brockholes.
Lancashire, 
Common .
. .
Buzzards [Buteo vulgaris] in Lancashire ...
[Bleasdale 
in North Lancashire].
Zool., June 1885, p.
230.
W. Fitzherbert Brockholes.
Lancashire.
Hairy Variety of the Moorhen \_Gall inula chloropus : at Claughton, Lancashire, 
October 13th, 1884].
Zool., January 1885, p.
31.
Geo. H.
Brocklehurst.
Yorkshire.
Late Foliage and Nesting.
Sci. Goss., July 1885, p.
166.
Naturalist^ 
bibliography: birds, 1885.
263 
Montagu Brown.
Northumberland.
Hybrid Black Grouse \Tetrao tetrix] and Pheasant [P/iasianus colchicus ; refers 
by way of comparison to Yarrell's record of a Northumberland-killed hybrid].
Zool., January 1885, p.
26.
J. T.
Burgess.
Yorkshire.
Ayton [nidification of Robin {Erythaats rubecula) and Dipper {Cinclus 
aquaticus)\ N.
H. Journ., May 15th, 1885, p.
79.
F. Carr.
Cumberland.
Early Nesting of Thrushes [( Turdus musicus) at Broughton Crags, Cumber- 
land, March, 28th, 1885].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., April 15th, 1885, ix, 59.
James Carter.
Yorkshire.
Curious Feat of a Jackdaw [(Corvus moneduld) ; 'storming' a children's fort].
Field, September 19th, 1885, p.
423.
Thomas Carter.
Yorkshire.
Nesting of the Dipper \_Cinclus aquaticus ; notes on nesting habits about 
Masham].
Zool., January 1885, pp.
25-26.
Thomas Carter.
Yorkshire.
Lesser Black-backed Gull [Lavus fotscus] on the Yorkshire coast [Information 
in support of its supposed breeding on the Yorkshire coast in 1884].
Zool., 
February 1885, PP- 67-68.
Thomas Carter.
Yorkshire.
Breeding of the Lesser Black-backed Gull [Larus fuscus] on the Yorkshire 
coast.
Z00L, September 1885, p.
346.
Abel Chapman.
Northumberland.
Bird-Life [as observed] on the [Northumberland] Border Moors in August 
[September, October, November, and December ; a series of lengthy articles, 
in which the habits of numerous species are referred to].
Field, August 22nd, 
1885, p.
315 ; September 26th, pp.
466-7 ; October 10th, p.
533 ; October 
24th, pp.
606-7 ; November 21st, p.
742 ; and December 12th, p.
824.
Alfred Crawhall Chapman.
Northumberland.
On the Seasonal Changes of Plumage in Birds [The plumage of several species 
of Northumbrian Limicolce alluded to].
Zool., June 1885, pp.
220-223.
R. W.
Chase.
Northumberland.
[Exhibition of a male King Eider {Somateria spectabilis), shot at the Fame 
Islands].
Midi.
Nat., June 1885, p.
174.
R. W.
Chase.
Northumberland.
[The Avifauna of the Fame Islands : presidential address to the Midland 
Union].
Midi.
Nat., July 1885, pp.
180-182.
J. E.
Clark.
Yorkshire.
[Rookeries at] York.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., April 15th, 1885, ix, 60.
Wm. EagLe Clarke.
. Yorkshire.
Lesser Black-backed Gull [Larus fuscus] and Eock Dove \C0l11mba livid] on 
the Yorkshire Coast [Remarks on the unsatisfactory evidence on which the 
former is said to have nested ; and on the possibility of the latter being in 
some cases confounded with the Stock Dove].
Zool., January 1885, p.
26.
Wm. Eagle Clarke.
Yorkshire.
Occurrence of the Desert "Wheatear \Saxicola deserti Temm.] in Yorkshire [in 
Holderness, October 17th].
Zool., December 1885, p.
479.
J. Cordeaux and W.
Eagle Clarke.
Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire, 
Lincolnshire, Cumberland, Westmoreland, Lancashire, Cheshire.
Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and Autumn of 1884.
. .
. 
Sixth Report (Vol. II, No. 1), [1885, 186 pp.
and map] [see review in 
Naturalist for November 1885, p.
383-4: the report contains the usual mass 
of facts ; the East Coast of England report by Mr. Cordeaux, pp.
39-73 ; the 
West Coast report by Mr. Clarke, pp.
101-124].
Sept.
1886.
.   
264 bibliography: birds, 1885.
John Cordeaux.
Northumberland.
' Cheviot's Mountains Lone ' [a long article, including notes on the birds].
Field-, October 3rd, 1885, p.
499.
John Cordeaux.
Cumberland.
Ring Ouzel [Turdus torquatus] feeding on Cherries [in Martindale, 1794].
Zool., November 1885, p.
436-7.
Ben Day. Yorkshire.
White Partridges [{Perdix cinerea) ; a brood near Doncaster].
Field, 
November 28th, 1885, p.
776.
C. D[ixon].
Lancashire, Yorkshire.
Bibliographical Notices.
The Birds of Lancashire.
By F.
S. Mitchell 
[Criticises Mitchell's notes on the Starling (Sturnus vulgaris) by the light 
of Yorkshire observation].
Ann. and Mag. N.
H., July 1885, (5) xvi, 65-66.
C. W.
Dod.
? Cheshire.
Birds [ Turdus musicus] carrying away the shells of their eg^s when hatched 
[presumably at Malpas, Cheshire].
Field, May 23rd, 1885, P- 676.
H. E.
Dresser.
Yorkshire.
Zoological Society [Note of exhibition of the Spurn example of Saxicola deserti\ 
Field, November 28th, 1885, p.
777.
W. Duckworth.
Cumberland, Westmoreland.
Eagle's Haunts in the North of England [Corrections and additions to 
Mr. Watson's article].
Field, January 31st, 1885, p.
134.
[Editor of Field.] / Lancashire.
[Review of] Mitchell's 'Birds of Lancashire' [giving numerous quotations 
from it].
Field, August 1st, 1885, p.
174.
Editor of Field.
Yorkshire.
Eoss's Gull [Lanes Rossii] in Greenland [' We have no faith in the oft-quoted 
statement that one was obtained many years ago in Yorkshire '].
Field, 
November 7th, 1886, p.
671.
Editor of Zoologist.
Lancashire.
The Birds of Lancashire.
By F.
S. Mitchell [Review].
Zool., August 1885, 
pp.
318-320.
Editor of Zoologist.
Yorkshire.
[Review of the] Sixth Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and 
Autumn of 1884.
[Numerous statistics culled from report.] Zool., December 
1885, pp.
492-496.
John Emmet.
Lincolnshire.
Our resident ' Dicky Birds ' in Winter [Enumerating those fed at Boston Spa 
in winter, and describing the apparatus used].
Nat. World, , February 1885, 
ii, 29-30.
J. P.
Entwisle.
Lancashire.
One-winged Grouse [picked up on Hareden Moors, Clitheroe, August 13th.
Fine young cock, never had a right wing].
Field, September 5th, 1885, 
P- 355- 
John Evans.
Lincolnshire.
Rare Birds killed in Lincolnshire [mostly somewhat common species, the most 
noticeable being the Bittern {Botaicrus stellaris), Little Auk {Mergulus alle), 
Merganser {Mergus merganse7')].
Field, January 17th, 1885, p.
65.
F. H.
Foljambe.
Yorkshire.
Ross's Gull [Larus Possii] in England [Continuing the discussion as to the 
authenticity of the Yorkshire record].
Field, November 28th, 1885, p.
776.
Riley Fortune.
. Yorkshire.
Redwing [Turdus iliacus] Nesting in Yorkshire [' I found what must [!] have 
been the nest of a Redwing at Harrogate ' in 1879].
Zool., November 1885, 
P- 435- 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: birds, 1885.
265 
G. D'E.
H. Fullerton.
Notts.
Cat and Kittens in a Magpie [Pica candala] 's Nest.
Field, March 7th, 1885, 
P- 307- 
J. W.
Goodall.
Cumberland.
The Pied Fly-Catcher [not rare near Keswick].
Sci. Goss., Sept.
1885, p.
214.
J. W.
Graham.
Lancashire.
Colony of Black-Headed Gulls [{Larus ridibundus), at Cockerham Moss].
N. H.
Journ.
, June 15th, 1885, p.
98.
G. H.
Caton Haigh.
Lincolnshire.
Winter Visitors to Lincolnshire [Notes on the Autumnal Migration].
Field, 
October 31st, 1885, p.
640.
G. H.
Caton Haigh.
Lincolnshire.
Partridges [Perdix cinered\ with White Horseshoes [Writing from Grainsby 
Hall, Great Grimsby, instances are quoted].
Field, Dec. 19th, 1885, p.
876.
Allan B.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Thirsk, N.
Yorks.
[Notes refer to Golden Plover ( Charadriits pluvialis) and 
Bullfinch {Pyrrhula mropcea)].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 15th, 1885, ix, 36.
S. R.
Hallam.
Derbyshire.
Swallow [species not stated] taking Artificial Flies [near Burton -on-Trent].
Nat. World, October 1885, p.
199.
S. R.
Hallam.
Derbyshire.
Phalacrocorax carbo [shot near Burton-on-Trent].
Nat. World, December 
1885, p.
234-5.
W. Hy. Heathcote.
Lancashire.
The Knot [ Tringa canutus — a female shot near Preston, second week in 
August, in summer plumage].
Sci. Goss., December 1885, p.
282.
[H.
H. Higgins.] Lancashire.
OPNIGOITOAIS.
Bird-Life under the Shrubs, and what may be seen from my 
study chair [at Rainhill, Liverpool : gossipping notes on the familiar birds].
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. Field Club, 1884-5, PP- 10-19.
Charles Dennis Hill.
Northumberland.
Swallows [Hirundo rustica] building in a room [the nursery of Shortridge 
House, near Lesbury, Northumberland].
Field, August 22nd, 1885, p.
315.
W. PIodgson.
Cumberland.
Large Flight of Titmice, etc.
[In Flimby Wood, near Maryport, end of 
September 1884.
The flight, over a hundred individuals, consisted mainly 
of Long-tailed Tits {Pants candains), and was accompanied by a brood of 
Creepers (Certhia familiaris)].
Land and Water, January 3rd, 1885, p.
12.
Peter Inchbald.
Lincolnshire.
Food of the Brambling, or Mountain Finch [The writer goes on to note that 
a Snow Bunting [Plect)'ophanes nivalis] from Lincolnshire had fed on seeds of 
a maritime chenopod].
Field, February 28th, 1885, p.
282.
Peter Inchbald.
Arrival of Fieldfare [ lurdus pilaris] and Redwing [ T.
iliacus] in Yorkshire 
[near Harrogate].
Field, October 24th, 1885, p.
607.
F. Jackson.
Lancashire.
Garstang [January 25th, large flock of Golden Plover— Charadrius pluvialis].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., February 15th, 1885, p.
13.
J. J.
J[ackson].
Yorkshire.
Kingfishers [Alcedo ispida] near Whitby [Instances of their occurrence on the 
seashore.
Writer states that they have not been previously seen, though 
frequent at Pickering and Malton].
Land and Water, Jan. 17th, 18S5, p.
55.
Sept.
1886.
266 BIBLIOGRAPHY : BIRDS, 1 885.
R. Duncombe Jewell.
Northumberland.
Winter Visitors in Northumberland [Swans, Geese, Ducks, and Redwings 
mentioned].
Zool., November 1885, p.
435.
J. E.
Kelsall.
Yorkshire.
Unrecognised Birds [on a Yorkshire moor] : Waxwings ?
[several identifications 
suggested].
Sci. Goss., April 1885, p.
94.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire, 
Nature near Louth, North Lincolnshire [The Bittern, or ' Mire-drum ' 
{Botaiirus stellarjs) once common, now scarce].
Nat. World, February 1885, 
ii, 24-25.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Nightingale {Danlias luscinia) [at Maltby Woods, near Louth].
Nat. World,.
July 1885, p.
138.
H. YVallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Mablethorpe [Ornithology : Stonechats {Pratincola rubicoia), abundant on sand- 
hills, June 6th, 1885].
Nat. World, July 1885, p.
137.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Heronry at Muckton Wood, Lincolnshire [particulars given].
Nat. World,.
July 1885, p.
129.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Louth Naturalists' Society [The Heronry at Muckton Wood].
Nat. World, 
August 1885, PP- 1 54-5* 
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Heron [Ardea cinereay* Nest.
Nat. World, September 1885, p.
177.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire, 
Rambles near the Coast [at Theddlethorpe, Lincolnshire ; nest of Sand-martin 
— Cotile riparia\ Nat. World, October 1885, p.
189.
F. Kirton.
N. E.
Yorkshire.
Thirsk [Bird-notes; notes on eight species].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., April 15th, 
1885, ix, 59-60.
F. Kirton.
Yorkshire.
Thirsk [nidification of Long-eared Owl {Asio otus) and variety of Rook ( CVrzw 
frugilegus)].
N. H.
Journ., May 15th, 1885, p.
79.
R. B.
L. Westmoreland.
Herons {Ardea cinerea\ and Rooks [Corvns frugilegus'] [At Dallam Tower, 
Westmoreland, a very large rookery and perhaps the most extensive heronry 
in the North of England flourish side by side.
At one time fights took place, 
but now they have for many years lived peaceably together].
Field, January 
17th, 1885, p.
65.
FL Lamb.
Yorkshire.
Unrecognised Birds [on a Yorkshire moor ; suggested to be Stone-chats 
{Saxicola rubicola)\ Sci. Goss., April 1885, p.
90.
L. Lee. Notts.
Sand-Martins {Cotile riparia] and their Nests [instance of persistent building 
in one place in Nottingham Park, regardless of disturbance by workman 
cutting a road].
Sci. Goss., September 1885, p.
214.
Thomas Lister.
Yorkshire.
South Yorkshire [Bird-notes, October 1st, 1884, to February 1st, 1885 : 
numerous species recorded].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 15th, 1885, ix, 36.
T. Lister.
. Yorkshire, 
Natural History Notes from [South] Yorkshire [Birds observed about Barnsley 
in the autumn 1884, and winter of 1884-5].
Zool., May 1885, p.
184.
Naturalist^ 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1885.
267 
R. Lofthouse.
Durham, Yorkshire.
Notes from the Tees [referring to the autumnal migration of birds].
Field, 
October 31st, 1885, p.
640.
J. L[ovellJ.
Yorkshire.
Starlings [Sturnus vulgaris ; quitting an old roosting-place at Driffield].
Nat.
Hist.
Journ., May 15th, 1885, p.
78.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
The Long-tailed Duck \Harelda glacialis ; at Monkhill Lough, January to 
March 1884].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, pp.
211-12.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Wild Fowl near Carlisle [The notes refer to numerous species noted in autumn 
1883 and spring 1884].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, ix, 211.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Shrikes [Red-backed Shrike {Lanius colhirio), Woodchat Shrike {Lanius 
pomarinus), Great Grey Shrike {Lanius excubitor), Pallas's Grey Shrike 
{Lanius major).
Notes on these species as Cumberland birds ; also general 
notes on their habits in the field, and on some species in confinement].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1884-85, pp.
97-107, with plate of Pallas's Shrike.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Green Sandpiper [Hclodromas oc/iropus] in Cumberland in Winter [One shot 
near Carlisle, January 3rd].
Field, January 10th, 1885, p.
61.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Occurrence of the Puffin [Fratercnla arctica] in Winter [They are obtained all 
the winter through on the Cumberland coast].
Field, January 17th, 1885, 
p. 65.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Woodpeckers and Nuthatch in Cumberland [Enquiry whether the Nuthatch 
{Sitta europcea) has occurred in Cumberland during the present century ; and 
whether it or the Green {Gecinus viridis) or Greater Spotted Woodpecker 
{Pints major) have nested during a similar period].
Field, January 17th, 
1885, p.
65.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Scarcity of Greenfinches [Ligurimcs c/iloris] in Cumberland.
Zool., May 1885, 
ii, 188.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Westmoreland.
The Hawfinch [Coccol/irausles vulgaris} in Westmoreland [The Ibis list states 
that this has occurred in winter in every county but Westmoreland.
One 
was, however, shot at Kirkby Lonsdale by I.
Hindson, as long ago as- 
December 1841.
A winter visitant, though irregular, to Cumberland].
Field, 
May 2nd, 1885, p.
581.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Occurrence of Buifon's Skua \_Stercorarms parasiticus] in June [near Carlisle].
Zool., July 1885, P- 2 59- 
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Black-chinned Bramblings [Fringilla montifringilla ; 'not melanism,' but due 
to an extension of the black face over the surface of the throat].
Zool., 
October 1885, p.
389.
L. D.
Marsden.
Lincolnshire.
Late Nesting of Quail [(Cotumix communis) ; nest with 10 eggs found August 
20th in a field of tares at Girsby, Lincolnshire].
Field, September 19th, 1885, 
p. 423.
L. D.
Marsden.
Lincolnshire.
Pied Woodcock [Scolopax rnsticiila\ in Lincolnshire [One shot in Maltby Wood, 
Louth, November 20th, had the flight feathers pure white].
Field, December 
5th, 1885, p.
785.
Sept.
1886.
268 BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1885.
Reginald D.
Marshall.
Grey Phalarope {Phalaropus fulicarms] in Cumberland [a young one shot 
September 23rd, on Derwentwater].
Field, October 24th, 1885, P- 607.
J. F.
Masham [misprinted Musham].
Lincolnshire.
Albino Rooks [Corvus frugilegus ; three Albinos with pink eyes in a nest at 
Wellingthorpe].
Zool., July 1885, p.
259.
J. E.
Mason.
Lincolnshire.
Curious Nest of a House Martin [(Chelidon urbica) at Alford].
Nat. World, 
December 1885, p.
233.
S. L.
Mosley.
Yorkshire, Notts.
British Birds: their Nests and Eggs [Girl Bunting {Envberiza cirlus) occasionally 
in Yorkshire].
Young Nat., August 1885, pp.
186-188.
[Albino Chaffinch (Fringilla celebs) near Huddersfield ; varieties of eggs 
at Rainworth.] Young Nat., September 1885, pp.
197-201.
S. L.
Mosley.
Yorkshire.
Varieties of Wood Pigeon \_Columba palumbus] and Magpie [Pica caudata].
[A 
variety of the Wood Pigeon, mottled drab, believed to have been killed in 
Lancashire.] Zool., November 1885, p.
437.
T. H.
Nelson.
Yorkshire.
Domestication of the Partridge \Perdix cinerea ; at Easby Hall, Cleveland].
Zool., January 1 885, p.
29.
T. H.
Nelson.
, Yorkshire.
Reported occurrence of the Blue-winged Teal \_QuerqueduIa discors] near 
Redcar.
[The bird shot at Cowpen on September 3rd, 1882, and recorded 
as an American Blue-winged Teal, proved to be a young male Garganey 
{Querquedula circia).~\ Zool., March 1885, p.
113.
Alfred Newton.
Durham.
Mr. Grieve on the Garefowl [review, making reference to the Durham fragment].
Nature, October 8th, 1885, xxxii, 545-6.
Francis Nicholson.
Cheshire, S.
Lancashire.
On the breeding of the Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus streperus in Cheshire.
[This note appeared in the Naturalist for March 1885, p.
182.
Author adds 
that he is satisfied that its ally the Marsh Warbler, A.
pahistris, does not 
occur in Cheshire.] Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, March 16th, 1885, 
xxiv., 54-55.
£Francis Martin Norman.] Northumberland.
Report of meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club for the year 1884 
[note of the Black-headed Gulls (Larus ridibundus) breeding at Pallinsburn 
(p.
445) ; and the birds noted at the Fame Islands, June 25th].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, No. ii (1885), pp.
439-460.
W. Peile.
Cumberland.
Cockermouth [Bird-notes: Buzzard (Butco vulgaris), Dipper [Cinches aqiittticus), 
Long-tailed Tit (Acredula rosea), Long-eared Owl (Asio otus), Brown Owl 
[Syrnium ahtco), Crow [Corvus corone), Wheatear (Saxicola oznanthe), and 
Hooded Crow ( Corvzis comix) referred to].
N. H.
Journ., May 15th, 1885, 
p. 79.
E. A.
Pim. Yorkshire.
Sea-Gull in York [February 13th, 1885].
N. II.
Journ., April 15th.
1885, ix, 60.
G. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Curious nest of the Song Thrush [Turdus musicus; atCopgrove, near Borough- 
bridge.
Nest placed among a number of young shoots covered with green 
leaves springing from the bole of a tree and formed outwardly entirely of fresh 
green shoots], Zool., August 1885, p.
311, 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: birds, 1885.
269 
T. N.
Postlethwaite.
Cumberland.
Late nesting [September 10th, 1884] of the Yellowhammer [Emberiza citrinella].
Zool., January 1 885, p.
30.
J. A.
R. Westmoreland.
Breeding of Woodcock [Scolopax rusticuld\ at Windermere [May 4th].
N. H.
Journ., June 15th, 1886, p.
99.
J. E.
R. Durham.
Solitary Snipe [Scolopax major} in Co. Durham.
[Shot 'last week' at Burn- 
ledge-in-Weardale.
Another shot about 'a fortnight ago.'] Field, October 
ioth, 1885, p.
533.
Thos.
Raine.
Yorkshire.
Occurrence of the Great Grey Shrike [Lanius excubitor\ near Leeds.
[The 
same record as appeared in the Naturalist for August 1885, p.
298.] Nat.
World, September 1885, p.
178.
T. G.
Reeve.
Lincolnshire.
Ring Ouzel [ Turdus torquatus\ feeding on cherries [in Lincolnshire].
Zool., 
September 1885, p.
346.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood [etc.].
Vol. II.
Leeds: printed for the Author.
1885 [pp.
viii + 258].
[Remarks on the avi-fauna (pp.
19-25), synopsis of species specially subject 
to persecution (p.
2%), miscellaneous notes (pp.
27, 87 to 193) ; tables of 
arrivals of migrants (pp.
92, 97, 105, ill, 126, 127, 144, 157, 169); rare birds 
captured during storms (p.
104); birds at Ledsham (p.
174, 176-178); at 
Jackdaw Crag (p.
184); at Cowthorpe (p.
186); on the limestone (p.
188); 
observations on domed nests (pp.
189-193).] 
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
The Fulmar \Fulmarus glacialis] at Hartlepool [found on the beach, October 12th ; 
another a few clays later, not far from the coast ; and a third near mouth of 
Hezleden Dene].
Young Nat., November 1885, P- 2 ^3« 
William Rose.
Lancashire.
A Suspended Nest of the Swallow [(H/rtmdo ritstica) between two pieces of 
iron hanging about 3 feet from a beam, Shaw Hill, near Chorley, Lancashire].
Field, August 29th, 1885, p.
322.
J. H.
Salter.
• Yorkshire.
Yorkshire Coast Bird-notes [various species referred to].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
February 15th, 1885, pp.
14-15.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Scarhoro' [Bird-notes, numerous species referred to].
N. H.
Journ., May 15th,, 
1885, p.
79.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
East Yorkshire Notes.— Birds [numerous species referred to, the notes extending 
from May 9th to August 31st, 1885].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., December 15th, 
1885, pp.
187-188.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire, Lake District.
The Pied Flycatcher \_Muscicapa atricapilla, near Scarborough ; detailed 
observations ; other birds mentioned].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., December 15th, 
1885, p.
188.
Howard Saunders.
All the Counties.
A History of British Birds (by the late Mr. Yarrell, fourth edition — edited, in 
part, by Howard Saunders).
Parts xxvii-xxx, concluding the work, and com- 
prising the Anseres with numerous allusions to the North of England.
Sept.
1886.
270 bibliography: birds, 1885.
[P.
L. Sclater.
Yorkshire.
[Curious Duck shot in Yorkshire ; Mr. Sclater exhibited and made remarks on 
a curious Duck shot on Lord Bolton's estate in Yorkshire, in January 1885, 
which was apparently referable to the Common Scaup {Fuligida martlet), but 
was remarkable for having the broad and clean white front of the female, and 
the black head of the ordinary male of this species].
P.Z.S., March 17th, 
1885, p.
246 ; and Zook, May 1885, p.
193.
Henry Seebohm.
All the Counties.
A History of British Birds, with Coloured Illustrations of their Eggs.
Parts v and vi, concluding the work, dealing with the Orders Limicolce, 
Gavice, Tubinares, Pygopodes, Anseres, and Steganopodes.
Many references to 
North of England.
TH.
Seebohm.] Lancashire or Westmoreland.
[Curious pale-buff variety of the Bed Grouse ( Tetrao scoticus) ; shot on a 
moor near Morecambe Bay, October i6th, 1884, by Mr. Gray Grayrigge.
Had been seen for three seasons on the moor.] P.Z.S., February 3rd, 
1885, p.
66.
Henry Seebohm.
Derbyshire, Northumberland.
The Nests and Eggs of Birds [including notes from the Derbyshire Grouse 
Moors and the Fame Islands].
Trans.
Herts.
N. H.
Soc, December 1885, 
iii, 255-260.
John Sim. Northumberland.
Objects of interest in our Pit District [of Northumberland; several birds 
mentioned casually].
Sci. Goss., February 1885, pp.
31-32.
[H.
H. Slater.] Yorkshire.
[Barred Warbler — Sylvia nisoria — on the Yorkshire Coast, August 28th, 1884.] 
P.Z.S., November 4th, 1884, p.
477.
C. C.
Smith.
Yorkshire.
[Birds] at Skipton-in- Craven [Popularly written notes].
Nat. World, August 
1885, pp.
I49-I5 1 - 
Thomas Southwell.
Yorkshire.
Unrecorded Occurrence of the Whiskered Terns \_Hydrochelidon 
hybrida, shot on the Swale at Hornby Castle in 1842].
Zook, December 
1885, p.
481.
R. Standen.
Lancashire.
[Black-headed] Gulls [Lai-ics ridibundus\ feeding on Moths [near Preston ; 
gullery at Winmarleigh Moss].
Nat. World, October 1885, p.
198.
Henry Stevenson.
Northumberland, Durham.
Ornithological Notes from Norfolk [Refers to the breeding of the true Rock 
Dove {Columba livia) in Durham and Northumberland].
Zook, September 
1885, p.
323.
J. A.
Erskine- Stuart.
Yorkshire, Lancashire.
Herons and Heronries [mentions five of the Yorkshire Heronries, also the one 
at Rawcliffe Hall, Lancashire, with 20 nests].
Nat. World, November 1885, 
pp.
204-5.
B. B.
L. T[all]., Secretary.
Yorkshire.
Bootham Natural History Club, York, [Kingfisher — Alcedo ispida — reported 
as seen on the Foss].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., December 15th, 1885, p.
182.
C. Donald Thompson.
Durham.
White Grouse [Lagopus scoticus.
An albino was shot on the Edmondbyers 
Moor, near Stanhope, co.
Durham, on the 7th December, 1884.
A few 
feathers sent to the Editor are pronounced by him as scarcely to be termed 
white, being smoke-coloured].
Field, January 31st, 1885, p.
134.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1885.
271 
Thomas Thompson.
Northumberland, Durham.
Birds nesting in September [Hedge Sparrow (Accentor modularis) near Ponte- 
land ; Green Linnet {Ligurinus chloris) at Winlaton ; Quail (Coturnix com- 
munis), nest of 13 eggs, near Ryton-on-Tyne, August 22nd, 1882].
Field* 
October 31st, 1885, p.
499.
Walter M.
Tomlinson.
Yorkshire.
Yellowhamtner [Eniberiza citrinelld\ sitting- in July [near Pontefract].
Field, 
September 5th, 1885, p.
359.
W. M.
Tomlinson.
Yorkshire.
Yellowhammer nesting in September [corrects error in previous note— 'July' 
was printed for ' September ; ' Editor adds that this bird often rears second 
brood in August].
Field, September 12th, 1885, p.
391.
Julian G.
Tuck.
Yorkshire.
Lesser Black-backed Gull [Lams fuscus] breeding on the Yorkshire 'Coast.
[Quite satisfied from Carter's evidence that this species breeds on Yorkshire 
coast.] Zool., October 1885, p.
388-9.
P. Vervaet.
Northumberland.
Bittern [Bolaicms stellaris] in Northumberland.
[One shot by Sir John 
Haggerston, Bart., on his Ellingham property, January 19th.] Field, January 
24th, 1885, p.
1 10.
Lord Walsingham.
Yorkshire.
On some probable causes of a tendency to melanic variation in Lepidoptera of 
high latitudes [refers incidentally (p.
137) to the change in the habits of York- 
shire Grouse].
Trans.
Yorksh.
Nat. Union, part 8 [publ.
1885], sheet D 9, 
P- 137.
H. Snowden Ward.
Yorkshire.
Hooded Crow [Corvus comix: seen near Scarborough, August 2nd].
Nat.
World, September 1885, p.
179.
W. E.
Ward.
Yorkshire.
Migration of Wagtails [Motacilla, species not stated].
Nat. World, May 1885, 
p. 99.
W. E.
Ward (Ilkley).
Yorkshire.
Cuckoos \Cuculus canoms\ in Pairs.
Cuckoo like a Hawk.
Nat. World, 
September 1885, p.
175.
John Watson.
Westmoreland, Cumberland.
Eagles' Haunts in the North of England [Long and interesting summary of 
information as to the Eagles and Eagle-haunts in the Lake District].
Field, 
January 24th, 1885, p.
no.
Cumberland, Westmoreland, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, 
John Watson.
Lancashire, Durham, Northumberland.
The Dotterel [Eudromias morinellus'] and its Migrations [a long and interesting 
article, alluding to most of the counties of the North of England].
Field, 
November 14th, 1885, p.
708.
Thos.
Watson.
Yorkshire.
Thirsk [Bird-notes; nesting of several species].
N. H.
Journ., Tune 15th, 
1885, p.
99.
Wm. Watts (Rochdale).
Lancashire.
Swallows [Hirundinidae, species not stated ; and their Parasites].
Nature, 
July 9th, 1885, xxxii, 223.
F. Wells and A.
Colli nson.
Yorkshire.
Ackworth [notes concerning Sea-gulls, Wild Geese, and Ducks, Kingfisher 
{Alcedo ispida), and Snipe {Gallinago ccelestis)\ N.
H. Journ., February 15th, 
1885, p.
15.
Sept.
1886.
272 bibliography: birds, 1885.
J. Whitaker.
Notts,, 
Puffin [Fratercula arcttca] in Nottinghamshire [Same record as in the Naturalist].
Z00L, February 1885, p.
68.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
An unobserved Habit in Long-tailed Tit [{Acredula rosea) ; picking food off 
surface of water, and plunging in to bathe].
Zool., March 1885, p.
113.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Hybrid between a Stock Dove [Columba cenas] and Tame Pigeon.
Zool., 
April 1885, p.
150.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Variety of Jackdaw [Corvus monedula, dark stone colour, outer edges of flight 
feathers white] ; and Chaffinch [Fringilla Calebs, several shades lighter than 
normal plumage].
Zool., May 1885, p.
184.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Grey Lag Goose [Anser cinereus] in Nottinghamshire [at Papplewick Hall, on 
1 6th February, 1885].
Zool., May 1885, p.
185.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Sparrow [Passer domesticus] attacking a Willow Wren [Phylloscopus trochitus\ 
[at Rainworth Lodge, near Mansfield.] Zool., July 1885, p.
263.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Swans' Nests [Cygnus olor; nesting habits at Rainworth].
Zool., July 1885, 
p. 263.
J. Whitaker.
, Notts.
Wrens' [ Troglodytes parvu lies'] Nests [use nearest available material for nests.
Instances quoted], Zool., July 1885, p.
265.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
* Humming' of the Snipe [Gallinagc cosiest is ; the sound peculiar owing to two 
or three feathers of one wing wanting.
From comparison at time with hum- 
ming of another bird with full wings, convinced that humming produced by 
wings].
Zool., August 1885, p.
306.
j. Whitaker.
Yorkshire.
Little Owl [Athene noctud] in Yorkshire.
[One captured on a fishing boat just 
off Scarborough in November 1884.
Another taken in a trap at Seamore, 
near Scarborough, six weeks later.] Zool., September 1885, p.
349.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Purple Sandpiper [ Tringa striata] in Nottinghamshire.
[One near Rainworth, 
picked up dead under telegraph wires, on September 25th, 1885.] Zool., 
December 1885, p.
480.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Grey Phalarope [Phalaropus fulicarius] at Mansfield.
[One shot October 17th, 
1885.] Zool., December 1885, p.
481.
J. Whitaker.
• Notts.
Redshanks [ Totamis calidris] nesting in Notts.
[Five or six pairs nested in 
North Notts, in the spring of 1885.] Zool., December 1885, p.
482.
J. E.
Wilson.
Yorkshire.
Rooks [Corvus frugilegus] casting up pellets [at Lightcliffe, near Bradford.} 
Field, October 31st, 1885, p.
640.
Frederic A.
Wrathall.
Yorkshire.
Dippers [Cinclus aquaticus; their habits as observed near Ayton].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., September 15th, 1885, pp.
123-4.
C. G.
Young and Ll. S.
Baxendale.
. Northumberland.
Partridge [Perdix cinerea] with White Horse-shoe.
[Northumberland instances 
given by each writer.] Field, December 12th, 1885, p.
824.
Naturalist, 
273 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT PICKERING.
The sixty-fourth meeting was planned for the investigation of that small section 
of the beautiful and charmingly picturesquely-wooded ravine known as Newtondale, 
which extends from Levisham to Pickering, with a field of somewhat more general 
scope for the geologists, who extended their peregrinations to the Hole of Horcum.
Nearly all the members having reached Pickering about n.o a.m., the bulk at 
once proceeded to Levisham, which was the starting point for both the lines of 
routes which had been planned.
One of them was geological, in charge of the 
Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A..
who conducted his party to the Hole of Horcum.
The 
other party was smaller in number, and its members satisfied themselves with 
working leisurely down the valley to Pickering.
At the stated time all had reached 
the Black Swan Hotel in that town.
After tea and sectional meetings, the evening 
was so pleasant and the time before the departure of trains so ample, that the 
general meeting, albeit held at the hour stated in the programme, was shortened 
by its being restricted to the necessary routine business and the taking as read of 
the usual reports of sections.
The chair at the general meeting was occupied by the Rev. E.
Maule 
Cole, M.A., one of the vice-presidents.
The minutes having as usual been taken 
as read, the Rev. G.
H. Lightfoot, Vicar of Pickering, and Mr. Robert Clark, of 
that place, were duly elected members.
The roll-call showed that the 50 or 60 
persons who were present were representative of 13 societies, viz.: — Beverley, 
Bradford (3), Driffield, Hull (Field Naturalists' Society), Leeds (3), Malton, Scar- 
borough, Cleveland (Middlesbrough), and Harrogate.
The thanks of the Union 
to the Rev. E.
M. Cole, Mr. John Braim, and Mr. Robert Clark, for their efficient 
guidance during the clay, were proposed by Mr. W.
Hodgson, of Malton, seconded 
by Mr. J.
T. Milow, of Scarborough, and unanimously voted.
Mr. Cole replied, 
after which it was resolved to take the Sectional Reports as read, on the motion of 
Mr. J.
E. Bedford, Leeds, seconded by Mr. W.
West, Bradford, and the rest of 
the evening was profitably employed in continuing and adding to the day's records.
The work of the Vertebrate section had been mainly done by two energetic 
Leeds ornithologists, Mr. W.
Cecil Scott and Mr. Walter Booth, and, in the 
absence of the sectional officers, the report was prepared by them.
In all 
53 species of birds were noted, 37 residents and 16 summer visitants.
The list 
was as follows : — Kestrel, Sparrowhawk, Spotted Flycatcher, Dipper, Missel 
Thrush, Song Thrush, Blackbird, Hedge Sparrow, Robin, Redstart, Stonechat 
(reported by Mr. R.
Clark, not seen by the reporters), Whinchat, Sedge Warbler, 
Whitethroat, Lesser Whitethroat, Wood and Willow Warblers, Chiffchaff, Wren, 
Great, Blue, and Longtailed Tits, Pied and Grey Wagtails, Tree and Meadow 
Pipits, Skylark, Common and Yellow Buntings.
Chaffinch, blouse Sparrow, Green- 
finch, Linnet, Bullfinch, Starling, Carrion Crow, Rook, Jackdaw, Magpie, Jay, 
Swallow, Martin, Sand Martin, Swift, Ringdove, Pheasant, Red Grouse, Partridge, 
Golden Plover, Lapwing, Common Snipe, Landrail, and Moorhen.
Of these 
the Yellow-hammer (with three eggs), House Martin, and Wren were found 
breeding.
No observations appear to have been made on the mammals, reptiles,, 
or fishes, beyond the occurrence of the Frog, Toad, tadpoles of Newts, and 
Trout.
Although none of the officers of the Conchological section were present, it was 
nevertheless strongly represented, and the results of the day's work were very satis- 
factory, three forms of unusual rarity being turned up, and a fair total list placed 
on record for a district hitherto quite neglected.
The collectors on the ground in- 
cluded Messrs.
Baker Hudson and Wm. Coates, of Middlesbrough, Wra. Denison 
Roebuck, F.L.S., of Leeds, and H.
T. Soppitt.
of Bradford.
The day's search 
was directed to Newtondale, from Levisham to a point called Farwath Bridge, 
and the evening's work to Pickering Castle Hill.
The total list included 8 slugs, 
21 land shells, and 6 water shells, altogether 35 species, in addition to which were 
noted 8 named varieties.
It is as follows: — Pimdhtm pusillum (F.
), Planorbis 
spirorbis (F.
), and monst.
scalaris (a very good specimen, found by Mr. B.
Hudson 
in a ditch near Farwath Bridge), Limncva peregra v.
ovata (Pickering Beck at 
Sept.
1886.
274 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT PICKERING.
Pickering), Z.
palustris (F.
), Z.
glabra (F., one specimen), Ancylus fluvialilis 
(Pickering Beck at Levisham), Avion ater and vars.
plambea (F.) and succinea (F.), 
hortensis (F.), another species of Arion, Limax maximus and var.
cellaria (F.
), 
Z. cinereo-niger (of this extremely rare species, of which not more than a score 
British examples are on record, Mr. Coates found a half-grown characteristic 
specimen at the gravel-pit at Farwath Bridge), Z.
agrestis and vars.
sylvatica (F.
) 
and albida (F.), Z.
Iczvis (very abundant along the beck-side near Levisham), 
Z. arboriun (P., a few), Succinea putris, Zonites cellarius, Z.
alliarius (P., abun- 
dant), Z.
nitidulus, Z.
purus var.
margaritacea (P.), Z.
radiatulus (P.), and var.
albinos (F.
), Z.
crystallinus, Z.
fulvus (P.), Helix aspersa (P.), nemoralis in 
variety, arbustorum (F.
) and var.
marmorata (F.), concinna, H.
hispida, H.
virgata (P.), H.
caperala (P.), Zf. rotundata, Bulimus obscurus (F., one), 
umbilicata (P.), Clausilia rngosa, CI.
laminata (F.
), and Zz/<7 lubj'ica.
The species 
found in the gravel -pit at Farwath Bridge only and not at Pickering are marked 
F., and those found only at Pickering Castle Hill are marked P., while those met 
with at both places are left unmarked.
For the Entomological section its president, Mr. N.
F. Dobree, reported that 
the party who took the high ground saw absolutely nothing.
There were three 
entomologists, but owing to cloudy weather no Butterflies were on the wing, and a 
specimen or two of the Small Heath {Ctenonympka patnphilus) were all that was 
taken.
A few larvae were found in the flowers of the Foxglove, from which it is 
probable they were those of Eupithecia pulcJiellala.
For the Botanical section the report was furnished by Mr. M.
B. Slater, of 
Malton, secretary, as follows: — The fine district of Newtondale, near Pickering, 
with the open moorlands beyond, was good ground for the botanists, the total 
number of plants recorded as seen by the explorers during their gamble being 293, 
which was by far the greatest number recorded during any previous excursion this 
season.
The members of the party made Levisham Station their starting point, 
some few of the botanists joining the geological party on their ramble across the 
moorlands to the Hole of Horcum, and others taking the route down the dale to 
Pickering, exploring on their way the banks of the stream.
On each side are moist 
meadows and copses, in which grow a great variety of our native wild plants.
The 
wooded hill slopes near Kingthorpe were also searched, and many interesting plants 
seen ; probably a greater variety of plants could not be gathered in so short an ex- 
cursion in hardly any other part of the county.
North Yorkshire has been well 
explored by good botanists for many years, and a very large list of the plants it 
produces is recorded in Baker's ' North Yorkshire,' and although no new plant was 
found which has not been previously recorded, many of the party had the pleasure 
of seeing some of our rarer wildings growing in their native haunts.
The following 
list comprises some of the most uncommon plants seen: — Cornns suecica, in its 
old habitat, but not in flower ; and on the adjacent moorlands — Erica letralix, 
E. cinerea, Callnna vulgaris, Vacciniuvi oxycoccos, V.
vitis-idtea.
V. myrtillus, 
Empetrmn nigrum, Myrica gale, Drosera rotundifolia, Genista anglica, Pinguicula 
vulgaris.
In Newtondale and the adjoining woodlands the following were seen: — 
Thaliclrum flavum, Aquilegia vulgaris, Arabis hirsuta, Reseda htteola, Hypericum 
pulchrum, H.
humifusum, H.
hirsutum, Ononis arvensis, Lotus major, L.
tenuis, 
Primus padus, Agrimonia eupatoria, Lythrum salicaria, Epilobium angustijolium, 
Hydrocotyle vulgaris, Coniu?n maculatum, Car duns nutans, C.
palustris, C.
erio- 
phorus, Serratula tinctoria, Achillea ptarmica, Gnaphalium sylvaticum, Senecio 
aquaticus, Inula conyza, Tragopogon pratensis, Lactuca muralis, Crepis paludosa, 
Campanula latifolia, Linaria minor, Veronica buxbaumii, Scutellaria galericulata, 
Echium vulgare, Lithospermiun officinale, Myosotis sylvatica, Lysimachia vulgaris, 
L. nummularia, Anagallis tenella, Triglochin palustre, Orchis pyramidal is, 
Gymnadenia conopsea, Listera ovata, Epipactis latifolia.
Some few species of 
Carex ; also upwards of 30 species of the native Grasses and 9 species of Ferns 
were seen during the ramble, mostly, however, kinds of wide distribution.
Of the Geological section all the officers were present, and the report is furnished 
by its senior secretary, Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., Leeds.
There was a very large 
attendance of geologists — probably the largest gathering the 'Union has witnessed.
Prof.
Miall,F.L.S..&c, Mr. J.
W. Davis, F.G.S.,&c.
Mr. J.
R. Mortimer, F.G.S., 
and other geologists, were in the party.
On the route from Pickering to Levisham, 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT PICKERING.
275 
Mr. Cole pointed out that, whereas at the former place the Lower Calcareous Grit 
was resting on the Oxford Clay of the valley bottom, yet on ascending Newtondale 
it has risen at Levisham station to the tops of the hills on either side.
On 
algihting a gradual ascent was made from Levisham to the striking moorland ter- 
race formed by the Kellaways Rock, which, viewed from the railway, shows such 
a bold and precipitous front.
On passing over this moor it was observed how much 
it resembled the appearance Of our millstone grit moors nearer home.
At one 
point a disused engine-house was noted, and on inquiry it was found that the thin 
and uncertain seams of coal to be found in the estuarine beds of the lower oolites 
had aroused at one time a spirit of speculation, doomed, however, to a disastrous 
close.
During this moorland walk continual opportunities presented of grasping 
the physical structure of the district, and the changes effected by denudation.
As 
Mr. Cole pointed out, the bold escarpment of the tabular hills just above us must 
at one time have extended northwards to the anticlinal, and is now gradually 
receding, entirely from the effects of sub-aerial denudation.
As regards the valleys 
of the district, they nearly all coincide in their direction with the dip of the strata, 
showing that the latter was the cause of their initial course, and further, as all 
those valleys running south cross the tabular hills, the courses of the streams must 
have been determined before the formation of the escarpment.
Making a further 
ascent up the slopes of the Oxford clay, the extremely isolated, yet romantically 
situated, inn at Saltersgate was reached, some 950 feet above the sea-level, after 
which, in a few minutes' walk, Mr. Cole effected somewhat of a surprise, by sud- 
denly disclosing the main object of the day, the Hole of Horcum.
The party was 
now on the summit of the tabular hills, and standing on the lower calcareous grit, 
by which they are capped, and before them lay stretched a gigantic natural amphi- 
theatre, half a mile across in some places.
Here, again, was a magnificent example 
of erosion arising from the drainage of its slopes and the small springs issuing from 
the Oxford clay.
The Hole of Horcum forms what is geologically known as an 
' inlier,' which one geologist defines as ' the isolated exposure of an underlying bed 
amidst others which are geologically above it,' or, more briefly, is an area of older 
strata surrounded by one of younger.
Thus, at the Hole of Horcum the bottom is 
composed of the Kellaways rock, the sloping sides of the Oxford clay, and the 
rugged edges at the top of the lower calcareous grit.
At this point Mr. Cole drew 
special attention to the narrow ridge which encloses the Hole of Horcum on the 
north, destined to break down before the slow but sure process of denudation.
Mr. Cole now led the way across the moor to a higher elevation called Winny Neb, 
and right in front rose the weird and conical summit of Blakey Topping, so closely 
connected with the mysterious worship and sacrifices of the Druids.
This peculiarly- 
shaped' hill is about 140 yards in length, narrow on the top, and perhaps elevated 
about 200 feet above the moor on which it stands.
Blakey Topping is, geologically 
speaking, an outlier, also the result of denudation, the summit being of lower cal- 
careous grit, and the sides of Oxford clay.
The reverse of the description of an 
inlier must be applied here, the younger strata being surrounded by the older.
From this point there was, too, a magnificent view.
A few miles away stretched 
that remarkable ridge called Langdale Rigg, which, as Mr. Cole said, although 
nearly two miles in length, is on its summit extremely narrow, in some places not 
above fifty yards wide.
On the right was the grand sweep of escarpment known 
as Cross Cliff, and far away in the distance could be seen Oliver's Mount at Scar- 
borough.
The view of these flat-topped and numerous nabs or escarpments over 
such a wide area presented a striking appearance.
Thne now necessitated a vigorous 
and health-inspiring walk over the moors back to Levisham, thence by rail to 
Pickering.
After tea the evening was too fine for the transaction of any but strictly 
necessary business, and accordingly the enthusiasm of the geologists led them to those 
fine sections in the middle oolites near Pickering Castle.
The clink of the hammers 
was soon heard, and many fine specimens speedily extracted, among which maybe 
mentioned Phasianella striata, Cerithium mitricatnm, Chemnitzia heddingtonensis, 
Belemnites abbreviates, Ammonites cordatus, A.
plicatilis, Cncullea corallina, 
THgonicB, Nerincea, Ostraa, Pecten, Gervillia, &c.
Also some fine typical speci- 
mens of the rock were obtained, showing well both the characteristic oolitic and 
pisolitic structure.
A bed of a peculiar stone, of an argillo-calcareous character, 
locally termed ' throstler,' and used in the manufacture of cement, was noted.
Sept.
tS86.
276 
NO TES—ENTOMOL OGY.
Diptera near Louth, Lincolnshire.— It may be well to record the 
following species of Diptera which have been taken near Louth.
The specimens 
have been identified, by very careful comparison with those in the British Museum 
collection, by Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
While dragging by the stream (river Lud) in Hubbard's Valley, on 16th July, 
I took Dolichopus ungiilatus Fab.
, Palloptera trimacula Meig.
, Scatophaga sterco- 
raria L., S.
merdaria Fab., Evipis lutea Meig., Psilopus platypterus Fab., Teta- 
nocera elata Fab., Sapromyza prceusta Meig., Authomyia marshami Steph., Sepsis 
pnnctam Fab., and Pegomyia quadrtim Fab.
The following species were taken in the drag-net on 20th July, from amongst 
the herbage by the sides of two occupation roads near Louth, known respectively 
as Mill Lane and Bishop's-brig Lane: — Syritta pipiens L., Musca vomitoria L.
, 
M. cczsar~L., Tipula histrio.
T. lunata L.
, Dolichopus brevipennis Meig., Tetano- 
cera ferruginea Fall., T.
cncullaria L., Heteroinyza buccata Fall., Ccenosia inter- 
media Fall.
, and Empis livid a L.
I took Phereva annulata Fab. and Asilns trigonus Meig., in June, on the coast 
sandhills at Mablethorpe, where the latter might be seen preying upon other 
Dipterous insects.
Actora czstuum Meig.
was common on the beach at Mablethorpe.
Hcematopota pluvialis L., Volncella pellncens L., V.
bombylans L.
, and V.
bom- 
bylans var.
plumata DG., were taken during a ramble through the woods near 
Louth, on 6th July, when, as is too often the case, H.
pluvialis was felt as well as 
seen.
— H.
Wallis Kew, Lee Street, Louth, 24th July, 1886.
Hyrnenoptera near Louth, Lincolnshire.— The following species 
of Hyrnenoptera from the neighbourhood of Louth have been named, by careful 
comparison with the specimens in the British Museum, by Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Abia sericea.
Taken on the flowers of Cow-parsnip (Heracleiivi sphondylinm) 
at Ken wick, near Louth, 6th July.
Dolerus gonager.
Louth streets.
Penthredo azicuparia:.
Common on herbage of hedge doanks in Mill Lane, near 
Louth.
Pimpla ocnlatoria.
— Common on leaves of laurel in the Louth Cemetery, 27th 
April.
Ichneumon rufidens.
— Under a prostrate log in Haugham Wood, near Louth, 
23rd April.
Mesoleptus testaceus.
— Maltby Wood, near Louth.
Ichneiu)iorz celerator.
— Authorpe, near Louth, 15th April.
Crabro cribrarius.
— Taken while at rest on flowers of Heracleum sphondylinm, 
at Donington-on-Bain, near Louth, 7th July.
Sphecodes gibbns.
— This insect was common on 7th July at Donington-on-Bain, 
where the railway cuts deeply into the upper green sand.
I noticed one specimen 
dragging away a juvenile grasshopper, which was much larger than itself.
Megachile circumcincta.
— Very common on the green sand at Donington-on- 
Bain ; many of them were bringing home cuttings of the leaves of Dog-rose.
One 
burrow which I opened contained five cells, each made of about thirteen pieces of 
leaf.
— H.
Wallis Kew, Louth, 24th July, 1886.
Spilodes palealis near Whitby.
— The insect which I reported in last 
month's number as Scoria dealbata turns out not to be that species, but, as Mr. G.
T. 
Porritt, F.L.S., informs me, Spilodes palealis, to which it has a very superficial 
resemblance.
It is an addition to the Yorkshire list of Lepidoptera.
— Joseph T.
Sewell, Whitby, August 14th, 1886.
NO TE—ZO OPH YTE.
Plumatella repens near Leeds.
— Whilst collecting microscopic 
material on the afternoon of the 17th of July, I found a small colony of this ex- 
quisitely beautiful Zoophyte.
I am not aware that it has hitherto been recorded 
for this district.
— Wm. Chapman, Leeds, July 27th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
277 
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Reed Warbler Nesting near Bipon.— I have this year taken eggs 
from a nest of the Reed Warbler {Acrocephalus sireperits) near this village.
This 
is worthy of note, as it is, I believe, the furthest locality northwards in which the 
nest has as yet been found.
— R.
A. Summerfield, North Stainley Vicarage, Ripon.
[We believe our correspondent is right in his surmise that this is the most 
northerly locality for this species as a summer resident, though it formerly nested 
on the mere at Scarborough, which is about 6 miles further north in latitude.
— Eds.] 
The Hawfinch Nesting at Boston Spa.
— A pair of Hawfinches 
{Coccothraustes vulgaris) have nested and bred this season in Padman's Nursery, 
Boston Spa. The young birds, along with their parents and the nest, were removed 
into an aviary.
The young ones died, probably on account of the old birds not 
being able to find their proper food in their new quarters, where the latter still are 
very lively, but looking not at all domesticated, and very anxious to get out of their 
prison-house.
— John Emmet, Boston Spa, August, 1886.
Departure of Hooded Crows from England.— On March 29th 
Hooded Crows (Corvus comix) and Rooks (C.
frugilegus) were passing along the 
Norfolk coast, and going in a southerly direction.
No doubt they were a part of 
the same band which the day before were seen at Flamborough by Mr. Bailey, 
'steering direct south from the headland' {Naturalist, p.
.150).
I believe their 
point of departure is between Yarmouth and Lowestoft, because that is the easter- 
most part of Great Britain ; and because on one occasion a number were seen from 
the Corton Floating Lightship (which lies between those towns) flying over the sea, 
having come from the land (Rep. on Migration, 1882, p.
40).
Their object must be 
to get the shortest sea passage, for their destination is north.
— J.
II.
Gurney, Jun., 
Northrepps, Norwich, July 23rd, 1 886.
Qliail Nesting in Lincolnshire.— On the 6th July last a nest con- 
taining 12 eggs was discovered by Charles Walter Chapman, on his father's farm 
at Maltby-le-Marsh, near Alford.
The eggs were addled, having been covered 
with clover in the course of mowing for five days before being found.
The parent 
birds had been noticed some time previously about the field.
The Quail {Coturnix 
comnmnis) is an occasional visitor in this district, but this is the first case of its 
nesting brought to my notice.
— Jas. Eardley Mason, Alford, 4th August, 1886.
Little Grebe in Wensleydale.
— Through some oversight the Dabchick 
{Podiceps fluviatilis) was omitted from the list of Wensleydale birds in the June 
number of the Naturalist.
It breeds in the dale at Semerwater and Locker Tarn.
E. Chapman, Carperby, Bedale, July 6th, 1886.
Bird-notes from Thorpe, near Halifax.— The Tree Sparrow 
{Passer montanus) has nested here this year.
I have never been certain as to this, 
but a young bird just fledged was shot here the other day among some common 
Sparrows.
It is a true Tree Sparrow and I have had it skinned.
There have been 
a few Wood Pigeons [Columba pahtmbus) here this summer; no doubt they have 
nested in some of the large woods.
— F.
G. S.
Rawscn, Thorpe, Halifax, August 
2nd, 1886.
Bird-notes from Whitby.
— 1886.
January 12th: Redshank {Totamts 
ca/idris), shot in Whitby Harbour.
March 5th : Several Black -headed Gulls 
{Larus ridibundtis) seen outside the piers at Whitby.
March 7th : Water Rail 
{Rallus aquaticus) taken alive near Whitby.
May 17th: Pied Flycatcher 
{Mtiscicapa atricapilla) shot in a garden near Whitby ; the tenant states that it 
had killed a number of his tees, that was the reason it was destroyed ; he also said 
that the Spotted Flycatcher is much more destructive among the Honey Bees than 
the Pied ones, especially when they have young.
This is corroborated by another 
person, who has several hives of bees.
I never before heard of either kind of Fly- 
catcher destroying bees.
It is fourteen years since I saw the Pied Flycatcher here, 
the last being 15th May, 1872, but this year two nests were found in Mr. Main's 
garden at Ruswarp, near here.
May 28th : A fine specimen of the Turtle Dove 
{Turtur communis) was shot near Whitby.
— Thomas Stephenson, Whitby, 
August nth, 1886.
Sept.
1886.
278 
NOTES ORNITHOLOGY.
Notes OH Notts.
Birds.— A very fine Bittern (Botanrus stellaris) was 
shot close to the town of Nottingham about Christmas, and another seen by the 
Duke of St. Albans' head-keeper as it rose from the side of a pond in Bestwood 
Park, in February.
I was watching the wild fowl on pond here the other day 
from the hall windows.
On an open piece of water were two Tufted Ducks and 
two Swans.
Every few minutes one of the Swans swam after one of the Ducks, 
which dived when the Swan got near.
The Swan very eagerly dashed at the place 
where it went down, and pecked at the spot ; about the third time the Swan 
swam up to the place and at once put its head and neck under water, and by the 
movements of its body was evidently trying to look if it could see where Mrs. Duck 
had gone.
I need hardly say I was very much amused.
It was a smart move on 
the part of Qygnus olor, but in the meantime, Fttligula cristata was twenty yards 
away, giving itself a satisfactory shake of the wings.
I am certain the Swan did not 
put its head down to feed, as directly it drew its head out it again rushed after the 
Duck.
— J.
Whitaker, Rainworth Lodge, Notts., March 15th, 1886.
Brent Geese (Bernicla brenta) and Great Grey Shrike 
(Lanius excubitor) in Nidderdale.- -On January 7th, while walking 
on the Nidd banks near Pateley Bridge, I was fortunate enough to get wtihin a 
few yards of two Brent Geese ; and again, on the 8th, saw them near the same 
place.
There is no other record of the occurrence of this marine species for 
Nidderdale that I am aware of.
On January 18th, when watching a large flock of Fieldfares, I started two 
Great Grey Shrikes, and followed them for a long distance, and could easily have 
shot them had I been so inclined.
This is the fourth instance of this bird which has 
come under my notice in this district.
— Wm. Storey, January 20th, 1886.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
The Marten in Northumberland.— In July 1871, the late Mr. Fife, 
of Lee Hall, while fishing in the North Tyne, Northumberland, saw a Yellow- 
breasted Marten {Mastela martes) come down to the river edge in the Countess Park, 
close opposite to where Mr. Fife was.
It stayed some time, when, observing the 
proximity of the fisherman, it went back into the wood again.
Mr. Fife was an 
excellent and practical naturalist, and there could be no doubt of its being the 
animal he said.
— E.
Anne, Burgh wallis Hall, Doncaster, August 5th, 1886.
Porpoise near Whitby.
— May 24th : A Porpoise [Phoccena C07nmunis) 
was captured off Whitby, on a baited hook set for fish.
This is the first occur- 
rence of such an event that has come to my knowledge.
— Thomas Stephenson, 
Whitby, August nth, 1886.
NO TES— FISHES.
Doree at Plamborough.
— On the 3rd of March, Mr. Stephenson 
Warcup picked up on the beach, where it had been cast up by the recent heavy 
swells, a fine and perfect specimen of the John Doree {Zeus faber L.).— M.
Bailey, 
Flamborough, March 3rd, 1886.
. Whitby Fish-notes.
— August 6th, 1886: A Codfish {Gadus morrhua), 
purchased and sent (among others) to the north by Egton, was found, when 
opened here, to contain botli smear and roe.
This is a remarkable occurrence, as 
the male fish contains the smear or milt, and the female the roe.
It was examined 
by several persons, but when I heard of it, it had been packed up, and I was too 
late to see it.
— Thomas Stephenson, August nth, 1886.
A splendid Salmon Trout {Salmo truita) was purchased here by Thos.
Smailes, 
length 29% inches, girth 22% inches, weight 15% lbs.; the finest fish I ever saw 
for the size of it.
It was purchased yesterday.— Thomas Stephenson, August 
nth, 1886.
Naturali>t ?
NEW BRITISH LICHENS.
279 
JOSEPH A.
MARTINDALE, 
I have recently gathered the following lichens, new, so far as I know, 
to the British Flora : — 
1. Parmelia isidiotyla Nyl. in Flora, 1875, P- 8 - On walls near 
Cliburn, Westmoreland, and near Penrith, Cumberland.
2. Paimularia lepidiota (Smrft.) Nyl, Scand., p.
290.
Lamy., 
Lich.
de Cauterets, p.
34.
On Andrceas and other mosses, 
Red Screes, Westmoreland.
Nylander has described this 
plant at page 124 of his Lich.
Scand., under the name of 
P annaria praztermissa.
NOTE— MICRO-ZOOLOGY AND BOTANY.
Microscopic Life near Askern.
— The report of micro, work at the 
Askern meeting on the 20th May, must of necessity be somewhat meagre, owing to 
the prevalent flooding of the water-courses and land at the time.
The following 
were, however, noted: — Entomostraca: Cy clops quadricoriiis,Canthocamptusminu- 
tus, Diaptomus castor.
RhizopodS: Arcella vulgaris, A.
aculeata, Difflugia sp.
INFUSORIA: Duisbryon sertularia, Paramecium sp.
, Trachelitis lamella, Chceto- 
notus sp.
, Euglena pyrum, E.
viridis, Chilodon cuculluhis.
MlCRO-FUNGI : 
Puccinia anemones (Campsall), ALcidium ficarice (abundant in Burghwallis Wood), 
and Podosph'cera clandestine (on hawthorn in road from Campsall to Burghwallis).
Alg/E : The Diatoms were plentiful, but of common species, Pinnularia, Navicula, 
and Diatoma, the chief feature being the large floating masses of Diatotna elon- 
gateim in the peaty ditches at Campsall.
Of DesmidE/E few were seen, viz.: 
Cosmarium crenatum, C.
pyramidatum, ClOsterium lunula, CI.
acerosum, and a 
new Yorkshire form, which I have elsewhere described as CI.
eboracense.
Among 
the unicellular Algae a peculiar form was kindly pointed out to me by Major Bacon 
Frank, in the pools at Campsall.
Of minute size (the little cells only measuring 
•000063 in.
to '00015 m< ) ^ covered, in irregular patches of pink hue, several square 
yards at the shallow end of the pool.
It seemed to grow alike upon the debris 
leaves or dead sticks.
On examination I find it is the Pleurococcus roseo-persicinus 
' Peach-bloom Pleurococcus' (Kiitz.) Rabenhorst ; a rather interesting discovery, 
as I have never before seen it in the county.
Other unicells were Pandorina 
morum, Goninm pecto rale (both universal), and Chlorospha;ra oliveri.
— W.
Barweli.
Turner, Leeds, July 28th, 1886.
Spurn Head.
— The learned author of 'The Geology of Holderness,' 
published last year among the Memoirs of the Geological Survey, states at p.
1 01 
of his very able and interesting work that ' previous to the 17th century an allusion 
in Camden's Britannia (published in 1586) is the Only clue we have to the ancient 
form of Spurn Head .
. .' &c, and on p.
102 he asserts that ' the first survey 
of Spurn Head was that made by Capt.
Greenville Collins, Hydrographer to the 
King, in 1684.' Mr. Clement Reid has evidently not seen the map of Yorkshire 
issued in 1577 by Christopher Saxton, the first English chorographer, and has not 
referred to the edition of the ' Britannia' of 1607, in which the map is reproduced.
Saxton's epitaph, given by Tanner, informs us that the maps of England were 
made from an actual survey which took up nine years.
The map of Yorkshire 
shows the form of Spurn Head very distinctly.
A MS.
chart of the Humber in 
Lord Burleigh's collection at the British Museum is also very instructive, though 
perhaps not very accurate.
— Lewis L.
Kropf, 37, Margaret Street, Hull, June 
12th, 1886.
Sept.
1886.
280 
BOOK NOTICES.
The Book of Duck Decoys : Their Construction, Manage- 
ment, and History.— By Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey, Bart.
London : 
John Van Voorst.
1886.
Singular to relate, this is the first work that has ever essayed to treat on a subject 
which should command wide sympathies, since it has claims upon the naturalist, 
the sportsman, and the archaeologist.
Not only, however, has a complete treatise 
on decoys and decoying hitherto been a desideratum, but it is much to be regretted 
that little or nothing has been placed on record concerning them, mainly owing 
to the jealous reserve of the craftsman in the days of yore, and thus we are 
deprived of much information regarding the past history of decoys that would 
now have been of extreme interest to us.
So much, indeed, is buried in oblivion that even the situation of the first British 
decoy is quite unrecorded, and, in fact, all we know about it is that ' Sir W.
Wode- 
house (who lived in the reign of James the First, 1603-25) made among us the first 
device for catching ducks, known by the foreign name of a koye.
' Long, however, 
before the early decades of the 17th century, there existed in our fenlands devices, 
bearing the name of decoys, into which in the summer and early autumn young 
ducks, or ducks which had moulted their flight feathers, were anything but decoyed, 
but were driven and hustled into tunnels covered with nets, erected on the margin 
of a suitable mere, by a cordon of advancing boats.
In this way enormous num- 
bers of fowl were captured annually, and there are records of as many as 4,000 
being taken at a single drive.
The first true decoy, of which there are any adequate' particulars, was 
made for King Charles II, in St. James's Park, by one ' Sydrach liilcus,' a 
Dutchman imported from Holland, where such engines were worked to advan- 
tage, for the purpose, and was completed in 1665.
After this, decoys became 
numerous in the fen-country, and in other suitable districts, and were, no 
doubt, a source of considerable profit to their owners, and continued so to be 
well into the 19th century, when the rapid advance of agriculture, the con- 
struction of railways, and perhaps, too, the perfecting of the fowling-piece, 
each and all militated against them, and gradually affecting their success only 
those survived which were either very favourably situated, and hence profitable, 
or those owned by persons who maintained them from a love of the sport they 
afforded.
But decoying is not a dead art in this country yet, and it is encouraging 
to know that some few decoys have been constructed in recent years, among 
others by our author and Lord Lilford, and it is much to be hoped that an impetus 
in their favour may result from the advantages and enjoyments to be derived 
from them, which are so pleasantly and so ably set forth in the book under 
consideration.
After much introductory matter of an historic and singularly interesting 
nature, our author proceeds to give a complete description of the art of the 
decoyman, of the various methods used by him, his /nodus operand?, and of 
the structure of decoys ; both sections of the subject being illustrated by a 
series of admirably coloured plates — reproductions in lithography of drawings by 
the author.
Then follows the most important portion of the subject from our own point of 
view — namely, the ' History of Decoys Past and Present ' — and to this the major 
portion of the book is devoted.
This section treats of the decoys formerly existing 
and those at present in use in the various counties of England, Wales, and 
Ireland — for no decoys exist or have ever been worked in Scotland — giving par- 
ticulars as to their structural peculiarities, date of formation, the success attending 
their operations, and numerous other items of interest ; while many of them are 
delineated upon coloured plans, specially prepared for the work.
Want of space 
forbids our giving extracts relating to the decoys, past and present, in the North of 
England, with which several numbers of the Naturalist might be filled.
They are 
no less than 61 in number, and of these 8 alone are still worked.
They are dis- 
tributed as follows: — 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES.
28l 
Hah 
Derbyshire.
Hard wick Hall ...
...
In use.
Lancashire.
...
In use.
Orford Hall .
Lincolnshire.
Not 
Ashby 
Bourne ...
...
Deeping Fen (5) .
...
Cowbit 
Fleet 
Dowsby 
Aslackby 
Mill yard Farm 
Sempringham Fen (3) 
South Kyme ...
North Kyme...
Timber land ...
Nocton Hall 
In use.
Friskney (5) ...
Not in use.
Hagnaby 
,, Wainfleet St. Mary's (2) 
Wrangle (3) 
Leake...
,, Skellingthorpe 
Burton Hall 
,, South Carlton 
,, South Kelsey 
Farlsthorpe ...
,, Broughton 
,, Keadby ...
...
,, Great Cotes ...
Not in use.
Haughton 
Park Hall 
Hornby Castle 
Thirkleby Park 
Coatham 
Escrick (2) ...
Osgodby 
Meaux 
Watton 
Nottingham.
In use.
Ossington 
Woolaton 
Westmoreland.
Lowther Castle ...
...
Not in use.
Yorkshire.
...
In use.
Scorborough ...
,, Holme 
...
Not in use.
Sunk Island ...
,, Thorne 
Goole 
Birdsall 
In use.
Not in use.
Not 
It is impossible to speak too highly of this book.
Indeed, though long neg- 
lected, the Decoy Book has lost nothing from delay in recent years, when it has 
secured for its author the gentleman who of all others possesses pre-eminently the 
necessary qualifications for its successful compilation — namely, of being an excellent 
field-naturalist and a thorough sportsman ; and the author of ' The Fowler in 
Ireland,' with his unrivalled knowledge of the duck tribe, has accomplished this 
labour of love in a manner worthy in every respect of his great reputation, and 
has produced a book at once invaluable and interesting.
We gladly make known the fact that Sir Ralph desires information on the un- 
worked and almost forgotten decoys which may have escaped his notice.
We are 
glad to be able to state that we ourselves are at present engaged in investigating the 
history of such an one in Yorkshire, which should be particularly interesting, since 
it was constructed in the year 1655.
We shortly hope to present to the readers of 
the Naturalist all the information obtainable concerning it.
— W.E.C.
Lord Lilford's Coloured Figures of the Birds of the British 
Islands.
We have received Part II of this important work, containing figures of the 
Black-throated Thrush, Desert Wheatear, Whinchat, Stonechat, Lesser White- 
throat, Garden Warbler, Great Reed Warbler, Savi's Warbler, Sedge Warbler, 
Hobby (immature plumage), Arctic Bluethroat, and White-spotted Bluethroat.
We had much pleasure in recommending this work to our readers in the January 
number of the Naturalist, and then expressed a very high opinion of its excellence.
A critical examination and comparison of the plates enables us to state that they 
are decidedly amongst the best that have ever been produced.
Sept.
1886.
282 
BOOK NOTICES.
Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and Autumn 
Of 1885.
By Mr. J.
A. Harvie-Brown, Mr. J.
Cordeaux, Mr. R.
M. 
Barrington, Mr. A.
G. More, and Mr. W.
Eagle Clarke.
Seventh Report, 
(Vol. II., No. 2).
Edinburgh : Printed by M'Farlane & Erskine, .
. 1886.
8vo, 174 pages and map.
The present report includes the same serried mass as its predecessors of detailed 
facts which it is no light task to arrange, and we heartily congratulate the 
reporters on their work.
The chief general results presented — so far as daylight 
can yet be seen — are the extreme regularity and precision of the migratory move- 
ments of each species, and the England East Coast reporter remarks that it would 
not be difficult to tabulate in advance with almost certainty the normal movements.
The Scottish reporter describes the movements of 1885 as being compressed, and 
resembling a closed fan, and objects to the term 1 accidental ' as applied to occur- 
rences of birds.
The English West Coast reporter draws attention to the necessity 
of observing what connection there is between meteorological conditions prevailing 
at the time and the movements of migratory birds, and suggests that a competent 
meteorologist should take part in the work of the Committee.
The Irish reporters 
lay stress on the importance of authenticating records by the preservation and 
identification of the wings of the birds killed.
It is gratifying here to note the 
generosity of the Commissioners of Irish Lights, in presenting copies of Morris's 
Birds to several of the Lighthouses.
The Reports are not.
of course, without 
their imperfections, and it appears to us that a general supervision and a common 
plan of writing would be of infinite value.
To illustrate this, one finds 'general 
remarks ' on the first page, and naturally supposes them to apply to the wdiole of 
the book.
But nothing of the kind ; they simply refer to the Scottish observations.
There are digressions, too, in some of the reports, which add nothing to their 
value, and are indeed quite irrelevant.
What need to praise observers for the ex- 
cellence of their observations, and then — in print — to ask them not to write across the 
red lines of the schedules?
Would not a post-card serve to the latter end ?
Interest 
is added to the whole volume by the diary of Heligoland observations which is 
given in the middle — and, altogether, British science is to be congratulated on so 
admirable a compendium of hard facts.
— W.D.R.
The Code of Nomenclature and Check -List of North 
American Birds.
— Adopted by the American Ornithologists' Union 
from the report of the Committee of the Union on Classification and Nomen- 
clature.
New York, 1886.
8vo, pp.
viii + 392.
If further proof were required to show that the modern American zoologists 
merit a foremost position among men of science, the Code of Nomenclature, which 
forms the first and perhaps the most important portion of the handsomely-printed 
book now before us, would amply suffice.
In it are displayed with equal force the 
rigid caution and thorough examination of evidence which are involved in the due 
consideration of such a subject, and the boldness of conception without rashness which 
leads to the adoption of the views of which that examination has demonstrated the 
soundness.
How long have our British naturalists stood shivering on the brink of 
certain reforms in their practice, which they cannot but see are inevitable?
The 
influence on modern zoological views of the evolutionary thought of the last 
quarter- century necessitates the adoption in some form or other of the American 
conception of trinomial nomenclature, and, in certain cases, of a quadrinomial or 
even a polynomial system, inasmuch as the laws of nomenclature must in the long- 
run be made subservient to the actual facts of which they are to be the method of 
expression.
On this, the radical side of the nomenclatural question, we hold that 
the American zoologists are on the right track, while reserving our judgment as to 
whether they have as yet proceeded as far on that track as the ultimate facts may 
require them to advance.
In respect of the conservative side of the question, we unreservedly express our 
conviction that their position is equally sound, in their stern, unbending, and rigid 
adherence to the Law of Priority in all its strictness, without- any exceptions, quali- 
fications, or grammatical or other emendations whatever.
A name is a name, and 
nothing else, and it must be used and spelt as used and spelt by the author who 
Naturalist, 
BOOK NOTICES : NOTES AND NEWS.
first gave it.
European authors, we believe, are gradually approaching to this view, 
and the sooner it is adopted by all of them the better chance have we of arriving 
at that ' fixity of nomenclature ' which is the Will-of-the-wisp zoologists are ever in 
pursuit of and never attaining.
We quite see that its adoption by British authors 
will bring tribulation for a space to British collectors and amateurs, till they can 
adapt themselves to the new environment ; but we are afraid that hitherto far too 
much regard has been paid to their convenience, to the hindrance of true scientific 
research.
One phase of this question is that in future certain species will have to 
bear duplicated names.
For instance, when the list of British mollusca is finally 
rectified, it will include such names as Planorbis planorbis, Carychium carychium, 
Vertigo vertigo, etc.
In these instances we have hitherto been misled by a pro- 
vision of the British Association code of nomenclature which is the bane of 
that code, and quite out of harmony with the cardinal principle of the Law of 
Priority.
The laws of nomenclature are discussed in this work at great length, and 
with abundant citation of evidence, fact, and argument ; and the discussion is 
followed by a series of recommendations to the framers of new names which, 
if acted upon by them, would add immensely to the convenience of future 
zoologists.
The second part of the book is occupied by a Check- List of North American 
birds, which offers various improvements worthy of imitation elsewhere, but the 
discussion of the list itself hardly falls within the scope of this journal.
We must 
conclude, therefore, by expressing our wish that the code of nomenclature could 
be separately reprinted and circulated broadcast among British zoologists.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union fungus foray will take place on Thursday, 
September 30th.
On the following day there will be an exhibition of the specimens 
in the Leeds Museum, kindly lent for the purpose ; and in the evening the usual 
dinner.
Several distinguished mycologists have promised to be present, and no 
effort is being spared on the part of the officials to make it a success.
Matter of interest to Yorkshire geologists is afforded by the fact that one of the 
most distinguished of their number, Mr. Wilfrid H.
Hudlestone, M.A., F.R.S., 
was at the last anniversary meeting of the Geological Society of London elected 
one of its honorary secretaries, and that he has also become an associate-editor 
of the Geological Magazine.
>ocX 
The Yorkshire Philosophical Society has sustained the loss of a munificent sup- 
porter by the decease, on the 15th August, at the ripe age of 78, of Mr. W.
H. 
Rudston-Read, J.
P., F.L.S., one of the landed gentry of the county.
He filled 
the offices of vice-president and ornithological curator to the Society, and long ago 
presented what is known as the ' Rudston-Read Collection of British Birds.' 
>co* 
We note that a ' Manual of North American Birds,' by the eminent ornitholo- 
gist, Prof.
Robert Ridgway, Curator, Department of Birds, Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington D.C.
, is in the press.
The author has had unrivalled advantages, 
arising from his own field experience, as well as his connection with the National 
Museum, and the access granted him to various other public and private collections 
of birds.
The work is to contain some 425 illustrations, suitably executed, and 
will conform to the geographical limits, classification, numeration, and nomencla- 
ture adopted by the American Ornithological Union, and is another proof of the 
extraordinary activity of the North American ornithologists in the cause of their 
science.
Sept.
1886.
.284 
NOTE — PALAEONTOLOGY.
At the recent annual meeting of- the Leeds Geological Association, the report 
showed that another year of usefulness and prosperity had been passed through.
The interest taken by the members in the work of the association had been fully 
maintained.
The membership showed an unprecedented increase, the numbers 
on the roll being fifty per cent, more than they were a year ago.
The meetings 
for the reading of papers, the exhibitions of specimens, and the excursions had 
all been most practical in their character, the most notable feature in the latter 
being the local excursions in the Lower Coal Measures, conducted so efficiently by 
Mr. Holgate, F.
G. S.
, who, from his special knowledge, imparted much informa- 
tion to those attending.
The past year had also been a memorable one by the 
issue of the first part of the 'Transactions,' the work having received the approval 
of the most distinguished geologists in the country.
Interchanges of proceedings 
are now made with kindred learned societies, thus enabling the members to 
be acquainted with geological progress and research in other districts.
It was 
also felt that the association had now attained such a standing, when, to its further 
advancement, a class of honorary members might be instituted, consisting of 
eminent geologists and individuals who have rendered the association signal ser- 
vices.
A resolution to this effect was carried, and Professors Green and Miall, of 
Leeds, the Rev. E.
M. Cole, of Wetwang, and Mr. Wm.
Horne, of Leyburn, were 
duly elected honorary members.
The election of the Executive for the coming 
year resulted as follows: — President, Mr. C.
D. Hardcastle ; Vice-presidents, 
Messrs.
J. E.
Bedford, T.
W. Bell, W.
Cheetham, and B.
Holgate, F.G.S.; 
Treasurer, Mr. J.
H. Bromley; Librarian, Mr. C Brownridge, F.G.S.
; Council, 
Professor Green, F.R.S., Dr. Monckman, Messrs.
C. Brownridge, F.G.S., and 
W. II.
Gill, and Aid. John Hill, of Morley ; Hon. Secretary, S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., 
52.
Wellclose Terrace, Leeds (re-elected third time).
NO TE — PA LJE ONTOL O G Y.
The Fossil Tree at Clayton.
— In the account last month of this re- 
markable fossil, a material error arose in the dimensions given, by the unfortunate 
omission of two ciphers in the manuscript.
The error, however, was too obvious 
not to escape immediate notice.
The area given of the ramifications of the stig- 
marian roots was said to be 'between 80 feet and 90 feet'; of course, it should 
have been 'from 800 feet to 900 feet.' The measurement across this area from 
N. to S.
is 29 ft.
6 in., and from E.
to W.
28 ft., giving a superficial area exposed 
of 826 ft.
Since last issue the following careful measurements have been obtained, 
which will give some idea of this colossal tree : — 
Height of stump ...
...
...
...
...
...
3 ft.
9 in.
Diameter of stump (longest axis) .'.
...
...
4 ft.
6 in.
,, ,, (at right angles to longest axis) ...
3 ft.
10 in.
Root.
Diameter 
Distance from 
Distance from point 
of bifurcation to 
Greatest 
close 
stump to point 
present termination of root.
Length of 
No.
to stump.
of bifurcation.
Right Fork.
Left Fork.
Root.
I ...
21 in.
...
4 ft.
.. 9 ft.
6 in.
...
13 ft.
17 ft.
2 ...
17,1 „ 
...
4,, 
.. 8„ 
6 ,, 6 in.
12 ,, 
3 ••• 
16 „ 
...
5 „ 
- • 7 „ 
4,, 
12 ,, 
4 ...
16 
...
4 ,, 
. 2 ,, 
4 ,, 6 in.
...
8 ,, 6 in.
5 ••• 
17!
» 
7,, 
.. 1 ,, 6 in.
3 •>•> 
10 „ 
6 ...
18 „ 
...
5 ,, 6 in.
. 
3 55 
4 ,, 6 in.
10 ,, 
7 — 
17 „ 
...
7 „ 6 „ .
• 3 
2 ,, 
10 6 in.
8 ...
17 „ 
...
7 „ 
. 9 ,, 6 in.
7 „ 
16 „ 6 „ 
The proprietors of the quarry have most carefully and admirably built the two 
damaged roots into position, so that the unique spectacle is now presented of a 
huge Sigillarian stump sending out eight forked Stigmarian roots.
They will let it 
remain in its present position a few weeks longer, although it stops work in that 
part of the quarry, and certainly all geologists, at least in the North of England, 
should see this giant of the Carboniferous flora.
— S.
A. Adamson, Leeds, August 
20th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
LEPIDOPTEBOUS FAUNA OF LANCASHIRE 
AND CHESHIRE.
JOHN W.
ELLIS, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.E., F.E.S., 
Liverpool \ Honorary Secretary, Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society.
NOCTURE.
Fam. BOMBYCOIDsE.
DILOBA, Boisd: 
Biloba caeruleocephala, L.
Common, and generally distributed 
throughout both counties.
DEMAS, Steph.
Demas coryli, L.
Not common, the localities recorded being 
Dolphinholme, near Lancaster (J.B.H.); Grange, local (E.S.); 
Croxteth Park, near Liverpool (C.S.G.).
Fam. A CRONYCTID/E.
CRANIOPHORA, Snell.
Craniophora ligustri, L.
Very scarce.
Lane.
— Speke, Hale, and Rainhill, at sugar (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Taken at Old Marsh Lane, Ince, by Mr. Newstead 
(A.O.W.).
ACRONYCTA, Ochs.
Acronycta leporina, L.
Generally distributed.
Lane— Bolton (W.J.) ; Chat Moss (J.C, W.J.); Hale and 
Huyton (S.J.C); Ormskirk (W.G.) ; Preston (J.B.H.) ; Rixton 
and Risley Mosses (J.C) ; Simonswood Moss (F.N. P., W.J., 
J.W.E.); Birch-wood, near Woolton (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Bidston (J.F.B., C.S.G.) ; Carrington Moss (J.C); 
Delamere Forest (F.N.P.) ; Dunham Park (J.C).
Acronycta alni, L.
Of occasional occurrence, principally in the 
larval state, recorded localities being : — 
Lane.
— Grange (J.B.H.) ; two larvae near his own house at 
Huyton, in August 1871 (S.J.C, Ent, v, 417) ; near Manchester 
in 1868 (J.
Leigh, Ent. Mo.
Mag., ii, 105); an imago at sugar, 
in June 1850, at Speke Hall (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Delamere Forest, taken by Mr. Leather in 1877 
(A.O.W.); larvae at Deysbrook, in August i860 (C.S.G.) ; Dun- 
ham Park, in 1842 (J.B.H.), and in July 1872 by J.
Chappell 
Sept.
1886.
286 J.
W. ELLIS I LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
(Ent. Mo.
Mag., ix, 195), and again in 1879 (It), xvi, 185); 
Hale Moss, near Altrincham, in August 1863 (E.
M. Geldart, 
Zool., p.
8,733); Marple (J.C.).
Acronycta tridens (W.V.).
Recorded from Wallasey and Ness, by 
J. F.
Brockholes, and from Chester and East Cheshire (i.e., the 
neighbourhood of Warrington), by Alfred O.
Walker.
Acronycta psi, L.
Common, and generally distributed.
Acronycta menyanthidis, View.
Common in the moss and moor- 
land districts.
Lane.
— All the high moors in N.E. Lancashire (J.B.H.); 
Bolton (W.J.); Chat Moss (W.J., J.C.)   Risley Moss (J.C.)'; 
Longridge, Withnell, and Staleybridge (J.C.M.) ; Pilling Moss 
(J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Carrington Moss and Lindow Common (J.C); Dela- 
mere Forest (F.N. P.).
The specific name of this species is so commonly regarded as 
a misnomer, that it is worth recording that on a single occasion 
Mr. Hodgkinson found the larva feeding on the bog-bean, 
{Mmyanthes trifoliatd) on Pilling Moss.
Acronycta rumicis, L.
Common and generally distributed, though 
apparently not now so plentiful as in former years.
Acronycta megacephala, W.V. Common and generally distributed 
throughout Cheshire and South Lancashire, but becoming scarcer 
in the northern parts of the latter county.
Acronycta aceris, L.
Recorded from Ashton-on-Mersey, where it 
is not common, by Mr. Chappell, and from Delamere Forest by 
Mr. A.
O. Walker.
BRYOPHILA, Tr.
Bryophila perla, W.V. Common on lichen-covered walls through- 
out both counties.
Bryophila algae, Fab. In the collection of the late Joseph Side- 
bottom are two specimens of this species captured at Disley, 
Cheshire, and obtained by him from Mr. R.
S. Edleston's 
collection.
Fam. ORTHOSIDsE.
NONAGRIA, Hiibn.
JJonagria arundinis, Fab.
( = typhae, Esp.).
Tolerably common 
wherever the reed-mace (Typha latifolid) grows.
CGENOBIA, Steph.
Coenobia rufa, Haw.
( = despecta, Tr.).
Ledsham- and Little Neston, 
recorded by Mr. A.
O. Walker on the authority of Mr. Brockholes.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTILE.
287 
TAPINOSTOLA, Led.
Tapinostola fulva, Hiibn.
Common in swampy places throughout 
both counties.
CALAMIA, Led.
€alamia lutosa, Hiibn.
Somewhat local, though abundant where it 
does occur.
Lane.
— Crosby (G.
A. Harker) ; Lytham (J.B.H.); Man- 
chester district, common (J.C.).
Ches.— Bidston Marsh, plentiful (C.S.G.) ; Wallasey (S.J.C., 
F.N. P.) ; throughout Wirral (J.F.B.).
LEUCANIA, Ochs.
Leucania pallens, L.
Abundant and generally distributed.
Leucania impura, Hiibn.
Abundant and generally distributed.
Leucania straminea, Fr. Taken by Mr. C.
S. Gregson, and by Mr.
T. Townley, from flowers growing in ditches between Leasowe 
lighthouse and Meols.
Leucania obsoleta, Hiibn.
Taken by Mr. Gregson and Mr. Townley 
— abundantly at one period, on Bidston Marsh.
Leucania comma, L.
Common towards the coast-line of both 
counties, becoming scarcer inland.
Leucania conigera, W.V. Local, and apparently not common 
where it does occur.
I have once met with it on ragwort 
flowers at Crosby ; Mr. Johnson records it from Crosby ; 
Preston, occasionally - (J.B.H.).
These are all the recorded 
localities in Lancashire.
Ches.— New Brighton and Dacre Park, near Birkenhead 
(C.S.G.) and Rock Ferry (J.F.B.).
Leucania littoralis, Curt.
Confined to the coast sandhills from 
Lytham to Wallasey, where the larvae are sometimes abundant, 
though the perfect insect is not often met with.
Leucania lithargyrea, Esp. Common, and generally distributed.
Leucania turca, L.
Rare at sugar in Dunham Park (J.C.).
(Con- 
firmed by J.B.H.) 
STILBIA, Steph.
Stilbia anomala, Haw. Local, the only places of its occurrence of 
which I have record being : — 
Dutton, near Ribchester (J.B.H., Ent., xiii, 105) ; Silverdale 
and Longridge (J.B.H. in litt.) ; Staleybrushes, one specimen 
taken by Thomas Hague (J.C.).
Sept.
1 88b, 
288 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE N0CTU7E.
CARADRINA, Tr.
Caradriaa exigua, Hiibn.
Mr. George A.
Harker captured a 
specimen of this rare species at light at Crosby, on September 
16th, 1884.
Mr. Hodgkinson mentions having once seen a 
specimen at Preston.
Caradrina morpheus, Hufn.
Tolerably common, and generally 
distributed.
Lane.
— Crosby (G.
A. Harker) ; Preston (J.B.H.) ; Prestwich 
(J.C.M.); Withington and Pendleton, at flowers of Epilobium, 
not uncommon (J.C.).
Ches.— Denhall and Chester (A.O.W.) ; Wallasey (J.C.M., 
J.W.E.).
Caradrina cubicularis, W.V. Abundant everywhere.
Caradrina alsines, Brahm.
Not common.
Preston district, not 
common (J.B.H.
). Wallasey and Bromborough, scarce (A.O. W.).
Mr. Gregson refers to its occurrence in this district, together with 
C. blanda, with which it had been confused.
Caradrina blanda, Tr.
( = taraxaci, Hiibn.).
Not common.
Preston 
(J.B.H.); Pendleton and Withington, at sugar, uncommon (J.C.) \ 
Wallasey (C.S.G., J.C.M., W.J.) ; Wirral (J.F.B.).
LAMPETIA, Boie.
Lampetia (Miana) arcuosa, Haw. Common, and generally distributed.
Lane.' — Altcarand Halewood, near Liverpool (C.S.G) ; Bolton 
(W.J.) ; Pendleton, common, but local (J.C.) ; Preston district, 
abundant at light (J.B.H.).
Ches.— Bowdon * (J.C.) ; Bidston Marsh (C.S.G., F.N.P., 
J.F.B.); Puddington (J.F.B.).
GRAMMESIA, Steph.
Grammesia trilinea, W.V. Somewhat local.
Lane.
— Crosby (G.
A. Harker) ; Huyton (^S.J.C) ; Preston, 
not rare (J.B.H.) ; Prestwich and Silverdale (J.C.M.).
Ches.
— Chester district (A.O.W.); Wallasey, common at sugar 
(F.N.P., W.J., J.W.E.).
The variety bilinea, Tr., occurs occasionally along with the 
type form.
CLEOCERIS, Boisd.
Cleoceris (Epunda) viminalis, Fabr.
Recorded only from Toppings 
Turton, near Bolton, where it was captured at heath flowers 
(J.
W. Baldwin, Young Naturalist, I, 387), and by Mr. C.
S. 
Gregson, from Hale and Knowsley.
' SEP 1886 Naturalist, 
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.
A. 
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching: boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae ; 
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa-digging ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light ; grouting ; smoking ; killing ; relaxing ; setting ; grease ; mites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera; Hymenoptera ; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AMD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P. M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
Now ready y &vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
In Preparation.
A Monograph of the Land and Fresh -Water Mollusca 
of the British Fauna.
The work is intended to be full, detailed, and exhaustive, and adequately 
illustrative of Variation, Development, and Geographical Distribution.
Co-operation is invited from all interested, and any information or specimens 
(the common species of every district are particularly desired) will be welcomed 
and carefully acknowledged.
The Authors may be addressed — c/o Mr. John W.
Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Hunslet New Road, Leeds.
Information is at present specially required on the Slugs {Testacella, Limax, and 
Arion), of which living specimens from every district are desired.
THE NATUEALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire (Noctuee)— J.
W. Ellis, 
F.E.S..&C.
. .
Notes on Birds of Cumberland, "Westmoreland, and Furness.— John Watson.
Bibliography for 1885.
~ 
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Notes.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Nat?cralist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have givei a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann. Mag.
Nat. Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — A.thenceum.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of— 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLI, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, pose free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
Now ready, price 2/- (postage 2y 2 d.J.
Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and 
Autumn of 1885.
By J.
A. HARVIE-BROWN, J.
CORDEAUX, R.
M. BARRINGTON, 
A. G.
MORE, and W.
EAGLE CLARKE ; 
Members of the British Association Migration Committee.
To be had of W.
Eagle Clarke, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds; 
or any Member of the Committee.
No. 135.
OCTOBER, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
^*'lll Ml DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
« jS^^^Ih \ AND 
WiM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS UNION.
Qontewte : 
- PAGE 
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire— John IV.
Ellis, L.R.C.P., c^c.
289 — 306 
Mollusca of Wressle and Neighbourhood — George Roberts, M.C.S 311 — 314 
The Lichens of Westmoreland — Joseph A.
Martindale (Parti) ..
.. ..
.317 — 320 
A Yorkshire specimen of Sturnus unicolor and other Uncommon Birds in a York 
Collection — Javies Backhouse, Junr., M.B.O.U ..
307,308 
Waterfall on Kinderscout, Derbyshire— H '.
Franklin Parsons, M.
D., F.G.S 310 
Notes— Ornithology : — ..
308 
Flamborough Bird-notes — Matthew Bailey ; Duck Decoys — H.
Franklin Parsons, 
M.D., F.G.S.
Notes— Fishes :— 
Snake Pipe-fish on the Lincolnshire coast — W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.
; Fishes observed 
near Goole — Thomas Bunker ; Grey Mullet near Scarborough — John H.
Phillips.
Note — Mollusca: — 
The Conchological stigma removed from Yorkshire — Baker Hudson, M.C.S.
Note- Lepidoptera:— ..
Lepidoptera near York — Thomas Wilson.
Note— Hemiptera : — 
Triecphora vulnerata near Louth, Lincolnshire- —H.
Wallis Kezu, F.E.S.
Note — Palaeontology: — ..
,. ..
Discovery of Carboniferous Vegetation at Bradford — S.
A. Adamsoti, F.G.S.
Book Notices :— ..
(Roberts' Naturalists' Diary; Swan Sonnenschein & Co.'s Young Collector Series; 
Bagnall's Hand-book of Mosses, etc.) 
Notes and News 
3°9 
314 
306 
306 
309 
315 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
: 
All Communications should be Addressed: — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
ICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPT.^ K...
„».
The NATURALIST.
>ccx 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
—15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
\'-'\ 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Notes on the Structure and Evolution of the Florideae, by Geo. Massee, F.R.M.S., 
8vo reprint, 13 pages and 2 plates, 1886.
[The Author.
Grevillea, a quarterly record of Cryptogamic Botany, No. 73, September 1886.
[Dr. Cooke, Editor.
On Kew Gardens and some of the Botanical Statistics of the British Possessions — 
By' J.
G. Baker, F.R.S., 8vo reprint, 28 pages.
[The Author.
Statuts de la Societe Royale Malacologique de Belgique, deuxieme edition, 1886, 
16 pp.
[La Societe.
Proces-verbaux de Seances de la Societe Royal Malacologique de Belgique, 1886, 
Janvier a Juillet, pp.
96.
[La Societe.
Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences — Proceedings, January — March, 1886.
[The Academy.
Botanical Exchange Club of the British Isles — Report for 1885.
[The Club.
Mineralogical Magazine, July 1886.
[The Mineral ogical Society.
British Association — Address by Sir J.
William Dawson, President, 8vo, 34 pp.
[Mr. S.
A. Adamson.
Bristol Naturalists' Society — Annual Report, etc., April 1886.
[The Society.
Bristol Naturalists' Society— Proceedings, Vol. V, part i, 1885-6.
[The Society.
Mineralogical Society — List of Members, February 1886.
[The Society.
Natural History Journal, September 15th, 1886.
[Mr. J.
Edward Clark, Editor.
Midland Naturalist for September 1886.
[The Editors.
The Young Naturalist for September 1886.
[J.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Naturalist's World for September 1886.
[P.
Lund, Editor.
Science Gossip for September 1886.
[Chatto and Windus, Publishers.
Scottish Naturalist for Jan., April, and July 1886.
[Prof.
J. W.
H. Trail, Editor.
Revue Bryologique, 13c Annee, No. 5, 1886.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
New York Microscopical Society — Journal for June 1886.
[The Society.
EXCHANGES.
Notices of Exchaiige inserted free of charge to Stibscribers.
Wanted.
— Batches of Helices, Nemoralis, and Hortensis, alive or dead, 
from all parts of England ; also any information respecting variation in banding ; 
forms rare or common, etc.
Exchange given in U.
Margaritifer.
— Baker Hudson, 
M.C. S., 5, Westbourne Grove, Coatham, Redcar, Yorkshire.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera., Ova, Larvse, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
289 
ANCHOCELIS, Guen.
Anchocelis lunosa, Haw. Recorded from Bidston lighthouse by 
C. S.
Gregson ; from Wallasey by Mr. Johnson ; and from the 
district of Wirral by Mr. Brockholes.
RUSINA, Boisd.
Rusina tenebrosa, Hiibn.
Generally distributed, but apparently not 
common.
Lane.
— Carnforth and Longridge, not common (J.B.H.) ; 
Crosby (G.
A. Harker); Manchester district (J.C.); Birch-wood, 
Woolton (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Tranmere (VV.G.) ; Wallasey (F.N.P., J.W.E.) ; Wirral 
(J.F.B.).
ASTEROSCOPUS, Boisd.
Asteroscopus sphinx, Hum.
( = Petasia cassinea, W.V.).
Bred from 
a larva found near Preston (J.B.H.) ; recorded by N.
Greening 
from East Cheshire (A.O.W.).
DASYPOLIA, Guen.
Dasypolia templi, Thunb.
Local.
Lane— Aigburth (C.S.G.); Crosby, a specimen taken on the 
sandhills in the autumn of 1885 (R.W.); Preston district 
(J.B.H.) \ West Derby, at light (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Bidston lighthouse (J.F.B.).
PANOLIS, Hiibn.
Panolis (Trachea) piniperda, Panz.
Common wherever there are 
fir plantations, especially in the neighbourhood of the 'mosses/ 
CHARGE AS, Steph.
Charaeas graminis, L.
Generally distributed and found sometimes 
on the Lancashire moorlands in great abundance, as during 1881.
T7ENI0CAMPA, Led.
Tseniocampa gothica, L.
Common and generally distributed through 
both counties.
Taeniocampa populeti, Fabr.
Generally distributed, but not common.
Lane.— Bolton (W.J.) • Hale and Lydiate (CS.G.) ; Chat 
Moss and Withington (J.C.) ; Longridge and Preston (J.B.H.) ; 
Prestwich (J.C.M.).
Ches.
— Generally distributed through Wirral, but scarce 
(J.F.B.); Eastham (C.S.G.); Marple (J.C).
Oct. 1886.
u 
290 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
Taeniocampa miniosa, W.V. Recorded as rare in Delamere Forest 
by Mr. Chappell.
Taeniocampa cruda, Tr.
( = pulverulenta, Bork.).
Generally distri- 
buted through both counties.
Taeniocampa munda, W.V. Not common.
Lane.
— Hale and Croxteth, occasionally (C.
S.G.); Preston 
(J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Bromborough and Puddington (J.F.B.); Dunham Park 
and Marple (J.C.); Eastham Wood (J.F.B., F.N. P., W.J,); 
Hooton (C.S.G.).
Taeniocampa stabilis, W.V. Common throughout both counties — 
the most frequent of the genus.
Taeniocampa gracilis, W.V. Local, and not common where it does 
occur.
Lane— Crosby (G.
A. Harker, F.N.P., R.W.) ; Chat Moss, 
Barton Moss, and Withington (JVC) ; Huyton (S.J.C.); South- 
port (G.
T. Porritt); Preston district and Longridge (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Lindow Common (J.C.) ; Wallasey (G.
T. Porritt and 
J.W.E.).
Taeniocampa incerta, Hum.
( = instabilis, Tr.).
, Generally dis- 
tributed.
Taeniocampa opima, Hiibn.
The only recorded localities for this 
species are the Wallasey sandhills, where it is abundant ; Lytham, 
where it occurs commonly ; and Longridge.
PACHNOBIA, Led.
Pachnobia leucographa, W.V. Formerly common at Preston, but 
now scarce (J.B.H.).
Pachnobia rubricosa, W.V. Generally distributed, but apparently 
not common.
Lane.
— Agercroft, Chat Moss, and Withington, not common 
(J.C); Preston district, formerly common (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Bowdon, Staley-brushes, and Marple (J.C) ; Eastham 
Wood (J.C.M.); Delamere Forest (F.N.P., G.
A. Harker); 
Wallasey sandhills (W.G., G.
T. Porritt, J.C.M., J.W.E.); 
throughout Wirral (J.F.B.).
ORTHOSIA, Tr.
Orthosia pistacina, Fab. Generally distributed and fairly common.
Orthosia rufina.
L. Not generally common.
Lane.— Crosby (F.N.P., W.J.) ; Hale (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Alderley district, common (H.
H. Corbett) ; Eastham 
(F.N.P., W.J.); Stourton and Bidston (C.S.G.) ; Staley-brushes, 
common (J.C.) ; Wirral, scarce (J.F.B.).
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
29I 
Orthosia circellaris, Hufn.
( = Xanthia ferruginea, Tr.).
Common 
and generally distributed.
Orthosia lota, L.
Common and generally distributed.
Orthosia macilenta, Hiibn.
Local.
Lane.
— Agercroft (J.C.) ; Grange (S.J.C); Birch-wood, 
Woolton (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Bowdon, not common (J.C.) ; Eastham Wood (W.J.) ; 
Rock Ferry, Eastham, and Puddington (J.F.B.).
Orthosia litura, L.
Common and generally distributed.
DYSCHORISTA, Led.
Dyschorista suspecta, Hiibn .
Scarce.
Lane—Barton Moss (J.C); Middleton (lb., and J.
Thorpe, 
Ent, iv, 135).
Ches.— Staley-brushes (J.C, J.B.H., J.
CM.); between 
Stourton and Hargreave Hall (C.S.G.).
Dyschorista ypsilon, W.V. Not very common.
Lane.
— Preston (J.B.H.); Prestvvich (J.
CM.); Withington 
(J.C).
Ches.— Marple (J.C); Alderley, rare (H.
H. Corbett) ; 
Wallasey, frequent (J.F.B., J.C.M., C.S.G., J.W.E.); West 
Kirby (F.N.P.).
PLASTENIS, Boisd.
Plastenis retusa, L.
Not common.
Lane.
— Liverpool district, occasionally (W.J.) ; Formby, taken 
by Mr. Gregson (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Knutsford, rare (J.C.) ; Wallasey, Bidston, Tranmere, 
Puddington, not common (J.F.B.).
Plastenis subtusa, W.V. Common in the Preston district (J.B.H.); 
not common on Chat Moss, and at Pendleton, Sale, and Bowdon 
(J.C.) ; on sugar at Wallasey (C.S.G.).
CIRRHCEDIA, Guen.
Cirrhcedia xerampelina, Hiibn.
Scarce.
The only localities of 
which I have any record are — 
Lane.
— Clitheroe, taken by B.
B. Labrey (J.B.H.) ; larva taken 
near Manchester (G.
Campbell, Ent. Mo.
Mag., vii, 140) ; 
Withington, by J.
H. Aspinwall (Ent., viii, 229).
Ches.
— One specimen recorded from Denhall by Mr. A.
O. 
Walker, probably on Mr. Brockholes' authority.
Oct. 1886.
292 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTU/E.
COSMIA, Ochs.
Cosmia trapezina, L.
Abundant throughout both counties.
Cosmia affinis, L.
Recorded as ' very rare ' from Alderley by Mr.
Corbett ; while Mr. Gregson mentions having taken it at sugar 
in a young elm plantation between Hightown and Sephton.
(Cosmia paleacea, Esp.
( = Euperia fulvago, Hiibn.).
Recorded 
from Lancashire in Newman's British Moths, p.
380, but on 
what authority I know not.) 
PYRRHIA, Hiibn.
Pyrrhia umbra, Hum.
(^Heliothis marginata, Fab.).
Local, but 
plentiful where it does occur.
Crosby is the only Lancashire 
locality recorded, but it occurs on the Cheshire coast at Wallasey 
and New Ferry.
HYDR/ECIA, Guen.
Hydrsecia nictitans, L.
Common and generally distributed, being 
especially abundant on the mosses.
Hydrsecia micacea, Esp. Common throughout both counties.
Hydrsecia petasitis, Doubl.
Occurs in the moorland regions of both 
counties, but much scarcer of late years than formerly.
Lane.
— Bolton (W.J., J.B.H.); Preston and Ribchester 
(J.B.H.); Staleybridge, common in 1870 (J.
CM.).
Ches.
— East Cheshire, recorded by N.
Greening (A.O.W.).
GORTYNA, Led.
Gortyna flavago, W.V. Common and generally distributed.
XANTHIA, Tr.
Xanthia gilvago, Esp. Recorded from Eastham, where it was 
captured by Mr. Wm.
Lello, in September 186& (Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
v, 129); also by Mr. Brockholes from Ness and Puddington.
Xanthia cerago, Tr.
( = fulvago, L.).
Common, and generally 
distributed wherever sallows grow.
Xanthia flavago, Fab.
( = silago, Hiibn.).
Common, but rather 
more local than the preceding species.
Xanthia aurago, W.V.
' Two taken at Lydiate, end of September 7 
(C.S.G.).
Xanthia citrago, L.
Local, and not very common where it does occurr.
Lane.
— Aigburth (W.J., C.S.G.); Myerscough Hall, near 
Preston (J.B.H.) ; Withington (J.C.).
Ches.
— Bowdon and Wilmslow (J.C.) ; Bromborough (C.S.G.) ; 
Dunham Park (J.C.M.); Chester (A.O.W.) ; Rock Ferry and 
Puddington (J.F.B.).
Naturalist,.
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
293 
SCOPELOSOMA, Curt.
Scopelosoma satellitia, L.
Common throughout both counties.
ORRHODIA, Hiibn.
Orrhodia vaccinii, L.
Common throughout both counties.
Orrhodia ligula, Esp.
( = spadicea, W.
V.).
Somewhat local.
Lane— Agercroft (J.C.) ; Aigburth (W.J.); Preston (J.B.H.).
Ches.— Chester (A.O.W.); Dunham Park (J.C.) ; Wallasey 
(C.S.G.) ; Wirral, but not abundant (J.F.B.).
SCOLIOPTERYX, Germ.
Scoliopteryx libatrix, L.
Not very common, but generally dis- 
tributed throughout both counties.
AMPHIPYRA, Ochs.
Amphipyra tragopogonis, L.
Abundant everywhere.
Amphipyra pyramidea, L.
Recorded as rare in Dunham Park 
(J.C.) ; from Eastham Wood (W.J.) ; and one from Puddington 
in 1870 (J.F.B.).
Fam. A GRO TIDAL.
TRIPH/ENA, Hiibn.
Triphsena fimbria, L.
Generally distributed, but not common.
Lane.
— Chat Moss and Withington (J.C.) ; Crosby (G.
A. 
Harker) • Preston and Lytham (J.B.H.).
Ches.— Bowdon (J.C); Chester (A.O.W.); Delamere (F.N.P.) ; 
Dunham Park (J.
CM.) ; Claughton, Denhall, Eastham Wood, 
Puddington, and Wallasey (J.F.B.) ; larvae plentiful between 
Wallasey and Leasowe in March and April (C.S.G.).
Triphsena ianthina, W.V. Not generally common.
Lane— Preston, not common (J.B.H.); Garston (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Bowdon, not common (J.C); Chester (A.O.W.) ; 
Delamere and West Kirby (F.N.P.) ; Tranmere and Rock Ferry 
( W.G.); Wallasey (J.W.E.) ; Wirral (J.F.B.
). 
Triphsena interjecta, Hiibn.
Local.
Lane.
— Wyre district, near Fleetwood (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Chester district (A.O.W.) ; New Brighton at flowers 
of ragwort (C.S.G.) ; Parkgate (W.G.) ; Wallasey (W.
J., J.F.B., 
and W.
Lello, Ent, iv, 155).
Mr. Gregson notices that this species does not come to rag- 
wort flowers before 11 p.m.
Oct. 1886.
294 J- W - ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTLLE.
Triphsena orbona, Fab.
( = comes, Hiibn.).
Abundant everywhere.
In his illustrations of varieties of < Lepidoptera, Part II, Mr.
Mosley figures several fine aberrations of this species from 
specimens in the collections of Messrs.
Johnson and Roxburgh, 
of Liverpool.
Triphsena pronuba, L.
Abundant everywhere.
AGROTIS, Hiibn.
* GRAPHIPHORA, Ochs.
Agrotis augur, Fab. Common and generally distributed.
Agrotis neglecta, Hiibn.
Scarce, the localities recorded being all 
in Lancashire, viz : — Button, near Ribchester (J.B.H., Ent., xiii, 
105); two specimens recorded from near Hale (C.S.G.); Pendle- 
ton and Chat Moss, not common (J.C.).
Agrotis xanthographa, W.V. Abundant everywhere.
Agrotis umbrosa, Hiibn.
Somewhat local.
Lane— Chat Moss (J.C.M.); Crosby (F.N.P., G.
A. Harker, 
R.W.); Preston (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Bowdon, not common (JVC); Wallasey (F.N. P., 
J.W.E.).
Agrotis rubi, View.
(=bella, Tr.).
Common and generally distri- 
buted, though not so plentiful as formerly.
Agrotis festiva, W.V. Common and generally distributed.
Agrotis conflua, Tr. Recorded from Preston by Mr. Hodgkinson.
Agrotis dahlii, Hiibn.
Very local.
Lane.
— Windermere, at sugar (J.B.H.) ; Birch-wood, Woolton, 
near Liverpool (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Alderley, rare (H.
H. Corbett) ; Hargreave Hall and 
Hooton (C.S.G.); Staley-brushes, not common (J.C.).
Agrotis brunnea, W.V. Common and generally distributed.
Agrotis baja, W.V. Generally distributed, though scarcely common.
Agrotis rhomboidea, Esp. Mr.
Gregson records the capture of a 
specimen of this species, taken on the wing, between Linacre 
and Bootle.
Agrotis triangulum, Hiibn.
Not common.
Lane.
— Longridge, and near Lytham (J.B.H.) ; Middleton 
and Pendleton (JVC.) ; Prestwich (J.
CM.) ; Old Swan, near 
Liverpool (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Chester (A.O.W.) ; Staley-brushes (J.C.) ) Wallasey 
(E.
L. Ragonot, Ent. Mo.
Mag., v, 76) ; Wirral, scarce (J.F.B.)* 
Agrotis C-nigrum, L.
Generally distributed and fairly common.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS I LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTU/E.
295 
Agrotis depuncta, L.
Recorded only from one (Cheshire) locality, 
viz.
:— Staley-brushes, where it is rare (J.C.).
Agrotis glareosa, Esp. Local, and not common where it does occur.
Lane.
— On heath flowers at Toppings Turton, near Bolton 
(J.
W. Baldwin, Y.N., i, 137); Crosby, one specimen (G.
A. 
Harker) ; Longridge, rare (J.B.H.); Woolton (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Alderley, rare (H.
H. Corbett) ; Dunham Park (J.C., 
J.C.M.) ; Ness, scarce (A.O.W.) ; Staley-brushes (J.C.); Stourton 
(C.S.G.).
Agrotis saucia, Hiibn.
Generally distributed, but nowhere common.
Lane.
— Aigburth, common some years (W.J.) ; Hale and 
Huyton (S.J.C.) ; Lytham, sparingly (J.B.H.); Pendleton and 
Chorlton, not common (J.C.).
Ches.
— Alderley, rare and uncertain in its appearance (H.
H. 
Corbett) ; Bidston, Eastham, Ness, and in the Upton Valley 
(J.F.B.); Staley-brushes (J.C.M.) ; Wallasey (C.S.G.).
Agrotis plecta, L.
Common and generally distributed.
Agrotis (Axylia) putris, L.
Generally distributed and fairly common.
Agrotis porphyrea, W.V. Tolerably common wherever there are 
large tracts- of heather.
Lane.-— Longridge (J.B.H.) ; Chat Moss (J.C.).
Ches.
— Bidston Hill, very common in the larval condition 
(J.W.E.) ; Carrington Moss and Staley-brushes, not common 
(J.C.) ; Delamere Forest (J.C.M.) ; Stourton (W.G.) ; a specimen 
taken at sugar at Wallasey (J.C.M.).
Agrotis agathina, Dup. Scarce.
Lane.
— Chat and Rixton Mosses, rare (J.C) ; Farrington 
Moss (J.B.H.) • Simmonswood Moss (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Bidston Hill, occasionally (W.J,, J.C.M.) ; Wallasey, 
one specimen taken by Mr. Almond, in August 1854 (C.S.G., 
J.F.B.).
* * SP/ELIOTIS, Boisd.
Agrotis lucernea, L.
Only recorded from two localities, both in 
Lancashire, viz., on heath flowers at Toppings' Turton, near 
Bolton (J.
W. Baldwin, Y.N., i, 387); near Grange (J.B.H.).
Agrotis simulans, Hum.
( = pyrophiia, W.V.).
Scarce.
Lane.
— Lytham, rare (J.B.H.); in Mr. Gregson's garden, 
Fletcher Grove, Old Swan, near Liverpool, in 1847 (Zool., 1848).
Ches.— Bidston (C.S.G.); Wallasey sandhills, once (W.J.).
Agrotis ravida, W.V. Recorded from only one (Lancashire) 
locality, viz.: — Rusholme, near Manchester, where it was once 
take n by Mr. G.
W. Adams (H.
H. Corbett).
Oct. 1886.
296 J.
W. ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
Agrotis prsecox, L.
Common on all the coast sandhills from South- 
port to Wallasey ; found inland rarely.
* * * AGROTIS, Hiibn.
Agrotis cinerea, W.V. Is recorded from the neighbourhood of 
Grange, but the locality of its capture is just beyond the 
boundary of Lancashire (J.B.H.).
Agrotis ripse, Hiibn.
Recorded from Runcorn (Cheshire), by 
Messrs.
Gregson and Melvill.
Agrotis cursoria, Bork.
Common on the Lancashire and Cheshire 
coast sandhills.
Recorded also from Denhall, by Alfred O.
Walker.
Agrotis nigricans, L.
Sandhills and mosses, tolerably common.
Lane- — Chat Moss (JVC.); Farrington Moss (J.B.H.); Crosby 
sandhills (G.
A. Harker) ; Southport (G.
T. Porritt).
Ches.
— Bowdon, not common (J.C.) ; Denhall (A.O.W.); 
Wallasey sandhills (W.J., F.N. P.).
Mr. Gregson notes (Ent., iv, 53) that the specimens which 
occur on or about the mosses are much darker in colour than 
the type form, this latter occurring on the sandhills.
Agrotis tritici, L.
Common on all the coast sandhills and occa- 
sionally inland.
Agrotis aquilina, W.V. On the sandhills and mosses, but not so 
common as the preceding species.
Agrotis obelisca, W.V. Of very rare occurrence.
Mr. Gregson 
records the species from Crosby and Stourton, and Mr. Brock- 
holes mentions the fact of its having been taken by Mr. N.
Cooke on the Wallasey sandhills.
Mr. Wilding took a specimen 
of this species at Heswall in August 1884.
Agrotis puta, Hiibn.
One specimen captured near Wallasey is 
recorded by Mr. Brockholes.
Agrotis segetum, W.V. Common and generally distributed, occa- 
sionally abundant.
Agrotis clavis, Hufn.
( = corticea, Hiibn.).
Local, and apparently 
not common where it does occur.
Lane.
— Crosby (C.S.G.); Preston, not common (J.B.H.).
Ches.— Wallasey (C.S.G., W.J., J.C.M., and E.
L. Ragonot, 
Ent. Mo.
Mag., v, 76).
Agrotis exclamationis, L.
Abundant everywhere.
Agrotis suffusa, Hiibn.
Generally distributed and fairly common.
Agrotis vestigialis, Hufn.
( = valligera, W.V.).
Abundant at sugar 
and on ragwort flowers on the coast sandhills from Lytham to 
Wallasey.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
297 
Fam. HA DENIDAZ.
APLECTA, Boisd.
Aplecta occulta, L.
Generally distributed, but not common.
Lane.
— Chorlton-cum-Hardy, near Manchester, rare (J.C.) ; 
Crosby, several (G.
A. Harker) ; Stretford, near Manchester 
(J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Claughton, near Birkenhead (J.F.B.) ; Delamere 
(A.O.W.).
Aplecta herbida, W.V. Local, and nowhere common.
Lane.
— Chat Moss (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., 1845, p.
1220); 
Botany Bay Wood, Cotteril Clough near Ringway, not common 
(J.C); Hale and Woolton (C.S.G.) ; Preston district (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Only recorded from one locality, viz., Led sham, by 
Mr. Brockholes.
APAMEA, Tr.
Apamea (Luperina) testacea, W.V. Common and generally distri- 
buted.
NEURONIA, Hiibn.
Neuronia (Heliophobus) popularis, Fab. Common and generally 
distributed.
Neuronia (Luperina) cespitis, W.V. Local.
Lane— Carnforth and Preston (J.B.H.) ; Crosby (C.S.G., 
W.J., F.N.P., G.
A. Harker); Withington (J.C).
Ches.— Dunham Park (J.C); Wallasey (C.S.G., W.J., J.F.B., 
F.N. P.).
APOROPHYLA, Led.
Aporophyla (Epunda) nigra, Haw. Recorded by Mr. Chappell as 
rare at Botany Bay Wood and Worsley ; and by Mr. Gregson 
from Crosby, Speke, and Lydiate.
Aporophyla (Epunda) lutulenta, W.V. Not common.
Lane.
— Var. lunebergensis, Frey, recorded from Dutton, near 
Ribchester, by Mr. J.
B. Hodgkinson (Ent, xiv, 68).
Ches.— Chester, scarce (A.O.W.); Eastham Wood (J.W.E.) ; 
Wallasey (F.N.P.).
CERIGO, Boisd.
Cerigo matura, Hufn.
( = cytherea, Fab.).
Common and generally 
distributed.
MISELIA, Steph.
Miselia oxyacanthse, L.
Oct. 1886.
Common and generally distributed.
298 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
DICHONIA, Hiibn.
Dichonia (Agriopis) aprilina, L.
Generally distributed, but not 
very common.
Lane.
— Preston (J.B.H.); Manchester district, common (J.C.).
Ches.— Eastham Wood (W.J., G.
A. Harker, F.N.P.); Bidston, 
Rock Ferry, Eastham, Ness, and Puddington (J.F.B.).
DRYOBOTA, Led.
Dryobota (Hadena) pro tea, W.V. Tolerably common and generally 
distributed.
EPUNDA, Dup.
Epunda lichenea, Hiibn.
Local, found only near the coast.
Lane.
— Lytham (J.B.H.); Formby, abundant in the larval 
state (J.W.E.); Crosby (G.
A. Harker and F.N.P.).
Ches.— Wallasey sandhills (J.C.M., F.N.P., G.
T. Porritt) ; 
Bidston lighthouse, taken there by Mr. Almond (J.F.B.).
POLIA, Tr.
Polia flavicincta, W.V. Mr. Gregson records a specimen captured 
at Allerton Hall, on sugar, and two between Dit'ton and Hale.
Polia chi, L.
Common and generally distributed, especially in the 
moorland districts.
DIANTH/ECIA, Boisd.
Dianthaecia conspersa, W.V. Scarce.
Lane.— Bedford Leigh (J.C.); Bickerstaffe (C.S.G.); Chorley, 
in 1853, by E.
C. Buxton (Z00L, xi, 4037); Preston, not 
common (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Tranmere, one specimen found by Mr. Warrington 
(J.F.B.); Marple (J.C.); West Kirby (C.S.G.).
Dianthsecia capsincola, W.V. Common and generally distributed.
Dianthsecia cucubali, W.V. Generally distributed, but not so 
common as the preceding species.
Dianthsecia carpophaga, Bork.
Local, nearly confined to the coast.
Lane.
— Crosby, common (W.J. and G.
A. Harker); Morecambe 
and Grange, common (J.B.H.) ; Hale and Formby (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Denhall, scarce (A.O.W.); West Kirby (C.S.G.).
MAMESTRA, Ochs.
Mamestra (Neuria) saponarise, Bork.
Recorded as scarce from 
Denhall, and from Delamere Forest, by Mr. A.
O. Walker.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
299 
Mamestra (Hecatera) serena, W.V. Local.
Lane— Crosby sandhills (F.N.P., J.W.E.).
Ches.
— Ness, Burton, Capenhurst (J.F.B.) ; Wallasey sandhills 
(W.J.).
Mamestra (Hadena) chenopodii, W.V. A specimen captured at 
Denhall in 1870, and recorded by Mr. Brockholes, is the only 
record I have of its occurrence in either county.
Mamestra dentina, W.V. Fairly common, and generally distri- 
buted.
Mamestra glauca, Hiibn.
Rather local.
. Lane.— Bolton (W.J.) ; Chat Moss (J.C.); Cheetham Hill 
(R.
S. Edleston, Zool., 1845, p.
1220) ; Longridge, moors above 
Chorley, Withnell, and White Moss, near Middleton (J.B.H.); 
Simmonswood Moss (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Delamere (A.O.W.) ; Lindow Common (J.C.) ; Staley- 
brushes (J.C, J.C.M.); Stourton (C.S.G.).
Mamestra contigua, W.V. Recorded from Barlow Moor, as rare, 
by Mr. Chappell, and from Rock Ferry, where a single specimen 
was captured in i860, by Mr. Bockholes.
Mamestra genistse.
The only record I have of the occurrence of 
this species is as follows : — Larvae found prior to 1868 on broom 
at Moore Station, Cheshire, by E.
C. Buxton (communicated by 
J.C.M.).
Mamestra thalassina, Hiifn.
Common, and generally distributed.
Mamestra suasa, W.V. Local.
Lane.
— Chorlton-cum-Hardy and Stretford, not common 
(J.C); Liverpool district (C.S.G.).
Ches.— Bidston and Wallasey (J.F.B.) ; Denhall (A.O.W.) ; 
Altrincham (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., ii, 683).
Mamestra oleracea, L.
Abundant everywhere.
Mamestra pisi, L.
Common and generally distributed.
Mamestra persicariae, L.
Common and generally distributed.
Mamestra brassicse, L.
Abundant everywhere.
Mamestra albicolon, Hiibn.
Common on the sandhills along the 
coast-line of both counties.
Mamestra (Aplecta) nebulosa, Hufn.
Fairly common and generally 
distributed.
Mamestra tincta, Bork.
Recorded from Grange-over-Sands, by 
Mr. Hodgkinson.
Mamestra advena, W.V. Mr. Gregson records the capture of a 
specimen at valerian flowers at Hale, and one from the same 
plant at Lydiate.
Oct. 1886.
300 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
HADENA, Tr.
Hadena leucostigma, Hiibn.
( = Apamea fibrosa, Hiibn.).
Local.
Lane.
— Huyton (S.J.C) ; Morecambe, abundant (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Dunham Park (S.J.C.) ; Wallasey sandhills, occasion- 
ally (W.J.).
Hadena adusta, Esp. Tolerably common and distributed over both 
counties.
Hadena abjecta, Hiibn.
Scarce.
Preston, scarce (J.B.H.); two 
near Claughton some years ago, taken by Messrs.
Almond and 
Warrington (J.F.B.); and also recorded from Ness and Pudding- 
ton by Mr. Brockholes.
Hadena (Xylophasia) polyodon, L.
( = monoglypha, Hum.).
Abundant everywhere ; the black variety occasionally taken on 
the moss-lands.
Hadena lithoxylea, W.V. Common and generally distributed.
Hadena sublustris, Esp. Recorded from Carnforth by Mr. Hodg- 
kinson, and from Hale by Mr. Gregson.
Hadena sordida, Bork.
( - Mamestra anceps, Hiibn.).
Local.
Lane.
— Preston district, not common (J.B.H.).
Ches.— W T allasey sandhills (C.S.G., J.C.M.); Wirral (J.F.B.).
Hadena gemina, Hiibn.
Common and generally distributed.
Hadena unanimis (Hiibn.).
Not generally common.
Lane.
— Chat Moss and Withington (J.C.) ; Hale and Croxteth 
(C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Chester, rather common in 1858 (A.O.W.) ; Prenton 
(C.S.G.); Wallasey, Rock Ferry, and Puddington (J.F.B.) ; 
occasionally about Alderley (H.
H. Corbett).
Hadena basilinea, W.V. Common and generally distributed.
Hadena hepatica, Hiibn.
Local.
Lane.— Preston, not rare (J.B.H.); Hale and Croxteth (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Cotteril Clough, near Ringway (J.C.) ; near Pudding- 
ton (J.F.B.).
Hadena rurea, Fab., and.
the variety combusta, Dup. Abundant 
everywhere.
Hadena scolopacina, Esp. Recorded from Agercroft, near Man- 
chester, on flowers of wild angelica, rare, by Mr. Chappell ; and 
from Brockholes Wood, near Preston, by Mr. Hodgkinson.
Hadena pabulatricula, Brahm.
( = Apamea connexa, Bork.) A 
single specimen taken at light at Wallasey, is recorded by 
Mr. Gregson.
Hadena (Celsena) haworthii, Curt.
Common on the moors and 
mosses.
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTU/E.
30 1 
Lane.
—Bolton (WJ.) ; Chat Moss (J.C., W.J.) ; moors above 
Chorley, abundant (J.B.H.) ; Simmonswood Moss (C.S.G., W.J., 
F.N.P., J.W.E.).
Ches.
— Carrington Moss and Lindow Common (J.C) ; 
Delamere Forest (S.J.C., F.N.P.) ; Staley-brushes (J.C).
Hadena didyma, Esp.
( = oculea, Guen.).
Abundant everywhere.
Hadena (Miana) strigilis, L.
Common and generally distributed.
Hadena fasciuncula, Haw. Common and generally distributed.
Hadena furuncula, W.V. Fairly common, but not nearly so 
generally distributed as the two preceding species.
Hadena literosa, Haw. Common, and generally distributed.
HYPPA, Dup.
Hyppa (Hadena) rectilinea, Esp. Mr.
Chappell records a specimen 
from Trafford, near Manchester ; and Mr. Hodgkinson refers 
to the capture of the larva on balsam, near Windermere.
DIPTERYGIA, Steph.
Dipterygia pinastri, L.
Of occasional occurrence.
Mr. Hodgkinson 
reports having seen several which had been taken near Man- 
chester.
In Cheshire it has been taken several times at Knuts- 
ford (J.C); while Mr. Corbett informs me it was common at 
Alderley in 1879, but that he had not seen it before or since 
(see also Ent, xiii, 14).
EUPLEXIA, Steph.
Euplexia lucipara, L.
Abundant everywhere.
HABRYNTLS, Led.
Habryntis meticulosa, L.
Common everywhere.
MORMO, Steph.
Mormo maura, L.
Common and generally distributed.
NyENIA, Steph.
Nsenia typica, L.
Common and generally distributed.
Fam. XYLINIDAL.
XYLINA, Tr.
Xylina socia, Hum.
( = petrificata, W.V.).
A specimen captured at 
the Dingle, near Liverpool, by Mr. W.
Johnson, is the only 
record of the appearance of this insect in our counties.
Oct. 1886.
302 J.
W. ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIkE NOCTURE.
Xylina ornithopus, Hufn.
( = rhizolitha, Fab.).
Scarce.
Recorded 
from Chat Moss by Mr. E.
C. Buxton (Zool., 1850, 2882); 
Manchester district, occasional (J.B.H.); Denhall, scarce 
(A.O.W.); and Mr. Brockholes records a specimen captured in 
the Upton Valley, near Birkenhead, in 1859.
CALOCAMPA, Steph.
Calocampa vetusta, Hiibn.
Local.
Lane— Aigburth (W.J.) ; Chat Moss, rare (J.C) ; Crosby, 
occasionally (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Delamere (A.O.W.) ; Eastham (G.
A. Harker and 
W.G.); Wallasey (J.C.M., J.F.B.) ; Bidston and Upton (J.F.B.).
C aloe amp a exoleta, L.
Generally distributed, but not common.
Lane.
— Agercroft, Barton Moss, Chat Moss, Bury, and 
Middleton (J.C); Preston district, not common (J.B.H.); Hale 
and Huyton (S.J.C).
Ches.— Chester and Ince (A.O.W.) ; Eastham (W.G., W.J.) ; 
Liscard, common (C.S.G.) ; Wallasey (J.C. M.) ; Wirral (J.F.B.).
EGIRA, Dup.
Egira (Cloantha) solidaginis, Hiibn.
Local.
Lane.
— Bolton Moors, common (W.J., J.C); Bamford Wood, 
abundant (J.
CM.); Anglesark, near Chorley, and Longridge, 
on stone walls (J.B.H.); a specimen taken at Walton Gaol, near 
Liverpool, on a lamp, by W.
Harrison in 1861 (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Staley-brushes, common (J.C, J.
CM., G.
T. Porritt).
Fam. CLEOPHA AVDjE.
XYLOCAMPA, Guen.
Xylocampa lithorhiza, Bork.
( = areola, Esp.).
Tolerably common 
and generally distributed.
Fam. CUCULLIDM.
CUCULLIA, Schrank.
Cucullia asteris, W.V. Mr. Hodgkinson records the capture of the 
larva of this species on golden-rod (Solidago virgaurea) at Grange.
Cucullia umbratica, L.
Local.
Lane.
— Bury, Middleton, Pendleton, and Staleybridge, not 
common (J.C.) ; Chorley (E.
C. Buxton, Zool., xi, 4037) ; 
Crosby (R.W., G.
A. Harker) ; Preston, but not so common 
as formerly (J.B.H.).
Ches.— Bowdon (J.C); Bidston (J.F.B.) ; Ness and Chester 
(A.O.W.); Wallasey (J.
CM., J.F.B., E.
L. Ragonot, Ent. Mo.
Mag., v, 76).
. 
Naturalist, 
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTILE.
303 
Cucullia chamomillse, W.V. Local.
Lane.
— Aigburth, the larva common a few years ago (J.W.E.) • 
Fylde district, not rare (J.B.H.) ; Irlam and Moss-side, near 
Manchester (J.C.) ; Lytham (J.B.H., Intell, 1856, p.
53).
Ches.— Bidston (J.F.B., J.W.E.) ; Bowdon, rare (J.C.) ; Den- 
hall (A.O.W.); Tranmere (W.G.) ; Wallasey (G.
T. Porritt).
Fam. HELIO THIDJE.
HELIOTHIS, Ochs.
Heliothis armigera, Hiibn.
Very scarce.
This species was first 
captured in Britain, at Salford, by Mr. Jno.
Thomas, in Sep- 
tember 1840.
(Recorded R.
S. Edleston, Zool., 1843, p.
260).
A specimen was captured on a salt-marsh at the mouth of Brom- 
borough Pool, in November 1857, by Mr. Almond (Zool., xvi, 
5947).
It has also been recorded from Huyton (S.J.C.) and 
Staley bridge (J.B.H.), and from Linacre, near Bootle, on ragwort 
(C.S.G.).
Heliothis peltigera, W.V. Very scarce.
Recorded from Black- 
pool, June 1876, by J.
W. Aspinwall (Ent., ix, 183); from 
Lytham and Farrington Moss, by Mr. Hodgkinson.
Mr.
Gardner records the capture of a specimen on ragwort flowers 
at Wallasey in 1879 ; and Mr. Wilding had the good fortune to 
find a specimen and the wings of a second on the Wallasey 
sandhills, on July 17th, 1884.
Fam. A NA R TIDAL.
HELIACA, Herr.-Schaff.
Heliaca tenebrata, Scop.
( = Heliodes arbuti, Fab.).
Local.
Lane.
— Abundant on a railway bank at Chorley (J.B.H.) ; 
Longridge (lb.) ; Orrell and Ford, near Liverpool (C.S.G.).
Ches.
— Beeston Castle and Chester (A.O.W.); Prenton Lane 
and Puddington (J.F.B.) ; between Spital and Parkgate (C.S.G.) ; 
Wilmslow, Knutsford, Ashley, and Mabberley (J.C).
ANARTA, Tr.
Anarta myrtilli, L.
Abundant on heaths and mosses.
Fam. PLUSIDA.
ABROSTOLA, Hiibn.
Abrostola triplasia, L.
Generally distributed, but scarcely common.
Lane.— Bolton (W.J., J.C); Bury (J.C); Chorley (E.
C 
Buxton (Zool., xi, 1853, 4037); Crosby (G.
A. Harker); Preston, 
rare (J.B.H.); West Derby (R.W.).
Ches.— Chester and Ince (A.O.W.) ; Knutsford (J.C); 
Wallasey (J.W.E.) ; Wirral (J.F.B.) ; Alderley (H.
H. Corbett).
Oct. 1886.
304 J.
W. ELLIS: LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
Abrostola tripartita, Hufn.
(^urticse, Hiibn.).
Somewhat local.
Lane.
— Bolton (W.J.) ; Preston, rare (J.B.H.).
Ches.— Ince (A.O.W.); Wallasey (J.C.M.); Alderley (H.
H. 
Corbett).
PLUSIA, Ochs.
Plusia chrysitis, L.
Generally distributed, but not usually common-.
Lane.
— Huyton (SJ.C.) ; Preston, not common (J.B.H).
Ches.
— Bovdon, Marple, and Wilmslow, not common (J.C.) ; 
Alderley (H.
H. Corbett) ; Chester district common (A.O.W.) ; 
Tranmere and Oxton (W.G.) ; West Kirby (F.N.P.).
Plusia chryson, Esp.
( = orichalcea, Hiibn.).
The only specimen 
captured in either Lancashire or Cheshire, of which I have any 
record, was beaten out of honeysuckle near Preston by Mr.
Hodgkinson, twenty years ago.
Plusia bractea, W.
V. Has occurred in several localities, viz.
: — 
Lane.
— Longridge, and formerly at Preston (J.B.H.); near 
Hyde, Manchester (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., ii, 1007) ; Staley- 
bridge, captured by — .
Radcliff (J.
CM.).
.Ches.
— Bowdon (R.
S. Edleston, Intell., 1857, vol.
i, p.
123); 
and again at Bowdon by J.
Sidebotham (J.C.M.); Marple, 
Disley, and Macclesfield, rare (J.C).
Plusia festucae, L.
Local.
Lane.— Bolton (W.J.) ; Hall Road, near Crosby (G.
A. 
Harker) ; round Manchester, but not common (J.C); Chorley 
(E.
C. Buxton, Zool., 1853, 4037).
Ches.
— Birkenhead and Puddington (J.F.B.); Chester 
(A.O.W.) ; Bowdon (R.
S. Edleston, Intell., 1857, vol.
i, p.
123); Alderley and Cheadle Hulme, rare, Heatley, common 
(H.
H. Corbett).
Plusia iota, L.
Local.
Lane.
— Crosby (G.
A. Harker); Chorley, common (J.B.H.); 
Manchester district, but not common (J.C.) ; Preston, not 
common (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Alderley, common (H.
H. Corbett) ; Bowdon (R.
S. 
Edleston, Intell., 1857, i, 123); Bromborough (R.W.); Chester 
and Ince (A.O.W.); New Brighton (J.C.M.); Puddington (J.F.B).
Plusia pulchrina, Haw.
( = V-aureum, Guen.).
Not common.
Lane.
— Manchester district (J.C.) ; Preston, not common 
(J.B.H.); Prestwich, one in 1876 (J.C.M.).
Ches.
— Bowdon (R.
S. Edleston, Intell., 1857, i, 123); Chester 
(A.O.W.); Puddington, scarce (J.F.B.) ; West Kirby and Frankby, 
at briar flowers (C.S.G.).
Naturalist.
J. W.
ELLIS : LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NOCTURE.
305 
Plusia gamma, L.
Common and generally distributed, sometimes 
abundant.
Plusia interrogationis, L.
Local 
Lane— Chat Moss (J.C.M.) ; Preston (T.
R. Pugh, Intell., 
1857, i, 115) ; Longridge Moors, common (J.B.H.).
Ches.
— Staley-brushes, four taken by Thomas Hague (J.C.).
Recorded also from the latter locality by Mr. Edleston (Zool., 
ii, 734)- 
Fam. OPHIUSID^E.
CATOCALA, Schrank.
Catocala fraxini, L.
I have records of the capture of about ten 
specimens of this scarce and handsome species in our counties.
Lane.
— A specimen at Bolton in September 1859 (Intell., 
1859, ii, 27); one at Agercroft Bridge, near Kersall Moor, 
August 1846 (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., 15 15) ; one at Prestwich 
Clough about 1846, by C.
Doyle (J.B.H.) (N.B.— Do these two 
latter records refer to the same specimen?); near Chorley 
(J.B.H.
); one near Newton Heath (R.
S. Edleston, Zool.
y 
1515); one near Manchester in 1868 (E.
Hopley, Ent. Mo.
Mag., v, 173).
Ches.
— A specimen in Mrs. Peacock's garden, Saughall Massie 
(C.S.G.) ; a specimen captured in a smithy at Upton (lb.) ; one 
at sugar in Eastham Wood, September 12th, 1868, by W.
Lello 
and E.
L. Ragonot (Ent. Mo.
Mag., v, 129): Bowdon (recorded 
by J.C); one near Carrington Moss (R.
S. Edleston, Zool., 
i5i5)- 
EUCLIDIA, Ochs.
Euclidia mi, L.
Local, but common where it does occur.
Lane.
— Kirby, Hale, and Lydiate, plentiful (C.S.G.) ; Silver- 
dale (J.C.M ).
Ches.
— Ashley, formerly common (J.C.
); railway bank 
between Wallasey and Spital, common (R.W., J.W.E., 
G. A.
Harker); Wallasey Sandhills, scarce (J.B.H.).
Euclidia glyphica, L.
Recorded from only one locality in Lanca- 
shire, viz., Speke, by Mr. Gregson.
Local in various places 
in Cheshire, viz., Ashley, formerly common (J.C); Beeston 
and Chester (A.O.W.) ; Eastham (lb.) ; Shotwick, taken by 
Mr. Almond (J.F.B.) ; Knutsford (T.
Harrison, Intell., 1857, i, 
123); sparingly with E.
mi on the railway bank between Spital 
and Bromborough (R.W., W.G., J.W.E.).
Oct. 1886.
• x 
306 
NOTES LEPIDOPTERA AND HEMIPTERA.
Fam. NOCTUOPHAL&NID&.
PROTHEDES, Led.
(Prothedes (Miana) expoiita, Stain t.
Mr. Hodgkinson remarks 
that this species probably occurs on Hamp's Fell, Grange ; it 
certainly occurs on the borders of Lancashire.) 
PROTHYMIA, Hiibn.
Prothymia viridaria, Clerck.
( = senea, W.V.) Common on the 
moss-lands and some of the sandhills.
Lane— Lytham (J.B.H.) ; Southport (G.
T. Porritt, J.B.H., 
W.J.); Simmonswood Moss (F.N.P., C.S.G.).
Ches.— Bidston Hill (J.F.B.); Prenton (C.S.G.) ; Delamere 
Forest (J.C.) ; Lindow Common, common (lb.).
NOTE— LEPIDOPTERA.
Lepidoptera near York.— On looking over Mr. Porritt' s 'List of 
Yorkshire Lepidoptera ' I find that a few which I have taken have not been noted 
for York since Mr. Stainton placed them in his ' Manual.
' 
Tephi'osia crepuscularia.
— I took this insect in Acomb Wood from the bole of 
an oak tree in 1882.
Numeria pitlveraria.
— This is another Geometer which I took in Acomb Wood 
by beating a few years ago.
Dicranura furcula.
— -Is not given for York; I have taken it repeatedly.
I 
remember one occasion when the larvae were found very commonly on the round- 
leaved sallow, Salix caprcra, in the York Nurseries ; I found them soon after hatching 
and the eggs had invariably been laid in twos and threes on the upper side of the 
leaves.
Xanthia citrago.
— This insect is not a very common one in any locality.
I 
remember some years ago beating a female out of some young lime trees in the 
York Nurseries.
Heliodes arbuti.
— This pretty little insect I have taken in this locality.
I found 
it in the corner of a field near Hobmoor.
It is a gentle flyer and settles on the 
flower of the buttercup (Ranunculus acris and R.
bulbosus).
Coleophora paripennella.
— Beating for larvae in September 1883, I came across 
cases of a Coleophora which I did not know.
I submitted them for Mr. Stainton's 
inspection and he gave them the above name.
I tried to rear them, but failed.
Coleophora sicccefolia.
— This rare case-bearer I was pleased to find in the 
autumn of last year amongst birch in Askham Bogs.
They were not plentiful, as I 
only found two, and the case was formed of half a withered leaf, the remaining 
half" being left unrolled up.
Nemotois minimella.
— The same evening that I found the siccafolia cases I 
came across the place where this species was flitting.
I had taken it before, but 
had no recollection where.— Thos.
Wilson, Holgate Nurseries, York, August 
24th, 1886.
NOTE— HEMIPTERA.
Triecphora vulnerata Illig.
near Louth, Lincolnshire.— This 
pretty insect, known as the 'scarlet-hopper,' is very plentiful about the month of 
June on the herbage by the sides of a certain hedge and ditch at Ken wick, near 
Louth.
It has also been found in two or three other localities in the district, but 
not plentifully.
— H.
Wallis Kew, Louth, nth September, 1886.
Naturalist, 
3°7 
A YORKSHIRE SPECIMEN OF STURNUS UNICOLOR, 
AND OTHER UNCOMMON BIRDS, IN A 
YORK COLLECTION.
JAMES BACKHOUSE, Jun., M.B.O.U., 
York ; Secretary to the Vertebrate Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists Union.
A few days ago whilst looking over the valuable collection of British 
Birds belonging to the York Blue Coat Boys' School, I had my 
attention drawn especially to a case containing a company of Starlings 
in various states of plumage, and amongst them two varieties, a cream- 
coloured one and a black one, i.e., an unspotted one!
Thinking 
that possibly this latter bird might be a specimen of the Sardinian or 
Unspotted Starling, I wrote, on my return home, to Mr. Dresser for 
skins, which he kindly sent at once, and by the aid of which I was 
enabled upon next visiting the collection to identify the Black Starling 
without doubt as the Sardinian species.
It is apparently an im- 
mature male.
An inspection of the case in which this bird stands 
revealed a label bearing the following important words : — ' Presd.
by 
G. Wright, 31, Fossgate.
1840.
Blk. Starling, shot nr.
Howden.' I 
have here given every word exactly as they are written upon the case, 
that there may be no mistake.
I further learnt from the keeper of the collection, Mr. Helstrip, 
that he remembered this bird being given to the Blue Coat School 
for their collection by the late Mr. Chapman, Birdstuffer, St. Helen's 
Square, as a curious melanism !
Having stated all the facts relating to this bird that I know worth 
recording, I leave the question of worthiness to rank as a British 
Bird to those who are competent to judge; but as this species has only 
a very limited range in Europe, probably never having been known 
to occur north of the Riviera, I thought it best to send this note to 
the ' Naturalist.' 
I do not advocate its being called a British Bird, however, even 
if its claim as having actually occurred appears to justify such a 
term, for I highly disapprove of cataloguing 'waifs and strays' along 
with our own avifauna.
Why should / be termed a Frenchman because I take a trip to 
France to see the country?
And why should a young and inex- 
perienced Sturnus unicolorhz dubbed a 'British Bird' if he happens 
to stray away out of his right migration route in some severe gale, 
and fall a victim to a Howden gunner?
Oct. 1886.
3 o8 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
As I noticed several other birds of more or less interest, with 
descriptions as to locality where they occurred, &c., in our county, 
I think it best to simply enumerate some of the more important ones 
here, as I am not aware that they have previously been recorded.
Common Crossbills (Loxia curvirostra).
Shot at Sand Hutton and 
Sledmere in 1866.
I understand that great quantities were also observed at 
Stockton-on-Forest during the same summer ; sixty or seventy 
having been brought at one time to a York birdstuffer.
Red-backed Shrike (Lanius collurio).
Obtained at Melbourne, 
near York.
Rose-coloured Pastor (Pastor roseus).
Shot at Dunnington in 1850.
Hoopoe (Upupa epops).
Shot near Selby in 1858.
Spotted Crake (Porzana maruetta).
Foss Islands, York, 1848.
Sand Grouse (Syrrhaptes paradoxus).
One shot out of a flock 
of five at Stockton-on-Forest (about 1863?); another from the 
same locality ; and a third killed on Haworth Moor, near Keighley.
Norfolk Plover (CEdicnemus scolopax).
Shot near York.
Solitary Snipe (Gallinago major).
Everingham Park, near York.
Little Chill (Larus minutus).
Shot at Bridlington in 1868.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Little Gull in County Durham.— A specimen of the Little Gull 
{Larus minutus) was shot on Whitburn Sands, near Sunderland, on 28th August 
last, and was brought to me the same morning.
It is in immature plumage, much 
like that of a young Kittiwake : eye and bill black, legs flesh-coloured, breast 
faintly tinged with roseate.
The tail is distinctly forked, showing an affinity, with 
the Terns ; which latter birds were also numerous on this coast at the same date.
They appeared on August 25th, on their passage southwards.
Dimensions of 
Little Gull: length, 9% in.; expanse, 2 ft.
3 in.; weight, a trifle over 3% Qz.
; 
sex, male; sent to Mr. Collingford, of Durham.
— Abel Chapman, Silksworth 
House, Sunderland, August 31st, 1886.
Flamborough Bird !Notes.
— Since Sunday (September 5th) I have 
observed several migratory birds congregating on the headland.
The strong 
westerly breezes have brought them here in large numbers.
Quantities of Swallows 
{Hirundo rustica) perch on the telegraph wires, and Wheatears {Saxicola cenanthe) 
on garden walls and about the lanes.
Several Pied Wagtails {Motacilla lugubris) 
are to be seen in the fields making ready for their departure.
— Matthew Bailey, 
Flamborough, September 9th, 1886.
Duck Decoys.
— There is, I believe, another decoy in Lincolnshire besides 
those mentioned in the list on p.
281 of the ' Naturalist ' for September 1886 (unless 
indeed it be included among the five at Deeping Fen).
This is at Crowland, and 
was said to be in use when I was in the neighbourhood in the autumn of 1881.
The mode of working was described to me, and I was told that a little dog was 
trained to perform antics on the edge of the water, the ducks following him out 
of curiosity, and being thus led On into the fatal tunnel.
If this be so, the name 
' The Dog and Duck,' frequently borne by public-houses in the lowdying districts 
of Eastern England, may be a relic of the former existence of decoys, and not 
merely a reference to the use of sporting clogs in wild-duck shooting.
— H.
F. 
Parsons, London, September 4th, 1S86.
Naturalist, 
NOTES— FISHES AND PALAEONTOLOGY.
NOTES— FISHES.
Snake Pipe Fish on the Lincolnshire Coast.— I have had brought 
to me a fine specimen of Nerophis ophidion, picked up dead on the sands at Skeg- 
ness in the present month (September).
— Wm. Eagle Clarke, Leeds, September 
18th, 1886.
Pishes Observed near Goole.
— I reported last year the capture of the 
Angler Fish {Lop kins piscatorius) near Goole.
I have again to state that some 
have been taken in the salmon nets.
In August a Weever ( Trachinns viperd) was 
picked up on a sand-bank three miles below Goole ; and this morning (7th 
September) a Pipe Fish {Syngnathits sp.
?), 16 inches long, was brought me 
from Howden Dyke, three and a half miles above Goole, and more than fifty from 
Spurn.
The largest Salmon {Sal/no salar) caught here weighed 35 lbs.
Some 
Sturgeon {Acipenser stitrio) were caught, but no Porpoises or Bottle-noses, 
though many were seen.
— Thomas Bunker, Goole, 7th September, 1886.
Grey Mullet near Scarborough.— On the 30th August a single 
specimen of a 'Grey Mullet' {Mugil sp.
?) was caught off the East Coast, 
not far from the beach at Hayburn Wyke, equi-distant from Scarborough and 
Whitby.
It was taken in a drift-net by Mr. Patrick, whilst fishing for Salmon.
It was a very fine one, and the weight 4 lbs.
Mullet, as a rule, swim along in shallow water, among weeds where small 
crustaceans abound, and the moment a boat approaches dart off with a heavy 
splash.
The conformation of the mouth is very remarkable, besides the peculiarity 
of the lips.
There is a ridge or an elevated rib in the lower jaw which fits into a 
groove in the upper part of the palate, which enables it to seize its prey in muddy 
sea-bottoms, and to reject the silt and sand.
I need hardly say that the Grey Mullet is an epicure's dish, and is rarely to be 
met with on the Yorkshire coast.
Its habitat is on the shores of the Bristol 
Channel, and Caermarthen Bay and the county of Sussex.
— John H.
Phillips, 
Yorkshire Fishery District, Scarborough, 17th September, 1886.
[It would be of the greatest interest to ascertain the precise species to which 
this interesting note refers, inasmuch as Mugil chelo Cuv.
{ — M.
septentrionalis 
Giinth), the Lesser Grey Mullet, which occurs regularly in summer within the 
mouth of the Humber estuary, is the only species whose occurrence off the 
Yorkshire coast rests upon indisputable authority (that of Dr. Giinther).
The 
claim of M.
capito rests upon the statement of Meynell (1844) that 'both species 
of Grey Mullet ' occur.
— Eds.] 
NO TE — PA LsE ONTOL O G Y.
Discovery of Carboniferous Vegetation at Bradford.— York- 
shire is becoming noted for discoveries of fine examples of Carboniferous vegetation, 
for, following closely upon the case of the now celebrated tree at Clayton, I have 
had reported to me, also in the Lower Coal Measures, a group of fossil roots at 
Bradford.
These were come across by workmen in excavating for the erection of 
some new offices in Darley Street, and, as in the former case, great care has been 
exercised in their baring.
My friend, Mr. J.
H. Monckman, D.Sc, furnishes the 
following particulars : — There are seven distinct stumps in position, within a dis- 
tance of 12 yards, varying in size from I ft.
6 in.
to 2 ft.
6 in.
in diameter.
The 
roots are in loose sandy shale, the stumps in ragstone, in which ripple-marked and 
worm-tracked stones are found.
The largest stump has a diameter of 2 ft.
6 in.
longest axis, and 2 ft.
diameter at right angles to longest axis.
It has been partly 
bared only, showing some stigmarian roots.
The larger roots and the stump are 
covered with carbonaceous matter.
The second stump is smaller ; height of stump, 
1 ft.
8 in.; longest diameter, 17 in.; at right angles to this, 16 in.
There are four 
chief roots at right angles to each other, stretching roughly S.E., S.W., N.W., 
and N.E. From the stump to the bifurcation of the roots is, approximately in each 
case, 2 ft.
; diameters of roots near the stump vary from 8 in.
to 9 in.
; length of 
root exposed, 5 ft.
6 in.
The remaining stumps are not yet bared ; they will not 
be cleared for a little while.
Messrs.
A. & G.
Taylor, Bradford, have photo- 
graphed the second stump just referred to.
— S.
A. Adamson, Leeds, September 
22nd, 1886.
Oct. t886.
3io 
WATERFALL ON KINDERSCOUT, DERBYSHIRE.
H. FRANKLIN PARSONS, M.D., F.G.S.
Kinderscout, the highest hill in the Peak of Derbyshire, has a broad 
flat table-top, formed of a thick bed of coarse gritstone (Kinderscout 
grit), the lowest bed of the millstone grit series.
This plateau ends 
on the western side in a long, nearly straight, rocky edge.
The 
surface of the plateau is covered with a bed of peat many feet in 
thickness, through which the watercourses have cut deep winding 
channels, frequently down to the rock.
The drainage of a large 
part of the plateau converges to a notch in the centre of the western 
edge.
Here there is a shelving rock, ending below in a free edge ; 
down this rock the water slides and falls in a cascade about 50 feet 
in height.
Approached from below the waterfall is found to be at 
the point of a funnel-shaped rocky gorge.
When the wind is in the 
west it blows up the gorge, and, intensified by convergence, meets the 
falling water and blows it back in the form of spray.
On June 23rd 
there being heavy showers, with a stiff westerly breeze, the cloud of 
spray as seen from Disley, six miles distant as the crow flies, was 
conspicuously visible, rising like a high column of steam above the 
hill.
The next day, when I visited the waterfall, the weather being 
fine, the stream had shrunk to smaller dimensions, and there was 
less wind, but the water going over the fall was all blown back as 
spray, none reaching the bottom except such as was splashed upon 
the rocks and trickled down them.
The rocks around the top of 
the fall were washed bare by the spray, and I was told by an in- 
habitant that in cold weather he had observed the spray to freeze in 
the air and fall as hail.
It rarely happens that a waterfall is so 
situated as to form a conspicuous object in the landscape at a 
distance ; it is usually in a rocky glen (excavated by itself), or at the 
head of a mountain valley shut in by hills.
The prominent position 
of the one on Kinderscout is due to the configuration of the hill ; 
the broad plateau affording the gathering ground for a stream of 
some size, while the high rocky escarpment forms the hard edge over 
which the water falls.
It is obvious also that, under the conditions 
above described, the volume of the water passing down the fall is 
augmented by that which has been blown back, and has found its way 
again into the stream above the fall ; in fact, some of the water has 
to tumble down the fall twice or more before it reaches the bottom.
I may mention that the Cloudberry (Rubus chamamorus) is 
abundant on Kinderscout, and that the flowers (of rare occurrence 
on the Yorkshire moors) were found in some plenty at one somewhat 
Sheltered Spot.
Naturalist, 
3 T * 
MOLLUSCA OF WRESSLE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
GEORGE ROBERTS, 
Lofthozise, Wakefield; Author of the History and Topography of Loft house, etc.
The parish of Wressle is situate on the banks of the Derwent, in the 
East Riding of Yorkshire.
The river rises near Robin Hood's Bay 
in the North Riding, on the east coast, runs inland, and, after passing 
through the central part of the East Riding, falls into the Ouse at 
Barnby-on-the-Marsh.
The district about Wressle is flat, and is 
intersected by slow-running drains.
The soil rests on sand ; height 
above sea-level, about 30 feet.
The tide comes up the river, and 
vessels can get up with the flow to Malton.
The flounder, and I 
think some other species of small flat-fish, are found in the river and 
in the dikes.
The extensive ruins of Wressle Castle stand near the 
river.
The foss contains a little water • Conium maculatum and 
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricus grow in it, and Dipsacus sylvestris 
in a hedge close by.
One of the ivy bushes which grow up the 
castle walls is an enormous size ; the bole near the bottom will be 
sixteen or seventeen inches in diameter.
The mollusks enumerated in the following list were observed or 
collected mainly during a day's visit to Wressle in August, 1884, and 
another similar visit, in company with Mr. J.
Beanland, of Bradford, 
in July, 1886.
A few of the species to which J.B. are affixed have 
been collected by Mr. Beanland at other times during 1885-6.
AQUATIC.
Sphserium corneum.
Near the Castle, and in Fleetdyke between 
Wressle and Bubwith.
Hundreds of young (July 1886), but 
very few adults.
Pisidium amnicum.
Fleetdyke, J.B.
Pisidium fontinale.
Fleetdyke, on caddis case.
Anodonta anatina var.
ventricosa.
Fleetdyke, dead shells.
Anodonta cygnea.
Newsholme, July 1886, J.B.
Paludina contecta.
A few, mostly young, in Fleetdyke, 1884.
Bythinia tentaculata.
Newsholme and Wressle, very common.
Bythinia tentaculata var.
cornea Locard.
' Horn-colour, more 
or less pale, rather transparent.' Fleetdyke.
Bythinia leachii.
Fleetdyke, on caddis cases.
Rare.
Valvata piscinalis.
Fleetdyke, in 1884 and 1886.
Valvata piscinalis var.
subcylindrica.
Fleetdyke.
Planorbis spirorbis.
Newsholme, J.B. Wressle.
Planorbis vortex.
Fleetdyke, and near the Castle.
Oct. 1886.
312 
G. ROBERTS I MOLLUSCA OF WRESSLE.
Planorbis complanatus.
Common in most drains.
Planorbis corneus.
In a small pond near the Castle, and in the 
Fleetdyke.
Also in a small pond near the Crescent Inn going to 
Bubwith.
Here Beanland threw in his net and brought out at 
the first haul a very fine one amongst a lot of Zannichellia 
paliistrisy but none were found afterwards.
Planorbis contortus.
White Rails dyke, J.B.
Physa hypnorum.
In a moist muddy dyke, mostly lying on the 
surface — dead and empty shells.
Physa fontinalis.
Fleetdyke, hundreds on June 12th, 1886, but 
very few to be found July 24th.
Limn sea peregra.
Common in Fleetdyke and other places on July 
24th, but nearly all young.
It is curious what becomes of the 
full-grown mollusks.
Probably water-rats and shrews will feed 
on them, and they may be able to extract the animal without 
gnawing the shell.
In the tidal drains such as the Fleetdyke, 
mollusks may be more uncertain and unstable than in other 
places not influenced by the tide, as by simply leaving hold of 
their food-plant they may be floated either up or down to a 
considerable distance every day.
Dead shells .will be floated 
down into the river and forwards into the sea in vast numbers.
I once found shells of Spharium comeum, Sphcerium rivicola, 
Neritina fluviatilis, Bythinia tentaculata, Valvata piscinalis, 
Limncea peregra, Limncea truncatula, Succinea elegans, Helix 
rufescens, Helix caritiana, Helix hispida, Patella vulgaris, Litto- 
rina rudis, and Littorina littorea, with the tooth of a rat and the 
tooth of a dog, in a barrowful of sand which had been dredged 
from the river Aire.
The epidermis on many of these was quite 
perfect.
Limnaea peregra var.
ovata.
Newsholme, 1885, J.B.
Limnaea auricularia.
Newsholme, rare, 1886, J.B.
Limnaea stagnalis.
Newsholme, 1886, J.B. A small form like 
fragilis was in the Fleetdyke in 1884.
Limnaea palustris.
Type and varieties tincta and elongata in new 
drains at Newsholme, July 1886, J.B.
Limnaea truncatula.
In White Rails drain, Newsholme, 1886, J.B.
; 
and on caddis cases in Fleetdyke.
TERRESTRIAL.
Arion ater.
On the banks of the Derwent, 1886.
Limax agrestis.
Creeping on the reeds on the bank of the Derwent.
Succinea putris.
Common on mud near the Fleet.
Naturalist, 
G. ROBERTS I MOLLUSCA OF WRESSLE, 
313 
Succinea virescens.
' Shell thin, mouth expanded.' One specimen 
found with putris.
This was seen and identified by Mr. T.
D. 
A. Cockerell, of Chiswick.
Succinea pfeifferi.
Creeping on the surface of a muddy dyke with 
the above.
Succinea pfeifferi var.
brevispirata Baud.
With the above.
Zonites nitidulus.
On the river bank.
Zonites cellarius.
Wressle, under stones.
Zonites purus.
Wressle.
Helix aspersa.
Frequent about cottage gardens, but apparently 
scarce elsewhere.
Helix nemoralis.
Common near the river.
Helix nemoralis var.
alboJabiata.
One specimen on the banks of 
the Derwent.
Helix nemoralis var.
libellula 12 3 45 + bimarginata.
Helix nemoralis var.
petiveria.
Common, with and without bands.
Helix nemoralis var.
trochoides Clessin.
Alt. 16 mill., diam.
17 mill.
Remarkably trochiform.
Shell yellow; band-formula 123OO.
These varieties of nemoralis^ along with others, were obtained 
on the artificial bank which runs along the river side from 
Wressle towards Bubwith.
The yellow shells with and without 
bands predominate, and are very glossy with the epidermis 
perfect to the apex.
I saw no Helix hortensis.
Helix arbustorum.
Abundant on the river side.
Helix arbustorum var.
depressa Scholtz.
Alt. 20, diam.
26 mill.
Wressle, J.B.
Helix arbustorum var.
conoidea ?
Helix arbustorum var.
trochoidalis Romaen.
Alt. 20^ mill., diam.
i8£ mill.
A variety new to Britain.
One specimen of this 
remarkable variety was picked up on the artificial bank in 1884, 
but three more were obtained at the same place in July 1886.
Helix arbustorum var.
fusca.
In a ditch near the railway station 
in 1884, but none in 1886.
Occurs also on the Derwent banks.
Helix arbustorum var.
fusca + roseolabiata (new var.).
Lip 
tinged with pink.
Other specimens have the lip of a purplish 
colour.
Helix arbustorum var.
cincta.
One specimen in 1884; none in 
1886.
Helix arbustorum var.
marmorata.
One specimen, J.B. A large 
percentage of the shells of both nemoralis and arbustorum that 
occur on the artificial bank which borders the river, have a 
pyramidal spire.
The vegetation is of an ordinary kind.
The 
Oct. 1886.
3i4 
NOTE — MOLLUSCA.
bank is about ten yards from the river.
Many of the shells 
were empty, but were quite fresh, as if the animal had been 
removed only a day or two before.
Helix cantiana.
Occurs on the bank with the above, but mostly 
young on July 23rd, 1886.
Helix cantiana var.
rubescens.
Intermixed with the type.
Helix rufescens.
Appears to be rare.
I have a note of finding one 
specimen in 1884.
Helix concinna.
Frequent with the other Helices on the river side.
Helix hispida.
Very few on the river side ; probably common in 
the woods.
Helix hispida var.
fusca Menke.
One or two; sent to Mr. Cockerell.
Helix sericea.
Newsholme, June 12th, 1886, J.B.
Helix rotundata.
Frequent.
Some of the Limncsa palastris sent to me from Wressle by 
Mr. Beanland, are small and might be the variety mentioned by 
Alder as inhabiting the margins of tidal rivers.
Two of the Z.
stagnalis are of an iridescent purple tinge on the outside of the 
last whorl, and pearly on the inside.
One specimen is obscurely 
5-banded.
A large number of the Helix arbustorum would fall 
under the variety alftestris, ' shell smaller, spire produced,' if that 
variety be continued in the British list, but it would be better to 
comprehend them under conoidea with a reduced size.
One large 
conical specimen of H.
arbustorum reaches alt.
23 mill., diam.
21 mill., but this, large as it is, falls short of the dimensions given 
for conoidea.
In regard to measurements, I think British con- 
chologists ought to fix a standard for themselves, and not be 
guided by measurements taken from shells which inhabit 
southern areas that are much more favourable than Britain to 
the development of mollusca.
NOTE— MOLL USCA.
The Conehological stigma removed, from Yorkshire.— It is 
with much pleasure that I have to announce the discovery of A malia gagates at 
Middlesbrough.
A specimen was taken on September 20th in a well situate in 
one of the kitchen gardens which are the remains of the old 'Tea Gardens,' the 
fortunate discoverer being Mr. T.
A. Lofthouse, son of Mr. R.
Lofthouse, architect.
The slug was seen by Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck and myself immediately after 
capture and proved to be a fairly typical specimen.
Notwithstanding the fact that 
it is by no means uncommon on the Lincolnshire coast line and also occurs 
abundantly in Durham, Yorkshire, until now, was unable to give any authentic 
record.
Now, however, that the spell has been broken probably it will put in an 
appearance and give an account of itself elsewhere.
At the same time and place 
several fine specimens of Amalia marginata were taken.
This is, I believe, the 
first time this species has been recorded for Cleveland.
— Baker Hudson, Redcar, 
September 20th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
3i5 
BOOK NOTICES.
The Naturalist's Diary: a Day-Book of Meteorology, Phenology, and 
Rural Biology.
. .
. Arranged and Edited by Charles Roberts, F.R.C.S., 
L.R.C.P., etc., .
. .
with a Chart showing the blossoming of spring 
flowers in Europe, and an introduction on natural periodic Phenomena, etc.
London: Swan Sonnenschein, Le Bas & Lowrey .
. .
[1886].
The object of this work is two-fold.
It is a guide to the recurrence of the 
periodic phenomena of nature, giving the average dates at which they may be looked 
for, a large number of species both of animals and plants being thus referred to ; and 
it also provides a blank half-page for each day of the year, on which to enter personal 
observations of a similar character.
Each page of this book is devoted to a day in 
the year ; being divided vertically the left side of the page contains the indications 
first mentioned, while the right side is left blank for the record of such phenomena 
as may fall within the cognizance of the possessor.
The introduction and the map 
are largely based upon the German observations of Herren Hoffmann and Ihne, 
of Giessen, and a perusal of it will show that the observers of periodic natural 
phenomena are endeavouring to advance beyond the Gilbert White stage and to 
search for the laws which regulate these phenomena.
It is satisfactory to note that 
greater rigidity and precision in recording the details is now to be aimed at, and 
that therefore greater accuracy may henceforth be expected in the generalizations 
based upon them.
>O0< 
Hand-book Of Mosses, with an Account of their Structure, Classification, 
Geographical Distribution, and Habitats.
By James E.
Bagnall, A.L.S.
. .
Second Edition.
London : Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey & Co 
1886.
[Price is., 96 pages, small 8vo.] 
The Young Collector.
British Fungi, Lichens, and Mosses, 
including Scale-mosses and Liverworts.
By E.
M. Holmes, 
F.L.S., .
. .
and Peter Gray, A.B.S.Edin.
. .
. London: Swan 
Sonnenschein, Lowrey & Co.
. .
. 1886.
[Price is.
. .
. 32 + 29 
+ 32 pages, small 8vo.] 
Sea-weeds, Shells, and Fossils.
By Peter Gray, A.B.S.Edin.; and 
B. B.
Woodward.
. .
. London : Swan Sonnenschein, Le Bas & Lowrey.
[Not dated.
Price is., 94 pages, small 8vo.] 
These little books form part of a series of introductions to collecting in various 
departments of natural history, and are all nicely printed and copiously illustrated.
In merit they are unequal, and decidedly the best is the admirable little hand-book 
of mosses by Mr. Bagnall, whose methodical treatment of his subject within the 
narrow limits assigned to him enables him to expound it to the best advantage.
As to the others we cannot pretend to admire the plan of treating upon such diverse 
and comprehensive sciences as phycology, malacology, and palaeontology in a single 
volume of no greater size than that allowed to Mr. Bagnall for a subject of much 
less extent, nor can we conceive that these volumes will serve any more useful 
purpose than that of whetting the appetite for works more advanced, more 
detailed and precise in their treatment of the subject.
The publishers are, however, 
to be congratulated upon their evident desire to be of service to their fellow-men 
by the production of low-priced manuals for collecting.
>O0< 
The Bradford Naturalists' Society have printed as a 16-page pamphlet the very 
excellent paper on the ' History of Botany J which was read at one of their meetings 
by Mr. J.
Clayton.
In it he carries the origin of the science back to very early 
times, and treats graphically and well of its subsequent progress down to the time 
of Darwin.
>c0 ^ 
We have received for notice a copy of a penny pamphlet entitled ' Workmen 
and Museums* ': being selections from a series of letters contributed to the ' Liver- 
pool Mercury' during the latter part of 1885 and the beginning of 1886, by 'R.M.'?
It runs to 28 pages, and treats of Teredo and Pholas, then of silk-producers, the 
growth of coal plants, whales, the nautilus as a prototype of modern shipping, and 
the foraminiferal origin of our chalk rocks.
Oct. 1886.
316 
NOTES AND NEWS.
At the annual meeting of the Wakefield Naturalists' Society, held on Wednes- 
day, 1st September, the following were appointed officers for the ensuing year : — 
President, Dr. W.
H. Haley ; Hon. Sec.
and Treasurer, W.
Rushforth ; Delegate 
to Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, W.
Rushforth.
>o<X 
Mr. Samuel A.
Adamson, F.G.S., gave a paper before the British Association 
in the Geological Section, at the recent meeting in Birmingham, on ' The Discovery 
of the base of a large Fossil Tree at Clayton.' Sir Wm. Dawson, President of the 
Association, Dr. H.
Woodward, and other distinguished geologists, spoke in 
appreciation of the paper, and also of the value of the discovery.
>«X 
The Louth Naturalists' Society still continues to flourish, as we are pleased to 
note, and to work actively at the natural history of their district.
At the annual 
meeting, held on the 5th of July, an encouraging report was given, in which some 
interesting details concerning the year's investigations were recited.
The list of 
officers for the ensuing year now stands thus : — Patron, Rev. W.
W. Fowler, 
M.A., F.L.S., Sec.E.S.
; President, Mr. T.
E. Markham ; Vice-president, 
Mr. A.
R. Yeoman, M.A.
; Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, Mr. H.
Wallis 
Kew, F.E.S. xxx 
At the September meeting of the Entomological Society of London, the fol- 
lowing gentlemen were elected Fellows : — Mr. P.
Cowell, of Liverpool ; and 
Mr. A.
O. Walker, F.L.S., of Colwyn Bay, North Wales.
Mr. C.
O. Water- 
house called attention to the numerous reports which had lately appeared in the 
newspapers of the supposed occurrence of the Hessian Fly {Cecidomyia destricctor) 
in Britain, and inquired whether any communication on the subject had reached 
the Society.
The Rev. W.
W. Fowler stated, in reply, that he had been in com- 
munication with Miss Ormerod on the subject, and that she ,had informed him 
that neither the imago nor larva of the insect had been seen, and that the identity 
of the species rested on the supposed discovery of the pupa.
Mr. A.
H. Swinton 
communicated a paper, entitled ' The dances of the Golden Swift.' In this paper 
the author expressed an opinion that the peculiar oscillating flight of the male of 
this and allied species had the effect of distributing certain odours for the purpose 
of attracting the females.
>o>< 
At one of the usual monthly meetings of the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomo- 
logical Society, amongst the objects exhibited were specimens of a caterpillar 
brought from New Zealand by the Rev. J.
W. Walker, and presented to Mr. S.
J. 
Capper.
These animals are called by the natives Aweto, and form the root of a 
bulrush {Sphceria Robertsia).
Another strange phase of animal life was shown, in 
spirits, in the shape of a fly carrying off a large spider !
This was captured in the 
very act in Entre Rios, South America.
Mr. Frederick Taylor, of Rainhill, 
presented this strange couple, and it is owing to the same gentleman's interest in 
spiders that the Liverpool Museum has the finest collection of trap-door spiders 
and their houses of any museum in the kingdom.
Besides these specimens, there 
was an enormous beetle, between four and five inches long, with a pair of giant 
horns and dangerous-looking mandibles.
It was feeding quietly on a faded 
banana, and seemed quite at home.
This came from South America, and has 
been kept alive since June.
It is called Dynastes typlwn, or, more familiarly, the 
elephant beetle.
In the museum, where it is now on view, it is more commonly 
known as Jumbo.
The paper of the evening was by Mr. S.
L. Mosley, who 
attempted to show the necessity existing for a more definite classification than we 
have at present in entomology.
All the variations from the type which is generally 
considered specific should be ranged under one of four groups, and the names used 
for those groups should not be used indiscriminately, as now.
That terms are too 
loosely used at present is admitted by all, and a reformation in scientific nomen- 
clature is greatly needed.
The groups suggested are — A, Race, as applied to a 
geographical or altitudinal form of a species ; B, Variety, to be used only for those 
forms which occur only more or less commonly with the type form, but which are 
recurrent, and should therefore receive distinct names, in addition to the specific 
ones ; C, Aberration, a departure from the type in colour, but not recurrent ; and 
D, a Monstrosity; which is a departure from the type in form, but which is not 
recurrent.
Naturalist, 
3 T 7 
THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
JOSEPH A.
MARTI NDALE, 
Staveley, near Kendal, Westmoreland.
Family I.
EPHEBACEI Nyl.
Tribe I.
SIROSIPHEI Nyl.
/. SCYTONEMA Ag.
1. Scytonema myochrous Ag., Syst, p.
40; Cooke, Brit.
Fr. W.
Algae, p.
265, pi.
cv, fig.
1; Zwackh., Lich.
Heidelbergs, p.
1. 
On moist rocks near the Force on the Kent, Levens Park.
//.
SIROSIPHON Ktz.
2. Sirosiphon saxicola Nag. in Ktz., Sp. Alg., p.
316 ; Cooke, Brit.
Fr. W.
Algae, p.
273, plate cxi, fig.
1. 
On rocks near Staveley, and in Kentmere.
///.
GO N ION E MA Nyl.
3. Gonionema velntinum (Ach., Syn., 329) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
88, 
tab.
i, fig.
11 ; Leighton, Lich.
FL, p.
9. 
Fertile on rocks near Kentmere Hall.
4. Gonionema compactum (Scytonema Ag., Sirosiphon Ktz.) ; 
Nyl. in Flora, 1883, p.
104.
Sirosipho?i compactus, Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
9..
Fertile on rocks in Mardale.
Tribe II.
PYRENOPSEI Nyl.
No species of the two British genera Euopsis and Pyrenofisis 
has yet been discovered in Westmoreland.
Tribe III.
HOMOPSIDEI Nyl.
Sub-tribe I.
EPHEBEI Nyl.
IV.
EPHEBEIA Nyl.
5. Ephebeia hispidula (Ach., Syn., 302); Nyl. in Flora, 1877, p.
231.
On rocks, Red Screes.
Barren.
6. *Ephebeia Martindalei Crombie; Nyl. in Flora, 1883, p.
104.
Sparingly fertile on rocks near Staveley.
Oct. 1886.
318 J.
A. MARTINDALE : THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
V. EPHEBE (Fr.) Nyl.
7. Ephebe pubescens (Ach., Syn., 302); Nyl., Syn., p.
90, tab." ii, 
fig.
1 and 17-20; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
10.
On rocks in almost all the valleys of the Cumbrian group, 
yet sparingly in each locality and not often fertile.
Kentmere 
with both apothecia and spermogonia.
Family II.
COLLEMACEI Nyl.
Tribe I.
LICHINEI Nyl.
VI.
LICHINA Ag.
8. Lichina confinis (Ach., Prod., p.
208) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
92 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
12.
On rocks at the mouth of the river Kent, Sandside.
Tribe II.
COLLEMEI Nyl.
VII.
COLLEMA (Ach.) Nyl.
9. Collema chalazanodes Nyl. in Flora, 1869, p.
293 ; Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
16.
On mossy rocks, Brigsteer.
10.
Collema myriococcum Ach., L.U., p.
638 ; Nyl, Syn., 104, tab.
iv, fig.
21 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
16.
On mossy walls near Tolson Hall ; at Plumgarths and else- 
where in the limestone district.
11.
Collema auriculatum (Hffm., Flora Germ., p.
90); Nyl, Syn., 
p. 106; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
17.
On mortared walls at Staveley.
Obryzum cornicidatum 
parasitic on it.
12.
^Collema granosum (Wulf in Jacq., Coll.
hi, 131, tab.
10, fig.
2); 
Nyl. in Stizb., Lich.
Helv., 269.
Among mosses on walls and rocks — Beathwaite Green, 
Brigsteer, and Kentmere Hall.
13.
Collema granuliferum Nyl. in Flora, 1875, p.
10 3 > Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
21; Larb., Lich.
Herb., 204.
On mossy walls at Brigsteer and near Kendal.
14.
Collema flaccidum Ach., Syn., p.
322 ; Nyl., Syn., p.
107 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
23.
On wet rocks by the Kent, at Staveley, and on rocks by the 
Lowther and elsewhere.
Not uncommon.
Naturalist 
J. A.
MARTINDALE : THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
319 
15.
Collema furvum Ach., Syn., p.
323; Nyl., Syn., p.
107 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
17.
On limestone walls at Beathwaite Green, Levens Park, 
Heversham Head, and near Kendal.
16.
Collema melaenum Ach., Syn., p.
315; Nyl., Syn., p.
108; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
20.
Common in the limestone district, as are also its varieties 
complicatum Schar., and marginale (Huds.).
17.
Collema polycarpon Schar., Spic, 532, En. 255, tab.
x, fig.
4, 
d.e.j Nyl., Syn., p.
109; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
22.
Common on limestone at Levens, Heversham, and Kendal.
Collema stygium (Del); Schar., Spic, 544, En. 260; Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
23, is merely a form of C.
polycarpon, vide 
Nyl. in Flora, 1883, p.
105.
It is common in the limestone 
district about Kendal and Levens, but most frequently 
barren.
18.
Collema crispum (Huds., Flora Angl., 447 ; Ach., Meth., 234) • 
Nyl., Syn., no (excl.
syn.
concinnu?n Flot.) ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, 19 (excl.
Zw., 159.) 
On mossy limestone walls near Brigsteer.
19.
Collema pulposum (Bernh.); Ach., Syn., p.
311 ; Nyl, Syn., 109; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
18.
Not rare on limestone soil at Levens, Brigsteer, Under- 
barrow, and Scout Scar, near Kendal.
20.
Collema limosum Ach., Syn., p.
309; Nyl., Syn., p.
no; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
19.
On limestone soil near Kendal, and at Beathwaite Green.
21.
Collema cheileum Ach., Syn., p.
310; Nyl., Syn., p.
m; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
20.
On mortared walls at Staveley, Kendal, and Levens.
22.
Collema conglomeratum HfTm., D.
Flora, ii, p.
102; Nyl., Syn., 
p. 115; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
24 (C.
fasciculare).
Near Ambleside, Sir J.
E. Smith, fide Leighton, Lich.
Flora, loc.
cit.
I have not gathered the plant myself in 
Westmoreland.
23.
Collema nigrescens (Huds., Flora Ang., p.
450); Ach., Syn., 
p. 321; Nyl., Syn., p.
114; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
24.
On trees, Levens Park and at Brow Foot, near Staveley, 
very rare.
All the Westmoreland plants I have seen are 
barren.
Oct. 1886.
320 J.
A. MARTINDALE : THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
24.
Collema multipartitum Smith, E.
Bot., 2582 • Nyl., Syn., p.
116; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
24.
Common on the limestone, Heversham Head, Farleton 
Knott, Whitbarrow, and Kendal 
[Collema isidioides Nyl. in Flora, 1883, p.
98, will probably be 
found on the limestone in South Westmoreland.
I have 
gathered it just beyond the border at Warton Crag, Lancashire.] 
VIII.
COLLEM ODIUM Nyl.
25.
Collemodium microphyllum (Ach., Syn., 310) ; Nyl., Syn., 113; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, 26 ; Lamy, Lichens de Cauterets, p.
5 ; 
Larb., Lich.
Herb., 2.
On elms, Levens Park.
26.
Collemodium plicatile (Ach., Syn., 314); Nyl., Syn., 109; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
30; Stiz., Lich.
Helv., p.
11.
On limestone walls and rocks at Sizergh and Levens, on a 
bridge near Staveley.
IX.
LEPTOGIUM (Ach.) Nyl.
27.
Leptogium tenuissimum (Dicks., Brit.
Crypt., i, T2); Mudd, 
Man., p.
46 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
26.
On mossy decaying stump of a tree, Levens Park ; J.
M. 
Barnes.
28.
Leptogium muscicola (Sw.) ; Nyl., Syn., 134, tab.
iv, fig.
11-15 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
34; Larb., Lich.
Herb., 121.
On rocks near streams and lakes — Scandale, Ambleside.
Staveley, Kentmere, and Mardale.
29.
Leptogium lacerum (Sw.) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
122 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
28.
On mossy walls, Patterdale, Kentmere, Staveley, Kendal, 
Heversham.
30.
^Leptogium lophseum (Ach., Syn., p.
324) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
122 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
29 ; Stiz., L.
H., p.
14.
On mossy walls, Plumgarths, Kendal, Milnthorpe.
31.
^Leptogium pulvinatum (Hffm., D.
Flora, ii., p.
104) ; Nyl., 
Syn., p.
122 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
28 ; Stiz., L.
H , p.
14 ; 
Larb., Lich.
Herb., 241.
On mossy walls, Kendal, Heversham, Milnthorpe.
32.
Leptogium sinuatum (Huds., Flora Angl., 535); L.
scotinum 
Nyl., Syn., p.
123 p.
pte.
; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
29.
On walls, Staveley, Kendal, Levens, Milnthorpe.
4 OCT 1886 Naturalis '' 
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AMD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest-, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
Now ready, Svo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.LS, 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL; REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The httle 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann.
& Mag. Nat.
Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.'— Athena-uni.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. E-LI, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
THE Ts ATIJ EALIST.
The Editors hoJ>e to publish the following papers within the next feiv months: — 
Notes on Birds of Cumberland, "Westmoreland, and Furness.— John Watson.
The Habits of the Greater Horse-shoe Bat— Rev. H.
A. Macpherson, M.A.
Strasburger on Foreign Pollination.
— Thos.
Hick, B.A., B.Sc.
Bibliography for 1885.
ZZZZZZ 
Natural History of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Not^S.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
"Every page is interesting." Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2id.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
6d.
post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all Booksellers.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commences January 1886.
Price 4s.
per annum.
London: D.
BOGUE, St. Martin's Place, W.C.
Leeds : TAYLOR BROTHERS, The Steam Colour Printing Works.
VOLS.
I., II., III., & IV.
MAY STILL BE HAD.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
No. 136.
I fl fe> 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.; , 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., \,khfrp.O 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS* UNION.
Contents 
The Lichens of Westmoreland — (Part i continued) Joseph A.
Martindale .
. ..
..^-zi- 
Botany of the Cumberland border Marches — J.
Gilbert Baker, F.R.S .
.. ..
..325- 
The Hitchingstone, Keighley Moor — S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S.
.. ..
.. -333- 
The Habits of the Greater Horse-shoe Bat— Rev. H.
A, Macpherson, M.A 337 
The Pied Flycatcher in Northumberland — A.
C. Chapman .
. .
. ..
.. ..
34^ 
Notes on the Eagles of the Lake District — JoJin Watson ..
.. ..
..  •343- 
Notes— Mammalia:— 
Lesser Horse-shoe Bat in Nidderdale — IV.
C. Clarkson, L.R.C.P.; Whitby Notes, 
Mammalia — Thos.
Stephznson.
Notes— Ornithology :— 340- 
Cream-coloured Skylark (Alauda arvensis) in Nidderdale — JVm. Storey; Albino Black- 
bird (Turdus merula) in Nidderdale-- W 7 ?/?.
Storey; Pochard and Hooded Crow in 
Durham — J.
T. T.
Reed; Duck Decoys— A'.
P. Gallwey ; Flamborough Bird-*' 
notes — Matthew Bailey; A Suggested Explanation of the Occurrence of the Sar- 
dinian Starling in England — J.
H. Gurney, jim., F.Z.S.; Greenshank in Nidderdale 
and Washburndale — IV.
Storey and JV.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.; The Turtle Dove in 
Yorkshire — Riley Fortune.
Notes— Conchology :— ..
.. 
Planorbis complanatus var.
submarginata in Yorkshire — Geo. Roberts, M.C.S.; Addition 
to Wressle list of Mollusca — Id.
; Cyclostoma elegans re-discovered in North Lin- 
coln-hire — H.
JVallis Kevu, F.E.S.; Limax cinereo-niger at Shipley Glen — W.
D. 
Roebr/ck.
F.L.S.; Estuarine Shells at Tetney, Lincolnshire — If. JVallis Mew, F.F.S.
Note— Arachnida: — ..
.. ..
.. .
. i 
Chelifer DeGeerii near the Lincolnshire Coast — H.
JVallis Kew, F.E.S.
Note — Crustacea: — .
.. ..
.. ..
.. 
Galathea strigosa on the Yorkshire Coast— Rev. E.
H. Smart.
Note — Hymenoptera: — ..
Hymenoptera at Louth, Lincolnshire—//.
JVallis Kew, F.E.S.
Note — Orthoptera: — ..
Occurrence of the True Migratory^Locust in Lincolnshire— Eland Shaw, F.E.S.
Notes — Fungi: — 
Cortmarius alboviolaceus and Boletus cyanescens near Kendal — Rev. C.
If. JVaddell; 
Cynophallus caninus near Leeds — W.
Eagle Clarke.
Note — Palaeontology: — ..
Discovery of the Base of another large Fossil Tree — 6".
A. Adamson, F.G.S.
Yorkshire Topography:-- 
The Rocks at Flamborough — Matthew Bailey.
Notes and News ...
Bibliography— Geology and Palaeontology for 1885 — Messrs.
S. A.
Adamson, F.G.S., 
and Alfred Harker, M.A., F.G.S 
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Coyent Garden, E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
Street.
age 
-324 
~33 2 
-33 6 - 
-339 
, 342 
-346 
339 
-342 
339 
339 
347 
348 
332 
336 
347 
348 
349 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghai 
All Communications should be Addressed : — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, 5s.
post free.
The NATURALIST.
>ccx — 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
x,^ 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, 7d.
each, post free 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Birmingham Natural History and Microscopical Society — Report and List of 
Members for 1885 — 8vo, 20 pages.
[Society.
The Scottish Naturalist for October 1886.
[Prof.
Trail, Editor.
Natural History Journal, October 1886.
[Mr. J.
Edmund Clark, Editor.
The Young Naturalist for October 1886.
[Mr. J.
E. Robson, Editor.
British Association, Birmingham Meeting — Daily Journal.
[Mr. S.
A. Adamson.
The Microscope (monthly), September 1886.
[The Editors.
Journal of Conchology, October 1886.
[Mr. J.
W. Taylor, Editor.
Journal of Microscopy, October 1886.
[Mr. Alfred Allen, Editor.
Science Gossip for October 1886.
[The Publishers.
Northamptonshire Natural Plistory Society — Journal, Sept.
1886.
[The Society.
The Midland Naturalist for October 1886.
[The Editors.
Hertfordshire Natural History Society — Transactions, vol.
iv, parts 1 and 2, May 
and July 1886.
[Society.
EXCHANGES.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Stibscribers.
Duplicates.
London Catalogue, 7th Edition: Nos. 7, 9, n, 26, 40, 41, 84, 
131, 173, 180, 184, 273, 273c, 274.
275, 276, 305, 325, 350, 372, 407, 568, 572, 
574, 576, 577, 579, 581, 5§4, 5^7, 594, 595, 608, 813, 816, 821, 823, 831, 835, 
838, 856, 858, 864, 914, 998, 999, 1007, 1008, 1039, 1040, 1261, 1264, 1265, 1276, 
1280, 1282, 1285, 1294, 1297, 1300, 1305, 1314, 1325, 1327, 1328, 1330, 1333.
Desiderata.
Nos. 89.
90, 101.
119, 167, 186, 214, 228, 347, 349, 370, 377, 536, 
538, 545, 546, 547, 556, 600, 720, 730, 749, 762, 817, 826, 834, 851, 855, 887, 
997, 1027, 1030, 1033, 1042, 1 133, 1266, 1267, 1279, 1286, 1302, 1304, 131 5, 
1320, 1338, 1347, 1435, 1487, &c.
— Herbert Goss, Berrylands, Surbiton Hill, 
Surrey.
The Distribution of the liepidoptera in the British Isles.-- 
As I am compiling notes for a work on this subject, I shall be much obliged for 
Local Lists of Lepidoptera, which, however incomplete, will be useful to me — 
W. Harcourt Bath, The Limes, Sutton Coldfield.
Dragon Flies.
— Wanted to correspond with Entomologists collecting these 
Insects, with view to exchange.
— W.
Harcourt Bath, The Limes, Sutton 
Coldfield.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupa?, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
J. A.
MARTINDALE : THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
32 1 
33.
Leptogium saturninum (Dicks., Brit.
Crypt, 2-21); Nyl., Syn., 
p. 127, pro parte ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
32 (excl.
exs.
cit.).
On a tree in Naddle Forest, Mardale.
34.
Leptogium Burgessii (Lightf., Flora Scot., 827) ; Nyl., Syn., 
p. 132 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
33.
On trees in Naddle Forest, Mardale.
35.
Leptogium Schraderi (Bernh.); Nyl., Syn., p.
133; Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
34 • Larb., Lich.
Herb., 4 {CollemQdium 
Crombie, Grevillea, xv., 12).
On limestone walls and rocks, Brigsteer, Levens, Miln- 
thorpe.
X. COLLEMOPSIS Nyl.
36.
Coilemopsis oblongans Nyl. in Flora, 1874, p.
305 ; Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
36.
. On limestone rocks at Haverbrack, and on Whitbarrow.
Fam. III.
LICHENACEI Nyl.
Tribe I.
CALICIEI Nyl.
XL TRACHYLIA (Fr.) Nyl.
37.
Trachylia stigonella (Ach., Meth., p.
88); Nyl., Syn., p.
167, 
tab.
v, fig.
33 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
47.
Parasitic on corticolous Pertusarice.
Levens Park, Underley 
Park, Lowther Park, and elsewhere.
XII.
CA LLC 'IUM (Pers.) Nyl.
38.
Calicium aciculare (Sm., E.
Bot., tab.
2385) ; Nyl., Syn., 
p. 148, tab.
v, fig.
14; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
40 ; Larb., 
Lich.
Herb., 81.
On trees, Levens Park and Lowther Park.
39.
Calicium arenarium (Hampe) ; Nyl. in Lamy, Lichens du 
Mont-Dore, p.
9. (C.
citrinum Nyl., Syn., p.
149, tab.
vii, 
fig.
1 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
44).
Parasitic on the thallus of Lecidea lucida^ on a wall near 
Staveley.
This is the only place within the county where I 
have seen it, but I found it growing in tolerable abundance in 
the neighbourhood of Sedbergh, just outside the county.
Nov. 1886.
Y 
32 2 J.
A. MARTINDALE: THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND, 
40.
Calicium trichiale *stemoneum Ach., Syn., p.
62 ; Nyl., Syn., 
p. 150, tab.
v., fig.
15 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
40.
On oaks, Lowther Park.
[Calicium melanophaBUin (Ach.) and its variety ferrugineum 
(T.
& B.) will probably be found within the county, as I have 
gathered both on pines in the plantation on Penrith Beacon, 
which is a very short distance outside the county boundary.] 
41.
Calicium hyperellum (Ach., Prod., p.
85); Nyl., Syn., p.
152, 
tab.
v, fig.
23 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
42.
Common on old trees in Levens Park, and elsewhere.
Extremely abundant in Lowther Park.
42.
Calicium roscidum Flk., D.
L., 42 ; Nyl., Syn., p.
153, tab.
v, 
fig.
22.
Almost covering the trunks of two or three old oaks in 
Lowther Park.
43.
Calicium trachelinum Ach.; Nyl., Syn., p.
154, tab.
v, fig.
24; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
42.
On trees in Levens Park and Lowther Park.
44.
Calicium parietinum Ach.; Nyl., Syn., p.
158; tab.
v, fig.
26; 
C. subtile ; p.
pte., Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
44.
On a decorticated portion of an oak trunk in Lowther Park.
XIII.
STENOCYBE Nyl.
. 
45.
Stenocybe byssacea (Fr.) Nyl. in Bot. Notis, 1854, p.
84 
{Calicium Nyl., Syn., p.
160, tab.
v, fig.
27; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
45).
On alder twigs, near Staveley.
Probably common.
XIV.
CONIOCYBE (Ach.) Nyl.
46.
Coniocybe furfuracea (L.) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
161, tab.
v, fig.
37; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
45.
The barren thallus is somewhat frequent on sandy soil at 
the roots of trees in North Westmoreland.
Var.fulva on elm 
in Lowther Park.
XV.
S PHI JVC TRINA (Fr.).
D.N.
47.
Sphinctrina turbinata (Pers.) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
142, tab.
v, fig.
1 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
38.
Common on Pertusarice.
Levens Park, Rigmaden, Underley, 
Staveley.
Very abundant in Lowther Park.
Naturalist, 
J. A.
MARTINDALE: THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
323 
Tribe II.
SPHJiROPHOREI Nyl.
XVI.
SPHALR OPHOR ON, Pers.
48.
Sphaerophoron coralloides Pers.; Nyl., Syn., p.
171, tab.
v, 
fig.
46 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
48.
On rocks and among mosses.
Staveley, Kentmere, Trout- 
beck, Patterdale, Grisedale, Mardale, and elsewhere.
In great 
abundance on Stybarrow Crag, at the head of Ulleswater.
49.
Sphaerophoron fragile (L.), Nyl., Syn., p.
172, tab.
v, fig.
45 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
49.
More generally distributed and commoner even than the 
preceding species.
Tribe III.
B/EOMYCEI Nyl.
XVII.
BMOMYCES Pers.
50.
Baeomyces rufus (Huds., Flora Anglica, p.
527); Nyl., Syn., 
p. 176, tab.
i, fig.
12, tab.
vi, fig.
12-14; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, 
p. 50.
Common on stones and earth.
Staveley, Kentmere, Mar- 
dale, Lowther Park, and elsewhere.
51.
Baeomyces roseus Pers.; Nyl., Syn., p.
179, tab.
vi, fig.
15-21 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
51.
Gathered once in fruit on the hills south of Bowness.
A sterile thallus, which seems to be the same as one kindly 
sent me by Dr. Arnold, of Munich, as Bceomyces rufus 
f. coccodes Fries., Sched., p.
15 ; Scand., p.
329, is common 
on the Lake District hills.
52.
Baeomyces placophyllus Ach., Meth., p.
323, tab.
vii, fig.
4; 
Nyl., Syn., p.
180; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
51.
In the higher parts of most of the valleys of the Cumbrian 
group, as in Kentmere, Mardale, Patterdale, and Langdale, 
but only seen once in fruit, and that immature.
[Baeomyces icmadophilus (Ehrh.) will no doubt be found in 
Westmoreland, at all events along the eastern hills.
I have 
gathered it on these hills, but on the Yorkshire side of the 
dividing line.] 
Tribe IV.
PILOPHOREI Nyl.
XVIII.
PIL OPHOR ON Tuck.
53.
Pilophoron fibula Tuck.; Nyl., Syn., p.
229; tab.
vii, fig.
6; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
69 ; Larb., Lich.
Herb., 5.
In fine condition, and covering the perpendicular surface of 
a large rock in Great Langdale.
Nov. 1886.
324 J- A.
MARTINDALE: THE LICHENS OF WESTMORELAND.
Tribe V.
STEREOCAULEI Nyl.
XIX.
STEREOCAULON Schreb.
54.
Stereocaulon coralloides Fr.
; Nyl, Syn., p.
241, tab.
vii, fig.
16; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
69.
On rocks.
Kentmere, Mardale, Patterdale, and elsewhere.
55.
Stereocaulon paschale (L.) ; Nyl., Syn., p.
242, tab.
vii, fig.
18- 
28; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
70.
On rocks in all the valleys of the Lake district.
56.
Stereocaulon denudatum Flk., D.
L., 79; Nyl., Syn., 247, 
tab.
vii, fig.
29; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
71.
On rocks, not uncommon.
Staveley Head, Kentmere, 
Patterdale, Glenridding!
57.
Stereocaulon condensatum Hffm.; Nyl., Syn., p.
249, tab.
vii, 
fig.
31 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
72 (excl.
var.
cereolinum).
On rocks, Staveley Head, Kentmere.
58.
Stereocaulon pileatum Ach., Syn., p.
285 {St. cereolinum Nyl., 
Syn., p.
250, p.
pte.
; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
72 omnino?) 
• On stones of a wall near Staveley.
XX.
LEPROCA ULON Nyl.
59.
Leprocaulon nanum (Ach., Meth., p.
315 • Nyl., Syn., p.
253; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
73); Nyl in Flora, 1876, p.
578; 
Larb., Lich.
Herb., 284.
In the fissures of rocks, Reston Scar, Staveley.
I saw it 
there in plenty in the year 1880, but lately looking for it I 
could not find the place.
Tribe V.
CLADONIEI Nyl.
XXI.
' P YCNO THE LI A (Ach.) Nyl.
60.
Pycnothelia papillaris (Ehrh.
; Nyl., Syn., p.
188); Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
52 • Cromb.
in Grevillea, xi, p.
111.
Recorded in Leighton's Lich.
Flora, p.
53, as having been 
gathered in Westmoreland, but no locality is given.
XXII.
CLADONIA (Hffm.) Nyl.
61.
Cladonia pyxidata (L.); Nyl., Syn., p.
192; Cromb.
in Grew, 
xi, p.
in.
Generally distributed and common.
Var. pocillum (Ach., Meth., 336).
On mossy walls near Tirrill, North Westmoreland.
Naturalist, 
BOTANY OF THE CUMBERLAND BORDER MARCHES.
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Of the Royal Herbarium, Kew ; ex-President of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union; A?ithor 
of i North Yorkshire,' etc.
In the county of Cumberland there are five well-marked physical 
tracts, as follows : — (i) The Coast Line.
(2) The Lake Hills.
Of 
these two alone is the botany tolerably thoroughly recorded.
(3) The 
Plain of Carlisle (Red Sandstone).
(4) The Border Marches, a tract 
consisting of arenaceous and aluminaceous hills that do not reach 
any considerable elevation, intersected by deep wooded river-beds.
(5) The Pennine Hills, further south than the last, which form part 
of the great back-bone chain of the island, into which limestone rock 
enters prominently, and which are much more lofty than those of 
the last group, reaching in Crossfell an altitude of 2,900 feet, which 
is higher than any mountain in Yorkshire, and only 250 feet lower 
than the topmost Lake peak.
District No. 4 has no doubt the 
smallest flora of the five.
The general elevation is high enough to 
repel a large number of the common lowland plants of the north of 
England, and the mountains are not high enough to bring in many 
of the characteristically boreal plants.
As just indicated, it is a 
strictly arenaceo-argillaceous region, without any intervention of lime- 
stone or basalt, so that one never sees such plants as Helianthemum 
vulgare, Arabis hirsuta, Origanum vulgare, or Draba incana.
It may 
be compared to the Whitby district in North Yorkshire (leaving of 
course the littoral out of account), which has the smallest flora of all 
the nine North Yorkshire drainage districts, or in the West Riding 
to the neighbourhoods of Sheffield, Huddersfiejd, Dewsbury, Bradford, 
or Todmorden, or to the little bit of upland Cheshire about Staley- 
bridge.
As there is hardly anything on record as to the plants it 
yields, I made, whilst staying there this year in September, and making 
excursions from Gilsland as a centre, a complete catalogue of all the 
plants I saw.
I doubt whether the total flora of the tract will mount 
much over 400 species in a broad sense (Flowering Plants and 
Vascular Cryptogamia).
From Gilsland northward to the border 
(above a dozen miles) stretch low undulating grassy moors, of which 
the following plants form the predominant phanerogamic vegetation : 
Potentilla Tormentilla, Vaccinium Myrtillus, 
Galium saxatile, Juricus effusus, 
Calluna vulgaris, Juncus conglomeratus, 
Erica Tetralix, Juncus squarrosus, 
326 
J. GILBERT BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Scirpus coespitosus, Aira flexuosa, 
Eriophorum angustifolium, Molinia cserulea, 
Agrostis vulgaris, Nardus stricta.
The hills are much more grassy and less heathy than our ordinary 
Yorkshire moors.
The charm of the district to a south-country 
botanist lies in the abundance of wild wood (trees and shrubs) that 
clothes the rocky banks of the deep river ghylls.
Here oak and ash 
and wych-elm, birdcherry and hawthorn and blackthorn, and many 
more have grown in abundance and luxuriance, undisturbed from time 
immemorial.
The stream which drains the district is the Irthing, with 
many tributaries, which falls into the Eden not far from Carlisle.
At 
Gilsland and higher up, the Irthing forms the boundary between 
Northumberland and Cumberland, but my notes refer solely to the 
Cumberland side of the river.
They do not reach further down the 
valley than Brampton, where the red sandstone of the Carlisle plain 
begins, and as regards elevation belong entirely to the upper half of 
Watson's mid-agrarian zone.
Here, as at the Lakes, cultivated fields 
are few in number.
There is no wheat, so that they are all barley, 
oats, turnips, potato-fields, or plots of garden ground, so that many 
of the common agrestal weeds are absent, and many of those usually 
common are scarce, and as at the Lakes houses and cultivated fields 
cease upwards, not with the limit of the super-agrarian, but with that 
of the mid-agrarian, zone.
No doubt it will be a capital country for 
mosses, lichens, and fungi, but to these I paid no attention.
Ranniiculacese.
— Anemone nemorosa, plentiful.
Ranunculus hede- 
raceus replaces aquatilis • I saw a ditch many yards long crammed 
full of it.
P. Flammula, acris, and repens, and Caltha palustris, all 
common.
Berberacese.
— Berberis vulgaris, hedges near Rosehill, in the angle 
between the Irthing and Poltross Burn, not native.
Papaveracese.
— Pap aver dulnum, plentiful in the cultivated fields 
at Brampton and sparingly higher up the valley at Low Row and 
Nether Denton.
P. Rhceas, not seen.
P. Argemone, sparingly at 
Brampton.
Cruciferae.
— Sinapis arvensis and Brassica Papa, neither plentiful.
Sisymbrium officinale, road-sides at Brampton.
S. Alliaria, woods at 
Naworth and hedge-banks at Brampton.
Cheirauthus Cheiri, plentiful 
on the walls of Lanercost Priory.
Cardamine pratensis and hirsuta, 
both common.
C. sylvatica, damp woods at Gilsland Spa and 
Naworth.
Nasturtium officinale and Capsella, both common.
Violacese.
— Viola palustris, sylvatica, and tricolor, all three common, 
the latter both type and arvensis, with intermediate forms.
Droseracese.
— Drose?-a rotundifolia only seen.
. 
Naturalist, 
J. GILBERT BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
3 2 7 
Polygalaceae.— Poly gala depressa, Irthing bank above Gilsland.
Caryophyllacese.
— Sileiieinflata, bed of the Irthing at Burdoswald, 
a few -flowered glabrous form.
Lychnis vespertina, diiirna, and 
Flos-cuculi, all three frequent.
Cerastium glomeratum, frequent.
C. 
triviale, common.
Stellaria nemorum, abundant in the damp woods 
about the stream in Naworth Park, from the castle all down to the 
Irthing.
S. media, common, both type and var.
neglecta.
S. Holostea, 
graminea, and aliginosa, all three common.
Arenaria serpyllifolia, 
on the Roman wall at Burdoswald, the walls of Lanercost Priory, 
and, the type and var.
leptoclados, in sandy fields at Talkin Tarn.
Sagina procumbens, common.
Spergula arvensis • this, Galeopsis 
Tetrahit, and Polygonum Persicaria, the three commonest weeds of 
cultivated ground.
Portulaceae.
— Montia fontana, common in the runnels, both 
type and var.
rivularis.
Hypericacese.
— Hypericum perforatum, only once seen, on the 
walls of Lanercost Priory.
H. dubium, side of the road between 
Talkin Tarn and Brampton.
II.
tetrapterum, Jmmifuswn, and 
pulchrum, frequent.
R. hirsutum, wooded banks of the Irthing at 
Gilsland and Burdoswald.
Tiliacese.
— Tilia intermedia, frequently planted.
T. grandifolia, 
avenue near Naworth Castle, planted.
Linaceae.
— Linum catharticum, frequent in dry grassy places.
Geraniacese.
— Geranium sylvaticum, common in woods and fields 
by the Irthing from Cromel Linn down to Burdoswald.
G. molle 
and dissectum, frequent.
G. Robertianum, woods and hedge -banks, 
common.
Erodium cicutarium, sandy fields at Brampton, the large 
caulescent form.
Oxalis Acetosella, common in all the woods.
Ilicaeese.
— Ilex Aquifolium, wild at Talkin Tarn, etc., but by no 
means common.
Aceracese.
— Acer Pseudo-platanus, woods and plantations, common, 
very fine trees near Lanercost Priory, doubtfully native, but 
copiously self-sown.
Leguminiferse.
— Ulex europceus and Sarothamnus, common.
U. Gallii, abundant below Talkin Tarn, seen also in Naworth Park 
and on the edge of the moor at Banks and Burdoswald.
Ononis 
arvensis, north bank of the Irthing beneath Burdoswald.
Anthyllis 
vulneraria, sandy field east of Talkin Tarn.
Medicago lupulina, 
frequent.
lYifolium pratense, medium, repens, procumbens, and minus, 
all frequent.
Lotus corniculatus, common in the meadows.
Z. major, 
common in damp meadows.
Vicia Cracca, V.
sepmm, and Lathyrus 
pratensis, all three frequent.
Nov. 1886.
328 J.
GILBERT BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Rosacese.
— Primus spinosa, everywhere common in woods and 
thickets.
P. Avium, banks of the stream below Naworth Castle.
P. Padus, everywhere common in woods and hedges, reaching the 
size of a tree 30 feet high, with a naked trunk, on the banks of the 
stream below Gilsland church.
Spircea Ulmaria, common.
Agri- 
mojiia Eupatoria, Combe Crags and by the Irthing near the Popping 
Stone.
Sanguisorba officinalis and Poterium Sanguisorba, north bank 
of the Irthing beneath Burdoswald.
Alchemilla arvensis, sandy fields 
over Talkin Tarn.
A. vulgaris, common.
Potentilla Tormentilla, 
common on the moors.
P. Fragariastrum, reptans, and anserina.
Comarum palustre, moory bogs.
Fragaria vesca, common.
Rubus 
Idceus, universal in woods, thickets, and hedges.
No suberect Rubus 
seen.
R. affinis Bab. non W.
& N., common about Brampton and 
less frequent higher up the valley at Low Row and Nether Denton ; 
a form with leaves densely hairy below at Over Denton.
R. rhamni- 
folius, once seen, near the Irthing above Naworth Bridge.
R. villi- 
caulis, once seen, at Denton.
R. mucronatus, once seen, at Burdoswald.
R. umbrosus, everywhere common in thickets and on the edge of the 
moors.
R. Radula, Red Beck and road-side near Nether Denton.
R. infestus, frequent in hedges and thickets from Gilsland all down 
the valley to Brampton.
R. pallidas, the universal bramble of the 
woods, from Gilsland all down the valley to Brampton : very plentiful 
in the Naworth woods.
R. corylifolius, frequent, especially about 
Naworth and Lanercost.
R. ccesius, woods and hedges at Burdoswald 
and Denton, all the robust variety agrestis W.
& N.
Rosa mollissima, 
abundant in the woods and hedges, very conspicuous in September 
with its bright red drooping globes of fruit ; very fine near the 
railway crossing at Over Denton and by the Irthing beneath Burdos- 
wald.
R. tomentosa, frequent.
Var. scabriuscula, by the Irthing 
beneath Burdoswald.
R. rubiginosa, apparently wild on the north 
side of the Irthing beneath Burdoswald.
R. canina, common ; many 
curious forms of the subcristatae, including subcristata, coriifolia, 
Watsoni, and marginata ; a form of subcristata with glaucous leaves, 
hispid peduncles, and glandular sepals, in hedges at Over Denton.
Cratcsgus jnonogyjia, everywhere common in woods and thickets.
Var. laciuiata, by the Irthing at Lanercost.
Pyrus Mains var.
acerba 
and P.
Aucuparia, both common in the native woods.
Onagraceae.
— Epilobium hirsutum, seen only once, on the banks 
of the stream below Naworth Castle.
E. parviflorum, obscurum, and 
montanum, common.
E. palustre, rills on Spade-adam waste.
Circcza lutetiana, frequent in woods.
Haloragiaceae.
— Myriophyllum alter Jiiflorum, Talkin Tarn.
Calli- 
triche stagnalis, runnels and ponds, frequent.
Naturalist, 
J. GILBERT BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
329 
Grossulariaceae.
— Ribes Grossularia, scattered in woods and 
hedges, but only single bushes.
Crassulacese.
— Sedum acre, walls of Lanercost Priory.
Saxifragaceae.
— Saxifraga aizoides, dripping rocks in the Cromel 
Linn Ravine and over Gilsland Spa. Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, 
damp woods at Gilsland and Naworth.
Pamassia palustris, bogs all 
down the valley from Cromel Linn to Brampton.
Umbelliferae.
— Hydrocotyle vulgaris, frequent in bogs.
Sanicula 
europcea, frequent in woods.
ALgopodium Podagraria, in the neigh- 
bourhood of most of the villages, but never far from houses.
Pim- 
pinella Saxifraga, frequent in grassy places.
Angelica sylvestris, 
everywhere in swamps.
Heracleum Sphondylium, common.
Tor His 
Anthriscus, common.
Chcsrophyllum sylvestre, common.
C. temulum, 
hedge-banks at Burdoswald and Brampton.
Myrrhis odorata and 
Conium maculatum, road-sides near Brampton.
Araliaceae.
— Hedera Helix, common in woods, and on rocks and 
walls.
Caprifoliaceae.
— Sambucus nigra, woods and hedges, frequent.
Viburnum Opulus, truly wild in the woods by the Irthingat Gilsland, 
Burdoswald, etc.
Lonicera Pericly?nenum, frequent in woods and 
hedges.
Rubiacese.
— Galium boreale, rocks in the Irthing, from Cromel 
Linn down beyond Gilsland.
G. cruciatum and verum, frequent.
G. Mollugo, frequent on the hedge-banks all down the valley from 
Gilsland to Brampton.
G. saxatile, common on the moors.
G. 
uliginosum, bog near Greenhead Cottages.
G. palustre and Aparine, 
both frequent.
Asperula odorata, frequent in woods, extending to 
the hedgerows.
Sherardia arvensis, sandy field at Talkin Tarn.
Valerianacese.
— Valeriajia officinalis, frequent in bogs.
Dipsaceae.
— Scabiosa succisa, common in grassy places.
S. 
arvensis, frequent.
Compositse.
— Carduus lanceolatus, palustris, and arvensis, all three 
common.
C. heterophyllus, north bank of the Irthing below Burdos- 
wald.
Arctium nemorosum, woods and road-sides, frequent ; typical 
minus not seen.
Centaurea nigra and Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum, 
both very common.
Matricaria Parthenium, on the bridge over the 
Poltross burn at Rosehill, etc.
M. inodora, the common mayweed 
of road-sides and cornfields.
Anthemis Cotula, twice seen about 
Gilsland.
Tanacetum vulgare, road-side between Brampton and 
Talkin Tarn, near a cottage.
Achillcza Millefolium, common.
A. Ptarmica, frequent in moory fields.
Artemisia vulgaris, hedges 
at Burdoswald and Brampton.
Filago germauica and minima, sandy 
fields over Talkin Tarn.
Gnaphalium uliginosum, frequent on peat.
Nov. 1886.
33° 
J. GILBERT BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Senecio vulgaris, Jacobcea, and aquaticus, all three common.
S. sylva- 
ticus, sandy banks below Talkin Tarn.
Bellis perennis, common.
Solidago Virgaitrea, Combe Crags and banks of the Irthing at Laner- 
cost Bridge.
Tussilago Farfcu-a, common.
Petasites vulgaris, banks 
of the Naworth stream and of the Irthing at Burdoswald, etc.
Eupatorium, expected, but not seen.
Lapsana, Hypochoeris radicata, 
Leontodon hispidus, L.
autumnalis, and Taraxacum, all common.
Lactuca muralis, beech wood over Talkin Tarn.
Sonchus oleraceus 
and asper, frequent.
S. arvensis, cultivated fields, occasionally.
Crepis virens, hedge-banks.
C. paludosa, dripping cliffs of Cromel 
Linn ravine and at Gilsland Spa. Hie?-acium Pilosella, frequent.
H. ccesium, damp rocks at Gilsland Spa. H.
vulgatu?n, rocks of 
Cromel Linn ravine, walls of Lanercost Priory, etc.
H. boreale, very 
common.
Campaimlaceae.
— -Jasione montana, sandy ground over Talkin 
Tarn.
Campanula latifolia, woods at Gilsland, Naworth, etc.
C. 
rotundifolia, common.
Ericaceae.
— Vaccinium Myrtillus, common on heaths ; abundant 
at Combe Crags.
Erica Tetralix, more common than E.
cinerea.
Call r una,.
common.
Jasminaceae.
— Eraximis, common in the wooded ravines.
Ligus- 
trum, hedges near the church at Gilsland ; not native.
Convolvulacese.
— Convolvidus sepium, frequent in gardens and 
hedges adjacent ; not native.
Scrophulariaceae.
— Verbascum Thapsus, walls of Naworth Castle.
Scrophularia nodosa and Digitalis, frequent.
Linaria Cymbalaria, 
walls of Naworth Castle and Lanercost Priory.
Veronica agrestis, 
an occasional weed.
V. arvensis, serpyllifolia, and officinalis, frequent.
V. montana, damp woods of Gilsland Spa. V.
Chamcedrys and 
Beccabunga, common.
Euphrasia, Bartsia Odontites, and Rhina?ithus 
Crista-galli, common.
Pedicularis sylvatica, swamps.
Labiatae.
— Mentha hirsuta, frequent, type and var.
paludosa.
M. arvensis, cultivated fields, a very robust form in a farmyard at 
Burdoswald.
Thymus Serpyllum, frequent.
Calamvitha Clinopodium, 
hedges.
C. Acinos, sandy field over Talkin Tarn.
Nepeta Glechoma, 
hedges at Brampton.
Prwiella, frequent.
Stachys Betonica, palustris, 
and sylvatica, all three frequent, but ambigua not seen.
Galeopsis 
Tetrahit, a frequent weed.
Lamium incisum, road-side at Nether 
Denton.
L. purpureum, frequent.
Ajuga reptans and Teua-ium 
Scorodonia, both common.
Boraginaceae.
— Myosotis ccespitosa, common in the runnels.
M. arvensis, frequent.
Anchusa arvensis, sandy turnip-field at 
Brampton.
Naturalist, 
J. GILBERT BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
33 1 
Pinguiculacese.
— Pinguicula vulgaris, frequent in swamps.
Primulaceae.
— Primula vulgaris and officinalis, both frequent.
Lysimachia nemo-rum, woods at Gilsland Spa.
Plantaginacese.
— Plantago major and lanceolata, common.
Chenopodiacese.
— Chenopodium and Atriplex angustifolia, occa- 
sional weeds.
C. Bonus-Henricus, road-sides.
Polygonaceae.
— Rumex nemorosus, obtusifolius, crispus, Acetosa, 
Acetosella, all common.
P. conglotneratus , not seen.
Polygonum 
Convolvulus, aviculare, Plydropiper, and Persicaria, all four common.
Euphorbiacese.
— Euphorbia Helioscopia, turnip fields at Brampton.
Mercurialis pere?inis, woods and hedges.
Urticaceae.
— Parielaria diffusa, walls of Naworth Castle.
Urtica 
dioica, common.
U. urens, farmyards at Burdoswald, etc.
Humulus, 
hedges near a cottage at Brampton.
Ulmus suberosa, hedges and 
plantations; not native.
U. moutana, common in the wild woods 
along the streams ; several very fine trees about Lanercost.
Amentiferse.
— Castanea and Carpinus, hedges and plantations.
Quercus,.
Corylus, Betula, and Alnus, everywhere common in the wild 
woods.
Populus nigra, alba, and tremula, Naworth Woods, etc., 
doubtfully native.
Salix pentandra, frequent by streams and in 
hedges • a long hedge full of it near Nether Denton.
S. fragilis and 
alba, by the streams about Naworth and Lanercost, doubtfully native.
S. purpurea, abundant on the rocky margin of the river all the way 
down from Gilsland to Lanercost Bridge.
S. viminalis, a doubtful 
native.
S. Smithiana, stream-sides and hedges at Nether Denton 
and Naworth.
S. caprea and cinerea, both common.
S. aurita and 
repens, edge of the moor at Over Denton.
S. nigricans, banks of the 
Irthing below Burdoswald, and very fine in the hedges near the Over 
Denton railway crossing.
Coniferse.
— Pinus sylvestris, woods of Naworth, etc.
Juniperus, 
edge of the moor at Burdoswald.
Taxus, edge of the ravine below 
Cromel Linn.
Typhacese.
— Sparganium ramoswn, runnels at Burdoswald and 
Milton.
Naiadaceae.
— Polygonum natans, pool at Gilsland.
P. polygoni- 
folius, moorland bogs.
P. prcelongus, obtusifolius, and pusillus, 
Talkin Tarn.
Alismacese.
— Triglochin palustre, shores of Talkin Tarn.
Hydrocharidacese.
— Elodea, a small pond near the Irthing full of 
it, flowering freely ; Talkin Tarn.
Orchidacese.
— The wrong season of the year, only Orchis macula ta 
and Lisiera ovata seen.
Iridaceae.
— Iris Pseudacorus, pond in Naworth Park.
Nov. t886.
33 2 
NOTES — FUNGI.
Liliacese.
— Scilla ?iutans and Allium ursinum, woods.
Narthecium, 
Spade-adam waste, 
Juncaceae.
— Luzula pilosa, beech wood over Talkin Tarn.
L. sylvatica, abundant in the Gilsland and Naworth Woods and at 
Combe Crags.
L. campestris and multiflora, frequent.
Juncus con- 
glo?neratus, effusus, glaucus, acutiflorus, bufonius, and lamprocarpus, 
all common.
Cyperaceae.
— Scirpus pauciflorus, bog below Talkin Tarn.
S. 
ccespitosus, common on the moors.
S. setaceus, damp road-sides.
Eriophorum angustifolium, swamps of Spade-adam waste.
Too late 
for Carices.
The following only seen in recognisable condition — viz., 
Carex acuta, vulgaris, glauca, panicea, sylvatica, and ampullacea.
Gramina.
— Anthoxanthum, Digr aphis, Alopecurus geniculatus, 
Phleum pratense, all common.
Agi'ostis vulgaris, very common, both 
type and var.
nigra.
Aira ccespitosa, common in swamps.
A. 
fiexuosa, common on the peaty moors.
A. caryophyllea, sandy fields 
over Talkin Tarn.
Avena flavescens and elatior, frequent.
Holcics 
mollis, la?iatus, Triodia, and Molinia, all common.
Melica uniflora, 
shaded woods at Gilsland and Naworth.
Glyceria fluitans, frequent 
in swamps.
Poa annua, pratcnsis, trivialis, Briza, Cynosurus, Dac- 
tylis, Festuca ovina, duriuscula, and pratensis, all common.
F. elatior, 
bed of the Irthing at Gilsland, etc.
Bromus asper and giganteus, very 
fine in the woods at Gilsland, Naworth, etc.
B. mollis, frequent.
Brachypodium sylvaticum, frequent about the Irthing.
Triticum 
caninum, woods at Gilsland and Naworth.
T. repens and Lolium 
perenne, common.
Nardus, very common on the moors.
Filices.
— Pteris, Lomaria, Athyrium Filix-fo3mina, Nephrodium 
Filix-mas, N.
dilatatum, and Polypodium vulgare, common.
Asplenium 
Ruta-muraria, walls at Gilsland, Naworth, and Lanercost.
A. Tricho- 
manes, with the last on the walls of Naworth Castle and Lanercost 
Priory.
Cystopteris, walls at Gilsland and Brampton.
Equisetacese.
— Equisetum arvense, common.
E. maximum, very 
fine in the Naworth Woods near Lanercost Bridge and by Kilnhill 
Beck.
E. sylvaticum, abundant in the wood over the Spa at Gilsland.
NOTES— FUNGI.
Cortinarius alboviolaceus Fr., and Boletus cyanescens 
Bull., near Kendal.
— These interesting species of fungi, which do not seem 
to have been found before in the North of England, were growing in woods this 
year near Kendal.
The latter species is remarkable for turning a deep azure blue 
immediately the flesh is broken.— C.
H. Waddell, Kendal, 8th October, 1886.
Cynophallus eaninus Fr.
, near Leeds.— A perfect specimen of this 
somewhat rare species was found by Dr. Hick in his garden at New Wortley, and 
brought to me on the 14th inst.
Mr. H.
T. Soppitt, to whom I sent it for deter- 
mination, has found it only at Saltaire and Bingley.
— W.
Eaple Clarke, Leeds, 
October I6th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
333 
THE HITCHINGSTONE, KEIGHLEY MOOE.
S. A.
ADAMSON, F.G.S., 
Joint Geological Secretaiy to the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, and Secretary to the Leeds 
Geological Associatioii.
The celebrated and time-honoured rock bearing the above name, 
rests upon the moors about five miles to the west of Keighley.
Cele- 
brated it certainly has been for many generations, for in pre-scientific 
days it attracted the notice of the curious and the superstitious.
Did 
not then the tradition go round how the wise woman of Cowling, in 
the valley below, seeing the block in her garden, and liking its room 
better than its company, thrust her broomstick into it, and suddenly 
'hitched' it to the top of the moors above?
And if any were in- 
credulous, why, was not the hole still left (of which more presently) 
showing where the broomstick had entered ?
Later, when science 
had enlightened the observers, the geological 'reason why' was applied 
to it, and for the last forty years the presence of the Hitchingstone 
in its solitary position has been attributed to icebergs, to land ice, 
etc.; in fact, the 'Great Ice Age' was held to be sufficient to account 
for it.
Thus, in 1874, we find a Mr. E.
G. Spencer reporting it to the 
Boulder Committee of the British Association, at the Belfast meeting, 
as an erratic or ice-borne boulder.
It must be said, however, that 
the account was hardly accurate enough, nor was the examination 
sufficiently exhaustive, to justify such a decision or report.
A few 
years later, Mr. J.
R. Dakyns, of the Government Geological Survey, 
who had surveyed the whole district, stated, in a letter to the Geo- 
logical Magazine, that ' in his opinion it is not a boulder,' and in a 
further communication says : ' It has no single characteristic of a 
boulder about it.
It is not rounded or scratched, nor is it standing on 
end, nor in any such a way as to raise a suspicion of its having been 
removed.' In the face of such conflicting statements, it was felt, for 
the honour of Yorkshire geology, that something should be done to 
solve the problem.
The writer of these notes, in a lecture before the 
Keighley Scientific Society on ' Erratics,' given last winter, suggested 
that this would be practical work for them to accomplish.
The idea 
was taken up, and the Boulder Committee of the British Association 
communicated with for instructions.
These were duly received and 
acted upon, and the investigation carried to a successful issue.
Although the work was nominally done by the Keighley Society, it is 
only fair to state that it was really executed by a single member, 
Mr. Daniel Smith, who, being very enthusiastic in the matter, claimed 
as a native of Cowling the privilege of bearing the entire expense.
Nov. 1886.
334 S.
A. ADAMSON : THE HITCHINGSTONE.
All being ready, the Leeds geologists were invited to inspect the 
excavation and give an opinion respecting it ; but before stating their 
verdict, it would be well to give a few details relative to the stone.
The Hitchingstone is an immense block of Rough Rock, or upper 
section of the Millstone Grit series, standing on the moor behind 
Wainman's Pinnacle (that rude monument situated on the crest of 
the bold escarpment of Earl Crag, so familiar to railway travellers on 
their way to Skipton, as it stands out in sharp relief against the blue 
sky), and is at an elevation of 1,175 feet above sea level.
As a 
boundary stone, it has been used from time immemorial to mark the 
place where the extensive estates of three great landowners meet, 
who each claim a portion of the block, viz., the Duke of Devonshire 
(Keighley Moor), Mr.Townley Parker (Stott Hill Moor), and Mr. Jas.
Lund (Sutton Moor).
It measures on its southern and western faces 
28 ft.
9 in.
and 25 ft.
respectively, and is 2 1 ft.
in height.
It has been esti- 
mated to contain about 15,250 cubic feet of stone.
There is a cavity 
running right through it, which coincides in its direction with the bed- 
ding plane; it is of an oval shape, its axes measuring 15^ in.
by 12 in.
An old work on Keighley gives very gravely an opinion ' that it is 
evidently the mould or matrix of an enormous fish'; but it is really a 
hole left by the weathering out of a large tree, which by the markings 
show it to have been of a Lepidodendroid character.
It was inter- 
esting to note that the longer axis of this cavity was horizontal, 
showing that it had been flattened by pressure.
There are no indi- 
cations of striae whatever (although any that may have existed may 
have weathered off), but there is every appearance of jointing, the 
east and west sides specially showing this.
This favours the opinion 
that the adjoining portions of rock may have been separated from 
this along the joints, leaving it in its original position.
The upholders 
of the erratic-block theory point out that there is an unconformability, 
that is, the plane of the bedding of the stone does not coincide with 
the dip of the surrounding strata ; but this may be explained.
An 
examination of the excavation shows that both the stone itself and 
the underlying bed have suffered much more by weathering on the 
north than on the south side, a portion of the under part of the stone 
to the north, two yards wide and one yard high, having been quite 
weathered away, leaving a passage from the western to the southern 
side.
By means of this weathering the stone has evidently been 
lowered at the northern end, and tilted up at the southern, thus 
causing the bedding of the stone to incline in a direction almost 
contrary to the original dip.
The section made by the excavation 
showed some ten inches of black peaty soil, and beneath this about 
a foot of quartz gravel, the latter arising from the denudation of the 
Naturalist, 
S. A.
ADAMSON : THE HITCHINGSTONE.
335 
Rough Rock.
Then followed a bed of sandstone, upon which the 
Hitchingstone immediately rests, of such a character and position as 
to indicate the basement bed of the Rough Rock.
This is of a much 
finer grain, and the large quartz pebbles which abound on the 
weathered face of the Hitchingstone are absent, the latter being in 
many places quite a conglomerate.
A few words should also be said 
upon the geology of the district.
The grit of Earl Crag, before men- 
tioned, is the principal rock of the Middle or Third Grits.
This is 
well defined and distinctly marked, and can be identified wherever it 
occurs.
It extends from Earl Crag down the Glusburn Valley to 
Hawkcliffe, which overhangs the valley of the Aire between Steeton 
and Keighley, and appears again on the northern side of the Aire 
in Brunthwaite Crags, Addingham High Moor, and Otley Chevin.
Brimham Rocks are also composed of this rock.
In this part of 
Yorkshire there are generally three beds of grit (when not interfered 
with by faults) between this bed of grit and the Rough Rock.
In 
walking from Earl Crag to the Hitchingstone, we pass from this main 
bed of the Third Grits to a bed of shale ; then across another bed of 
grit, and another bed of shale ; then over two faults, which meet 
almost at right angles between Round Hill and Winter Hill.
Having 
crossed the faults, we step over another bed of grit, then another of 
shale, which underlies the bed of grit composing Hitchingstone Hill, 
on which is the block the subject of this article.
In this walk we 
follow the direction of the dip, and consequently have passed by 
degrees from lower to higher strata.
On account of the faults, there 
is a little difficulty in tracing all the beds, but it is almost a certainty 
that at Hitchingstone Hill we are upon the basement bed of the 
Rough Rock.
Scattered over all the surface of the moor are to be 
seen scores of smaller, but still large blocks of the coarse conglome- 
rate of the Hitchingstone, and higher up the moors, southwards, for 
miles, it occurs in situ.
The glacialists have made many conjectures as 
to the original home of this block.
Rivock, on the north of the Aire, 
the Earl Crag, and several other places on the adjacent moors have 
been pointed out as likely positions to have furnished such a stone.
There are two methods by which large blocks like this may have 
been removed during the glacial period.
They may have been forced 
along the ground by land ice, or have been carried on an iceberg and 
dropped to the sea bottom as the ice melted.
There is no evidence 
that this part of the country was, during the glacial period, so thickly 
covered by ice as to admit of a glacier so powerful as would be 
required to push onwards such a ponderous mass as this • and if it 
had been dropped from an iceberg, it is probable that the surface of 
the rock underneath would have presented a different appearance 
Nov. 1886.
33 6 
NOTE — PALEONTOLOGY.
to what it does now.
Mr. Hardcastle, President of the Leeds 
Geological Association, standing appropriately under the shadow of 
the mighty block, reviewed all these facts in a short address, and 
stated the result of the examination — viz., that the stone is not a true 
erratic, as that term is understood, but that it is a portion of the 
strata of Rough Rock which originally covered these moors.
With respect to the solution of the ' Hitchingstone ' problem, as 
narrated above, Mr. Adamson informs us that he has received the 
following opinion of the investigation from Dr. Crosskey, the Secretary 
to the Boulder Committee of the British Association : — ' Many thanks 
for the very valuable account of the examination of the Hitchingstone.
The conclusion arrived at seems to me justified by the facts narrated, 
and the dignity of a " Boulder " will have to be taken away from the 
famous Hitchingstone.' — Eds.
NO TE — PALsE ONTOL O G Y.
Discovery of the base of another large Fossil Tree.— Yorkshire 
quarry owners seem now to be thoroughly on the qui vive for fossil trees, for I 
have had a second example of some colossal fossil roots reported to me, and along 
with my friends, Messrs.
C. Brownridge, F.G.S., and Hoffman Wood, F.G.S., 
have visited the scene of the discovery.
This is again at the Fall Top Quarry, Clayton, 
but in a part worked by Messrs.
Briggs and Shepherd.
They have only partially 
bared it, further progress being at a standstill until a road is diverted.
Being in 
near proximity to the former example of Messrs.
Murgatroyd's, it is.
of course, in 
the same geological horizon, viz., in the measures between the Better Bed Coal and 
the Elland Flagstone.
In order that a comparison might be instituted between 
this and the former discovery, the following measurements of the roots now exposed 
were carefully made by the gentlemen above-named.
The diameter of the area at 
present bared is from N.
to S.
20 ft., and from E.
to W.
22 ft.
4 in., or a superficial 
area of 446 ft.
The base of the stump is irregular in shape, but approximately 
circular with an average diameter of 3 ft.
11 in.
There are eight roots again in 
this example, some not yet bared very far, and all those exposed are broken at 
their extremities ; beginning with the roots on the south we have 
Root.
Diameter 
Distance from 
Distance from point of bifurcation to 
Present 
close 
stump to point 
present termination of root.
length of root 
No.
to stump.
of bifurcation.
Right Fork.
- Left Fork.
Exposed.
20 in.
...
6 ft.
. 2 ft.
3 in.
...
2 ft.
6 in.
...
8 ft.
6 in.
2 ...
2Q| ,, 
...
7 ,, 6 in.
. 
• 1 „ 9 „ 
....
2 „ 6 „ ...
10 ,, 
3 ••• 
19" „ 
...
7 „ 6 „ ..
6 „ 
...
8 „ 6 „ ...
16 ,, 
4 ...
17* 
...
8„ 
. 7 ,, 6 in.
...
7 ,, 6 ,, 
15 ,, 6 in.
5 - 
20 ,, 
...
7 „ 
• 3 " 
...
— 3 „ ...
10 if 
6 ...
18 „ 
...
7,, 
• 4 „ 
...
1 „ 9 „ ...
7 ••• 
20 ,, 
...
7 „ 
Not bared 
7 » 
8 ...
2Qj „ 
...Partially bared 
5 ,, 6 in.
The stump is almost entirely denuded away, as at the utmost some 12 or 15 inches 
only can be said to be left of it.
There are many broken pieces of stigmaria laid 
about in various places, but we Were informed they did not all belong to the tree 
in question, and as they were thus mixed it would be quite unreliable to attempt 
to restore the roots to their original length.
Although most certainly this is a 
magnificent specimen, yet after careful comparison and due consideration of all 
points, we did not consider it as fine an example as the one previously discovered 
by Messrs.
Murgatroyd.— S.
A. Adamson, October 13th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
337 
THE HABITS OF THE GREATER HORSE-SHOE BAT.
Rev. H.
'A.
MACPHERSON, M.A., 
Alember of the British Ornithologists Union; Joint-Author of the 
' Birds of Cumberland.' 
Considering the number of field naturalists at work at home, it is 
to be regretted that our knowledge of the distribution of our Bats 
has made little or no advance in the last ten years.
Even that 
admirable granary of facts, the Zoologist, has taught us little or 
nothing about Bats of late years, and other periodicals present a 
similar blank of information.
Exception must, of course, be taken 
as to Yorkshire, in which the distribution of British mammals has 
been traced with such admirable exactness by Mr. Roebuck ; as to 
almost all the other counties, our ignorance exceeds our knowledge.
In Cumberland, some six species of Bats have been obtained, the 
most interesting being the Barbastelle.
It has not, indeed, come 
under the writer's notice in his county ; but he lately examined, in 
the collection of Mr. Bond, two examples of the Barbastelle, obtained 
at Carlisle by the late Mr. T.
C. Heysham.
The object of the 
present paper is to embody some interesting observations on a 
somewhat rare species, the Greater Horse-shoe Bat, as observed in 
Devonshire.
The writer having recently advertised for live Bats, Mr.
Mitchell, of X , in Devonshire, offered to supply him with some 
* Lesser Horse-shoe Bats ' ; but the species intended proved to be 
the rarer Greater Horse-shoe.
In a note of August 14th, Mr. Mitchell remarked, ' I generally 
get the Horse-shoe Bats in some large caves, a few miles distant.' 
On the 17th he wrote, ' I am sorry to keep you so long waiting for 
the Bats ; I went to the caves yesterday, but although I was in them 
for nearly three hours, I only succeeded in catching two, and one of 
these was so badly hurt, having its wing broken in capture, that I 
was obliged to kill it.
The other is doing well, and sleeps com- 
fortably all day, only feeding in the evening.
I am going down to 
the caves again to-morrow ; they are situated close to the river 
Y .
I hope to secure half a dozen more.
The only reason that 
I can assign for my failure to obtain more specimens yesterday is 
that a great many visitors have been to see the caves lately, and I 
fancy that their noise and the lights which they carried must have 
disturbed the Bats.
Early in the spring I could go down and pick 
off as many as I could carry away, since they were not in the least 
frightened, and would permit me to take them down from where they 
were hanging with scarcely a movement ; whereas now, as soon as I 
entered the cave they began to fly from one part of the cave to the 
Nov. 1886.
z 
338 REV.
H. A.
MACPHERSON : GREATER HORSE-SHOE BAT.
other.
Stationing myself near a rather small hole, which leads from 
one passage to another, I managed to secure two in a butterfly net 
as they flew through.
Although they fly very swiftly, I feel sure that 
if I had had a larger net to put before the hole, which is about 5 ft.
by 3 ft.
in size, I should have been able to catch a dozen or so in as 
many minutes.
The hole in question slopes downwards, leading 
from a higher passage to a lower one, and I noticed that the Bats 
only flew down this hole, never up it.
I may remark, that though I 
am generally pretty accurate with the butterfly net, yet the Bats w r ere 
nearly always too quick for me, and I was surprised to see how 
quickly they turned aside, avoiding the net and the projecting pieces 
of rock in the neatest manner possible I enclose a few moth 
wings [chiefly those of a large yellow underwing, H.A.M.], which I 
picked up out of a heap of their refuse, in order to demonstrate the 
general nature of their food ; there were several Cockchafers, Dor- 
beetles, Scavenger-beetles, and other Coleoptera, all partly eaten, in 
these heaps, which were near the mouth of the cave.
The Bats seem 
to prefer the mouth of the caves to the interior parts, for although I 
went in a great distance, I failed to see a single Bat beyond a certain 
limit, i.e.-, where the daylight failed absolutely.' 
In another letter, of August 19th, this admirable observer 
remarks, ' I again visited the caves yesterday to try to get a few 
more Bats.
I am sorry to report that I only secured a single 
specimen ; they have become so excessively wild that I experienced 
the greatest difficulty in getting that one, which I only obtained by 
stretching a net across a certain part of the cave.
I send you the 
two I have been able to catch, by this morning's post.' 
The specimens in question were duly delivered next day, one 
only being alive and well.
The other had died, no doubt in transit 
It was a male, and of an extremely pale colour above, as compared 
with its fellow.
The writer at once handed it over to the Natural 
History Museum at Kensington — the British Room of which is 
much in need of Bats, — Mr. Harting kindly taking charge of the speci- 
men in the absence of Mr. Thomas.
The survivor, a female, exhibited great anxiety to escape, and 
crawled with some agility, rapidly twitching its large and delicate ears.
The horse-shoe membrane, which shrinks in preserved examples, 
was fully developed in both specimens, and the canine teeth seemed 
large in comparison with the very small incisors.
Upon being released the female made a few circles round the 
room, flying slowly and heavily, as compared with the smaller British 
Bats.
Once, indeed, it struck in flight against a bookcase, being, 
perhaps, confused by the shaking of its journey and the strangeness 
Naturalist, 
NOTES — MAMMALIA, ARACHNIDA AND CRUSTACEA.
339 
of its fresh environment.
After a brief period of exercise, during 
which- it twice settled on a book, it alighted on the corner of a 
picture, and there remained hanging during the remainder of the day.
It was absolutely free from any disagreeable scent, and seemed to be 
of a mild disposition, never attempting to bite, even if roughly 
handled.' It was placed at night in a glass cage, and supplied with 
water, which it lapped with eagerness, clinging to the back of the 
case by its posterior limbs, the anterior portion of the body resting 
upon the saucer's edge.
Unfortunately, it refused to eat, though 
supplied with house flies and mealworms, and in spite of care only 
survived its companion a few days.
Twice it uttered a low cry 
when being handled.
As already remarked, the specimens in question were undoubtedly 
Greater Horse-shoe Bats, a species for which the writer and others 
have of late years searched unsuccessfully in Kent's Cavern, where it 
was formerly obtained by Montagu.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Lesser Horse-shoe Bat in Nidderdale.— On September 23rd a 
friend and I found one of these Bats suspended from the roof of a disused level of 
a coal mine, near Pateley Bridge.
This confirms Mr. Storey's previous note of 
this species {Rhinolophns hipposideros) in this district.
— W.
C. Clarkson, Pateley 
Bridge, October 16th, 1886.
[It is of interest to confirm the occurrence of a species like this on what is, so 
far, the northernmost outskirt of its known range in Britain.
— Ens.] 
Whitby Notes.— Mammalia.— In the Whitby Museum is the skull of 
what is here called the Bottle-nosed Whale, which was stranded at Whitby many 
years ago ; it is labelled Delphi mis {Hyperdodon) bidentahis.
On the 29th September, 1886, a Porpoise {Phcccena communis) was brought 
into Whitby, caught in the herring-nets.
— Thomas Stephenson, Whitby, 15th 
October, 1886.
. == ^=^ = 
NOTE— ARACHNIDA.
Chelifer DeG-eerii Koch near the Lincolnshire Coast.— 
On 2nd October, 1886, I took two examples of this pseudo-scorpion from behind 
the decayed bark of some wooden railings, near the sea, at Mablethorpe.
Earlier 
in the summer I observed other specimens in the same locality, one of which had eggs 
attached to the underside of her abdomen.
Mr. Cambridge, who kindly identified 
the species, states that he had only before received it from Hastings.
— H.
Wallis 
Kew, Louth, Lincolnshire, 7th October, 1886.
NOTE—CR USTA CEA.
Galathea strigosa on the Yorkshire Coast.— Last August a 
specimen of this crustacean was given me which had been taken at Runs wick, in 
a net (trawl, I presume).
Happening to be in Scarborough shortly after, Mr. E.
Thompson, of Westborough, naturalist, showed me a large number of specimens of 
it, about an inch long, and said they were frequently brought into Scarborough.
He called it the Squat Lobster, and I see that Mr. P.
H. Gosse, in one of his 
papers, calls it the Squat Crab.
Reference is made to its habit of springing back- 
wards to a very considerable distance, when alarmed, and its ability to so spring 
backwards into a small hole for shelter with unerring aim.
— Edward H.
Smart, 
The Vicarage, Kirby-in-Cleveland, via Northallerton, September 3rd, 1886.
Nov. 1886.
34Q 
NOTES— ORNITHOLOGY.
Cream-coloured Skylark in Nidderdale.
— A friend of mine has 
sent me a cream-coloured Skylark (Alauda arvcusis), which he caught on Hay- 
shaw Moor, near Pateley, September ioth, 1886.- — Wm. Storey, Pateley Bridge, 
October nth, 1886.
Albino Blackbird in Nidderdale.— I have obtained a perfect white 
example of the Blackbird ( Turdtcs meriila), which was found badly injured by 
flying against the telegraph wires at Pateley, by Mr. Thos.
Milner, on October 
2nd, 1886.
— Wm. Storey, Pateley Bridge, October nth, 1886.
Pochard and Hooded Crow in Durham.— A Pochard (Fuligula 
ferina) and a very dark specimen of the Hooded Crow ( Corvus comix) were shot 
by a local gunner on 7th October, 1886.
— J.
T. T.
Reed, Ryhope, Durham,, 
nth October, 1886.
Duck Decoys.
— Dr. Parsons is quite correct about there being a Decoy 
near Crowland, but it is in Northamptonshire, not Lincolnshire, it is situated.
It is one of the best in England, has eight pipes, and is rented by Mr. Williams,, 
whose family have been its lessees for over 200 years.
The pool lies between the 
rivers Nene and Wei land, in the N.E. corner of the county, between Peakirk and 
Crowland, two miles N.E. of the former town.
— R.
P. Gallwey, Thirkleby Park,, 
Thirsk, Oct. 4th, 1886.
Flamborough Bird-notes.
— On October 5th Woodcocks arrived on the 
headland, along with several Crested Wrens and Hooded Crows.
Since October 
2nd more sea-birds have frequented our coast than I ever remember, and such a 
variety too.
Manx Shearwaters (Puffinus anglorum), Cineraus Shearwaters 
\Puffinus griseus), and hundreds of Skuas and Gannets {Sula bassand) ; also 
Guillemots {Lomvia troile) and Razorbills (Alcd tarda) in their winter plumage, 
Little Gulls {Lams minutus), Terns, one Black Guillemot {Uria grylle), immature, 
and thousands of Kittiwakes {Rissa tridactyla) feeding in the early morning, 
several I saw having herrings' tails hanging out of their bills.
The birds covered 
a large area north and south of the headland.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough,, 
October 13th, 1886.
A Suggested Explanation of the Occurrence of the Sar- 
dinian Starling in England.
— Mr. Backhouse's record of the Sardinian 
Starling {Sturmis unicolor Marm.) in Yorkshire is very interesting.
It seems very 
likely that this species has once occurred in the New Forest, for Mr. G.
B. Corbin 
writes in the Zoologist ( 1877 , p.
22) of a black Starling killed there, and which, 
like the Yorkshire bird, was supposed to be a variety of the common species.
There is, however, an undoubted tendency in species to vary occasionally in 
plumage, so as to resemble other closely-allied species, and cases like the present 
may sometimes be accounted for in this way.
If it be so, the two black Starlings 
now recorded are not emigrants from Spain, but the progeny of common English 
Starlings {Sturmis vulgaris), and probably were bred in this country.
I merely 
throw out this suggestion for what it is worth.
— J.
H. Gurney, jun.
, Northrepps, 
Norwich, Oct. 4th.
Greenshank in Nidderdale.— On Saturday last a Greenshank ( Totanus 
canescens) was brought me, which had been shot three days previously on the 
margin of a small stream, near Pateley; there is no record of a similar instance 
happening near Pateley Bridge, or in Nidderdale.
— -Wm. Storey, Pateley Bridge, 
October nth, 1886.
[On the 26th and 27th of September we observed no less than five Green- 
shanks in the Washburn Valley, where they frequented the muddy fiats around 
the reservoirs, which were very low.
It was amusing to observe the brisk manner 
in which they searched for food in the shallows, running too and fro in an almost 
excited state.
Occasionally they would swim quite unconcerned across deep 
channels to neighbouring shallows.
We also saw this bird here at the same date 
last year ; it is no doubt of annual occurrence in suitable inland as well as coast 
localities, when on its autumn migration.
— W.E.C.] ' Naturalist,.
34i 
THE PIED FLYCATCHER IN NORTHUMBERLAND.
ALFRED CRAWHALL CHAPMAN.
That the Pied Flycatcher {Muscicapa atricapilld) is a regular summer 
visitant to this country is sufficiently well known, but in Northum- 
berland it is distinctly scarce, and not until this year (1886) have I 
had an opportunity of studying it at its breeding-place.
On the 23rd May last I visited a certain locality in Northum- 
berland with a view of seeing this bird, and was well rewarded 
by seeing no less than six males and three females between the 
hours of 4 and 8 a.m. During the course of the day I came across 
two other males in a different locality, so that in all I counted eight 
males and nearly as many females in one day's walk.
I was very anxious to find a nest of this species, and though I 
spent hours in watching the bird, it was only by the merest good 
fortune that I succeeded in watching one hen to her nest.
It was 
evidently- early in the season for them to be breeding, and I confi- 
dently believe that with the exception of one pair, none of the others 
had as yet any thought of nidification.
After 8 o'clock in the morning any attempts at nes't-building 
seemed to cease altogether, for though up to that time both male and 
female were constantly carrying dry grasses to a certain tiny hole in the 
wing- wall of a bridge over a small stream, yet after this the hole seemed 
to be deserted altogether, and not even the birds were to be seen in 
the vicinity of the nest.
Evidently, therefore, one pair was building, and I was well pleased 
with the result of this day's observation.
The notes I made at the time impressed me with the apparently 
delicate nature of these birds' constitutions, but this was doubtless 
due to the fact that they had only recently arrived in this country, 
and were fatigued with their long journey.
The cocks nearly always 
sat with drooping wings and fluffed out body feathers, though at the 
same time they were busily engaged all day feeding on the flies along 
the stream-side.
They constantly kept uttering their pretty little song, 
which reminded me rather of that of the Hedge Sparrow, but the tone 
was much more mellow • at times, also, it seemed to resemble the 
song of the Whitethroat and Reed Bunting.
When perched they 
have a habit of gently flirting the tail up and down, and they seemed 
equally at home whether sitting on the ground, or on a stone in mid- 
stream, or perched on the topmost branches of the trees.
I once 
watched one bathe himself, and, after carefully drying and preening 
his feathers in the sun, recommence feeding.
Nov. 1886.
342 
NOTE ORNITHOLOGY.
The presence of water seems indispensable to them, probably on 
account of the flies about it ; and I observed that at times, especially 
when frightened, both genders uttered a shrill note, very like that of 
M. grisola.
The males, when gliding through the trees, reminded me of 
short-tailed House Martins, and when sitting, or clinging to the bark 
of a tree, of Lesser Spotted Woodpeckers.
I saw an old nest of the previous year in a decayed stump of a 
tree, and this, or a hole in some bridge or wall, seems to be their 
regular nesting-place.
They always affect the more open parts of the 
woods, and seem to rigorously avoid thick cover.
On June 5th I revisited the nest found building on May 23rd, 
and to-day the hen bird was sitting, snugly ensconced on her nest in 
the wall, which contained six fresh eggs.
The female sat very close, and was loath to leave her eggs ; even 
when I touched her with a twig as she sat, she only crouched lower 
down on her nest.
Meantime the male bird, which had been sinsnnsf 
close at hand, came quite near, and when we withdrew a little dis- 
tance, he popped into the hole beside his mate ; both then, however, 
came out together, and we proceeded to examine the nest, which was 
composed entirely of dry white grasses, with a few dead leaves as a 
foundation ; there were absolutely no signs of any other material in 
the lining.
It was remarkable that we only saw one other pair of birds here 
to-day, where on May 23rd we had seen so many, and I then con- 
cluded that the birds seen on the first occasion were part of a migra- 
tory flock, most of which had since passed on ; moreover, the keepers 
on the estate informed me — and they were men thoroughly acquainted 
with the- birds of the district — that they had never seen so many- 
Pied Flycatchers in any previous year.
NO TE — ORNITHOL O G Y.
The Turtle Dove in Yorkshire.— There is no doubt that many birds 
which a few years ago were considered purely South of England birds are gradually 
extending, year by year, their range northwards.
Perhaps one or two instances of 
the extended range of the Turtle Dove {Cohuuba turtur) may prove interesting 
to the readers of the Naturalist.
On July 31st of the present year I saw a pair of these birds near Weeton.
They were on the Harrogate side, and when first seen were feeding in a grass field..
I have no doubt but that the nest was near at hand.
A specimen has also been obtained near Guisborough, this year, May 22nd- 
It was in fine plumage, but in poor condition.
Last year I found them nesting in fair numbers in the neighbourhood of Aln- 
wick, Northumberland, on July 26th ; and this year they have also been seen in 
the same county near Chathill, a name which will be recognised by many as being 
the nearest station to the noted Fame Islands.
— Riley Fortune, Alston House, 
Harrogate, September 27th, 1886.
Naturalist,.
343 
NOTES ON THE EAGLES OP THE LAKE DISTRICT.
JOHN WATSON, 
Fern Leigh, Kendal.
No bird list has yet been published having reference to the area 
comprehended in the above title.'"' And this is the more remarkable, 
as the avi-fauna of the Lake District is, in some respects at least, 
peculiarly rich.
One or two local lists, valuable in their way, yet 
extremely meagre, are scattered throughout various topographical 
works, but no one has attempted hitherto to focus this matter, or 
even to sift it.
For a dozen years past we have been at pains to 
bring together what has been already referred to, and to add from 
our own personal knowledge facts connected with the geographical 
distribution of the birds of the district.
In doing this, it need hardly 
be said that we have ignored political boundaries, nor that the dis- 
trict referred to is a well-defined geographical area.
Roughly speak- 
ing there are five different geological formations, and the physical 
constitution of the ground would seem in many cases to determine 
the food supply.
Certain species favour the smooth conical hills of 
the soft Skiddaw slates, and the birds of prey have their haunts 
among the rugged and splintery peaks of the Borrowdale series — 
forming perhaps the grandest scenery in the district.
And so, in 
like manner, the smooth undulating hills of the Silurian system, the 
scaurs of the carboniferous limestone, and the plains and gentler 
undulations of the country occupied by the new red sandstone —   
these, the five great geological divisions of our local area, has each 
its birds.
Another fact w y hich must not be lost sight of, is the great 
extent of sea-board, which stretches from the Solway Firth on the 
Cumbrian coast, down to Morecambe Bay ; this fact adds to our 
list a host of birds which feed upon sea-haunting creatures.
It need hardly be said that in a mountainous country like the 
Lake District, the Raptores are, and have ever been, the strong point 
of its avi-fauna.
This has been abundantly shown upon previous 
occasions,t and we purpose now to reduce to something like order 
some notes on the birds of this hitherto neglected district.
Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetus).
Although there has been no 
recent occurrence of the Golden Eagle, there can be no question 
that at one time it commonly bred among the Lake mountains.
About fifty years ago (in 1837, as nearly as we can determine) 
* Since this was written, Messrs.
Duckworth and Macpherson have published a 
list of the Birds of Cumberland, with some notes on the Birds of Westmoreland.
t Eagles' Haunts in the North of England, by John Watson ; Field, January 
24th, 1885.
Nov. 1886.
344 
JOHN WATSON i EAGLES OF THE LAKE DISTRICT.
two remarkably fine specimens, male and female, were deposited 
in the Kendal Museum, from Cumberland, though the late 
Dr. Gough, more than a local naturalist, deplored that they 
were not accompanied by actual data.
There can be little 
doubt that the Eagle which Clarke"' described as the ' largest/ 
and being of a colour 'very dark brown, inclining to black 
on the back and upper part of the neck,' was A.
cJuysa'etus.
In this bird the stretched wings measured six feet eight inches, 
and the species referred to was very ' daring and bold.' 
Golden Eagles certainly had their haunts near those of the wild 
Red Deer on Martindale Fells, and in 1775 tried to establish an 
eyrie there.
And Richardson — who contributed a paper on the 
Natural History of Ullswater to Hutchinson's ' History of Cum- 
berland' — states that the majority of Eagles which frequented 
the Lake District belonged to A.
chrysaetus.
The golden eagle 
bred on the highest part of the Cheviots, and in 1838 one or two 
pairs bred among the Border mountains.
From the description 
of birds killed, but not identified by competent naturalists, there 
are probably records of half a dozen Golden Eagles ; from the 
circumstance mentioned, however, these must always remain 
among the possibly doubtful specimens.
Durnford in his ' Birds 
of Walney Island,' records a specimen of A.
cluysaetus shot 
near Furness Abbey in 1815.
At the present time it cannot 
even be said that the Golden Eagle is even a casual visitant to 
its former haunts, and there is no recent record of its occurrence.
White-tailed Eagle (Haliaetus albicilla).
Even now the White- 
tailed Eagle occasionally makes its appearance at intervals of a 
few years, the birds mostly occurring in winter, and being in im- 
mature plumage.
In January of the present year (1886) a 
specimen occurred off Humphrey Head, where it stayed for about 
a week, preying upon sea-birds.
On a Sunday the gamekeeper, 
walking his rounds, came upon the bird feeding upon a dead 
sheep; fortunately, at the time, he was without his gun.
This species was certainly common, almost throughout the 
whole district, during the second half of the last, and the begin- 
ning of the present centuries.
Not less than a dozen eyries 
must have existed at the same time.
About 1777, Clarke records 
that the species bred at Wallow Crag, near Hawes water, in 
Westmoreland.
The birds laid two eggs, and when the young 
were hatched it was from the vicinity of the nest that there were 
taken thirty-five fish (mostly Lake Trout), seven lambs, besides 
other provision of game.
The trout were mostly taken from 
* Survey of the Lakes, 1787.
Naturalist, 
JOHN WATSON : EAGLES OF THE LAKE DISTRICT.
345 
Haweswater.
Clarke further tells us that of this White-tailed 
species many bred in the mountains every year.
The Sea Eagle 
also nested among the precipitous mountains which surround the 
head of Ullswatet, and here, as in the case mentioned above, 
their prey consisted of the Great Lake Trout and lambs.
The 
mountainous environment of Keswick also held Eagles' eyries ; 
and from Borrowdale, Dr. Law, Bishop of Elphin, received a 
young bird of the species under notice, which lived in captivity 
nineteen years ; its tail became white at six years old.
Seeing that the shepherds of the district lost so many lambs 
during the breeding season of the Eagles, they almost every year 
plundered the eyries.
Of these, one of the ancient seats was at 
Eagle Crag in Borrowdale, and the nest here was annually 
robbed.
Upon an appointed day shepherds from the neigh- 
bouring mountains assembled armed with guns and other 
weapons, one of them being let down the rocks to a distance of 
about a hundred and eighty feet.
He generally succeeded in 
bringing away either the eggs or young eagles, and his remunera- 
tion was regulated accordingly.
If eaglets were brought away 
the money they would bring was considered ample remuneration; 
but if eggs, every neighbouring shepherd gave to the climber for 
each egg five shillings.
The nest of the white-tailed species is 
described as being made of twigs twisted together and more than 
a yard over.
Never more than two eaglets nor eggs were dis- 
covered, and after the young were hatched they were always 
either conducted or driven from the locality as soon as they 
were strong on the wing.
In spring and summer they feasted 
upon lambs, sometimes carrying away such as were a month old ; 
and in winter the water-fowl of the lakes supplied them abun- 
dantly with food.
At Raven Crag, Eagle Crag, and Eskdale 
were eyries of the White-tailed Eagle as well as at the spots 
already indicated.
A specimen of H.
albicilla was seen flying 
at Low Wood, on the banks of Windermere, in 1822, and a pair 
nested at Whitbarrow Scaur, a towering limestone escarpment at 
the head of Morecambe Bay, Westmoreland, in 1849.
The 
species also bred on the precipitous rock which forms the 
western barrier to the front of Helvellyn, and Willoughby also 
speaks of an eyrie in Whinfield Park, Westmoreland.
A bird of 
this species was captured on Black Coomb in 1838, and an 
immature bird occurred on Blundeil Sands about i860.
Spotted Eagle (Aquila clanga).
Mr. W.
A. Durnford examined a 
specimen of this rare species in 1875.
It was picked up dead 
on Walney Island by a party of fishermen.
We have grave doubts 
Nov. 1886.
346 
JOHN WATSON: EAGLES OF THE LAKE DISTRICT.
whether this was not an escaped bird from one of the Liver- 
pool dealers, or from some of the show places in its vicinity.
Certainly such birds were there about the time of the occurrence 
of this particular example.
The whole of the above has reference to the Eagles where the 
species is either stated, or specific marks for identification are 
pointed out.
But besides this there are a number of records in 
which simply the ' Eagle ' is stated, and where there is little or 
nothing to lead to identification.
Under this head, then, must 
be classed the ' Eagles ' that bred in the parish of Brampton 
(Aubrey) ; the two seen on the same day by Mr. Thompson 
near Ullswater; and, finally, those comprehended in the list 
from the churchwardens' accounts of the parish of Crosthwaite, 
Cumberland.
These are as follows: — '1750: To Mr. Jas.
Bowe's man for one old eagle, is.; to Jas. Bowe for two young 
eagles, is.
1752: To Wm. Ware for one old eagle, 2s.; to 
Jas. Gateskel for two young eagles, 2s.
1762 : For two eagles 
and one fox, 4s.
4d.
1762 : For foxes and eagles, £1 6s.
6d.' 
In the same district to which this list refers the parish authorities 
kept a rope to use in robbing the eyries, and this was for long let 
out on hire to the shepherds and dalesfolk.
Upon one occasion, 
when a general raid was made upon the /era natures, there 
were destroyed ' 15 Foxes, 9 Martens, 12 Wild Cats, besides a 
prodigious number of Foulmarts, Eagles, Ravens, Gleades, &c.' 
The Osprey (Pandion haliaetus).
The Osprey is a casual visitant 
of not unfrequent occurrence, and appears regularly as a 
visitant in both spring and autumn.
Scarcely a year passes 
without one being shot, and ifl the autumn of one year no less 
than five were taken.
Their silver crests prove these to be 
matured birds, though occasionally immature ones have been 
taken.
When passing they invariably stop to rest about the still 
mountain tarns or the more secluded lakes, and it is mostly in 
the vicinity of these that the birds are shot.
Even if unmolested 
they rarely stay more than two or three days before passing 
on.
More occur on the autumn migration from their northern 
breeding haunts than in spring.
In an account of the natural 
history of Ullswater we are told that Ospreys bred in large trees 
in Whinfield Park, Westmoreland.
Sir Humphrey Davy and 
Wordsworth saw one of these birds fishing in one of the quiet 
tarns among the hills which they speak of as ' the grey, or silver, 
or fishing eagle.' The individual occurrences of the birds are 
too many to particularise, and these seem much less frequent in 
the north and west of Cumberland than in .the more southern 
portion of the area.
Naturalist,.
NOTES : CONCHOLOGY AND HYMENOPTERA.
347 
NOTES— CONCHOLOG Y.
Planorbis complanatus var.
submarginata in Yorkshire.— 
Of this variety of Moquin Tauclon's I collected about one hundred specimens on 
September 30th, 1886.
The shell is large; keel rather sharp, and placed a little 
apart from the margin.
The locality for this — which I suppose is new to York- 
shire, if not to Britain — is Sharleston, near Pontefract.
— Geo. Roberts, Loft- 
house, Wakefield, October 19th, 1886.
Addition to Wressle List of Mollusca.— Since the publication of 
my list Mr. Beanland has called my attention to a variety of SpJuvrium comeum 
which was collected at Fleetdyke, in July 1886.
The variety, which has been sub- 
mitted to Mr. Cockerell, of Chiswick, turns out to be a new one to Britain.
SpJmrium comeum var.
regidaris Pascal.
The description is, ' Regularly 
globose, with yellow margin.' About six specimens were found, along with others 
of the typical form.
— Geo. Roberts, Lofthouse, Wakefield, October 19th, 1886.
Cyclostoma elegans re-discovered in North Lincolnshire.— 
I have had the pleasure of re-discovering this shell in its old locality in the Louth 
district, Burwell Wood, for which place the celebrated Dr. Martin Lister (who 
was doubtless of the family of Lister of Burwell) recorded it in his ' Historiae 
Animalium Anglire ' so long ago as 1678.
The part of Burwell Wood in which 
the species occurs is a valley with steep chalky sides known locally as ' Grisel 
Bottom.' — H.
Wallis Kew, Louth, nth September, 1886.
Limax cinereo-niger at Shipley Glen.— Mr. J.
A. Hargreaves, of 
Baildon, has sent me a fine specimen of the var.
viaura of this species, which he 
found under a stone in Shipley Glen, on the 30th of September, the same locality 
in which Mr. West found the first Yorkshire specimen some years ago, the variety 
on that occasion being hictuosa.
— Wm. Denison Roebuck, Sunny Bank, Leeds, 
October 6th, 1886.
Estuarine Shells at Tetney, Lincolnshire.— On 12th July I had 
occasion to go to Tetney (near the mouth of the Humber), and was able to spend 
a short time on the foreshore.
Cardiwn edule L.
was very plentiful, ' cockle- 
beds ' extending for miles.
Specimens of Mya arenaria L.
were obtained from 
some men who were digging them out of the clay, considerably above low-water 
mark.
The animals of this species are eaten by people living near the sea, under 
the name of ' clams.' Liitorina rudis Maton, was taken from the muddy pools in 
the saltmarsh.
Littorina littorea (L.
) was extremely abundant all over the sand- 
and mud-flats, often amongst Salicornia herbacea.
Most of the specimens of this 
shell were referred by Mr. Cockerell to the v.
paupercula of Jeffreys.
Hydrobia 
tilvce Penn.
was of course abundant.
I searched for, but was unable to find, 
Melampus myosotis (Drap.), which is recorded for Saltfleet on this coast.
— 
H. Wallis Kew, Louth, Lincolnshire, October 6th, 1886.
NOTE— HYMENOPTERA.
Hymenoptera at Louth, Lincolnshire.— As the natural history of 
the county of Lincoln is so little known, it may be well, perhaps, to record the 
following six species of Hymenoptera, which have been kindly identified by Mr. E.
Saunders, viz.: — Chrysis is^nita, Gorytes mystacens, Andrena albicrus, Andrena 
albicans, Odynerus pictus, and Halictus subfascia/us, all taken in the Louth district, 
1886.
Mr. E.
A. Eitch has kindly identified a specimen of Ichneumon trilineatus, 
of which I found eight examples beneath the loose bark of two dead ash-trees in 
Grisel Bottom, Burwell Wood, near Louth, in December 1885.
— H.
Wallis Kew, 
Louth, Lincolnshire, 6th October, 1886.
NOTE.— YORKSHIRE TOPOGRAPHY.
The Rocks at ITlamborough.
— Allow me to state — in reference to 
the two pinnacles in Selwick's Bay, which are mentioned at p.
218 of the July 
Naturalist as being unnamed, and for which names are there suggested — that ever 
since I can remember they have been called Adam and Eve.
— Matthew Bailey, 
Flamborough, September 9th, 1886.
Nov. 1886.
348 
NOTES AND NEWS.
NO TE— OR TH OPTERA.
Occurrence of the true Migratory Locust in Lincolnshire.
— On Friday last Mr. H.
Wallis Kew sent me a living female of Pachytylits migra- 
torias L.
to identify, and has asked me to send a notice of its occurrence.
He 
obtained it from a taxidermist in Louth, to whom it was brought by a little girl, 
who said it was found in a stubble field at Withern, eight miles from Louth.
— 
Eland Shaw, St. Mary's Hospital, London, W., 19th October, 1886.
[In presence of the fact that the Yorkshire specimens of 1876 were referred 
by Mr. Robert McLachlan, F.R.S., and the Baron de Selys-Longchamps, to 
Pachytylits cinerascens, the occurrence of the true P.
migratoritis is of considerable 
interest.
Mr. Shaw informs me that not only the specimen now recorded, but the 
other British examples he has seen, were referable to the true migratoriits, which 
is very readily distinguishable from cinerascais.
He expresses a wish to be placed 
in communication with any entomologists of the North of England who collect 
Orthoptera, inasmuch as all the localities from which he at present possesses 
specimens are in the South.
Entomologists who possess Northern specimens of 
Orthoptera cannot, therefore, do better than increase our very limited range of in- 
formation on this department of the entomological fauna of the North, by entrusting 
their specimens to him for determination.
— W.D.R.] 
NOTES AND NEWS.
Messrs.
Taylor and Francis will shortly publish a work by Mr. T.
Mellard 
Reade, F.G.S., entitled 'The Origin of Mountain Ranges.' In addition to con- 
taining a systematic theory of Mountain-Building, with detailed Experimental 
Illustrations, the Structure and Geological History of the great Mountain-Masses 
of the Globe will be discussed.
The work will also contain many Maps and 
vSections of Mountain Ranges, and a contoured Map of the North-Atlantic Ocean, 
together with numerous sketches of Mountain-Structure and Scenery, from Nature, 
by the Author.
. >co< 
Geological readers will be glad to know that the celebrated Clayton fossil tree 
has found a permanent home in one of our northern universities, Prof.
Williamson, 
F.R. S., having purchased it for Owens College, Manchester.
The genial and 
learned professor was in Clayton recently, and, along with the curator of the 
college, personally superintended the removal, which, by the help of Messrs.
Murgatroyd and their workmen, was very expeditiously and carefully done, being 
accomplished in three days.
The weight of the fossil, when detached from its 
bed, was found to be about five tons, certainly a respectable weight for a single 
specimen of our Yorkshire carboniferous vegetation.
>ox 
In Section C (Geology) of the British Association at the recent meeting in 
Birmingham, were read a large number of papers bearing in some way upon the 
geology of the North of England, viz.: — Report on the Erratic Blocks of England 
and Wales, Dr. Crosskey, F.G.S.
; Notes on the discovery of a large Fossil Tree 
in the Lower Coal Measures, at Clayton, near Bradford, S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S.; 
Report on the Fossil Plants of the Tertiary and Secondary Beds of the United 
Kingdom, J.
S. Gardner, F.G.S.
; On recent researches amongst the Car- 
boniferous Plants of Halifax, Prof.
W. C.
Williamson, F.R. S.
; On the Lower 
Palaeozoic Rocks near Settle, J.
E. Marr, F.G.S.; On the exploration of Raygill 
Fissure, J.
W. Davis, F.G.S.; On Concretions, H.
B. Stocks; On the Strati- 
graphical Position of the Salt Measures of South Durham, Prof.
Lebour, F.G.S.; 
On the Classification of the Carboniferous Limestone series, Northumbrian type, 
Hugh Miller, F.G.S.
>co< 
At the October meeting of the Entomological Society of London, Mr. W.
F. 
Kirby exhibited, on behalf of Mr. John Thorpe, of Middleton, a long series of buff 
and melanic varieties of Avipliidasis betularia, and read notes on them com- 
municated by Mr. Thorpe.
The Rev. W.
W. Fowler exhibited a number of 
minute Acari, which had been doing injury to fruit trees near Lincoln.
Mr.
Poulton gave an account of experiments recently made by him with the larvae of 
several species of Vanessa, for the purpose of ascertaining the relations of pupal 
colour to that of the surface on which the larval skin was thrown off, and exhibited 
the frame constructed for these experiments.
Naturalist, 
349 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural 
history and physical features of the North of England.
GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1885.
The Editors are indebted to Messrs.
S. A.
Adamson, F.G.S., and 
Alfred Harker, M.A., F.G.S., for the present instalment of the 
Bibliography ; to both gentlemen for contributing the titles and 
abstracts, and to the former for arranging and classifying the materials 
thus brought together.
There are a few titles cited of papers for 
1884 which had previously escaped notice or come to hand since the 
1884 instalment was published.
Papers which appear in the Naturalist itself are cited but not 
abstracted.
Sir Frederick Abel.
Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham, Derbyshire.
Explosions in Coal Mines.
[Gives list of disastrous explosions in coal mines t in 
northern counties since 1875.
Suggests safeguards against accidents, as 
improved ventilation, better safety lamps, etc.] Journal of Society of Arts 
and Nature, December 3rd, 1885, xxxiii, 108-112.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Idle and Thackley [description of strata (the Halifax 
beds) at the West Yorkshire Colliery, Idle, also of a remarkable fault in 
railway cutting between Idle and Thackley].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 
1885, p.
28.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Guiseley and Menston [description of glacial drift in 
railway cutting].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, p.
27.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Wrose Bill arid district [details of section given at 
Wrose Hill Fire Clay Works, and review of the Elland Flagstone at Idle].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
29, 30.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Hawes [geology of railway journey from Leeds to 
Hawes described.
Sections of Yoredale rocks given, also explanation of cause 
of the ravine at Hardraw and deposition of Yoredale rocks.].
Trans.
Leeds 
Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
30-32.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Norber [account of Silurian erratics on Mountain Lime- 
stone, with reasons for their deposition; Conglomerates observed at base of 
Mountain Limestone].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
32-34.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Pateley Bridge [beds at Scot Gate Ash Quarries 
described].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
34-36.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Barnsley [section in excavating a gasholder tank 
minutely described : in blue clay a number of basaltic and felspathic boulders 
found, evidently from Cumberland : Pre-historic relic of mica schist discovered 
about 30 ft.
from surface].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
42-43.
Nov. 1886.
350 bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
S. A.
Adam son.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Keighley Moors [deposit of Travertin in Sutton Clough 
noted: the ' Hitchingstone,' a huge block of millstone grit near Earl's Crag, 
described, and theories adduced for its cause].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 
1885, pp.
39-41.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Brimham Rocks [description of Brimham Rocks given, 
with their cause.
Denudation ascribed to atmospheric agencies].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
38-39.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
Report of Excursion to Ingleton [account of unconformity at Thornton Force, 
Carboniferous Limestone upon highly-inclined Silurian schists].
Trans.
Leeds 
Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
37-38.
II.
C. Beasley.
Lancashire.
A Quarry at Poulton and the relations of the Glacial markings there to others 
in the neighbourhood.
[This quarry is in the Keuper Sandstone and near the 
north end, one face of a joint is exposed : the joint is a closed one, but the 
part exposed is covered with Slickensides and very distinctly striated horizon- 
tally: there are also three other exposures which are described, each showing 
glaciation.] Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc, 1885, vol.
v, pp.
84-93.
T. G.
Bonney.
Cumberland.
On the Occurrence of a Mineral allied to Enstatite in the Ancient Lavas of 
Eycott Hill, Cumberland.
[The rocks are described as enstatite-diabase, 
with a silica percentage of about 53 *o6 ; the enstatite is mostly converted into 
serpentine.
There are also crystals of augite and small scales of iron-glance.] 
Geol.
Mag., February 1885, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
76 80.
The Eristatitic Lavas of Eycotc Hill [a reply to Mr. Rutley's letter].
Geol.
Mag., July, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
334, 335.
On the so-called Diorite of Little Knott (Cumberland) .
. .
[The character 
of the mass varies in texture and composition from an ordinary diorite to the 
type of rock which the author names hornblende-picrite.
The paper also 
comments on the distribution of the boulders from this source : the Anglesey 
boulders, formerly described, are probably derived not from Little Knott, but 
from outcrops in the island itself] Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli, pp.
511-522, PI.
xvi ; Abstracts in Phil.
Mag., August, vol.
xx, p.
205; Geol.
Mag., July, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
328, 329.
Wm. Brockbank, F.G.S. Lancashire.
On the Levenshulme Limestone: a Section from Slade Lane eastwards.
[These Limestones are classed as Permian by the Author, although Boyd 
Dawkins refers them to the Upper Coal Measures.
Reasons for this given, 
also account of the section investigated.] Mem. Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc.
Third Series, vol.
viii, 1884, pp.
125-132.
Ceo. H.
Brocklehurst.
Yorkshire.
A Visit to Whitby and its neighbourhood.
[Very brief sketch of the rocks in 
the vicinity of Whitby, with a few of the characteristic fossils named.] Nat.
World, January 1885, n-12.
R. T.
Burnett.
Lancashire.
Report of Excursion to Hill Top near Bury [notes a fault near Chesham Brook, 
and a seam of coal in the millstone grit in a quarry].
Proc.
Manch.
Scientific 
Students' Assoc., 1884, p.
32.
R. T.
Burnett.
Derbyshire.
Report of Excursion to Castleton [notes deposit in a quarry at Windy Knoll 
of Elaterite (commonly known as Iillastic Bitumen) lying upon the massive 
limestone with a thin capping of brecciated limestone on the top].
Proc.
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc., 1884, PP- 3 2 > 33* 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
35 r 
S. Chadwick.
Yorkshire.
Geological [Report] [notes additions to Museum, particularly a giant Ammonite 
from the lower or flint chalk on Thixendale Wold, measuring 4 feet in diameter 
and weighing about 20 stones ; also a sponge new to Britain of the genus Cystis- 
pongia from the lower chalk].
Malton Nat. Society's Annual Report for 
1884-5, PP- 37-40.
S. Chadwick.
Yorkshire, 
Inoceramus involutus, Sow., at Ganton Wold.
Naturalist, June, vol.
x, p.
258.
Rev. E.
M. Cole.
Yorkshire.
On some Sections at Cave and Drewton with plate [in first section a ferruginous 
sandstone exposed belonging to the A.
spinatus zone of the Middle Lias: 
second section is in the Cave Oolite equivalent to the Millepore Limestone of 
the Lower Oolites: third section at Drewton gave a splendid exposure of the 
Kellaways Rock].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol. Soc, 1885, pp.
49-52.
Rev. E.
M. Cole.
Yorkshire.
On the Physical Geography and Geolosry of the E.
Riding of Yorkshire.
[General review of its Physical Geography, with table of geological formations 
occurring ; these formations then considered in detail, with their localities.] 
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol. Soc, 1885, pp.
1 13-123.
J. R.
Dakyns and C.
Fox Strangways.
Yorkshire.
The Geology of Bridlington Bay (Memoir of the Geological Survey): pp.
18 
with sections and index.
[In this memoir the following beds are reviewed : 
the White Chalk ; Boulder Clay and Gravel, with Bridlington Crag ; Sands 
and Gravels and Upper Boulder Clay; Late Glacial Beds; Lacustrine and 
Fluviatile Beds.
A list of fossils from the Bridlington Crag is given, also a 
list of publications on the district.
An account of the Lake-dwelling at 
Ulrome, the first explored in England, is included.] 
J. W.
Davis.
Yorkshire.
On the Contortions in the Chalk at Flamborough Head [general description of 
the Yorkshire Chalk, with the contortions in the Bempton Cliffs minutely 
detailed.
Probable cause of displacement considered].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol. Soc, 1885, pp.
43-49.
J. W.
Davis.
Yorkshire.
Report of Committee to assist in the Exploration of the Raygill Fissure in 
Lothersdale, Yorkshire.
[Operations were suspended during the preceding 
year.] Brit.
Assoc.
Rep., 1884, p.
240.
W. Boyd Dawkins.
Northern counties generally.
On the Carboniferous Flora [reference to the ancient geography of the North of 
England in the Carboniferous Period].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, 1885, 
part 5, vol.
18, pp.
101-113.
N. F.
Dobree.
Lincolnshire.
Large Ammonite at Hessle.
Naturalist, November 1885, p.
378.
Yorkshire.
Mammalian Remains at Kelsey Hill, Holderness.
Naturalist, November 1885, 
P- 378.
Miss Donald.
Cumberland, Yorkshire, 
Notes on some Carboniferous Gasteropoda from Penton and elsewhere.
[Describes a new species, Aclisma costatula.~\ Trans.
Cumb.
and YVestm.
Assoc., No. ix, p.
127, with a Plate.
[Editor of the Field.] Yorkshire.
The East Riding of Yorkshire [a lengthy review of Mr. Tiffin's Essay on the 
agriculture of the East and North Ridings.
Includes a sketch of the surface 
geology and soils].
Field, March 14th, 1885, p.
348.
-Nov. 1886.
352 bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
Etheridge, R.
Northern Counties generally.
Manual of Geology, by John Phillips, Part II, Stratigraphical Geology and 
Palaeontology; 712 pp., with 32 plates, map, and many tables of fossils.
[This volume has but little matter in common with the original work of 
Professor Phillips.
It contains much information relative to the geology of 
the North of England, among which may be cited the portions referring to 
the Cambrian and Silurian of the Lake District, pp.
66-69, 78-81; the Car- 
boniferous Limestone and Yoredale series, pp.
213, 215-217, 221-223; the 
northern coal-fields, 226, 228-232, 249, 258, 259 ; the Permian, pp.
307-311 ; 
the Trias of Lancashire and Cheshire, pp.
327-329 ; the Lias of Yorkshire, 
PP- 359-3 6 7* 372, 376-379, 381-383, 386-388, 393-399, 402, 403 ; and of Lin- 
colnshire, pp.
374, 375 ; the Oolites of Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire, 
pp.
412-415, 425-427, 473 5 th e Yorkshire Oolites, pp.
353, 354, 44Q-444, 
450-452, 460-466, 482, 483 ; the Speeton and Tealby series, pp.
529-532 ; the 
Yorkshire Chalk, pp.
565-568 ; the Glacial deposits of northern England, pp.
673, 677, 679 ; and the bone-caves of Kirkdale, etc., pp.
682, 683.] Reviewed 
in Geol.
Mag., December 1885, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
563-569.
Prof.
Everett.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Seventeenth Report of the Committee, consisting of [17 names] appointed for 
the purpose of investigating the Rate of Increase of Underground Tempera- 
ture downwards in various localities of Dry Land and Under Water.
[Relates 
observations made in the Mersey Tunnel and in various pits in the East 
Manchester coal-field.] Nature, September 24th, 1885, xxxii, 503-4.
Geological Survey of England and Wales.
Northern Counties generally.
Publications in 1885 (Edward Stanford, 55, Charing Cross, London, Sole 
Agent).
Horizontal Sections — 6 in.
to mile.
No. 133.
— Passing near Darlington and Osmotherley MoOr. Black Hamble- 
ton, Boltby, Hood Hill, Kilburn, Coxwold, Husthwaite, and 
Easingwold.
135.
— Upsall, Boltby Moor, Hambleton Hills, Hawnby, the Tabular 
escarpment, Cropton, Salter's Gate, Hackness, Seamer Moor, 
Gristhorpe Bay.
137.
— Knaresborough, Yale of York, Crayke, Howardian Hills, Vale of 
Pickering, Kirkby Moorside, Lastingham, Pickering, and Fyling- 
dales Moors to Robin Hood's Bay.
138.
— Sections illustrating the structure of the Oolites of the Howardian 
Hills.
,, 139.
— Section along the western escarpment of the Wolds, Malton, 
Langton, Burythorpe, Leavening, Acklam, Kirkby Underdale, 
Bishop Wilton, Kildwick Percy, Londesborough, Market 
Weighton, Sancton, Newbald, South Cave, Brough-on-the- 
H umber.
Vertical Sections — 40 ft.
to one inch.
No. 70.
— Sections to illustrate the Carboniferous Limestone in the district 
between Woodend and Moor Row (Cumberland Iron and Coal 
fields).
71.
— Sections to illustrate the Carboniferous Limestone in the district of 
Moor Row, Cleator Moor, and Frizington (Cumberland Coal and 
Iron fields).
72.
— Sections to illustrate the Strata above the six-quarter or low-bottom 
Coal on the Cleator Moor and Frizington district.
Sclid Geology — 1 in.
to mile.
91 N.E., Lancaster.
96 S.W., Thirsk.
96 N.W., Northallerton.
1 10 N.W., Berwick (West), 
no N.E., Berwick (East), 
no S.W., Wooler (Northumberland).
93 S.E., Selby.
- 
3 NOV 1886 Naturalist, 
No:u ready, 8w, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST OF YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLI, Liverpool.
JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
'The authors of this catalogue may tnke a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The Lttle 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ami.
&> Mag. Nat.
Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athenceum.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
"Every page is interesting." Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2^d.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
61 post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London: W.
SWAN SONNENSC1 !
& CO.
Of all Booksellers.
THE N ATU BALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Strasburger on Foreign Pollination.— Thos.
Hick, B.A., B.Sc.
lEJotes on the River Tees, its Marshes, and their Fauna.— Robert Lofthouse.
Annotated List of the Land and Freshwater Mollusca of Lincolnshire.
Bibliography for 1885.
Natural History of Lincolnshire,— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Not^S.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
In Preparation.
A Monograph of the Land and Fresh-Water Mollusca 
of the British Fauna.
The work is intended to be full, detailed, and exhaustive, and adequately 
illustrative of Variation, Development, and Geographical Distribution.
Co-operation is invited from all interested, and any information or specimens 
(the common species of every district are particularly desired) will be welcomed 
and carefully acknowledged.
The Authors may be addressed — c/o Mr. John W.
Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Hunslet New Road, Leeds.
Information is at present specially required on the Slugs (Testacella, Lit?iax, and 
Arion), of which living specimens from every district are desired.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.RiS., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects- 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is 10s.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c, should be sent to the Editors at the above address, 
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The Chapter on Co/eof>tera, by Edward Neivman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching: boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae ;.
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa DIGGING ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light ^ 
indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould; cabinets and store boxes; painting; arrangement and nomenclature;, 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera ; Hymenoptera ; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
No. 137.
DECEMBER, 1886.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGISTS* UNION.
gonfcnts : 
The Birds of the Lincolnshire Fens and Wolds in 1612 — Michael Drayton, with 
Annotations by John Cordedux, M.B.O. U.
.. ..
.. ..363 — 368 
Strasburger on Foreign Pollination — Thomas Hick, B.
A., B.
Sc. 369 — 374 
New Westmoreland Lichens — W.
Nylander, translated by J.
A. Martindale ..
.. 374.
Notes — Ornithology:— 368, 374 
Variety of the Kittiwake — Matthew Bailey ; Tree-sparrow in North Lincolnshire — Id.
Bibliography — Geology and Palaeontology for 1885 — Messrs.
S. A.
Adamson, F.G.S., 
and Alfred Marker, M.A., F.G.S.
(concluded) 353—362 
Title-page, Preface, and Index to the Volume.
LONDON : 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON : 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
>co< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
>o3< 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
Subscription 5/- per annum, post free.
Single numbers, yd.
each, post free 
Correspondents should write scientific and technical terms distinctly.
Back Numbers Of the Naturalist.
— The Editors will, at any time, 
be glad to hear from persons having volumes or odd numbers of the old 
series to dispose of.
State price and condition.
Receipts for Subscriptions are enclosed with the next Number, and 
are not sent direct unless stamp be sent for postage.
Advertisements.
— Scale of charges may be had on application.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Revue Bryologique, 1886, No. 6.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
Natural History Journal, November 1886.
[Mr. J.
Edmund Clark, Editor.
The Young Naturalist for November 1886.
[Mr. J.
E. Robson, Editor.
Science Gossip for November 1886.
' [The Publishers.
The Midland Naturalist for November 1886.
' [The Editors.
The Manx Note Book, No. 8, October 1886.
[A.
W. Moore, Editor.
Liverpool Science Students' Association — Report, 1885-6.
[The Association.
The Auk, a Quarterly Journal of Ornithology, October 1886.
[The Editor.
Geology of the District between Market Weighton and the Humber — F.
Fielder 
Walton, 8vo, 24 pages.
[The Author.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Transactions, vol.
iv, part 3, Oct. 1886.
[The Society.
Classification of the Vegetable Kingdom — Compiled by J.
D. Siddall — A broad- 
sheet.
[The Compiler.
Leeds Nat. Field Club— Trans., 1886, 8vo, pp.
88 and plate.
" [The Club.
The Structure and Life-history of the Cockroach, by L.
C. Miall and Alfred Denny — 
8vo, 1886.
[The Authors.
Manchester City News, weekly.
[The Editor.
The Badminton Library — 'Shooting,' by Lord Walsingham and Sir Ralph Payne 
Gallwey, Bart.
— 2 vols..
8vo, 1886.
[Messrs.
Longmans.
The Distribution of the Lepidoptera in the British Isles.— 
As I am compiling notes for a work on this subject, I shall be much obliged for 
Local Lists of Lepidoptera, which, however incomplete, will be useful to me.
— 
W. Harcourt Bath, The Limes, Sutton Coldfield.
Dragon Flies.
— Wanted to correspond with Entomologists collecting these 
Insects, with view to exchange.— W.
Harcourt Bath, The Limes, Sutton 
Coldfield.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
4 Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, sent out 4 on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
353 
Drift Geology — 1 in.
to mile.
96 N.W., Northallerton, 
96 S.W., Thirsk.
no N.W., Berwick (West), 
no N.E., Berwick (East), 
no S.W., Wooler.
103 S.W., Barnard Castle.
93 S.E., Selby.
A. Geikie.
Northern Counties generally .
Texthook of Geology; 2nd ed., revised and enlarged ; London, 1885 ; 992 pp.
with many illustrations.
[This valuable standard work contains many re- 
ferences to the geology of the northern counties : we may mention a few.
Local Metamorphism around the Skiddaw granite, p.
563 ; ' Lower Silurians ' 
of Westmoreland and Cumberland, p.
669 ; ' Upper Silurians,' p.
681 ; Car- 
boniferous Limestone and Yoredale series of North of England, p.
737 ; 
Lancashire Coal-measures, p.
742; Permian rocks, pp.
753, 754; Yorkshire 
Lias, p.
789 : Inferior Oolite of Yorkshire, p.
795 ; Oxfordian and Corallian 
rocks, pp.
797, 798 ; Speeton Clay, p.
823 ; and Glacial deposits of northern 
counties, p.
903.] 
W. H.
Gill.
Yorkshire.
Speeton Cliffs to Gristhorpe Bay (Abstract) [describes White Chalk at Speeton, 
Red Chalk, Neocomian beds at Speeton, Kimmeridge Clay, Lower Calcareous 
Grit, Oxford Clay, and Lower Oolites, with fossils].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
21-23.
W. H.
Gill.
Yorkshire.
Iron Ore from Allotment Gardens at Stourton [this deposit due to the flow of 
an ancient watercourse heavily charged with iron, which had converted the 
original soil into a deposit of iron ore about 1 5 in.
in thickness, varying in 
width from 9 ft.
to 4 ft.
6 in.].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, p.
7. 
J. G.
Goodchild.
Cumberland.
The Penrith Sandstone [an exhaustive account of the Penrith Sandstones of the 
Lower Permian series ; giving also a sketch of Cumberland at the time when 
they were deposited, their relation to the older strata, and speculations as to 
the life of the period ; advocates a lacustrine origin for this sandstone, the 
associated conglomerate or Brockram being supposed to have originated by 
the aid of shore-ice].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, ix, 31-51.
J. G.
Goodchild.
Cumberland, Westmoreland.
Contributions towards a list of the Minerals occurring in Cumberland and 
Westmoreland (concluding part).
[Concluding part of list, with General 
Index to list of Cumberland and Westmoreland minerals.] Trans.
Cumb.
and 
Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, pp.
175-199.
Herbert Goss.
Derbyshire.
On some recently discovered Insecta from Carboniferous and Silurian Rocks 
\Archceoptihts ingens from the Coal-measures near Chesterfield is the largest 
known of British Palaeozoic insects (p.
4 of reprint)].
Proc.
Geol.
Assoc., 
1885, vol.
ix, No. 3, pp.
131-151.
W. S.
Gresley.
Derbyshire.
On certain Fossiliferous Nodules and Fragments of Haematite (sometimes 
Magnetite) from the (so-called) Permian Breccias of Leicestershire and 
South Derbyshire.
[Abstract.] [The author refers the dimpled and striated 
character of these pebbles to ice-action.] Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli.
Proceedings, pp.
109, no.
Derbyshire, Lancashire, Cheshire.
On the occurrence of Quartzite Boulders in a Coal-seam in Leicestershire.
[Describes the occurrence of a boulder of quartz-conglomerate, and of pebbles 
of quartzite in the underclay of a coal-seam at Church Gresley Colliery, 
Derbyshire.
Refers also to similar discoveries in Lancashire and Cheshire.] 
Geol.
Mag., December, Dec. hi, vol.
ii, pp.
553-555- 
Dec. t886.
a 2 
354 BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1 885.
William Gunn.
? Northumberland.
On the Finding of Shells [marine, of existing species, 14 names given] in the 
Boulder Clay near Berwick-on-Tweed.
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, pt.
ii 
(1885), pp.
540-1.
W. Gunn.
Northumberland.
Posidonomya Becheri.
[States that this shell was long ago recorded from Budle 
by Murchison and others, and discusses the correlation of the Carboniferous 
beds of Northumberland, etc.] Geol.
Mag., February, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
92, 93- 
A. Harker.
Yorkshire.
The Oolites of the Cave District.
Naturalist, May 1885, pp.
229-232.
B. Holgate.
Yorkshire.
On the Geology of Leeds (Abstract) [notes river-terraces on the banks of the 
Aire, also the ancient 'bell pits,' so common in and about Leeds, formerly 
worked extensively for ironstone].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
5, 6.
B. Holgate.
Yorkshire.
On Geology of the Nidd Valley.
[General summary of conditions under which 
the strata had been laid down, and alternations of beds accounted for.] 
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 1885, pp.
35, 36.
T. V.
Holmes.
Cumberland.
Notes on the best Locality for Coal beneath the Permian rocks of North-West 
Cumberland.
[After stating that coal-seams beneath the Permian rocks of 
North-West Cumberland may be looked for at Maryport, Aspatria, and Bolton 
Low Houses, uses great caution, as the available facts are few in number, and 
such as allow but vague conclusions.
Gives particulars of several borings and 
criticises at length Mr. Kendall's paper on the same subject.] Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1884-85, pp.
109- 119, and woodcuts.
T. V.
H[olmes].
Cumberland.
Changes of Channel in the Solway.
[Brief note drawing attention to maps 
published in 1841 and 1877 showing changes in the Solway channels, but no 
details given.] Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-4, ix, 215.
T. V.
H[olmes].
Cumberland.
Silloth New Dock.
[Beds in excavating this dock consisted of alternations of 
sand and well-rounded, false-bedded gravel resting on a chocolate clay.
Clay 
contained both local and travelled boulders, such as Criffel Granite, Ennerdale 
Syenite, etc.
Mammalian remains found at or near the base of the sand and 
gravel.
Upper formation contained remains of recent littoral shells, as Trophon, 
Fusus, Cardium, Tellina, Pecten, etc.] Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 
1883-84, ix, 214.
T. V.
H[olmes].
Cumberland.
Section North of Silloth [section a little north of Silloth ; the low foreshore consists 
of tough boulder clay ; above this a belt of fine clay, covered by blown sand.
Most interesting to note that the surface of the fine clay had been drained, 
and exhibited evidences of the action of the plough, pointing to a greater ex- 
tension of the land westward at no very remote period].
Trans.
Cumb.
and 
Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, pp.
213-214.
T. V.
H[olmes].
Cumberland.
The Carlisle Water Supply [comments on 'the ancient and fish-like smell' 
which often accompanies the water supply of Carlisle, and suggests the sinking 
of an artesian well to tap the Kirklinton and St. Bees' Sandstone, to remedy 
this].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, p.
213.
J. Horne.
Isle of Man.
The Geology of the Isle of Man. Trans.
Glasgow Geolog.
Soc, vol.
vii, 
part 2 (1882-84), 1885, p.
254.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
355 
W. H.
Hudlestone.
Yorkshire.
Contributions to the Palaeontology of the Yorkshire Oolites [describes and 
figures Yorkshire species of gasteropoda belonging to the genera Nerilopsis, 
Turbo, Trochus, Pleurotomaria, Trochotoma, Patella, Actceonina, Action, 
and Bulla, from the Oolitic strata, giving synonyms and references to the 
literature of the subject].
Geol.
Mag., February to June 1885, Dec. iii, 
vol.
ii, pp.
49-54, 121-129, 151-159, 201-207, 252-257, with plates ii-v, and 
folding table.
Concluded from 1884.
Wilfrid H.
Hudlestone.
Yorkshire.
The Geology of Malton and Neighbourhood, being the Presidential Address 
delivered before the Malton Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society.
. .
November 18th, 1884.
[A graphic sketch of the geology of Malton and dis- 
trict, giving contour map and several sections.
Detailed description of the 
Corallian rocks and their fauna, the Supra-Coralline and Kimmeridge Clay, 
Post-Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks.
The three great faults near Malton 
described, and review of the glacial and post-glacial periods, with their effects 
upon the district.] Annual Report of Malton Nat. Soc.
for 1884-5, PP- l S°> 
illustrated.
O. W.
Jeffs.
Lancashire and Cheshire.
A Buried Valley.
Naturalist, April, vol.
x, p.
212.
Westmoreland, Durham, Yorkshire, Northumherland, Cumherland, 
T. Rupert Jones and James W.
Kirkby.
Lancashire.
Notes on the Palaeozoic Bivalved Entomostraca.
— No. XIX.
On some Carboni- 
ferous Species of the Ostracodous genus Kirkhya, Jones.
[Jf. permiana Jones, 
Durham, Yorkshire, Northumberland, Cumberland, Lancashire (179).
K. itmbonata (D'Eichw.), Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland.
K. annectens J.
& K., Yorkshire (183).
K. spiralis J.
& K., Northumber- 
land, Cumberland, and Westmoreland (176-185).
K. spinosa J.
& K., 
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Lancashire (186).
K. costata (M'Coy), 
Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Northumberland (187).
K. tirei Jones, 
Northumberland and Lancashire (190).] Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., March 
1885, (5) xv, 174-191, and plate iii.
Lancashire, Westmoreland, Northumherland, &c.
T. Rupert Jones and J.
W. Kirkby.
The Carboniferous Ostracoda of the North-West of England.
[This paper 
gives lists of the bivalve entomostraca from a number of localities in the Fur- 
ness district, the specimens being derived from the shales associated with Scar 
Limestone and from the Yoredale beds.
Several new species are mentioned 
but not described.
A list is given comparing the species found here with 
those of the Northumberland area and of Scotland.] Geol.
Mag., December, 
Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
535-541.
Cumherland, Durham, Yorkshire, Derbyshire.
T. Rupert Jones, J.
W. Kirkby, and G.
S. Brady.
A Monograph on the British Fossil Bivalved Entromostraca from the Carboni- 
ferous Formations.
— Part IV, pp.
57-92, plates vi, vii.
[Describes several 
species of Cytherella and Entomis from the Mountain Limestone series, including 
new species, C.
valida from Calees, East Cumberland, E.Burrovii, E.Konincki- 
ana, and E.
obscura from Settle, West Yorkshire.] Palaeontograph.
Soc.
Mem. for 1884.
John W.
Judd.
Cheshire.
A Problem for Cheshire Geologists [Abstract].
[After referring to several 
patches of strata or outliers, the results of denudation, but which were 
evidently once connected with the strata forming escarpments in their imme- 
diate vicinity, and also stating generally the immense changes effected by 
denudation, he draws attention to an outlier of the Lias between Audlem and 
Wem, about 10 to 12 miles in length and 4 miles in breadth.
He requests 
Dec. 1886.
356 bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1885.
the Society to investigate the exact extent and limits of the outlier, its relation 
to the surrounding strata, and the nature, thickness, and fossil contents of the 
strata which make up the outlier.] Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 
1885, pp.
45-49.
A. J.
Jukes-Browne.
Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, 
The Boulder Clays of Lincolnshire.
[The author divides the boulder clays of 
Lincolnshire and Holderness into two distinct types: (1) the grey or blue, 
and (2) the brown series ; the former being the ' Chalky ' or ' Basement' clay, 
and the latter including both the ' Purple ' and the Hessle clays, which he 
regards as forming one series.
Between the two types named he finds a distinct 
break, the brown clays being of much newer date than the grey.
The author's 
conclusions are confirmed by Mr. Lamplugh as regards Holderness.] Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli, pp.
1 14-132.
Abstracts in Nature, vol.
xxxi, p.
402; Geol.
Mag., March, pp.
135-137; etc.
A. J.
Jukes-Browne.
Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire.
The Geology of the South-West part of Lincolnshire, with parts of Leicestershire 
and Nottinghamshire.
Mem. Geol.
Surv.
Eng. and Wales, 1885, 180 pp.
J. D.
Kendall.
Cumberland.
On the Best Locality for Coal beneath the Permian Eocks of North-west 
Cumberland.
[A reply to a paper by Mr. T.
V. Holmes.] Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., No. x, 1884-5.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Nature near Louth, East Lincolnshire [Jukes-Browne's observations (Q.J. G.
S., 
1884) quoted].
Nat. World, February 1885, ii, 24-25.
R. Kidston.
Northumberland.
On some new or little known Fossil Lycopods from the Carboniferous forma- 
tion.
[Two new species are described from the Coal-measures of Newcastle, 
etc.
— Sigillaria coriacea and Lepidodendron Peachii.~\ Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., May 1885, 5th ser., vol.
xv, pp.
357-365, plate xi.
R. Kidston.
Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire.
On the Kelationship of Ulodendron, Lindley and Hutton, to Lepidodendron, 
Sternberg; Bothrodendron, Lindley and Hutton; Sigillaria, Brongniart; 
and Bhytidodendron, Boulay.
[Lepidodendron veltheimianum Sternb., 
various Northumberland localities ; Sigillaria discophora Konig, Durham, 
Northumberland, Yorkshire.] Ann. and Mag. N.
H., October 1885, (5) xvi, 
239-260, with plates iii-vii.
W. S.
Lean and J.
Lovell.
Yorkshire.
[Two Letters to 'Nature ' on the Earthquake felt in East Yorkshire at 10.47 
a.m. on June 18th.
The shock was most severe at North Dalton, near Drif- 
field ; but no structural damage is recorded.
See also the ' Hull Packet,' 
'Eastern Morning News,' and 4 Hull Express' for June 19th and 20th.] 
Nature, June 25th, 1885, p.
175.
G. A.
Lebour.
Northumberland.
Note on the Posidonomya Becheri Beds of Budle (Northumberland), with 
remarks on the distribution of the species.
[Describes the Budle Shales, and 
cites their commoner fossils.
The author agrees with Mr. Gunn in referring 
these beds to the Bernician, not the Tuedian series.
He also discusses the 
range of Posidonomya in England and on the Continent].
Geol.
Mag., 
February 1 885, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
73-76.
G. A.
Lebour.
Durham.
Note on an Abnormal Deposit of Drift Coal in North Durham.
Naturalist, 
March 1885, pp.
179-180.
G. A.
Lebour.
On some recent Earthquakes on the Durham Coast and their Probable Cause.
[Ascribes the shocks to the falling in of cavities in the Magnesian Limestone 
on which Sunderland stands.
Alludes also to similar shocks a t Midiles- 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1 885.
357 
brough, and to the ' breccia-gashes ' of the Durhairi coast, which are 
regarded as of cognate origin].
Geol.
Mag., December, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
513-515.
[A paper read before the Geological Section (C) of the British 
Association, Aberdeen, September 1885].
Abstract also in Nature, October 
8th, vol.
xxxii, p.
559.
J. Leitch.
Cumberland.
Notes on the Geological Formation and Fossils of the Silloth New Dock.
[Detailed description of the strata met with mentioned in T.
V. Holmes' note, 
with full account of the Mammalian remains found in the gravel].
Trans.
Cumb.
and West.
Assoc., 1883-4, pp.
169-174, and plate [of remains of Bos 
primigenius\ 
Percy Lund.
Yorkshire.
Calcareous Jottings.
[Brief description of Cracoe near Skipton, its scenery and 
geology].
Nat. World, January 1885, ii, 8-10.
M. Luceyt.
Lancashire.
Memoire sur le bassin houiller du Lancashire.
Annales des Mines, ser.
8, torn, 
v, ie Hvr. de 1884, p.
5. 
D. Mackintosh.
Cheshire.
Traces of an Inter-glacial Land-surface at Crewe.
[Short account of good 
sections of book or leaf clay at Crewe Railway Station, which graduated with- 
in a vertical extent of about a foot, into a very .typical and undisturbed 
Upper Boulder Clay.
Mr. Siddall states this leaf clay is the finest he has yet 
examined, finding in it a shallow or brackish water species of Foraminifera — 
viz., Polystomella striatopunctata\ Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 
1885, pp.
50-51.
A. T.
Metcalfe.
Derbyshire.
On the Discovery: in one of the Bone-Caves of Cresswell Crags of a portion of 
the Upper Jaw of Elephas primigenius, containing, in situ, the first and 
second milk-molars (right-side).
[Found in red sand at the entrance to the 
Pin-hole Cave : described by Sir Richard Owen.] [Abridged.] Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli, p.
30.
Abstract in Geol.
Mag., January 1885, Dec. iii, 
vol.
ii, p.
44.
L. C.
Miall.
Yorkshire.
On a Megalichthys from the Yorkshire Coal-field.
Naturalist, January 1885, 
pp.
121-124 and pi.
i. 
H. Miller.
Cumberland and North of England generally.
On Fluxion Structure in Till.
[See Bibliography for 1884, in Nat., 1885, 
p. 400].
Rep. Brit.
Assoc., 1884 (Montreal), pp.
720-721.
J. R.
Mortimer.
Yorkshire.
On the origin of the Chalk Dales of Yorkshire with sections [Cannot accept 
the erosion theory as sufficient to account for them ; states they are due 
originally to fractures in the crust, their present rounded outlines the result of 
subsequent denudation.] Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol. Soc, 1885, pp.
29-42.
G. H.
Morton.
Lancashire.
On the Microscopic Character of the Triassic Sandstones of the country round 
Liverpool [Review of former researches on this subject — 26 specimens of 
Sandstones (localities named) microscopically described.
Concludes that the 
quartz and other minerals forming these sandstones were derived from two or 
three different sources, chemical changes having also occurred since their 
deposition].
Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc, part I, vol.
v, pp.
52-74.
F. M.
Norman.
Northumberland.
Report of Excursion to Pallinsburn.
[Account of the ' Bradford Kaims ' near 
Locker Station.
One of those remarkable ridges known as ' Eskers.' These 
are composed of rolled shingle from Silurian Rocks.] Proc.
Berwickshire 
Nat. Club, 1884, pp.
440-442.
Dec. 1886.
358 bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1885.
F. M.
Norman.
Northumberland.
Keport of Excursion to the Farne Islands.
[States the Fame Islands are an 
outcrop of the Great Whin Sill, with remains of sedimentary fossiliferous rocks 
and boulder clay.
Marks of glaciation were seen.] Proc.
Berwickshire Nat.
Club, 1884, pp.
455 and 456.
F. M.
Norman.
Northumberland.
Report of visit to Newcastle Museum.
[List of mineral and fossil collections 
contained therein.] Proc.
Berwickshire Nat. Club, 1884, PP« 481-485.
F. M.
Norman.
Northumberland 
Embedded Reptiles, with special reference to the discovery of a Live Frog in 
the Carboniferous Limestone at Scremerston, with two plates.
[History given 
of previous examples, and the present case exhaustively examined and 
described.
This frog, the modern species, Rana temporaria, of which nothing 
is known till Post-Pliocene times, whereas the Scremerston Limestone is at 
the base of the Carboniferous Rocks.] Proc.
Berwickshire Nat. Club, 1884, 
pp.
49I-505- 
Sir R.
Owen.
Derbyshire.
Notes on Remains of Elephas Primigenius from one of the Cresswell Bone- 
Caves.
[Gives description and figures of the teeth found by Mr. Metcalfe 
(vide supra).] Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli, pp.
31-34.
Abstract in 
Geol.
Mag., January, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, p.
44.
J. Postlethwaite.
Cumberland.
On the Trilobites of the Skiddaw Slates.
[Records several new forms].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., No. x, 1884-5, with four plates.
H. Prodham.
Durham.
Drift-Coal in Durham.
Naturalist, April 1885, p.
213.
T. Mellard Reade.
Lancashire.
Evidence of the Action of Land-Ice at Great Crosby, Lancashire.
[Abridged.] 
[At the Mowbrey brick and tile works there occurs between the Keuper 
Marls and the Low Level Boulder Clay a deposit 3 ft.
or 4 ft.
thick formed 
from the marl, and containing large blocks of Keuper Sandstone, grooved and 
striated.
The author refers this to the action of land-ice].
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli, pp.
454-456.
Abstract in Phil.
Mag., July, vol.
xx, 
P- 73- 
T. Mellard Reade.
Cheshire, Lancashire.
The Mersey Tunnel : its Geological Aspects and Results.
[The rock on the 
Birkenhead side very hard and compact ; on the Liverpool side softer and 
more thinly bedded.
All of it evidently belongs to the division of the Bunter 
known as the Pebble beds.
The rock under the river was remarkably homo- 
geneous throughout, and comparatively free from faults.
In the actual Tunnel, 
at some 300 yards from Liverpool side, the bottom of the pre-glacial valley 
was intersected by the upper part of the Tunnel, the roof for about 100 yards 
being in hard Boulder clay.
Speculations on the history of the erosion of the 
pre-glacial channel of the Mersey, also the history of the formation of the post- 
glacial channel of the river given.] Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Assoc., Part i, 
vol.
v, pp.
74-84.
T. Mellard Reade.
Lancashire.
Borings on the Southport and Cheshire Lines Extension Railway.
[Several 
records of bore holes given, which are interesting as extending the knowledge 
of the lie of the post-glacial beds in the neighbourhood.] Proc.
Liverp.
Geol.
Soc, Part i, vol.
v, pp.
93-100.
T. Mellard Reade.
Lancashire.
On a Section across the River Douglas at Hesketh Bank.
[The special interest 
of this section is due to the fact that in constructing the foundation of a bridge 
were discovered, about 20 ft.
from the surface, some human remains, consisting 
Naturalist.
bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
359 
of right and left thigh bones, 16 inches long ; also the fibula and two portions 
of the pelvis, containing the sockets.
These bones lay very close to the top 
of the very coarse gravel forming the bottom stratum of the post-glacial 
deposits.] Proc.
Liverp.
Geol.
Soc, Part i, vol v, pp.
100-104.
Clement Reid.
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire.
The Geology of Holderness and the adjoining parts of Yorkshire and Lincoln- 
shire.
(Memoir of the Geological Survey), pp.
177 with map, sections, and 
index.
[This memoir describes the glacial and post-glacial deposits of 
Holderness and adjoining parts of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire.
It refers to 
sheets 85, 94 S.E. and N.E., and also to considerable areas in 94 S.W. and 
N.W. Flamborough Head is the northern limit of this area, and the chalk 
downs for some way southwards its western boundary.
Against these uplands, 
and in the depression to the east and south of them, a series of glacial, inter- 
glacial, and post-glacial deposits has been accumulated to a depth of about 
100 feet.
The almost continuous range of coast cliffs from Flamborough Head 
to the Humber mouth exposes interesting sections of the boulder clays with 
transported stones from remote and widely -separated sources, among which 
are Cumberland, the Cheviot Hills, and the mountains of Scandinavia.
The 
interesting transported masses of sand and clay known as the ' Bridlington 
Crag ' receive minute notice, and much use in their description has been made 
of the writings of Mr. Lamplugh.
There are some interesting charts from 
1684 to the present time, showing the changes in the course of the Humber.
There is a good bibliography of works on Holderness dating from 1662.
The 
chapters on Economic Geology and Water Supply are very practical, and 
there are lists of Well Borings and Sections which occupy 30 pages.] Re- 
viewed Geol.
Mag., February 1886, p.
85, and Naturalist, March 1886, p.
86.
C. Ricketts.
Cheshire, Lancashire.
On some Erratics in the Boulder Clay of Cheshire, etc., and the Conditions of 
Climate they denote.
[Abridged.] [These erratic blocks, which occur in a 
clay beneath the true boulder clay in the Mersey valley, are of a variety of 
rocks.
They show evidence not only of glacial striation, but of subsequent 
weathering, and sometimes splitting in situ.
The author explains the 
weathering by the supposition that these boulders once formed portions of 
land moraines, and were subsequently carried down to sea in consequence of 
an extension of the glaciers].
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xli, pp.
591-598.
Abstracts in Phil.
Mag., August, vol.
xx, p.
207 ; Geol.
Mag., July, Dec. iii, 
vol.
ii, p.
330.
F. Rutley.
Cumberland.
The Enstatitic Lavas of Eycott Hill [a personal reference to the work done by 
the late Mr. J.
Clifton Ward].
F. Rutley.
Cumberland, Westmoreland.
The Felsitic Lavas of England and Wales, with an introductory description of 
the chief characters of this Group of Rocks, by F.
Rutley, F.G.S., index of 
localities and 4 plates.
[Definition of felsitic rocks with chapters on banded, 
spherulitic, and perlitic structure.
Fluxion structure also explained.
Tabular 
statement of petrological affinities or the relation which the rocks mentioned 
in the memoir bear to one another.
Examples of felsitic lavas occur in Lake 
District at Red Crag, Long Sleddale Valley, Till's Hole, near Grizedale Tarn, 
in Duddon Valley, Copper-mine Valley, The Knott, Broughton Moor, west 
side of Great Stickle, Appletreeworth, Shap Wells, etc.] Memoirs of the 
Geol.
Surv.
Engl, and Wales.
S. James A.
Salter.
Derbyshire, Yorkshire.
Marble [Enumeration of various Derbyshire and Yorkshire marbles].
Notes 
and Queries, March 14th, 1885, 6th Series, xi, 201-202.
H. W.
Schneider.
Furness.
On the Haematite Iron Mines of Low Furness.
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., No. x, 1884-5.
360 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1885.
S. H.
SCUDDER, 
Lancashire.
Two more English Carboniferous Insects.
[Records and describes two portions 
of insects' wings from the Lancashire coal-field.
Both belong to the group 
Protophasmida of Brongniart : one is referred to the genus Archaoptilus, 
while the other is quite new, and is here named Aidccophasma anglica.] 
Geol.
Mag., Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
265, 266.
J. Shipman.
Notts.
The Story of the Hemlock Stone.
[Gives a resume of speculations as to the 
origin of the Hemlock Stone, a huge, isolated pillar of sandstone of the 
Keuper Basement Beds of the Trias at Stapleford Hill, about six miles west 
of Nottingham.
Conclusions formed that it was formed by weathering through 
vast periods of time ; then buried by the drift in the Great Ice Age, which 
has since been carried away by denudation, leaving the rock pillar in its 
present state.] 32nd Annual Report, Nottingham Naturalists' Society, pp.
11-16.
W. Shone.
Cheshire.
The Silting up of the Dee : its cause [Geological history of the Dee reviewed.
Cause of its silting up being the flood tide bringing up vast quantities of sand, 
and the width of the river decreasing rapidly within a few miles.
The 
narrowing of the river between Connah's Quay and Chester produces a violent 
' bore ' with each flow of the tide.
This carries coarse sand up the river, 
and the causeway at Chester, checking the 'bore,' causes the sediment to be 
thrown down.
The withdrawal of water from the upper Dee by the canal 
aggravates the evil.] Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 1885, pp.
52-61.
John Sim. Northumberland.
Objects of Interest in our [Northumbrian] Pit District.
\_Anthracosia ovata 
figured at p.
32].
Sci. Goss., February 1885, pp.
31, 32.
M. Simpson.
Yorkshire.
The Fossils of the Yorkshire Lias described from Nature.
With a carefully 
measured Section of the Strata, and the Fossils peculiar to each.
2nd ed., 
1884, Whitby.
[The first edition appeared in 1855.
The present edition 
reprints also the ' Section of the Yorkshire Lias ' given in the 4th edition of 
the Guide to the Geology of the Yorkshire Coast in 1868.
The Fossils are 
carefully described, but without figures].
("Theodore] Sington.
Derbyshire.
Mineral Deposit, occurring on Windy Knoll, near Castleton.
[Very brief 
account of this deposit, which has not been named or its chemical constitution 
definitely ascertained].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, February 16th, 
1885, xxiv, 53.
H. B.
Stocks.
Yorkshire.
Analysis of a Hydraulic Limestone Concretion from the Yorkshire Coast- 
[Analysis of one from Sewerby, near Flamborough, compared with one from 
Isle of Sheppey.
General remarks on other concretions].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc, 1885, pp.
55, 56.
C. Fox Strangways, C.
Reid, and G.
Barrow.
Yorkshire.
The Geology of Eskdale, Eosedale, etc.
(Memoir of the Geological Survey), 
pp.
65, with index.
[This memoir describes the area represented in sheet 96 
N.E. Old Series ; sheet 43 New Series.
The geology of this remarkable part 
of the north-east of Yorkshire is minutely detailed.
Nowhere can be seen so 
plainly the effects of erosion in carving out the numerous valleys which radiate 
from the table-land.
The Lias, Lower and Middle Oolites with their divisions, 
all of which are so well seen in these valleys, are described.
Numerous tables 
of sections and analyses of ores are given.
A short chapter gives an account 
of the Whinstone or Cleveland Dyke.
The Physical Geography of the district 
is explained, and a list of geological works referring to this part of Yorkshire 
given.] 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1885.
3 6x 
(The late) Geo. Tate.
Northumberland.
On a Toad in a Limestone Rock at Whittle.
[This toad said to have been 
found in- Carboniferous Limestone.
The idea scouted as to its having been 
thus enclosed ; the Limestone being of marine origin, and toads not in existence 
at the time.] Proc.
Berwickshire Nat. Club, 1884, pp.
505, 506.
J.J. H.
Teall.
Northumberland, Cumberland.
On some Quartz-Felsites and Augite-Granites from the Cheviot District.
[The author describes fully the varieties of quartz-felsite met with in the 
Cheviots, and also certain granites remarkable for containing augite as well as 
biotite ; and speculates on the relations of the two rocks.
The paper also 
contains Dr. Petersen's analyses of a hypersthene-andesite and a porphyrite 
from the same district, and of their respective ground -masses ; and refers to 
the felsite of Carrock Fell, Cumberland, and its relations.] Geol.
Mag., 
March, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
106-121.
Yorkshire, Lancashire, Westmoreland, 
B. Thompson and T.
J. George.
Derbyshire.
A Catalogue of the Geological Collection in the Northampton Museum.
Part III.
— The Carboniferous System.
[Gives list of Carboniferous fossils, 
one of the most interesting being a large slab of Limestone from Swaledale, 
showing in relief some fine specimens of Woodocrinus macrodactylus.} 
Journal Northamptonsh.
Nat. Hist.
Soc. and Field Club, vol.
3, No. 22, May 
1885, pp.
240-245.
Rev. J.
Stanley Tute.
Yorkshire.
Note on Spirangium carbonarium, with woodcut.
[This specimen discovered 
in breaking a sandstone boulder from the Drift, probably derived from one of 
the members of the Yoredale series.] Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol. Soc, 
1885, p.
53.
W. Y.
Veitch.
Yorkshire.
Three new species \Chonetes clevelandicus, Pleuromya naviaila, and Isis liassicd] 
observed in the Yorkshire Lias, with plate.
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol.
Soc, 1885, p.
54.
G. R.
Vine.
Northumberland, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Derbyshire.
Micro-Palaeontology of the Northern Carboniferous Shales.
Parts iv, v, vi 
(concluded from 1884).
Naturalist, April, September, November 1885, pp.
207-212, 313-320, 367-378.
G. R.
Vine.
Lancashire.
Notes on the Yoredale Polyzoa of North Lancashire, "with + plate.
[Table 
showing the range of Carboniferous Polyzoa in the Yoredale rocks.
Detailed 
descriptions of species, several of them being new forms.] Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Pol. Soc, 1885, pp.
70-98.
Thomas Ward.
Cheshire.
On the Manufacture of Salt in Cheshire.
[Historical account of salt trade 
given ; a short review of the geology of the Cheshire salt beds ; a description of 
the process of manufacturing common salt ; statistics of trade and other 
valuable information.] Memoirs of Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Third Series, 
vol.
viii, 1884, pp.
9-26.
Thomas Ward.
Cheshire.
On the Action of Water upon beds of Rock Salt.
[Phenomena exhibited by 
the action of water upon beds of Rock Salt carefully dealt with in classes — viz:, 
Water in a state of rest ; Water descending by gravitation and passing over 
beds of salt in its course to a lower level ; Water descending by gravitation to 
beds of salt below the surface of the earth, and reappearing as brine springs 
at the surface, but at a higher level than the salt beds ; Natural Water set in 
motion, or its motion accelerated by artificial means, such as pumps ; Water 
conveyed artificially to salt beds, and then pumped up again.] Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, 1883-4, xxiii, 5-28.
Dec. 1886.
362 bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1885.
Edward Wethered.
Yorkshire.
On the Structure and Origin of Carboniferous Coal Seams.
[Review of literature 
on this subject.
Section of Better Bed at Low Moor given, and results of micro- 
scopic examination inch by inch through the seam carefully detailed.
The 
author is unable to endorse Prof.
Huxley's statements as to the structure of 
coal, as though the first 3 in.
from the top is very largely nlade up of 
macrospores and microspores, and the same may be said of the layer 4 in.
from the top, though they are mostly of a different species to those above, 
yet below that point spores form but a small proportion of the whole mineral.] 
Journ.
Roy. Micr.
Soc, June 1885, v, 406-420.
J. White.
Cumberland, "Westmorland, Lancashire.
Bandom Notes on the English Lake District.
Trans.
Glasgow Geol.
Soc, 
vol.
ii, part 2 (1882-84), 1885, p.
334.
W. C.
Williamson.
Lancashire, Yorkshire.
On some undescribed tracks of Invertebrate Animals for the Carboniferous 
Rocks, and on some inorganic phenomena, simulating plant remains, produced 
on tidal shores.
[Brief abstract given, mentioning a new form of Chrossocorda, 
which the author regards as merely tracks of marine animals, in opposition to 
the views of Schimper and others, who think this genus represents some 
fucoidal form of Palaeozoic life.
A second form of track found by J.
W. 
Davis, F.G.S., at Hawes, in the Yoredale beds, has been named Protichnites 
davisi after its discoverer.
Casts of markings produced recently by drainage 
lines combined with ripple marks left by the retiring tide, producing an effect 
easily mistaken for the geometrically arranged scale leaves of some Cycad, 
were exhibited at the reading of this memoir].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, 1885, xxiv, 37-38.
E. Wilson.
Lincolnshire.
The Lias' Marlstone of Leicestershire as a source of Iron.
[General features of the 
Lias Marlstone described.
Good section in railway cutting south of Tillon 
Station, with characteristic fossils in each zone given.
Short history of its 
discovery as a valuable article of mining industry.
Refers to Lincolnshire.
] 
Midi.
Nat., March 1885, viii, 61-66, with plate.
A. Smith Woodward.
Yorkshire.
On the Literature and Nomenclature of British Fossil Crocodilia.
[Quotes species 
from the Whitby Lias.].
Geol.
Mag., November, Dec. iii, vol.
ii, pp.
496-510.
A. S.
Woodward.
Cheshire.
Note on the Occurrence of Evansite in East Cheshire.
[The first record of 
this mineral in the British Isles.] Mineral.
Mag., 1884, vol.
v, pp.
333, 334.
H. Woodward.
Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Cumberland.
A Monograph of the British Carboniferous Trilobites, Part II, pp.
39-86, 
plates viii, ix ; Palseontograph.
Soc. Mem.
for 1884.
[Describes species of 
Grijfithides, Phillipsia, and Brachemytopus from Settle, Longnor, Caldbeck, 
and other northern localities.] 
T, Wright.
Yorkshire.
Monograph on the Lias Ammonites of the British Islands, Part vii, pp.
441- 
480, plates lxxviii-lxxxvii ; Palseontographical Soc. Mem.
for 1884.
[Treats 
of several species of the genera Harpoceras and Stephanoceras from the Upper 
Lias of Whitby, etc, giving diagnoses, dimensions, descriptions, affinities, and 
differences, localities and stratigraphical positions.] 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire.
Excursion r to Anston Stones, in conjunction with the Nottinghamshire Naturalists, 
April 30th.
Naturalist, June 1885, pp.
260-262.
Yorkshire.
Excursion to Boroughbridge, May 25th.
Naturalist, July 1885, pp.
279-281.
Excursion to Pocklington, June 24th.
Naturalist, August 1885, pp.
307-309.
Excursion to "Whitby, August 3rd.
Naturalist, October 1885, pp.
348-350.
Excursion to Blubberhouses, September 26th.
Naturalist, November 1885, 
pp.
379-382.
. 
Naturalist, 
363 
THE BIRDS OF 
THE LINCOLNSHIRE FENS AND WOLDS IN 1612.
MICHAEL DRAYTON; 
WITH 
Annotations by JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U.
[The stanzas here given, which are taken from the 23rd and 25th Songs of the 
well-known Poly-olbion, a poetical description of the counties of England and 
Wales, which was published about the year 1612, constitute, perhaps, the oldest 
record of the Lincolnshire avifauna, and enable us in some measure to compare 
its former state with that of the present day.
It forms, therefore, with the anno- 
tations, a fitting continuation of our series of papers on the natural history of 
Lincolnshire.
Some of the notes are by the late William Yarrell, as published by 
him at p.
228 of the 'Annals of Natural History' for 1844, and one or two from 
Dr. Samuel Johnson's edition of the ' British Poets.' For the names, which are in 
conformity with the B.O.U. list of British Birds, and for most of the annotations, 
we are indebted to Mr. Cordeaux, than whom no one knows the county and its 
avifauna better.
The authorship of the notes is shown by the initials S.J.
(for Dr.
Johnson), W.
Y. (for William Yarrell), and J.C.
(for John Cordeaux).-EDS.
Naturalist.
] 
From Ely all upon that eastern sea, 
Then Lincolnshire herself, in state at length doth lay, 
Which for her fatt'ning fens, her fish, and fowl, may have 
Pre-eminence, as she that seemeth to outbrave 
All other southern shires 
['THE FENS.'] 
She 1 , by the Muse's aid, shall happily reveal 
Her sundry sorts of fowl, from whose abundance she 
Above all other tracts, may boast herself to be 
The mistress, and (indeed) to sit without compare, 
With her just proper praise, thus Holland doth proceed : 
" My various fleets for fowl, O who is he can tell, 
The species that in me for multitudes excel !
The Duck 2 and Mallard 2 first, the falconer's only sport, 
1 ' She ' refers here to the fen district of Lincolnshire, or the ' Parts of Holland.' 
2 Anas Boschas L.
; female and male.
The Peregrine Falcon was the species 
most commonly used for duck-hawking, and our Wild Duck, from its courage as well 
as its powers of flight, is almost the only duck that will take the air boldly and try 
conclusions with him.
I have been told by falconers, that if it blows hard, the 
Wild Duck can make its way up wind so fast as to get clear off.
The Peregrine 
Falcon is frequently called the Duck-hawk.
They breed on high rocks near the 
coast, and subsist almost exclusively on water-fowl.
— W.Y.
Dec. 1886.
364 THE BIRDS OF LINCOLNSHIRE IN l6l2.
(Of river flights the chief, so that all other sort 
They only green-fowl term) in every mere abound, 
That you would think they sat upon the very ground, 
Their numbers being so great, the waters covering quite, 
That rais'd, the spacious air is darken'd with their flight ; 
Yet still the dangerous dykes, from shot do them secure, 
Where they from flash to flash, like the full epicure 
Waft, as they lov'd to change their diet every meal ; 
And near to them you see the lesser dibbling Teal 3 
In bunches 4 , with the first that fly from mere to mere, 
As they above the rest were lords of earth and air.
The Gossander 5 with them, my goodly fens do show 
His head as ebon black, the rest as white as snow.
With whom the Widgeon 6 goes, the Golden-eye 7 , the Smeath 8 , 
And in odd scatter'd pits, the flags and reeds beneath, 
The Coot 9 , bald, else clean black, that whiteness it doth bear 
Upon the forehead star'd, the Water-hen 10 doth wear 
Upon her little tail, in one small feather set.
The Water- Woosell 11 next, all over black as jet, 
With various colours, black, green, blue, red, russet, white, 
Do yield the gazing eye as variable delight 
As do those sundry fowls, whose several plumes they be.
The diving Dobchick 12 , here amongst the rest you see, 
Now up, now down again, that hard it is to prove, 
Whether under water most it liveth, or above : 
With which last little fowl, (that water may not lack, 
More than the dobchick doth, and more doth love the brack 13 ,) 
3 Qiierquedula crecca (L.).
4 The word used in falconry and by fenmen for a company of teal.
— S.J.
5 Gossander = Goosander, Mergus merganser L.
0 Mareca penelope (L.).
7 Clcuigula glaucion (L.).
8 Smeath would appear to be another name for the Smew, Mergus albelhis~L-W ".Y '.
9 Coot-Bald or Bald-Coot, Fulica atra L.
10 Water-hen or Moor-hen, Gallinula chloropus L.
The specific name refers to 
the green colour of the legs ; the under tail-coverts are nearly white, as noticed by 
Drayton.
— W.Y.
11 This can scarcely refer to the Water Ouzel or Dipper, a bird which could never 
have been common in Lincolnshire ; certainly not in the fens.
May have been 
one of the Rails.
An old name of the Water Rail {Rallus aquaticus) is ' Brook 
Ouzel.'— J.
C. 
12 Dabchick or Little Grebe, Tachybctptes fluviatilis Tunst.
13 Salt water.- S.J.
Naturalist, 
THE BIRDS OF LINCOLNSHIRE IN l6l2.
365 
The Puffin 14 we compare, which coming to the dish, 
Nice palates hardly judge, if it be flesh or fish 15 .
" But wherefore should I stand upon such toys as these, 
That have so goodly fowls, the wand'ring eye to please.
Here in my vaster pools, as white as snow or milk, 
(In water black as Styx,) swims the Wild 16 Swan, the like 16 , 
Of Hollanders so term'd, no niggard of his breath, 
(As poets say of swans, who only sing in death) 
But oft as other birds, is heard his tunes to roat, 
Which like a trumpet comes, from his long arched throat 17 , 
And tow'rds this wat'ry kind, about the flashes brim, 
Some cloven-footed are, by nature not to swim.
There stalks the stately Crane 18 , as tho' he march'd in war, 
By him that hath the Hern 19 , which (by the fishy car) 
Can fetch with their long necks, out of the rush and reed, 
Snigs 20 , fry, and yellow frogs, whereon they often feed : 
And under them again, (that water never take, 
But by some ditches' side, or little shallow lake 
Lie dabbling night and day) the palate-pleasing Snite 21 , 
The Bidcock 22 , and like them the Redshank 23 , that delight 
Together still to be, in some small reedy bed, 
In which these little fowls in summer's time were bred.
The buzzing Bitter 24 sits, which through his hollow bill 
A sudden bellowing sends, which many times doth fill 
The neighbouring marsh with noise, as though a bull did roar ; 
But scarcely have I yet recited half my store : 
And with my wondrous flocks of Wild-Geese 25 come I then, 
Which look as though alone they peopled all the fen, 
u Fratercula arctica (L.).
15 Several species of water-fowl, supposed to feed exclusively on fish, are per- 
mitted to be eaten by Catholics on their maigre days.
— W.Y.
16 Elk and Hooper, names of the Wild Swan, Cygnus ferns.
— W.Y.
17 See Dr. Latham and Mr. Yarrell's papers in the ' Transactions of the Linnean 
Society,' vols, iv., xvi., and xvii., on the convoluted wind-pipes of Wild Swans.
— W.Y.
18 Grits communis Bechst.
19 Ardea cinerea L.
20 Small eels.— W.Y.
21 Snite or Snipe, Gallinago ccelesiis (Frenzel).
22 Bidcock and Bilcock, old names for the Water Rail, Rallus aquaticus L.
23 Tetanus calidris L.
24 Bitter or Bittern, Botaurus stellaris (L.
). The generic name is derived from 
Bos and Taurus, in reference to the bull-like roar.
— W.Y.
25 The particular species is doubtful.
— W.Y.
Dec. 1886.
b 2 
3 66 
THE BIRDS OF LINCOLNSHIRE IN l6l2.
Which here in winter time, when all is overflow'd, 
And want of solid sward enforceth them abroad, 
Th' abundance then is seen, that my full fens do yield, 
That almost through the isle, do pester every field.
The Barnacles 26 with them, which wheresoe'er they breed, 
On trees, or rotten ships, yet to my fens for feed 
Continually they come, and chief abode do make, 
And very hardly forc'd my plenty to forsake : 
Who almost all this kind do challenge as mine own, 
Whose like, I dare aver, is elsewhere hardly known.
For sure, unless in me, no one yet ever saw 
The multitudes of fowl, in mooting time they draw : 
From which to many a one, much profit doth accrue.
" Now such as flying feed, next these I must pursue ; 
The Sea-Meaw 27 , Sea-Pye 28 , Gull 29 , and Curlew 30 , here do keep, 
As searching every shoal and watching every deep, 
To find their floating fry, with their sharp-piercing sight, 
Which suddenly they take, by stooping from their height.
The Cormorant 31 then comes, (by his devouring kind) 
Which flying o'er the fen, immediately doth find 
The Fleet.
best stor'd of fish, when from his wings at full, 
As though he shot himself into the thicken'd skull 32 , 
He under water goes, and so the shoal pursues, 
Which into creeks do fly, when quickly he doth choose 
The fin that likes him best, and rising, flying feeds.
The Ospray 33 oft here seen, though seldom here it breeds, 
Which over them the fish no sooner do espy, 
But (betwixt him and them, by an antipathy) 
Turning their bellies up, as though their death they saw, 
They at his pleasure lie, to stuff his glutt'nous maw." 
26 In reference to the old fable.
— W.Y.
27 Sea-Mew, Sea-Mell, and Sea-Mall, old names for a small common Gull 
Thus Caliban, among his other offers of service to Stephano, says : ' and some- 
times I'll get thee young sea-mells from the rocks.' — Shakspeare 's 'Tempest?
Act 2, 
Scene 2.— W.Y.
28 Sea-Pye, a name for the Oyster-catcher, Hccmatopus ostralegus, in reference 
to its black and white colours.
— W.Y.
29 Already noticed.
so Numenius arquata L.
Both words refer to the bent form of the beak ; 
Numenius meaning 'new moon.' — W.Y.
31 Cormorants, Phalacrocorax carbo (L.), nested in trees on the shores of Fritton 
Lake, Norfolk, as late as 1825.— J.C.
32 Scull, or scool, a shoal; so, in Cornwall, a school of pilchards, &c.
— W.Y.
33 Pandion halia'etus L.
Naturalist, 
THE BIRDS OF LINCOLNSHIRE IN l6l2.
367 
[< THE WOLDS.'] 
1 .
. .
34 that which Holland seems to vaunt her on the most, 
By me is overmatch'd; the fowl which she doth breed, 
She in her foggy fens, so moorishly doth feed, 
That physic oft forbids the patient them for food, 
But mine more airy are, and make fine spirits and blood : 
For near this batt'ning isle in me is to be seen, 
More than on any earth, the Plover 35 gray, and green, 
The corn-land loving Quail 36 , the daintiest of our bits, 
The Rail 37 , which seldom comes, but upon rich men's spits : 
The Puet 38 , Godwit 39 , Stint 40 , the palate that allure, 
The miser, and do make a wasteful epicure : 
34 What precedes is the chant of the ' Parts of Holland ' in praise of the Fens.
The ' Parts of Lindsey ' now takes up the strain in defence of the Wolds.
35 The Golden Plover, Charadrias phivialis.
This is the ' Grey 1 Plover, 
' Whistling ' Plover, ' Green ' Plover of old authors.
Perhaps in no part of 
England do we still find larger flocks of the Golden Plover during the winter 
months ; numbers are shot in the north-eastern marshes, and often form no 
inconsiderable proportion of the home wild-fowl exposed in the game shops.
The true Grey Plover (Squatarola helvetica) rarely occurs at any distance from the 
sea.
The young of this, in the golden-spotted plumage of autumn, was very 
frequently confounded with the Golden Plover.
— J.C.
36 Coturnix communis nests annually on the Lincolnshire north wolds.
The 
familiar and monotonous call notes may be heard from the time of turnip sowing 
till harvest, after which they probably leave the district, as they are rarely met 
with in the shooting season.
— J.C.
37 Rail or Daker-hen — Corncrake, Crex pratetisis.
Abundant in some seasons, 
and less common in others ; of fairly frequent occurrence in September.
The 
Landrail should be cooked when quite fresh ; it was much appreciated by old 
sportsmen as a delicacy.— J.C.
38 Peewit or Lapwing, Vanellus vulgaris.
— Several isolated farmsteads in North 
Lincolnshire bear the name of ' Pyewipe ' from the former abundance of this 
species.
Enormous flocks still frequent the east coast marshes and middle marsh 
district in the winter, and large numbers are netted.
— J.C.
39 Bartailed Godwit {Limosa lapponica) and Blacktailed Godwit (Z.
agocephala).
The former is a common migrant on the coast of Lincolnshire in the autumn ; 
again appearing in the spring, during the second week in May, often in very 
considerable flocks.
It very rarely occurs at any distance from the coast.
With 
reference to this species, Fothergill, in the ' Ornithologia Britannica,' 1799, p.
7, 
says — ' This bird is caught, and shot, mixed with the ruffs, in our marshes, 
especially in the fens opposite Spurn Point.' In the ' Boston Corporation Records,' 
1597, appears the entry: — ' To be sent to the Lord Treasurer as a present, one 
dozen Godwights, five dozen Knots, and one dozen Puets, at the Corporation 
charge.' The Black-tailed Godwit formerly bred regularly in the fens.
It now 
occurs occasionally in the autumn on the coast, but very rarely in the spring, on 
the return migration.
— J.C.
40 Stint = Dunlin, Tringa variabilis.
Dec. 1886.
3 68 
THE BIRDS OF LINCOLNSHIRE IN l6l2.
The Knot 41 , that called was Canutus' bird of old, 
Of that great king of Danes, his name that still doth hold, .
His appetite to please, that far and near was sought, 
For him (as some have said) from Denmark hither brought : 
The Dotterel 42 , which we think a very dainty dish, 
Whose taking makes such sport, as man no more can wish ; 
For as you creep, or cowr, or lie, or stoop, or go, 
So marking you (with care) the apish bird doth do, 
And acting every thing, doth never mark the net, 
Till he be in the snare, which men for him have set.
The big-bon'd Bustard 43 then, whose body bears that size, 
That he against the wind must run, e'er he can rise : 
The shoulder, which so shakes the air with saily wings, 
That ever as he flies you still would think he sings.
These fowls, with other soils, although they frequent be, 
Yet are they found most sweet and delicate in me.' 
41 Tringa canutus L.
— The wide-extending muds and sands on the Lincoln- 
shire coast, and the great flats of ooze at the entrance of the Humber and Wash, 
afford very attractive feeding grounds for immense flocks of Knot, and great 
numbers remain in these situations during the winter.
This species was formerly 
taken in nets,' like the Ruff, and when fatted for the table was considered almost 
equal in delicacy of flavour.
— J.
C. 
42 Eudromias morinellus.
— Occurs with tolerable regularity, but in very limited 
number, on the high wolds, in the last week in April, and in the marsh districts 
of North and North-east Lincolnshire early in May, sometimes continuing till 
later in the month.
Dotterel are not easily distinguishable on fallow-land or newly- 
sown corn.
Their habit, however, when resting, of suddenly elevating a wing — 
just as Golden Plover do — will frequently lead to their instant detection.
The 
poem alludes to the well-known belief that Dotterel imitated or mimicked the 
actions of the fowler.
— J.C.
43 Otis tarda.
— The records of the Bustard on the Lincolnshire wolds are very 
few.
They probably became extinct about the close of the last century or com- 
mencement of the present, when the wolds were enclosed and cultivated.
— J.C.
NO TE— ORNITHOL O G Y.
Tree-sparrow in North Lincolnshire.
— November 13th.
This 
pretty species {Passer montanus), which nests somewhat sparingly in North-east 
Lincolnshire, occurs in very large numbers in the autumn, arriving in October and 
November.
This afternoon I found a flock crowding the top of a low hedge, 
probably numbering 2,000 birds.
They sat very closely packed along the sunny 
side of the fence, from which, with much chattering, they continued to drop in a 
continuous stream on to a barley stubble, and concentrating specially at one spot, 
till a space of something like eight yards by five was so densely crowded that to 
the eye nothing but a brown patch was visible ; for many yards around this also 
hundreds were scattered on the stubble, apparently searching for small seeds, as 
they constantly shifted their position.
When put up they flew rapidly in three or 
four very crowded detachments to the next fence, again uniting in one flock and 
dropping as before on the stubble.
From their very bright and clean appearance 
I think they must have been quite a recent arrival.
— John Cordeaux, Great 
Cotes, November 15th, 1886.
Naturalist, 
369 
STRASBTJRGER ON FOREIGN POLLINATION.
THOMAS HICK, B.A., B.Sc, 
Demonstrator and Assistant Lecturer in Botany, The Owens College, Manchester.
Botanical readers of the Naturalist will probably remember that in 
the last volume some account was given of Strasburger's New Investi 
gations on the process of Fertilisation in Phanerogams.
In the course 
of those investigations, foreign pollen grains were often met with on 
the stigmas of plants, which had not only put forth pollen-tubes, but 
had forced the same to a greater or less distance down the styles.
Struck with this phenomenon, and doubtless recognising its im- 
portant bearing upon several physiological questions, Strasburger in- 
stituted a series of observations and experiments, with the object of 
determining within what limits the formation of pollen-tubes on 
foreign stigmas is possible, whether any disadvantage is connected 
therewith, and if so, whether there exist any protective contrivances 
by which such a mode of pollination is, as a rule, prevented.
The 
results of the investigation he has recently published in a paper 
which appears in the current part (Band xvii, Heft I) of Pringsheim's 
' Jahrbiicher fiir wissenschaftliche Botanik,' and which, like everything 
from the pen of the Bonn Professor of Botany, will well repay close and 
attentive study.
The title of the paper is ' Uber fremdige Bestau- 
bung,' which we have translated as above — 4 Foreign Pollination' — 
and purpose in what follows to give a resume of the experiments made 
and of the conclusions arrived at.
In doing so, Strasburger's own 
language will be followed as closely as possible, so that no injustice 
may be done him by a misinterpretation of his statements.
Of the 
experiments themselves nothing need be said, save that they were 
rigorous and numerous enough to ensure the reliability of the general 
results, and that wherever possible the pollination was effected 
reciprocally, that is, the stigma of A was dusted with the pollen of B, 
and conversely the stigma of B with the pollen of A.
The first plant to be experimented with was Fritillaria persica, 
taken first in the early year.
It was soon found that the pollen of 
this plant is capable of forming pollen-tubes, not only on its own 
stigma, but on those of other plants belonging to different genera, 
and even to different natural orders.
Thus the pollen grains germinate 
on the stigmas of Convallaria latifolia, C.
polygonatum, Tulipa Ges- 
neriana, Scilla hispanica, S.
non-scripta, Orchis mascula, and O.
Morio.
The germination on Convallaria latifolia quite agrees with the normal 
behaviour on its own stigma.
The pollen-tube penetrates the stylar 
Dec. 1886.
370 STRASBURGER ON FOREIGN POLLINATION.
canal from the stigma, grows downwards therein, and as its proto- 
plasmic contents move forwards, the emptied portion of the tube 
become closed up in the usual, way by the formation of cellulose 
plugs.
Yet only a small number of pollen-tubes reach the ovary, and 
of these the further development is soon arrested, no tube growing 
into the micropyle of an ovule.
In Orchis mascula and O.
Morio the 
process is often carried considerably further.
Here the Fritillaria 
pollen-tubes may penetrate more deeply into the ovary, where they 
form six strings, growing downwards in the placentas.
Now in many 
Orchidese, the ovules themselves are only formed as a consequence 
of pollination, and it is highly significant that the development of 
the ovules in the species named was excited by the pollen-tubes of 
Fritillaria, as if they had been derived from the pollen of the Orchis 
itself.
In one example of Orchis Morio this development went as far 
as the formation of the inner integument of the nucellus, when the 
process was arrested by the death of the pollen -tubes.
Thus the 
stimulus only continues so long as the pollen-tubes remain alive, but 
so long as it lasts it is quite of the same kind as that produced in 
normal pollination.
In no case did a pollen-tube of Fritillaria reach 
the micropyle of an ovule and complete the fertilising process.
On the stigmas of other plants, the pollen grains of Fritillaria were 
unable to germinate and form pollen-tubes.
This happened in experi- 
ments with Narcissus poeticus, Chelidonium majus, Pozonia officinalis, 
Cheiranthus Cheiri, Lupinus luteus, Lamiwn album, Doronicu?n Par- 
dalianches, and other species.
The reciprocal experiments with these plants were limited by a 
want of material, but it was established that the pollen of Narcissus 
poeticus and N odorus germinates as little on Fritillaria as the pollen 
of Fritillaria on the Narcissi named.
Orchis Morio on the contrary, 
in certain cases, formed tolerably good pollen-tubes on the stigma 
of Fritillaria.
From this it would seem as though a reciprocity in 
the germinating power of pollen-grains might be inferred to hold 
generally, but experiment shows that such a reciprocity is absent 
quite as frequently as it is present.
Taking all the experiments into 
consideration, however, Strasburger thinks it follows, with evidence, 
that the capacity of pollen grains to put forth tubes on foreign stigmas 
is in no way restricted within the limits of sexual affinity, nor even 
v/ithin those of relationship.
Another position he considers to be established is that the proper 
pollen of a plant is not able to exclude foreign pollen from germi- 
nating.
On the stigma of Scilla hispanica, its own pollen and that of 
Fritillaria per sica form tubes simultaneously, which grow intermingled 
downwards in the style.
So, on the stigma of Orchis Morio, its own 
Naturalist, 
STRASBURGER ON FOREIGN POLLINATION.
37 1 
and vigorous Friiillaria pollen-tubes were simultaneously produced ; 
but when the latter were given 24 hours' start, they did not prevent 
the former from developing normally, entering the ovary, and later 
on completing the fertilising process.
Hence pollinating with foreign 
pollen, even when the latter is capable of forming pollen-tubes, need 
not be disadvantageous to the plant concerned.
On dicotyledonous plants the experiments with the pollen of 
Fritillaria did not succeed in causing the development of vigorous 
pollen-tubes, and on this account the experiments in this direction 
were chiefly made with Agapafithus umbellatus.
On the stigma of 
Achimenes grandiflora the pollen of Agapanthus umbellatus germinates 
readily, the tubes growing deep down into the style and building 
numerous drops of cellulose.
This shows that even monocotyle- 
donous pollen is capable of vigorous development on a dicotyle- 
donous stigma.
On the contrary, however, the pollen of Achimenes 
grandiflora did not germinate on Agapanthus, so that here is a case 
of failing reciprocity.
On Nicotiana tabacum only a portion of the 
pollen grains of Agapanthus germinate, but these form tubes of very 
considerable length, the poisonousness of Nicotiana offering appa- 
rently no hindrance to their development.
Moreover, Nicotiana 
pollen produced very good tubes on Agapanthus which penetrated a 
distance far into the style, and thus furnished an example of vigorous 
development of dicotyledonous pollen on a monocotyledonous stigma.
A very beautiful illustration of this is also afforded by the behaviour of 
Lathyrus montanus on Convallaria latifolia, where the pollen-tubes 
of the Lathyrus actually reach the cavity of the ovary of the Conval- 
laria.
The pollen of Lathyrus montanus germinates well also on 
Orchis Morio, though the tubes do not penetrate into the ovary and 
have but an inconsiderable influence on the development of the ovules.
In the cases hitherto referred to, which are typical of numerous 
experiments recorded by the author, the pollen grains germinated on 
the foreign stigma, but the fertilising process was not completed by 
the entrance of the tube into the micropyle and the copulation of 
the sperm nucleus with that of the egg-cell or oosphere.
But in 
others, a nearer approach to complete fertilisation was exhibited.
Thus, specimens of Orchis Morio were pollinated with Orchis fusca.
In a short time pollen-tubes were put forth in the normal way, and 
grew down into the ovary, stimulating, as usual, the development of 
the ovules.
By the time the egg-apparatus was fully formed in the 
embryo-sac, the ends of the pollen-tubes had turned to the ovules, 
and soon entered the micropyle.
In many ovules the embryo-sac 
shrivelled before the entrance of the pollen-tube ; in others the tip 
of the pollen-tube reached the embryo-sac, but fertilisation did not 
Dec. 1886.
372 
STRASBURGER ON FOREIGN POLLINATION.
follow ; in others, again, fertilisation was in process and presented 
the usual phenomena ; while, lastly, in some ovules a rudimentary 
embryo was already formed.
These rudiments were partly normal 
and partly abnormal in appearance, but ultimately all died.
From 
these facts it may be inferred that the fertilisation and the develop- 
ment of the embryo are here effected under conditions of some 
difficulty, and are therefore not carried to a successful termination.
Incidentally too, they point to a possible explanation of the well-known 
circumstance that hybridisation often yields only a few seeds capable 
of germinating, and frequently gives rise to mal-formed embryos.
Similar experiments with other species of Orchis gave similar 
results, but in the case of Orchis latifolia pollinated with O.
mascula, 
tolerably numerous embryos of normal appearance were developed, 
some of which attained maturity and ripened themselves fully.
On 
these, however, there is no need to dwell, as hybrids are well known 
to occur among orchids, not merely within the limits of the same 
species, but between members of distinct genera.
Besides experimenting as described, Strasburger also tried the 
effect of placing pollen on the transverse section of the style after 
the removal of the stigma, and also of placing pollen directly in the 
cavity of the ovary.
As might be expected, the results in both cases 
were very various, both when proper and foreign pollen was employed.
When treated with their own pollen some plants produced as good 
seed after pollination in these irregular ways as after pollination of 
the stigma, and with foreign pollen the degree of pollen-tube 
formation differed in different cases.
Thus, however useful as a 
receptive surface, and as a suitable nidus for the germination of the 
pollen, the stigma is not an indispensable portion of the sexual 
apparatus.
The fact having been established that heterogeneous plants are 
capable of forming pollen-tubes on one another, Strasburger next 
enquired whether social plants are protected against this, especially 
those that are wind-fertilised.
He found that the pollen of Plantago 
lanceolata germinates on the stigma of Ranunculus acris, and sends 
its tubes into the style, so that in this Ranunculus there would seem 
to be no protection against wind-fertilised neighbours.
On the other 
hand, the pollen of Plantago did not germinate on Stellaria Holostea.
In the converse experiments, pollen from Ranunculus acris was 
found to put forth a few short tubes on the stigma of Plantago 
lanceolata, while that from Stellaria Holostea developed vigorous 
tubes which entered a good way into the style.
In this connection the Graminece are obviously of special interest, 
but there are many difficulties in the way of obtaining decisive results 
Naturalist, 
STRASBURGER ON FOREIGN POLLINATION.
373 
from them.
It is not easy, indeed, to prevent a stigma from being 
fertilised by its own pollen, nor to distinguish this from pollen 
derived from a foreign source.
But speaking generally, Strasburger 
states that species belonging to different genera only seldom form 
pollen-tubes on one another, but that species of the same genus 
mostly do.
From this he infers that there can be no question of 
special protection here, since it would be as much required for allied 
species as for allied genera.
Summing up the whole of the evidence on this head, our author 
thinks it follows that in wind-fertilised phanerogams no special 
protection exists to prevent the entrance of pollen-tubes, and the 
same may probably be said of Gymnosperms, though he confesses 
he has made no experiments upon them.
It would seem then, from what is here recorded, that there are no 
protective adaptations to prevent the germination of foreign pollen 
on the stigma and the entrance of its tube into the style, and even 
the ovary, and that the germination and entrance of foreign pollen 
is possible within the widest limits, even from Monocotyledons to 
Dicotyledons, and the reverse.
That foreign pollen-tubes do not 
often come to the ovary, and seldomer find their way between the 
ovules, is connected with the circumstance that here the disadvan- 
tageous influences to which they are exposed in the foreign environ- 
ment are accumulated.
In no case will a pollen-tube find in a foreign 
plant quite the same conditions as in its own, the specific distinctions 
of the two plants pre-supposing the specific variety of their protoplasm.
Moreover, where foreign pollen reaches a stigma, there is little or no 
disadvantage to the plant, as the normal development of the proper 
pollen is not hindered by the presence of the foreign, even though 
the latter puts forth pollen-tubes which traverse the style and reach 
the ovary.
The wide range within which heterogeneous pollination is 
possible, and the absence of protective contrivances against it, would, 
at first sight, lead us to expect a much more frequent occurrence of 
spontaneously-produced hybrids than experience shows is the case.
But, as Strasburger shows, the very processes which bring about 
pollination limit the production of such hybrids to an extremely 
small number.
Many circumstances conspire to bring legitimate 
pollen to a stigma, whether by the agency of insects, the wind, or 
otherwise, and it will usually happen that a flower will be legitimately 
pollinated several times, so that if by any chance foreign pollen be 
brought, it will be debarred from operating by the super-abundance 
and prepotency of the proper pollen.
As a proof, however, that 
spontaneously produced hybrids do occur, Strasburger refers to the 
Dec. 1886.
374 
MARTINDALE : NEW WESTMORELAND LICHENS.
genera Salix, Rubus, Cirsium, and Ifteracium, which are rich in 
species and tend to form varieties, and in which fertile hybrids are.
known to arise.
Such is a brief account of these most interesting researches.
It is not pretended that it is at all adequate to the importance of the 
subject or the merits of the paper ; but it will, at least, show the 
direction in which the accomplished author is at present working, 
and may induce some of our readers to seek further details in a 
perusal of the paper itself.
NOTE—ORNITHOLOG Y.
Variety Of the Kittiwake.— -A White Kittiwake {Rissa tridactyld) was 
shot at Flamborough, about one mile south of the headland, by Mr. Saltfleet, on 
Saturday, October 23rd.
This most splendid specimen is all white, with the 
exception of a little fawn colour on the wing coverts, with a deeper fawn where 
the black should be on the primaries ; eyes brown ; legs, feet, and bill yellow.
— 
Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, November nth, 1886.
[This specimen, from the above slight description, appears to us to agree fairly 
well with what is known of a certain immature phase in the plumage of the Ivory 
Gull {Pagophila eburnea).
— Eds.] 
NEW WESTMORELAND LICHENS.
JOSEPH A.
MARTINDALE, 
Staveley, near Ke?idal, Westmoreland.
Dr. Nylander has recently described, at p.
461 of 'Flora' for this 
year, two new Lichens gathered in Westmoreland, and submitted to 
him for determination.
As both may be expected to occur in similar 
places in Britain, I append a translation of Nylander's descriptions.
Lecanora flavocitrina Nyl. Like L.
citrina, but having the thallus 
composed of thin appressed squamules, which are either alto- 
gether citrino-pulverulent or only so at the margins ; apothecia 
orange-yellow, biatorine, margined (0*3 — 0*4 mm.
broad) ; 
spores 8, shaped like those of the Placodia, 0*007 — "oio mm.
long, and 0*006 mm.
broad.
Hymenial gelatine turning a full 
blue with iodine.
On clay slate stones in walls near Staveley (J.
A. Martindale).
Lecanora crenulatella Nyl. Thallus citrine, thin, unequal, rimose; 
apothecia subconcolorous, zeorine (about 1 mm.
broad) most 
frequently surrounded by an elegantly crenulated thalline margin; 
spores 8, shaped like those of the Placodia, 0*016 — 20 mm.
long 
and o - oo8 — 9 mm.
broad (loculi of medium size).
On limestone blocks near Sandside (J.
A. Martindale), 
A well-marked plant, hardly to be placed under L.
erythrella.
Naturalist, 
375 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
CONTRIBUTORS.
Adamson, S.
A., f.g.s., 252, 284, 309, 333, 
Anne, Capt.
E., J.P., 278.
[336, 349.
Archer, H.
T., 181, 215.
Armistead, J.
J., 69.
Ashford, C, 114.
[307.
Backhouse, J., jun., m.b.o.u., 214, 215, 
Bailey, Matt., 18, 114, 150, 188, 278, 308, 
Baker, J.
Gilbert, f.r.s., 325.
[340, 374.
Baldwin, E.
T., 17, 61, 238.
Benn, T.
G., f.r.met.s., 32, 64, 84.
Berridge, W., f.r.met.s., 32, 64, 84.
Binstead, C.
H., B.A., 18.
Brady, W.
E., 54.
Brewis, T.
W., 48, 238.
Bunker, T., 81, 309.
Carter, J.
W., 67.
Carter, Thos., 182, 231.
Chadwick, S., 102.
Chaloner, Rev. J., 68.
Chapman, Abel, m.b.o.u., 308.
Chapman, A.
C, 37, 237, 341.
Chapman, E., 183, 277.
Chapman, Win.
, 276.
Clark, J.
E., b.a., b.sc, f.g.s., 60.
Clarke, W.
Eagle, f.l.s., m.b.o.u., 18, 68, 
[114, 150, 182, 193, 309, 332, 340.
Clarkson, W.
C, l.r.c.p., 339.
Cockerell, T.
D. A., m.c.s., 55, 78, 81, 163.
Cole, Rev. E.
M., m.a., 112.
Cordeaux, John, M.B.O.U., 1, 363, 368.
Day, Francis, c.i.E., f.l.s., 19, 81, 115.
Drayton, Michael, 363.
Duckworth, Wm., 235.
Dufty, J.
N., f.g.s., 113.
Ellis, J.
W., f.e.s., 49, 50, 103, 164, 245, 
Emmet, John, f.l.s., 214, 277.
[285.
Fawcett, J.
W. L.
M. T., 112, 113.
Fortune, Riley, 342.
Fowler, Rev. W.
W., m.a., f.l.s., 65, 149.
Gain, W.
A., m.c.s., 213.
Gallwey, Sir R.
P., Bart., m.b.o.u., 340.
Goss, Herbert, f.l.s., f.e.s., 100, 213.
Greening, Linnaeus, 81.
Gurney, J.
H., f.z.s., 45, 114.
Gurney, J.
H., jun., f.z.s., 17, 277, 340.
Dec. 1886.
Hanson, C.
C, 113, 114.
Harker, Alfred, m.a., f.g.s., 102, 349.
Harrison, John, 18.
Hartnup, J., jun., 32, 64, 84.
Hey, Rev. W.
C, m.a., 161.
Hick, Thomas, b.a., b.sc, 369.
Hobkirk, C.
P., F.L.S., 236.
Hodgson, Wm., a.l.s., 230.
Hudson, Baker, m.c.s., 314.
Ingleby, J., 67.
Irvine, J.
W., 32, 64, 84.
[251, 276, 306, 339, 347.
Kew, H.
Wallis, f.e.s., 79, 170, 171, 213, 
Kirk, J.
M., 213.
Knubley, Rev. E.
P., m.a., m.b.o.u., 150.
Kropf, Lewis L., 279.
Lawton, Wm., 32, 64, 84.
Lee, P.
F., 212.
Lofthouse, R., 113.
[i5o> 235, 337.
Macpherson, Rev. H.
A., m.a., m.b.o.u., 
Martindale, J.
A., 49, 101, 279, 317, 374.
Mason, J.
Eardley, 215, 277.
Milne, J.
G., 78, 80.
Mitchell, F.
S., m.b.o.u., 129.
Moore, A.
W., f.r.m.s., 32, 64, 84.
Mortimer, R., f.g.s., 48.
Musson, C.
T., f.l.s., m.c.s., 59, 251.
Nelson, T.
H., m.b.o.u., 68, 143, 173, 182, 
Nylander, Dr. W., 374.
[238, 252.
Oldfield, G.
W., m.a., f.l.s., 230.
Oldham, Charles, 214.
Parsons, H.
F., m.d., f.g.s., 308, 310.
Paul, Geo., f.g.s., f.r.m.s., 32, 64, 84.
Paver-Crow, R., J.P., 113.
Peak, Ed., 100.
Pearson, H.
G., 48.
Perry, Rev. S.
J., f.r.s., 32, 64, 84.
Phillips, John H., 309.
Porritt, G.
T., f.l.s., f.e.s., 16, 66, 251.
Rawson, F.
G. S., 277.
Reed, J.
T. T., 67, 68, 340.
Roberts, Geo., m.c.s., 36, 67, 163, 311, 347.
Robson, John E., 17.
Roebuck, W.
Denison, f.l.s., 80, 113, 193, 
Rosenstock, R., b.a., 151.
[259, 347.
Rowntree, Allan, f.r.met.s., 32, 64, 84.
376 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
CONTRIBUTORS— 
Sewell, J.
T., 251, 276.
Shaw, Eland, f.e.s., 348.
Slater.
M. B., 212.
Smart, Rev. E.
H., 339.
Smith, J.
B., 32, 64, 84.
Soppitt, H.
T., 60.
Stabler, George, 15.
Standen, Robt., M.c.s., 36, 80.
Stephenson, T., 81, 277, 278, 339.
[340.
Storey, Wm., 36, 48, 150, 188, 193, 278, 
Summerfield, Rev. R.
A., m.a., 277.
Taylor, J.
W., M.C.S., 78, 79, 251.
Tomlin, J.
R. Brockton, m.c.s., 79.
Tomlinson, H.
G., 48, 188.
Turner, W.
Barwell, f.c.s., f.r.mic.s., 33, 
[279.
Continited.
Waddell, Rev. C.
H., 332.
Wade, E.
W., 59.
Wake, C.
Staniland, M.A.l.j 225.
Waller, A.
R., 133.
Wallis, T.
W., 32, 64, 84.
Watson, John, 343.
West, Wm., 60.
Wheeler, W.
H., m.i.c.e., 32, 64, 84.
Whitaker, J., F.zis., 278.
Whitehead, John, 85.
Whitlock, F.
B., 17, 67, 130, 215.
Whitworth, W.
S., 32, 64, 84.
Wilkinson, H.
J., 173.
Wilkinson, Johnson, 188.
Wilson, Thomas, 257, 306.
Yellowley, Wm., 238.
BOOK NOTICES.
A. O.
U. List of N.
American Birds, 282.
Bagnall's Handbook of Mosses, 315.
Botanical Exchange Club Report, 82.
Buckley and Brown's Vertebrata of Suther- 
landshire, 61.
Chester Society's Proceedings, 61.
Clayton's History of Botany, 315.
Cole's Geology of Hull and Barnsley Rail- 
way, 191.
Fitzgerald's Dictionary of Plant Names, 255.
Gallwey's Duck Decoys, 280.
Gray and Woodward's Seaweeds, Shells, 
and Fossils, 315.
Holmes and Gray's British Fungi, Lichens, 
and Mosses, 315.
Leeds Geological Association Transactions, 
62.
Lilford's Figures of British Birds, 30, 281.
London Catalogue of British Plants, Eighth 
Edition, 219.
Macpherson and Duckworth's Birds of 
Cumberland, 192.
Pennington's British Zoophytes, 30.
R. M.
on Workmen and Museums, 315.
Reid's Geology of Holderness, 82.
Report on Migration of Birds, 282.
Roberts' Naturalists' Diary, 315.
[82.
Somerville's List of British Marine Shells, 
Speight's Tourist's View of Ireland, 191.
Watson Botanical Exch.
Club Report, 223.
CHESHIRE.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272 ; A Septem- 
ber Walk through Cheshire, 56, 57 ; 
Swallows and the Storm, 214.
Coleoptera: Serica brunnea and Donacia 
dentipes at Knutsford, 57 ; Liverpool 
List, Parts 7, 8, 9, Sternoxi, Malaco- 
dermi, Heteromera, 164-170 ; Part 10, 
Rhynchophora, 245-251.
Cryptogamia: Bibliography, 181 ; iridium 
tussilaginis near Congleton, 57 ; Man- 
chester Cryptogamic Society (Mosses in 
Cheshire), 60 ; Moss-flora of Ashton- 
under-Lyne, 85-100.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, 174-179; 
A September Walk through Cheshire ; 
56, 57.
Geology and Palseontology : Bibliography, 
350-362.
Hymenoptera: Cynips rosae nr.
Chelford, 57.
Lepidoptera: Heliothis peltigera at Wal- 
lasey, 49 ; Haclena protea at Chelford, 
57 ; Lepidopterous fauna of Lancashire 
and Cheshire, Part II, Sphinges, 50-54 ; 
Part III, Bombyces, 103-111 ; Part IV, 
Noctuse, 285-306.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241 ; Squirrel 
at , Congleton, 57 ; Whiskered Bat in 
Cheshire, 113.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Mollusca : Bibliography, 144-149; A 
September Walk through Cheshire, 56- 
58 ; Varieties of Bythinia tentaculata, 
Zonites excavatus,and Cochlicopa lubrica 
in N.E. Cheshire, 78; Limnasa peregra 
m. decollatum and Bythinia tentaculata 
m. decollatum in Cheshire, 79; Scarcity of 
Helices in N.E. Cheshire, 80 ; Testacella 
scutulum at Chester, 80.
Reptiles and Amphibians: Bibliography, 
241 ; Reptiles of Warrington district, 81.
Societies: Chester Society of Natural 
Science (review of proceedings), 61.
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
377 
CUMBERLAND.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272 ; Notes on 
some Solway District Birds, 69-78, 150; 
The Birds of Cumberland (review), 192; 
Swallows and the Storm, 214 ; Shoveller 
Nesting in Cumberland, 235, 236; Eagles 
of Lake District, 343-346.
Cryptogahiia : Bibliography, 180, 181; 
Variety of Lastraea filix-mas at Patterdale 
(Manchester Cryptogamic Society), 60 ; 
New British Lichens, 279 ; Calicium 
melanophaeum and var.
ferruginea on 
Penrith Beacon, 322 ; Vascular crypto- 
gams of Cumberland Border Marches, 
325-332.
Fishes: Bibliography, 243, 244 ; Early and 
Late Salmon Rivers, 19 ; Vcndace and 
Gwyniad in the English Lakes, 8l.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, [74-179; 
Rosa lucida, 100 ; Solway Notes, 230 ; 
Botany of Cumberland Border Marches, 
325-332.
Geology and Palaeontology: Bibliography, 
349-3 6 .2.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241 ; Bar- 
bastelle Bat in Cumberland, 337.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149; Shells 
at Millom, 78.
DERBYSHIRE.
Birds: Bibliography, 260-272; Breeding 
of Cuckoo and Ring Ouzel, 17 ; Nidi- 
fication of Ring Ouzel and Missel Thrush, 
48 ; Birds of Derbyshire Peak, 130-132, 
188 ; How to Form a Rookery, 188 ; 
Duck Decoys, 281.
Cryptogamia: Barbula squarrosa, 18; 
Moss-flora of Ashton-under-Lyne, 85 to 
100; Thamnium augustifolium at Miller's 
Dale, 100; Monk's Dale Mosses, 212.
Flowering Plants : Bibliography, 174-179: 
Cloudberry on Kinder Scout, 309.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
349-362 ; Palseontological Notes from 
British Museum, 81.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 241.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149.
Topography: Waterfall on Kinder Scout.
310.
DURHAM.
Birds: Bibliography, 260-272 ; Fulmar 
Petrels near Hartlepool, 17 ; Flocks of 
Skylarks on the Coast, 67 ; Grouse and 
Weather, 68 ; Weather and Swallows, 
182 ; Nidification of Shoveller, 235 ; 
Little Gull in Co. Durham, 306 ; Pochard 
and Hooded Crow in Durham, 340.
Cryptogamia: Bibliography, 180, 181.
Fishes : Bibliography, 243, 244.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, 177-179.
Geology and Palaeontology: Bibliography, 
349-362 ; Palseontological Notes from 
British Museum, 81.
Lepidoptera: Cidaria suffumata at Darling- 
ton, 213.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241; Badgers 
in Durham, 112; Otters in Durham, 113, 
173 ; Noctule in Durham, 113, 173.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149 ; Mollusca 
from Seaton Carew, 163.
Reptiles and Amphibia: Bibliography, 242 
LANCASHIRE.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272 ; Quail at 
Pilling, 17 ; Birds near Warrington, 56 ; 
The Raven' in Bowland, 129; Nidifica- 
tion of Shoveller, 235; Duck Decoys, 281.
Coleoptera: Liverpool List, Parts vii, viii, 
ix, Sternoxi, Malacodermi, Heteromera, 
164-170, Part x, Rhynchophora, 245- 
251.
Cryptogamia: Bibliography, 180, 181; 
Equisetum arvense at Warrington, 56 ; 
Moss-flora of Ashton-under-Lyne, 85 to 
100 ; Collema isidoides in Lancashire, 
320.
Fishes : Bibliography : 243, 244.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, 174-179 
Nuphar lutea at Warrington, 56.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
349-362 ; Palseontological Notes from 
British Museum, 81.
Lepidoptera: Lepidopterous Fauna of Lan- 
cashire and Cheshire — Part ii, Sphinges, 
50-54; Part iii, Bombyces, 103 -ui: 
Part iv, Noctua.% 285-306; A September 
Walk through Lancashire, 55.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241 ; Former 
Occurrence of Badgers in North Lanca- 
shire, 36.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Dec. 1886.
378 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
L A N C A S H I R E — Continued.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149; Septem- 
ber Walk through Lancashire, 55, 56 ; 
Lancashire helices, 80, 163.
Neuroptera: Hemerobius nervosus and 
Limnophilus lunatus near Rainhill, 59.
Keptiles: Bibliography, 241; Reptiles of 
Warrington District, 81.
Societies : Lancashire and Cheshire Ento- 
mological Society, 316; Manchester 
Geological Society, 31 ; Manchester 
Microscopical Society, 31, 158, 159; 
Microscopy in Manchester, 31 ; Man- 
chester Cryptogamic Society, 100, 212 • 
Manchester Scientific Students' Associa- 
tion, 128 ; Manchester Literary and 
Philosophical Society, 128 ; Manchester 
Field Naturalists' Society, 1 58.
LINCOLNSHIRE.
Arachnida: Spiders near Louth, 170; 
Tibellus oblongus at Mablethorpe, 171 ; 
Chelifer degeerii at Mablethorpe, 339.
Actinozoa : A new variety of Tealia crassi- 
cornis at Mablethorpe, 170.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272 ; The Lin- 
colnshire Avifauna in Fuller's time, 9 ; 
Decoys, 10 ; Birds in Isle of Axholme, 1 1 ; 
Pied Flycatcher at Alford, 215 ; Nidifica- 
tion of Shoveller, 235 ; Quail nesting 
in Lincolnshire, 277 ; Duck Decoys, 
281, 306, 340 ; Birds of the Fens and 
Wolds in 16 1 2 (from Drayton's Poly- 
olbion), 363 ; Tree-sparrow in North 
Lincolnshire, 368.
[ l 73- 
Coleoptera: Beetles at Mablethorpe, 171- 
Cryptogamia : Bibliography, 181; Ferns 
in the fens, 10.
Diptera : Diptera near Louth, 276.
Fishes : Freshwater fisheries in the fens, 12 ; 
Snake Pipe-fish at Skegness, 309.
Flowering Plants : Bibliography, 174-179; 
Vegetation in the fens, 10; Half-day's 
ramble at Mablethorpe, 171, 172; Ballota 
nigra near Louth, 213.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
351-362; Geology of the county, 6.
Hemiptera: Notonecta glauca and Nepa 
cinereaat Mablethorpe, 173; Triecphora 
vulnerata near Louth, 306.
Hymenoptera: Ophion luteus at Mable- 
thorpe, 172; Pteromalus puparum near 
Louth, 213 ; Megachile ligniseca and 
Halictus rubicundus at Mablethorpe, 251 ; 
Hymenoptera near Louth, 276, 347.
Lepidoptera : Fen Insects, 1 1 ; Lepidop- 
tera at Mablethorpe, 172 ; Vanessa ata- 
lanta near Louth, 213.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241 ; Bos 
primigenius and other fossil species, 7 ; 
Mammals of the county, 9 ; Red Deer at 
Lindholme, etc.
, 1 1 ; Badger in Lincoln- 
shire, 113.
Meteorological Returns: 32, 64, 84.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149; Cor- 
bicula numinalis fossil at Croxton, 8 ; 
Mollusca at Louth, 79 ; Helix arbustorum 
v. cincta and Limnaea glabra near Lin- 
coln, 149 ; Half-day* s Ramble at Mable- 
thorpe, 17 1- 1 73 : Estuarine Shells at 
Saltfleet, 251 ; Cyclostoma elegans re- 
discovered in North Lincolnshire, 347 ; 
Estuarine Shells at Tetney, 347.
Orthoptera : Occurrence of true Migratory 
Locust in Lincolnshire, 348.
Reptiles and Amphibians: Bibliography, 
242.
Societies : Foundation of Society at Great 
Grimsby, 224 ; Louth Naturalists' Society, 
316.
Topography : Lincolnshire, its history and 
physical geography, I to 16.
Trichoptera : Limnephilus fiavicornis at 
Mablethorpe, 173.
ISLE OF MAN.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272.
Fishes: Bibliography, 242-244.
Flowering Plants : Bibliography, 175- 
179.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
350-362.
Lepidoptera: Variation in Genus Cidaria, 
213.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149.
Societies: Isle of Man Natural History and 
Antiquarian Society, 31.
NORTHUMBERLAND 
Birds: Bibliography, 260-272; Ornitho- 
logical Notes from the Northumberland 
Coast, 37 ; Aquila clanga in Northumber- 
land, 47 ; Hawks mobbed by small 
birds, 181 ; Jackdaw and young birds, 
215; Birds deserting their nests, 215; 
Nidification of Shoveller, 235; Pied 
Flycatcher in Northumberland, 341 ; 
Turtle Dove near Chathill, 342.
Cryptogamia: Bibliography, 180.
Naturalist 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
379 
NORTHUMBERLAND— 
Fishes : Bibliography, 243, 244 ; Early and 
Late Salmon Rivers, 19 ; Periods of 
Migration of Salmon, 115.
Flowering Plants : Bibliography, 174-179.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
350-362; Palseontological Notes from 
the British Museum, 81.
Continued.
Mammalia : Bibliography, 239 - 241 ; 
Badgers in Northumberland, 112; The 
Marten in Northumberland, 238, 278.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149.
Reptiles and Amphibians : Bibliography, 
242.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272 ; Breeding 
of Cuckoo and Ring Ouzel, 17 ; Dunlins 
and Black Tern near Nottingham, 215 ; 
Nidification of Shoveller, 235 ; Notes on 
Notts Birds, 278 ; Duck Decoys, 281.
Fishes : Bibliography, 244 ; Early and Late 
Salmon Rivers, 19.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, 177-179.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
350-362.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241.
Mollnsca : Bibliography, 144-149; Palu- 
dina contecta and Balia perversa found 
in Notts, 213; Helix cantiana in Notts, 
251.
Reptiles and Amphibians: Bibliography, 
241.
Societies, &c.: Curatorship of Nottingham 
Museum, 224.
WESTMORELAND 
Birds : Bibliography, 260 - 272 ; Young 
Skylarks fed by an older nestling, 48; 
Quail in North Lancashire, 48 ; Grouse 
and the weather, 68; The Birds of 
Cumberland and Westmoreland (review), 
192; Swallows and the Storm, 214; 
Duck Decoys, 281; Eagles of the Lake 
District, 343-346.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography, 180 - 181 ; 
Additions to Lichen Flora of Westmore- 
land, 49 ; Coscinodon cribrosus at Conis- 
ton, 100; Descriptions of New British 
Lichens, 101; New British Lichens, 279; 
The Lichens of Westmoreland, 317-324 ; 
Cortinarius albo-violaceus and Boletus 
cyanescens near Kendal, 332; New West- 
moreland Lichens, 374.
YORKS 
Anthropology : The Anthropology of York- 
shire, 225-230.
Birds : Bibliography, 260-272 ; Sparrow- 
hawk and Viper at York, 17 ; Variety of 
Carrion Crow near Settle, 18; Flam- 
borough Notes, 18 ; Late brood of 
Swallows near Rotherham, 48 ; Lesser 
Spotted Woodpecker and Grasshopper 
Warbler in Nidderdale, 48; Light- 
coloured Grouse in Nidderdale, 48 ; 
Stone-curlews on the Yorkshire Wolds, 
48 ; Birds in f lolderness, 63 ; Corn 
Bunting — Diversity of Eggs, 67 ; Grouse 
and the Weather, 68 ; Flamborough 
Notes, 114, 150, 188, 216, 308, 340; 
Lapwing — Diversity of Eggs, 114; Eagle 
Owl near Huddersfield, 1 14; The Raven in 
Dec. 1886 
AND FURNESS.
Fishes : Bibliography, 242-244.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, 175-179; 
Rosa lucida in Westmoreland, 100; Im- 
patiens noli-me-tangere at Stock Ghyll 
Force, 230.
Geology and Palseontology : Bibliography, 
350-362.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241; Badger 
in North Lancashire, 238.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Mollusca: Bibliography, 144-149.
Mosses : Hedwigidium imberbe and Grim- 
mia hartmanni found in England, 1 5 ; 
Barbula squarrosa near Kendal, 18.
Societies: Kendal Natural History Society, 
3i.
HIRE.
Bowland, 129; Occurrence of Hawfinch 
near Boroughbridge, 150; Cormorant and 
Green Woodpecker in Nidderdale, 150; 
The Weather and the Swallows, 182, 214; 
List of Wensleydale Birds, 183-188; 
Woodcock, Wryneck, and Hawfinch in 
Nidderdale, 188; Birds observed at 
Askern, 189 ; Avifauna of Upper Nidder- 
dale, 197-204; Thrush laying in a Black- 
bird's Nest, 215 ; Late stay of the Red- 
wing, 215 ; Marfield Pond, Masham, and 
its bird-life, 231-234; Nidification of 
Shoveller, 235 ; Birds in Upper Nidder- 
dale, 253 ; Birds near Pickering, 273 ; 
Reed Warbler nesting near Ripon, 277 ; 
Hawfinch nesting at Boston Spa, 277 ; 
Departure of Hooded Crows from Eng- 
3 8o 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
YORKSHIR E — Continued.
land, 277 ; Little Grebe in Wensleydale, 
277 ; Bird notes from Thorpe near 
Halifax, 277 ; Bird notes from Whitby, 
277 ; Brent Geese and Great Grey Shrike 
in Nidderdale, 280 ; Duck Decoys, 281 ; 
A Yorkshire specimen of Sturnus unicolor 
and other uncommon birds in a York 
Collection, 307, 308 ; Explanation sug- 
gested, 340; Cream-coloured Skylark in 
Nidderdale, 340 ; Albino Blackbird in ' 
, Nidderdale, 340 ; Greenshank in Nidder- 
dale and Washburndale, 340; Turtle 
Dove, in Yorkshire, 342 ; Variety of the 
Kittiwake at Flamborough, 374.
Coleoptera : Harpalus calceatus at Brid- 
lington Quay, 65 ; Beetles at Bridlington 
and Filey, 65, 66; Proposed list of York- 
shire Beetles, 83 ; Beetles of Upper 
Nidderdale, 211.
Crustacea : Crayfish in Upper Nidderdale, 
211; Galathea strigosa at Runswick and 
Scarborough, 339.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography, 180, 181 ; 
Bradford Naturalists' Society — a year's 
Botanical Work, 60 ; Notes on Fresh- 
water Algae from Washburndale and 
Strensall, with descriptions of new species, 
33-35 ; Fern and Micro-fungi in Holder- 
ness, 63 ; Moss-flora of Ashton-under- 
Lyne, 85 to 100 ; Additions to Hull 
district flora, 100 ; Flora of Strensall, 
York, 143; Fungi at Askern, 190 ; 
Mosses and Hepatics at Askern, 212 ; 
Calicium arenarium at Sedbergh, 321 ; 
Bseomyces icmadophilus in Yorkshire, 
323 ; Cynophallus caninus near Leeds, 
332.
Diptera: Hsematopota pluvialis at Pateley, 
211.
Fishes : Bibliography, 243, 244 ; Early and 
Late Salmon Rivers, 19 ; Eels off Flam- 
borough, 12; Whitby notes, 81, 278; 
Goole notes, 81, 309; Askern notes, 189; 
Fish-fauna of Upper Nidderdale, 205; 
Sting-ray at Redcar, 252 ; Fish near 
Pickering, 273 ; Doree at Flamborough, 
278 ; Grey Mullet near Scarborough, 309; 
Flounders at Wressle, 311, 312.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography, 174-179; 
Araucaria producing seed in East York- 
shire, 59 ; Trientalis europaea in Nidder- 
dale, 60; Bradford Naturalists' Society 
— a year's Botanical Work, 60 ; Holder- 
ness notes, 63 ; Additions to Hull district 
flora, 100; Flora of Strensall and district, 
York, 133-143, 173, 212; Newbould's 
additions to the Yorkshire Flora, 160; 
Plants at Askern, 190; Plants at Flam- 
borough, 217; Plants at Marfield Pond, 
Masham, 231; Plants in Upper Nidder- 
dale, 254 ; Plants near Pickering, 274 ; 
Plants at Wressle, 311.
Geology and Palaeontology : Bibliography, 
349-362 ; Fossils at Kelsey Hill, Holder- 
ness, 8 ; Palseontological Notes from the 
British Museum, 81 ; Reid's Geology of 
Holderness (review), 82; Transactions of 
Leeds Geological Association (review), 
62 ; Jointing in the Mountain Limestone 
of the Austwick district, 102 ; Joints 
cutting through Pebbles, 102; Asteracan- 
thus ornatissimus in the Middle Oolites 
near Malton, 102; Askern geology, 190; 
Geology of Hull and Barnsley Railway 
(review), 191 ; Geology at Flamborough, 
217 ; Large Fossil Trees at Clayton, 252, 
284, 316, 348 ; Geology in Upper Nidder- 
dale, 254; Geology at Pickering, 274; 
Discovery of Carboniferous Vegetation 
at Bradford, 309 ; The Hitchingstone, 
Keighley Moor, 333-336 ; Discovery of 
the base of another large fossil tree, 336.
Hymenoptera : Hymenoptera of Upper 
Nidderdale, 210; Plymenoptera captured 
near York in 1883 and 1884, 2 57 to 2 59- 
Hemiptera : Triecphora vulnerata in Ed- 
lington Wood, 251.' 
Lepidoptera : Huddersfield notes, 16 ; 
Varieties of Ephyra punctaria and Nu- 
meria pulveraria near Barnsley, 18 ; 
Acherontia atropos and Sphinx ligustri 
near Barnsley, 54 ; Holderness notes, 
63 ; Oncocera ahenella and Catoptria 
expallidana near Huddersfield, 66 ; 
Melanippe unangulata at Bradford and 
Bard en, 67 ; Leucania impura at 
Askern, 190;.
Lepidopterous fauna of 
Upper Nidderdale, 208-210; Eupi- 
thecia lariciata at Flamborough, 217; 
Scoria dealbata at Whitby, 251, 276; 
Lepidoptera in Upper Nidderdale, 254 ; 
at Pickering, 274; and near York, 306; 
Spilodes palealis at Whitby, 276.
Mammalia: Bibliography, 239-241; Albino 
Moles in Coverdale and Nidderdale, 36 ; 
Red Deer in Nidderdale, 36 ; Badgers in 
Yorkshire, 36, 67, 1 13, 143, 238 ; Weasel's 
method of carrying its young, 67 ; Physeter 
bidens at Spurn, 9; Badger on the York- 
shire Wolds, 112; Large Stoat near 
Boroughbridge, 113; Foumarts near 
Huddersfield, 113; Mole and Water 
Shrew at Askern, 189; Mammalian fauna 
of Upper Nidderdale, 195-197; Mammals 
in Upper Nidderdale, 253 ; Porpoise near 
Whitby, 278 ; Whitby notes, 339; Lesser 
Horse-shoe Bat in Nidderdale, 339.
Meteorological Returns : 32, 64, 84.
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
381 
YORKSHIR E— Continued.
Micro-Zoology and Botany: Microscopic 
life at Askern, 213, 279.
Mollusca : Bibliography, 144 to 149 ; 
Marine shells at Whitby, 78 ; Pupa mar- 
ginata v.
brevis near Whitby, 79 ; Shells 
in Coverdale and near Markington, 163; 
Mollusca at Askern, 189 ; Molluscan 
fauna of Upper Nidderdale, 206-208 ; 
Paludina contecta near Bawtry, 213 ; 
Mollusca at Flamborough, 216 ; Helix 
lactea in Yorkshire, 251; Mollusca in 
Upper Nidderdale, 253 ; Mollusca near 
Pickering, 273 ; Mollusca of Wressle and 
neighbourhood, 311-314, 347; The Con- 
chological Stigma removed from York- 
shire, discovery of Amalia gagates at 
Middlesbrough, 314; Planorbis compla- 
natus var.
submarginata near Pontefract, 
347 ; Limax cinereo-niger at Shipley j 
Glen, 347.
Obituary Notices: W.
W. Newbould, 159; 1 
W. H.
Rudston Read, 283.
Orthoptera: Earwigs at Pateley Bridge, \ 
211.
Reptiles and Amphibians : Bibliography, j 
241 ; Sparrowhawk and Viper at York, I 
17; Amphibians at Askern, 189; Reptiles 
and Amphibia of Upper Nidderdale, 204; 
Newts at Flamborough, 216; Slow-worm 
in Nidderdale, 253; Amphibians at Picker- 
ing, 273.
Societies : Bradford Naturalists' Society, 
63 ; Formation of Harrogate Naturalists' 
Society,224; Heckmondwike Naturalists' 
Society, 63 ; Hull Field Naturalists 
Society, 63, 83 ; Leeds Geological Associa- 
tion, 62, 284; Leeds Naturalists' Club, 63 ; 
Ripon Naturalists' Club, 224 ; Re-estab- 
lishment of Thirsk Natural History 
Society, 224 ; Wakefield Naturalists' 
Society, 31, 316 ; Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union, 62, 83; at Beverley (Annual Meet 
in g)> 156, J 57 ; at Askern, 189,190; 
at Flamborough, 216-219; in Upper 
Nidderdale, 253 ; at Pickering, 273-275 
Fungus Foray, 283.
Topography: Flamborough Head, 161, 
162 ; Upper Nidderdale, 193, 194 ; 
Spurn Head, 279 ; The Rocks at Flam- 
borough, 347.
Zoophyta : Plumatella repens near Leeds, 
276.
MISCELLANEOUS.
America: New Desmids, 34, 35.
Biology: Strasburger on Foreign Pollina- 
tion, 369.
Birds : Notes on the Two Spotted Eagles 
inhabiting the European Continent, 45- 
47 ; Corn Bunting — Diversity of Eggs, 
67 ; Lilford's Coloured Figures of British 
Birds (review), 30, 281 ; Migration of 
Birds on the West Coast of England and 
Wales — request for aid, 114, Review of 
Report, 282 ; Discovery of the Nest of 
Ross's "Gull, 150 ; Sale of the Jardine 
Collection, 223 ; Notes on the Cuckoo, 
237 ; Code of Nomenclature and Check- 
List of North American Birds (review), 
282 ; Ridgway's proposed Manual of 
North American Birds, 283.
Coleoptera: Rev. W.
W. Fowler's new 
work on British Coleoptera, 224.
Cryptogamia: Spruce's Memoir on the 
Amazonian Hepaticae, 62 ; Cooke's 
British Desmids, 83 ; Descriptions of 
New British Lichens, 101 ; Bagnall's 
Hand-book of Mosses (review), 315 ; 
Holmes and Gray's British Fungi, Lichens 
and Mosses (review), 315 ; Gray and 
Woodward's Seaweeds, Shells, and 
Fossils (review).
315.
Colours : Nomenclature of Colours, 62.
Desmids : Descriptions of New Species, 33- 
35 ; Geographical and Geological Dis- 
tribution, 35.
Devonshire: Greater Horse Shoe Bat in 
Devon, 333.
Fish : Early and Late Salmon Rivers, 19 ; 
Periods of Migration of Salmonidse, 115- 
127.
Flowering Plants: Review of Botanical 
Exchange Club Reports, 82 ; Contribu- 
tions to Phenology, 151; Eighth Edition 
of the London Catalogue (review), 219, 
223; Second Report of Watson Botanical 
Exchange Club (review), 223 ; Preserva- 
tion of Native Plants, 236 ; Fitzgerald's 
Dictionary of Names of British Plants 
(review), 255 ; Clayton's History of 
Botany (review), 315; Strasburger on 
Foreign Pollination, 369.
Geology: Mellard Reade's proposed work 
on The Origin of Mountain Ranges, 348.
Leicestershire : Bird-notes, 67.
Lepidoptera : Variation in Genus Cidaria, 
213.
Mammalia : Weasel's method of carrying 
its young, 67 ; Habits of Greater Horse- 
shoe Bat, 337-339- 
Mollusca : Achatina acicula in Saxon coffins 
and other mollusca in Bath Museum, 59 ; 
Somerville's List of British Marine Shells 
(review), 82.
Dec. 1886.
3 82 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
MISCELLANEOU S— Continued.
Monmouthshire : New Desmids, 35.
Northamptonshire : Duck Decoy near 
Crowland, 340.
Personal Notices: S.
D. Bairstow, 192; 
Rev. W.
H. Dallinger, 128 ; Thomas 
Hick, 63; Rev. H.
H. Higgins, 159; 
W. II.
Hudleston, 283 ; George Paul, 
192; The late Rev. L.
Rudd, 159.
Scotland: Andreaea huntii in Braemar, 212.
Societies, &c.
: British Association, 236, 
348 ; Elizabeth Thompson Science Fund, 
31 ; Entomological Society of London, 
83, 158,224, 316, 348; Geological Society 
of London, 223, 283 ; Linnean Society, 
62 ; Royal Society, 192 ; Royal Micro- 
scopical Society, 128.
Staffordshire : A September Walk through 
Staffordshire (mollusca, plants, lepidop- 
tera), 58, 59.
Suffolk: Nidification of Shoveller, 235.
Sutherlandshire : Vertebrate Fauna of 
Sutherlandshire (review), 61.
[212.
Wales : Thuidium delicatulum at Dolgelly, 
Warwickshire : Notes on the Cuckoo, 237.
Zoophytes : Pennington's British Zoophytes 
(review), 30.
NEW SPECIES DESCRIBED IN THIS VOLUME.
New Species described in this Volume: j Lecidea obturbans Nyl., 101 ; Lecidea 
Micrasterias platyptera Turner, 34 and I acutula Nyl., 101 ; Lecanora flavocitrina 
plate I, fig.
5; Staurastrum quadri- Nyl., 374; Lecanora crenulatella Nyl., 
spinatum Turner, 35 and plate I, fig.
4 ; I 374.
ADDITIONS TO BRITISH FLORA.
Additions to British Flora: Lichens, Seven species, 49 ; Two species, 279.
2 DEC 1886 
Printed by McCorquodale & Co. Limited, Leeds.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of— 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
S. L.
MOSLEY, Huddersfield.
Dr. ELLI, Liverpool.
-JOHN SANG, Darlington.
G. ELISHA, London.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
There is also being issued at present a List of British Lepidoptera 
for labelling collections, after the arrangement of the late Henry Doubleday, with all the 
latest corrections and additions.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE.
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL, REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
'The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — A?ui.
&> Mag. Nat.
Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Atheneeum.
NOW ENLARGED TO TWENTY PAGES.
THE NATURALIST'S WORLD.
Illustrated.
' Price Twopence Monthly.
"A capital little monthly." Bradford Observer.
"Every page is interesting." Midland Gazette.
Specimen copy sent post free for 2 id.
Yearly Subscription 2s.
61 post free.
Offices: ILKLEY, YORKS.
London : W.
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.
Of all Booksellers.
"indispensable to students and collectors.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. V.
commenced January 1886.
Vols.
I., II.', III., & IV.
may still be had.
The Journal, edited by Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Hunslet Road, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, 
THOS.
W. BELL, 10, Reuben Place, Leeds.
THE NATUKALI8T.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Notes on the River Tees, its Marshes, and their Fauna.
— R.
Lofthouse.
. 
Annotated List of the Land and Freshwater Mollusca of Lincolnshire.
List of Lancashire Land and Freshwater Mollusca.— R.
Standen.
Bibliography for 1885 (continua tion).
Natural History Of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to any one willing to furnish notes.
Short Notes.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c, are particularly desired.
The Insect Hunter's Companion, 
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. FARN.
The .
Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edzvard Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching; boxing female moths ; 
pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; 
searching by night ; how to rear the larvae ; sleeving ; hybernating larvae ; 
parasites ; preserving larvae.
Pupa DIGGING ; preserving pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; sugaring; light; 
indoor light; grouting; smoking;, killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; 
number of specimens and manner of placing ; transmission by post ; entomological 
diary; books.
Micro-lepidoptera ; Coleoptera ; Hymenoptera ; Breed- 
ing of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON : SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY ADD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Tournals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at "the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London : BAILLXERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
NOW READY, 224 PAGES, 125 ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY 8vo.
PRICE 7s.
6d.
THE STRUCTURE AND LIFE-HISTORY OF 
THE COCKROACH: 
%\x Intrabttttion ta i\z ^tubg of $nmts.
BY 
L/C.
M I ALL AND ALFRED DENNY.
LONDON: LOVELL REEVE & CO.
LEEDS: RICHARD JACKSON.
KM 