The >Tatnralist,^Jai3.
18S8.
FRONTISPIECE.
View looMn^ to the Soutli.
IN HELIGOLAND: 
TWO VIEWS OF MR.
GATKE'S GARDEN.
THE 
NATURALIST: 
A 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Recorder to and Ex-President of the Conchological Society, and Hon. Secretary 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, &c.
; 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
Member of the British Ornithologists' Union, and of the British Association 
Committee on the Migration of Birds ; Hon. Secretary Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union, &c.
1888.
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Hexrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
M"^GORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, GaRDINGTOX StREET, EUSTOX ; 
and 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
1888.
PREFACE.
The first duty of the Editors is to thank their contributors and their 
subscribers — the former for the excellence of the articles which have 
during the year maintained the standard of The Naturalist at its 
accustomed level, the latter for their appreciation and their kind 
support.
That the Editors have not been unsuccessful in doing justice to 
all departments of their subject will be seen by a glance through the 
volume.
In Geology — the two admirable Reports on Yorkshire 
Boulders, the papers on Coal-dust and Explosions in Coal-mines, 
and on Igneous Dykes; in Botany — those on the Pennine District 
Florula of Cumberland, Lincolnshire Marsh and Water Plants, 
the Flora of Wensleydale, the Lichens, Hepaticse and Mosses of 
Westmorland, the list of West Yorkshire Fungi and the numerous 
additions to the Flora of AVest Yorkshire ; in Entomology — the 
account of a visit to the Isle of Man, and the valuable list of 
Lincolnshire Hemiptera-Heteroptera ; in Conchology — the list of 
Airedale MoUusca ; and in Ornithology — the numerous records of 
Pallas' Sand-Grouse ; all testify that the Editors have had provided 
for them the means of catering for all classes of their readers.
In addition to this, attention may be drawn to the valuable 
paper on Heligoland, and the autotype illustration which by its 
author's kindness forms the frontispiece to this volume.
The publication of the Bibliography has been resumed, and 
the ])resent volume contains several valuable instalments of it.
As to the future, a change in the editorship has to be announced.
Hitherto The N'ati/raiist has had the benefit of being conducted by 
two Editors resident in the same town, first by Messrs.
Hobkirk and 
Porritt at Huddersfield, and then by the present Editors at Leeds.
PREFACE.
Mr. Clarke's removal to Edinburgh unfortunately brings this state of 
» things to a close ; and, for the next year's volume at any rate, the 
dual control will give place to a new arrangement, whereby 
Mr. Roebuck becomes general editor, with the assistance of 
specialists in various departments of study.
Mr. Clarke will con- 
tinue to take charge of the vertebrate zoology ; botanical papers 
will be submitted to Mr. J.
Gilbert Baker, F.R.S., F.L.S., and 
Mr. Chas.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., a former editor; another former 
editor, Mr. Geo.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S., will exercise oversight of 
the entomological articles ; while those on geology will be submitted 
to Mr. Alfred Harker, M.A., F.G.S.
; and on micro-zoology and 
micro-botany to Mr. W.
Barwell Turner, F.C.S., F.R.M.S. The mere 
mention of these names will suffice to justify a confident expectation 
that in the future The Naturalist wall be even more worthy of 
support in the future than it has been in the past.
No. 150.
JANUARY 1888.
ft w 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
^^^^^"^K EDITED PA' 
i\<<C^'^^ i^^^HvM.
DENISON ROE 
BUCK, F.L.S., 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
COKRESl'ONDEKENDIR MITGLIEU DES OKNITHOLOGISCHEX VEREINS IN WIEN.
eonfenfs: 
Heligoland (with Photographic Plate) — yo/m Cordeaicx, M.B.O.U i to 12 
Yorkshire Entomological Ho\^%~-George T.
Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S 12 
A Curious Habitat of Some Mosses— C//«.f. P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S 13 & 14 
The Leafing of the Oak and the P^sh—C/ms.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S 14 & 15 
Saunders' 'List of British Birds' (Review) ..
.. 16 
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee and its First Year's Work— .9.
A. Adavison.
F.G.S.
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
171024 
The Lichens of Westmorland — Joseph A.
Martindale 25 to 28 
Notes — Ornithology ..
.. ..
.. • ..
15 
Crested Tit near Keighley — E.
P. P.
Butterfield ; Flamborough Bird-notes — 
MaWikv Bailey.
Note— Fishes \ 24 
Three-bearded Reckling in the North Sea — John Cordeaiix, M.B.O.U .
LONDON : 
LovELL Reeve & Co..
5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.G.
McGoRQUODALE & Go. LIMITED, Gardington Street, Euston ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghali, Street.
All Communications should be Addressed: — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
With Photographic Plate, PRICE ONE SHILLING (Post free).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
1 1 l.cinii the wish ol ihe Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
inforinanon concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely im Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
>cx 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should he sent as <oon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naiuralist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof : 50 copies.
4 pp.
4 - : 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7, -; 
16 pp.
9^: 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp 8 - ; 12 pp.
10 6 : 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
The Manx Book, No. 12, for October 1887.
[Mr. A.
W. Moore, Editor.
The Zoologist, No. 132, for December 18S7.
[Mr. J.
E. Harting, Editor.
The Garner, No. 27, for December 18S7.
[Mr. A.
Ramsay, Editor.
Revue Br)-ologique, 14^' Annee, 1887, No. 6.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
Flower-Land : an Introduction to Botany for Children, and for the use of Parents 
an.d Teachers.
By Robert Fisher.
M.A.
(Vicar of Sewerby, Hull).
Small 8vo.
62 pagCb.
[John Hey wood, publisher, Manchester.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Society.
— Trans., Vol. iv., Part 7, Nov. 1^87.
[Society.
Grevillea, No. 78, for December 18S7.
[Dr. M.
C. Cooke, Editor.
Manchester Geological Society.
— Trans.
, Parts xi & xii of Vol. xix.
[Society.
[. G.
Goodchild on Ice Work in Edenside and some of the adjoining parts of 
NorthAVestern England.
8vo.
Reprint, 57 pages.
1887.
[Author.
J. H.
Gurney on the Misdeeds of the Common House-Sparrow.
1887.
8vo., 9 pp.
[Author.
Nat. Hist.
Journal, vol.
xi.
No. 99, for December 1887.
[Editors, Vork.
The Essex Naturalist, No. 11, for November 1887.
[The Essex Field Club, 
Naturalists' World, vol.
iv, No. 48, December 1887.
[Percy Lund, Editor.
Journal of New Vork Micro.
Soc, vol.
iii, No. 4, October 1887.
[The Society.
The Voung Naturalist, Part xcvi, for Dec. 1887.
[Mr. J.
E. Robson, Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, vol.
x. No. 120, for Dec. 18S7.
[The Editors, Birmingham.
Science Gossip.
No. 275.
for Nov. 1887.
[]\Iessrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
Wesley Naturalist, No. 10, December 1S87.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Dragon Flies.
— Mr. W.
Harcourt Bath, Ladywood, Birmingham, desires to 
correspond with students of the Odonata in all parts of the globe, as he is specially 
working up this group of insects.
Specimens for figuring in his forthcoming 
' Monograph of British Dragon Flies ' will be specially acceptable.
There is, 
probably, no class of insects so neglected as Dragon Flies, and Mr. W.
Harcourt 
I'ath will be very [ileased to assist anyone desirous of commencing their study.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3id.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera" Ova, Larvse, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, i\;c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
The NATU RALIST 
For 18 88.
HELIGOLAND.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes, Ulceby, Luicolnshire.
The Ornithology of Heligoland should have a special interest for 
Yorkshire naturalists, from the fact that Flamborough Head lies 
almost exactly in the latitude of this north-sea island."^ Migrating 
birds which pass Heligoland are seen to travel directly westward ; 
consequently, it is reasonable to presume that some portion of these 
eventually strike the Yorkshire coast, ^vlr.
J. H.
Gurney, jun., has, 
with much diligence, drawn up a comparative tablet showing special 
coincidences in the migration of the same species to Heligoland and 
the east coast of England, and he enumerates at least twenty-seven 
instances in which well-marked migratory movements on that island 
may be correlated with similar movements on the English coast 
between the years 1868 and 1883.
Had the materials at Mr. Gurney's 
disposal been fuller and more complete, no doubt many other cor- 
responding movements than those recorded by him might have 
been adduced.
The occurrence of the Rustic Bunting fnow in the York 
Museum; both at Spurn and at Heligoland on the same day, 
Sept.
17th, 1881, with light variable easterly winds, is interesting as 
further connecting the two localities.
The Barred Warbler and 
Desert Chat are now also recorded from both places, and the Arctic 
Bluethroat and Shorelark have in late years been observed in some 
numbers on the coast at or near Spurn.
In drawing a comparison between the two localities it must be 
borne in mind that Heligoland has great advantages as an ornitho- 
logical station from its isolated position and the smallness of the 
area to be observed, and the comparatively large number of those 
living there who can at once recognise a strange visitor when it 
appears, as well also from the fact that it lies in the track of a 
much-used and well-established highway of migration.
On the other 
* Plamborough Head, Lat. 54' 7' N.
; Heligoland, Lat. 54^ lo' 46" N.
t Trans.
Norfolk anr] Norwich Naturalists' Society, vol.
iv, part I, pp.
52-61.
Jan. 1888.
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
hand, a rare immigrant arriving on the Yorkshire coast will probably 
escape observation altogether, both from the great extent of coast- 
line and inland cover, as well as the scarcity of competent observers.
In the autumn of 1874 I visited Heligoland in H.M. cutter 
* Active,' and was subsequently able, by the assistance of Mr. Gatke, 
to give some account of the ornithology of the island in a paper which 
appeared in The Ibis for 1875.
This summer (1887) I paid a second 
visit there, leaving Grimsby on July 19th in the S.S.
' Northenden,' 
and landing in Hamburg with one hour to spare to catch the Heligo- 
land boat, the fine new S.S.
' Freia.' The average passage is seven or 
eight hours, a considerable portion of which is occupied in running 
down the Elbe.
When crossing the North Sea a few Herring Gulls 
and an occasional Guillemot were observed, and as we neared the 
Neuwerk.
Lighthouse, the first land seen on approaching the Elbe,"' 
a large flight of Terns collected in our wake, on the look-out for any 
small morsel of food brought to the surface by the revolutions of the 
screw or tossed in the creamy eddies slipping away from under the 
counter.
, These Terns were all the so-called Common species y 
occasionally the crowd was joined by two or three Sandwich Tern, 
but these latter appeared much less trustful of man and his works^ 
and kept at some distance.
Near the harbour of Cuxhaven I saw 
some Kittiwakes and two pair of Lesser Terns, also a single Scoter, 
swimming close to the landing jetty.
I know no prettier sight on the lower Elbe at this season than to 
watch the large flights of Tern which, mile after mile, hover in 
close attendance on the steamboats passing up and down the river.
There is a perpetual glance of white fish-shaped bodies, and a flicker 
of slowly-beating wings, crossing and re-crossing, rising and falling, 
turning, twisting, or hanging poised — all seem as if intent on thread- 
ing the mazes of some comphcated aerial dance, yet at the same 
time making good progress ahead.
Sometimes they drift so close 
that they barely escape a rebuff from the flapping of the big German 
ensign blown out from the flagstaff at the stern.
I can hear their 
' kree-krcea ' above the throbs of the engine and the shuddering of 
the huge paddles, and can see the glitter of the keen hard restless 
eyes, ever directed downwards to search the tumbling waters racing 
astern, well able to pick out the smallest atoms of floating matter.
Now one, and then another, will swoop like arrows to the surface, 
or they stoop only part-way, and then as quickly rise, momentarily 
* The Neuwerk is an old square tower on a sandy island of that name, and 
was originally (so says the (uiide Book) erected in 1290, as a castle to protect the 
mouth of the river against pirates.
Since 1870, the entrance to the Elbe at 
Cuxhaven has been very strongly fortified with earthworks and heavy guns.
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
3 
perhaps deceived by the drift of some bottle-cork ; often, too, several 
stoop at the same object, and then there is a chorus of angry screams 
as the least successful of the graceful foragers mount to their former 
level.
Out of hundreds seen thus following the steamboats, I did 
not identify an Arctic Tern {Sterna macrura), a fact rather remarkable 
considering how common this species is on the English coast.
Amongst the Terns which follow in our wake down the Elbe was a 
- Little Gull {Larus minidiis).
This was an adult, but it had the 
black on the head much broken, the forehead and occiput being 
streaked with greyish-black.
The flight was very elegant and tern- 
like, its stoop also was that of a tern, and when hovering and in 
the act of taking food, the tail, which was pure white above and 
below, was expanded to the full, and I then noticed it was slightly 
but perceptibly forked.
As we approach Heligoland from the Elbe the island appears to 
much advantage ; first, as a grey-blue lump on the horizon, massive 
and square, and as mile after mile are run over, slowly the natural 
features develop, a narrow green stripe of upper cliff crowning the 
broad deep band of red sandstone, and lowest of all and to the 
foreground are the white sands of Sa?id-tnsel, or Sandy Island.
Green, red, and white — these three colours in successive stripes 
constitute the flag of this small dependency, for so runs a rhyme : — 
Gron is dat Land, 
Rohd de Kant 
Und witt de sand : 
Dat is dat Wappen 
von Helgoland.
Some miles off at sea the lodging-houses on the upper plateau 
(Oberland) stand out very prominently in blocks along the edge of 
the cliff, and beyond is the spire of the church and the lighthouse.
The land below the clifl" (Unterland) is also seen to be crowded with 
houses, mostly erections of wood.
The steamboats anchor in the 
Sound, between the main island and the diine (Sand-insel).
Passengers 
are landed at the pier— the chief promenade — in boats.
There is no 
trouble about luggage, which is taken to the waiting-house in the 
Unterland ; you can choose lodgings and then go and claim the 
luggage, which is carried by porters to your rooms.
There is a curious old map of Heligoland, reproduced by 
Herr Rudolph Crell in his Guide*, which shows the island (from 
* This map was originally drawn by the Royal Mathematician, Johannes Meier, 
of Husum, Denmark (born 1606), and appeared in ' The New Topography of the 
Dukedoms of Schleswig and Holstein,' by Biirgermeister Dr. Kasper Daukwerth, 
at Husum, in 1652.
Jan. 1888.
A 2 
4 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
tradition) as of very considerable extent in the year 800, having then 
not less than seven havens or anchoring-places, and numerous 
villages and streams.
In 1649, actual sur\-ey represents it as 
reduced to less than one-fourth of its traditional extent.
At a 
comparatively recent period the main island appear^ to have been 
connected with Sand-insel.
and there is also represented near the 
latter a considerable outlier of solid rock, which has disappeared 
altogether.
I found that since my last visit an enterprising Berlin firm has 
erected a * hft ' between the lower and upper town : this is a decided 
boon to those who wish to avoid the long wooden staircase of 190 
steps which gives access to the Oberland.
The charge is only ten 
pfennigs — a Uttle over a penny.
On leaving the lift we step on to 
the terrace-walk, known as the Falm, which flanks the upper town.
This is a most pleasant lounge on a fine day : leaning over the low 
parapet we look down upon Unterland^ a maze of clean bright houses, 
small gardens, narrow^ alleys, and tree-tops ; beyond these the pier 
and the ' bright-striped boats at their anchorage : further oft", in the 
middle of the Sound, are the ' Freia ' and the German gunboat ' Falke.' 
From this elevated spot an immense round of sea is visible — to-day 
it is purple along the outer circle, which in the middle distance passes 
into delicate shades of lavender and violet, in the foreground one 
broad belt of flashing emerald, streaked with narrow lines of lace-like 
foam over the shallows of Sand-insel — a fair and lovely scene as seen 
beneath an azure sky.
Over the plants which grov,- along the clifl" the 
Humming-bird Hawk-moths hang poised or dash erratically to and 
fro seeking the last-born blossom of the small convolvulus or 
combind.
Many Small Tortoise-shell Butterflies dance in the sun- 
shine, and the soft summer breeze is musical with twitterings of 
Martins hawking above the lower town.
Following the terrace I 
turn up Trinit}^ Street — passage it might more fitly be called — and 
presently am standing in Mr. Gatke's studio, exchanging hearty 
greetings.
The well-remembered bird-cases are there on the walls, 
containing so many of the rare wanderers to the island, yet there 
have been considerable and rich additions since my former visit.
What a remarkable collection is here brought together from all 
quarters, remarkable when we consider the great distances many of 
these wanderers have travelled, also from the large number of species 
represented.
Take, for instance, that case of Buntings ; the Heligoland list 
includes seventeen species against nine known to have visited Great 
Britain, and there are sixteen of these represented in this one case.
Following the arrangement and nomenclature of Mr. Dresser's 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
5 
' List of the Birds of the Western Palsearctic Region,' the Buntings 
included in the Heligoland avi-fauna are 
1. Emberiza melanocephala Scop.
Black-headed Bunting.
About fifteen or twenty occurrences.
2. Emberiza cinerea Strickl.
Strickland's Bunting.
Once.
3. ^'Emberiza luteola Sparrm.
Chestnut-headed Bunting.
Twice 
seen in garden by Mr. Gatke — May and September — but 
not obtained.
The example in the collection was not taken 
on the island.
4. Emberiza miliaria Linn.
Common Bunting.
An occasional 
visitor, but never common.
5. Emberiza citrinella Linn.
Yellow Bunting.
Common.
6. Emberiza cirlus Linn.
Cirl Bunting.
Two or three times.
7. Emberiza hortulana Linn.
Ortolan.
Common.
8. Emberiza cia Linn.
Meadow Bunting.
Two or three times.
9. Emberiza csesia Cretzsch.
Cretzschm.ar's Bunting.
Twenty 
to thirty years ago, in spring, with S.E. winds — altogether 
then twenty or thirty occurrences.
10.
Emberiza leucocephala Gmel.
Pine Bunting.
One very 
fine male in spring, taken in ' throstle-bush ' in the garden.
11.
Emberiza aureola Pall.
Yellow-breasted Bunting.
Two 
young males and one female.
T2.
Emberiza rustica Pall.
Rustic Bunting.
About ten times 
in the autumn, and once in spring — a female.
13.
Emberiza pusilla Pall.
Little Bunting.
Forty to fifty 
occurrences.
14.
Emberiza schoeniclus Linn.
Reed Bunting.
Common.
15.
Emberiza pyrrhuloides Pall.
Large-billed Reed Bunting.
One, April 24th, 1879, o^^^ male in the most perfect 
nuptial plumage.
16.
Calcarius lapponicus Linn.
Lapland Bunting.
Rare in 
spring, two or three a day in the autumn.
17.
Plectrophanes nivalis Linn.
Snow Bunting.
Common.
Einberiza chrysophrys Pall, the Yellow-browed Bunting, and 
E. striolata Licht., the Striped Bunting, have so far not yet been 
recognised at Heligoland.
Then again, take the case containing the PhylloscopincE.
Where 
in any other collection in Europe could we find, grouped together 
within the space of a few inches, local examples of Phylloscopus 
super ciliosus^ P.
proregiilus^ P.
tristts, P.
bonellii, P.
horealis^ P.
nitidis, 
and P.
vh'idanus} 
* Not included in Mr. Dresser's ' List of European Birds.' 
Jan. 1888.
6 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
The cases containing the Thrushes (I forget liow many examples 
there are of Tardus varius alone), Larks, Wagtails, and Pipits are 
all equally remarkable in the number of species represented as well 
as the beauty of the specimens.
To me, however, the most interesting 
spot on the island was the garden adjoining the house, for in this 
small but well-kept enclosure more rare stragglers have been either 
recognised or obtained than in any other spot in Europe, and 
Mr. Gatke has frequently remarked that he would willingly give up 
his present collection to possess the rare unrecognised migrants which 
from time to time have visited them.
During my visit, however, it 
rt-as dead low-water time, the autumn tide of migration having scarcely 
commenced to flow.
There are flowers and not birds to look at — 
Heligoland roses are famous, but none we saw could compare with 
those in this garden — the blooms especially of Le France, Baroness 
Rothschild, and Souvenir de ]\Ialmaison being of extraordinar}^ size 
and beauty.
At the end of the garden farthest from the house is a 
cluster of elders and willows, which are used as a ' throstle-bush,' of 
which more later on ; beyond the 'throstle-bush' is a path or open 
space, and then a row of rough-topped hawthon:!S against the 
boundar}' wall.
It was in this ' throstle-bush ' that Mr. Gatke took 
that beautiful Pine Bunting in his collection, and he was in 
the act of explaining to me his excitement in making the cap- 
ture, when I happened to look into the thorns and saw sitting 
within a few feet of us a male Crossbill in the red plumage, and 
also a green female.
Here, indeed, were some actual migrants 
worth seeing.
Mr. Gatke said that about twenty to thirty a day 
had been coming in, and that I should probably find others in 
the neighbouring gardens, that it is a dull stupid bird, and their 
presence is readily recognised by their repeated call-notes.
In these 
Oberland gardens and the grounds of Government House there 
is much good cover for birds, far more than appears from casual 
inspection.
Subsequently to my visit I received from Mr. Gatke two photo- 
graphs of the garden, which are here reproduced, accompanied 
by the following explanatory- notes : — ' In the willows to the left of 
the house, of the one view of the garden, Mr. Seebohm failed to 
obtain Phylloscopus superciliosus, a female, on the 4th of October, 1876, 
and on the next day he succeeded in shooting a fine male in the 
topmost branches of the willows of the other photograph — in both 
instances I had seen the bird in the morning, and I was certain they 
would return ere long to the willows — a favourite haunt of this little 
leaf-warbler, as in fact of the whole of that family, particularly as they 
prefer 5a//.v smithiana — which in consequence I always cultivate — 
Naturalist, 
CORDKAUX : HELIGOLAND.
7 
and scarcely ever do they resort to .V. caprea^ of whicli there are also 
some specimens in my garden.
'lo the left of the high pole, in the view without the house, one 
day an JLviheriza ritstica perched from three to four feet above my 
liead ; a little further on, near the thin stick, where the white spots 
are, I caught that beautiful male of E.
pythiornis you saw in my 
collection.
'I'hen, in the middle of the topmost branches, which are 
a little lower than those further to the right, Mr. Seebohm shot his 
P.superciliosus^ and over the whole frame from left to right I have seen 
at least half a score more of these little darlings.
The only time 
I heard its tiny call-note repeated more than once in short succession 
was one day when I came on a sudden on one so close that I actually 
made a grip at it with my hand and thereby frightened it out of its 
small wits.
Further to the extreme right of the highest willow, 
Turdits varius and T.
fuscatus have been caught.
Einberizci nielano- 
cepliala I have repeatedly shot with my walking-stick gun ; the little 
English Redpole, Linota rufescens^ as also Z.
exilipes^ with spotless 
white rump and with a little bill.
Emberi?:a luteola I met six to 
eight paces behind the spot where I caught E.
p)yt]iiornis.
Just a little 
further to the right, where the photograph ends, my son shot Phyllos- 
copus nitidiis^ and I rejjorted E.
inelanocephala^ Sturnns roseus^ 
JVtylloscopus iristis.
Was once within arm's length of Sylvia fuscata 
through the dried-up planking dividing my garden from my neigh- 
bour's.
In the bushes underneath the flag of the other photograph 
1 shot with walking-stick gun, Fhylloscopus viridcmus ; saw ever so 
many superciliosus, several tristis — so well known by its call-note, 
resembling the cry of a very young chicken repeated four or five 
times in quick succession ; Sylvia vielanocephala^ several Sturmis 
roseus,^ etc., etc.
The oldest tree on the island is a mulberry, so old that its aged 
limbs are supported with iron clamps and traces.
This is in a garden 
near the church.
Trees are fairly abundant both in the upper and 
lower town, those best suited to the sea-breezes and soil being the 
sycamore, elm, lime, pear, and cherry.
The elm trees which flank 
the wooden staircase, also some trees in the garden of the Con- 
vensation House, may be fairly called timber; besides these there is an 
abundance of elder, thorn, lilac, syringa, willow, and the ' tea '-shrub.
The gardens attached to the pleasant and clean-looking houses are 
bright with roses, petunias, splendid stocks, sweet-williams, and 
J' rench \'alerian ; the latter attracts numbers of migratory moths.
The upper town ends somewhat abruptly, and beyond this the 
island is an open elevated common, wind-swept and without tree or 
bush, forming a long and narrow triangle, flanked by cliffs 200 feet 
Jan. 1888.
8 
CORDEAUX : HELIGOLAND.
in depth.
This plateau is about three-quarters of a mile in length 
by a third of a mile in greatest breadth, with a gentle and continuous 
inclination from S.W. to N.E. I do not think it would be possible 
to get a (ticket pitch on any part without a certainty of a long-driven 
ball going over the cliff into the sea.
The common is divided in its 
greatest length by a broad footway, Kartofel-Ailee, or potato street ; 
to right and left are the small potato plots, occasionally varied with a 
few oats — cut green for fodder for the ewes, and with spaces of short 
turf, on which the milk-ewes are tethered.
There is not a cow or a 
horse on the island, and no wheeled conveyance above a hand-barrow.
The ui)per plateau is surrounded by a wire fence, the top wire 
spiked, which follows the cliff-line in and out.
This is a favourite 
])erching place for the small birds, as Chats, Titlarks, etc.
During 
my stay, however, I did not see any immigrants excepting the 
Crossbills and a young Cuckoo flying in the street near the post-office.
Wheatears, Chats, Pipits, Wagtails, Warblers, and Larks, none had 
yet arrived.
Excepting the Guillemots, Sparrows, StarHngs, and 
Martins, birds rarely nest on Heligoland ; the Lark, Chaffinch, and 
Tree-pipit have nested, and also a pair of English Redpoles, in 
Mr. Gatke's garden, but the nest was destroyed by a cat.
The Oberland during my stay swarmed with White Butterflies and 
tlie Lesser Tortoise-shell, also a few Meadow Browns, settling per- 
petually on the blossoms of Galium verum and Sisymbrium offici?iale.
These two plants, now in full bloom, gave the upper plateau the 
appearance of a mustard-field in flower.
Other English weeds are 
the common thistle, field wound-wort, and cornbind.
The greater part of these Butterflies were immigrants from the 
nearest land, forty miles to the eastward.
I saw several like flakes 
of snow drifting across the sea from this direction, and amongst them 
a single example of Vanessa cardui.
W^e have only to see the 
collection of Lepidoptera and Coleoptera made by Mr.- Gatke to 
recognise the fact that the migration of insects is here as remarkable 
as that of birds, but this is a chapter yet to be written.
Near to the signal station at the S.W. and highest corner of the 
island, and between there and the lighthouse are the ' throstle-bushes.' 
I counted six at a distance varying from 50 to 100 yards apart.
A 
'throstle-bush' may be either artificial or natural, like the growing 
shrubs in Mr. Gatke's garden.
These, however, were all artificial, 
and consisted of a mass of thorns and sticks stuck upright in the 
ground, ten feet high and about fifteen in width, and four or five 
feet thick near the ground, gradually thinning to the -top.
The near 
side facing the east is left open, the far side and top are covered 
with a light net extending to within a foot of the ground, and there 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
9 
fastened to small upright stakes ; from these extends in an horizontal 
direction the ground net, so arranged that when birds get in there is 
no getting out.
On a migratory night flocks of various Thrushes 
rush headlong into these shelters — the only refuge on the bleak 
plateau that they can see before them, frightened by the glare of the 
lanterns and the beating of sticks, and finding egress impossible on 
the other side, they flutter down to pass beneath the ground net, 
from which there is no escape.
These decoys are very effective, and 
immense numbers of migrants, even Hooded Crows, are captured 
from time to time.* 
The flat shores of Sand-insel offer very considerable attractions to 
the migrating waders.
The island is a cluster of sandhills with a 
short sandspit extending eastward, and a long and somewhat curved 
shingle beach to the west.
The sea-grass and some slight barriers of 
brushwood, put down to check the drift of sand, afford but scanty 
protection to any land birds which may alight here.
I only saw a 
solitary Thrush and a few Sanderlings, Redshanks, Grey Plover — the 
mere avant couriers of the great bird army so soon to appear.
The 
sandhills swarmed with Grasshoppers, which are greedily gobbled up 
by a party of young Ducks.
Near to the Diinnen pavilion there is a 
quantity of brushwood packed 'on end' (Lincolnshire— ' double- 
banded kids ') for repairing the sand-barriers during the winter.
This 
was suggestive of future shelter for any number of Goldcrests or other 
small immigrants.
At this season, however, at least during the 
greater part of the day, there is little privacy for any birds, as the 
island is occupied by bathers, and after the bath they sit or recline 
to the number of eight hundred or more in numerous picturesque 
groups on the long and narrow belt of shingle which stretches to the 
west, the bright-coloured wraps and sunshades of the ladies being 
somewhat suggestive of a bank of many-coloured flowers ; here for 
hours they remain reading or in conversation, sketch the island, 
perhaps, on some flat-sided pebble, or lazily watch the long rollers 
thundering to their feet.
Like the Lotus-eaters, 
They sat them clown upon the yellow sand, 
Between the sun and moon upon the shore : 
And sweet it was to dream of Father-land, 
Of child, and wife — 
Only that in this case the sand is not yellow but white, and, when 
bathing the smallest shell or pebble is clearly visible in six feet of 
water.
* Mr. Gatke informs me that on the night of October 14th, in the present 
autumn, a Heligolander went to the north point of the island with a lantern and 
cudgel, and there killed seventy-five Hooded Crows roosting on the grass, part of 
ajnigratory flock which had come in during the evening.
Jan. 1888.
lO 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
Mr. Gatke, when describing to me, in his garden one afternoon, 
the migration of the Goldcrest, said, it might be on some still bright 
afternoon in October, suddenly from above a small bird drops into the 
shrubs, then another, then two or three, after which numbers keep 
droi)ping in, not only here, but into the neighbouring gardens.
Some 
of these fragile-looking little wanderers commence feeding, or making 
a pretence to feed, others sleep, like dots of feathers amongst the 
shrubs.
The sun has set and twilight deepens, a single planet shines 
like a distant lamp in space.
Something tells them that it is time to 
move : half-an-hour after sunset one is seen to rise, flying directly 
upwards, wings and body being kept perpendicular to the plane of 
the horizon, like a small spread-eagle.
A tiny note sounds out aloft, 
then one and then another rise ; the notes are repeated, now from 
one, now from another, till the whole flock is called together and on 
the wing.
Then, circling once or twice, they strike off into the 
gathering darkness towards the western isles.
In considering the phenomena of migration, due allowance must 
be made for the finer senses of the lower animals, , their better 
remembrance of locality and stronger vision.
It is easy to under- 
stand how birds with their acute sight, and migrating in the day time, 
may discern Heligoland from the nearest coast to the east, only forty 
miles away, and from Heligoland be able to see Borkum and then 
Ter SchelUng, and the southward trend of the European coast-Hne.
Yet in the night, when birds most migrate, these landmarks would be 
invisible, and in the great sea passage of 360 miles between Heligo- 
land and PLngland there are no landmarks to give even the general 
direction.
There is the light of star or planet, and that these are 
an important factor in migration there can be no doubt, but to what 
extent stars and planets act as actual guiding points we shall never 
be able to tell, although we know that when the sky is obscured with 
heavy clouds or by fog, birds not unfrequently lose their way, and 
when the stars again become visible, or the m.oon rises, speedily 
appear to find the right course again.
It is known that in foggy thick w^eather migrating birds become 
much puzzled, and it is invariably under these adverse meteorological 
conditions that they are observed about light-houses or light-vessels, 
or clamorously careering above the lights of a town.
The rays from 
a light-house or light-ship are not thrown upwards, but are directed 
to the horizon ; consequently, on a foggy night, to birds passing some 
distance overhead the hght from a light-vessel would appear as an 
illuminated circle, a spot where the fog seems less' dense, or a little 
brighter than the surrounding gloom, more or less distinct according 
to the level of flight ; a flock of migrating birds seeing this light 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX: HELIGOLAND.
II 
spot, perhaps with the idea they are over land, strike directly down- 
wards — as it has been described at the light-vessels — as if descending 
perpendicularlv through a funnel, and as they come within the plane 
of the reflectors will, we are told, dash to and fro erratically for 
hours round the lantern, ^h.
Gatke thinks that this phenomenon of 
the circling flock, as his observations at Heligoland have shown, is 
more likely due to a continuous stream of birds constantly recruited 
from above, rather than the same flock flying for hours round the 
light, and that as soon as birds find out their mistake, after circling 
once or twice round" the light, they pass forward again or rise to 
their former altitude.
Birds, indeed, do not appear to be attracted to bright lights in 
the same manner as moths, for these latter come on bright nights 
just as on dull : the former, as a rule, only in fogs, snowstorms, 
thick and obscure weather.
There is no doubt that the phenomena attending a migration of 
Gold-crests at Heligoland maybe repeated at one and the same time 
at Borkum, Ter Schelling, and other stations on the European coast- 
line.
Observations, as recorded in the migration reports, show that 
the Gold-crests, as well as other birds, do sometimes arrive on the 
British coasts in one broad front, which on the one side may touch 
the Shedands, and on the other the Channel islands.
The migratory 
movement is, however, not invariably a broad stream ; as an illus- 
tration out of many, take that remarkable migration of the Honey 
Buzzard past Heligoland on Sept.
19th, some years since.
Their 
course, Mr. Gatke told me, was nearly due E.
and W..
crossing the 
sandspit which stretches out north-east of Sand-insel.
About noon, 
five to ten together : then gradually somewhat larger numbers at 
short intervals: then from three to six p.m. an almost interrupted 
stream, the rear of one lot almost mingling with the van of the 
next.
It was a very fine September day, and so calm and still that 
spectators on the main island, distant three-quarters of a mile or 
more, thought they could distinguish the winnowing sound of the 
wings.
This migration of the Honey Buzzard is the more remarkable 
from the fact that these birds are very solitary in their habits, nesting 
considerable distances apart, and that they are not often visible in 
the great woods and forests they mostly frequent.
It is difticult to 
understand how so rapid a mobilisation of the species was effected 
over the vast area of their breeding range, as well as to understand 
the impelling cause which drove them westward in numbers suflicient 
to keep up a continuous stream of many hours past Heligoland.
I left this bright little island in the North Sea with regret — a 
regret apparently shared by many of my fellow-passengers, for long 
Jan. 1888.
j'oRRn r: Yorkshire entomological notes.
after the ' Freia " was ploughing her way through green seas towards 
the Kibe, there passed the frequent wavings of handkerchiefs between 
friends on board and friends on shore.
The Germans have, unfairly 
I always say, been called a stolid and cold-blooded race ; they are 
certainly sufficiently demonstrative in their farewells.
How soon, 
I thought, beneath the flutter of countless handkerchiefs and shouts 
of 'aiif wiedersehen,' might the dark battalions once more march 
out to guard their frontiers ; it may be the prelude of triumph to 
some, but assuredly it would be the commencement of a life-long 
sorrow to the many.
The return journey to Grimsby was altogether unev^entful, only a 
few Herring Gulls being seen ; and soon after leaving the Elbe, the 
body of a sailor drifted past — the very saddest sight since leaving home.
YORKSHIRE ENTOMOLOGICAL NOTES.
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Huddersjield ; Author of tJie List of Yorkshire Lepidopte7-a, etc.
Mr. S.
L. Mosley informs me that a specimen oi Apleda tincta was 
found drying its wings, having just emerged from pupa, in Greenhead 
Park, Huddersfield, during the past season.
A specimen at Edling- 
ton, Doncaster, is the only previously recorded occurrence in the 
county, and it is not unlikely that the pupa of the Huddersfield 
specimen was brought among the soil attached to the roots of some 
tree or plant introduced into the park.
Other additions to the 
Huddersfield list are — Depressaria badiella, of which several speci- 
mens were taken at Grimescar by Mr. G.
W. K.
Crosland, and for 
which Redcar was the only previous Yorkshire locality ; Pcedisca 
biliinana and Gelechia poUiella I took in the Netherton Wood ; this 
latter local northern species has also occurred in the greatest pro- 
fusion at Greenfield both seasons since the one I first found it there 
in 1885.
Additions for other localities are Dep7'essaria weirella at 
York, a fine specimen of which I took off a ragwort bloom on the 
night of August i6th, when collecting in company with Mr. G.
C. 
Dennis, thus adding another locality, it only being previously known 
in the county from Saltburn.
And in the current number of the 
' Entomologists' Monthly Magazine,' Mr. Eustace R.
Bankes 
announces the finding, at the beginning of October last, of larvae 
of Neptiaila tormentillcB on Potentilla torme7itilla on the West 
Riding moors.
Mr. Stainton adds a note, suggesting that the species 
may possibly be, not tormentillce, but the same as a specimen he 
bred from the s:ime plant at Dunkeld twenty-seven years ago, and 
which is still without name.
In either case the species is new to the 
countY list.
_ _   
13 
A CURIOUS HABITAT OF SOME MOSSES.
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S.
Read in Section D, British Association, Manchester, September yth, 1887; and afterwards at 
Scottish Cryptogamic Society, October 1887.
As is probably well known amongst geologists the South-Western 
portion of the West Riding of Yorkshire is situated on the Lower 
Coal-Measure series of the Carboniferous formation.
The numerous 
beds of coal of various thickness have been deposited, and are now 
found intercalated, amongst thick beds of sandstone, some very 
fine-, others coarse-grained, and these sandstone beds are exten- 
sively quarried in the district for the excellent building materials 
they supply.
It was in one of these quarries, situate at a Colliery called Hartley 
Bank, near Dewsbury, that the occurrence of this curious moss-habitat 
was observed.
At the bottom of the quarry, which is some 30 ft.
or 
40 ft.
below the normal surface of the hill-side in which it is exca- 
vated, are some deeper holes where blocks of stone have been taken 
out below the average level, and these have been filled up with water 
percolating through the cracks in the bedding of the rock.
In one 
of these in which the water stood from a depth of 10 in.
to 24 in., I 
observed, in June 1887, a peculiar looking moss which I could not 
recognise at first sight.
It was growing perfectly upright in a loosely 
tufted manner and apparently rooted in the bottom of the pool ; it 
rose up to within an inch or two of the surface, but all of it quite 
submerged.
I rooted up a small tuft with a stick for examination 
and on putting some of it under the microscope I was very much 
surprised to find it was Affiiuiii hornum.
I at once sent off some 
spec miens to Dr. Braithwaite of London and to Mr. Boswell of 
Oxford, who both confirmed my naming of the specimens, but 
Dr. Braithwaite was of opinion that it was merely a temporary aber- 
ration from the usual form caused by a temporary submergence.
Mr. Boswell expressed great interest in such a curious circumstance as 
this purely terrestrial or aerial-growing moss being found submerged, 
and both gentlemen concurred in saying that it was the first time 
such a thing had come under their notice.
On re-visiting the quarry 
a week or two later, I found on inquiry that it was no temporary or 
partial inundation that caused the existence of these pools, but that 
they had been filled with water for at least eight or ten years, and that 
even in the dryest seasons the depth of the water never varied more 
than an inch or two.
I then made a fresh gathering, of which, after 
h aving w ell washed it, for the tufts were coated with a diatomaceous 
Jan. 1888.
B 
14 
hobkirk: leafing of oak and ash.
slime, 1 sent in its fresh state a fair quantity to Mr. Boswell by the 
same evening's post.
Both of us were I think considerably surprised 
to find that this second gathering was not Mniiiui lion: urn but 
Polytrichupi commune, and Mr. Boswell afterwards wrote me, that 
amongst some loose fragments he had found several bits of another 
moss — Bryum i^Webera) albicans.
The tufts of Polytrichum are somewhat sparingly branched and 
much elongated and attenuated, and the leaves are more distantly 
placed on the stem, and the same may be said of the Mjiiuni, l)ut 
bevond this there does not appear to be any structural difference in 
either stem or leaves, between these specimens and the normal form.
Both species also in several instances show distmct iniiovati'ms, thus 
to my mind proving that they are not a single season's growth, as 
Dr. Braithwaite seemed at first inclined to believe, but that they 
must have passed two or more seasons in this unusual habitat, where 
to all appearance they both grow and flourish, in considerable 
quantity.
THE LEAFING OF THE OAK AND THE ASH.
C. p.
HOBKIRK, F.L.S.
Old superstitions die hard, and this old legend, celebrated m a 
doggrel couplet, seems to be one of them.
There is about as much 
sense and about as much truth about it as in the somewhat similar 
superstition connected with St. Swithin's (lay being a prognostic of 
the state of the weather for the forty subsequent days.
I am not at all surprised that Mr. Hagger received so many 
unsatisfactor}' answers from farmers and others on this subject ; 
it would have been surprising had it been otherwise.
As Mr. Hagger 
says, the gist of them is no doubt conveyed in the second paragraph 
of his article, and that paragraph contains a full answer to the 
question.
This answer may, perhaps, be put into a more concrete 
form even than he has there put it.
The only real and scientific reason and cause of the one tree or 
the other being in leaf earliest is the kind of weather that has 
preceded the leafing, not the weather that is yet to succeed.
The 
amount of sunshine, warmth, and rain, or absence of sunshine, cold, 
frosty, and dry weather, will have their full effect in determining the 
time of leafing of these two or any other trees, arid also according 
to the varied habits of these trees will determine priority of leafing, 
and this will also be affected by the kind of soil, shelter, or exposure 
Naturalist, 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
^5 
of individual trees : but to suppose or believe for one moment that 
these should indicate anything of the future seasons is preposterous 
m the extreme, and this also seems to be the opinion, though not 
clearly expressed, of Mr. Hagger in his third paragraph.
When 
1 say not clearly expressed, I mean that it seems to me that 
]VIr. Hagger is not quite convinced in his own mind as to the truth 
or otherwise of the legend; but I think that if we look the matter 
fairly in the face we shall arrive at the conclusion that the sum of the 
environments that liave been at work is the cause of the times of 
leafing, and that there is no more scientific value to be ascribed to 
the couplet than to the St. Swithin"s or any other similar weather 
forecast.
The time of leafing is the efl:ect of past causes, and not 
in any way a cause or even prognostication of future events.
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Crested Tit near Keighley.
— A few weeks ago a person at ^lany-AVells 
expressed a wish that I should go and see what he described as a ' strange ' 
Ijird, but thinking it would be — what .such examples usually turn out to be — a 
common species, I neglected paying a visit.
The bird in question is a Crested Tit 
{Pams cj'istatus), and was shot by a farm servant near Keighley about the first week 
in August, and brought to a local birdstufter.
This is the second recorded occurrence 
of this species in this district, the other having been shot, I l)elieve, on Thornton 
Moor.
Another Ijird, viz., the Green Sandpiper [Helodronias ochropiis).
which is 
an addition to our local avifauna, I saw on the loth of September last flying about 
Many-Wells reservoir, in company with Redshanks {'lotaniis calidn's), one of 
which had been wounded with a gvm-shot.
On calling the other day at Mr.
Oliver's, the birdstufter, into whose hands many a rara avis has fallen, I am sorry 
to add that the above bird (apparently an adult specimen) had been shot, and got 
into his possession.
— E.
P. P.
Butterfield, Wilsden, Sept.
20th, 1887.
Flamborough Bird -notes.
— The sea-birds at Flamborough have been 
far more numerous this season, and the number of eggs taken supersedes in 
quantity the take of all previous seasons.
The other evening I had a very pleasant 
sail round the headland, and was struck to see so many thousands of Puffins 
{Frntercula ardica).
^lost of the Guillemots [Lonivia troile) and Razorbills [Alca 
torda) with their young have taken their departure.
The Puffins all round the 
Robin Lythe Hole and neighbouring rock when on wing darkened the air.
The 
Sea Swallows, Skuas, }vlanx Shearwater [F2i_ffiiuis angloriini).
also the Sandwich 
Terns {Sterna cantiaca) have made their appearance.
[Manx Shearwaters have 
arrived in great numbers.
— Matthew Bailey, August loth.
1887.
Flamborough Bird -notes.
— Perhaps it might be of interest to know 
that the sea-birds.
Guillemot {Lonivia troile).
Razor-bills {Alca torda).
Puffins 
{Fraterciila arctica), Kittiwakes {Jvissa tridacfyla), etc., etc., on our coast increase 
every year.
I am sure that naturalists would be astoni.shed to see the quantities of 
Skuas, Little Gulls {Lanes and ."Shearwaters.
Fulmar Petrels {Fiil»iarics 
glacialis) have been seen, and one shot ; also one immature Sabin's Gull 
{Lams sabini).
and the Grey Phalarope {Phalaropiis ftilicarliis).
.Several winter 
visitants have already arrived on our coast I believe.
The Hooded Crow {Cor-dus 
comix) was the first to arrive, September ist, Crested Wrens {Regulus cristatiis) 
and Ring Ousels {Tiirdiis torquaius) following.
Yesterday several Woodcocks 
{Scolopax riLsticicla) were shot on the headland ; unfortunately they have brought 
with them very rough weather.
— Matthew Bailky, Flamborough, October iith, 
1887.
Jan. i£88.
i6 
SAUNDERS" 'LIST OF BRITISH BIRDS.' 
A 'List of British Birds," revised to April 1SS7, by Howard Saunders, F.L.S., 
F Z.S..
etc.
London: Gurnev & Tackson, successors to Mr. Van Voorst, 
1SS7.
: — _ 
A LIST of British Birds by a recognise.!
authority on the subject has, 
we venture to say, long been a desideratum.
True it is that 
Wharton's useful list has for some years occupied the tield in this 
particular department of ornithological literature, but it was open to 
considerable nnprovement, among others in respect of the classiiication 
employed.
Xo doubt Sundevall's system has many virtues, but as a 
whole we confess we never became really familiar with it.
and 
consequently had almost invariably to refer to the index to species 
— happily supplied.
The chief requirements in a list of this description are, we take 
it, as follows : — 
(ist) That it shall be an authority as to what species are to be 
truly considered British.
(2nd) That i: shall be based upon all that is recognised as 
soundest and best as regards the important question of C/assifuition.
(3rd) That its Xomendature shall be in accord with the recognised 
laws of priority — the only true method by which we can eventually 
hope to arrive at the much-to-be-desired uniformity both at home 
and abroad.
(4th) That the list shall be handsome and suitable as regards its 
typography.
Regarding the fultilment of the hrst three — the most imponant — 
of these desiderata, the measure of success achieved depends entirely 
upon the author selected for the task, and in this respect all of us 
must recognise that the choice was a most happy one, for it would 
have been indeed a difficult matter to have made one more suitable 
than that of the gentleman so well known to ornithologists 
for his varied and useful bird-work, and particularly in our present 
special connection as the successful editor of Volumes III and IV of 
the standard work on our avifauna — Varrell's • British Birds." But 
while it is a pleasure to recognise that the all-important conditions 
have been fultilled in a manner that leaves little — indeed, if a few of 
the square brackets were removed we should say absolutely nothing — 
to be desired ; yet as regards the typography it is quite otherwise.
In 
this respect it does not come up to our ideal of what the typograpliy 
of such a hst should be, and indeed it is not too much to say that in 
this respect it is weak.
Apart from this defect, which we full}- admit 
is of quite secondary moment and entireh- a matter of taste, this is 
Irom its general excellence facile princeps among lists of British Birds.
Naturalist, 
T7 
THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE 
AND ITS FIRST YEAR'S WORK.
S. A.
ADAMSON, F.G.S., 
Hon. Secretary to the Committee.
The above Committee has now successfully completed the first year 
of its operations, and has duly presented a report of the same to the 
Bouider Committee of the British Association.
This was approved 
of and presented by Dr. Crosskey in the Geological Section at the 
recent meeting of the British Association in Manchester.
In the 
preliminary remarks of the report of the British Association Com- 
mittee, they state — ' We have been greatly assisted by the formation 
of a Boulder Committee in connection with the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union, of which Professor Green, F.R.S.,is President, and Mr. S.
A. 
Adamson, F.G.S., the Hon. Sec.
Were a similar committee organised 
in each county, the work of the Committee of the Association could 
soon be brought to a satisfactory conclusion.' As some evidence of 
the success the Yorkshire Committee has achieved, it may be stated 
that the Boulder Committee of the British Association has been in 
existence fifteen years ; in all this period only seven reports had 
been presenter] upon erratics in Yorkshire.
This show^s conclusively 
how haphazard, or, as may be termed, accidental, the character of 
the previous work had been.
Now, when the work has been 
properly organised by a Yorkshire Committee, in the first year of its 
operations seven reports, embracing boulders or groups of boulders 
in fifteen different localities, have been accepted by the British 
Association and printed in their report for 1887, whilst several 
other valuable reports have been deferred, and, m addition, the new 
reports already received for the second year's work are still more 
numerous.
The Committee desire to thank most warmly the gentle- 
men who have forwarded reports, for their esteemed and valuable 
co-operation, and would still further press upon them — and, indeed, 
upon all Yorkshire geologists and scientific societies — for their con- 
tinued efforts, until the county is exhaustively reported and the 
glacial map of Yorkshire completed.
As this is the first report of 
the Committee, it may be well to relate in a brief manner its origin 
and history before giving details of its accomplished work.
A meeting 
of Yorkshire geologists was held at the Leeds Mechanics' Institution 
on Nov. 23rd, 1886, when a resolution was passed, establishing 
a committee to receive reports and conduct observations relative to 
the erratic blocks of Yorkshire.
At a meeting of the Executive of 
Jan. 1888.
i S ADAMSOX : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
ihc Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, held four days later, this resolution 
was unanimously confirmed.
The Boulder Committee being now 
in actual existence, its first meeting was held on Dec. 23rd, 1886, 
when a draft scliedule upon which to record observations was 
submitted and ado[)ted.
A copy of this schedule was given in The 
Xatiiralisi for May 1S87.
Upon the ist Jan., 1887, this schedule 
was issued to Yorkshire geologists and to each society affiliated with 
the Union, with the satisfactory results before alluded to.
The 
detailed reports comprised in the first year's work of the Committee 
are now ])resented.
THE ' GREYSTONE,' LEEDS.
C. D.
HARDCASTLE, 
p7-esident of the Leeds Geological Associatio7i.
Situated in Parish of Leeds, one mile from the town, on the side 
of the old highway to Bradford, opposite the northern end of 
Ventnor Street, on property belonging to the ' Pious Use Trust.' 
Only 6 in.
in height, is now exposed above the causeway, and it 
projects 6 in.
from a garden wall which is built over it.
The base of 
the exposed segment along the flags measures 2 ft.
10 in.
Old 
inhabitants say it was formerly from 4 ft.
to 5 ft.
above ground, and 
from 3 ft.
to 4 ft.
in diameter, but of irregular form.
Its entire length 
is perliaps 7 ft.
or S ft.
Thoresby, in 17 15, calls it 'a prodigious great 
stone." Probably originally nearly rectangular.
There are indenta- 
tions in the stone, but not natural.
Millstone Grit, similar to that 
of Horsforth and Bramley Fall.
The .Rough Rock of Horsforth is 
about four miles distant on the same side of the river, and at a 
considerable elevation, some of the quarries being about 475 ft.
above the sea.
The stone has probably come from there.
Bramley 
is about three miles away, on the opposite side of the river, and at 
an elevation of 200 feet.
The Greystone legend is that a huge giant 
hurled it from the Ciiant's Hill at Armley, about half a mile distant 
on the opposite side of the river : in proof of which statement the 
indentations of the sjiant's thumb and finders are still to be seen.
The Giant's Hill, however, belongs to the Flagstone Series of the 
Lower Coal Pleasures, whereas the ' Greystone ' is Millstone Grit.
115 ft.
above sea-level.
On the 6 in.
Ordnance Map— Lat. 53° 48' 
40", Long.
1° 34' — as 'Greystone.' An ancient boundary stone.
Has served from time immemorial as boundary stone separating the 
manors of Leeds and Burley.
Thoresby, in 1715, quotes an old 
MS.
survey, N.D.
(Lapis cinereus ingentis magnitudinis admodum 
antiquatis et vetustatus existens = The Greystone of great size, very 
Naturalist, 
A DAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
1 9 
ancient and existing beyond memory).
It rests upon yellow clay 
from 8 ft.
to 9 ft.
in thickness, below which there is Coal Measure 
Shale.
Note.
— According to Thoresby, there was an old boundary stone 
called the Paudmire Stone, in Leeds main street (Briggate), similar 
to this boulder.
This memorable stone was purposely sunk below 
the pavement as a supposed nuisance when that part was newly 
paved in the mayoralty of Mr. Samuel Hey (1703).
The two stones 
are in a direct line w^ith the Rough Rock of Horsforth, which is to 
the N.W.
NOTES ON FLAMBOROUGH HEAD BOULDERS.
Rev. E.
MAULE COLE, M.A., 
Weiwang ; President of ike Geological Section of the YorksJw-e Naturalists Union.
An immense number of boulders have been lodged on the top of 
Flamborough Head.
On Beacon Hill are half a dozen of great size, 
mostly rounded, consisting of Granite, Whinstone, Sandstone, and 
Mica Schist with Garnets.
These have probably been placed in 
their present position, but not moved far, as a neighbouring small 
ravine, called Hartindale Gutter, reveals the fact that the boulder 
clay in this locality is full of large boulders.
On the neighbouring 
side of the ravine leading down to Thornwick Bay there is a boulder 
of Cherty Limestone lying on the surface, which measures 65 in.
long X 52 in.
broad and about 20 in.
high.
A rounded boulder of Sandstone, 32 in.
x 21 in.
x 14 in., projects 
in the side of the same ravine.
On Cliff Lane, Bempton, by the side of the road, is a group of 
eight large Whinstone boulders, more or less rounded, which were 
removed from the adjoining fields to their present position more than 
seventy years ago.
The average size is 40 in.
x 40 in.
x 20 in.
In the village of Bempton, by the blacksmith's shop, lies a Whin- 
stone boulder, 56 in.
x 24 in.
x 18 in., and numerous others are 
visible m all directions.
REPORTS UPON ERRATIC BLOCKS IN THE NORTH RIDING 
OF YORKSHIRE.
W]\L GREGSON, 
Baldersby., Thirsk ; Hon. Local Sec. Yorkshire Geological and PolytecJuiic Society.
Cattersty Sands, Skinningrove.
Three miles S.E. of Saltburn.
Grey Granite — diameter, 3 ft.
; rounded ; no striations.
Rests 
upon Lower Lias Shales, on the shore.
Jan. 18S8.
20 
ADAMSOX: THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
Whorlton.
Eight miles X.E. of Northallerton.
Ti rev (.iranite— diameter.
3 fr.
: sub-angular : is striated.
Rests 
uron Lias.
250 ft- above sea-level.
Baldersby Park.
Five miles S.W. of Thirsk.
Millstone Grit — 6 ft.
x 3 fr.
: angular ; no striations.
Rests on an 
outlier of Lower Lias, go ft.
above sea-level.
Elmire.
Six miles S.
of Thirsk.
Shap Granite — diameter, 2 ft.
; sub-angular ; no striations.
Rests 
on Keuper Sandstone, overlaid by gravel.
60 ft.
above sea-level.
^fTTT Beck.
Robin Hoop's Bay — (3 Boulders).
Ten miles X.
of Scarborough.
S'nap Granite — height, 2 ft.
: circumference.
9 ft.
; sub-angular : 
no striations.
Rests on Lower Lias on the shore.
Shap Granite — height, i ft.: circumference.
7-jft.; sub-angular; 
no striations.
Rests on Lower Lias on the shore.
Shap Granite — height and circumference and other circumstances 
exactly similar to the last-named.
HuTTOx Moor.
Three miles N.E. of Ripon.
There are a good number of erratic boulders scattered over this 
moor, from i ft.
to 3 fr.
in diameter, a few of which are of Grey 
Granite, the remainder being chiefly Millstone Grit.
They all rest 
on the Keuper Sandstone.
LOW FIELD, NEAR FIERCEBRIDGE.
R. TAYLOR MAXSOX, M.R.C.S..
Pi7 rli71£i-i171.
Low Field is three-quarters of a mile west of Cliffe Hall near 
Piercebridge.
on the Yorkshire side of the Tees.
The boulder is in 
the hedge-side on die east side of the Field, about 200 yards from 
the river.
It is about 70 ft.
above the river: 10 ft.
long on front 
face ; 7 ft.
4 in.
from front to back.
The boulder is sunk in the 
ground considerably : portion visible 4 ft.
above soil.
Sub-angular; 
rounded top.
Long shaped — longest axis N.
to S.
Xo groovings ; 
it may identify the boulder that an attempt has evidently been made 
to break it ; holes have been cut in it witli chisels.
It is Shap Fell 
X.^tur.iHst.
A]:)AMSON : 'J'HE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
Cjranite, and is 250 ft.
above sea-level.
Isolated ; some beds of 
gravel not far off.
Embedded, 1 think, deeply in the soil, which 
is heavy clay.
No'i'K.
— Another smaller boulder is lying to the left of the walk, 
leading to Cliffe Hall, about a mile west of the other.
It is rounded, 
and about 3 ft.
long, with long axis E.
and W.
It has probably been 
moved by those who made the path near which it lies.
THE 'STRANGER'S STONE,' NEAR BARNARD CASTLE.
R. TAYLOR MANSON, M.R.C.S.
It is on the bank of Deepdale Beck, a small stream running into 
the Tees from the Yorkshire side, a little above Barnard Castle.
I should think the stone is a mile up the stream from where it flows 
into the Tees.
It is on the north bank.
It stands about 8 ft.
high, 
and has a circumference of 22 ft.
None of it is embedded.
It stands on a flat bed of rock at the edge of the stream.
It is 
semi-oval in shape as seen from the land side ; from the bed of the 
river, its outline is that of a blunted plough-share.
It is smoothed.
It is long-shaped, longest axis N.E. and S.W. This boulder may 
have been situated on the higher ground above the river and been 
sent crashing down to where it is.
This supposition is founded on 
the fact that on the south-end face are seen two holes filled with 
lead, as if for insertion of iron hinge-hooks for a gate.
I don't know 
any reason why three holes should have been drilled and filled with 
the block in its present position, as the gate or whatever was attached 
would hang over the river.
No groovings upon it.
It is Shap Fell 
Granite, and is known as the ' vStranger's Stone,' which may be a cor- 
ruption of the ' Strange Stone,' alluding to the peculiarity of its 
differing from others in mineral character.
Near it is a board with 
the following painted inscription :— 
I'ray whence coni'st thou, a stranger in the land?
What stopped thy progress in this pleasant dale?
Wert thou from Shap, and l)rought by fairy hand.
As felspar crystals mark thee from that Fell?
How cam'st thou here — what l)ore thee on thy way?
Wert thou by water or by glacier driven ?
I'm now thy Icjrd, and here thou long shall stay.
To raise our thoughts and praise the God of Heaven.
It is 550 ft.
above sea-level.
It is isolated, but other smaller blocks 
are observable in the river bed.
It rests on Mountain Eimestone 
forming the bed of the river.
Jan. 1888.
22 
ADA.MSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
SADBERGE, NEAR DARLINGTON (COUNTY OF DURHAM).
R. TAYLOR M ANSON, M.R.C.S.
In Village of Sadberge, three miles N.E. of Darlington.
The 
boulder was found in Glacial Clay Avhile excavations were being 
made for a reservoir.
About 6 ft.
6 in.
long, 4 ft.
high; estimated 
weight, four tons.
It is a wedge-shaped mass.
The boulder is long 
shaped, and has been moved.
On what has originally been the base 
of the boulder there are innumerable striae in the direction of the 
longer axis, and all parallel to one another.
So far as I could 
ascertain (the incrustations of clay have not been removed) there 
were none of the crossings of striae so generally seen.
The striae are 
confined to the original base.
The rest of the surfaces are irregular 
and angular.
The rock is a compact Encrinital Blue Limestone, one 
of the Yoredale rocks, probably from Upper Teesdale, and is 218 ft.
above sea-level.
Too recently discovered for any legend, but no 
doubt traditions will gather round it, as it will be knovrn in the 
future as the 'Jubilee Stone.' Her Majesty is Countess of Sadberge, 
and the inhabitants of the village determined that one part of their 
Jubilee proceedings should be the dedication of this large boulder.
It was removed from the excavation where it had been found to the 
village green, and on Jubilee Day a service was held in the village 
church.
A procession from the church was then formed, escorted by 
a troop of Yeomanry.
An address on the history of Sadberge was 
given by the Rev. J.
\V.
Baron, the stone was unveiled, and a feu de 
joie fired over it by the Hussars.
THE ' BULMER'S STONE,' DARLINGTON (COUNTY OF DURHAM).
R. TAYLOR MANSON, M.R.C.S.
It is on the west side of Northgate, at the edge of the flagged 
pavement, opposite some old cottages, to w^hich it is claimed as an 
appurtenance.
Nearly opposite the west end of Garden Street, 
Darlington, on the Ordnance Map. By compass circumference, 
N. and S., 13 ft.
5 in.; ditto, E.
and W., 12 ft.
8 in.; horizontal cir- 
cumference (l i ft.
from ground), 13 ft.
5 in.
; height from ground, 3 ft.
All portions visible are rounded.
It has been moved.
No groovings, 
but some fractured surfaces smoothed.
It is Shap Fell Granite.
It is 
known as ' Buhner's Stone ' from old Willy Bulmer, who, during the 
excitement of the Peninsular wars, used to perch on it and read the 
newspapers aloud to the neighbours.
I do not know the origin or 
age of — 
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
23 
In Darnton toune ther is a stane, 
And most strange is yt to tell, 
That yt turnes nine times round 
When yt heares ye clock strike tvvell.
It is 157 ft.
above sea-level, and is marked on the 25-in.
Ordnance 
Map. It is well shown on a photo of Northgate to be had from 
Wood, picture dealer, Darlington.
It is isolated, but there is both 
gravel and sand in the immediate neighbourhood.
I believe that it 
rests on Glacial red clay, but the clay, sand, and gravel are irregularly 
distributed through the town.
I think it is red clay there.
Note.
— I have found Shap Fell granite several times in the bed 
of the Tees, at Piercebridge and at Low Coniscliffe.
Have never 
observed it in the Wear, or rather that ])ortion of it down to Bishop 
Auckland.
NOTES ON SHAP GRANITE BOULDERS AT SCARBOROUGH.
Forwarded by JOHN H.
PHILLIPS, 
Hon. Sec.
Philosophical a7id Archceological Society, Scarboroiigh.
There are very few boulders in the neighbourhood to be met 
with.
They have been broken up for road metal and for repairing 
walls, etc.
There is a fine specimen in Mr. Read's garden, The 
Valley, Scarborough, about 4 ft.
high, 3 ft.
wide, and 12 m.
or 14 in.
in thickness.
It was found on the beach, embedded in sand, when 
the foreshore was made, about six years ago.
In an old disused 
shrubbery and plantation belonging to the family of Mr. Wharton, 
in King Street, Scarborough, are upwards of twenty boulders, 
hunted up in the neighbourhood, chiefly on sea-beaches at Cloughton, 
Burniston, Hayburn Wyke, etc., by the late Mr. Wharton, forty or 
fifty years ago.
The largest is about 1 1 ft.
in circumference and 
4 ft.
in height, rounded like a cone.
There are no striations upon 
any of them, and apparently they have been laid on the sea-beach a 
great length of time, and subject to the wear and tear of the ocean, 
so that they resemble rolled stones, rounded by attrition.
All the 
preceding examples are Shap Granite.
NOTE UPON THE ' HITCHING STONE,' KEIGHLEY MOOR.
By the British Association Boulder Committee — Dr. H.
W. Ckosskev, Hon. Sec.
This huge block of Millstone Grit was described to the British 
Association Committee by Mr. E.
G. Spencer in 1874, as a 'boulder,' 
and the details concerning it will be found in the Report of the 
British Association for that year, ]).
196.
Jan. 1 888.
-4 
NOTE FISHES.
A few years subsequently, Mr. J.
R. Dakyns, of the Ideological 
Survey, stated, in a letter to the Geological Magazine, that 'in his 
opinion it is not a boulder,' and that • it has no single characteristic 
of a boulder about it.
It is not rounded or scratched, nor is it 
standing on end, nor in any such a way as to raise a suspicion of its 
having been removed.' 
The Leeds Geological Association has.
during the past year, 
thoroughly investigated the subject, and the secretary (Mr. Adamson) 
has described the results in a paper, published in The Xaturalist^ 
November 1886.
p. 333, and also in the Transactions of the Leeds 
Geological Association.
iSSo. part 2.
In these papers clear and satistactoiy reasons are given in con- 
firmation of ]Mr. Dakyns' opinion.
The • Hitching Stone" cannot be 
regarded as an erratic, bur is a portion of the " Rough Rock." which 
originally covered these moors, and in situ.
\'aluable reports upon the Norber boulders, by Mr.
]. W.
Davis, F.G.S., and upon erratics near Barnsley, by Mr. Hemingway, 
have been deferred.
The second year's work of the Committee 
already comprises reports upon erratics at Bempton.
Filey, Guis- 
borough, Lindholme.
Kirkby L'nderdale.
Ingieton.
Speeton, Seamer, 
Saltburn.
Crristhorpe, Cirosmonr.
Sleights, etc.
Mr. Ct.
W, Lamplugh 
is also engaged upon an exhaustive account of the boulders on the 
Yorkshire coast between Bridlington and Flamborough.
The hon.
secretary (Mr. Adamson, F.G.S., 52.
Wellclose Terrace, Leeds) will 
gladly forward, upon application, schedules upon which to record 
observations, or give any information respecting the work of the 
Committee and the results desired.
NOTE— FISHES.
Three-bearded Rockling; in the North Sea.— J/(;Av7<7 iricimna (Bl.).
I obtiiincd a very line example to-day.
from the pontoon at (.irimsby, of what 
appears to be the deoi^-sea form of this fish, the J/, niaculata or Spotted Rockhng 
of Dr. Liiinthei.
It \\ a> taken in a trawl-net between Flamborough and the Dogger.
'I'he length is i6{f in., girth iu>t behin>i the pectoral fin Til in.
In the fi^esh 
tish the colours are very beautiful, graduating tVom light olive or olive-buft' above 
to orange below ; the latter colour much brighter on gril-covers and cheeks : belly, 
whitish.
The upper parts closely spotted wuh large hair-brown spots, both round 
and irregular in shape, but each spot disnnct and separate, and not confluent or 
banded.
These spots are \ cry regular in a line on each side along the back and 
root of the dorsal fin as tar a> ihe tail, and Ixdow are more ihinlv^lispersed.
only 
a few extending to below the lateral line.
The anterior poriion of th.e back, also 
the upper surface of the head, is more thickly spotted than tlie po.sterior.
There 
IS an irregular line of large brown spots on and along the dorsal tin.
the pectorals 
have also each three spots, and acr<,^>s ihe rooi end\M' the tail is a band-like line 
of lesser spots.
The three barbs and edges of the tins, brilliant red : eves 
prominent, with pupils black, and iri> >hadnic golden.
The colours fade soon 
,-\fter death.— John roKiM-..vL \, Great Coies.
Ulceby.
December 19th, 1SS7.
Xntui-.-^list, 
25 
THE LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
JO,-,t' I'ff A.
\IAJ<-J INlJAf,K, 
^tavelcy ^ iicrir l\'ei/.dal, IVc itii/orl'Dul.
XXXIII.
LOBAR fNA Nyl.
122.
Lobarina scrobiculata (Scop.;; Xyl. in Flora, 1877, p.
233; 
Slicla Nyl., Syn., i, jj.
353 ; Stictina Leighton, Lich.
Flora, 
p. I I o.
On trees.
Not common.
Naddle Forest, Mardale, and 
near Staveley.
The plants are all very small, and poorly developed.
XXXIV.
R/CrlSOIJA (iJ.X.) Xy].
123.
Ricasolia g-lomulifera (Fightft.j ; Nyl, Syn., i, p.
368; 
R. amplissima Feighton, Fich.
Flora, p.
iJ2.
On trees.
Curwens Island, Windermere, and in Lowther 
and Fevens Parks.
I'he specimens from Lowther Fark are very fine, but 
barren.
124.
Ricasolia herbacea (Huds., Fl. Angl., p.
544;; Nyl., 
Syn., i, p.
639; R.
ludevirejis J>eiglito;i, J>ich.
i-lora, p.
1:3.
On trees.
Fevens Park, Tiear Ambleside, Mardale, Fowther 
Park.
Tril.e XIV.
PELTIGEREI Xyl.
.Sul;-tribe F PELTIDFI x\yl.
XXXV.
PELTIDEA (Ach.j Xyl.
125.
Peltidea aphthosa (F., Sp. Plant., No. 46); Ach., Syn., 
p. 238; Feltigera Nyl., Syn., i, p.
322, tab.
viii, fig.
38; 
Feighton, Fich.
Plora, p.
10 1.
On the ground.
Not common.
Scandale, Mardale, 
Kentmere, near Staveley, Sanrlside.
XXXVI.
so 1,0 R IN A Ach.
126.
Solorina saccata (F., P'l.
Suec, No. 1102;; Ach., Syn., 
p. 8 ; Nyl., Syn., i, p.
330, tab.
viii, fig.
41 ; Feighton, Fich.
Flora, p.
106.
On earth in the limestone districts.
Abundant on Kendal 
Fell, Whitbarrow, Sandside.
On Coniston limestone near 
Kentmere Hall.
127.
Solorina spongiosa (Sm., E.
Bot., tab.
1374); Nyl., Syn., i 
. ]j.
351 (as variet}' of .S'.
saccata) ; S.
linibata Feighton, Fich.
Flora, p.
107.
On the ground near the mouth of the Kent.
Jan. 1888.
26 
MARTINL'ALE : LICHENS OF WEST.MORLAND.
Sub-tribe II.
PELTIGERIXEI Xyl.
XXX XEPHJ^OMIUM Xyl.
12S.
Nephromium laevigatum (Ach., Syn., p.
242): Xyl., 
Svn..
i. p.
32c : Leighron.
Lich.
Flora, p.
99.
Var. parile (Ach., Prod., p.
164): Xyl. Syn., i, p.
320 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
99.
On shady moist rocks.
Pugh Crag, Kentmere.
129.
Nephromium lusitanicum 1 Schar..
En., p.
323) : Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, r.
\zz.
On trees and mossy roci^s.
Xot \try common.
>Lirdale, 
Pujjh Crag.
Kentmere.
Cm-wens Island, Windermere.
XXXJ'III.
PEL TIGER A (Hffm.) Xyl.
13c.
Peltigera malacea (Ach..
Syn., p.
240); Xyl., Syn., i, 
p. 323 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
102.
On mossv walls.
Hun dhow, near Staveley.
and near Rydal.
131.
Peltigera canina ( L..
Sp. Plant., Xo. 4S) ; Xyl., Syn..
i. 
p. 324; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
loi.
On the ground, on trees, and mossy walls.
Common 
throughout the county.
132.
Peltigera rufescens (Xecker.
Meth.
Muse, p.
79): Hffm..
D. Flora, p.
ic; : Xyl..
Syn..
i, p.
324 : Leighton.
Lich.
Flora, p.
102.
On mossy walls.
Burneside Lane, near Staveley.
133.
Peltigera polydactyla (Xecker.
Meth.
^Lisc.
p. 85); 
Hffm., D.
Flora, p.
106 : Xyl., Syn., i, p.
326 : Leighton.
Lich.
Flora, p.
103.
On mossy walls.
X'ot common.
Xear Staveley.
134- Peltigera SCUtata (Dicks..
PI.
Crypt., Fasc.
in, p.
18); 
Leighton.
Lich.
Flora, p.
104.
I have not gathered this plant myself, but it is recorded in 
Leighton's Flora as having been found in the county by Sir 
J. E.
Smith.
135.
Peltigera horizontalis (L., Mant., ii, p.
132) : Xyl., Syn., 1, 
p. 327 : Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
104.
On rocks and walls.
Very hne near Kentmere Hall and.
near Staveley.
Tribe X^^ PHYSCIEI Xyl.
A'-VAYA'.
PHySCE4 (Schreb.) Xyl.
136.
Physcia parietina (L., Sp. Plant., Xo. 25): Xyl, Syn., i, 
p. 410 : Lcight., Lich.
Flora, p.
131.
On walls, trees, and roofs of houses.
Common everywhere, 
especially on farm-buildings.
Naturali.st, 
MARTINDALE : LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
27 
Var. aureola (Ach.).
Kendal, Heversham.
Var. ectanea (Ach.).
On rocks at Sandside and Arnside.
137.
Physcia polycarpa (Ehrh., Exs., 136); Nyl., Syn., i, p.
411; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
133 (both as a variety of Ph.
parietina).
On trees, wood, and walls.
Not common.
Near Miln- 
thorpe, near Cliburn, and in Lowther Park.
138.
Physcia lychnea (Ach., Meth., p.
187) ; Nyl., Syn., i, 
p. 411; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
132 (both as a variety 
oi Ph. parietina).
On trees.
Rare.
Lowther Park.
139.
Physcia ciliaris (L., Sp. Plant., No. 28); Nyl., Syn., i, p.
414 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
133.
On trees.
Not common.
Levens Park, near Sizergh 
Castle, Lowther Park, where it is more abundant than in other 
parts of the county ; near Staveley (saxicolous).
140.
Physcia pulverulenta (Schreb., Spicileg.
Fl. Lipsicae, p.
128); 
Nyl., Syn., i, p.
419 (excl.
varr.); Leighton, Lich.
Flora, 
p. 135 (excl.
varr.).
Common on trees, less frequent on walls and rocks.
Levens Park, Lowther Park, Ambleside, Staveley, Sandside.
141- ^Physcia pityrea (Ach., Prod , p.
124); Nyl., Syn.,i, p.
420 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
135 (both as var.
of Ph. pulverulenta).
On trees.
Not common.
Near Barton and in Lowther 
Park.
142.
Physcia detersa Nyl., Syn., i, p.
420, as var.
of P.pulvernlenta 
On trees.
Abundant in Lowther Park, but barren.
143- Physcia subdetersa Nyl. in Flora, 1878, p.
344, note.
On trees.
Lowther Park, but not so abundant as the 
preceding.
144- Physcia venusta (Ach., Meth., p.
211, tab.
viii, fig.
5); 
Nyl, Syn., i, p.
421 ; Leight., Lich.
Flora, p.
136, as a form 
of Ph. pulverulenta.
On trees.
Levens Park.
145.
Physcia aquila (Ach., Prod., p.
109) ; Nyl., Syn., i, p.
422; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
142.
At Elph How, near Staveley.
This plant is essentially a 
maritime species, and therefore, seeing it does not occur on 
Jan. 1888.
28 
MARTINDALE : LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
the short piece of Westmorland coast, it is rather remarkable 
that it should be found inland.
Perhaps the coast rocks 
being of limestone may have something to do with its absence 
there.
Although especially a dweller by the sea, it has been 
gathered at great distances from the coast, as, for instance, 
among the Cevennes in France and the Himalayas in India 
(vide Nyl., I.e.).
146.
Physcia stellaris (L., Sp. Plant, No. 27); Nyl, Syn., i.
p. 424, p.
pte.
; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
140, p.
pte.
On trees.
Kentmere, Troutbeck.
The type is somewhat 
uncommon, but the var.
leptalea (Ach., Meth., p.
198) is 
widely distributed on rocks and stones.
147.
"Physcia tenella (Scop.); Nyl., Syn., i, p.
426; Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
141 (both as var.
of Ph. stellar is).
On trees and stones.
Generally distributed and abundant.
148.
Physcia aipoHa (Ach., Prod., p.
112); Stizb., Lich.
Helv., 
p. 73 ; Physcia stellaris, p.
pte., Nyl., Syn., i, p.
424.
On trees.
Lowther Park and Levens Park.
149- Physcia tribacia (x\ch., L.
U., p.
415; Syn., p.
191); 
Nyl., Syn., i, p.
425, as a form of stellaris ; Ph. erosa (Borr.) 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
139.
On mossy walls.
Common.
Mr. Crombie, in his Index Lichenum Britannicorum, 
Grevillea, vol.
xv, p.
78, keeps Ph. erosa (Borr.) distinct from 
Ph. tribacia (Ach.); but according to Dr. Nylander (in litt.) 
there is no difference between them.
150.
Physcia caesitia Nyl. in Norrlin, Lapp., 326.
On walls at Staveley, abundantly.
Probably common.
These plants have a somewhat different appearance from 
specimens of Ph. ccEsiiia kindly communicated by Dr. Arnold, 
of Munich, the lacinise of the Staveley plants being con- 
siderably narrower ; but they are identical Avith specimens from 
New Galloway, gathered by Mr. McAndrew, and which were 
named by Dr. Nylander.
The reaction with K.
is the same 
• in all.
151.
Physcia csesia (Hffm., En., p.
65, tab.
xu, fig.
i) ; Nyl., 
Syn., i, p.
426; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
141, as var.
of 
Ph. stellaris.
On stone walls, here and there.
Not very common.
In 
several places near Staveley.
JAN 7,333 Naturalist, 
Just Published, Svo, sewed, 6d.
A LIST OF BRITISH BIRDS 
(REVISED TO APRIL 1887), 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., etc., 
Editor of Vols.
3 and 4 of YnrreWs ' Hisfory of British Birds, ' 
For Labelling Specimens, or for Reference ; the various species, whether those 
Breeding in the British Islands, Occasional Visitors, or of doubtful history, being 
distinctively printed.
GURNEY & JACKSON, Successors to Mr. VAN VOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
No7ij ready, ?>vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c., of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium tiirougli which information on every Scientific Subject maybe obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 16.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of iMicroscopj- and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. TufFen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mk. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.iNI.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
Crown Svo, Cloth, Illustrated.
TOPOGRAPHY AND NATURAL HISTORY 
LOFTHOUSE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
By GEORGE ROBERTS.
CONTENTS : Vol. I.
— Antiquities; Field-nomenclature; Ancient Houses; Registers; 
Charities ; Industries ; Surveys ; Statistics ; Ancient Leases ; Natural History Diary from 
1862 to 1875 ; Essays on Natural History ; Lists of Plants and Shells.
CONTENTS: Vol. II.
— Flora and Fauna: Customs; Notes on Church Sun-dials; 
Memoir of Charles Forrest ; Notes on Old Families ; Rothwell Registers ; Observations on 
Domed Nests : Natural History Diary from 1R76 to 1883 ; Additional Lists of Plants and Shells.
Price of First Volume - - 5s.
Od.
,, Second Volume - 3s.
6d.
To be obtained from the Author, Lofthouse, Wakefield.
THE IsTATTJUAIjIST.
The Editors hope to ptiblish the following papers within the next few months: — 
Botany of tlie Cumberland part of tlie Pennine Kange.— T.
Gilbert Baker.
F.R.S., F.L.S., etc.
• 
List of Hymenoptera occurring near Kirton-in-Lindsey.— C.
F. George.
Notes on Botanical Nomenclature.— Dk. G.
B. de Toni (Padua).
List of Land and Freshwater Mollusea of Airedale.— H.
T. Soppitt and 
J. W.
Carter.
Yorkshire Naturalists at Welton Vale, and on Hatfield Chace.
Evidences of Glacial Action near In gleton.— Robert R.
Balderston.
Interesting G-eological Discovery at Wortley, Leeds.— C.
Brownridge, F.G.S.
List of the Flora of Wensleydale.— John Percival, B.A.
Coal-Dust and Explosions in Coal-Mines— Rev. Arthur Watts, F.G.S.
The Ornithology of Skiddaw, Scawfell, and Helvellyn.— John V/atson.
Bibliography of Entomology for 1885-7.
Bibliography of Geology and Palaeontology for 1886.
Lincolnshire Marsh and Water Plants.— Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A.
Lists of the Mosses and Hepatics of Westmorland.— Geo. Stabler.
North of England Specimens in the British Museum — T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
The Editors are open to receive suitable papers for insertion, particularly on Ichthyology, 
Entomology, Ornithology, etc.
Price 6d.; Post Free, jd.
No. I Ready September u/, 1887.
THE NATURALISTS' MONTHLY: 
A JOURNAL FOR NATURE-LOVERS AND NATURE-THINKERS, 
Edited by Dr. J.
W. WILLIAMS, M.A.
The Natjcraiists' iSIonthly will contain — (i) Original and Recreative Papers on Popular 
Scientific Subjects by well-known writers ; (2) Articles on the Distribution of Animal and Plant 
Life in the British Islands ; (3) Monographs on groups generally looked over by the Field- 
Naturalist, as the British Fresh-water Worms and Leeches in Zoology, and the Lichens and 
Mosses in Botany ; (4) Accounts of Scientific Voyages and Expeditions ; (5) Biographical Lives 
of the Greatest Scientific Men ; (6) 'The Editor's Easy Chair' — a Monthly Chit-chat on the most 
important Scientific Questions of the da\^ ; (7) Reports of the Learned Societies ; (8) General 
Notes and Correspondence ; (9) Reviews of the late>t Works and Papers ; (10) Answer and 
Query Column for Workers.
TJie Natnralists'' Moitthly will be issued on the ist of each Month.
Annual Subscriptions, 7 - post free, 
London : WALTER SCOTT, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6cl.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is ids.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c., .should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
No. 151.
2 FE?^^ 1888 
FEBRUARY 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESPONDERENDIR MITGLIEU DES OKNITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN, 
®onf cn(s : 
The Lichens of y^&%tmor\a.nd— Joseph A.
Mar ti7idale 
The Botany of the Cumberland part of the Pennine Range — J.
G. Baker, 
F.R.S., F.L.S 
The Yorl<shire Naturalists' Union at Welton Vale 
Interesting Discovery of Boulders in the Coal Measures at Wortley, near 
Leeds — Charles Brownridge, F.G.S.
In Memoriam — John Sang, by John E.
Robson 
Dr. Day on British and Irish Salmonidae (Review) 
Bibliography— Lepidoptera, 1885, 1886, 1887 
Note— Botany 
Linaria minor in Cumberland— /^i7//rt;;« Hodgson.
Note— Mollusca 
Amalia gagates in Cheshire — J.
G. Milne.
Note— Geolog y 
, Ancient and Modern : or, Scenes in the History of a Glacial Pebble — S.
Chadwick.
Note — Polyzoa .
. 
Note on Paludicella Ehrenbergi — Thoinas Shepheard.
Note — Hymenoptera .
. ..
Sirex Juvencus at Hull — N.
F. Dobree.
Note— Ornithology 
Albino Kittiwake at Flamborough — Matthew Bailey.
^ ^'^I."'?"- -'i'^ 
PAGE 
29 to 32 
3 3 to 44 
45 to 48 
49 to 51 
52 to 54 
55 to 57 
58 to 60 
44 
48 
LONDON : V^/i-Z-lL 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
McCORQUODAI.E & Co. LIMITED, CaRDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghall Street.
All Communications should be Addressed : — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
XO< 
I'l' being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
-^^^ 
Conmninications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Journal of New York Micro.
Soc, vol.
iv, No. i, January 1888.
[The Society.
The Essex Naturalist, No. 12, December 1887.
[The Essex Field Club.
Journal of Microscopy and Natural Science, New Series, vol.
i. Part i, Jan. 1888.
[Postal Microscopical Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part xcvii, Jan. 1888.
[Mr. J.
E. Robson, Editor.
Scientific News for General Readers, vol.
i. No. i (New Series) Fridav, Jan. 6, 1888.
[Editor.
The Scottish.
Naturalist, No. xix, Jan. 1888.
Prof., Trail, Editor.
Notarisia, Commentarium Phycologicum, Annoiii, No. 9, Gennaio, 1888.
[Redattori.
Journal of Comparative Medicine and Surgery, vol.
ix.
No. i, Jan. 1888.
[Editors.
The Midland Naturalist, vol.
xi.
No. I2i, Jan. 1888.
[Birmingham N.H.S., 
Botanical Record Club.— Report for the years 1884, 1885, 1886.
[The Club.
Eastbourne Natural History Society.
— Transactions, Part 11 of vol.
i, and Part i 
vol.
ii.
[The Society.
Science Gossip, No. 277, for Jan. 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
Wesley Naturalist, No. 11, January 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
The Naturalists' Monthly, Nos. 3, 4, 5, Nov., Dec. 1887, and Jan. 1888.
[Mr. Walter Scott, Publisher.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Roeson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G. ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when coiriplete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
J. W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all 'reputed' species, and full 
oibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
• Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidopteraj' Ova, Larvae, and Pupse, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, <!v:c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc..
is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
MARTINDALE : LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
29 
152.
Physcia obscura (Ehrh.,Exs., 177); Nyl., Syn., i, p.
427 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
136, 
On trees.
Lowther Park, Levens Park, and near Kendal.
Var. virella (Ach.).
On trees and walls near Kendal and near Shap.
153.
Physcia adglutinata (Flk.); Nyl., Syn., i., p.
428; 
I.eighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
137.
On trees.
Levens Park, and near Sizergh Castle.
Tribe XYI.
GVROPHOREI Nyl.
XL.
UMBILICARIA (Hffm.) Nyl.
154.
Umbilicaria pustulata (L., Sp. Plant., No. 52); Nyl., 
Syn., ii, 4 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
143.
On rocks.
The Crag, Crook ; and on Ulpha Crag.
In 
considerable abundance at both places, but barren.
XLL GYROPHORA (Ach.) Nyl.
The species of this genus are by no means well represented 
in Lake Westmorland, and in this respect the flora of this 
part of the county compares unfavourably with that of the 
higher part of Teesdale at Cronkley Scar and Falcon Clints.
On most of the higher passes and mountains, the rocks bear 
a few straggling and poorly-developed plants of G.
cylindrica^ 
in some places accompanied by G.
erosa, in others by 
G. polyphylla \ but they are nowhere abundant, while as 
specimens their development leaves much to be desired.
G. 
proboscidea occurs on Cross Fell, and will most probably be 
found on the Westmorland portion of the Pennines, but I have 
not met with it among the lake mountains of the county.
155- Gyrophora cylindrica (L., Sp. Plant., No. 29) ; Nyl., 
Syn., ii, p.
13; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
148.
On rocks.
Helvellyn, Striding Edge, near Red Tarn, Red 
Screes, Little Hart Crag, High Street, Nan Bield, Long Stile 
in Mardale.
It occurs also on Sea Fell, just outside the 
Westmorland boundary.
The variety denudata occurs here and there along with 
the type.
156.
Gyrophora erosa (Web., Spic, p.
259); Ach., Meth., 
' p.
103; Nyl., Syn., p.
15 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
145.
On rocks, near Red Tarn, Helvellyn.
Feb. 1 888.
c 
30 MARTINDALE : LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
157.
Gyrophora polyphylla (L., Sp. Plant., No. 55); Nyl., Syn., 
ii, p.
18; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
143.
On rocks.
Little Hart Crag.
Maize Beck, Teesdale.
The 
only Westmorland specimens in my herbarium at present are 
those from Little Hart Crag.
I have a distinct recollection 
of gathering it on rocks near Maize Beck, but I seem only to 
have preserved the specimens gathered the same day on 
Cronkley Scar, Yorkshire.
I have also gathered it at other 
places in Westmorland ; as for instance, on the hills on the 
west of the Lune between Grayrigg and Tebay, and on the 
crags of Harter Fell overlooking the head of Mardale.
158.
Gyrophora polyrrhiza (L., Sp. Plant, No. 56); Nyl, Syn., 
ii, p.
18; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
146.
On rocks.
Staveley Head.
In this case, also, the only Westmorland specimens in my 
herbarium are from a single station, though I have met with 
the plant a few times in other places in the county, which, 
however, from forgetfulness I am unable to specify.
Tribe XVIL LECANO-LECIDEEI Nyl.
Sub-tnbe L PANNARIEI Nyl.
XLIL PANNARIA Del. Nyl.
159.
Pannaria rubiginosa (Thunb.) Nyl., Syn., ii, p.
29 ; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
150.
Var. coeruleobadia (Schleich) Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
151 ; 
F. riibiginosa var.
cojiopha Nyl., Syn., ii, p.
30.
On trees.
Not very uncommon.
Mardale, Kentmere, 
near Staveley, near Ambleside.
I have never met with the type in Westmorland.
160.
Pannaria brunnea (Sw.) Nyl, Syn., ii., p.
31 ; P.
pczizoidea 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
151.
On mossy earth and stones.
Not rare.
Patterdale, Mar- 
dale, Kentmere, and near Staveley.
There is a specimen in 
my herbarium, gathered in Mardale, on decayed poles used 
as palings, in which the habit is somewhat different.
161.
Pannaria nebulosa (Hffm., Flora Germ., ii, p.
166); Nyl., 
Syn., ii, p.
32 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
153.
On earth between rocks, and on the tops of walls.
Not 
so common as the preceding.
Cunswick Scar, near Cross- 
thwaite, near Cliburn.
Naturalist, 
MARTINDALE : LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
31 
XLIII.
PAXXULARIA Xyl. in Flora, 1S79, p.
360.
[Pannularia lepidiota (Smmrf.)- 
In The N'atuj'alist for 1886, p.
279, I recorded this species 
for Westmorland.
Renewed examination of my specimens 
from Red Screes has convinced me that my determination 
was erroneous, and that they, in reality, merely represent a 
diminutive state of i^.
niuscoruiiu specimens of which I have 
from the same place.
The whitish suffusion of the thallus 
and the sorediate aspect of the margins in these specimens 
are due to some foreign lichenose matter which had overgrown 
the plant.
It is needless, perhaps, to say that I regret my 
mistake.] 
162.
Pannularia triptophylla (Ach., Syn., p.
53); Fa?i?iaria 
Nyl., Syn., ii, p.
36 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
152.
On trees.
Somewhat rare.
Scandale, Kentmere, Staveley.
163.
Pannularia nigra (Huds., Fl. Angl., p.
524); Fannaria 
Nyl., S}'n., ii, p.
36 ; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
154.
On limestone rocks.
Very common throughout the lime- 
stone districts.
Cunswick Scar, Kendal Fell, AVhitbarrow, 
Haverbrack, Sandside.
164.
Pannularia muscorum (Ach., Syn., p.
193): Faiuiaria 
Nyl., Syn., ii, p.
40; Fannaria carjiosa Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
155.
On mosses.
Red Screes, Kentmere.
XLIV.
COCCOCARPIA Pers.
Xyl.
165.
Coccocarpia plumbea (Lightft., Flora Scot., ii, p.
826) ; 
Nyl., Syn., ii, p.
42 ; Fannaria Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
154.
On trees.
Rare.
Curwens Island, Windermere, and in 
Lowther Park.
XLV.
LEPROLOMA Xyl. in Flora, 1SS3, p.
107.
166.
Leproloma lanuginosum (Ach., Syn., p.
201) ; Amphiloma 
Nyl., Syn., ii, p.
52; Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
156.
On shady mossy rocks.
Common in the Silurian districts 
and abundant in some places.
I have not met with it on 
limestone.
Dr. Nylander has recently removed this plant from the 
genus Afuphiloma, on account of its constantly imperfect 
development.
The same cause renders its true position in 
classification uncertain.
Feb. 1888.
32 
MARTINDALE : LICHENS OF WESTMORLAND.
Sub-tribe II.
LECAXOREI Xyl.
XLVL LECANORA (Ach.) XyL 
A. Group of L.
hypnortiin [Psoi-onia).
[Lecanora hypnorum (Vahl.) should occur in Westmorland, 
as it is reported from all the neighbouring counties, but I 
have not succeeded in finding it yet.] 
B. Group of L.
saxicola ( Sqiiaviaria ).
167.
Lecanora crassa (Huds., Fl. Angl., 2nd ed., p.
530) ; 
Sqiiainaria Nyl, Syn., ii, p.
58 ; I.eighton, Lich.
Flora, 
P- 157- 
On earth in crevices of limestone rocks.
Common in the 
limestone districts.
Kendal Fell, Whitbarrow, Haverbrack, 
etc.
16S.
Lecanora saxicola (Pollich) ; Squamaria Nyl., Lich.
Scand..
p. 133 ; I-eighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
158.
On rocks and walls.
Common.
The v^ariety versicolor 
(Pers.) occurs here and there, as at Staveley, along with the 
type.
169.
Lecanora gelida (L., Mant, ii, p.
133); Squamaria Nyl.,.
Scand., p.
134: Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
159.
On rocks and walls.
Common in the slate district, but 
seldom well developed, and often existing in a more or less 
dispersed condition.
C. Group of Z.
miirorii7)i {Placodiiiin).
170.
Lecanora dissidens Nyl. in Flora, 1875, p.
29S; Leighton, 
Lich.
Flora, p.
161 (as a form of Z.
miirorum).
Vide The 
Katia-alisi^ ^887, p.
357.
On rocks, walls, and roofs.
Widely distributed throughout 
the county, and in some places abundant.
Arnside, Sandside, 
Kendal, Staveley, Shap, Barton, Eamont Bridge.
171.
Lecanora lobulata Smmrf.; Nyf., Flora, 1883, p.
105; 
Leighton, Lich.
Flora, p.
1 6 1 (as a variety of Z.
nmrorwn).
Vide TJie Naturalist^ 1887, P- 35 S.
On rocks and stones.
Very abundant (vitelline form) 
along the shore from Sandside to the boundar)- line between 
Westmorland and Lancashire.
I have only gathered a very 
few specimens of the miniate form on Whitbarrow.
Naturall^l, 
33 
ON THE BOTANY OF THE CUMBERLAND 
PART OF THE PENNINE RANGE.
J. G.
BAKER, F.R.S., F.L S., 
Royal Herhariiitn, Kew; Vice-President of the Yorkshire Naturalists Union.
I HAVE long felt curious to know what the botany of the Cumberland 
part of the Pennine range was like.
On the west side of it, the Lake 
district is well known, and on the east and south, Tynedale, Wear- 
dale, Teesdale, Wensleydale, and the country round Settle, have been 
well searched ; but for the hundred square miles of Cumberland that 
drain into the Tyne, and form part of the great Pennine range, 
there are scarcely any botanical records.
So this year, after attending 
the meeting of the British Association at Manchester, I took lodgings 
for a fortnight at Alston, and the present paper contains a summary 
of what I saw during this visit.
Physical Geography and Geology.— The district dealt with 
belongs entirely to Cumberland, but immediately adjoins portions of 
Northumberland, Durham, Westmorland, and the north-west corner 
of Yorkshire.
Throughout the lower levels the mountain limestone 
is universal; it reaches a height of 1,950 feet above sea-level on the 
north side of Crossfell, and above it there is a thick cap of Millstone 
Grit ; so that, from a geological point of view, it presents a complete 
contrast to the Lake mountains.
The two main streams — the South 
Tyne and the Nent — unite just below Alston, a short distance south 
of the Northumbrian border, at an elevation of about 900 feet above 
sea-level.
From Alston it is ten miles to the head of the Tyne, and 
rather less to the head of the Nent, and each main stream has 
numerous branches.
There are two broad open grassy valleys, with 
but little crag on the hill-sides, the heather mainly confined to the 
Jiigh gritstone ridges.
All the fields are bounded by stone walls, and 
the main roads into Teesdale and Weardale are excellent.
There 
are no lakes or tarns, and I did not see a single Potamogeton or 
Batrachian Raniincidus, much less Isoetes., Littorella, or Lobelia dort- 
inaiina.
It is a country of innumerable waterfalls, where the streams 
break through the bands of limestone, but none of them are so large 
as the High Force or Hardraw Force ; the best known are Lower 
and Upper Nent Force, near Alston, and Ashgill Force, on a side 
stream six miles above Alston, up the Tyne.
Crossfell reaches a height 
of 2,8oo' feet, so that the district covers the whole sweep of two of 
Watson's botanical zones, the super-agrarian and infer-arctic.
Alston 
is the only town, and it stands on a steeply-sloping hill-side, at an 
Feb. 1888.
34 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
elevation of 900 to 1,100 ft.
The village of Garrigill, four miles up 
the South Tyne, stands on an alluvial terrace along the river at a 
height of I, TOO to 1,150 ft.
The considerable village of Nenthead, 
five miles up the other valley, is from 1,250 to 1,500 ft.
above sea- 
level.
There are numerous scattered farm-houses in both valleys, of 
which Priorsdale House over Ashgill reaches 1,766, and Rumney's 
House 1,980 ft.
above sea-level; the latter, 500 ft.
higher than the 
well-known inn at the top of Kirkstone Pass.
The hills over Alston 
reach 1,600 ft.
The pass into Weardale is 1,850, and into Teesdale 
over 1,900 ft.
above sea-level; and the long wall-like ridge of Crossfell — 
the culminating point of the Pennine range, the watershed between 
Tyne, Tees, and Eden — bounds the horizon, looking south from 
Alston, and maintains for two miles an unbroken level of 2,600 tO' 
2,Soo ft.
Cultural characteristics of the Super-agrarian Zone.
— 
Of corn cultivation there is practically none above Alston.
I saw only 
a single field of oats, and hawthorn hedges are very few in number ; 
but houses and gardens extend to the upper limit of the super-agrarian 
zone, whilst at the lakes there are scarcely any above the mid-agrarian 
zone.
At Nenthead there must be at least fifty small gardens and 
allotment- patches at a height of 400 to 500 yards.
Speaking 
generally of these super-agrarian gardens, gooseberries, raspberries,, 
cherries, and black and red currants, succeed well ; plums occa- 
sionally, but apples and pears do not ripen properly.
Rhubarb and 
potatoes are common and excellent, also cabbages and turnips ; and 
lettuce, peas, parsley, and mint, are grown occasionally.
There are 
many plantations up to 600 yards, those at the highest levels con- 
sisting mainly of pine, spruce, and larch.
The commonest planted 
deciduous trees are the sycamore and beech, and poplars are not 
uncommon.
In the gardens, lilac and laburnum both fruit commonly; 
honeysuckle, Irish yew, ivy, snowberry, and arbor-vitae are frequent ;.
box, holly, rhododendron, hop, and cherry-laurel rare ; I did not 
see any out-of-door hydrangeas, clematises, jasmines, or aucubas.
There are a few open-air fuchsias, and sometimes calceolarias and 
zonal pelargonia are bedded out.
I noted one small araucaria, a few 
fine dahlias, hollyhocks, and sunflowers in sheltered gardens at Alston; 
and good hybrid Cape gladioli, as far up the valley as Ashgill; pansies 
are sometimes very fine.
Other favourite garden-flowers are Aconiiuin 
Napellus and panicuIatiLm, Pceonia officinalis^ Wallflower, Iberis iim- 
bellata^ Arabis caiicasica, Matihiola tnca?ia, Hesperis, Limaria, Papaver 
som?iifenun, Tagetes patida, Calendula officinalis, Sweet William, 
Anlennaria viai'garitacea, Chrysanthennini coro7iaritim, Polemoniunt 
cccruleum.
Phlox pa?iiculafa, Callisteplms chine?isis, Mimulus luieus.
Naturalist, 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
35 
Pyrethrum Partheniu77i^ and PJialaris ariindinacea var.
picta.
Of 
herbaceous climbers, TropcEolum majus is the most common, and 
Calystegia sepiiun is not unfrequent round the door porches.
Garden 
roses are represented by gallica, spinosisshna^ rubiginosa, and various 
forms of t?id!ca.
I saw a fine Gloire de Dijon against the front of a 
house at Alston with a southern exposure.
ENUMERATION OF WILD PLANTS.
Where no height is given, I did not see the species over 300 to 
350 yards.
In nomenclature, I have followed the eighth edition of 
the London Catalogue.
Ranunculacece.
— Ra?uinculus^ no form of the section Batra- 
chium seen ; R.
jFlanimula^ R.
acris, and R.
repens everywhere 
common, ascending to the infer-arctic zone on Crossfell, and 600 yds.
on Knoutberry Hill, over Nenthead.
Caliha paiust?'is, common, 
ascending to 650 yds.
in the springs on Crossfell.
Aco7iitum Naptllus^ 
established in a wood at Nenthall.
Papaveraceae and Fumariaceae.— None, except P.
soffuii- 
feru?n and P.
Rhceas as garden flowers.
Cruciferae.
— Cheiranthns Cheiri, walls at Alston.
Nasturtium 
officinale, rare in streamlets, up to 400 yds.
above Nenthall.
Arahis 
sagittata, limestone rocks at Ashgill Force, etc., 400 yds.
Cardajnine 
prateiisis, common in grassy places, up to 700 yds.
on Crossfell.
C. hirsuta, walls at Alston.
C. sylvatica, Ashgill Force, etc , up to 
400 yds.
Draba incana, limestone rocks at Ashgill Force, High 
Mains lime-kilns, and up to 550 yds.
at Windy Brow, east of Tyne- 
head.
Erophila vuli^aris, limestone walls at Alston.
Cochlearia 
alpifia, common in hill-streams and about the lead-mines from 
550 yds.
over Tynehead and Nenthead down to Lower Nent Force.
Sisymbrium 77/(7//^//^:, limestone rocks, up to 400 yds.
below Nenthead.
S. Alliaria, Lower Nent Force.
Brassica Rapa and B.
alba, casual 
weeds up to 500 yds.
over Garrigill.
B. Sinapis, once seen near 
Alston.
Capsella, a common weed up to 500 yds.
in both valleys.
Thlaspi alpestre, everywhere common about the lead-mines, associated 
with Arenaria verna and Cochlearia, from 500 yds.
over Garrigill and 
Nenthead, down to the cliffs of Lower Nent Force.
Cistineae.
— Heliafithem^im Cha7ncecistus, plentiful at the High 
Main's lime- kilns, two miles south of Alston, 400 yds.
Violarieae.
— Viola palustris, common in swamps up to 600 yds.
on Knoutberry Hill, over Nenthead.
V. sylvatica, common in woods 
up to the main limestone rocks of Windy Brow, 550 yds.
V. lutea, 
common on grassy banks from Lower Nent Force up to the main 
limes tone of Windy Brow, 300 to 550 yds.
Feb. 1888.
36 BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Polyg^alese.
— Fi'hcj/ii serpyUaLra, Upper Nent Force, Black- 
burn lead-mines, etc..
to 400 yds.
Caryophyliese.
— No Si.'ene.
Lvclnn's diiima.
common in the 
woods as high as Ashgill.
400 yds.
L. Flos-cunili, swamps up to 
500 vds.
on Hartside Fell.
Cerasfiuui glomcratum^ road-sides up to 
400 vds.
C. Triviah.
common up to the ridge of Crossfell.
Stellaria 
fnedia.
common up to 650 yds.
on Crosslell, both type and var.
jii^lccta.
S. HolC'Sfca.
common in woods up to AshgilL 400 yds.
6".
gram:j:ca, swamps up to 550 yds.
over Tynehead.
5. uliginosa.
runnels, up to 700 yds.
on Crossfell.
A?'enaria verna^ everywhere 
common about the lead-mines, from 500 yds.
over Garrigill and 
Xenthead down to Lower Xeni Force.
A. serpyllifolia, limestone 
rocks up to 600 }-ds.
on Hartside Fell.
Sagi/ia _procu?nbens, dams 
and road-sides up to the ridge of Crossfell.
6'.
fmdosa^ swamps up 
10 7 CO yds.
on Crossfell and 6co yds.
on Knoutberry Fell, over 
Xenihead.
Portulaces.
— -Mcnfia rivularis.^ runnels up to 700 yds, on 
Crossie:i.
Hypericine^.
— HyJ^iJ-icum puIcJu-ufu and H.
hirsutuni^ common 
in the limestone woods up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
H. perfo7'aium.
not 
seen.
Malvaceae.
— Xone seen, except Hollyhock and Malope rarely 
in the gardens.
Tiliaces.
— A few fine trees of Tilia Tulgaris in plantations at 
Alston.
Linese.
— Linu?}: cathariicum, common about the limestone, up 
10 occ }\:s.
over Tynehead, and on Hartside Fell.
Z. usitatissiiniini, 
casual, ai Alston.
Geraniacece.
— Geranium sylvaiicum, common in woods and 
meacows up to Ashgill and X^enthead, 400 vds.
G. f>raiense.
meadows up to Garrigill 400 yds.
G. /nolle and G.
dissectian not 
seen.
G. lu::d:nn, rocks at Lower Xent Force.
G. Rohcriianum, 
common in woods up to the main limestone cliffs over Tynehead, 
550 vds.
Oxalis Accfosella.
common in woods up to 750 yds.
on 
Crossfell.
Sapindaces.
— Aco- Pscudo-platajius, one of the commonest 
trees of the plantations, up to 550 yds.
in Ashgill woods : often seen 
self-sown about the waterfalls, etc.
Leg"uminoss.
— Ulcx curopcTus. rare, up to 400 vds.
over 
Xenihall.
Cv//>,v^ and Ono7iis not seen.
Trifolium /nz/cv/.Tt', meadows 
up to 600 yds.
on Yad Moss.
T. mediunu common in woods up to 
450 yds.
over Garrigill.
T. ckgans, established by the side of the 
road up Hartside.
500 yds.
T. j-cpens, common up to Soo vds.
on 
Naturalist.
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
37 
Crossfell T.
dubium^ once seen west of Alston, 400 yds.
Lotus 
i:orniculatus, grassy places up to 550 yds.
over Tynehead.
Vicia 
Crncca, Ashgill Force, 400 yds.
V. sepium, common up the main 
limestone rocks over Tynehead, 550 yds.
Lathyrus pratensis, grassy 
' places up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
L. juacrorhizus, Lower Nent 
Force, etc.
Rosaceae.
— Prunus spinosa^ common, truly native in the 
limestone woods up to Ashgill, and nearly to Nenthead, 400 yds.
P. Fadus, everywhere common by the streams up to 500 yds.
Spiraea Ulmaria, common up to 550 yds.
over Tynehead.
Rubiis 
Idceiis^ everywhere common up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill woods.
No fruticose or suberect Rubus seen within the Cumberland area, 
but R.
ififestus ascends the Tyne valley to Slaggyford.
R. cceshis^ 
Tyne side above Alston Bridge, mixed with R.
Idceus.
R. saxatilis, 
limestone rocks.
Lower Nent Force, the Glen and over Tynehead, 
300 to 550 yds.
R. Cha?n6S7norus, a?jundant on Knoutberry Fell, over 
Nenthead, down to 650 yds.
; not seen on Crossfell.
Gemn itrbanum^ 
woods up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
G. rivale, common in woods, up to 
550 yds.
over Tynehead.
Fragaria vesca, common in woods up to 
Ashgill.
Fote?itiila Fragariastrum, woods up to 450 yds.
over 
Garrigill.
F. Fornientilla^ common on heaths up to the Crossfell 
ridge.
F. anserina, roadsides up to 500 yds.
ascending Hartside.
Alcheniilla vulgaris, common in grassy places up to the Crossfell ridge.
Foterium offici?iale^ common in meadows up to 400 yds.
Rosa mollis 
and R.
canina^ common in the woods up to 400 yds., the latter mainly 
var.
subcristata Baker.
R, tomentosa, Nent side below Upper Nent 
Force.
Fyrus Aucuparia^ everywhere common by the streams and 
in woods, ascending to 750 yds.
on Crossfell and the highest main- 
limestone cliffs over Tynehead.
Cratcegus mo?iogyna, common in the 
native woods up to 450 yds.
over Garrigill.
Hedges of any kind are 
extremely few in number in the whole district.
Saxifragese.
— Saxi/raga stellaris, runnels of Crossfell and 
Knoutberry Hill, 600 to 700 yds., not abundant.
S. hypnoides, Ashgill 
Force, Yad Moss, Crossfell, etc., 400-750 yds.
Chrysosple?iiutn 
oppositifoliuni, Ashgill Force, Upper Nent Force, etc., 400 yds.
Farnassia^ common in swamps all through the limestone country up 
to 550 yds.
Ribes Grossularia, Ashgill Force, etc., a casual.
R. 
pelroiuin, banks of the first little stream that joins the Tyne above 
Alston, on the east side of the river.
Crassulacese.
— Sedum Felephium^ rocks of Lower Nent Force.
.S'.
villosuin, runnels by the side of the Alston and Middleton road 
above Tynehead.
6".
acre, walls at Alston and Garrigill.
Droseraceae.— None seen.
Feb. 1888.
38 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Halorageae.
— Callitriche stagnalis and C.
hamulata, both ascend 
to the infer-arctic zone on CrossfelL 
Onagrarieae.
— Epilobium angustifolium, banks of the Tyne at 
Ashgill, and of the Nent below Upper Nent Force, 400 yds.
E. 
parvifioruni var.
rivulare, swamps up to 400 yds.
E. inontaniLvi^ 
common in woods up to 500 yds.
E. obsairum, common in swamps 
to 400 yds.
E. palustre, swamps up to 700 yds.
on Crossfell, 600 
yds.
over Nenthead.
E. alsinefolium, springs below the main-lime- 
stone cliffs of Windy Brow, over Tynehead, 550 yds.
E. alpimim, 
springs at the east end of Crossfell, over the Cashwell Mine, where 
It was discovered by the Rev. F.
Addison, 600 to 700 yds.
Umbelliferae.
— Sanicula, Lower Nent Force, the Glen, etc, 
Hydrocotyle, not seen.
Pimpinella Saxifraga, Ashgill Force, 400 yds.
Conopodiiun^ grassy banks.
Chcerophy/Ium ie?nnhi7n, Lower Nent 
Force.
AntJiriscus sylvesti-is and Heracleuni, common in meadows 
up to the main-limestone cliffs over Tynehead, 550 yds.
Angelica, 
damp woods, up to 500 yds.
over Ashgill Force.
Caucalis AnfhrisaiSy 
dry banks up to 400 yds.
above Nenthall.
Araliaceae.
— Hedera Helix, common, truly native, on the lime- 
stone rocks up to 400 yds.
at Ashgill, and above Nenthall.
Caprifoliacese.
— Sajnbucus nigra, only seen in plantations.
Viburniini Opulus, stream-sides up to 400 yds., rare.
Lonicera 
Per icly menu ni, woods, not common, often in gardens at Alston.
Rubiacese.
— Galium boreale, main limestone cliffs of Windy 
Brow, over Tynehead, 550 yds.
G. cruciafa and veriL7n, common up 
to 450 or 500 yds.
over Garrigill.
G. saxatile, common at all levels 
up to the Crossfell ridge.
G. sylvestre, common on limestone cliffs 
from Lower Nent Force to 550 yds.
over Tynehead.
G. pahistre, 
swamps up to the high springs of Crossfell.
G. uliginosum, swamps 
up to 500 yds.
over Tynehead.
G. Apari?ie, rare.
Asperula odorata^ 
common in woods up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
Valerianeae.
—   Valeriana officinalis, common in damp woods up 
to 550 yds.
over Tynehead.
Scabiosa snccisa, common in meadows 
up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
S. columbaria, High 
.\rains limestone quarries, 400 yds.
Compositae.
— Eupatoriiwi, not seen.
Solidago, main limestone 
rocks of Windy Brow, 550 yds.
Bellis perennis, common up to the 
Crossfell ridge.
Achillcca Millefoliiwi and A.
Ptarmica, both common 
up to the Crossfell ridge.
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum, common 
in meadows up to 400 yds.
Tussilago Earfara, common up to the 
Crossfell ridge.
Petasitcs, banks of lower part of Tyne and Nent up 
to Upper Nent Force.
Senecio vulgaris, a common weed up to 500 
yds.
over Garrigill.
6".
Jacobcea, common up to 500 yds.
over 
Naturalist, 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
39 
Garrigill.
S. aqitaticus^ common up to 450 yds.
over Garrigill.
Cnicus lauceolatiLS and C.paliLstris^ common up to the Crossfell ridge.
C. heterophyllus, common in woods and meadows up to 550 yds.
in 
the Ashgill plantations.
C. arve?isis^ common up to 600 yds.
on 
Hartside.
Ce?ifaurea nigra, common up to 500 yds.
in the iVshgill 
plantations.
Lapsana, common up to 400 yds.
in the Nent valley.
Crepis pahidosa, common up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Hieraciufu Pilosella, grassy banks up to the main-limestone scars of 
Windy Brow, 550 yds.
H. cceshim var.
Smithii and H.
vidgaium, 
common on the limestone rocks and walls up to 550 yds.
H. 
crocatwn, banks of the Nent at Middle Nent Force.
H. boreale^ 
common in .woods up to 450 yds.
over Garrigill.
Hypochceris radicata^ 
pastures to 400 yds.
Leo7itodon autumnale, pastures up to the 
Crossfell ridge.
Z. hispidus, pastures up to 500 yds.
over Tynehead.
Taraxacum, common up to 650 yds.
on Crossfell, and 600 yds.
over 
Nenthead.
Lactiica muralis, limestone rocks at Ashgill Force, 400 
yds.
Sorichus asper, waste ground up to 450 yds.
over Garrigill.
Campanulaceae.
— Ca?npamila latifolia, woods by the Tyne up 
to 400 yds.
at Ashgill.
C. rotufidifolia, grassy places up to the main 
limestone at Hartside, 600 yds.
Vacciniacese.
— Vaccinmm Myrtillus, heaths and woods at all 
levels up to the Crossfell ridge.
V. Vitis-idcea, not seen.
Ericaceae.
— Calluna, common at all levels up to the Crossfell 
ridge.
Erica cinerea.
Plumbag'inese.
— Amuria maritima, abundant at the High 
Mains lime-kilns, associated with Cochlearia, Thiaspi alpestre, and 
Arenaria verna, 400 yds.
Primulaceae.
— Priimda vitlgaris and P.
veris, common up to 
Ashgill, 400 yds.
P, farinosa, not seen, though Parnassia, its usual 
associate in Teesdale, is so common.
Lysimachia 7ieinoriim, Ashgill 
Force, 400 yds.
Oleaceae.
— Fraxi?ius, one of the commonest trees of the district, 
up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Gentianeae.
— Gentiana Amarella, frequent about the limestone 
up to 400 yds.
Borag"ineae.
— Myosotis ccespitosa, runnels up to 450 yds.
over 
Garrigill.
M. sylvafica, Ashgill Force, and wood by the Nent above 
Nenthall, 400 yds.
M. arvensis, woods up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
Scrophularineae.
— Linaria Cyubalaria, casual, on walls at 
Alston, Scrophularia nodosa.
Lower Nent Force.
Digitalis, frequent 
up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Veronica agrestis, a weed 
up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
V. persica, a weed in the gardens at Nent- 
he ad, 400 yds.
V. arvensis, up to 600 yds.
in limestone quarries of 
Feb. 18S8.
40 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Yad Moss.
V. Chanuedrys^ common up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill 
plantations.
V. i/iontajia^ Ashgill Force, 400 yds.
V. serpyllifolia 
and V.
officinalis^ up to 650 yds.
on Crossfell.
V. sciitellaia, swamps 
u}) to 400 yds.
V. Beccabiiiiga, common in runnels up to the high 
springs of Crossfell.
Euphrasia^ everywhere common up to the 
Crossfell ridge.
Bartsia Odontites, road-sides up to 400 yds., rare.
Pedicular is pal us tr is and sylvatica, frequent in swamps up to 500 yds.
over Tynehead.
Rhinanthus Crista-galli, common in grassy places 
up to the Crossfell ridge.
Lentibularieae.
— Pinguicula vulgaris^ swamps up to the high 
springs of Crossfell.
Labiatae.
— Mentha arvensis^ road-sides, rare.
Frunella, grassy 
places up to the Crossfell ridge.
Stachys palustris, road-sides, rare.
.S".
sylvatica, common in woods up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
Galeopsis 
Tetrahit^ a weed, up to 500 yds.
over Nenthead.
Lamium purpuremn^ 
a weed up to 500 yds.
over Garrigill.
Teucriuni Scorodonia^ common 
in woods up to Ashgill, and wood beyond Nenthall, 400 jds.
Ajuga 
reptans, woods up to 500 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Plantaginese.' — Plantago major and P.
laiueolata, common up 
to 650 yds.
on Crossfell and 600 yds.
over Nenthead.
P. media, lime- 
stone quarry near Alston, 400 yds.
Chenopodiaceae.
— Chenopodium album, weed at Alston, rare.
C. Bonus-He?iricus, about houses up to 450 yds.
over Tynehead.
Atriplcx patula, weed up to 450 yds.
over Garrigill.
Polygonaceae.
— Polygo?ium Convolvulus, w^eed up to 500 yds.
ascending Hartside.
P. aviculare, road-sides up to 500 yds.
P. 
Persicaria, a weed up to 450 yds.
over Garrigill.
Rumex viridis, 
woods, rare.
R. obtiisifolius, waste ground up to 500 yds.
R. crispus.
waste ground up to 600 yds.
on Hartside.
R. Acetosa and R.
Aceiosella, 
meadows and heaths up to the Crossfell ridge.
Euphorbiaceae.
— Mercurialis perennis, common in woods up to 
Ashgill, 400 yds.
Urticacese.
— Ulmus montana, one of the commonest trees of 
the district, up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Urtica dioica, 
common up to the highest miners' huts on Crossfell.
U. urens.
Alston, Garrigill, etc., up to 400 yds.
Cupuliferae.
- -^^///Az, frequent in the woods; B.
gliitinosa 
specially noted at Ashgill Force.
Alnus, everywhere common by the 
streams up to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Corylus, common 
in the limestone woods up to Ashgill and above Nenthall, 400 yds.
Quercus much less common than Elm, Ash, and Rowan; Q.
sessiliflora 
specially noted at the lead-mine west of Nenthall.
Fagus, one of the 
commonest trees of the plantations, up to 550 yds.
at A^hsill.
Naturalist, 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
41 
Salix penfandra, about the Nent below Upper Nent Force, and near 
the junction of the Black burn and Tyne, 400 yds.
S. frat^ilis 2.x\(\ 
S. alba^ about the stream near the Glen waterfall, a mile above Alston, 
probably planted.
S. viminalis and S.
Smi/hiana, only seen near houses, 
probably planted.
S. caprea and 6\ ci?ie/ea, frequent up to 550 yds.
in 
the Ashgill plantations.
S. aurifa, frequent up to 400 yds.
on the 
banks of the Nent below Nenthead.
S. phylicifolia, the commonest 
willow of the stream-sides from Ashgill and Nenthead downwards, 
400 yds., in a great variety of forms.
Popiilus alba, P.
?iigra and P, 
treninla^ often seen but probably always planted, as is P.
balsamifera.
Empetracese.
— Empetrttni^ common on heaths up to 800 yds.
on Crossfell.
Coniferae.
— Pine, Spruce, Larch, common in the plantations.
Orchidese.
— Too late for Orchids, the only one seen being 
Orchis maculata in a wood by the Nent, 400 yds.
Liliacese.
—  Allium jcrsinujji, woods near Alston.
Juncacese.
— Junms effusus.J. co7iglofneraltcs, /.
squarrosus, and 
J. sHpimcs, common at all levels up to the Crossfell ridge.
/. biifoniiis, 
runnels up to 600 yds.
over Nenthead.
/. glaucus, up to 400 yds., 
rare.
J. laniprocarpus, common in swamps up to 600 yds.
J. aaiti- 
floriis, common in swamps up to 500 yds.
over Tynehead.
Luztda 
maxima, common in woods up to the main-limestone cliffs of Windy 
Brow, 550 yds.
L. j?iultiJlora, heaths up to the Crossfell ridge.
Z. campesti'is, common.
Naiadaceae.
— Triglochi7i palustre, common in swamps up to 
700 yds., especially by the side of the road up Hartside.
No 
Potamogeton, Typha nor Sparganium seen.
Cyperaceae.
— Scirpns ccespitosns, common on heaths up to the 
Crossfell ridge.
Eriophorum vaginatw7i, heaths up to 650 yds.
on 
Crossfell.
E. angjistifoliiun, boggy heaths up to 800 yds.
on Cross- 
fell, 650 yds.
on Knoutberry Fell.
Carex ec/miafa, swamps up to 
700 yds.
on Crossfell.
C. ovalis and C.
acuta, lowland bogs.
C. Goode- 
novii, common in swamps up to 500 yds.
C. glauca and C.
dioica, 
common in bogs up to 650 yds.
on Crossfell.
C. panicea, swamps up 
to 500 yds.
C. sylvatica, lowland woods.
C. /lava, swamps up to 
700 yds.
on Crossfell.
C. fulva, ascent of Crossfell from Garrigill, 
500 yds.
C. hirfa, road-side between Garrigill and Alston, 400 yds.
C rostrata, mountain swamps up to 600 yds.
over Nenthead.
Gramineae.— -/V^<7/^7m cauariensis, a casual weed.
arundi- 
7iacea, damp woods up to Ashgill, 400 yds.
A7it]ioxa7ithu77i, 
common up to 650 yds.
on Crossfell.
Milium effusui7i, Ashgill 
Force, 400 yds.
P/ileu77i p7-ate7ise, road-sides up to 400 yds.
Agrostis ca7ii7ia, A.
alba, and A, Z'ulga7'is, common up to the ridge of 
Feb. 1888.
42 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
Crossfell.
A viviparous form of A.
vulgaris occurs.
A. nigra^ common 
by road-sides.
A. puinila, very characteristic at the east end of the 
Crossfell ridge, near the Cashwell lead-mine.
Deschampsia coespitosa 
and D.flexiiosa^ common up to the Crossfell ridge.
Holcus lanatus and 
//.
mollis^ common up to 500 Or 5 50 yds.
Trisetiun Jlavescens, main lime- 
stone of Hartside Fell, 600 yds.
Avena pratensis^ limestone rocks 
at Ashgill Force and by the Nent below Nenthead, 400 yds.
ArrJieiiatJieriun, common up to 400 yds.
Triodia decumbens^ Upper 
Nent Force.
Sesleria cceridea^ main-limestone cliffs over Tynehead, 
550 yds.
Cynosuriis, common up to 500 yds.
MoH/iia, heaths up 
to 550 yds.
in the Ashgill plantations.
Melica unifiora^ Lower Nent 
Force and the Glen waterfall.
Dactylis, pastures up to 500 yds.
over 
Garrigill ; a viviparous form near the Alston cemetery.
Briza 
media, common up to the main -limestone rocks over Tynehead, 
550 yds.
Foa annua and P.
praiensis, common up to the Crossfell 
ridge.
P. triviaiis, frequent.
P. ?ienwralis, Lower Nent Force and 
Ashgill Force, 400 yds.
Glyccria fluitans, swamps up to 600 yds.
over Nenthead.
G. plicata, Tyne-side above Alston.
Pestiica ovinia 
and F.
duriuscula, common up to the Crossfell ridge.
F. pratensis, 
common up to 500 yds.
over Garrigill.
F. arundinacea, up to 500 yds.
ascending Hartside.
Bromus giganteus and B.
asper, woods in both 
valleys up to 400 yds.
Brachypodiu?n sylvaticum, Lower Nent Force.
Lolium pereiL7ie, common up to 500 yds." ascending Hartside.
Agropyruni caninum, frequent in the limestone woods up to Ashgill, 
400 yds.
A. repens, common up to 500 yds.
on a garden -wall at 
Nenthead.
Nardus, common up to the Crossfell ridge.
Filices.
— Pteris, common up to 500 yds.
Cryptogramme^ 
plentiful on the gritstone rocks of the Crossfell ridge.
Loniaria, 
heaths up to 500 yds.
Aspleniu?n Adiantum-nigruni, shown to me by 
Mr. Richardson, from Ashgill.
A. viride, frequent on the limestone 
cliffs up to 550 yds.
over Tynehead.
A. Trichomanes and A.
Ruta- 
muraria, walls at Alston.
Athyrium, common up to the gritstone 
rocks of the Crossfell ridge.
Scolopendriiun, limestone rocks, rare- 
Cystopteris fragilis, common on limestone rocks up to 550 yds.
over 
Tynehead.
Polystichum lobaium, Ashgill Force and rocks by the 
Nent below Nenthead, 400 yds.
Lastrea Filix-mas and L.
dilaiata, 
common up to 800 yds.
on Crossfell, many forms of both species.
Polypodiuin vulgare, common up to the main-limestone rocks over 
Tynehead, 550 yds.
P. Dryopteris and P.
Phegopteris ascend to the 
shaly banks of the highest gills of the Tyne, 500 to 600 yds.
Ophioglossum vulgatuni, shown me by Mr. Denwood on a grassy 
bank ascending Hartside from Alston, 500 yds.
Bofrychium, Upper 
Nent Force, and found by Mr. Richardson near Ashgill, 400 yds.
Naturalist, 
BAKER : CUMBERLAND BOTANY.
43 
'E.quiSQ.tdiC^dt.—Equisefiwi arvense, common up to 500 yds.
E. sylvaticum^ common up to 400 yds., very fine in wood sloping to 
the Nent below Nenthead.
E. palustre^ common up to 700 yds.
on 
Crossfell.
E. limosum^ up to 400 yds.
in the Nent valley.
Lycopodiaceae.
— Lycopodium Selago, gritstone ridge of Crossfell 
and main-limestone cliffs of Windy Brow, over Tynehead.
L. alphium^ 
gritstone ridge of Crossfell.
Selaginella selaginoides^ swamps below 
the limestone at High Mains and Windy Brow, 400 to 500 yds.
Plants of the Infer-arctic Zone.
— The following are the 
species which I saw on the Crossfell ridge within the bounds of the 
infer-arctic zone, with the heights to which they reach : — 
Up TO 750 OR 800 Yards.
— Sagina procumbens, Cerastiuin triviale^ 
Oxalis Acefoseila, J'rifolium irpeiis^ Pyrus Aucuparia, Saxifraga 
hypnoides^ Galhtm saxatile^ Bellis perennis, Caiiuna vulgaris^ Vaccmhim 
Myrtilbis^ Einpetrum 7iigrum, Urtica dioica^ Rumex Acetosa^ R.
Acefoseila, Jtmcus sqimrrosus, Eriophoriun angustifolium, Carex 
stellulata, Agrostis vulgaris, Deschampsia flexuosa, Poa praterisis, 
Festuca ovma, Nai'dus stricta, Athyrium Filix-foemina, Cjyptogramme 
crispa, N'ephrodium Filix-j?ias, A^.
dilatatiun, Lycopodium Selago, and 
Z. alpinum — twenty-eight species.
Up to 700 Yards.
— Ranuncidits Flammula, R.
repeiis, R.
acris, 
Cardainine pratensis, Sagina nodosa, Stellaria uliginosa, Moniia 
fontana, Saxifraga stellaris, Callitriche haniiilata, C.
stagnalis, 
Epilobiuni alpinum, E.
palustre, Galium palustre, Achillcea Ptarmica^ 
A. Millefolium, Tussilago Farfara, Cnicus palustris, Apargia aiLtu7n- 
nalis, Euphrasia officinalis, Veronica Beccabunga, Thymus Serphyllum, 
Pinguicula vulgaris, Triglochin palustre, Juncus effusus, J.
supinus, 
Carex fiava, Deschampsia ccespitosa, Agrostis alba, A.
ca^tina, 
and Equisetum pahistre — thirty species.
Up to 650 Yards.
— Caltha palustris, Stellaria media, Alchemilla 
vulgaris, Potentilla Tormentilla, Cnicus la?iccolatus, Taraxacum 
officinale, Rhi?ianthus Crista-galli, Veronica serpyllifolia, V.
officinalis, 
Prunella vulgaris, Plantago major, P.
lanceolata, Eriophorum 
vaginaium, Carex dioica, C.
glauca, Scirpus ccespitosus, Ju7icus co?i- 
glomeratus, Luzula 7Jiultiflora, A7ithoxanthum odoratiwi, and Poa 
annua — twenty species.
The only other species seen elsewhere, not contained in the above 
list, was Rubus Cha7nm7no7'us on Knoutberry Fell, at 650 or 700 yds.
The best plant-stations.
— It may save the time of those 
who follow if I indicate what I found the most productive plant- 
localities in the district.
They were — (i) Banks of the Nent about 
Upper and Lower Nent Force; (2) Rocky banks of the Nent where 
the road crosses the stream between Nenthead and Nenthall ; 
Feb. 18S8.
44 
LINARIA MINOR IX CUMBERLAND.
(3) The east end of the Crossfell ridge, over the Cashwell mine ; 
(4; Limestone cliffs of High Mains, midway between Alston and 
Garrigill and (5) of Windy Brow, due east over Tynehead ; (6) Ashgill 
Force and the plantations above it, up to a height of 600 yds.
; 
(7) The Glen Waterfall on the second tributary stream on the east 
side of the Tyne, above Alston.
Summary.
— Xot counting varieties and casuals my Alston list 
contains 304 species, of which 301 belong to the super-agrarian and 
79 to the infer-arctic zone.
Doubtless both these figures might be 
increased by 25 per cent, if the district was worked in the middle of 
summer.
The montane element seems to enter into the flora of the 
district to about the same extent as in Wensleydale or Weardale, 
and much less than in Teesdale.
Montane plants here specially 
plentiful are Thlaspi alpest?'e^ Cochkaria alpifia^ Arenaiia verna^ 
Viola lutea, Cardiius hctcrophyllus^ Rosa subcristata, Geranium 
sylvaiicum, Faniassia palustris, and Salix phylicifolia.
\Miether 
Potamogetpn^ Batrachiiun, Sparga?iium.
TypJia^ Hydrocotyle^ Drosej-a, 
Pnmida farinosa, Erica Teiralix^ Vacciniuin Mtis-idcea^ and several 
other things I expected, but did not see, are really absent, I leave for 
thos:- v.'-::' fj'.low me to search out.
Evidently more of the lowland 
species a-ccnd the hills in the Mountain Limestone than in the slate 
tract.
301 is exactly the number of species recorded from the super- 
agrarian zone at the Lakes, but in many cases the species are different, 
as will be seen by comparing this present list with ray Lake Flora, 
The super-agrarian zone is here entirely ]\[ountain Limestone hills, and 
at the Lakes entirely Silurian hills, with much less continuous ridge and 
a more, sudden slope.
The infer-arctic zone here is entirely ]\Iillstone 
Grit, and its poverty in boreal types is no doubt essential, not casual.
NOTE— B OTA XY.
Linaria minor in Cumberland.
— Under the date of July 1S72, I find 
in my notes a record of the discover}- of this plant on the Cockermouth and 
Workington line of railway at Brigham station, two miles from the former town, 
where it continues to flourish in some abundance on the ballast used in the con- 
struction of the railway, which consists of loose gravel partially mingled with coal 
ashes.
I next found it growing plentifully on the ]\Iaryport and Carlisle Railway 
some little way to the eastward of Aspatria station, and close to the triple-arched 
viaduct, which there spans the line over a deep cutting.
Some fifteen or sixteen 
years ago a subsidence of the railway occurred at this particular point owing to 
the * creeping ' of an adjoining colliery working.
It became necessary to raise the 
line to its proper level, and engine ashes from the pit were utilised for the purpose.
Here the Linaria promptly made its appearance, and so rapidly has it spread that 
it may be gathered there now by hundreds.
Another locality iiiay be added, viz., 
the extensive limestone quarr}- at Yeathouse, near Frizington, -where I saw two or 
three plants only in 1877.
These grew on a bank of refuse from the workings, 
but whether ashes were present I do not remember.
I have had no opportunity 
of examining the last mentioned station since the date referred to.
I find no 
mention o{ Linaria minor in any of the lists compiled by previous observers in 
any part of Cumberland.— Wm. Hodgson, Flimby, Maryport, Nov. 17th, 1S87.
Naturalist.
45 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT WELTON VALE.
The 69th meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union was held on 
the 27th of August last, at the pleasant little village of Welton (near 
Brough), for the exploration of Welton Vale, a picturesque little 
valley excavated in the Wolds.
Permission had been kindly granted 
by Mr. W.
H. H.
Broadley for members to wander freely over his 
estates.
The excursion was well attended by East Riding members 
and favoured by brilliantly fine, not to say sultry weather.
No 
stated parties were arranged, the field of investigation being so 
circumscribed, but the members present found the best of guidance 
at the hands of Mr. E.
A. Peak, the superintendent of the Hull parks, 
who is well acquainted with the plants of the district, and of Mr. F.
Fielder Walton of Hull, who was equally familiar with its geological 
characteristics.
Swanland Dale was included in the investigation, 
and also the small valley called Wold Dale.
All the members re-assembled in the afternoon at the Green 
Dragon Hotel at V/elton, where they were well catered for, 
Aftea tea the usual meetings were held.
At the general meeting, 
in the absence of all the vice-presidents, Mr. Thomas Bunker of 
Goole was chosen to fill the chair.
The minutes of the Sedbergh 
meeting having been read and confirmed, the Scarborough Philo- 
sophical and Archaeological Society was unanimously admitted into 
the Union — and Mr. John Handley, of Briggflatts near Sedbergh, was 
elected a member.
Thanks were then voted to Mr, Broadley and to 
Captain Burstall for permission to visit their estates; to Messrs.
E. 
A. Peak and F.
F. Walton for their services as guides ; and to Mr.
Bunker for presiding.
The Sectional Reports were then given.
For the Vertebrate Section its secretary, Mr. James Backhouse, 
jun., M.B.O.U., York, reported that on account of the smallness of 
the number of observers and the scarcity of migrants, there were very 
few birds seen.
For the Conchological Section, too, for Vvdiich Mr. J.
Darker 
Butterell, of Beverley, secretary of the section, reported, there were 
only very few species recorded, the reason in this case being the long- 
continued drought of the season and the dryness of the soil on the 
day of investigation.
Claiisilia lamiiiata and its var.
albida, C.
ritgosa, Helix virgafa, etc., were collected, and Plaiwrbis albus was 
collected in its old locality — the pond at the entrance to the dale.
The Entomological Section — strange to say for so favourable a 
district and such fine weather — was not represented, further than that 
Feb. 1888.
D 
46 
VORKSmRb: NATURALISTS AT WELTON VALE.
Mr. Riley and the chairman gave some interesting information as to 
the spread of the Hessian Fly {Cecidoinyia destructor) in East 
Yorkshire, some i3upa3 of it having been found during the day.
For the Botanical Section, in the absence of all its officers, Mr.
E. A.
Peak furnished the following account of the proceedings of the 
botanical members: — The botanists started, in company with the 
geologists, from the 'Green Dragon' Inn, Welton, a little after lo a.m., 
going by what is locally known as the ' high ' road to Elloughton, 
where at the foot of the walls was found J4!^r7/z'<3 roiundifolia in flower, 
although it was not at all plentiful.
Passing through this little 
hamlet in the direction of Brough, they came to a gravel-pit, where 
the geologists seemed to have a good time of it, but it yielded nothing 
particular botanically ; and from here the route was taken to the 
Brough and Cave High Road, searching on the way for Cardiius 
eriophonis^ which grows here, but was not found on this occasion.
Soon after gaining the road the party came on a fine patch of Astra- 
galus gIycyJ)h\Ilos in fruit, Ballot a nigra in plenty by the road- 
side : thence proceeding m the direction of Cave, they soon came to 
the 'Cockle-pits,' and speedily found Ag?'ostis spica-V€?iti^ Campanula 
glomerata^ Gentiana aniarella^ and Saponaria officinalis^ although 
none were plentiful.
Here the botanists parted company with their 
geological friends, who went in the direction of Cave, and the 
botanists going to the south of EUerker to visit a little bit of choice 
botanical hunting-ground where they expected to find Me?iyanthes 
trifoliata, Pinguicula vulgaris^ Anagallis tendla, and Pedicidaris 
pa/ustris, which expectations were not disappointed.
From this 
jjoint they made direct for the village of Brantingham, going by way 
of Green's-lane, where was gathered Lycopsis arvensis.
The next 
destination was the chalk-pit in Brantingham Dale, where was found 
abundance of Campa?iula gloinerata, Gentiana amarella, a plant or 
two of Carlina vulgaris and Tanacetuni vulgare, the latter evidently 
an escape.
It was now time to think about wending the way back 
to Welton, which was accordingly done, going by way of Spout hill- 
top to look for the solitary patch of Campanula rapmiculoides which 
used to grow there, and which was found, but not in flower, so that 
the botanists had to be content — or otherwise — with leaves and 
l)artially withered flower-stems.
From here they proceeded along 
the brow of the chalk Wolds, picking up as they went a plant or two 
oi Arahis hirsuta and Epilobium angustifolium, and Circcca lutetiana 
m plenty, but they had not time to visit a field,- although near, 
where Linan'a clatine is usually found ; then down Elloughton Dale, 
hui Cklora perfuliata could not be found in its known locality, and so 
back to Welton.
It may be mentioned that Campanula latifolia.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT WELTON VALE.
47 
Linaria ininor^ and Laduca niuralis were gathered by one of the 
party near North Ferriby on the day previous to the Union's visit.
The other plants noted were the following : — RaniLncidus flaminula^ 
Reseda lutea^ R.
hiteola^ Helianthemum viiigare, Silene 7Wctiflora^ 
S. inflata, Lychnis vespertina^ L.
diurna, Cerastiiim semidecandruin^ 
C. arve?ise, Siellaria gra??nnea, Malva sylvestris^ Linum catharticuiii^ 
Geranium robertiamiui^ Ononis spinosa, O.
arve7isis, Anthyllis vul- 
neraria, Loins major^ Prunus spinosa, Spircea filipendula^ Agrinionia 
eupatoriwn^Poterium sangiiisorba^ Alchemiila arvensis^Fragaria vesca, 
Geii/n nrbanuin^ Epilobiuni hij'siiiuni^ Myriophylluni verticiiiatuni^ 
Ribes alpiman, Parnassia palusiris, Sanicula europcea, ^PtJuisa 
cy7iapi2iin, Siiaiis pratensis, Daiicus carota^ Tori/is antJiriscus^ 
ChcErophylliinitemiduin^ Cornussangiiinea^ Galium cruciatuiii, G.veru/n, 
Aspenila odorata, Valeriana dioica, Dipsacus sylvestris, Scabiosa 
succisa^ S.
columbaria^ S.
arvensis, Car duns nutans, Centaurea 
scabiosa, Artemisia vulgare, Lnula dysenterica, Aster tripolium, 
LiypochcEris radicata, Leontodon autumualis, Tragopogon pratensis.
Campanula rotu/idifolia, Convolvulus arvensis, Linaria vulgaris^ 
Eiphrasia officinalis, Bartsia odontites, Mifitha hirsuta, Af. sativa, 
Thynuis serpyllum, Calamintlia clinopodium, Stachys aj-vensis, 
Galeopsis versicolor, Anagallis arvensis, Glaux maritima, Plantago 
media, Chenopodium album and var.
viride, Euphorbia peplus, E.
exigua, Urtica urens, Lfumulus lupulus, Triglochin palust?'e, T.
maritimum, Listera cordata, Juncus obtusiflorus, J.
lanprocarpus, 
Eriophorum vagitiatum, Avena flavescetis, Brachypodium sylvaticum, 
Pteris aquilina, Nephrodium Jilix-mas, N.
di la latum, and Equisetum 
arvense.
For the Geological Section, in the absence of all its ofticers, 
Mr. F.
Fielder Walton, of Hull, who has paid special attention to 
the district, and is the author of a memoir upon it which has been 
reviewed in this journal, reported that the party leaving the Green 
Dragon at Welton first went to the entrance to Welton Dale ; then 
to Elloughton and along the high-road to South Cave ; then over 
Mount Airy and across Woodale into Brantingham Dale ; then 
through the plantations on the hill-sides to Elloughton and back 
again to Welton.
Several deviations were made for the purpose of 
examining the pits and quarries along the route.
The Millepore 
Limestone, the lowest of the strata examined, is in this locality about 
20 ft.
in thickness, and consists of bands of bluish limestone usually 
massive and well jointed.
After exposure to the weather it changes 
to a pale yellow or brown colour.
The upper portions of the 
Millepore Limestone become alternated with beds of sand and 
.gradually become changed into the Sandy Oolite.
The Sandy 
'.?eb.
1888.
48 
AMALIA GAGATES IN CHESHIRE.
Oolite Avas well seen in two quarries near the road-side a little to the 
north of Brough.
One of these (the Cockle pits) gives the following 
section from above downwards : 
Ft.
in.
Brown rubbly Oolite ..
6 
0 
Compact Limestone ...
2 
6 
Brown Oolite (loosely bedded) 
I 
6 
Compact Oolite 
3 
0 
Irregular seams of loosely-bedded Oolite ...
lO 
0 
Total 23 
0 
The other quarry, the strata of which overlie those just mentioned, 
was found to present less of the oolitic character of the limestone — 
but was much more fossiliferous ; numerous specimens of Rhyncho- 
nella^ Terebraticla^ and Pecten were found, also several of Trigonia, 
Modiola^ and FiJina.
The Kelloway sands were examined at South 
Cave and numerous specimens of GryphcEa bilobata^ Rhyncho?iellay 
Terebratida, and fragments of a large ammonite which must have 
measured twelve inches in diameter, were found.
The Red Chalk was 
seen at the entrance to Welton Dale ; and its position was indicated 
at several places along the route by springs issuing from underneath 
the grey chalk.
Great interest was taken in these springs by the 
members of the party, who found walking very hot work.
The lower 
strata of the chalk were examined in several places on the hill-sides.
Several sand- and gravel-pits were seen.
The gravel was mainly 
composed of rounded and sub-angular fragments of chalk, flint, and 
oolitic limestone.
Gryphcea mcurva, Behmnites^ and a species of 
Ostrea were found mixed with the gravel; and in a pit near Elloughton 
fragments of bones of some large animal (probably of the mammoth 
type), which had been found by the workmen, were seen.
This concluded the business.
The few West Riding members 
present being unable to get away by train for a couple of hours, spent 
their time in inspecting Mr. Broadley's gardens and greenhouses, and 
afterwards on the shores of the Humber near Brough Station.
NOTE— MOLL USCA.
Amalia gag-ates in Cheshire.
— On the 5th of September last year, while 
looking for slugs in a garden at Bowdon, Cheshire, I was much interested to find 
a siiecinien of what I took iox Amalia gagates ; and, on sending it to Mr. Roebuck, 
my opinion was confirmed.
I know of no previous record for the species in 
Cheshire.
The only time I have found it before was in Achill Island, co.
Mayo, 
where it was tolerably plentiful on the turf walls.
— T.
G. Milne, Corpus Christi 
College, Oxford, Jan. i6th, 1888.
[The specimen was typical in colour, being nearly black, and not of the 
brownish lint so usual in British examples ; the typical colour is rare in Britain, 
and I have only seen about three examples amongst the very numerous specimens 
of A.
gaoates which have passed through my hands.
— W.D.R.] 
Naturalist, 
49 
INTERESTING DISCOVERY OF BOULDERS IN 
THE COAL MEASURES AT WORTLEY, 
NEAR LEEDS.
CHARLES BROWNRIDGE, F.G.S., 
Bur ley, Leeds.
At a recent meeting of ttie Leeds Geological Association, Mr.
C. Brownridge, F.G.S., read a short paper, entitled 'Notes on Four 
Boulders found in the Black Bed Coal and overlying Shales and 
Ironstone at Wortley.' Mr. Brownridge, after alluding to the fact 
that the presence of boulders in the coal measures is becoming an 
important question, said that these interesting discoveries occur 
from time to time, some having been found in the coalfields of 
Leicestershire, Lancashire, Derbyshire, North Staffordshire, and the 
Forest of Dean ; but none hitherto appear to have been recorded from 
our immediate district.
As evidences of this character may eventually 
become powerful factors in determining geological ])roblems, it is 
essentially desirable such discoveries should be recorded.
The 
position where these boulders were found is situate in the fork of land 
bounded by the London and North Western and Great Northern Rail- 
ways, the Geldard Road and the Farnley Beck, and were got out of 
the pit known as the ' No. i Black Bed Pit.' The whole of this neigh- 
bourhood is worked for the Wortley fire-clay by Messrs.
Ingham and 
Sons, in the commercial manipulation of which they have achieved 
such a wide reputation.
Along with the fire-clay the better bed coal 
above is got, and at a still higher level the black bed coal and the 
overlying ironstone are worked.
It was in the last-named beds that 
the specimens were found.
The depth of the black bed coal from 
the surface is here 30 ft.
The largest of the boulders is a coarse 
gritstone, and nearly spherical in shape.
Its dimensions are 2 ft.
6 in.
by 2 ft., and it has a fairly smooth, polished face, with slight striae.
This example was found embedded in the 'bind,' or clayey shales, 
just overlying the coal.
The other three boulders (or pebbles) are 
quartzites, and much smaller in size, varying from 11 in.
by 9 in.
to 
3J in.
by 2J in., and were all found embedded in the black bed coal 
itself.
Two of the specimens are more angular in general shape 
than the third specimen, but in all of them the angles are well 
rounded off and the faces polished.
Prof.
Bonney, D.
Sc ., LL.
D. , F.
R. S.
, etc.
, to whom two section s of the 
quartzites have been submitted, kindly describes them as follows : — 
Feb. 18S8.
5© BROWNRIDGE : BOULDERS IN THE COAL MEASURES.
*No. I Specimen.
—The grains in the rock are remarkably v/ell 
rounded.
The majority are quartz, but there are some grains, also 
rounded for the most part, which are brown in colour, more or less 
opaque.
I think it possible that these are decomposed felspar, stained 
by infiltrated bituminous material.
The quartz grains are cemented 
by secondary quartz, sometimes, but not always, in optical continuity 
with the adjacent grains ; cavities appear to be frequent in most 
grains, but are generally of very small size; sometimes a tiny bubble 
may be noted, but I think that they are commonly empty ; some 
grains contain a number of small almost colourless belonites, rather 
like silhmanite, which are commonly seen in the quartz of certain 
old granitoid rocks ; others contain a flake of brown mica, a tiny 
crystal or two, probably an iron oxide or a crystallite, which may 
be zircon.
I expect the quartz has been derived from an old 
granitoid rock.
The well-rounded grains difference this specimen 
from those quartzites or grits which I have hitherto seen from 
boulders in coal, but a specimen which I obtained from one of 
the old quartzites of the Lickey Hills also contains many well- 
rounded grains, and so does a quartzite in the Charnwood series ; 
of course, I do not mean to suggest that we must look in this 
direction for the parent rock.
' No. 2 Specimen.
— This rock differs but little from the last.
The grains, as a rule, I think, are not quite so well rounded, and 
rather more are stained ; those containing the belonites are perhaps 
not quite so common.
A small grain may be brown tourmaline, and 
T think this mineral is also included in a quartz grain.
It is very 
probable that this boulder comes from the same parent rock as the 
other one.' 
Prof.
Bonney, in his presidential address to Section C of the 
British Association at Birmingham in 1886, described several 
boulders found in coal, the examination of which he rightly considers 
to be of great value, from the light it may throw upon the physical 
conditions existing in the carboniferous period, and this opinion, 
coming from a scientist of such great authority and experience, 
should expand this field of inquiry, and in time lead to practical and 
valuable results.
The reason why these stones are thus found located in such 
phenomenal positions can only at present be surmised, as the subject 
is at present rather vague ; but the theory has been adduced that 
they have been carried down by masses of floating vegetation in a 
manner similar to that recorded by travellers on the Amazon, where 
in the swamps and shallows such masses are seen floating, carrying 
foreign matter along with them.
It has also been suggested that 
Naturalist, 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
51 
there have been circumstances analogous to those at present in Siberia, 
where the plains — something like the old Coal Measure plains — are 
surrounded by lofty ice-covered mountains, and boulders are borne 
into these plains by glaciers.
A leading London newspaper, in recently 
reporting a similar specimen, gravely alleged it to be a meteorite.
This singular idea would, however, be instantly rejected by the most 
credulous novice as being utterly untenable.
The matter has lately 
been twice brought up before the Geological Society of London, 
when interesting discussions took place.
This report by Mr. BroWn- 
ridge was rightly deemed by the members to be extremely valuable, 
the more so that the paper was accompanied by specimens of rocks 
composing the boulders.
Thanks were expressed by the author to 
Messrs.
W. Brogden and J.
Parkin, of Messrs.
Ingham and Sons, for 
their kindness in rendering every facility in furnishing the specimens.
NOTE—GEOLOG V.
Ancient and Modern : or, Scenes in the History of a Glacial Pebble.
— Some two or three years ago when pulling down some old cottages near 
Driffield there was discovered at a considerable depth beneath the foundations a 
very fine specimen of an ancient British stone-hammer.
This, however, appears 
to have attracted very little attention, for in a very short time it was cast on one 
side amongst other rubbish which was being carted away for the purpose of forming 
the foundation of a new road to a gentleman's house close by ; one of the men 
seeing this curious looking stone with a hole through it, thought that if he could 
only get a shaft in, it would do to break up the lumps of stone bricks and chalk 
that were too large to set without.
Acting on the spur of the moment a shaft was 
procured and fixed into the head, the man at once commenced work, and to the 
astonishment of everyone it stood the test well, giving every satisfaction as though 
it had been made of iron.
It has been used for similar purposes for above two 
years, and when rescued from its dangerous work it had apparently suftered very 
little misfortune, considering the rough work it had been put to.
it is made out 
of a piece of Dark Blue Whinstone (probably an old glacial boulder from the coast), 
and has evidently been about 9 in.
long, 314 in.
square at the thickest end.
The 
hammer with the shaft in has been presented to the Malton Naturalists' Society, 
and is now in their Museum, where it will be treasured amongst many other links 
in the history of the past.
— S.
Chadwick, Malton, October 9th, 1887.
NOTE— POL YZOA.
Note on Paludicella Ehrenbergi.
— Those who study the development of 
the freshwater Polyzoa may be interested in the discovery, at this season of the year, 
of the Hybernacuhan, or resting-bud of this beautiful Polyzoon.
I have for several 
years watched its development from the Bybe?'nacuhijn, about the month of April, 
but have not till now seen it in the autumn, before the darker coating of debra 
had partly obscured its shape.
No statoblasts having been found with this species, 
it seems pretty certain that \\\e Hybernactihmi (first discovered by Van Benedin) 
is the only means of development.
The club-shaped terminating tubes have 
within them an oval semi-transparent kind of nucleus or cell, which evidently 
contains the resting germ, and supplies the place of the free statoblast of all the 
other species.
— Thomas Shepheard, Ringsley Lodge, Chester, Dec. ist, 1887.
JVO TE—HYMENOPTERA.
Sirex juvencus at Hull.
— A specimen of this insect was caught last August 
in Hull, in the vicinity of the Albert Dock, and is in my possession.
— N, F.
DOBREE, B everley, E.
Yorks, Jan. i6th, 1888.
Feb. 1888.
52 
JOHN SANG.
The North of England has for more than half a century been remark- 
able for the number of hard-working entomologists it has produced.
For quite fifty years there has been an unbroken succession of them, 
keeping the northern district far in advance, entomologically, of any 
otlier part of the country, excepting the metropolis.
Not among the 
very first of this band of workers, but still early in the field, was John 
Sang, whose death in the early part of last year left a gap that will 
not be easy to fill up.
Though a native of the county of Durham, 
and best known for his work round Darlington, where he was born 
on March 3rd, 1828, and where he resided most of his life, he did 
not commence his entomological career there.
In the year 1843 he 
went to Wakefield to ' serve his time ' as a draper, and during the 
six years of his residence in that town were sown the seeds of that 
love of music and of entomology that afterwards filled up so much of 
his life.
In 1848 he took a specimen of Deilephila celerio^ o which 
he was accustomed to point with pride and pleasure as one of his 
most valued insects — valued especially because he had taken it 
himself.
In 1849-50 he resided in Manchester, and during that year 
he began to study entomology in a more scientific manner than 
before, and also commenced the formation of a collection in earnest.
On his return to Darlington he commenced business as a draper, 
ultimately realizing a modest competency, which enabled him to devote 
all his time to his favourite pursuits.
In 1882 he had the misfortune 
not only to lose his savings, but he was obliged to part with his 
collection to enable him to meet an obligation he had incurred 
through becoming security for his brother-in-law.
He then accepted 
an engagement with Dr. Mason, of Burton-on-Trent, to re-card the 
Rye collection of Coleoptera, and subsequently to figure Coleoptera 
and dissections.
In this work he was still engaged at the time of his 
death.
Such is a very brief account of his life.
He was never married, 
residing with his sister till her death, and subsequently alone.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing about John Sang was his 
memory.
When a boy he gave a proof of this by repeating the 
whole of a small History of England, and as a reward for this feat 
he was taught French and Latin, which were of great service to him 
subsequently in his entomological studies.
Later in Hfe he added 
German to these, and of all he had a very thorough knowledge.
In 
his musical studies his memory served him so that he could sing or 
play the greater part of the twelve principal oratorios performed by 
Naturalist, 
IN MEMORIAM JOHN SANG.
53 
the Darlington Choral Society while he was secretary of it, without 
the score.
In entomology his memory was truly wonderful.
He 
knew the particulars of the occurrence of every rare species, where, 
when, and by whom each was taken, and in whose collection they 
now were.
He knew the markings of even the most minute species, 
and would unhesitatingly point out an error in the figure of any of 
them.
He knew the food of each, and was familiar with the earlier 
stages of many.
These may not seem to be difficult of accomplish- 
ment when this is read, but no one who had witnessed any of John 
Sang's feats of memory can help wondering, not only at the accuracy 
of it, but at the quickness and readiness with which he could reply 
to any point that was raised.
The writer first made Mr. Sang's 
acquaintance in the year 1859, when he called upon him with some 
insects he could not name.
Mr. Sang took the box, and named 
them, one after the other, as fast as their names could be written 
-down till he came to the last one.
' That one,' said he, ' I do not 
know.
I never saw it before, but I'll tell you in a minute.' A book 
was produced, a page or two examined carefully, and the capture 
pronounced to be Eninielesia imifasciata^ then a great rarity.
The 
book, of course, was ' Stainton's Manual of Butterflies and Moths, 
then just published.
In 1852 Mr. Sang commenced a diary, which he continued with 
more or less fulness till the year 1881.
This diary is not by any 
means a model, for it is merely a list of species occurring at various 
localities at certain dates.
To say there are no notes would be 
untrue, but they are very few indeed.
' May 15th, 1872 — Coniscliffe 
Lane, Gregsonella flying in sun, 3 to 4 p.m., worn,' is one of the 
very few where any record is made of the habits of an insect.
'Worn,' 'much worn,' Mate,' 'early,' and such like, are not of 
unfrequent occurrence.
Under May 27th, 1874, there is — 'Tees- 
side, Coniscliffe, Tanacetana flying freely in afternoon ; try a week 
earlier still' 'May i6th, 1869 — Hellkettles, (too small to 
take).' 'July nth, 1869 — Hellketlles, larvae of Respkndellum^ large 
mine on i8th' The fact evidently was that his memory was so 
thoroughly trustworthy that he did not need to make notes ; he 
certainly was a very close observer, and could tell the habits of any 
species he had been in the habit of taking.
Occasional notes are 
given on weather, thus : ' April 14th, 1875, Good Friday — last snow, 
a very severe week,' is a sample of many such notes.
Once or twice 
he has been in too great a hurry to record the last snow, thus on 
April 22nd, i860, he writes Mast snow '; then on May 29th the same 
year he records : ' Whit Monday, last snow, very heavy from 5.30 a.m.
to 10 a.m.,' and to make the entry of April 22nd correct, he inter- 
Feb'.
]888.
54 
ALBINO KITTIWAKE AT FLAM BOROUGH.
polates after ' last snow ' the words ' but one.' The diary is carefully 
indexed, and contains records of the capture of 826 species.
This- 
is a surprising number, for no common things are recorded, thus, 
fifteen butterflies only are entered, and but two sphinges.
Mr. Sang 
never appears to have followed tliat course so customary now-a-days 
of collecting macros only to begin w^ith.
Even in 1853 the bulk of 
the entries in the diary are of Tortrices and Tineina.
Residing at 
Darlington, on the borders of Durham, North Yorkshire was as con- 
venient a collecting-ground as his own county, and those w^ho have 
examined Mr. Porritt's valuable catalogue of Yorkshire Lepidoptera 
will know how very much it is indebted to John Sang for the North 
Yorkshire records.
Richmond appears to have been his favourite 
collecting-ground in that county, but Redcar also had frequent 
visits.
Nor was he altogether a stay-at-home collector.
He appears 
to have visited one time or other, most of the best-knowm localities- 
— the Isle of jNIan, West Wickham, Darenth, Gravesend, Dover, 
Folkestone, etc., etc., are all recorded.
In 187 1 he spent tw^o days 
at Folkestone, August 2nd and 3rd, and he appears to have done an 
extraordinary work, having taken imagines of ten butterflies, fourteen 
macros, and twenty micros — in all, forty-four species in two days,, 
common things not included.
To attempt to enumerate or to classify 
his captures is not possible here.
The North Yorkshire list, as said 
above, is incorporated in Mr. Porritt's work ; the Durham captures 
yet require careful editing, which perhaps Mr. Gardner and I may 
do before long.
Mr. Sang was troubled with an internal complaint, which some- 
times caused him much suffering, and often compelled him to stay 
at home when he would have preferred to be off in the woods and 
lanes.
But he did not die from this, but from disease of the heart, 
which carried him off in his sleep, between Saturday, the 19th, and 
Sunday, the 20th March.
He was buried m Darlington Cemetery^ 
on Tuesday, March 22nd, 1887, beside his mother.
The name of John Sang will long be remembered in the North 
of England, and it will be handed down to future generations in 
GeUcliia sa?igiella, which was named in his honour by his friend and 
fellow-worker, Mr. H.
T. Stainton.
— John E.
Robson.
NOTE—ORNITHOLOG Y.
Albino Kittiwake at Flamboroug-h.
— Strange to relate, another white 
Kittiwake {Rissa tridaciyla) has been shot at Flamborough this season about 
four or live miles south of the headland, on the 15th November, 1887, which 
fell to the gun of Mr. Thos.
Leng, who is well known as a crack shot.
I bought 
it.
It is a splendid specimen, nearly perfect white, with the exception of a little 
tinge of very light drab on the primaries on the outer margin, also on the tips of 
the tail-feathers.
— Matthew^ Bailey, Flamborough, November i8th, 1 887.
Naturalist, 
55 
DR.
DAY ON BRITISH AND IRISH SALMONID^E.
'British and Irish Salmonidoe.' By Francis Day, CLE., F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc.
In one volume, with I2 plates.
Williams & Norgate, London and Edinburgh, 
1887.
Naturalists are well aware of the extent and nature of Dr. Day's 
contributions to the Ichthyological literature of our islands.
He 
has given us what is now most deservedly recognised as the 
standard work on ' British and Irish Fishes,' and has contributed 
innumerable and valuable articles on his favourite science to the 
proceedings of the learned societies, and to the pages of serial 
literature.
His latest work, now under our consideration, is devoted 
to the British and Irish Salmonidae, a family the life -histories and 
the numerous varietal forms of whose species offer a subject full 
of difficult problems, worthy of the enthusiasm and the ability which 
the author is so well-known to possess.
It is quite mipossible in the space at our disposal to give an 
adequate notion of the contents of this perfect mine of information 
on all matters worthy of attention appertaining to this most 
interesting family of our indigenous fishes ; but we must allude to 
the great amount of matter that is new and original, or known only 
to the few possessing unusual advantages.
In this connection we 
must not fail to express our own as well as our author's due appre- 
ciation of the indebtedness of ichthyologists to that worthy and 
enlightened baronet, Sir James Ramsay Gibson-Maitland, whose 
unrivalled fish-farm at Howietoun has been a nursery for many 
experiments, and the means of contributing not a little to our know- 
ledge of the Salmonidj3e, and also to the valuable art of fish- 
culture.
Commencing with the allusions of the classical and ancient 
writers to the Salmones, the author passes on to discuss the family's 
distribution in both time and space, its anatomical attributes, 
its culture, etc., etc., all of which are adequately treated, and in a 
manner leaving nothing to be desired.
It is, however, in dealing with the life-histories of the species 
that the book assumes, to our mind, its most important and 
interesting stage.
The lordly Salmon alone has about one 
hundred pages devoted to an elaborate account of his engaging 
biography, to the results of experiments at the establishments for 
his artificial culture, and to fishery laws affecting him in the three 
kingdoms.
Feb. 1888.
DAY ON BRITISH AND IRISH SALMONID^.
Then comes the Trout.
The opening paragraph of this section 
is ominous of what is to follow.
It is this — ' it now becomes 
desirable to offer some remarks restricted to the marine and fresh- 
water forms of the British Trout, which have been considered by 
some ichthyologists and fishermen to be anadromous and non- 
migratory freshwater species.
Before entering upon each in detail it 
appears desirable to explain why it is that I find myself unable to 
accept the numerous species that have been described, believing those 
ichthyologists [Widegren, Malmgren, etc.] more correct who have 
considered them modifications of only one, which, as Salmo tt'utta^ 
includes both anadromous and non-migratory freshwater forms.' We 
are quite aware that Dr. Day worked on these lines when he treated the 
Salmonoids in his 'British Fishes,' but we had not then the pleasure 
of making known our hearty approval of this departure, one that, 
we believe, does much to explain many of the puzzles which the 
recognition of a large number of distinct species inflicts upon us, 
and makes.
easy the solution of some vexed questions.
Dr. Giinther 
(' Catalogue of Fishes,' vol.
vi ; Study of Fishes, p.
644-5) describes 
eleven species of British Trout, and the fact that this accurate 
observer has been able to distinguish so many local forms in these 
islands is evidence of the variability of the species and nothing more.
Although Dr. Day states — ' it is, I think, possible to prove that 
marine salmonoids may take on a freshwater existence ; also that 
Salmo trutta, S.
canidricus, and other anadromous so-called species, 
can be traced into freshwater forms of trout,' we think, nevertheless, 
that the Sea-Trout and the Brown, or freshwater Trout may be 
regarded as now sufficiently distinct for the demands and con- 
venience of zoological classification and nomenclature, respectively.
Recognizing this split, and applying the useful trinomial nomen- 
clature so appropriate to their respective varieties, our Trout stand 
as follows : — 
SEA-TROUT.
Salmo triitia L., Salmon-Trout.
Sahjio triitta cambricus Donovan, Sewin ; this being simply a 
southern race of Salmo triitta.
To these forms also belong the Salmonoids known as Salmo 
argentcus C.
& V., Salmo brachypoma Giinther, and Salmo erlox Nilss.: 
also the Bull-Trout, Gray-Trout, Scurf, Speriing, Whitling, Sprod, 
Peal, Sea-Trout, White-fish, and White-Trout (Ireland), Turff 
(Devon), Buntlings (Wales), and Blue Cap, all of which are treated 
of, and their parentage and phase explained.
Naturalist, 
DAY ON BRITISH AND IRISH SALMONIDi^:.
57 
FRESHWATER TROUT.
Sabno fario L., Brown Trout.
Sahno fario leve7ie?isis Walk., Loch-Leven Trout.
Sal/no fario — - — (no scientific name has been given to this race), 
Crasspuill Trout.
Salmo fario esiuarius Knox, Estuary Trout.
Sabno fario orcade?isis Giinth., Loch-Stennis Trout.
Salmo fario cornnbiensis Walk., Cornish Trout.
Salmo fario ferox Jard.
& Selby, Great Lake-Trout.
Salmo fario stomacJiicus Giinth., Gillaroo Trout.
Salmo fario (no scientific name has been given to this race), 
the Swaledale, or more correctly speaking, the Oxnop, Trout.
All these forms are described and considered at length in the 
book.
In considering the Char, Dr. Day says, ' although Char do not 
differ so much in colour among themselves as do our Trout, partly 
owing to their not frequenting salt-water, still, at various ages, their 
forms are so diversified, and sexual distinctions so considerable, as 
to have deceived many ichthyologists who have studied these fishes 
more in museums than in their natural haunts.
Fish-culture has, 
however, proved of great service in eradicating from systematic 
zoology a large number of species, which must, however, unfor- 
tunately continue ofr years encumbering the pages of ichthyo- 
logical literature.' Gunther ('Catalogue of Fishes,' vi ; Study of 
Fishes, pp.
645-646) admits six species, but the above remarks 
of our author's make it doubtful if they are even varietal forms, 
and he only admits one species.
He does not, however, explain 
the ages and sexes of his one species, Sabno alfimis, to which 
Dr. Giinther's species are referable, which we should much like to 
know.
We think w^e have said enough to indicate that this work is 
one of unusual interest and worth, and if we have failed so to do, 
the fault is ours, and will be soon removed on an examination 
of the book itself, which is a most valuable contribution to the 
bibliography of our fauna.
It is nicely got up, liberally illustrated 
with woodcuts, and last but not least it is embellished with a 
series of plates drawn by the author, nine of them being beauti- 
fully and faithfully coloured, thus adding not a Httle to the attrac- 
tiveness of the book.
We can only regret that the genera Osnieriis, 
Coregonus^ and Ai-geniiiia^ with their few species, are not included in 
this masterly survey, which is confined to the ' game fishes ' of the 
family.— W.
E. C.
Feb. 1888.
58 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural history and 
physical features of the North of England.
LEPIDOPTERA, 1885, 1886, 1887.
Anon, [not signed].
Durham, Yorkshire.
Obituary.
John Sang.
[Refers to his capturing Chm-ocanipa cderio at 
\Val<etield in 1848; Psecadia funerella at Richmond; Hypcrcallia chris- 
tiernana at Castle Eden ; Lithocolletis vacciniella at Harrogate ; Miana 
expolita^ Gelechia sangiella near Darlington in 1862, and G.
telragonella 
near Redcar].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., May 1887, xxiii, 278-9.
Axon, [not signed].
Derbyshire.
The Lepidoptera of Burton-on-Trent and Neighbourhood [compiled by 
the Entomological Section of the Burton-on-Trent Natural History Society, 
and based on the observations of E.
Brown, W.
Ciarneys, J.
T. Harris, 
G. Baker, P.
B. Mason, C.
F. Thornewill, G.
A. Smallwood, T.
Gibbs, 
J. E.
Nowers, G.
H. Whitluck, and W.
M. Anderson.
The district, 
which is' defined as extending from 15 to 20 miles round Burton in every 
direction, includes a large portion of Southern Derbyshire ; and the list 
(which includes 40 butterflies, 19 sphinges, 57 bombyces, i66noctuse, 162 geo- 
meters, 33 pyrales, and 12 pterophori, or a total of 489 species) forms a valuable 
contribution to a knowledge of the distribution of lepidoptera in the district.
South's arrangement is adopted, and the paper is prefaced by a brief geological 
sketch by Frank E.
Lott].
Ent., July, Aug., Sep., 1885, xviii.
177-183, 
208-212, 231-237.
Anon, [signed by Secretary of Society].
Derbyshire.
[Geometra papilionaria taken at Little Eaton ; exhibited to Derby 
Naturalists' Society].
Young Nat., Ap. 1886, vii.
78.
Yorkshire.
AcKWORTH Boys' Essay and Natural History Societies' Reports.
[Notes on Lepidopterous Captures ; Cenira vimila and Siiierinthus popitli.'\ 
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 1885, pp.
117- 11 8.
R. Ad KIN.
Westmorland and Furness.
[Food-plants of Cidaria reticulata ; taken as larvse on Impaiiens noH-vie- 
ianxert'.
near Windermere, by H.
Murray].
Trans.
Ent. Soc.
Lend., 1886, 
p. Ivi ; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1887, xxiii.
192 ; Ent., Jan, 1887, xx.
20; and 
Young Nat., Jan. 1887, viii.
13.
J. Arkle.
Lancashire, Westmorland.
Entomology in North Lancashire [captures of lepidoptera at Morecambe, 
Grange, Witherslack, etc.; numerous species cited].
Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
241-244.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Poecilocampa populi at Chester [common there in Nov. 1886].
Ent., 
Feb. 1887, XX.
41.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Abundance of Sesia tipuliformis at Chester [also of Abraxas grossiilariatd\.
I jU., Get. 1887, XX.
272.
W. A.
Atmore.
Lincolnshire.
Notes on Ephippiphora tetragonana [in a wood near Grantham, Aug. 9th, 
1885 ; habits, time of appearance, and food-plant discussed].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
April 1887, xxiii.
260.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1 885-6-7.
59 
Eustace R.
Bankes.
Yorkshire, Westmorland.
Nepticula tormentilla in Yorkshire and Westmorland [in fair numbers in 
1887 ; it is a pity the Yorkshire locality is so vaguely referred to as ' West 
Riding moors '].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1887, xxiv.
160.
Charles G.Barrett.
'The Pennines.' 
Food of Peronea caledoniana, Steph.
[extremely abundant on the Pennine 
Hills — why not have stated definite localities?
— and always amongst I^ac- 
ciiiiitni myrlilhcs ; Grapkolitha geminana, Larentia didytnata^ and Hypsipetes 
elutata also referred to].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1885, xxii.
112.
Charees G.
Barrett.
'The Pennines.' 
Curious performance of a Noctua [Cehma ha-uorthii, on the Pennines; 
query, where?].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1885, xxii.
112.
Charles G.
Barrett.
Westmorland, Lancashire, Yorkshire.
Lepidoptera on Stone Walls and Rocks [at Kendal and on the Pennine slopes 
between Oldham and Huddersfield ; lengthy and interesting notes on Polia 
chi, Oporabia Jiligranitnaria, Larentia ccEsiata, and CloantJia soiidagniis, their 
conspit-uousness or otherwise, and variation].
Ent. Mo, Mag., Oct. 1885, 
xxii.
111-112.
Charles G.
Barrett.
Derbyshire.
Tephrosia crepuscularia and biundularia [ ; remarks on their specific differ- 
entiation,, founded on Derbyshire specimens of a dark-gray colour taken in 
April].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1886, xxiii.
41.
Charles G.
Barrett.
Derbyshire.
On the Specific Identity of Tephrosia crepuscularia, W.V., and biundu- 
laria, Esp.
[referring, in the course of the argument, to Derbyshire examj^les 
taken in April].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep, 1886, xxiii.
87.
Charles G.
Barrett.
Derbyshire.
Food of Acidalia luteata [and its occurrence in Derbyshire].
Ent. Mo.
Mag , 
Oct. 1886, xxiii.
109.
Charles G.
Barrett.
Yorkshire.
Eupithecia extensaria, Freyer, in Norfolk [with a reference to the two 
Yorkshire examples taken near Hull and at Spurn Point].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Oct. 1887, ^xiv.
114.
G. C.
BiGNELL.
? Lancashire.
Macrocentrus infirmus bred from Hydraecia petasitis [sent by Mr. Pierce of 
Liverpool : locality not stated].
Ent., April 1887, xx.
114.
E. Leaton Blenkinsopp.
Durham, Northumberland.
Etymology of * Oubit ' [the hairy oubit is the common name throughout 
Northumberland and Durham for the caterpillars of the tiger-moths 
( Arctiadce )].
Notes and Queries, March 14.
1885, 6th S.
xi.
217, 
W. D.
B[RArrHWAiTE].
Yorkshire.
Ackworth [captures ; large number of larvae of the Vapourer Moth ( Orgyia 
auticpia), hitherto rare near Ackworth].
Nat. Hist.
Jour., Nov. 15th, 1885, 
p. 164.
John B.
Bridgman.
Yorkshire.
[Mania typica, larva obtained by Peter Inchbald, from People's Park, Hull, 
May 1884J.
Trans.
Ent. See.
Lond., 1886, p.
349.
S. J.
Capper.
Lancashire.
President's Address [to the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological 
Society : refers to the Lancashire Laphygnia cxigiia\ Eighth Annual Report 
of the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society— Session 1884.
Published 1885, pp.
6-9.
Jo;{N T.
Carrington.
Derbyshire, Yorkshire.
Collecting- the Genus Eupithecia [refers incidentally to E.
valcrianala 
{viniinala) near Derby (?), E.
coiistnctata near Richmond, Yorkshire, and 
E .
extensaria near Hull], Ent., May 1885, xviii.
141, 142, and 146.
Feb. 1888.
6o BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
John T.
CAiiRixcrrox.
Cheshire, Lancashire.
The Tephrosia Discussion [referring to the appearance of an occasional 
black T.
biimdjilaria in Delamere Forest ; and to the colour-variation of 
AjnpJiidasys beticlaria in Lancashire and Cheshire].
Ent., July 1886, p, 184.
John T.
Cakrington.
Yorks., Lanes., Cheshire, Derbyshire, Isle of Man, 
Collecting- British Clear-wing-ed Lepidoptera [notes founded on Yorkshire 
experience of Macro^ilossa bombyliforinis, and Gregson's South Lancashire and 
Cheshire experience of Trochiliicm crabroniformis {bembecifoniiis) ; Sesia 
sphei^iforz/iis and S.
ciilicifojviiis in Yorkshire ; S.
fonniciformis^XoxV^ixo.
and 
Derbyshire; S.
7nuscifo7'mis ( philaiithi/or?nis), Isle of Man].
Ent., April 
1887, XX.
96-105.
John T.
Carrington.
Yorkshire, Cheshire, Isle of Man.
Collecting" Autumnal Lepidoptera [with a reference to his capture of a long 
series of Cirrhadia xeravipelina on ash-trees by the side of Knavesmire, 
York ; and to the occurrence of its dark var.
unicolor in the park at the back 
of Douglas, Isle of Man ; also to Pei-onea penmitana frequenting the beds of 
dwarf rnses on Wallasey sand-hills ; and to the larva of Deilephila galii being 
captured on ^Yallasey sand-hills].
Ent., Aug. 1 887, xx.
202-206.
J. \Y.
Carter.
Yorkshire.
Acherontia atropos at Bradford [Two instances ; one at Girlington, 
Sep. 8th ; one at Idle, Sep. 18th, 1884].
Nat. World, April 1885, ii.
78.
J. AV.
C[arter].
Yorkshire.
Obituary [of John Firth, with notes of his lepidopterous captures near Brad- 
ford].
Young Nat., Oct. 1885, p.
235.
J. AY.
Carter.
Yorkshire.
Ennomos autumnaria at Leeds [flying about in the market, Sep. 1884], 
Young Nat., March 1886, vii.
56.
J. W.
Carter.
Yorkshire.
Entomolog-ical Note — a Comparison [of the appearance in different years of 
the HyberniiB and Phigalia near Bradford].
Young Nat., March 1886, vii.
56.
J. AY.
Carter.
Yorkshire.
Cheimatobia Brumata [Feb. 17th, 1878, is the latest date on which noticed 
flying near Bradford].
Young Nat., April 1886, vii.
79.
J. AY.
Carter.
Yorkshire.
Further note on C.
Brumata [and its time of appearance near Bradford].
Young Nat., May 1886, vii.
104.
J. AY.
Carter.
Yorkshire.
Asthena luteata [and Eupisteria heparata ; in Bradford district].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 1886, xxiii.
141.
Joseph Chappell.
Cheshire.
Deilephila euphorbias reported from Bowdon [details given].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1886, xxih.
108; also Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
250.
Joseph Chappell.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
The Tephrosia Discussion [details of occurrences in Lancashire and Cheshire 
given, and several localities cited for T.
crepusculaj'ia and T.
bhmdiUarid\.
Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
254.
Joseph Chappell.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Varieties of Amphidasys betularia [and its gradual change of colour near 
Manchester during forty years past ; localities cited].
Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
253-4.
[Mr. Clarke].
Westmorland or Furness.
[Nudaria mundana near Windermere, found commonly in one spot 
exhibited to Haggerston Ent. Soc, Sep. 2nd., 1886].
A'oung Nat., Oct.
1886, vii.
205.
Naturali 
^ 1888 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., & WM.
DENISOW ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — An?i.
&> Mag. Nat.
Hist.
' The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athe-nceuni.
NOW READY, 224 PAGES, 125 ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY 8vo.
PRICE 7s.
6cl.
. 
THE STRUC7URE AND LIFE-HISTORY OF 
BY 
L. C.
MIALL AND ALFRED DENNY.
LONDON: LOVELL REEVE & CO.
LEEDS: RICHARD JACKSON.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. EARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edivard Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching ; boxing female moths ; pairing insects.
How to obtain Larv^ by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; searching by night ; how to rear 
the larvas ; sleeving; hybernating larvae ; parasites; preserving larvae.
Pupa digging; preserv- 
ing pupas ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities ; net ; mothing ; honeydew ; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; number of speci- 
mens and manner of placing; transmission by post; entomologic.il diary; books.
MiCRO- 
lepidoptera; Coleoptera; Hymenoptera ; Breeding of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
'NATURALIST' REPRINTS.
No. I.
— List of Land and Freshwater Mollusca of Lancashire, by Robert 
Standen.
No. II.— Bird-notes from Heligoland for the year 1886, by Heinrich Gatke, 
C.M.Z.S.
No. HI.
— Heligoland, by John Cordeaux, M.B.O. U.
(with autotype plate of 
views of Mr. Gatke's garden).
NINEPENCE EACH, POST FREE.
The NATURALIST.
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof : 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/*^; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
My Telescope : and some objects which it shows me.
By a Quekett Club-man.
8vo., cloth, 84 pages, and plates.
[Roper & Drowley, Publishers.
The Shell-Collector's Handbook for the Field.
By J.
W. Williams, 8vo..
cloth, 
148 pages, interleaved.
[Roper & Drowley, Publishers.
The Shells of Ackworth and Went Vale.
By Hugh Richardson.
8vo., 30 pages 
and map.
[The Author.
Notes on the Cooke Collection of British Lepidoptera.
By John W.
Ellis, 
L.R.C.P. 8vo.
reprint, 1887, 8 pages [The Author.
British Frogs and Toads.
By Linnaeus Greening, Warrington, 1888.
8vo., 26 
pages.
[The Author.
The Naturalists' Monthly, Vol. i.
No. 6, Feb. 1888.
[Walter Scott, Publisher.
Journal of Conchology, vol.
v. No. 9, Jan. 1888.
[Mr. J.
W. Taylor, Editor.
Nottingham Nat. Soc.
— Trans, and 35th Report, 1887.
4to, 33 pages.
[Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part xcviii, Feb. 1888.
[J.
P2.
Robson, Editor.
Wesley Naturalist, No. 12.
February 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
Science Gossip, No. 278.
for Feb. 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
Barnsley Naturalists' Society — Transactions, vol.
v, 1885-6.
[The Society.
Manchester Geological Society — Transactions, vol.
xix, Part xiii.
[The Society.
Ice Work in Edenside and some of the adjoining parts of North Western England.
By J.
G. Goodchild.
8vo.
reprint, 1887, 57 pages.
[The Author.
Revue Bryologique, 15'^ Annee, 1888, No. i.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
Cumberland and Westmorland Assoc.
— Trans., No. xii, 1886-7.
[The Assoc.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 122, Feb. 1888.
[Birmingham N.H.S., 
On Some Anglesey Dykes.
II.
By Alfred Harker, 8vo.
reprint, 7 pages.
[Author.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., vol.
xii.
No. loo, Feb. 15, 1888.
[J.E.Clarke& B.B.Le Tall, Eds.
Psyche, a Journal of Entomology, vol.
v, Nos. 141 and 142, Jan. and Feb. 1888.
[The Cambridge Ent. Club.
The Essex Naturalist, vol.
ii, Nos. i & 2, Jan.
& Feb. 1888.
[The Essex Field Club.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Statnton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is los.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c.
, should be sent to the Editors at .the above address.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturali-sts' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc.
is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
61 
Joseph Chafpell.
Cheshire, Lancashire, Derbyshire.
Obnoxious and Injurious Insects [Sesia tipidiformis very common at 
Bowdon and Manchester ; S.
spheoiforinis, sparingly on Chat Moss ; S.
beui- 
beciformis, very destructive near Manchester ; Zeiizera cesciili at Burton-on- 
Trent ; and Cossiis ligniperda, common in Dunham Park, sparingly all round 
Manchester, and an oak tree quite riddled near Peover, Cheshire].
Young 
Nat., Dec. 1887, viii.
228.
Wm. Eagle Clarke.
Yorkshire.
Heliothis peltigera in Yorkshire [on the sandhills at Kilnsea, Holderness, 
just out of pupa, 1 6th Sep. 1885 : new to Yorkshire fauna].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Oct. 1885, xxii.
106.
Richard Coby.
Lancashire.
Nyssia zonaria in Lancashire [at Crossens near Southport, many specimens ;, 
food-plant knapweed].
Ent., June 1886, xix.
158.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Yorkshire.
On Melanism [with a reference to Eupithecia albipunciala var.
angelicata 
Prest, from Selby].
Ent., March 1887, xx.
58-59.
[J.
A. Cooper].
Derbyshire.
[A Series of Tephrosia biundularia Bork., from Derby, exhibited to South 
London Ent. Soc, Nov. loth, 1887].
Young Nat., Dec. 1887, viii.
234;.
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1887, xxiv.
162; Ent., Dec. 1887, xx.
333.
[Mr. Cropper].
Lancashire..
[Nonag^ria neurica from Lancashire exhibited to Cambridge Ent. Society], 
Ent., April 1885, xviii.
128.
Elizabeth Cross.
Lincolnshire.
Nemeophila plantaginis Double-brooded [in Lincolnshire, where it occurs 
in great numbers on the sandy warrens near Applel^y].
Ent., Sep. 1886, 
xix.
231.
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Isle of Man, Lancashire, 
C. W.
Dale.
Derbyshire, Durham, Northumberland.
The History of our British Butterflies.
[This is issued in the form of a 
separately-paged supplement to the 'Young Naturalist,' and enters in great 
detail into the.
whole history and range of the various species, collated from 
all possible sources of information.
The Beverley records iox Faptlio viachaon 
are given at pp.
5-6, and for P.
podalirhis at p.
7 ; Robson's record of a large 
flight of Fieri s brassicce at Hartlepool is repeated at p.
15 ; Gonepteryx rhanuii 
stated not to have been observed as Manx at p.
25 ; Colias hyale stated as 
having occurred as far north as York in 1842, and in Yorkshire and Lan- 
cashire in 1868, at pp.
35-6 ; absence of Thecla betiihr from Isle of Man, 
Yorkshire, Durham, and Northumberland, and its presence in Lancashire 
referred to at p.
39 ; absence of T.
w-albtim from Isle of Man, and its 
occurrence at Melton Wood near Doncaster noted at p.
41 ; the fraudulent 
Yorkshire record ol T.
pruni, and its inclusion as a Derbyshire insect on the 
strength of one being in a box of captures within a few miles of Chesterfield, 
referred to at p.
43 ; Geo. Wailes' record of Polyoniviatiis argiohcs for Nor- 
thumberland and Durham repeated at p.
56 ; P.
acis noted for Yorkshire and 
Lincolnshire at p.
57 ; the presence of P.
corydoii in Lancashire and its 
absence from Yorkshire and Isle of Man noted at p.
65 ; detailed notices of 
the occurrence in Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire, and Lancashire of 
P. agestis, and its varieties artaxgrxes, sal/iiacis, and alloiis, given at pp.
76-8 ; 
the absence o{ Netneobins lucina from Northumberland, Durham, and the Isle 
of Man, and its presence in Westmorland and Cumberland, noted at p.
82 ; 
Yorkshire cited at p.
85 as the furthest northern locality for Afelanargia 
galathea ; increasing scarcity of Hipparckia juegccra since i860 in the Durham 
district, and its presence in the Isle of Man, noted at p.
90 ; Manx occurrence 
of H.
semele noted at p.
92 ; absence of //.
tithoitus from Isle of Man noted 
at p.
98 ; presence of var.
arete of //.
hyperaiitJnis in Yorkshire, and the 
captu re in Durham of two individuals of that species without any spot whal- 
March i88S.
E 
62 BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
ever, noted at p.
100 ; and at p.
loi the absence of the species from the Isle 
of Man ; capture in Yorkshire by Mr. Watson of Haworth's original specimen 
of what is now var.
polydama of Ccenotiyuipha typhnn^ and the occurrence of 
x-^x.
philoxenus ('the Manchester Ringlet') on Thorne Moor, Yorkshire, and 
commonly on Chat Moss, Lancashire, noted at p.
102, and at pp.
103 and 
104 it is stated that some Cumberland specimens appear to be somewhat 
intermediate between vars.
laidion and philoxemis ; the absence of the species 
from Isle of Man is noted at p.
103 ; and on p.
104 somewhat lengthy details 
are given as to Yorkshire and Lancashire occurrences of the species and its 
varieties laidion and philoxen2i,s\ Young Nat., Supplements to the numbers 
for Feb., March, April, May, June, July, Aug., Sep., Oct., Nov., and Dec, 
1887, at the pages cited above.
C. W.
Dale.
Lancashire.
On the Variation of Species [with incidental references to Manchester 
Chortobiits daviis\.
Young Nat., July 1885, PP- 1 50- 152.
(iEORGE Dawson.
Cumberland.
Local Entomology.
Part 4.
Cuspidates.
[Detailed notes on the distribu- 
tion, habits, and life-history of the Notodontidte, 17 species, occurring in 
Cumberland].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., 1883-84, vol.
ix.
pp.
201- 
209.
J. Lyon Denson.
Cheshire.
Abundance of A.[braxas] grossulariata [and oiLiparis aiirifliia, in Cheshire, 
and scarcity of Vanessa Lardiii\ Nat. World, Dec. 188"^,.
p. 232.
N. F.
Dobree.
Yorkshire.
Sphinx convolvuli [at Beverley, two, and in Hull, two].
Ent., Nov. 1887, 
XX.
303.
Robert Dutton.
Yorkshire.
Sphinx convolvuli [three males and two females near York, Aug. 27th and 
29th, Sep. 4th, 5th, and 7th].
Ent., Oct. 1887, xx.
272.
C. Eales.
Cumberland.
Sphinx convolvuli [at Carlisle, 31st Sep.
{sic)\.
Ent., Oct. 1887, xx.
272.
[Thos.
Eedle].
Lancashire.
Coenonympha typhon ; Irish and Manchester specimens compared].
Young 
Nat., Nov. 1886, vii.
228.
John W.
Ellis.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Entomological Localities near Liverpool [a most valuable and useful paper, 
dealing with the lepidoptera and coleoptera v\hich occur on the Lancashire 
coast sandhills, at Wallasey sandhills, at Eidston Flill, and on Simmonswood 
Moss ; very numerous species cited with notices of their numbers and 
habitats].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1886, xxiii.
57-63.
W. Finch, jun.
Yorkshire.
Variety of Smerinthus populi [bred from a Scarborough larva ; characterised 
by absence of markings].
Ent., May 1886, xix.
126.
J. (jARDNER (Darlington).
Durham or Yorkshire (which ?).
On the Identity of certain Agrotidas [refers to A.
tritici and A.
nigricans 
occurring 'here,' and negatively to A.
obelisca and A.
aqiiilina\ Ent., June 
1885.
xviii.
166.
J. (Gardner.
Durham.
Chserocampa nerii at Hartlepool [on July 23rd, 1885].
Ent., Aug. 1885, 
xviii.
218 ; and Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep. 1885, xxii.
89.
J. Gardner.
? Durham.
Tinea picarella bred [from fungi; locality not stated, 'but probably Hartle- 
pool].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep. 1885, xxii.
90.
J. Gardner.
? Durham.
Tinea picarella [bred from fungus; locality not stated].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
July 1887, xxiv.
42.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1885-6-7.
63 
John (jardner.
Durham, Northumberland.
Obituary.
John Sang" [with notices of Harpella bractedla at Shotley Bridge ; 
of Miana expoUta ; and of Gelechia tetragonclla near Hartlepool].
Young 
Nat., April 1887, viii.
73-76.
John Gardner.
Durham.
Luperina cespitis at Hartlepool [on Aug. 24th, 1887 : new to Durham 
County List].
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
178.
John Gardner.
Durham, Yorkshire.
Peculiarities of the Season [scarcity of Apa/nea gcuiina and Xylopliasia 
riirea; abundance of Maviestra albicolon and Heliotliis ;/in?-ginata ; and 
reported Yorkshire occurrence of Vanessa antiopa\.
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, 
viii.
181.
R. W.
GouLDiNG and H.
Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Rhopalocerous Fauna of Louth [36 Butterflies enumerated, with localities].
Nat. World, iMay 1885, pp.
83-84.
[Mr. Goldthwaite].
Cumberland.
Exhibition of varieties of Lyccoia alsiis and Fidoiiia atoinaria, together 
with black Xylophasia polyodon and Niidaria senex, captured by himself at 
Keswick, at Haggerston Ent. Soc.
Meeting].
Young Nat., Dec. 1886, vii.
249.
Thomas Gibbs, jun.
Derbyshire.
Asthena blomeri [and its dates of appearance in a wood at Bretby, near 
Burton-on-Trent].
Ent,, Jan. 1886, p.
16.
H. Goss.
Yorkshire.
Sphinx convolvuli [and Acherontia atropos near Spurn Point and on 
vessels in the North Sea ; extracts from Cordeaux's paper in T/ie Naturalist 
on 'The Spurn'].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1885, xxii.
162.
Herbert Goss.
Lancashire, Westmorland.
Melanic Variation in Lepidoptera of High Latitudes [discusses Cicno- 
iiympha typhon [davits) as an instance of species 'becoming paler the further 
we proceed north,' from his experience in Lancashire and \Vestmorland].
Ent., April 1885, xviii.
122.
•C.
S. Gregson.
Lancashire, Yorkshire.
Notes on Variation in some Shetland Lepidoptera [refers to the variation of 
Hepialiis hiimidi in Lancashire, and of other species in Lancashire and 
Yorkshire].
Young Nat., Jan. 1885, vi.
15-19.
C. S.
Gregson.
Cheshire, Isle of Man.
Entomological Nomenclature [with note of Oxyptilns teticrii, from Delamere 
Forest, and Isle of Man].
Young Nat., Feb. 1885, vi.
34.
C. S.
G[rec;son].
Cheshire, Cumberland, Isle of Man.
Obituary.
Nicholas Cooke [and his discoveries of Lepidoptera in the North 
of England].
Young Nat., June 1885, vi.
139-142.
C. S.
Gregson.
Cheshire, Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland.
Note on certain Agrotidae [refers to colour-variation of ^Yallasey and Bidston 
Hill specimens of Giiophos obsciiraria.
and mentions Lancashire, Westmorland, 
Cumberland (where he took it recently) and Cheshire for Agrotis si /ii Hans 
{pyropliila)\ Ent., June 1885, xviii.
165-166.
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man.
Note [on Manx lepidoptera ; Sciophila colquhounana^ Eudorea linadal:s^ and 
an unknown species].
Young Nat., Sep. 1885, p.
215.
C. S.
Gregson.
Lancashire.
Three hours [collecting Lepidoptera] on the Sandhills at Crosby, near 
Liverpool, on Bank Holiday, Aug. 3rd, 1885 [numerous species cited].
Young 
Nat., Oct. 1885, vi.
234-5.
March 1888.
64 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1885-6-7.
C. S.
ClREosox.
Lancashire, Cumberland, Cheshire.
Notes on intermediate Varieties of Lepidopterous Insects [ ; of MelitiTa 
arieniis in X.
Lancashire and near Liverpool ; of Chortobms daviis in Lanca- 
shire and Cuml)erland ; of Tephrosia biundtdaria in Delamere Forest ; 
Chancas graminis m Lancashire; and numerous other species whose localities 
are not given].
Young Nat..
Nov. 1885, vi.
251-254.
C. S.
CiREc;sox.
Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire.
Notes on Lepidoptera .
. .
[discusses Lord Walsingham's views on melanism, 
illustrating by Aniphydasis hetularia in Cheshire, Tephrosia butndnlai-ia ancl 
Boariiiia repandata in Delamere Forest, Gnophos obsctirata at Bidston Hill.
Cheshire, Abraxas grossidariata var.
varleyata in Lancashire and Yorkshire ; 
and Tephrosia crepiisciilaria at Barnsley].
Young Nat., Dec. 1885, vi.
276- 
278.
C. S.
Gregson.
Lancashire, Cheshire, Westmorland.
Variation in Lepidoptera.
Intermediate Forms [of Bovibyx quen tts on the 
coast of Lancashire and Cheshire ; of Larentia didyinata at Windermere ; and 
of A/nphidasis betjilaria in Lancashire, Westmorland, and Cheshire].
Young 
Nat., April 1886, vii.
61-64.
C. S.
Gregson.
? Yorkshire.
Exceptional Proceedings of a Female [Dasypolia] Templi [sent by 
Mr. Harrison of Barnsley ; the irregularity was in ovijDosition].
Young Nat., 
June 1886, vii.
127.
C. S.
Gregson.
Lancashire.
Rearing- [Abraxas] Grossulariata and [Spilosoma] Lubricepeda (sic) 
[about eighty good varieties of the former bred from 4,000 larvee ; larvae of 
latter fed upon Acoiiitiivi napelhis were almost black].
Young Nat., Sep.
1886, vii.
192.
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man.
Notes on Isle of Man Captures in June [1887 ; numerous species of Lepi- 
doptera mentioned].
Young Nat., July 1887, viii.
138.
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man.
A Day's ' Scientific ' Insect-Hunting on the Isle of Man in June 
[1887 ; several species of Lepidoptera referred to].
Young Nat., Aug. 1887, 
viii.
153-155- 
C. S.
Gregson.
Lancashire.
Eupithecia permutata at Liverpool [i.e., Formby and Whitbarrow Scar].
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
179.
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man, Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness.
Note on some Varieties of Dianthaecia Conspersa from North Wales and 
from Shetland [compared with specimens from various localities in the North 
of England].
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
178.
C. S.
Gregson.
Lancashire.
A Strange Larva on Cabbage [near Liverpool ?
— might possibly be Botys 
urticalis\ Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
179.
[In reply to this note, Geo. T.
Porritt and Fred.
Bond each write in the 
next number of Young Nat.
(Oct. 1887, p.
203), suggesting that the unknown 
larva was that of Pioma forficalis\ 
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man.
Polia nigrocincta bred [from Manx larvx].
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
179.
C. S.
Gregson.
Yorkshire.
An Exceedingly Dwarfed Specimen of Tephrosia biundularia [taken by 
George Rose near Barnsley, June 1887].
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
181.
C. S.
Gregson.
Lancashire.
Semaria Woeberana [occurring at ?^Ir. Gregson's house, Fletcher Grove, 
Liverpool, June 1887, on pear-trees].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
203-204.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1885-6-7.
65 
C. S.
Gregson and G.
Rose.
Yorkshire.
A Night's Sugaring- in Wharncliffe Wood, Y orkshire, in Aug. 1887 [the 
results were TriphtFua fimbria^ Apat?iea connexay Nocfiia glareosa, N'.
fesiiva, 
plecta^ N.
da/ilii, y.
daja, Cloaiitha soiidagifiis, Cosniia trapezina, Orthosia 
snspecta and var.
cous^euer, and Aviphipyra tragopogonis ; Cidaria iinnianata^ 
Larentia dniymaia, and Euaorea ulniella also taken ; and unsuccessful search 
for Cidaria reticulata was made].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
193-194.
James Grime.
Lancashire.
Plusia festucae [and its occurrence near Bolton, formerly in a few places, 
but now confined to one, and likely to l:)ecome extinct from being too closely 
collected].
Ent., Aug. 1886, xix.
209.
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Hadena rectilinea [once very abundant near Sheffield ; now quite extinct].
Ent., July 1886, p.
181.
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Apamea connexa [near Sheffield ; inquiry as to discovery of larva].
Ent.
, 
Oct. 1886, xix.
252.
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Lepidoptera at Sheffield during 1886 [a most unsatisfactory season, but no 
species are mentioned or details given].
Ent., Feb. 1887, 42- 
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Zeuzera pyrina in March [on the 3rd March, 1887, in the town of 
Sheffield].
Ent., May 1887, xx.
137.
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Amphidasys betularia var.
doubledayaria [near Sheffield : a query as to 
result of breeding this form].
Ent..
July 1887.
xx.
182.
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Migration of insects [reference to abundance of the three species of Pieris near 
Sheffield in 1887, and of Colias edtisa there in 1877].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec.
1887, xxiv.
159.
A. E.
Hall.
Yorkshire.
Xanthia aurago in October [close to Sheffield, 22nd Oct., 1887].
Young 
Nat., Nov. 1887, viii.
222.
J. Howard Hall.
Lancashire.
Sphinx convolvuli [a female in town of Bury.
Sep. 2nd].
Ent., Oct. 1887, 
XX.
272.
[Mr. Hall].
Derbyshire.
[Variation in Derbyshire specimens of Cleoceris viminalis Fb. and Xanthia 
fnlvago L.
: exhibited to South London Ent. Soc.
Feb. i8th, 1886].
Ent., 
April 1886, xix.
94; and Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 1886, xxii.
267.
S. R.
Hallam.
Derbyshire.
Death's Head Hawk Moth (Acherontia atropos) [near Burton-on-Trent, 
live larvce in Aug. 1885].
Nat.
^Yor]d.
Oct. 1885, p.
197.
GEORiiE A.
Harker.
Lancashire.
Chaerocampa celerio at Crosby [near Liverpool ; Sep. i6th, 1885].
Ent., 
Oct. 1885, xviii.
262.
G. A.
Harker.
Lancashire.
C[haerocampa] celerio at Crosley [misprint for Crosby near Liver]iool, 
Sep. i6th, 18S5].
Young Nat., Oct. 1885, p.
232.
J. Harrison.
Yorkshire.
Cleoceris (Epunda) viminalis and Melanippe tristata [: black forms of 
former bred, and second brood of latter near Barnsley].
Ent., Seji.
1SS5, 
xviii.
244.
March i8b8.
66 BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1 885-6-7.
John Harrison.
Yorkshire, Derbyshire.
Tephrosia crepuscularia and T.
biundularia [, their differentiation ; and 
their variation and occurrence near Earnsley and in Derbyshire].
Ent.
, June 
1886, xix.
159-161.
John Henderson.
Yorkshire, Lancashire, ?
Cheshire.
The Buckler Collection [contained Erebia blaiidina from Yorkshire eggs : 
ChoTtobiiis dazus from Chat Moss ; and Sesia ciiliciforjuis from J.
Steele, of 
Congleton].
Young Xat., May 1886, vii.
92-96.
Ci. AI.
A. Hewett.
Notting-hamshire.
Smerinthus ocellatus at South Searle, Newark, unusually abundant ; details 
given].
Ent., Oct. 18S6, xix.
250.
G. M.
A. Hewett.
Notting-hamshire.
Acronycta aceris [a second brood at South Searle, Newark ; details given].
Ent., Oct. 1SS6.
xix.
251.
John Hill.
Derbyshire.
Hybemia defoliaria [at Little Eaton, near Derby, in February, unusually 
late].
Young Nat., March 1S85, vi.
71.
John Hill.
Derbyshire, 
Colias Hyale [at Babbington near Ilkeston, July 4th, 1S85].
Young Nat., 
Aug. 1SS5, vi.
191-192.
John Hill.
Derbyshire, 
Notes on the Variation of [31 species of] Lepidoptera taken near Derby.
Ent. Mo.
Mag., June 1S86, xxiii.
5-7.
John Hill.
Derbyshire.
Taking- lepidoptera on Grass Stems, etc.
[55 species referred to as thus 
found in the Derby district].
Young Nat., Jan. 1887.
4"^.
J. B.
HoDGKiNSON.
Westmorland and Furness, 
Habits of Ephippiphora tetragonana [at \Yindermere].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
March 1SS5.
xxi.
235.
J. B.
Hod -xKiNSON.
Derbyshire, 
Bryophila algae [two in Sidebotharn's collection were taken at Strines 
iMarple) ; brief history given].
Ent., April 1885, viii.
122.
J. B.
HoDfiKiNSON.
Westmorland or Furness.
The Home of Cidaria reticulata [on the borders of Windermere Lake in 
Lancashire, where it tirst occurred in 1856 to author and T.
H. Allis, and 
where it feeds on Lnpatiens noIi-ine-tans;eye : its great scarcity stated and 
history given].
Ent. Mo.
Alag., Sep. 1885, xxii.
91-92.
J. B, HoDGKiNsoN.
Lancashire, Westmorland, Furness, 
Stray Notes from Preston [refei-ring to numerous species at Windermere, 
Grange, Witherslack, and Blackpool].
Ent., Oct. 1885, xviii.
266.
J. B.
HoDGKiNsoN.
"Westmorland or Furness.
Nepticula myrtillella feeding on Polypody [near Windermere].
Ent., Fe1).
1S86, p.
43.
J. B.
HoDGKiN-'iN.
Westmorland or Furness.
Absence of Cidaria reticulata [from its accustomed haunts].
Ent., Feb.
1S86, xix.
43.
J. B.
HoDGKiNSON.
Lancashire, 
Trifurcula pallidella and Genista tinctoria [at Dutton near Ribchester.
where it was tirst discovered as British by Mr. Hodgkinson in 1879].
Ent.
Mo. Mag., Jan. 1880, xvi.
186 ; and June 1886, xxiii.
15.
J. B'.
Hodgkinson.
Westmorland and Furness, Lancashire.
Gelechia ossella at Arnside [and Grange, in 1880 and 1883].
Ent., Sep.
1886.
xix.
233.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1885-6-7.
67 
J. B.
HoDGKiNSON.
Westmorland and Furness.
Chrysoclysta bimaculella at Windermere [where also occurs Nepticiila 
inti7nelld\.
Ent., Sep. 18S6, xix.
233.
J. B.
HoDGKiNSON.
Yorkshire.
Apamea connexa in Scotland [the original British locality stated to be near 
Barnsley].
Ent., Sep. 1 886, xix.
231.
J. B.
HODGKINSON.
Lancashire, Westmorland or Furness.
Miana captiuncula (expolita) at Arnside [and at Windermere ; in fair 
quantity].
Ent., Oct. 1 886, xix.
253.
J. B.
HODGKINSON.
Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland, L of Man.
Micro-Lepidoptera in 1886 [near Preston, at Arnthwaite near Carlisle, at 
Morecambe Bay, at Windermere, at Arnside, and in the Isle of Man 
numerous species cited].
Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
244-246.
J. B.
HODGKINSON.
Lancashire, Durham or Yorkshire, Isle of Man.
Notes upon Nepticulidae [near Preston, Southport, Darlington, Port Erin, 
etc.
; numerous species cited].
Ent., Oct. 1887, xx.
251-253.
W. F.
DE V.
Kane.
Yorkshire.
Some Notes on the Comparative Study of British and Continental 
Rhopalocera [; with a passing allusion to the dark-brown Yorkshire Ccejio- 
nynnpha typJion with numerous and large ocelli].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 1887, 
xxiii.
247.
R. Kay. Lancashire.
Sphinx Convolvuli at Bury [Sept.
13th, 1885].
Ent., Nov. 1885, xviii.
295.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
In the Woods in April \_Melanargia galathea, Gonepteryx rhaiiini, Euchelia 
jac(ib(VcB, and Polyoiiniatiis phlcpas mentioned as occurring near Louth].
Sci. Goss., April 1886, pp.
78-79.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
The Sea Banks of the Lincolnshire Coast ^Euchelia jacobcvcr, Lasiomniata 
7//eg-tvi'a, Cy/it/iia ' cardiii\ and 1\xnessa tuiicic, noted as comnion at Mable- 
thorpe].
Nat. World, Jan. 1885, ii.
10.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Nature near Louth, East Lincolnshire [Localities given for Etichclia 
jacobcvcs, Melaiiargia galathea, Melitcva arteviis, Eticlidia giyphica, and Co/ias 
edusd\.
Nat. World, Feb. 1885, ii.
24-25.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
The Clouded Yellow [Colias ednsa) [very abundant near Louth in 1877, not 
seen since].
Science Gossip, July 1885, p.
165.
H. Wallls Kew. Lincolnshire.
Mablethorpe [lepidoptera ; five species enumerated as seen Tune 6th].
Nat.
World, July 1885, p.
137.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Louth Naturalists' Society [Pearl-bordered Fritillary {Argynnis euphrosyiie) 
on May 25th, at Burwell].
Nat. World, Aug. 1885, p.
155.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Rambles near the Coast [at Mablethorpe, Theddlethorpe, and Saltflect ; 
notices of six lepidoptera].
Nat. World, Oct. 1885, pp.
188-150.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
[Colias edusa near Louth in 1877].
Nat. World, Dec. 1S85, p.
221.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Woodland Rambles in Lincolnshire [in llaugham and Maltby Wooils, 23rd 
April and 1st May, 1886; Vanessa io, Milaiiargia gaiat/iea.
and Diurnea 
fa'^dla noted].
Young Nat., July 1886, vii.
129-131.
RLirch 188S.
68 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1 885-6-7.
H. Wallis Kew.
Lincolnshire.
Field Notes.
No. 12.
Natural History Odds and Ends.
\Dicranida vinula 
at Louth ; notes on its pupation ; Tortrix viridana and Noctita briintiea near 
Louth].
Nat. World, Dec. 1886, p.
221-222.
Lancashire and Cheshire Entomolocical Society.
Lane, Cheshire.
Abstract of the Session [referring to Heliothis peltigera^ Wallasey ; and 
Laphyjrina exigua, Crosby].
Eighth Annual Report, Lancashire and 
Cheshire Ent. Soc, 1885, p.
5. 
B. LocKYER.
Yorkshire, Cheshire.
Notes on Lepidoptera [with reference to Argyjinis paphia var.
valezina, A.
adippe, and Smerinthiis populi, all near Whitby], Young Nat., Aug. 1886, 
vii.
163-165.
{Boinbyx riibi, moors and lanes near Whitby, common as larva 
in Aug.
; B.
querctis {calliinie)^ larva common on the moors near Whitby, 
Aug. 1866 ; Saturnia carpi ni^ larva common on the Yorkshire moors, Aug.
1866].
Young Nat., Sep. 1886, vii.
189-190.
yDicrania-a vinula at Whitby 
in 1866, and Notodonta ziczac at Whitby].
Young Nat., Dec. 1886, p.
244.
YAcronyda rumicis at Birkenhead].
Young Nat., Jan. 1 887, viii.
22.
\^Ai7a7-ta myrtilli at Whitby].
Young Nat., June 1887, viii.
103.
W. LOWENBERG.
Etymology of *Oubit.' [The hairy caterpillars of the Tiger-moths {Ardiada) 
are called 'Oubuts' by the English Northern men, as Ed.Topsell in his History 
of Serpents, 1607, p.
665 (1653 ed.), says].
Notes and Queries, March 14th, 
1885, 6th S.
xi.
217.
John Mack ay.
Cumberland, Durham, Lancashire, Northumberland.
Vanessa polychloros in .
. .
Argyllshire [with illustrative reference to 
its Northern English distribution].
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
176.
Philip B.
Mason.
Derbyshire.
Semaria Wceberana [occurs freely in Mr. Mason's garden at Burton-on-Trent ; 
food-tree stated].
Young Nat., Nov. 1887, viii.
223.
T. Meldrum.
Yorkshire.
Early Emergence of C[irrhoedia] Xerampelina [9th Aug. at Ripon ; all over 
by 22nd Aug., which is the usual time].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
203.
Thomas Meldrum.
Yorkshire.
Ennomos fuscantaria [bred from larva found in Newby Park, Ripon ; details 
given].
Young Nat., Nov. 1887, viii.
223.
H. Murray.
Furness.
Breeding Botys terrealis [from Grange larvre].
Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
255.
H. Murray.
Lake District.
Breeding Cidaria reticulata and Penthina postremana [from Lake District 
larvte ; details of food-plant, etc., given].
Ent., Oct. 1886, xix.
251-252 ; 
also see Young Nat., Jan. 1887, viii.
15.
H. MuRRy\Y.
Lancashire.
Sphinx convolvuli [three specimens, all worn, and one of Chccrocampa celerio, 
at Carnforth].
Ent., Dec. 1887, xx.
324.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire.
Sesia tipuliformis [and how to find the larvae : incidentally refers to Chester 
experience].
Ent., April 1886, p.
90.
RoHT.
Newstead.
Cheshire.
Macaria liturata.
Variety [from Delamere Forest, roughly described].
Ent., 
Oct. 1887, XX.
279.
J. E.
NowERs. Derbyshire.
Acherontia atropos at Burton-on-Trent [an imago at Branstone Junction, 
Sep. 28th, 1885, a pupa a few days before, and several larvce in and about 
the town during the year].
Ent., Dec. 1885, xviii.
317.
N.ituralist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
69 
Stephen Pegler.
Nottinghamshire.
Chaerocampa celerio at Retford [in November 1884].
Ent., April 1885, 
xviii.
121.
[Another occurrence].
Ent., Nov. 1885, xviii.
293.
F. N.
Pierce.
? Lancashire or Cheshire.
A New Geometer [Oporabia approximaria Gregs., sp.
nov.
; not described ; 
locality not stated].
Voung Nat., Feb. 1885, vi.
48.
F. N.
Pierce.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Butterflies around Liverpool [Notes on the unusual occurrence of Vanessa 
cardtii^ V.
atalanta, V.
io, Satynis megara, and S.
ageria in 1884].
Young 
Nat., April 1885, vi, 92-93.
F. N.
Pierce and G.
A. Harker.
Cheshire.
Easter at Hartford [numerous lepidoptera enumerated as captured].
Young 
Nat., June 1885, pp.
120-123.
F. N.
Pierce.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Are Butterflies disappearing from the British Isles?
[refers to Argynnis 
aglaia occurring at Southport in profusion in 1 884, and not found at all in 
1885; to Vanessa io in various Lancashire and, Cheshire localities; and to 
Satyriis megara not having decreased in 1885 as compared with 1 884, in 
Cheshire and Lancashire].
Young Nat., Nov. 1885, vi.
260.
F, N.
Pierce.
Lancashire.
Variety of Triphaena pronuba [varying in colour of left posterior wing ; bred].
Ent., May 1886, xix.
128 ; also see note with same heading in Young Nat., 
Aug. 1885, vi.
192.
F. N.
Pierce.
Durham.
Notes on a Holiday in Suffolk [with comparison ot Durham and Suffolk 
Cranibus perlelhis at p.
214].
Young Nat., Nov. 1886, vii.
213-218.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Further Notes on British Pterophoridae [ ; referring to the habits of 
PteropJioi-ns inonodactyhis, P.
acavthodactylus^ and P.
bipiinctidaciylus, as 
observed near Huddersfield].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Feb. 1885, xxi.
207-8.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Arctia mendica feeding" on Birch [in Green Farm Wood near Doncaster, 
where Phycis beticlella in plenty and a few Coleophom ciirrucipennella were 
also taken].
Ent., June 1885, xviii.
194.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Heliothis peltigera, etc., in Yorkshire [taken by W.
E. Clarke at Kilnsea in 
Holderness, Sep. 6th, and new to Yorkshire Fauna ; H.
marguiata, larvae 
near Scarborough, Aug. 31st ; Sphinx convohnli \n ffudderstield town, Aug.
22nd].
Ent., Oct. 1885,' xviii.
264.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Lancashire.
Lepidoptera at Southport [in mid-Aug. 1885 : refers to Agrotis tritici, A.
aquilina, A.
obelisca, occurring together along with A.
vestigialis ( valligera J, 
A. cursor ia^ and A.
priccox also Phytonietra irnca and Leiiconia saliiis\ 
Ent., Nov. 1885, xviii.
300.
[G.
T. Porritt.] Lancashire.
[Melanic variety of an Agrotis, probably ^^^.t^'/Zx obelisca Hiibn., taken at 
Southport; exhibited to Ent..
Soc.].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Dec. 2nd., 
1885, p.
xxxiii.
; Ent. Mo.
Mag., ]-xx\.
1886, xxii.
188.
G. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Bryotropha [Gelechia] politella in Yorkshire [common near Greenfield].
Ent., Jan. 1886, xix.
16.
March 1888.
70 BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA.
1SS5-6-7.
G. T.
Porrit:.
Yorkshire, 
Description of the Larva of Scoparia ang-ustea, Curt..
=coai-ctalis, Zell.
[taken abundantly on Huddersheld Cemeiery wali : details of capture and 
life-history given].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Fel\ 1SS6, xxii.
209-210.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Food of the Larva of Polia fiavicincta Ian abundant species about 
Huddersfield.
feeding on low plants in great variety].
Ent., May 1SS6, 
xix.
12S.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Melanism in Hibernia prog-eminaria and Diurnea fagella [near Hudders- 
neld : e^ddence that dark forms are much commoner than formerly].
Ent.
Mo. Mag,, July 1SS6, xxiii.
40-41.
G. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Spilodes palealis in Yorkshire [near Whitby : new to Yorkshire list].
Ent.
, 
Oc:.
1SS6.
xix.
255.
Ge'.'.
T. Porritt.
Yorkshire.
Pterophorus dichrodactyius and P.
Bertrami [at Saltburn-by-the-Sea : 
"r::.:.- ::" occurrence in August].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1SS6, xxiii.
163.
Gz:.
T. Porritt.
, Yorkshire.
[Variation in Cidaria suffumata and Hypsipetes elutata at Huddersiield : 
specimens exhibited to Ent. Soc.
London.
Dec. 1st, 1886.] Trans.
Ent.
S-'C.
Lonu., 1SS6.
p. Ivii : also Ent. Mo.
Mag..
Jan. 1S87, xxiii.
192 ; Ent..
Jan. 1SS7, XX.
21 : and Young Nat., Jan. 1SS7, viii.
14.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Yorkshire.
[Variation in Huddersfield examples of Hibemia progemmaria, and the 
:- ::c:.-r :: •.
.tt:-:t:s:n.] Proc.
Ent!
Soc. Lond., April 6th, 1SS7 ; Ent. Mo.
Ma~..
Miv 1SS7.
xxiii.
2S0 : Ent., Mav 18S7, xx.
140 ; Young Nat..
Mav 
1887, viii.
'S7.
[Geo. T.
Porritt.] Yorkshire.
[Melanic varieties of Diurnea fag-ella from Huddersfield, exhibited to Ent.
Soc. Lond., Oct. 5th, 1SS7 ; the typical pale form had almost disappeared 
from the neighbourhood.] Ent..
Nov. 1SS7.
xx.
310 : Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov.
1SS7, xxiv.
140 ; Yoimg Nat , Nov. 1S87, viii.
216.
[G.
T. Porritt.] Durham.
[Dark Form of Crambus perlellus being exhibited to Ent. Soc.
Lond., 
Oct " r: 5:."..
i^i,".
Mr. Poriitt remarked that this brown form occurred at 
Hartlepool with the ordinar\- typical form of the species, and was there 
regarded as only a variety of it.] Ent. Mo.
Mag..
Nov. 1887, xxiv.
139: 
Ent., Nov. 1S87, XX.
309; Young Nat., Nov. 1887, "^'hi.
215.
G. PuLLEx. Derbyshire.
[Lepidopterous] Notes from Derby ^Ac7-072ycia nnnicis, A.
alni, Pygara 
bucephala.
Eupith.
iiaiiaia, Anarta inyi-iilli, Agrotis porfhyrea, Acheroutia 
at}-opos.
Sphinx coiivolvuli, and Cn-rJmdia mentioned, with details].
Young 
Nat., Oct. 1S85, p.
238.
E. L.
Ragonot.
Cheshire, Yorkshire.
Revision of the British Species of Phycitidse and Gallerids.
^Homczo- 
soma saxicoba Vaugh., stated to be apparently the most frequent form of 
nimbella in England : ^v^iter has it from Yorkshire, Cheshire, etc.] Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1885, xxii.
26.
L. R[icHARD50N] and B.
B. L.
T[all].
Yorkshire.
York : Bootham School News [Excursion, June 4th, ^Yhitby ; four species 
of lepidoptera named].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1885, p.
95.
Naturalist,- 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1885-6-7.
71 
L. RiCHARDSOX.
Yorkshire, Northumberland.
Holiday Captures [; Amphidasis betularia near Sheffield; Chelonia plan- 
taginis at Sleights, near Whitby ; Phisia interrovationis near Hexham ; Scsia 
bembeciformis at Newcastle-on-Tyne].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sept.
15th, 1885, 
p. 122.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its Neighbourhood 
[etc.].
Vol. n.
Leeds: printed for the author.
1885 [pp.
viii.
— 25S].
[Blue Butterflies (p.
27); Vanessa atalanfa (p.
91) ; V.
iLvtiaz (pp.
91, 107.
116, 132, 135, 150) ; various moths (p.
93) ; Vanessa io (pp.
94, 100) ; Colias 
ediisa (p.
95); Cynthia cardni (p.
no) ; White Butterflies (pp.
132, 133, 135, 
136, 137) ; Pieris rapcE (p.
138) ; Tiger-moths (p.
149) ; Pieris brassicar 
(p.
150); Burnet-moth (p.
151); Cerura vinida (p.
151); Saticrnia carpini 
(p.
151); Pygcera bncephala (p.
151); dotted border and spring usher moths 
(p.
157) ; Vanessa nrttciz (p.
158-161) ; White Butterfly (p.
158-161) ; 
Anthochai-is cardaniincs (p.
161); Satyj-ns janira (p.
161); Burnet-moth 
(p.
161); Ino statices { ^.
161); Large Heath Butterfly (p.
161 .
John E.
Robsox.
Yorkshire.
A Catalogue of British Lepidoptera and their named varieties {^Cidaria 
sujfmnata \?cc.
piceata Haw., Huddersheld].
Young Nat., Jan. 1SS5, vi.
14.
John E.
Robsox.
Durham, Yorkshire.
Are Butterflies disappearing from the British Isles ?
[refers to Vanessa 
antiopa at Castle Eden, Cohas ednsa in Durham, Papilio inachaon at Beverley, 
Argynnis aglaia in Castle Eden Dene, Vanessa C.
-album at Hartlepool, lo, 
Satyrns cegeria, S.
megcera^ S.
liyperanthns, Lycccna alsns, and Hesperia 
sylvamis in Durham, and Chortobins paviphihis in the West Riding].
Young 
Nat., March 1885, vi.
59-65.
John E.
Robsox.
? Durham.
Variety of Ccenonympha pamphilus [described ; locality not stated, presum- 
ably near Hartlepool].
Young Nat., July 1885, vi.
16S.
John E.
Robsox.
Durham..
Chaerocampa neirii at Hartlepool [July 23rd, 1SS5].
Young Nat., Aug.
1885, vi.
192.
John E.
Robsox.
Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire.
Are butterflies disappearing from the British Isles?
Young Nat., Aug.
1885, vi.
179-184.
JOHX E.
Robsox.
Durham.
Sphinx convolvuli at Hartlepool [21st Aug. 1885].
Young Nat., Sep. 1885, 
vi.
216.
John E.
Robsox.
Durham.
Rare Hawk Moths at Hartlepool [in unusual number ; instances given of 
SpJiinx convolvnli (several), AcJierontia afropos (two), ChcTvocanipa ceberio, 
(one) ; and reference to former occurrence of Deilephila galii and D.
livornica\ Young Nat., Oct. 1885, vi.
239.
[J.
E. Robsox.] Durham, Yorksh.
[error], Northumb.
? Lancash.
or Chesh.
1885 [ ; being an account of the year's additions to the British lepidopterous 
fauna; Gelechia tetragonella Stainton, from Tees mouth near Greatham, details 
given, and error in original record (Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct, 1S85, p.
99) 
corrected ; Mr. Gregson's Oporabia approximaria considered a good species ; 
a new unnamed N'epticiila found near Newcastle-on-Tyne by J.
Sang].
Young 
Nat., Jan. 1886, vii.
2-3.
J. E, Robsox.
Durham.
The Death's Head {Aeheronfia acropos'] at Hartlepool [one, a female, 22nd 
May, taken on a flshing-boat, and another, two days later, on the rocks].
Youn g Nat., June 1886, vii.
128.
March 1888.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
72 bibliography: lepidoptkra.
1SS5-6-7.
[T, E.
Rohm3n.] Yorkshire.
Review.
The Lepidoptera of Dorsetshire.
By C.
W. Dale [comparisons 
are made with Porriit's Yorkshire list, rhe larrer having thirty-nine species 
more than Dorsetshire].
Young Xat., July 1SS6, vii.
141-143.
[. E.
RoEsoN.
? Durham.
Variety of Zygsna filipenduls [with the usual spots and the hind %dngs a 
dull dark pink ; presumably from near Hanlepool].
Young Xat., Sep.
1SS6, vii.
192.
JOK.x E.
ROBSON.
Durham.
On the specific distinctness of Tephrosia crepuscularia, AV.V..
and 
biiindularia, Esp.
[and their occurrence in co.
Durham].
Enr. Mo.
Mag..
Oct. 1SS6, xxiii.
111-112.
J. E.
RoB^o^^ Durham, Cheshire.
AgTOtis aquilina, tritici, etc.
[their differentiation ; cccurrer.ce in 
Durham and Cheshire].
Young Xa:..
Oct. 1SS6, vii.
209-210.
J. E.
RoBSOx.
? Durham.
On the flight and pairing- of Hepialus hectus and humuli [in co.
Durham?].
Em. Mo.
Mag., I:^S7.
xxiii, 1S6, 
John E.
Robsox.
? Durham.
On the flig-ht and pairing of Hepialus sylvinus and lupulinus [a'.-o H.
velleda 0,-:.
\ H.
.,.
....'.
]. Er.:.
Mo. M:-g..
Feb. 1SS7, xxiii, 214-215.
JoHX E.
RoFSOx. Durham, Northumberland.
Lycaena agestis, AY.V.
[a full account of its variation and life-histor)-].
Young Xa:..
May 1SS7.
^-iii.
S1-S7.
JOHX E.
RoBsox.
Durham.
A dwarf specimen of Cabera pusaria ^taken in Hezledon Dene: barely ten 
lines in expanse].
Young X a:..
Sex. iSS;.
viii.
179.
JoHx E.
RoBsox.
Durham.
White Butterflies [have been in most unusual numbers round iHartlepool for 
the past two months ; Pieris drassiia, P.
rapu.
and P.
napi mentioned, also 
Maincstra brassisizX Ent, iMo. iMag., Oct. 1S87, xxiv.
112.
JOHx E.
RoBsox.
Durham.
Luperina Cespitis in the County of Durham [two former records recited].
Young Xat., Oct. 1SS7, viii.
202.
JOHX E.
RoBSON'.
. Yorkshire.
C[irrhaEdia}.
Xerampelina v.
Unicolor [taken near Ripon in 1SS7, by 
T. Me'drum.
and now in Mr. Robson's collection].
Young Xat., Xov. 1S87, 
viii, 223.
John E.
Robson.
Yorkshire.
Melanic Variety of Melanippe Montanata [taken by Mr, ^Yaite, June 1886, 
in a iane near Ripon], Young Xa:., Xov, 1SS7, \-iii.
223.
]. T.
Roi.r,i:Rs. Lancashire.
Lepidoptera observed in the neighbourhood of Oldham, in 1SS4 [thirty-four 
species enumerated].
Young Xat., March 1SS5, p, 69, 
Arthur J.
Rose and Oliver C.
Goldthwaite.
Westmorland.
Nine Days at Rannoch [Comparison of Ra:nnoch and ^Yitherslack Cccfio- 
nympha typ-:cn (./.::://) at p.
134].
Ent., May 1 885, xviii.
134.
(iEOR.E Rose.
Yorkshire.
Sphinx Convolvuli [near Barnsley ; several from Aug. 28th to Sept.
30th].
Ent., Xov. 1SS7, XX, 303.
(".EORGE Rose, Yorkshire.
[Sphinx] Convolvtili in Yorkshire [near Barnsley, ten ; details given].
Young Xa:., ( >c:, 1SS7, viii, 202.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
73 
[Mr. Rose.] Lake District.
[Exhibition of Lake District specimens of Boarmia repandata, South 
London Ent. Soc, Xo\-.
4th, 1SS6].
Ent., Dec. 1886, xix.
307 ; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1886, xxiii.
167.
M. RouTLEDGE.
Cumberiand.
Sphinx convolvuli [at Stone House, Carlisle, one, Sep. 6th, 1887].
Em..
Oct. 1887, XX.
272.
James H.
Rowxtree.
Yorkshire.
Acronycta alni near Scarborough [near Seamer Beacon, Tune 25th, 1887], 
Ent., Oct. 1887, XX.
275.
T. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Scarborough [lepidoptera ; one butterfly and four moths noted].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May 15th, 1SS5, p.
79.
Reginald E.
Sai.wey.
Yorkshire.
Is Deiopeia pulchella permanently established in Britain ?
[with a reference 
to its capture at Acomb, Yorkshire].
Ent., July 1886, xix.
169-172.
L. L.
Samuels.
Lancashire.
Moth Trap [and results of its use in Manchester ; seven common lepidoptera 
named].
Ent., May 1886, xix.
139.
J. Saxg (Darlington).
? Durham or Yorkshire.
Occurrence of Sciaphila abrasana [no locality given ; taken in Aug. 1884].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1885, xxi.
192.
J. Sang (Darlington).
? Durham or Yorkshire.
Ephippiphora tetragonana bred [from larva; found ' on the coast '].
Ent.
Mo. Mag., Jan. 1885, xxi.
191.
J. Sanc;.
? Durham or Yorkshire.
Late appearance of Hepialus humuli [A female netted at the end of Aug. in 
fine condition but pale coloured and very small ; locality not stated, probably 
near Darlington].
Ent., Jan. 1885, xviii.
21-22.
J. Sanc;, ?
Northumberland, Durham.
A new (?) Nepticula larva [mining Potcntilla cormentilla near New castle-on- 
Tyne, and surmised to be either N'.
torynentillcB, new to Britain, or an 
undescribed species].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 1885, xxii.
138.
J. Sang.
? Durham or Yorkshire, Isle of Man.
Butalis fusco-cuprea bred [from Lotus corniculatiis in the Isle of Man ; occurs 
on railway-banks near Darlington].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., March 1 886, xxii.
239.
J. Sang.
? Durham or Yorkshire.
Longevity of the larva of Nepticula apicella [near Darlington ?] Ent. Mo.
Mag., .Alarch 1886, xxii.
236.
J. Sang.
Durham.
Lithocolletis sorbi, Erey [in upper Weardale, 1854; details of capture and 
life-history given ; Z.
poniifoliella^ L.
spuiicolella, and Argyresthia spiniella, 
also referred to].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 1886, xxii.
262.
W. G.
Sheldon.
Derbyshire.
On Xanthia fulvago var.
flavescens [at Breadsall Moor near Derby, etc.].
Ent., Oct. 1887, XX.
277-278; Young Xat., Nov. 1887, viii.
219.
[Mr. Sheldon.] Derbyshire.
[Xanthia fulvago L.
and var.
flavescens P^sp., exhibited to South Load.
Ent.
Soc, Sep. 22nd, 1887, with remarks on ' the number of melanic specimen* 
which he had observed in a j^articular valley in Derbyshire '].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 1887, xxiv.
138, Ent., Nov. 1S87, xx.
311.
March 1888.
74 BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
[W.
G. Sheldon.] Derbyshire.
[A series of about 25 Tephrosia biundularia Bork.
from Derbyshire, 
exhibited to South Lond.
Ent. Sec, Nov. loth, 1887].
Young Nat., Dec.
1887, viii.
234.
[Mr. Sheldon.] Derbyshire.
Haggerston Entomological Society [discussion on Argynnis paphia ; Mr.
Sheldon had met with it in Derbyshire].
Young Nat., May 1885, vi.
iii- 
112.
^Y.
G. Sheldon.
Yorkshire.
Notes on Scoparia angustea [with references to Porritt's experience at 
Huddersfield].
Ent..
Dec. 1887.
xx.
318-320.
\V.
G. Sheldon.
Derbyshire.
Lepidoptera of Derbyshire [notes on numerous species captured round Little 
Eaton, on Breadsall Moor, at Repton, and at Lathkill Dale, from June 8th 
to i8th, 1S85].
Ent., Dec. 1885, xviii.
318-319.
AY.
G. Sheldon.
Derbyshire.
Retarded appearance of Lepidoptera {Thera variata out early in June in 
Derbyshire, abundant up to 26th Sep. in Surrey].
Ent., Dec. 1885, xviii.
323- 
John Sim-.
Northumberland.
Objects of Interest in our Pit District [of Northumberland ; several 
butterflies cited by their English names].
Sci. Goss., Feb. 1885, pp.
31-32.
G. A.
Smallwood.
Lancashire.
Tephrosia crepuscularia and T.
biundularia [their differentiation, and 
occurrence of the latter near Manchester and Warrington].
Ent., June 1886, 
p. 162.
G. A.
Smallwood.
Derbyshire, Yorkshire.
The Life-History of Tephrosia crepuscularia (or biundularia) [reference to 
Barnsley specimens].
Ent., Nov.' 1886, xix.
266-269.
Richard South.
Yorkshire.
Tephrosia crepuscularia and T.
biundularia [remarks based partly on speci- 
mens from Barnsley].
Ent., Nov. 1886, xix.
269-272.
Richard South.
Yorkshire.
President's Address.
[Reviewing the Additions to the British fauna during 
the year; remarks: (p.
17) 'A Gelechia taken by Mr. Sang, amongst 
Arteiinsia maritiina in salt-marshes near Redcar, in July, is described by 
Mr. Stainton, under the name of G.
tet7'agonella''\ Proc.
South Lond.
Ent.
and Nat. Hist.
Soc, pp.
17-18.
Richard South.
Derbyshire, Lancashire or Cheshire.
Observations on Acherontia atropos [with casual references to its occurring 
at Burton-on-Trent and Liverpool].
Ent.
, June 1886, xix.
147-152.
PL T.
Stain'jon.
Yorkshire.
Description of a New Gelechia from our salt-marshes : G.
tetragonella 
[taken by J.
Sang amongst Artemisia inantinia in salt-marshes near Redcar, 
in July; interesting local details by J.
Sang given].
Ent. Mo.
Mag..
Oct.
1885, xxii.
99, 
PI.
T. Stainton.
Durham or Yorkshire.
The MetalHc Green Species of the genus Coleophora (Metallosetia of 
Stephens, Damophila of Curtis) [C vielilotella was first detected by John Scott 
in August 1859, at Stockton-on-Tees, where, in i860, T.
H. Allis also took 
a fine series].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1885, xxii.
97.
H. T.
Stainton.
Derbyshire.
Habits of Hepialus velleda [reprint of a note by >L Hill of Little Eaton, in 
Ent. W.
Int., July 2nd, 1859, vi.
107].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., March 1887, xxiii.
234.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
75 
R. Standex.
Lancashire.
Gulls Feeding- on [Ghost] Moths [Hcpialus hiimiili'.
near Preston].
Xat.
World, Oct. 1SS5, p.
19S.
C. E.
Stott.
Lancashire.
Amphidasys betularia [the typical form still occr.rs in the Bolton district ; one 
at light, June 14th, 1SS7].
Ent., Aug. 1887, xx.
211.
Chas.
E. Stott.
Lancashire.
Sphinx Convolvuli [two near Bolton : one of them at Astley Bridge Church, 
Aug. 31st; the other near Horwich.
Sept.
4th].
Ent., Oct. 1887, 273.
J. A.
Erskine Stuart.
Yorkshire.
Early appearance of a Butterfly [A Piens caught at Dewsbury on ^larch 
24th.
18S6.] Xat. World.
May 18S6, p.
98.
C. K.
Tero.
Lincolnshire.
Acronycta alni [near Grimsby, larva, Sept.
1SS4].
Ent., July 1S85, xviii.
194.
C. K.
Tero.
Lincolnshire.
Variety of Melanippe montanata [taken near Grimsby ; description by 
Editor].
Ent., Xov. ib'S6, xix.
2S3.
C. K.
Tero [misprinted C.
R. Low].
Lincolnshire.
Sphinx Convolvuli [three: z.Vid, Acherontia airopos, one: at Grimsby].
Ent., 
Nov. 1S87, XX.
303 ; and erratum at p.
325.
Jno. H.
Thompson.
Cumberland, Yorkshire.
Early Butterflies iVanessa tirticix near Penrith.
Jno. H.
Thompson ; a ' Common 
White' in the Valley, Scarborough; no dates given].
Xat. Hist.
Journ., 
Feb. 15th, 1885, p.
13.
R. H.
Thompson.
Lancashire.
Amphidasys betularia [at Withington near Manchester, all black, with only 
a single example of the normal form].
Ent., Sept.
1887, xx.
232.
Chas.
F. Thornev^ill.
Notts.
Euphasia catena near Nottingham [seen by recorder in 1878, in the collec- 
tion of an engine-driver, who had him.self taken it in a lane near Xottingham], 
Ent., June 1885, xviii.
167.
Chas.
F. Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Lycaena argiolus in the Midlands [scarce round Reptonj.
Ent., March 
1886, p.
63.
Chas.
F. Thornewill.
? Derbyshire.
Lobophora viretata [near Burton-on-Trent, in three ditterent woods ; county 
not stated].
Ent., July 1S86, p.
iSi.
J. H.
Threlfall.
Lancashire, Westmorland.
On the *Lita' Group of the Gelechiidae [with references to Gdechia (Liia) 
semidecandrella, sp.
nov..
from the coast sand-hills, near Preston : and 
G. (Z.) junctella at Witherslack].
Ent., March 1887, xx.
65 (also cf Ent.
Mo. Mag., March 1887, xxiii.
233).
J. W.
ToMLiNSON.
Notts.
Colias Edusa near Newark [several specimens, early in Sept.
1SS5].
Ent., 
Oct. 1885, xviii.
257.
W. H.
Tugwell.
Lancashire.
Notes on the Crambi from Deal [and on Preston examples of Crat/idus ccn- 
tajninelhis ; long note on their specific difterentiation, with woodcut].
Ent., 
April 1886, xix.
75-78.
[W.
H. Tugwell.] Lancashire.
[Crambus contaminellus Herr.-Sch. non Hlib., Lancashire ; its specific deter- 
mination.] Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 18S6, xxii.
26S.
March 1888.
76 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1885-6-7.
[W.
H.] TuGWELL.
Durham.
[Exhibition of a varied series of Spilosoma menthastri Esp. bred from 
Hartlepool eggs].
Ent., July 1886, xix.
190.
J. W.
TuTT.
Lancashire.
Crambus contaminellus [from Lancashire and Sussex] in the Zeller Collection 
[long note on nomenclature and specific differentiation].
Ent., April 1886, 
PP- 73-75- 
J. W.
TuTT.
Yorkshire.
The Tephrosia discussion [with special reference to Harrison's Barnsley 
records of T.
biiuidtilaria].
Ent., July 1 886, p.
183.
J. W.
TuTT.
Lancashire.
The Crambus contaminellus discussion ; with description of Cra7nbus 
salinellus, mihi [founded on the Preston specimens, amongst others].
Ent., 
March 1887.
xx.
52-57.
J. W.
TtiTT.
Yorkshire, ?
Durham.
Variation in Scoparia ingratella ; and remarks on S.
ambigiialis and S.
atonialis [with references to S.
dubitalis taken near Darlington, and to S.
ambigiialis ixom.
Yorkshire].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1887, xxiv.
42-43, 
J. W.
TuTT.
Yorkshire.
Acidalra promutata and Melanthia ocellata [the latter stated to be ' double 
brooded .
. .
certainly as far north as Yorkshire'].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Nov. 1887, xxiv.
133.
James AY.
Tutt.
Lancashire.
The Lita Group of Gelechiidae [Messrs.
Hodgkinson and Threlfall got 
specimens on the Lancashire coast, referred to Lita jiinctella, but probably 
new].
Ent., Nov. 1887, xx.
293.
Howard Vaughan.
Isle of Man, Durham or Yorkshire.
[Variation of Cidaria immanata, C.
suffumata and C.
russata ; specimens 
shown to Ent. vSoc. Lond.
from Isle of Man, and Darlington].
Trans.
Ent.
Soc. Lond., May 5th, 1886, p.
xix.
; also in Young Nat., June 1886, vii.
120; 
Ent. Mo.
Mag., June 1886, xxiii.
24; and Ent., June 1886, xix.
167.
Howard Yaughan.
Yorkshire and ?
Northumberland.
[Variation in Gnophos obscurata from various localities, including Yorkshire, 
Berwick-on-Tweed, etc.].
Trans.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Dec. ist, 1886, p.
Ivi.
; 
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1887, xxiii.
191 ; Ent., Jan. 1887, xx.
20; and Young 
Nat., Jan. 1887, viii.
13.
A. O.
Walker.
Cheshire, Yorkshire.
Climatic Causes affecting- the distribution of Lepidoptera in Great Britain 
[the result showing the diminution of species in a N.
VV.
direction and pointing 
to a conclusion that moisture is against a rich lepidopterous fauna : the 
comparisons made are between Yorkshire and Cheshire].
Proc.
Chester Soc.
Nat. Sci., No. 3, 1885, pp.
62-68.
Alfred O.
Walker.
Cheshire.
Macrolepidoptera of the Chester District [An enumeration — with localities 
— of 37 butterflies, 18 sphinges, 56 bombyces, 184 nocture, 165 geometers, 
and 69 pyrales, 529 in all ; some of them from the Welsh portion of the 
district only].
Proc.
Chester Soc. Nat.
Sci., No. 3, 1885, pp.
69-85.
Lord Walsl\(;ha.al Yorkshire, Lancashire, Northumberland.
On some Probable Causes of a Tendency to Melanic Variation in 
Lepidoptera of high latitudes [details of experiments with Yorkshire Tanagra 
ch(Ei-opliyllata ( p.
124), and refers (p.
133) to melanic forms of Abraxas grossu- 
lariata (Lancashire), Polia chi (Newcastle), and Tephrosia crepusailaria and 
T. biundiilaria Barnsley)].
Trans.
Yorks.
Nat. Union, Part 8, [1885] Sheets 
D8 and D9, pp.
1 13-140.
_______ 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1885-6-7.
77 
W. Warren.
Yorkshire.
' Note on Dichrorampha tanaceti [and its synonymy, in course of which the 
writer notes that he has bred D.
herbosaiia in Yorkshire from roots of tansy 
and yarrow, among which plants he also caught them flying in numbers].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. i88s, xxi.
igo-i.
William Warren.
Lancashire or Furness.
Notes on the Species of Heinemann's Family Chauliodidae that occur in 
England [ALc/i;nia profiigella Stn., abundant in Lancashire, where it has 
been bred by Threlfall and Murray from Pimpinella saxifraga], Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1887, xxiv.
147.
|rC.
O. Waterhotise.] Yorkshire..
[Sphinx convolvuli taken in Yorkshire, brought to British Museum, and 
exhibited to Ent. Soc.
Lond., Oct. 7th, 1885.] Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Oct.
7th, 1885, p.
XXV.; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1885, xxii.
167.
A. H.
Waters.
' North of England.' 
Winter Moths \_Cheii)iatobia boj'eata said to be abundant in the North of 
England, but absent in Scotland].
Nat. World, Jan. 1886, p.
7. 
[Mr, Wellmax.] ?
Derbyshire.
[Agrotis cursoria from Burton-on-Trent, exhibited to vSouth Lond.
Ent. Soc, 
Aug. 25th, 1887].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
198.
[Mr. Wellmax.] ?
Derbyshire.^ 
[Lobophora viretata Hb., from Burton-on-Trent, exhibited to South Lond.
Ent. Soc, June 23rd, 1887.] Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1887, xxiv.
71; Ent., 
Aug. 1887, XX.
215 ; and Young Nat., Aug. 1887, viii.
162.
[Mr. Wellmax.] ?
Derbyshire..
[Burton-on-Trent examples of Ag-rotis cursoria Bork., exhibited to South 
Lond.
Ent. Soc, Aug. 25th, 1887.] Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1887, xxiv.
119 ; 
Ent., Oct. 1887, XX.
287..
TuFFEN Wes'j .
Lancashire.
. .
Oak Egger Moth, Lasiocanipa Qiierctis [mentioning that an ento- 
mologist carrying some females by train between Liverpool and Manchester, 
several males dashed against the windows of the carriage, etc.].
Journ.
of Micr.
and Nat. Sci., Jan. 1886, v.
45.
The Titles given above — 264 in number — -substantially represent 
the work accomplished by lepidopterists during the three years 1885, 
1886, and 1887, with the exception of such few Titles as may have 
escaped the notice of the compilers of this Bibliography.
Titles of papers which have appeared in our own journal are 
not given here, to save space and repetition, more especially as the 
Index to The Naturalist is compiled with a special view to con- 
venience of reference.
The broad features of the lepidopterous work of the three years 
may be summed up by a reference to the continued activity of the 
Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Durham, and Yorkshire ento- 
mologists, and the publication for the two first-named counties of 
Dr. Ellis's and Mr. A.
O. Walker's valuable county-lists ; the equal 
activity of the Burton-on-Trent naturalists resulting also in a most 
March 1888.
K 
78 
BOOK NOTICES.
excellent list for their district, which — so far as we are concerneid 
— includes much of Southern Derbyshire ; and on the other hand 
to the almost total neglect of Nottinghamshire and Northumber- 
land.
We trust future years may see a revival of entomological 
activity in these counties, and more especially — if we may be 
permitted to say so — in the case of Nottinghamshire, for which we 
beheve that a county catalogue of Lepidoptera is still a great 
desideratum.
BOOK NOTICES.
The Cat : its Natural History ; Domestic Varieties ; 
Management and Treatment (with Illustrations).
By Philip M.
Rule.
With an essay on Feline Instinct, by Bernard Perez.
London: Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey & Co., 1887.
176 pages 
in small 8vo., with plates.
The title sufficiently explains the general scope of this little book, 
which — as the dedication to Mr. John Colam makes manifest — is 
devoted to the humanitarian and popular, and not to the scientific 
aspect of the subject.
>oo< 
Lectures delivered before the Sunday Lecture Society, 
Newcastle-on-Tyne.
London : Walter Scott, 1887.
Small 8vo.
This Httle volume includes seven lectures by some of our ablest 
men.
They are as follows : The Natural History of Instinct, by 
G. J.
Romanes, F.R.S.
; Animal Life on the Ocean Surface, by Prof.
H. N.
Moseley, M.A., F.R.S.
; The Eye and its Work, by Litton 
Forbes, M.D.; The Movements of Plants, by Ernest A.
Parkyn,M.A.; 
The Relations between Natural Science and Literature, by Prof.
H. 
Nettleship, M.A.
; Facts and Fictions in Zoology, by Dr. Andrew 
Wilson, F.R.S.E.
; and The Animals that make Limestone, by Dr. P.
Herbert Carpenter, F.R.S.
— each lecture being separately paged.
>c>< 
The Young Collector's Handbook of Ants, Bees, Dragon- 
flies, Earwigs, Crickets, and Flies (Hymenoptera, Neuroptera, 
Orthoptera, Hemiptera, Diptera).
By W.
Harcourt Bath.
London : Swan Sonnenschein & Co., 1888.
Small 8vo., 108 
pages, with numerous woodcuts.
The woodcuts in this little book are well calculated to give a 
preliminary idea of the leading types of the insects belonging to the 
groups specified, and — may we venture to hope — to excite an interest 
in them and a desire to know more about them than Mr. Bath's little 
volume (from its limited capacity as compared with the vast numerical 
extent of the orders on which it treats) can supply.
Should even one 
-earnest student of the future date his first impulse from this work, it 
will not have been published in vain.
Naturalist, 
79 
NOTES ON AND ADDITIONS TO 
THE AVI-FAUNA OF UPPER TEESDALE.
J. BACKHOUSE, Jux., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U.
Since writing the article on this subject, which appeared in The 
Naturalist oi October and November 1885, a few more species have 
been added to the list, and other strangers have also been reported 
but unfortunately not identified.
Last summer the writer spent a considerable amount of time in 
the Tees Valley, but, though constantly on the look-out for birds, 
comparatively little of interest was noted.
The following diary extracts 
may, however, be of value, so are given for what they are worth.
June 4th.
— Dipper's nest, with two perfectly fresh eggs, found at 
Cauldron Snout — the nest placed v/ithin reach of any heavy flood, 
such as are so frequently caused by severe thunderstorms.
June 6th.
— Heard a Dipper singing beautifully as it flew past me; 
a pretty warbling kind of song.
June 24th.
— A Peregrine Falcon seen by my father flying over 
from Yorkshire ofl" Mickle Fell.
June 27th.
— Whinchat heard producing a most peculiar note, just 
like the scream of a young hawk, though, of course, not so loud.
When at length caught sight of, the bird was seated on the topmost 
spray of a small hazel-bush, and could be seen calling.
It was 
•evidently a note of alarm, but one quite new to me.
Every now and 
then it made ordinary remarks, and then the call would be repeated.
Nor was this the first time this call had been heard, for on two or 
three previous occasions, whilst passing by the same place, similar 
cries were noted, but were supposed to be those of a Sparrow Hawk 
.at a distance.
June 29th.
— Examined a Gannet which had strayed on to Cross 
Fell during the spring migration.
The stuffer also reported a Green Sandpiper killed by the ' Wheal ' 
in August or September 1884, by Mr. Charlesworth, of Wakefield.
As this occurrence was likewise reported by another reliable person, 
there can be little doubt as to its authenticity.
July 6th.
— Was shown by Mr. Wearmouth an adult Pochard, 
which had been captured by his uncle in 1868, at California Dam.
Besides the three last-named birds, which are ail new to the 
Teesdale list, I have examined (through the kindness of Mr. Wear- 
mouth) a Common Scoter and a Great (Jrey Shrike, the property 
March 1888.
8o 
FLIGHT OF BIRDS ON THE SOLWAV.
of Mr. W.
Lea, of Newbeggin.
The former was killed in one of the 
large pools below Winch Bridge ; and the latter, picked up defunct 
on Cronkley Scar (Yorkshire), was erroneously recorded in my 
previous paper as the Red-backed species.
In August 1886 a pair of Whimbrel passed close to us at Green 
Hurth Mine, a thick scotch mist prevailing at the time.
They were 
evidently migrating, for nothing more was either seen or heard of 
them.
The Red-backed Shrike has again been seen by ?\Ir. Wearmouth, 
(1887) haunting the old spot by the river-side, but he has searched 
in vain for its nest.
The Spotted Flycatcher has been wonderfully plentiful this last 
summer in the Tees Valley.
Some dozen or so of nests came under 
my own notice, and others were reported to me.
Mr. C.
Dowson, one of the oldest ' watchers ' in the valle_7, informs 
me that the Dotterel used to arrive on Cross Fell in <fine seasons at 
the end of April or the beginning of May. Dunlins, Common 
Sandpipers, and Curlews all appear, he says, in April usually.
In a letter from Mr. J.
Cordeaux, dated from Barnard Castle, 
September 17th, 1887, after having spent some days at High Force, 
he writes : — ' I am tolerably certain I heard the note of the Crossbill 
on the first morning I was there, but I never subsequently heard it 
or caught sight of the bird, although I frequently examined from our 
window and the road the tree tops with a glass.
Crossbills were 
crossing Heligoland in some numbers in July' (see The Naturalist, 
1885, p.
358).
In a subsequent letter Mr. Cordeaux also mentions having noticed 
a small party of Siskins on a mountain ash near the Force.
NO TE^ ORNITHOL OGY.
Remarkable Flight of Birds on the Solway.
— The following extract 
from niy notes may be of service : — " Sunday, December 12th, 1886.
Weather 
extremely cold, the thermometer lower than at any previous date during 
the year.
Brisk gale from X.N.E.; atmosphere hazy with intermittent snow 
showers.
At daybreak noticed a very remarkable flight of birds on the English 
shore of the Solway Firth at Flimby.
The bulk of the flight, probably nine- 
tenths of the whole, consisted of Skylarks, the rest being made up of occasional 
troops of Starlings, Redwings, and Plovers, both green and golden.
The birds, 
except the Ciolden Plovers, were flying quite low, barely clearing the roofs of the 
dwelling-houses.
Their tails were turned towards the storm, and their line of 
flight was almost j^arallel with the beach.
The flight was, observed flrst - about 
8.30 a.m., and continued, with very slight intermission, until the commencement 
of divine service at 10.30.
How much longer it lasted I cannot say definitely, 
but at midday only stragglers appeared.
Taking the duration of the flight as 
extending over two and a half hours, and assuming that 100 birds crossed the 
observer's line of vision in every minute — a moderate estimate I am persuaded — 
we arrive at an aggregate of 15,000 birds passing during the morning." — • 
W. Honc.sox, A.L.S., Plimby, Maryport, Nov. 17th, 1887.
' 
Naturalist, 
8i 
THE RUDSTONE.
Rev. E.
MAULE COLE, M.A., 
Vicar of IVetivaug ; President of the Geological Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union ; 
Author of ' Scandinavian Place Names,' etc.
The great monolith at Rudston near Bridlington, in the East Riding, 
is one of the most remarkable boulders in Yorkshire.
Its dimensions 
are — length, from 45 ft.
to 50 ft.
; breadth, 5 ft.
10 in.
; thickness, 
2 ft.
3 in.
; whilst the estimated weight is said to be 46 tons.
It is 
a species of grit, finer grained than the Millstone Grit of the West 
Riding, and similar to the Grits of the Lower Oolite found on the 
watershed of the North Eastern moorlands.
For many hundreds of 
years it has been standing erect on the brow of a low hill, beneath 
which meet, at a right angle, two dales, one extending southwards 
from the great Wold Valley, the other passing eastwards to Bridlington 
Bay. Half of it is buried in tlie ground, and it is self-evident that 
it was erected artificially.
Rumour says that it formed one of three 
similar erect stones or menhirs, but there is not the slightest evidence 
of this, beyond the fact that a few small stones of similar grit may 
be detected in the walls of some buildings adjacent.
The probability 
is, that when this large stone was stranded, smaller ones of a similar 
character, and from the same source, were stranded with it.
The 
larger one was seized upon and erected by the primitive inhabitants 
as a memorial or monument of some departed hero; the lesser ones 
were left, to meet eventually with a less noble but perhaps more 
useful fate.
If this be true, the stone is a bloc percht\ in other words, 
an erratic, carried by ice, and stranded on an eminence similar to 
those found in the Jura.
The great glacier which crept along the East coast of Yorkshire, 
may not have extended so far inland as Rudston, but floating ice 
might easily have borne the boulder up the dale from Bridlington, 
and the projecting nab at the sharp turn of the valley would be just 
the place where we should expect it to get stranded.
Its original 
home must be looked for at the Peak, or other portions of the Oolitic 
Cliffs, whence it was torn away, and gently carried to its present 
position.
When once erected by human hands, it might have been 
a seat of worship, long before the i)resent church was built close to 
it, and it seems to have given the name to the village, which 
subsequently clustered round the foot of the hill.
The terminal 
' Stan ' (Rodestan, as it occurs in Domesday) is clearly to be 
distinguished from the ordinary ' ton,' and the village should be 
Rudstone, not Rudston.
(The spelling in Domesday, A.D.
:o8o- 
MarcU 1888.
82 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
1086, is Rodestain, Rodestan, and Rodestein.
In Kirkby's Inquest, 
A.D. 1277, it is Ruddestan, Rudestane, and Rudstane).
Rudd was 
a common Icelandic personal name, and, under ordinary circum- 
stances, Rudston would be perfecdy correct to designate the enclosure 
(tun) of a man of that name : but the spelling in Domesday Book, as 
also in Kirkby's Inquest, clearly points to the word 'stan' or 'stone.' 
It may have been Rudd's Stone (Ruddestan).
But here again the old 
spelling suggests an alternative, for it is ' Rodestan.' Hence some 
have imagined that ' rode ' meant ' red,' though the stone is not red : 
others that it meant 'rood' as in rood-screen and rood-loft.
The 
writer thinks that the first part of the word may mean 'famous' from 
'hrod ' Icelandic for fame or renown, and that the name was given by 
the Danes when they saw, and wondered at the great stone, already 
erected by earlier inhabitants.
On the wolds we find V-shaped hollow ways leading from one 
point to another, now for the most part filled up 'by the gradual 
accumulation of soil, and only showing a slight terrace on a dale side.
These represent ancient British tracks.
In the face of a chalk 
quarry, one hundred yards or less from the monolith, there is an 
appearance of such a hollow V-shaped way, 5 ft.
in depth, from 
which the writer has obtained oyster-shells and bones of great age.
The direction of this hollow is straight for the monolith, but till 
further excavations are made it is unwise to build any theory upon it.
Meanwhile, the stone itself may well be brought before the notice of 
the Boulder Committee, as having, probably, more interest attached 
to it than any other boulder in the county.
NOTE—LEPIDOPTERA.
The Supposed Yorkshire Nepticula tormentillse ; and the occurrence of 
another Species New to the County.
— Mr. Eustace R.
Bankes informs me that 
the Yorkshire locality where he took the supposed larvae of Nepticida tor?nei2iillir 
(Nat. xii.
pp.
12 and 59) in October last, is Ingleborough (Clapham) ; and that both 
in 1886 and 1887 he also found rather commonly round Ingleborough larvae of 
Lithocolletis sorhiella Frey ( = aJ(cnparieUa Scott), and bred the perfect insect 
last spring.
He also found the same species sparingly at Richmond, Yorkshire.
It has not hitherto been recorded for the county.
But it now seems clear (Ent.
Mo. Mag., xxiv.
187) that the supposed A'.
toinnentillcB from the Yorkshire 
and \Vestmorland moors is not that species at all, but an entirely new one, for 
which we still want a name.
— Geo. T.
Porritt, Huddersfield, Felj.
13th, 1888.
NOTE— MAMMALIA.
Otter in Lincolnshire.
— In The Lincoln, Rtitland, and Stamford Mei-airy of' 
27th January, 1888, it is stated that a fine dog-otter {Ltiira vulgaris) was found in 
Dunston Fen on Monday, the 23rd of January, on the farm of Mr. James Clifton.
It was captured on the banks of the Carr-dyke and is now in the possession of 
Mr. J.
v^mith, chemist, Lincoln.
— J as.
Eardi.ey Mason, Alford, Feb. 6th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
85 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT HATFIELD CHACE.
In glorious weather the Yorkshire NaturaHsts' Union held their last 
excursion for 1887 on September 21st, at Hatfield.
It was 
originally intended that the September meeting should take the form 
of a 'fungus foray,' but after the extraordinarily dry summer, and 
after consulting an eminent mycologist, it was anticipated that fungi 
would be unusually scarce objects this autumn, and the executive 
deemed it advisable at the last possible moment to once more post- 
pone the fungus hunt for another year, and substitute for it an 
ordinary excursion.
Hatfield, in the extreme south-west of the West 
Priding, was the spot selected, and the district marked out for investi- 
gation was that broad expanse of moorland, nine square miles in 
extent, known as Hatfield Chace.
The choice was a happy one, for 
not only was the hunting-ground unlimited in extent, but practically 
the district hitherto had been unexplored.
Shortly before nine o'clock 
the bulk of the naturalists alighted at Stainforth Station, and wended 
their way to the village of Hatfield, about one mile distant.
Hatfield 
contains a fine church, and is a real type of a Yorkshire village.
In 
due time the party arrived at the village, and caused no little conster- 
nation among the inhabitants, who gazed in curiosity at the visitors 
as they marched through with their vasculums, bags, hammers, and 
other paraphernalia.
It was evident that something unusual was 
expected, for at the meeting-place — the Blue Bell — was suspended 
from the uppermost window an immense ' Union Jack,' a true indi- 
cation that meant business.
A small party intent upon botany, 
conchology, and ornithology, set out immediately, and hastily 
hurried along country roads and lanes to the ' Chace,' where collect- 
ing commenced in good earnest.
The others, after being augmented, 
followed later, under the leadership of Mr. T.
J. Hasselby, of 
Doncaster.
A few under the guidance of jNIr. J.
M. Kirk, also of 
Doncaster, more leisurely made their way to some brick-ponds a 
short distance away, where they succeeded in fishing up some of the 
most magnificent microscopic objects of the lower orders of animal 
and plant life.
After awhile two of the parties came in contact with 
each other near to Lindholme Hall, and, as they lunched, discussed 
what had been collected or observed.
One had all but trod on a 
viper, and filled his box with fungi of various sizes and kinds.
Another had got a number of rare plants and large caterpillars.
Some had got nothing, and it was thought desirable that the southern 
portion of the Chace and the banks of the river Torne should he 
examined, from thence to return by way of the large drains to HatfieK!.
A party of four undertook this task.
The remainder either visited 
March 1888.
^4 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT HATFIELD CHACE.
some so-called erratic boulders at Lindholme, or went two miles 
lurther to examine a warp pit — a large sheet of water covering about 
sixteen acres.
The party of four struck due south across a vast 
purple-clad heath, now and again stopping to collect a rare plant, 
then deviating a little to the left to see something unusual that one 
of them had just detected in the insect way, or winding more to the 
left still to gather some bright-coloured fungi.
After walking for about 
an hour and a half in this fashion, it began to be monotonous, and 
also swampy.
What puzzled them was the south extremity of the 
moor seemed to be as far off as ever ; they were evidently lost.
Under 
the circumstances it was thought advisable to strike out for a 
village that lay to the right, which they did.
A little further and on 
the edge of the moor, was observed a woman gathering blackberries, 
from whom was learned, to their astonishment, that the village was 
Wroot, in Lincolnshire, and several miles from Hatfield.
A trap 
was sought up, and in a few minutes the party were driving at a rapid 
rate back to Yorkshire.
They alighted in a good district, a mile 
or two over the border, and in a capital collecting ground.
Several 
interesting objects were dredged up from the large drains, and no 
few plants of various kinds were collected from the adjoining culti- 
vated fields.
After all the misadventures of the party, however, they 
were amply compensaJted later on by some good finds.
It was 
not long before the Union Jack was sighted at Hatfield, and it 
was soon found that all the dust-stained naturalists had assembled, 
and were ready for the excellent repast, which was duly served 
by the host.
After tea sectional meetings were held, at which reports 
were drawn up of the work done during the day.
The general 
meeting was held in the Parochial Meeting Room, within the vicarage 
grounds, kindly lent for the occasion by the Vicar, who had beautified 
the room by several cases of stuffed birds and animals captured in 
the district, and including two Polecats, Black Game (that, doubtless, 
had been naturalised in that district), and Stockdove.
The chair 
was occupied by Dr. Erskine-Stuart, of Stainclifi'e.
On calling the roll 
of Societies, it was found that the members present represented the 
following twelve Societies : Bradford (two Societies), Leeds (four), 
Heckmondwike, York, Dewsbury, Goole, Hull, and Doncaster.
Mr. G.
H. Caton Haigh, of Grainsby Hall, Lincolnshire, was duly 
elected a Member of the Union.
A vote of thanks was accorded 
Mr. C.
Wright, the Hon. Mrs.
Meynell-Ingram, and' Mr. A.
L Wells 
for allowing the members to visit their estates; to Messrs.
Batty, Kirk, 
and Hasselby for acting as guides ; and to the Vicar for the use of 
the Parochial Meeting Room.
The Vicar, in responding to the vote, 
made some observations on his exhibits.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT HATFIELD CHACE.
85 
Mr. W.
E. Clarke, F.L.S., in reporting for the Vertebrate Section, 
stated that 21 species of birds had been observed, including 14 resi- 
dents, and seven summer visitors.
Noteworthy amongst them was 
the Stonechat, a bird very locally distributed in Yorkshire, and the Hen 
Harrier, a dead specimen of which had been picked up on the moors.
Mr. W.
D. Roebuck, F.L.S., in reporting for the Conchological 
Section, observed that 21 species of Mollusca had been collected, 
18 of which were fresh-water species, including LinmcBa glabra 
(abundant in one of the drains), Sphceriuui lacustre^ Valvata cristata, 
etc., and three terrestrial species.
The district was remarkably 
deficient in land species.
In the absence of the secretary of the Entomological ^Section, 
Mr. Roebuck also stated that a number of insects had been reported.
The most interesting finds were larvae of Emperor Moth, Fox Moth, 
Eiibolia cerDinaria^ several moths, and a number of fine caterpillars 
of Trichiosoma vitellince.
For the Botanical Section, Air. P.
Fox Lee, phanerogamic 
secretary, the only officer of the section present, reported that the 
botanical members had had a rare field-day.
At this late period of 
the year and especially after the prolonged hot summer, it could not 
be expected that very many of the phanerogams would be noticed in 
bloom, and there was little to add to the known flora of this part of 
South West Yorkshire.
Compensating somewhat for the scarcity of 
plants in bloom, a sight long to be remembered was the profuse 
fruiting of the blackberries, the oak, the guelder rose, the dog rose 
{Rosa lutetiana Leman), and the hawthorn.
On the heather-clad 
expanse of Hatfield Chace, a wild primeval bog, also on the banks 
of the dikes and drains, several of the typical peat-loving plants were 
observed.
The best plant ' find ' on the Chace was Andromeda 
polifolia L., a rare member of the Ericacece, with pink, waxy globose 
flowers.
It was fairly abundant, scattered among the Ling and 
Cross-leaved Heath.
A diligent search was made for the three 
British Sundews, all of which occur on the adjoining larger tract of 
Thorne Waste, but only one of them, Drosera 7'ot2indiJolia L., was 
found.
There were fine fruiting bushes of Myrica gale L.
on the 
Chace, but not a trace of Osniunda rcgalis L., once said to grow 
here in thickets (quite likely places), could be made out.
Besides 
these, on the Chace proper, the following species worthy of mention 
were seen far advanced in the * sere and yellow leaf ' :—j£^//7^'/V//;// 
angustifoliuui L., Rhynchospora alba Vahl, and Eriophoruui vagina- 
turn ]>.
In the drains and on the })eaty banks of ditches occurred 
Stellaria aquatica Scopoli, Siellaria glaitca With.
(H.
Payne), Hydro- 
cotyle vulgaris L., Hippicris vulgaris L., Potaniogeton pusillus var.
March 1888.
86 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT HATFIELD CHACE.
temnssima Koch., a barren Myriophvlhnn, and the Cyperus Sedge 
Carex pseudocyperus L.
Four ardent members started on a bee-Une 
(as they thought) across the undrained part of the Chace, from near 
Lindhohne, intending to reach Hatfield in time, of course, for the 
meat tea.
Unfortunately for them, in spite of compass and ordnance 
maps, they thoughtlessly persisted in steering south instead of west.
One of them tumbled into a bog-hole, too, and had to shout to his 
companions for assistance.
Perhaps it was mainly owing to their 
bemg so bent on finding the Droseras, or to their searching so 
carefully for rare fungi, that they forgot to take the bearings often 
enough on this flat stretch of marshy country.
However, they 
eventually found themselves at Wroot in Lincolnshire, nearly nine 
miles from Hatfield I The order was now given by the conchologist 
who was in conniiand, that nothing pertaining to natural history must 
be noted here, as Lincolnshire had no claims upon the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union.
But the ' botanologists,' not to be scared by 
such peremptory orders, at once proceeded to a practical study of a 
certain foreign plant of the Solanacece^ that species known so well by 
its fragrant aroma, viz., JSHcotiaiia tabacum, specimens of which were 
not far to seek.
This unofficial visit to Wroot was the means, after 
all, of getting botanical information both interesting and amusing.
During the day there had been noticed in several places, and 
specimens gathered for winter use, the fairy-ring fungus, Ma7'asmius 
oreades, called the Champignon.
A meadow, bordering this 
Lmcolnshire village, patterned over with 'rings' of the choice edible 
' toad-stooL presented such an interesting sight that one would have 
been sorry to have missed it.
The amusing part of the affair was 
this — a native, on being asked his opinion as to the occurrence of 
toad-stools in ring clusters in the meadow yonder, said, ' they grew 
that way where horses had rolled ' !
It is aveiTed in some districts, 
that hedgehogs have something to do with the appearance of this 
fungoid growth, by ' running in circles,' and the fairies are beheved 
to hold their revels within the circles on the night before full moon.
Be this as it may, however, the ' Wroot " definition of the botanical 
matter in question was elucidated in a new fashion.
In a little while 
a conveyance was obtained, and the explorers were driven with all 
despatch over the Yorkshire borders again, to within four miles of 
Hatfield.
The conchologists at once commenced dredging in the 
drains for shells — although a shooting party who looked over the 
hedge said 'they were catching minnows' ; and the botanologists to 
recording the growth of hedge-row, stubble-field and broad road-side, 
as if nothmg out of the usual 'routine ' had happened.
The best of 
these observations were Papave?- dubiuin L., Spergularia rubra Pers^, 
Naturalist^ 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT HATFIELD CHACE.
87 
El'odium cicutariu7n L'Herit., Riibus siiberedus {v£ir.
f is sus?), Dipsaats 
sylvcstris L,, Sderarithiis annuus L., and Hordeuin murinum L., 
Senecio sylvaticus L.
was very fine and abundant in the sandy lanes 
bordering the Chace.
The total number of observations on marking 
the London Catalogue was found to be 142.
Mr. H.
T. Soppitt supplemented the botanical report by stating 
that about thirty species of fungi were collected on or near the 
Chace, including Ag.
(iMyce?ia) leptocephala Pers., Ag.
{Psilocybe) 
ericcEus Pers., Cort.
{TeIa?nonia) limonius Fr., Cort.
{Derfnocybe) 
ciiinamo7rmis Fr., Cort.
{Hygrocybe) casianeus Fr., Lactarius subdulcis 
Fr., L.
rufus Fr., L.
glyciosmus Fr., Marasuiius oreades (abundant), 
Calocera viscosa Fr., Phragmidiiim rtibi Pers., P, violaceuvi Schl., 
Rhytisma andromedcs Fr., and Hypoxylon concejitricuni Grev.
For the Geological Section Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., secretary, 
reported that the excursion presented a fine field for the microscopists 
and botanists (promoted now to the rank of botanologists !), but left, 
as was thought, comparatively little for the geologists to do.
No 
welcome escarpment or delightful quarry welcomed the eyes of the 
hammermen, and long did their well-used tools hang idly by their 
sides.
Still, the day was not without charm, and, indeed, profit also ; 
an opportunity was presented of viewing a wide extent of primeval 
bog, and also of being informed how this was changed into fertile land.
The party, under the guidance of Messrs.
Rimes and Batty, set out 
in the direction of Lindholme, passing through the village of Hatfield 
Woodhouse on the way.
In every direction could be seen long straight 
drains and dikes, the work of the old Dutch engineers, who, in the 
fens and bogs of this district, found ample scope for their special 
talents, and gave the locality a strong resemblance to their own 
Holland over the sea.
The transformation of heath and morass into 
fertile and profitable land was explained to be by the process of 
' warping that is, the tidal rivers are allowed to overflow the peat 
levels, until the fine silt held in suspension is deposited.
The waters 
are then dammed out and the process repeated, when a thick deposit 
of fine impalpable mud is gradually laid down ; this being worked 
into the land produces a rich and fertile soil.
The sand and mud 
composing this warp originates from the wasting of the cliffs and 
shores of Holderness, and is brought down by the H umber.
More 
silt is carried into the rivers by the tide than is brought down b>- 
them..
Mr. Sollit stated some years ago that in a gallon of water 
taken from the Humber when it was agitated by the tide there were 
from 315 to 320 grains of this fine deposit, some of it so exceedingly 
fine that it did not settle to the bottom of a vessel after a spare 
of ten hours.
This silt was analysed, and a sample taken off Brough 
March 1888.
88 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT HATFIELD CHACE.
consisted of moderately fine sand, 77 parts; alumina, 6; carbonate 
of lime, 6 ; carbonate of magnesia, i ; soluble salts, 2 ; oxide of iron, 
2 ; and organic matter, 6.
A local geologist (Dr. Arbuckle) stated 
that the usual sequence of the beds in the district of Hatfield Chace 
were — (i) the warp already alluded to; (2) peat, with the remains of 
an ancient forest at the base ; (3) sand ; (4) shiny laminated clay l 
and (5) gravel and sand.
The Triassic Sandstones, capped with recent 
gravel, rise here and there as bosses.
Near Lindholme the only 
section seen during the day was examined ; this was a gravel-pit, the 
gravel resting upon a bed of sand, almost consolidated into stone, 
and having the name of ' pan sand.' The boulders and pebbles 
extracted from the gravel were of great variety, and very interesting 
from this reason.
Specimens of sedimentary rocks, as magnesian 
limestone, carboniferous sandstones of various kinds, gannister and 
millstone grit ; rocks of volcanic or igneous origin, as porphyry and 
basalt, and other rocks such as quartzite, vein quartz, black f^mts, 
and chert were obtained.
There is little doubt that these gravels are 
re-arranged glacial deposits, washed from the waste of the till or 
boulder clay during some of the post-glacial submergences.
It 
should be stated that two of the pieces of gannister found showed 
most plainly the well-known markings of stigmaria.
A short walk 
brought the party to the perfectly solitary mansion of Lindholme 
Hall; a visit to which was, perhaps, the chief object of the geological 
section.
There are two celebrated boulders on the west front of the 
hall, and it was for their examination that the visit was made.
By 
the courtesy of Mr. Wright, they were accurately measured by Mr.
Brownridge, F.G.S., and other particulars obtained, in accordance 
with the schedule issued by the Yorkshire Boulder Committee.
One 
boulder was undoubtedly of millstone grit, the other was more 
dubious, and a small chipping was kindly permitted from it for future 
determination and report.
The name of the traditional William of 
Lindholme (about whom so many legends were related) is connected 
with these boulders, but, as usual, in a mythical manner.
A long 
walk along dike-banks and grass-grown lanes had to be made before 
arrival at Hatfield.
For the Section of Micro-Zoology and Micro-Botany, the secretary, 
Mr. J.
M. Kirk, of Doncaster, reported that the following forms had 
been met vvitli : — Entomostraca : Daplinia pulex^ Cyclops qiiadri- 
£or?its, Diaptomus castor^ Eurycercus laniellattis^ Canthocamptus 
}ui?mt7is.
Infusoria : Loxodes bursar ia^ Lindia torulosa, Chcetonarus 
lariis^ Pitrodiiia patino^ Steiitor inuHeri, Paraineciiun aurelia, Actmo- 
p/irys sol, Traclielocera viridis, Amphileptus fasciola, Coleps hir/us, 
Dileptus foliu?Ji, Aco77iia vitrea, Urostyla grandis, Vorticella nebulifei-a^ 
Naturalist, 
ASHFORD : VERTIGO ANGUS IIOR IN YORKSHIRE.
89 
V. epistylis^ V.
carcJiesium.
Rotatoria : Rotifer vulgare, Diglena 
lacustris^ Hydatina se?ita, Lindia toru/osa, Anurcea curvicornis.
Hydra: Hydra vulgaris.
Diatomace^ : Navicula cuspidaia, Fleuro- 
sigina (varieties), Frushdia olivacea^ Fragilaria capucina, Nitzschia 
sig/iioidea, Cyuiatopleura solea., Cocconenia lanceolatuvi, Diatoma 
7'ulgare, Diadesmis cofifervacea, Goinphoneina acu?ni?iatu?fi, Pitmiilaria 
nobilis.
DESMiDiACEi*: : Closteriuni acerosum, C.
vioniliferit??i^ Cosma- 
riwn 7)iaj'garitferum.
Confervoid Alga: Volvox globator (abundant).
The usual vote of thanks terminated the proceedings, after which 
most of the members, betook themselves to the station for their 
respective destinations.
A few remained, being desirous of learning 
more particulars of Hatfield eccentricities, and were successful in 
gaining much valuable information.
On leaving the village some of 
the natives gave three ringing cheers for the naturalists.
This 
terminated the last excursion for 1887, and it can truly be said that 
the meeting was both a successful and an enjoyable one, and will long 
be remembered.
ANOTHER YORKSHIRE LOCAXITY FOR 
VERTIGO ANGUSTIOR 
CHARLES ASHFORD, 
Ckristc/uirch, Ha7its; one of the Referees to the Concholos^ical Society.
Having occasion a few days ago to look through my series of V.
pusilla., taken by myself in Went Vale 185 1-4, I detected among 
them a single example of V.
angttstior, which v/as at once submitted 
to Messrs.
Taylor and Nelson.
Its correct identification being 
beyond dispute, there remains only the question of evidence as to 
locality.
These after-finds in the cabinet are rightly looked upon 
with some suspicion, and I should not have ventured to claim a 
formal record in this case had not the evidence in favour of Went 
Vale been unusually strong.
For it happens that the shell in question 
is the only example of V.
aitgiisiior, in a recent state, that has ever 
come into my hands ; moreover, I have never taken K pusilla else- 
where than in Went Vale nor received it from any correspondent at 
home or abroad, and all my exam]:)les of that species have occupied 
the same box for more than thirty years.
These facts appear to me 
to preclude the possibility of error by misplacement.
The locality 
recorded by Mr. Backhouse, viz., Milford, is about ten miles N.N.W 
of Went Vale.
March i88S 
90 
APPROXIMATE CONVERSION NUMBERS 
FOR THE USE OF NATURALISTS.
J. S.
WOOD, 
Xybor^, Deiunark.
The reduction-tables at the end of Mr. Ridgway's book on ' Colour ' 
are certainly very complete and useful, but a simpler method of 
reduction for the several measures would have been very welcome to 
many naturalists.
I have myself often felt the want of such an 
approximate method of reduction, and have for some time used a 
table of my own working-out for that purpose.
This table I take the 
liberty of enclosing for publication.
TO CONVERT 
English inches to millimeters 
multiply by 127 and divide by 5 
Millimeters to English inches 
5 
>» 
127 
Lines i^p.d.r.) to eighths of English inch 
32 
45 
Eighths of English inch to Lines (p.d.r.) 
45 
. 5 5 
32 
Lines to millimeters 
> 5 
115 
! 1 
51 
or a little more accurate 
69*5 
• 1 
30-8 
Millimeters to Lines 
51 
5» 
115 
or a little more accurate 
• J 
30-8 
J > 
69-5 
Swedish inches to English inches 
? 5 
37 
5 5 
38 
English inches to Swedish inches 
5 > 
38 
! 1 
37 
Leipsic inches to English inches...
56 
3 ." 
52 
English inches to Leipsic inches...
! 5 
52 
5 J 
56 
English inches to Danish inches...
5> 
34 
35 
Danish inches to English inches...
35 
J 5 
34 
Danish eighths of an inch to millimeters 
85 
5 5 
26 
Millimeters to Danish eighths of an inch 
J J 
26 
» > 
85 
Twentieths of English inch to millimeters 
J 5 
127 
100 
Millimeters to twentieths of English inch 
? 5 
100 
127 
Sixteenths of English inch to millimeters 
127 
5 J 
80 
Millimeters to sixteenths of English inch 
So 
127 
Twelfths of English inch to millimeters 
J J 
127 
5 5 
60 
Millimeters to twelfths of English inch 
5 5 
60 
5 > 
127 
Tenths cf English inch to millimeters ...
127 
50 
Millimeters to tenths of English inch ...
5 J 
50 
> > 
127 
EXAMPLES.
Reduce 5^ English inches to millimeters.
5j = 5'25 X i27 = 666"75-^5 = i33'35 millinieters.
Reduce 1440 lines (p.d.r.) to millimeters.
i44oXii5 = i656o'o-f-5i = 3247'o nullimeters "J 
(rirst method) (_ Correct, 
Or ,, ,, ,.
1440 x69'5 = ioooSo'o-f-3o"S = 3249'3 millimeters ( 324S'48.
(second method).
/ 
Reduce 120 tenths of an English inch to millimeters.
1 20 X 127 = 1 524o-=-50=3O4"8 millimeters.
Reduce 240 twentieths ., ..
240 X 127 = 30480-1-100= 304'S millimeters.
Reduce 6 Swedish inches to millimeters.
6X37 = 222-^38 = 5 "894 English inches.
5"8947Xi27 
= 748"6269-f-5 = i49"72538 millimeters.
- 
Naturalist, 
91 
LAND AND FRESH-WATER MOLLUSCA OF 
UPPER AIREDALE, YORKSHIRE.
H. T.
SOPPITT AND J.
W. CARTER, 
Ex-Presidents of the Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Some years ago the Bradford Naturalists' Society mapped out a 
portion of the North-West Riding of Yorkshire for the purpose of 
investigating its fauna and flora.
The district thus mapped out 
includes (i) the Yorkshire portion of the Lune drainage; (2) the 
Ribble drainage, Yorkshire portion ; (3) the drainage of the 
Wharfe from its source to its junction with the Washburn below 
Otley; and (4) the drainage of the Aire from its source to the 
boundary of Leeds Borough.
During the last few years the Aire- 
dale portion of the district has been most assiduously worked for 
mollusca, as the following list shows, and it would be interesting 
for comparison if conchologists investigating the more eastern 
portion of the valley would publish the results of their work in the 
pages of The Naturalist.
The river Aire has its source at Malham Tarn, a large sheet of 
water covering 153 acres, which is fed by a number of small streams 
having their origin on Fountains Fell and Hard Flask.
The whole 
of the district down towards Skipton is of a Limestone character — 
Mountain Limestone and Yoredale; beyond, to the limit of our 
district it is chiefly Millstone Grit.
Owing to the comparative absence of stagnant ponds, dykes, etc., 
several common species, which might be expected to occur, are 
apparently absent, e.g., Physa fontinalis, Valvata cristata., etc.
; and 
to the land species Aane litieata and Achatina acicula may possibly 
yet be added.
The list is mainly the combined work of the following 
members of the Bradford Naturalists' Society — Messrs.
J. Beanland, 
J. A.
Hargreaves, M.C.S., F.
Rhodes, M.C.S., W.
West,' F.L.S., and 
the writers; when otherwise the recorders' names are given.
To Mr.
Hargreaves we are specially indebted for valuable assistance rendered 
in the compilation of the list, and to Mr. James Ellison of Steeton 
for information concerning that portion of the district.
For the examination of critical forms our thanks are due to 
Messrs.
John AV.
Taylor, Ex-President of the Concliological Society, 
W. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., and George Roberts, M.C.S., of 
Lofthouse.
Every species and variety mentioned in the list, without 
recorder's name being attached, has been verified by one of the three 
last-named gentlemen, or by ourselves.
The arrangement followed 
is that of the Conchological Society's List of British Land and Fresh- 
water Mollusca, 1883.
March 1888.
92 
SOPPITT AND CARTER: UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
MOLLUSCA AQUATILIA.
CONCHIFERA.
SPH^RIID^.
Sphasrium corneum L.
Abundant and generally distributed.
Leeds and Liverpool Canal, Manningham, Saltaire, Bingley, 
Apperley and Calverley ; ditch near Bingley ; pond near 
Cottingley Bridge ; ]\Ialham Tarn.
Var. flavescens ^Nlacgill.
Canal, Saltaire.
Var. nucleus Stud.
Common in Frizinghall Dam ; canal, 
Calverley; not uncommon in Malham Tarn, 1883 (Roebuck 
and Butterell).
Sphserium rivicola Leach.
In great abundance in Leeds and 
Liverpool Canal, but being chiefly an inhabitant of the mud at 
the bottom, is seldom obtained by dredging.
Saltaire, Gilstead, 
Thackley, and near Apperley.
Var. compressa Pasc.
Apperley, 1887.
Sphserium lacustre Mull.
Generally distributed and fairly 
common.
Pond on Baildon Green; canal, Saltaire; ditch, 
Dowley Gap, near Bingley ; pond at Bradford Moor ; dam at 
Greengates ; pond at Calverley ; pond at Rilstone ; Esholt 
(A.
Hartley).
Var, brochoniana Bourg.
Ditch, Dowley Gap ; pond, Brad- 
ford Moor.
Var. ryckholtii Norm.
Pond, Baildon Moor; Esholt (A.
Hartley).
Pisidium amnicum Mlill.
Local, and by no means common.
Canal, Saltaire ; Bingley, Apperley, Malham Tarn.
Pisidium fontinale Drap.
Common and generally distributed.
Ponds, Bradford Moor ; near Apperley, fine and plentiful ; 
ditches, Calverley, Thackley, Tong Park, Hawksworth ; Canal 
near Esholt ; Airton and Malham, in bogs.
Var. henslowana Shepp.
Canal near Esholt ; ditch, Thackley.
Var. pulchella Jenyns.
Pond, Bradford Moor.
Var. cinerea Alder.
Shipley Glen, Baildon Moor.
Pisidium pusilliim Gmelin.
Common and generally distributed.
Pond, Bradford jNIoor; bog, Shipley Glen, numerous; Baildon 
Moor ; ditch, Dowley Gap ; Thackley ; stream, Calverley ; bog, 
Cullingworth; not uncommon in Malham Tarn, September 1883 
(Roebuck and Butterell).
Var. obtusalis.
Bog, Shipley Glen.
Pisidium nitidum Jenyns.
Bindey (T.
Hebden, Trans.
Y.N.U.).
i U k¥ 1R8 a Naturalist, 
Price 6c/.; Post Free, ']d.
No. I Ready September ist^ 1887.
THE NATURALISTS' MONTHLY: 
A JOURNAL FOR NATURE-LOVERS AND NATURE-THINKERS, 
Edited by Dr. J.
W. WILLIAMS, M.A.
The Naturalists Moiithty will contain — (i) Original and Recreative Papers on Popular 
Scientific Subjects by well-known writers; (2) Articles on the Distribution of Animal and Plant 
Life in the British Islands; (3) Monographs on groups generally looked over by the Field- 
Naturalist, as the British Fresh-water Worms and Leeches in Zoology, and the Lichens and 
Mosses in Botany ; (4) Accounts of Scientific Voyages and Expeditions ; (5) Biographical Lives 
of the Greatest Scientific Men ; (6) ' The Editor's Easy Chair' — a Monthly Chit-chat on the most 
important Scientific Questions of the day; (7) Reports of the Learned Societies; (8) General 
Notes and Correspondence ; (9) Reviews of the latest Works and Papers ; (10) Answer and 
Query Column for Workers.
The Natiiralists' Mofitkly will be issued on the ist of each Month.
Annual Subscriptions, 7/- post free.
London : WALTER SCOTT, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.
No7v ready, price 2/- (postage ly^d.).
Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring- and 
Autumn of 1886.
By J.
A. HARVIE-BROWN, J.
CORDEAUX, R.
M. BARRINGTON, 
A. G.
MORE, AND W.
EAGLE CLARKE ; 
Members of the British Association Migration Committee.
To be had of W.
Eagle Clarke, i8, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds; 
or any Member of the Committee.
Nozv ready, Svo, cloth, price 6j- post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, t&c, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DENISON roebuck, Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
Crotvfi Svo, Cloth, Illustrated.
TOPOGRAPHY AND NATURAL HISTORY 
OF 
LOFTHOUSE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
By GEORGE ROBERTS.
I 
CONTENTS : Vol. I.
— Aiuiquuies ; Field-nomenclature; Ancient Houses; Registers; 
.^^rorities ; Industries; Surveys; Statistics; Ancient Leases; Natural History Diary from 
i^HSs to 1875 ; Essays on Natural History ; Lists of Fhuu> and shells.
CONTENTS: Voi..
II.
— Flora and Fauna; Customs; Notes on Church Sun-dials; 
Memoir of Charles Forrest; Notes on Old Families; Kothwell Registers; Observations on 
Domed Nests : Natural History Diary frem 1876 to i8d3 ; Additional Lists of Plants and Shells.
Price of First Volume - - 5s.
Od.
Second Volume - 3s.
6d.
To be obtained from the Autlior, Lofthou.se, Wakefield.
THE I^ATXJRALIST.
TJie Editors Jtope to publish tJie following papers ivitkin the next few months: — 
Insect Migratioii at Heligoland.— Edm. de Selys, Longchamps ; contributed hy 
John Cordeaux.
List of Hymenoptera occurring near Kirton-in-Lindsey.— C.
F. George.
Notes on Botanical Nomenclature.— Dk. G.
B. de Toni (Padua).
Evidences of Glacial Action near In gleton.— Robert R.
Balderston.
An Entomoloffical "Rlxpedition to Nortli "Wales and the Isle of Man.— 
Geo. T.
Porritt, F.L.S..
F.E.S.
List of the Flora of "Wensleydale.— John Percival, B.A.
Coal-Dust and Explosions in Coal-Mines— Rev. Arthur Watts, F.G.S.
The Ornithology of Sklddaw, Scawfell, and Helveliyn.— John Watson.
Bibliography of Entomology for 1885-7.
Bibliography of Geology and Palseontology for 1886 
Lincolnshire Marsh and Water Plants.— Rev. W.
F -wlek, 3M.A.
Lists of the Mosses and Hepatics of Westmoriind.— Geo. Stabler.
North of England Specimens in the British Museum.— T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
The Editors are open to receive suitable papers for insertion, particularly on Ichthyology, 
Entomology, Ornithology, etc.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published.
No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
containsQueries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, E.vtracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 16.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopj- and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialist.-, and illustrated bj- Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its das';.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope witn Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;'" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of ^licroscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P. M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King WiUiam St., Strand, W.C.
Post Free in Cardboard Covers, Is.
; Cloth, Is. 6d.
Address: — * Flower-Land,' Sewerby Vicarage, Hull; or can be ordered througli any 
Bookseller, or from the Publisher, John Heywood, Deansgate, Manchester.
AN EASY INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY, 
FOR CHILDREN, AND FOR THE USE OF PARENTS AND TEACHERS.
Vicar of Seweruv, Htll.
' Few works are written in such a plain manner as this, especially when dealing with Botany.
It is one of the easiest introductions to the subject we have come across.' — Horticitltiiral Times.
' Parents or Teachers who are able to take their children for country rambles will find here a • 
capital basis provided for conversational les>ons in the rudiments of Botany.' — Teachers' Aid.
No. 153.
APRIL 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESPONDEKENDIR MITGLIEU DP:S OH NITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN.
§ontents : 
Land and Fresh-water Mollusca of Upper Airedale, Yorkshire— /T.
T. Soppitt and 
J. W.
Carter 
An Entomological Expedition to North Wales and the Isle of ma.n—Geo. T.
Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S.
.. 
Aculeate Hymenoptera in North Lincolnshire— C i^.
George, M.R.C.S.
. 
Some Recent Bird-Books (Review)— Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.
Lincolnshire Marsh and Water Plants — Rev. William Fowler, M.A.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union : 26th Annual Report 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union : Annual Meeting at Malton 
In Memoriam : Thomas Lister ..
Note— Cryptogamia 
Polysticlmm angulare in North Lincolnshire — Jas. Eardley Mason.
Notes— Lepidoptera 
The Locality for certain Agrotidae— J.
Gardner; Moths attracted by the Illumina- 
tions of Lincoln Cathedral — W.
IF.
Fozvler.
Note — Mammalia and Fishes 
Whale at Flainborough — Matthew Bailey.
Note— Coleoptera 
Quedius longicornis at Hartlepool — y.
Gardner.
Note— Botany 
Some Ingleton Plants — R.
E. Leach, M.A.
93 to I02 
103 to 107 
107 
108 to 110 
III to 114 
115 to 119 
120 to 123 
123 & 124 
102 
110 & H4 
119 
119 
LONDON : 
LovELi, Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
Mt-CoRQUODALE & Go. LIMITED, Cardington Street, Euston ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghai.i. Street.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free.
The NATURALIST.
->ccx- 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
>ox 
Communieations should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof : 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Proceedings of Philadelphia Academy of Nat. Sciences.
Pt. 2.
April-Aug. 1887.
Science Gossip, No. 279, for Mch. 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
Grevillea.
No. 79, for ]\Iarch 1888.
[Dr. M.
C. Cooke, Editor.
Wesley Naturalist, No, 13, for March 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
Trans, of the Manchester Geological Soc, vol.
xix, Parts 14 & 15.
[The Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part xcix, for March 1888.
[J.
E. Robson.
Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 123, for March 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
Yorkshire Notes and Queries, Parts i to 10, Oct. 1885 to Jan. 18S8 inclusive.
[Mr. J.
Horsfall Turner, Editor.
Fourth Ann. Report of the Malton Field Naturalists' Soc, 1886-7.
[The Society.
Memoirs of the' Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society.
Third Series, 
vol, x, 1887.
[The Society.
Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, Vol. xxv, 
Session 1885-6 ; and vol.
xxvi, Session 1886-7.
[The Society.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., vol.
xii.
No. loi, Mch. 15, 1888.
[J.E.Clarke & B.B.Le Tall, Eds.
' Sunlight,' by the author of ' The Interior of the Earth.' Second Edition.
Cloth, 8vo., 180 pages.
[Messrs.
Triibner & Co.
Transactions and Proceedings of the Botanical Societv of Edinburgh.
Vol. xvii, 
Part I.
1887.
' [The Society.
The Mineralogical Magazine, vol.
vii, No. 35, Dec. 1887.
[The Mineralogical Soc.
An Indictment of Darwin.
By Oswald Dawson.
8\^o.
, 36 pages.
[The Author.
Revue Bryologique, Annee, 1888, No. 2.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
Mittheiburgen des Ornithologischen Vereines in Wien, xii Jahrg., Nr. 3, Marz, 1888.
Post Free in Cardboard.
Covers, Is.
; Cloth, Is. 6d.
Address: — 'Flower-Land,' Sewerby Vicarage, Hull; or can be ordered through any 
Bookseller, or from the Publisher, John Heywood, Deansgate, Manchester.
AN EASY INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY, 
FOR CHILDREN, AND FOR THE USE OF PARENTS AND TEACHERS.
Vicar of Sewerby, Hull.
' Few works are written in such a plain manner as this, especially when dealing with Botany.
It is one of the easiest introductions to the subject we have come 3.cross.'—Hortic2tltHral Times.
' Parents or Te.ichers who are able to take their children for country rambles will find here a 
capital basis provided for conversational lessons in the rudiments of Botany.' — TeacJiers Aid.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c, , sent out ' on approval.
' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
93 
UNIONID^.
Unio tumidus Phil.
By no means a common species.
Dead 
shells in canal at Gilstead near Bingley, and at Thackley.
Living examples, river Aire at Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Var. radiata Jeff.
Canal near Silsden (J.
Ellison).
Var. ponderosa Pascal.
River Aire, Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Var. arcuata Bouch.
River Aire, Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Unio pictorum L.
Rare.
One dead shell, canal near Bingley, 
1886; one ditto from canal dredgings between Apperley and 
Calverley.
Living examples from the Aire near Steeton 
(J.
EUison).
Var. deshayesii Rossm.
River Aire near Steeton (J.
EUison).
This variety — as we are informed by Mr. George Roberts — was 
recorded and described by Brown from the river Aire, Keighley, 
in 1845, as Unio deshayesii.
Anodonta cygnea L.
Common in suitable localities.
Rawson's 
Mill Dam, Bradford Moor, 1869 or 1870, several very, fine speci- 
mens (Dr. Evans).
Pond on Bradford Moor, 1882.
Dead 
examples, canal dredgings, Saltaire and near Calverley.
Canal 
near Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Var. incrassata Shepp.
Canal dredgings between Apperley 
and Calverley, 1887.
Var. zellensis Gmel.
Canal dredgings between Apperley and 
Calverley, 1887.
A form partaking of characters of two latter 
varieties from river Aire, Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Var. rostrata Rossm.
In mud of pond near Garnett's ]\Iill, 
Bradford, abundant, about one-fourth of them being remarkable 
in having a curious incurvature of the basal margins of both 
valves.
Dredge heap, Apperley.
Var. stagnalis.
Dredge heap, Apperley 
VAR.avonensis Mat.
& Rack.
nonMont.
Several living examples, 
canal between Calverley and Apperley.
Var. intermedia Brown non Lamarck.
Greengates, near 
Apperley.
Anodonta anatina L.
Frequent.
Leeds and Liverpool Canal, 
Bingley and Calverley.
Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Var, radiata Jeff.
Canal dredgings near Calverley.
Var. complanata Rossm.
River Aire near Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Common in canal between Apperley and Calverley, 1S87.
Canal dredgings near Calverley.
Var. arelatensis Jacq.
Canal at Gilstead, 18S6.
April 1888.
G 
94 SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
Var. normandi Dupuy.
Canal at Gilstead, 1886.
Var. cristata Nelson.
Very rare.
Dredge heap between 
Apperley and Calverley.
Var. piscinalis Nils.
Canal dredgings near Calverley.
DREISSENID^.
Dreissena polymorpha Pall.
Extremely abundant in the Leeds 
and Liverpool Canal between Keighley and Calverley, very 
variable in form and size, finest at the bottom of the locks.
GASTEROPODA.
• ^ ^ NERITID^.
Neritina fluviatilis L.
Local, and apparently confined to the 
canal ; Saltaire, Gilstead, Bingley and Keighley.
Var. trifasciata Colb.
In same localities, and commoner than 
the type.
PALUDINID^E.
Paludina vivipara L.
Local and rare.
Pond, Bradford Moor, 
several, 1886-7.
Canal, Gilstead, numerous, June 1886, on 
which date a portion of the canal was let off ; several attempts 
have been made since to obtain it in the same locality, but 
without success.
Ditch, Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Bythinia tentaculata L.
Extremely abundant; the commonest 
species of mollusc found in the canal ; seldom found in any 
other habitat.
Frizinghall Dam ; pond, Thackley, rather large 
but much eroded: margin of Malham Tarn, 1887, numerous 
and fine although dead examples.
Var. ventricosa Menke.
Several places in the Leeds and 
Liverpool Canal.
Var. excavata Jeff.
Canal, Apperley.
Var. major Locard.
Canal, Bingley, Apperley, and Calverley.
Var. zonata Baudon.
Canal, Saltaire, Bingley, Calverley, and 
Apperley, not uncommon ; pond, Thackley.
Var. fulva Locard.
Canal, Bingley to Apperley, common.
Var. cornea Locard.
Canal, Bingley to Calverley, but not 
common.
Var. angulata Roberts.
Rare.
Canal, Saltaire and Apperley.
The following is Mr. Roberts' description of this new variety: — 
* Each whorl somewhat sharply angulated or shouldered above 
the periphery, giving the shell a turreted appearance; colour, 
reddish; length, 9-10 mill.' (Nat, 1887, p.
19).
MoNST.
decollatum Jeff.
Frizinghall Dam, the most abundant 
form; canal, Manningham.
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
95 
VALVATIDAL.
Valvata piscinalis Mlill.
Generally distributed in the Leeds and 
Liverpool Canal ; Bingley, not uncommon, Saltaire, and Thackley, 
occasionally.
A few specimens at Malham Tarn approaching 
var.
acuminata, 1883 (Roebuck and Butterell).
Dead specimens 
in abundance on the margin of the Tarn, 1887.
Var. subcylindrica Jeff.
Canal, Bingley.
LIMN^ID^.
Planorbis nitidus Mlill.
Extremely abundant in Frizinghall 
Dam, near Bradford.
Occasional in canal, Saltaii'e, Apperley ; 
and ditch, Dowley Gap, near Bingley.
Planorbis nautileus L.
One specimen, Malham Tarn, 1883 
(Roebuck and Butterell).
Canal, Saltaire and Bingley 
(J.
Wilcock, in Trans.
Y. N.
U.).
Var. crista L.
Abundant in mill-dam at Tong Park, 1887.
Planorbis albus Miill.
Generally distributed and common.
Frizinghall Dam ; Beckfoot Lane ; canal, Bingley to Calverley ; 
pond, near Bingley old river-bed, Keighley ; mill-dam, Tong 
Park.
Skipton (W.
Nelson).
Var. draparnaldi Shepp.
Dam at Thackley ; canal, Bingley.
Planorbis spirorbis Mlill.
Locally abundant.
Ditches at 
Thackley ; Dowley Gap, near Bingley ; and Airton.
MoNST.
scalaris.
A single specimen in a ditch at Dowley 
Gap, near Bingley, Jan. 22nd, 1887.
Planorbis vortex L.
Common in canal near Bingley; rare, 
Saltaire ; Calverley, 1872 (H.
Shaw).
Planorbis carinatus Miill.
Generally distributed and common.
Abundant in pond on Baildon Green; pond at Tong Park; 
canal, Bingley to Calverley.
Planorbis complanatus L.
Extremely rare.
Canal, Calverley 
1872 (H.
Shaw).
Not found since.
Perhaps a case of mistaken 
identity.
Planorbis COrneus L.
Not a common species.
Frizinghall 
Dam ; pond on Baildon Green, introduced twenty years ago by 
Mr. T.
Hey ; pond at Fagley ; ditch, Steeton (J.
Ellison).
Planorbis contortus L.
Abundant and generally distributed.
Canal, Saltaire, Bingley; ditches, Dowley Gap, and near 
Cottingley Bridge ; abundant, Malham Tarn.
Physa hypnorum L.
Extremely local, having only been met 
with by Mr. W.
E. Collinge, M.C.S., of Leeds, who informs us 
that he found it in profusion at Bell Busk.
April 1888.
96 
SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
Limnaea peregra Miill.
Common everywhere.
Var. ovata Drap.
Common and fine in the canal at Manning- 
ham ; Gilstead ; Malham Tarn, 1883 (Roebuck and Butterell).
Var. labiosa Jeff.
Canal, Bingley.
Var. oblonga Jeff.
Canal, Thackley.
Var. minor Colb.
Dam at Greengates, near Apperley.
Var. ampullacea.
Canal, Thackley ; pond, Esholt (A.
Hartley).
Var. Candida Porro.
Canal, Saltaire and Bingley.
Limnaea auricularia L.
Generally distributed.
Canal from 
Bingley to Apperley, very fine ; ditch near Steeton (J.
Ellison) ; 
river Aire, Bingley, and Seven Arches, Bingley.
Limnaea Stagnalis L.
Rare.
Ponds, Fagley ; canal dredgings, 
Apperley; ditch, Steeton (J.
Ellison) ; Malham^ Tarn, 1887.
Var. fragilis-variegata Roeb.
Common on Potamogeton 
lucens in Malham Tarn, 1883 (Roebuck and Butterell).
Limnaea palustris Miill.
Common and generally distributed.
Frizinghall Dam; canal, Bingley to Calverley; ditches, Dowley 
Gap, near Bingley.
Var. elongata Moq. Ditches, Dowley Gap.
Var. roseolabiata Jeff.
Ditches, Dowley Gap.
A keeled form near Bingley, 1887.
A form approaching var.
pellucida Roff., Canal, near Saltaire.
Var. tincta Jeff".
Canal, Calverley.
Limnaea truncatula Miill.
Generally distributed and commoner 
than the last.
Canal from Bingley to Calverley ; ditch, 
Thackley; bog, Shipley Glen; Seven Arches, near Bingley; 
Hawksworth ; Rilstone ; Draughton (W.
D. Roebuck) ; Airton 
and Malham.
Var. minor Moq. Shipley Glen ; under logs of wood in wet 
places by the side of Malham Tarn, September 1883 (Roebuck 
and Butterell).
Var. ventricosa Moq. Rare.
Ditch, Thackley.
Limnaea glabra Miill.
Rare and local.
Pond at Baildon Green, 
1882-3, not taken since.
Ancylus fluviatilis Miill.
Common in canal, and in most streams 
in the district.
Skipton (W.
Nelson) ; Malham Tarn.
Var. albida Jeff.
River Aire at Malham Cove.
Ancylus lacustris L.
Rare and local.
Pond on Baildon Green : 
old river-bed, Keighley.
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
97 
MOLLUSCA TERRESTRIA.
ARIONIDM.
Arion ater L.
Abundant and generally distributed.
Var. brunnea Roeb.
Common.
Shipley Glen; Hawksworth.
Var. rufa L.
Nab Wood.
Var. plumbea Roeb.
Shipley Glen.
Arion subfuscus Drap.
Marshy field, Tong Park, 1887; Saltaire, 
1887.
Arion hortensis Fer. Common everywhere.
Arion bourguignati Mab. Often found in company with A.
hortensis^ and probably equally common (Mr. Roebuck tells us 
that it is probably generally much commoner, occurring in the 
open fields with L.
agrestis, while A.
hortensis prefers gardens).
LI MAC I D^.
Limax maximus L.
Generally distributed.
Bradford, Manning- 
ham, Saltaire, Bingley, Steeton, Airton.
Var. cinerea Moq. Charlestown.
Limax cinereo-niger AVolf.
Rare and local.
One, Shipley 
Glen, 1883.
Var. maura Held.
One, Shipley Glen, 1886.
Limax flavus L.
Frequent in cellars, etc., Bradford.
Limax agrestis L.
Abundant everywhere.
Var. sylvatica Moq. non Drap.
Abundant everywhere.
Var. nigrescens Colb.
Gardens near Peel Park, Bradford.
Near Apperley.
Limax laevis Miill.
Local.
Bog, Shipley Glen ; Fagley Wood, 
near Malham Tarn, September 1883 (Roebuck and Butterell).
Limax arborum B.-Ch. Not common.
Calverley; Idle; Seven 
Arches, near Bingley; Cottingley ; Gordale Scar, 1877 (W.
Nelson) ; Airton near Malham.
HELICIDAL.
Succinea putris !>.
Generally distributed and common in 
suitable situations.
Canal-bank, Bingley to Apperley ; Marley, 
very fine; Airton, near Malham; Gordale, 1,300 ft, two 
examples incrusted ; Malham Tarn, 1883 (Roebuck and 
Butterell).
Var. albida.
An albino specimen found near Apperley, 1887 
(A^Hartley).
April 1888.
98 SOPPITT AND CARTER: UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
Succinea elegans Risso.
Probably often confounded with the 
last.
One or two examples only of this species have been 
verified.
Canal-side, Saltaire and Apperley.
Vitrina pellucida Miill.
Common and generally distributed in 
suitable localities throughout the district.
From Malham to 
Calverley.
Zonites cellarius Miill.
Common in damp situations, often 
found in cellars in Bradford.
Frizinghall, Saltaire, Bingley, 
Calverley, Malham.
Var. albinos Moq. Saltaire ; Heaton ; Seven Arches, near 
Bingley ; Thackley.
Zonites alliarius Miller.
Common and generally distributed 
throughout the district.
Zonites glaber Stud.
Locally common.
Saltaire; Seven Arches^ 
near Bingley ; Cottingley ; Thackley.
Zonites nitidulus Drap.
Common throughout the district.
Var. nitens Mich.
Shipley Glen, Nab Wood.
Zonites purus Alder.
Local and somewhat rare.
Near Skipton, 
1881; Gordale, 1883; Buck Wood, Thackley, 1887.
Var. margaritacea Jeff.
Commoner than the type.
Harden 
near Bingley, 1875 (W.
Nelson); Buck Wood, Thackley, 1886 ; 
Nab Wood, Saltaire, 1886 ; Calverley Wood, 1887.
Zonites radiatulus Alder.
Very local.
Shipley Glen, 1883, 
still occurs in the same locaHty ; CuUingworth, 1883.
Var. viridescenti-alba Jeff.
Rare.
Shipley Glen, 1 881 (W.Nelson).
Zonites nitidus Miill.
Local.
One example, canal-side, Saltaire, 
1886 ; one in Nab Wood, Saltaire, 1887.
Extremely abundant 
amongst Glyceria rt;^?/«/^V<2, .canal-side, Thackley to Calverley 
(1887).
Zonites excavatus Bean.
Local, but in some places abundant.
Saltaire, i886; Fagley Wood, common; Nab Wood; Shipley 
Glen; Calverley Woods, 1887.
Zonites crystallinus Miill.
Generally distributed in suitable 
localities throughout the district.
Zonites fulvus Miill.
Generally distributed, but chiefly found in 
woods.
Saltaire, 1880; Heaton Wood, 1882; common in 
marshy ground at Shipley Glen, first found in 1882 (W.
Nelson) ; 
Seven Arches, near Bingley, 1886-7 \ Beckfoot Lane, near 
Bingley; Fagley Wood ; Nab Wood, Saltaire ; Malham, 1887.
Helix lamellata Jeff.
Rare and local.
Shipley Glen, several 
examples, 1887.
One, 1888.
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
Helix aculeata Miill.
Very local.
Harden near Bingley, 1875 
(W.
Nelson) ; Shipley Glen, three examples, 1887 ; Seven 
Arches near Bingley, common, 1887.
Helix aspersa Miill.
Very rare off limestone.
Beckfoot I.ane, 
Bingley, one, dead, 1881 ; Steeton, several (J.
Ellison); not un- 
common in gardens at Airton, near Malham, 1887.
Helix nemoralis L.
Generally distributed, but most abundant 
on limestone.
Var. roseolabiata Tayl.
Several specimens near Calverley, 
agreeing in colour with var.
petiveria Moq., with the five bands 
of the type present.
Var. albolabiata Von Mart.
Railway embankment near Idle, 
with the colour of var.
libelliila Risso, and the band-formula 
00100.
Var. libellula Risso.
Frequent, and variously banded.
Apperley, 
Bingley, Malham, Calverley, Havvksworth.
Var. rubella Moq. Malham, Apperley, Nab Wood, Saltaire, 
Calverley, etc.
— with and without bands.
Var. petiveria Moq. Frequent, the banded form most common.
Gilstead, Apperley, Calverley ; canal-bank.
Idle ; etc.
Var. castanea Moq. Rare.
Several examples near Apperley.
Helix hortensis Miill.
Like the last, this species is most 
abundant on a limestone soil.
Its occurrence off limestone in 
numbers and variety is chiefly on railway embankments.
Several 
named varieties occur with the type.
Var. minor Moq. Near Apperley.
Var. lutea Moq. A common form.
Bingley, Apperley, Malham.
Var. olivacea Tayl.
Confined to the railway embankment near 
Apperley, where it was first found by Mr. A.
Hartley, to whom 
we are indebted for a fine series of specimens.
Helix arbustorum L.
Most abundant on limestone, and 
doubtfully indigenous on the millstone grit, its occurrence in 
numbers being in the vicinity of lime-kilns.
Gordale Scar, 1877 
(W.
Nelson) ; Malham, 1882 ; Airton; Gargrave (J.
Whitwam); 
Bell Busk (W.
Nelson); Rilstone, 1887; one dead specimen 
amongst rejectamenta of river Aire at Cottingley ; one, Seven 
Arches, near Bingley ; common and increasing in numbers at 
Apperley, in proximity to a lime-kiln.
Var. alpestris Ziegl.
Airton near Malham, 1883.
Var. marmorata Tayl.
Airton, common, 1882; Rilstone; 
Ap perley, frequent, 1887.
April 1888.
lOO SOPPITT AND CARTER : UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
Var. cincta Tayl.
Malham, 1882; Bell Busk (J.W.Taylor); 
Gordale, one, 1882 (W.
D. Roebuck); Airton, 1883; Rilstone, 
1886.
Var. flavescens Moq. Malham, 1882 ; Airton (W.
Nelson) ; 
Gargrave (J.
Whitwam) ; Rilstone, 1886.
Var. albinos Moq. Gargrave, 1882 (J.
Whitwam).
Helix rufescens Penn.
Probably the most abundant land-shell 
in the district.
More or less scalariform examples are not 
uncommon.
Var. minor Jeff.
Two examples, Malham, 1887.
Var. rubens Moq. Common with the type.
Var. alba Moq. Common.
Var. depressa Loc. A flat form occurring commonly at 
Greengates, also at Saltaire and near Bingley.
Helix concinna Jeff.
Rare.
Saltaire.
Var. albida Jeff.
Buck Wood, Thackley.
Helix hispida L.
Locally common.
Malham, common, 1882 ; 
Gordale, 1882; Airton, one (W.
D. Roebuck); Bingley, 1882; 
Idle; Saltaire, 1886; occasionally near Bingley; Frizinghall, 
common, 1887.
Var. subrufa Moq. Malham, 1883 (Roebuck and Butterell).
Var. depilata Aid. Bingley ; near Esholt ; near Calverley.
Var. albida Jeff.
Buck Wood, Thackley.
Helix sericea Miill.
Common, and in some places abundant.
Banks of canal from Bingley to Calverley in profusion; Malham, 
September 1883 (W.
D. Roebuck); Gennet's Cave, 1887; 
Skipton (R.
C. Middleton, M.A.).
Helix fusca Mont.
Rare and local.
Several examples from a 
bog in Shipley Glen, 1887.
Helix virgata DaCosta.
Very local.
Common in a pasture at 
Morton Banks, near Bingley, June 1884; in great profusion in 
a short hilly pasture at Cottingley, near Bingley, since 1882; a 
variety approaching lutescens abundant with the type.
Helix caperata Mont.
Common and generally distributed.
Under dead leaves, Bingley, 1882 (J.
A. and E..P. P.
Butterfield); 
cross-roads near Ingrow; Gilstead, Heaton, Saltaire, Fagley, 
Apperley, Calverley.
Helix ericetorum Miill.
Local and confined to the limestone 
district.
Malham, 1873 (J.
W. Taylor), 1877 (W.
Nelson); 
Airton (W.
Nelson); upper end of Gordale Scar, 1887.
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT AND CARTER: UPPER AIREDALE MOLLUSCA.
lOI 
Helix rotundata Miill.
Abundant throughout the district.
Var. turtoni Flem.
Calverley, 1886.
Var. alba Moq. Fagley woods, 1887.
Helix rupestris Drap.
Abundant, but confined to the limestone.
Kirby Malham, 1877 (W.
Nelson) ; Cracoe, 1881 (T.
W. Bell) ; 
Malham, 1882 and 1887 ; Airton, 1882 (W.
D. Roebuck); near 
Gargrave, 1883 ; Skipton, 1883.
Helix pygmaea Drap, Not uncommon in a few localities.
Chellow Dean, near Bradford, 1883 ; amongst dead leaves, 
Shipley Glen, 1887: Fagley Wood, 1887.
Helix pulchella Miill.
Not common.
Apperley Bridge 1878 
(W.
Nelson); Calverley, dead examples, 1882 (W.
Nelson).
Var. costata Miill.
Commoner than the type.
Canal bank 
between Apperley and Calverley; Idle; Saltaire; Seven Arches, 
near Bingley, all in 1887.
Helix lapicida L.
Confined to the limestone, where it is not 
uncommon.
Near Gordale Scar, 1877 (W.Nelson); Malham, 
1882; Airton, 1884; Kirby Malham, 1887; Rilstone, 1886.
Var. nigrescens Taylor.
Malham, 1883.
Bulimus obscurus Miill.
Generally distributed, and in some 
places common.
Gordale, at 1,000 ft., 1883; Airton, 1883; 
Bingley, Dowley Gap, Nab Wood, Saltaire, Idle, Thackley, 
Apperley.
Pupa secale Drap.
Apparently rare, but abundant about Settle, 
in Ribblesdale, only a few miles outside our area, and on the 
same formation as the upper portion of Airedale.
Malham, 1871 
(H.
Shaw).
Pupa ringens Jeff.
Very local and not uncommon.
Boggy ground, 
upper end of Shipley Glen, 1882 (W.
Nelson).
Taken every 
year since.
Var. pallida Jeff.
Occurs with the type.
Pupa umbilicata Drap.
Abundant on limestone, but local on 
the millstone grit.
Kirby Malham, 1877 (W.
Nelson); Malham, 
1882 ; Gordale, 1887 ; near Skipton, 1877 (R.
Scharff) ; Harden 
near Bingley, 1875 (W.
Nelson); Buck Wood, Thackley, 1886; 
Esholt, common, 1887 (A.
Hartley); near Keighley; Idle, 1887.
Var. curta Westerl.
Between Bingley and Harden.
Pupa marg"inata Drap, Rare.
Limestone rocks, Malham, 1882.
Vertigo antivertigo Drap, Very local.
Bog in Shipley Cilen, 
1882 (W.
Nelson), and found commonly up to the present time 
in the same locality.
April 1888.
102 POLYSTICHUM ANGULARE IN NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE.
Vertigo pygrnaea Drap.
Very rare.
Two examples, Malham, 
1882.
Vertigo alpestris Alder.
Very local.
Confined to a garden 
wall near Bingley, 1887.
Not previously recorded for Yorkshire.
Vertigo substriata Jeff.
Very local, having only been found at 
Shipley Glen in boggy ground, associated with Vertigo a?iti- 
veriigo, Pupa ringens, etc., 1887.
Vertigo pusilla Miill.
Very rare.
Two amongst moss, Malham, 
1882.
Vertigo edentula Drap.
Very local and somewhat rare.
Marshy 
ground, Shipley Glen, several, 1887.
Balea perversa L.
Common on the limestone.
Malham, 1882 ; 
Gennet's Cave, 1882 (W.
D. Roebuck) ; Kirkby Malham, 1887.
Clausilia rugosa Drap.
Common and generally distributed.
Abundant on limestone rocks, Malham ; on silurian rocks, 
Malham Moor, 1883 (Roebuck and Butterell) ; Airton to 
Gargrave, 1883 ; near Skipton (R.
Scharff) ; Bingley, Gilstead, 
Apperley, Idle, Calverley.
Var. dubia Drap.
Up to the present time has only been found 
on limestone.
Malham, 1882; Gordale and Airton, 1887.
Clausilia laminata Mont.
Very rare.
Rocks near Skipton, 1882 
(VV.
Whitwell).
Cochlicopa tridens Pult.
Generally distributed.
Beckfoot Lane, 
near Bingley, 1882 (E.
R P.
Butterfield) ; bog, near Ingrow; 
Buck Wood, Thackley ; Red Beck, Heaton, near Saltaire.
Cochlicopa lubrica Miill.
Common and generally distributed 
throughout the district, from the source of the Aire to the Leeds 
borough boundary.
Var. lubricoides Fer. Malham, 1882; Saltaire, 18S7.
Carychium minimum Miill.
Common in suitable locaUties 
throughout the district.
Gargrave, Bingley, Shipley Glen, 
Frizinghall, Idle, Nab Wood, Saltaire, Calverley.
The total number of species enumerated in the list is 93.
NOTE—CRYPTOGAMIA.
Polystichum annulare in North Lincolnshire.— This fern, new to North 
Lincoln, has been found by Miss wSusan Allett, of Tothill, in a hedgerow in the 
parish of Withern.
Dr. F.
Arnold Lees identified the specimen, a frond of 
which was sent him through me.
— Jas. Eardley Mason, Alford, Feb. 6th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
AN ENTOMOLOGICAL EXPEDITION 
TO NORTH WALES AND THE ISLE OF MAN.
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Hudders/ield ; Author of the ''List of Yorkshire Lepidopiera.' 
In August last, in company with Mr. G.
W. K.
Crosland, of this 
town, I made an entomological excursion to North Wales, making 
Penmaenmawr head-quarters.
We arrived there on the evening of 
August 4th, and most of our collecting was done in the immediate 
vicinity of that charming little place, and on the sandhills lying 
between it and Conway and Llandudno.
On several of the earlier 
evenings we climbed up the Moel Leys Mountain, on the possibility 
of finding one or two late specimens of Agrotis ashworthii still on 
the wing, but, as we feared, it was evidently over, for no trace of it 
was to be found, though some years previously, in July, I had 
discovered it was a not uncommon species there.
And we were, of 
course, quite too late for the local Acidalia co?itiguaria, which occurs 
on the same mountain, as well as probably on all the rocks from 
Conway to Llanfairfechan.
On the Moel Leys, but not high up, we 
were glad to find Stilbia a7ioviala was fairly common, and in fine 
condition, evidently just getting well out ; and we were also very 
pleased to find that Cidaria picata still occurred in its old habitat 
near Conway.
The Y>XQt\.y Larentia olivata occurred not uncommonly 
on rocks, whilst the most abundant Noctua was the lively Tryphcena 
janihina.
This species seemed to occur everywhere ; on beating a 
holly-bush six or eight specimens would sometimes fly out ; and in 
gardens and lanes it appeared to be quite as abundant as its bigger 
narrow-bordered brother T.
pronuba is in Yorkshire.
We collected such species of the orders Lepidoptera, Neuroptera 
(omitting Psocidcc and Ephemeridce), Trichoptera, and Orthoptera as 
came in our way, but the district did not appear rich in species, as 
the appended lists will show.
Only in the Lepidoptera, however, had 
we had much previous experience, or there is little doubt the list 
would have been largely augmented, the character of the ground 
being evidently very favourable for the other orders.
For a change in the collecting, on the 15th we crossed over to 
the Isle of Man, returning to Penmaenmawr on the 20th.
On the 
island we hoped to have got Folia 7iigrocincta^ but were disap- 
pointed; and as I had also searched for the larvae two months earlier, 
in June, on the ground where some years ago Mr. Roxburgh, of 
Liverpool, and I found nearly forty larvae one evening, we began to 
April 1888.
104 
PORRITT : AN ENTOMOLOGICAL EXPEDITION.
fear that 7iigrod?icta was becoming scarce.
After our return home 
we suggested this to a Liverpool lepidopterist, who has had great 
experience with the species, and were then at once informed by him 
that as three collectors had spent about a fortnight on the very 
ground, just before our going there in June, working every available 
yard of it for this species, and so taking plenty, our informant's 
surprise would have been great if we had found any !
In the middle 
of August, too, we were probably a fortnight too early for the variety 
unicolor of Cirrczdia xerampelina^ which used to be not uncommon 
in the Nunnery Grounds near Douglas, and doubtless equally so in 
other parts of the island, as its food (the ash) flourishes luxuriantly, 
and is undoubtedly the tree of the Isle of ]\Ian. In the list of species 
for the Isle of Man, I have also included those I took when there 
from the 17th to 20th June during the past season, as well as several 
Trichoptera I took several years ago.
PENMAEN.AIAWR AND DISTRICT.
LEPIDOPTERA.
Vanessa io.
Satyrus cegeria^ and about a dozen other species of 
butterflies occurred, but none of any rarity.
Satyrus semele seemed 
equally at home either on mountains or sandhills, and was common.
Hepiahis sylvinus \ Gnophos obsacrata ; Larentia olivata \ EupithcEcia 
linariata, larvae in seed capsules of Linaria vulgaris ; E.
minutata ; 
E. subfulvata ; E.
p2unilata \ E.
nanata ; Coremia zmidentaria^ 
abundant everywhere ; Scotosia dubitata, on ling flowers after dark, 
high upon the Zvloel Leys ; Cidaria picata^ about rocks between Pen- 
maenmawr and Conway \ C.
pj'unata, abundant about old currant or 
gooseberry bushes in gardens ; Fygcera bucephala, larvae in profusion 
on sallows ; Charceas graminis.
very fine on the jNIoel Leys ; Miana 
literosa ; Agrotis porphyrea \ Tryphcena ja?ithina, abundant every- 
where, apparently much more so than T.
pro nub a ; Noctua umbrosa ; 
Xanthia cerago \ Anarta myrtilli^ larvae ; Mania maura ; Stilbia 
anoniala, common on, but near the base of, the Moel Leys; Pyrausta 
piirpuralis \ Endotricha flammealis ; Scoparia mercuralis ; S.
truiici- 
colalis^ a Scoparia occurred rather commonly in one hedge at Pen- 
maenmawr, which seems to be a pale form of this species ; Crambus 
geniculellus ; Pero?iea spo?isa7ia ; Tortrix unifascia7ia ; Dictyopteryx 
holmiana ; Grapholitha 7iisa?ia ; Spilo7iota i7icarnata7ia, this pretty 
species occurred in profusion among Eosa spinosissi77ia in Conway 
Bay, and on the opposite sandhills near Llandudno ; Fhoxopteryx 
limdana^ common ; Xa7ithosetia ha77iana ; Conchy lis inopia7ia] Aphelia 
pratana, abundant ; Hypolepia radiatella^ most abundant, and almost 
as variable as plentiful ; Phibalocera quercella ; Depressaria costosella ; 
Naturalist, 
porritt: an entomological expedition.
D. umbellella and D.
nanatella, common ; D.
nervosella ; Gelechia 
tricolorella ; Pterophorus go?iodactyIus, second brood ; P.
iithodactylus, 
in profusion among Imcla dysenierica on the sandhills near Llandudno ; 
P. monodaciylus, equally abundant as larvae and pupae among convol- 
vulus, at Penmaenmawr.
NEUROPTERA.
Most of the Neuroptera and Trichoptera were taken by beating 
the bushes and trees overhanging a wild mountain stream leading up 
to the Fairy Glen, near Penmaenmawr.
y^schna jiincea ; Chloroperla 
grammatica ; Leiictra fusdventris, abundant ; Neuioitra meyeri ; 
Hemerobins subiiebidosiis ; Chrysopa flava ; C.
Jlavifrons, h^^itQiLi out 
of ash trees, apparently the commonest Chrysopa then out.
TRICHOPTERA.
Lwmophihis sparsits \ Silo pallipes ; Cncncecia irrorata ; Lepidos- 
i07iia hirta ; Odontocerum albicorne^ plentiful ; Hy dropsy che ijistabilis ; 
Philopotainus moiitanus^ perhaps the most abundant species ; 
Wormaldia occipitalis ; Plectroctieinia geiiiciilata, one specimen ; Poly- 
centropits flavomaculatits and P.
iniLltig2itfatiLS ; Rhyacophila dorsalis, 
abundant.
ORTPIOPTERA.
Forficula aiiricidaria; Ste?iobothiHs viriduhis ) S.riifipes', S.elegans; 
S. parallelhis ; S.
bicolor^ in great profusion everywhere, both on 
mountains and sandhills; Goniphoceriis macidatits {bigitttahis) equally 
abundant, and everywhere in company with S.
bicolor ; Odotitwa 
piL7ictatissinia, several of this beautiful and singular species on low 
plants, or beaten out of bushes.
THE ISLE OF MAN.
LEPIDOPTERA.
Vanessa atalanfa, Castletown ; Satyrus inegcEra, in abundance 
everywhere, and very brightly coloured ; S.
sejneie, on the rocks ; 
Sesia philanthiformis, about Statice armeria on the rocks between 
Derby Castle and Onchan Harbour, in June ; Boinbyx rubi, in larval 
stage at Port Soderick ; Epione apiciaria ; Boarniia repandata ; 
Crocallis elinguaria, abundant ; Gnophos obsciirata^ very fine in 
Onchan Harbour; Lare?itia saiicata, common in a lane near Onchan; 
Eupithecia venosata, abundant among Silene inflafa^ in June ; E, con- 
sirictata, Onchan Harbour in June ; E.
pumilata, common in ash 
trees ; Melanthia rubiginata, common ; M.
ocella/a, second brood : 
Coremia propugjiata ; C.
ii/iidc/itaria ; Cidaria russata, common, and 
almost black ; C.
if}i??ia?iaia, in the greatest profusion in ash trees, 
on tapping the trees along a stream at Port Soderick, they flew off in 
April 1888.
io6 
PORRITT: AN ENTOMOLOGICAL EXPEDITION.
great numbers, and in splendid variety, both in pale and dark forms; 
C. festata, abundant ; Hypsipetes elutata, common, but the forms 
veiT ordinary ; Notodo7ita ziczac, in larval stage at Port Soderick ; 
Hydro'cia niicacea ; Muuia literosa ', Tryphcv?ia orbona, the reddish 
form with spotted tip, sometimes mistaken by beginners for T.
subsequa, was not uncommon ; Dianthcccia capsophila^ common in 
June, a few larvas in August ; D.
cucubali, Onchan Harbour ; 
D. ccesia^ abundant in June in Onchan Harbour, was taken even more 
freely than capsophila \ a few larvae in August at same place, and also 
at Port Soderick, but we were evidently too late for the larvae which 
had doubtless gone down early this unusually hot summer ; Hadena 
pisi'y Abrosiola urticcE \ Gonopie?'a Iibat?ix ; Cra?nbus gejitculelliis ; 
Homcvoscvna jiimbcUa^ larvis plentiful in camomile flowers on the 
rocks beyond Derby Castle; Phycis carbonariclla, Scarlett Rocks, 
Castletown ; Teras caudana and T.
coiitami?iana ; Sfiaphi/a colqu- 
houjiana^ on the rocks between Derby Castle and Onchan Harbour ; 
Bactra lajiceolafia ; Pivdisai sc7Jiifiisca?ia^ small hill form ; Conchylis 
stramifieana, common; Depj-essaria aixnella^ D.
siibpropinquella^ 
D. alst7'{rmeriella^ D.
applanella^ and D.
heradiella ; Gelechia ci?ie?'ella ; 
Glyphiptcryx thraso?iella^ abundant at Port Soderick ; Coleophora 
albicostclla ; Ptcropho7'iis microdactylus, about Eupatoriuin avwa- 
bi?ium in June.
NEUROPTERA.
Isoptcryx bur?neisfen\ common by sweeping the herbage on the 
sides of streams ; Lcudra fusdvcntn's^ in similar situations ; 
Heine7-obius viicaiis and H.
hurnuli ; H.
subncbulosus, abundant ; 
H. iiervosus^ not uncommon near Douglas and Port Soderick.
TRICHOPTERA.
Limnophilus ce7itralis ; Z.
auriada [taken commonly in a 
previous year] ; L.
sparsus ; Se7'icosto77ia perso7iatiwi, Port Soderick ; 
Lepidostojjia hi7ia [taken in a previous year] ; Bercea ptillata, abundant 
by sweeping the long grass in a damp meadow at Port Soderick in 
June ; Odofifocenwi albicor7ie, Port Soderick; Ify dropsy die ijisiabilis^ 
plentiful ; PhilopotiDims 7Tt07iia7ius, very abundant, flying in the sun- 
shine over rapid streams ; Wor7naldia stdniigra^ common, Port 
Soderick ; Plcdroc7iejiua co7!Spersa, common near Douglas ; P.
ge7ii' 
cu/afa, two nice specimens by beating herbage overhanging the 
stream in a wood behind Douglas ; Poly ce7iir opus Jlavo77iaculatus^ on 
the stream at Port Soderick ; Ti7wdes assi77if/!s, this local species 
occurred in scores on dripping rocks at Port Soderick in June, and 
a few stragglers were still about in August; Rhyacophila dorsalis^ 
abundant; Agapetus fuscipes [taken in a previous year].
Naturalist, 
GEORGE: ACULEATE HYMENOPTERA IN NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE.
Icy 
ORTJIOPTKRA.
Sienobothris viridulus and .S'.
hicolor.^ abundant; and of course 
Forficula auricularia, 
DII^TRRA.
Three species of Tipulidoi taken near Douglas in June have 
been kindly named for rne by Dr. K.
H. Meade, of Bradford, as 
Amapolis littoralis^ Pedicia rivosa^ and Ftychoptera contaminata.
ACULEATE HYMENOPTERA IN NORTH 
LINCOLNSHIRE.
The following is a list of Aculeate Hyrnenoptera which I have 
myself taken at Kirton-inT^indsey and neighbourhood 
C. F.
^j\/)V(j]., M.R.C.S., 
Kirto?i,-in-Li7tdiey ; Ex-Pre.ident 0/ the Fo-AaL I.l icroscopical Society.
FOSSOKES.
Andrena nigroanea.
Andrena gwynana.
Andrena prsecox.
Andrena chrysosceles.
Andrena minutula.
Nomada ]ineo]a.
Xomada altemata.
Xornada raf;corr.; - .
Epeoiui vari ' ; 
Melecta lucluo-.a.
Ccelioxys elongata.
Megachile willughljiella.
Megachile centuncularis.
Osmia rufa.
Anthophora pjilipes.
Apathus rupestris.
Apathus vestalis.
Rornbus cognatus.
RoniLus muscorum, 
Bombus distinguendus.
Bombus hortorum.
BomVjus subterraneus.
Bombus lapidarius.
Bombus terrestris.
Bombus virginalis.
Apis mellifica.
Pompilus viaticus.
Priocnemis fuscus.
Amrnc' c.'.ulosa.
Diod^ ^: 
Peiriph.",' /...
\ .gubris.
Mellinus arvensis.
Crabro clavipe.s.
Crabro vagabundus.
Crabro cep?ialote.s.
Crabro cribrarius.
QxzSjccj peltarius.
DlPLOI'TERA.
Vespa vulgaris.
Vespa gerrnanica.
Vespa rufa.
Vespa sylvestris.
Odynerus antilope.
Anthophila.
Colletes succincta.
Sphecodes gibbus.
Sphecodes pilifrons.
Sphecodes dimidiatus ?
Halictus rubicundus.
Halictus quadrinotatus.
Halictus cylindricus.
Halictus punctatissimus.
Halictus morio.
Andrena alljicans.
Andrena trimmerana.
Andrena nitida.
Andrena fulva.
Andrena clarkella.
I may add that of other groups 
Sirex juvencus has occurred, 
a living specimen having 
been caught in this place 
since the above list was 
made out.
April x888.
io8 
SOME RECENT BIRD- BOOKS.
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S.
1. — A Manual of North American Birds.
By Robert Ridgway, 
L'  .
.s:ra:ed by 464 outline drawings of the generic characters.
Philadelphia : 
J. B.
Lippincott Company.
1888.
2. — The Birds of Wiltshire, comprising all the Periodical and Occasional 
Msitants, as well as those which are indigenous to the County.
By the 
Rev. Alfred Charles Smith, M.A., Christ Church, Oxford; Rector of 
Yatesbur}- : Member of the British Ornithologists' Union ; Hon. Sec.
of 
the Wiltshire Archceological and Natural History Society.
Published for 
the Author by R.
H. Porter, 6, Tenterden Street, London, W.
; and 
H. F.
Bull, Devizes.
1S87.
3. — Some more illustrations of Wild Birds, showing- their natural habits.
By C.
Ada.msox.
London : Gurney 6: Jackson.
N ewcastle-upon-Tj-ne : 
Mawson, Swan, k Morgan.
1S87.
r^Ir. Ridgway's ]\L\xrAL is another reminder of the excellence 
of the \vork accomplished by North American ornithologists ; indeed, 
it is perhaps not too much to aver that the avifauna of the Nearctic 
Region has been worked out with a thoroughness that cannot be 
claimed for any other of the zoogeographical regions.
This most 
satisfactory result is in no small measure due, we believe, to the fact 
that our western cousins long since adopted enlightened plans of 
procedure when electing to devote their attention to the Nearctic 
Region as a whole.
In this respect they may be said to be far in 
advance of their European confreres, and what a contrast we in 
Britain afford.
With us the rank and file of our naturahsts are 
content to be for ever studying our Insular fauna as if it were an 
important natural region in itself, forgetting our direct relationship 
to the continent of the Pal^arctic region, whose western portion, 
at least, should form the area for their studies.
We beUeve this 
regrettable state of things is to some extent pardonable, since it is 
in no small measure the direct result of the want of a IManual on 
European Birds, like the one for North America now under our 
consideration — a book whose object ' is to furnish a convenient 
Manual of North American Ornithology, reduced to the smallest 
compass by the omission of ever}-thing that is not absolutely 
necessary for determining the character of any given specimen, and 
including, besides correct nomenclature of each species, a statement 
of its natural habitat and other concomitant data.' Such a Manual 
for European Birds is greatly needed, and would supply a long-felt 
and undeniable blank in the literature of a popular subject; it would 
also stimulate our younger ornithologists to better — because more 
Naturalist, 
CLARKE : SOME RECENT BIRD-BOOKS.
useful — work, and give them broader ideas than those now held.
Moreover, although we have Mr. Dresser's magnificent and ency- 
clopsedic volumes on the ' Birds of Europe ' — a work of which all 
Englishmen may feel justly proud, but one of the many books on a 
favourite study that can, from their costliness, be commanded by 
comparatively few — this book, strange to say, stands alone as the 
only work worthy of attention on the European (Western Palae- 
arctic) avifauna, in any language.
North America, on the contrary, 
has and has had a number of good books, both costly and cheap, 
devoted to its feathered tribes, and the result is, its avifauna has 
been worked up, not only to a great pitch of perfection for so large 
a natural region, but its birds are famiHar to the whole body of its 
ornithologists — a most happy state of things, resulting in the younger 
naturalists knowing exactly where there is an opening for their 
investigations.
These manuals have another distinct use — they are 
a most desirable vade mecum for the traveller, since they readily go 
into a corner of the portmanteau.
Mr. Ridgway's Manual is not 
intended to be in any sense a popular treatise ; it is eminently a 
student's book, the descriptive portion of it being based upon the 
' key ' principle throughout.
By this method the consulter is con- 
veyed by means of clear diagnostic characters, based entirely upon 
external peculiarities, from the orders through families and genera to 
species and sub-species, which are described in all phases of their 
plumage.
It is the production of one of the most accomplished of 
living ornithologists, who, as Keeper of the Department of Birds 
in the United States National Museum, has had the unrivalled 
collections of that institution at his command, and the result is, in 
every respect, a thoroughly reliable Manual, based upon the latest 
lines laid down by scientific ornithologists.
The 464 outline 
figures of generic characters, contained on 124 plates, will be 
welcome, because useful, not only to American naturalists, but 
to ornithologists generally.
These plates have been produced by 
what is known as the ' Jewett ' process, and are quite marvels for 
their wonderful clearness.
The frontispiece to the book is devoted 
to an artistic portait of him who was Nestor of American ornitholo- 
gists — the late Spencer Fullerton Baird.
In The Birds of Wiltshire — one of the latest additions to the 
series of County avifaunas — we have a marked contrast to Mr.
Ridgeway's Manual, which will, no doubt, be considered by some as 
too scientific and advanced; while the Rev. Mr.
Smith's book is 
decidedly retrograde.
An author is certainly fully entitled to his 
convictions, but we, on seeing our old familiar friend the Swift 
regarded as a species of the Swallow family (Hirundinidaj), confess to 
April i888.
n 
110 
GARDNER : THE LOCALITY FOR CERTAIN AGROTID^.
having rubbed our eyes and wondered if it could really be true that 
even the most widely acknowledged advances in ornithological science 
made during the past quarter of a century could have been so 
thoroughly ignored.
The above however is only an instance of the 
methods of this book so far as nomenclature and classification are 
concerned, and we admit that these are matters of quite minor 
importance in a faunal work.
Moreover, the author very properly 
tells us — in the prospectus that — 'This book, however, makes no 
pretensions of a scientific character, nor does it adopt the classification 
and nomenclature of the most modern school, but rather follows in 
the wake of " Yarrell " [but certainly not the last and much the best 
edition], which was the universally accepted text-book of ornitho- 
logists until within the last few years.
In short, it professes nothing 
more than to be a plain account of the Birds of Wiltshire, written 
for Wiltshire people by a Wiltshire lover of birds.' The author has 
had much experience in the avifauna of Wiltshire and his notes on 
the birds of the county are excellent, and of great value, since they are 
in every respect reliable.
Additional information on the various 
species are here and there given for Norway, Switzerland, Portugal, 
and Egypt, in which countries the author has travelled.
Nor is this all, 
for every species is described ; and sections are devoted to obsolete 
views on Classification, Nomenclature, and Structure ; and to the 
Faculties, Beak, and Feet of Birds.
These in addition to the 
information in strict keeping with the title of the book swell its pages 
to 588, making an imposing volume.
Mr. Adamson's 'Some more Illustrations of Wild Birds* 
will be welcome to field-ornithologists, to whom his well-known spirited 
drawings at once appeal through their vigorous accuracy.
In this 
new series, however, more attention has been paid to the finish of the 
pictures, which are finely reproduced in monochrome lithography, 
and thus while they retain their charming power they also possess in 
addition the artistic merit of highly-finished drawings.
The book is 
nicely got up and is not out of place on the drawing-room table 
of an ornithologist.
NOTE—LEPIDOPTERA.
The Locality for certain Agrotidae.
— In the Bibliography (Lepidoptera, 
1885-6-7) in the March number of The Naturalist, there are seven notices to which 
my name is attached, the first of wliich, 'on the identity of certain Agrotidae,' is 
very misleading, owing to its being dated Dai'lington.
This occurred through the 
notice in question being sent from a village in Teesdale, where I was staying for a 
few days, and the post town of which is Darlington ; of course, Hartlepool should 
be substituted for Darlington, and then the matter is intelligible, for I should very 
much question such a coast-loving species as A.
valligera ever having been taken so 
far inland as DarUngton, — ^J.
Gardner, 8, Friar Terrace, Hartlepool, 20th March, 
1 888.
Naturalist, 
Ill 
LINCOLNSHIRE MARSH AND WATER PLANTS.
Rev. WILLIAM FOWLER, M.A., 
Vicar of Liversedge \ Vice-President of tke Yorkshire Naturalists Utiiott.
The plants included in the present paper are those which grow either 
in the rivers, drains, marshes, or pools of the county, or on their banks.
By some (whose only idea of Lincolnshire is, that it is flat from end 
to end, and full of drains) it may be thought that water-loving plants 
may be found in almost every parish.
This, however, is by no 
means the case.
Large portions of the county (the Chalk and OoHtic 
and Liassic ranges of hills, for instance) are quite as little likely to 
produce such plants, as the Gogmagog hills of Cambridgeshire, or 
the Cleveland hills of Yorkshire.
It is only in the low-lying districts, 
of course, that marsh and water plants are found, such as the Isle of 
Axholme ; the neighbourhood of the Foss Dyke near Lincoln ; the 
belt of marsh land near the coast, as about Grimsby, Saltfleet, and 
Skegness ; the valley of the river Witham between Lincoln and 
Boston ; and the south-eastern corner of the county, as about Boston 
Spalding, Deeping, and Holbeach.
In the following list, as in former 
ones, localities will -be given only for such plants as do not seem to 
be universally distributed throughout the county, or, being so, are of 
special interest.
Thalictrum flavum.
On banks of drains, specially in the south.
Ranunculus circinatus, R.
fluitans, R.
trichophyllus, R.
Drouettii, R.
peltatus, R.
Baudotii (with var.
marinus), 
R. Flammula, are common or frequent.
R. Lingua is less 
so, but may be found near Saltfleet, Washingborough, and the 
Foss Dyke near Lincoln.
Caltha palustris.
Nuphar luteum.
Nocton Delph, and other drains.
Nymphaea alba.
Nocton Delph; Tvvigmoor; pools on Scotton 
Common.
Nasturtium sylvestre.
Trent banks ; Crowland.
Nasturtium palustre.
Nasturtium amphibium.
Foss Dyke ; near Haxey.
Barbarea vulgaris, 
j Barbarea stricta.
Ditch bank near Corby ; Bank of the river 
i Ancholme (Lees).
I Lychnis Flos-cuculi.
1 Stellaria aquatica.
Beckingham ; Foss Dyke.
1 April iS88.
112 
FOWLER : LINCOLNSHIRE MARSH AND WATER PLANTS.
Stellaria palustris and S.
uliginosa.
Montia fontana.
Hypericum quadrang-ulum and H.
quadratum.
Althsea officinalis.
On the banks of drains about Wainfleet, 
Holbeach, and Boston.
Spiraea Ulmaria.
Hippuris vulg-aris.
Abundant in South Lincoln.
Myriophyllum verticillatum.
Saltfleetby.
Myriophyllum spicatum and M.
alterniflorum, frequent.
Callitriche stagnalis and C.
obtusangula.
Lythrum Salicaria.
Peplis Portula.
Cicuta virosa.
Never seen by me ; but recorded for South 
Lincoln.
Slum latifolium.
Not uncommon in South Lincoln, but only 
occurring sparingly in North.
Sium erectum.
CEnanthe fistulosa, CE.
lachenalii, and CE.
phellandrium.
Galium palustre, and G.
uliginosum.
Eupatorium cannabinum.
Frequent.
Pulicaria dysenterica.
Bidens cernua.
Saltfleetby; Frodingham.
Bidens tripartita.
Not a common plant.
Petasites vulgaris.
Senecio aquaticus.
Cnicus palustris.
Hottonia palustris.
Frequent in ditches and pools.
Lysimachia vulgaris.
Samolus valerandi.
Haxey ; Saltfleetby ; Deeping St. James.
Symphytum officinale.
On ditch banks in South Lincoln.
Myosotis csespitosa, M.
palustris (with var.
strigulosa 
Reichb.).
Solanum Dulcamara.
Scrophularia aquatica.
Veronica Anagallis and V.
Beccabunga.
Utricularia vulgaris.
Not very common.
Mentha hirsuta and M.
sativa.
Lycopus europaeus.
Scutellaria galericulata.
Naturalist, 
fowler: LINCOLNSHIRE MARSH AND WATER PLANTS.
113 
Stachys palustris.
Littorella lacustris.
Scotton Common.
Polygonum amphibiurn.
Rumex palustris.
Frequent in South Lincoln, and about Wain- 
fleet.
Rumex Hydrolapathum.
Rumex maximus Schr.
(Beeby).
River Welland.
Alnus glutinosa.
Salix fragilis, S.
alba, S.
triandra, S.
purpurea, S.
viminalis, 
S. Smithiana, S.
cinerea, and S.
Capraea.
Ceratophyllum demersum.
Brick ponds near Brigg.
Elodea canadensis.
Hydrocharis Morsus-ranse.
Plentiful about Saltfleetby.
Stratiotes aloides.
Plentiful in the ditches on the east coast.
Iris Pseudacorus.
Juncus effusus, J.
conglomeratus, J.
glaucus, J.
supinus, 
J. lamprocarpus.
Juncus obtusiflorus.
Far less common than the foregoing.
Typha latifolia and T.
angustifolia.
Sparganium ramosum and S.
simplex.
Sparganium minimum.
Ditches near Nocton Delph, and New 
Idle river, in the Isle of Axholme; Scotter Common.
Acorus Calamus.
Not seen by me, but reported by Mr. Mason 
of Alford, as growing in that neighbourhood.
Lemna trisulca, L.
minor, L.
gibba, L.
polyrrhiza.
Alisma Plantago.
Sagittaria sagittifolia.
Butomus umbellatus.
Not very common.
Triglochin palustre.
Potamogeton natans, P.
polygonifolius, P.
lucens, P.
perfoliatus, P.
crispus, P.
densus, P.
pectinatus, with 
var.
scoparius.
Potamogeton rufescens.
Saltfleetby.
Potamogeton plantagineus.
Barnetby (Lees).
Potamogeton heterophyllus.
Double rivers, Isle of Axholme.
\ Potamogeton obtusifolius.
River Ancholme (Lees).
Potamogeton flabellatus Bab. Pools near the Wash.
Si Zannichellia palustris (as segregate).
New Idle River, 
f Zannichellia pedicillata Fr. Littleworth (Beeby).
April 1888.
114 
NOTES — LEPIDOPTERA, MAMMALIA AND FISHES 
Eleocharis palustris.
Scirpus lacustris.
Scirpus tabernaemontani Gmel.
Not common.
Carex disticha, C.
vulpina, C.
ovalis, C.
acuta, with var.
prolixa Fr.
; C.
Goodenowii Gay, C.
glauca, C.
pal- 
lescens, C.
panicea, C.
flava, C.
paludosa, C.
riparia.
Carex Pseudo-cyperus.
Foss Dyke, near Lincoln.
About 
Bourn and Spalding.
Deeping St. James.
Calamagrostis epigeios.
Deschampsia caespitosa.
Phragmites communis.
Gatabrosa aquatica.
Glyceria fluitans, G.
aquatica.
Glyceria plicata.
Ditch near Blyton.
Equisetum maximum, E.
palustre, E.
limosum.
If the above list be not as full as might have been expected for 
a county like that of Lincoln, it must be remembered that it is a 
county in a high state of cultivation, and that the clearing-out of 
drains periodically, and the mowing of their banks, do not conduce 
to the maintenance, but to the destruction, of its water-loving flora.
NO TE—LEPID OPTERA.
Moths attracted by the Illuminations of Lincoln Cathedral.
— On June 21st 
and 22nd in last year, one of the principal Jubilee illuminations in the Eastern 
counties was produced by the lighting of the great central tower of Lincoln 
Cathedral by about forty arc incandescent electric lights ; this illumination was 
visible at a distance of fifty-five miles.
On the second night I went up the tower 
about eleven o'clock, and noticed that several moths were flying about ; I only 
had a few minutes on the tower, but picked up two, which turned out to be 
Leiocavipa dictcxa and Acronycta ahti ; other moths were flying up to the light, 
and the men in charge told me that they had been very numerous on both nights.
I have no doubt that a large and interesting number of species might have been 
taken.
Any person who is acquainted with the height of the great tower of 
Lincoln above the fens cannot help being struck by the perpendicular distance 
which these moths must have flown from the surrounding county.
— W.
W. 
.Fowler, Lincoln, Feb. 27th, 1888.
NOTE— MAMMALIA AND FISHES.
Whale at Flamborough.
— Lent is going out with a vengeance ; no matter 
what quarter the wind blows from we have nothing but violent gales, and the sea 
terribly rough, sending in tremendous breakers.
Several more Congers {Conger 
vulgaris) have been picked up by the fishermen.
Yesterday morning, to his very 
great surprise, one of our sturdy young fishermen came upon the Bottle-nosed 
Whale washed ashore alive at Danes Dyke, near to the residence of Mrs. Cattrell 
Dormer.
The whale is a most splendid specimen, with two pectoral fins, one 
dorsal fin, no ventral fin ; belly, silvery white, with several pencil-like lines 
extending from lower jaw behind the pectoral fins ; back, cloudy-dark or black, 
with two blow-holes right on top of the head ; mouth, when open, extends a little 
over 2 ft., with a beautiful kind of fringe round the jaws ; measurement, length 
over all, 16 ft.
; round shoulders, 9 ft.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamboroug h, March 
14th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
115 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION: 
26th ANNUAL REPORT.
In presenting the twenty-sixth annual report the Executive Council 
have to state that the Union still remains in a flourishing and pros- 
perous condition, with the result that both at its excursions and by 
the individual researches of its members and associates much good 
work is being done towards the investigation of the fauna and flora 
and physical features of the county.
It is peculiarly the task of the 
county Society to undertake work of a character which is beyond 
the scope of the local Societies which in Yorkshire are so numerous 
and so active, and that the Union is fully alive to the responsibilities 
which are thus entailed upon it, is fully evidenced by the publication 
recently of the handsome and singularly complete volume upon the 
Flora of West Yorkshire from the pen of Mr. F.
Arnold Lees, by the 
commencement of the issue of a new and revised edition of Mr. J.
Gilbert Baker's classical and very scarce work on North Yorkshire, 
and by the success which has attended the operations of the 
Yorkshire Boulder Committee and of the sister committee for 
investigating the Marine Zoology of the Yorkshire Coast.
The Meeting's held during the year have been five in number, 
the places and dates being as follows : — Saltburn-by-the-Sea, Whit- 
Monday, 30th May ; Gormire Lake and Thirkleby Park, Wednesday, 
20th July ; Sedbergh and Howgill Fells, Monday, ist August ; Welton 
Vale, Saturday, 27th August; Hatfield Chace, Wednesday, 2TSt 
September.
For each of these excursions the usual fully-descriptive 
circular which conduces so much to the success of the day's investi- 
gations was issued, and at all the meetings some good results were 
achieved.
[The detailed description of each meeting is here omitted, 
full particulars having from time to time appeared in this journal].
On all these occasions the Union has been indebted as of old to 
the great kindness of the landowners for facilitating research on their 
estates, and to the Yorkshire Railway Companies for the privileges 
granted to the members attending the various excursions and 
meetings.
The Societies which constitute the Union now number 37, 
being an increase upon the number reported twelve months ago.
Two societies — the Beverley and Honley Naturalists' Societies — 
having ceased to exist, are no longer borne on the roll.
On the 
other hand the addition of the Ackworth School Natural History 
Society, Brighouse Friends' Botanical Society, Craven Naturalists' 
Association, Leyburn Literary and Scientific Society, Leeds Y.M.C.A.
Naturali sts' Club, Scarborough Philosophical Society, and Thirsk 
April 1888.
Il6 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ANNUAL REPORT.
Natural History Society, seven strong societies — is evidence that the 
active study of natural science in Yorkshire — partly due to the 
stimulus given by the periodical visits of this Union to the various 
parts of Yorkshire — is steadily on the increase.
The statistics which the secretaries of the various societies are 
obliging enough to furnish, as in previous years, show that the 
number of Associates (that is, of the aggregate membership of the 
affiliated societies) is now 2,109, ^vhich being added to the direct 
membership makes a sum total of nearly 2,500 members and 
associates.
The Membership still continues to be a source of anxiety to 
your Executive Council, inasmuch as it remains stationary at about 
375, in spite of the very strong claims which the Union— as the 
central and county Society— has upon the support of all Yorkshire 
naturalists.
The Financial Position of the Union continues to be in a 
sound and healthy condition.
The Local Treasurers continue to be a much-valued help to 
your Secretaries and Executive, and are of much service to the 
members who reside in their respective districts.
The Publications of the Union have been as heretofore, with 
the addition of the long-expected and recently-issued Flora of West 
Yorkshire.
The Transactions.
— Parts 10 and 11 are now ready, and will 
be distributed in course of a few weeks.
The former part contains 
papers on Yorkshire Botany, and a continuation of the Rev. W.
C. 
Hey's List of Yorkshire Beetles.
The latter part is entirely devoted 
to the first instalment of Mr. Baker's North Yorkshire, illustrated by 
a remarkably clear and distinct geological map of the North Riding.
The two parts which will succeed those first mentioned are 
intended to be mainly devoted to continuing this valuable work, 
which the Union is fortunate in having had placed at its disposal by 
its distinguished author.
The geology, which forms the instalment 
about to be issued, has been carefully revised to date by Mr.
J. Edmund Clark, of York, and the map which accompanies it, is 
an exceptionally successful and clear one.
The chapters on lithology 
and climatology, which the author has himself revised, are now 
being printed, and they will be followed by the Flora proper.
This 
is also brought down to date, and includes the observations of later 
investigators.
The chapter on mosses has been confided to Mr.
Matthew B.
Slater, of Malton, than whom no one is more competent 
to deal with the subject.
Mr. Slater will also add, what was not in 
the original edition, a list of the North Riding hepatics.
Naturalist 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL REPORT.
II7 
The West Yorkshire Flora has now been issued to the 
subscribers.
It is in every respect a credit to its author and his 
collaborators, from its remarkable completeness, accuracy and fulness 
of detail, and handsome appearance.
It forms a portly volume of 
about 850 pages, and is — as Mr. Baker informs us — the most com- 
plete work of its kind which has appeared for any district of 
comparable extent in the world.
It will always be to the credit of 
the Union that it was the means of finally bringing about the 
production of so useful a work.
The NaturaHst has been regularly and punctually published 
month by month, and has formed a convenient and much-appreciated 
vehicle for communications relating, not only to Yorkshire, but to 
the whole of the North of England.
All that it needs is such an 
increase in the number of subscribers as will not only place the 
balance on the right side of the account, but also provide funds for 
improving the journal, by enabling its editors to give occasional 
illustrations.
The Library of the Union has been largely increased during 
the year, partly by purchase, but mostly by donations from members 
and friends, including Messrs.
S. A.
Adamson, W.
Eagle Clarke, 
Rev. Canon Fowler, J .
G. Goodchild, J.
H. Gurney, jun., J.
A. Harvie- 
Brown, J.
E. Harting, Alfred Marker, P.
F. Lee, Prof G.
A. Lebour, 
J. C.
Melvill, R.
T. Manson, F.
Nicholson, E.
E. Prince, R.
Ridgway, 
T. Mellard Reade, W.
D. Roebuck, R.
Spruce, Rev. W.
Thompson, 
etc.
The Union being a subscriber to the Zoological Record — a most 
important annual publication — availed itself during the year of 
purchasing, on very advantageous terms, the complete set of back 
volumes.
A similar opportunity of filling up to a large extent the 
gap which exists in the Union's set of the Zoologist was also made 
use of Amongst the other books which have been added are Canon 
Fowler's new work on British Coleoptera, Mr. Ridgway's on Colour 
for Naturalists, Mr. Thompson's Florula Sedbergensis, Mr. Mellard 
Reade's Origin of Mountain Ranges, Prof Lebour's Geology of 
Northumberland and Durham, and Harvie-Brown and Buckley's 
Vertebrate Fauna of Sutherland and Caithness.
The Executive take this opportunity of acknowledging the 
services of Mr. Chas.
Brownridge as Honorary Librarian during the 
year.
Thanks to him, the Library has been put in order, ready for 
the preparation of the catalogue, a necessary preliminary to members 
being able to make use of the books.
The books and other property of the Union are stored at the 
Leeds Mechanics' Institute, through the kindness of its Committee, 
April 188S.
Il8 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UXION ANNUAL REPORT.
to whom the Executive are under great obHgation for the use of the 
Boprd-room for their meetings.
The Librarian will be pleased at any time to receive from 
members copies of suitable books, particularly of works \\Titten or 
published by themselves or dealing with Yorkshire natural history- 
or geology.
The Sections of the Union have carried on their work during 
the year with the energy and success of former years, and their 
operations have tended much to the success of the various meetings.
Committees of Research.
— During the year the two Com- 
mittees which were appointed at the last annual meeting for specihc 
research have carried on their operations with success.
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee has already scheduled a large 
number of erratics, and have duly published the results.
The value 
of their work has been borne witness to by the Boulder Committee 
of the British Association, who state that were similar committees 
formed in other counties and their operations carried on with the 
same vigour and success as in Yorkshire, the work of the British 
Association Committee would soon be brought to a satisfactory 
conclusion.
The other Committee, that for investigating the Marine Zoolog}- 
of the Yorkshire Coast, although they have not as yet pubhshed 
their results, have been working quietly at their subject.
A goodly 
number of specimens have been sent in and recorded for the future 
use of the Committee.
British Association.
— The Union has again been selected as 
one of the associated societies of the British Association, and at the 
Manchester meeting (which was largely attended by members of this 
Union) Mr. C.
P. Hobkirk, chairman of the Executive, was the 
official representative at the Conferences of Delegates of Scientihc 
Societies.
Proposed Alteration of the Constitution.
— Your Executive 
have given very careful consideration to the question which a 
resolution of the last Annual ^Meeting placed in their hands, and 
are unanimously of opinion that the present regulations for the 
election of the General Committee of the Union are calculated to 
meet all the requirements that can legitimately arise, and that the 
rules being sufficiently comprehensive and practicable in their 
present form, do not need amendment.
The Secretariate.
— Your Executive have to express their 
satisfaction that the heavy labour which the work of the Union 
entails upon its honorary secretaries has been substantially relieved 
by the appointment at the last annual meeting of Messrs.
P. H.
Naturalist, 
NOTES — COLEOPTERA AND BOTANY.
119 
Grimshaw and W.
C. Scott as Honorary Assistant Secretaries, each 
of whom has taken charge of a definite branch of work which would 
otherwise have fallen as of old upon the Honorary Secretaries.
The Presidency of the Union for 1888 has been offered to 
and accepted by a well-known Yorkshire geologist, intimately 
connected with the district in which the present annual meeting is 
being held, and in Mr. Wilfrid H.
Hudleston, M.A., F.R.S., who is 
one of the Secretaries of the Geological Society of London and an 
Editor of the Geological Magazine, and whose monographic papers 
on the palaeontology of the Oolitic Rocks of Yorkshire are so well- 
known, we have a worthy successor in the series of distinguished 
Yorkshiremen who have for the past ten years presided over the 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
In conclusion, the Executive have to express a regret, which will 
be unanimously shared by the members, that Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey 
could not honour the Union by accepting the ofiice of President for 
the customary second year.
They have also to express gratification 
at the success which has, under Sir Ralph's presidency, attended the 
proceedings of the Union during the past year.
NOTE— COLEOPTERA.
Quedius longicornis at Hartlepool.
— I have recently had some beetles 
returned from my friend Mr. W.
(j, Ijlatch, of Birmingham, to whom I had sent 
them to name, and amongst others of less note I was pleased to observe three 
specimens of the rare species Qziedius Io77gicor)iis Kr.
, which were captured on 
our sandhills during last summer.
This is new to the Northumberland and Durham 
list, not appearing in Bold's Coleoptera of the two counties, and is a valuable 
addition.
— ^J.
Gardner, 8, Friar Terrace, Hartlepool, 20th March, 1888.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Some Ingleton Plants.— I send the names of a few of the plants we used to 
find in the neighbourhood of Ingleton fifteen or twenty years ago.
It will be very 
interesting to me to hear whether they are still to be found.
In the ' Helks,' the large wood below the Thornton Falls, Convallaria inajalis 
was abundant, Polygonatuni itniltijlorufii rather uncommon, while the 'find' was 
the Daphne niezereiuji ; though I am not aware of any other place in the North of 
England where it is said to be really wild, I think it was so here.
On some rocks above Thornton Force a root oi Aspleniiim gernianicuvi has been 
found.
In King's Dale on the side of Gragreth was a solitary clump of Epilobuim 
hirsuhim, and Aspidiinn lonchitis has been found on the neighbouring rocks, though 
very uncommon.
On the way to the Ingleton Falls I have found Pinquicula vulgaris.
Primula 
farinosa, Trollijis etii-opams, Polypodiuni dryopteris, and P.
phegopleris.
Ophrys muscifera has been met with between, I think, the two rivers.
On an old wall between Ingleton and Kirkby Lonsdale the Ceicrach ojiiitiarnni 
used to grow.
— R.
E. Lp:ach, M.A., St. Mary's Cottage, Bcccles, Suffolk, March 
9th, 1888.
April 1888.
120 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION: 
ANNUAL MEETING AT MALTON.
The Twenty-sixth Annual ^Meeting, held this year at Malton, on 
Wednesday, the 7th of March, was an extremely successful and 
pleasant one — a result for which the exertions of the members of the 
Malton Society (which enjoys a high place among our local societies) 
are in the main responsible.
By the courtesy of the Committee of 
the Malton Institute, various rooms in that building were placed at 
the Union's service.
The proceedings commenced at 3.15 p.m., 
when the General Committee met in the Museum for the transaction 
of the Union's business.
The attendance included the official 
delegates of seven societies (eleven others being unofficially repre- 
sented by Permanent Members of the Committee), the two honorary 
secretaries and one honorary assistant-secretar}-, the honorary 
librarian, four presidents and seven secretaries of sections, two other 
members of the Executive, and twelve other Permanent INIembers of 
the General Committee — making a total of forty.
The Rev. E.
Maule 
Cole.
M.A., a vice-president, occupied the chair.
The minutes of 
the preceding annual meeting were read, discussed, and then unani- 
mously adopted, on the motion of Mr. Erskine Stuart, seconded by 
Mr. S.
A. Adamson.
The Twenty-sixth Annual Report was then read by the secretaries, 
together with the certificate of the auditors to the effect tliat the 
accounts had been duly examined and found to be correct, after 
which the Reports were adopted, on the motion of "Mr. John Stears 
(Hull), seconded by 'Sir.
"Washington Teasdale, F.R.A.S.
(Leeds).
The excursion -programme for iSSS was then fixed as foUosvs, 
on the recommendation of the Executive, unanimously confirmed on 
the motion of Mr. J.
J. Stead (Heckmondwike), seconded by ^Mr.
P. F.
Lee (Dewsbun-) :— 
Leyburn : Whit- Monday, 21st ^lay.
Saddleworth : Saturday, i6th June.
Robin Hood's Bay ; Monday, i6th July.
Market Weighton, for the Wolds ; Bank Holiday Monday, 6th August.
Fungus Foray, with Meetings at Leeds, about the end of September.
It was then decided, on the motion of ^Ir. W.
Denison Roebuck, 
F.L.S., seconded by Mr. J.
W. Addyman, B.A., that for the purpose 
of arranging excursions in future years, the five districts of the 
county be Mr. Cottrell Watson's well-known botanical divisions, viz.: 
South-East York.
Xorth-East York, North-West York, Mid-West 
York, and South-West York.
The principal changes involved are the 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALTON.
121 
division of what is now the North-Western Hills district into two dis- 
tricts, and the abolition of the Central district, decided advantage being 
likely to accrue from the increased facility for visiting the Western dales.
Proceeding to the election of officers, it was first announced that, 
as stated in the concluding paragraph of the Report, Mr. W.
H. 
Hudleston, M.A., F.R.S., had accepted the presidency.
The two 
retiring Hon. Secretc=iries (Wm. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., and 
Wm. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., both of Leeds) were re-elected, as were 
also the two retiring Hon. Assistant Secretaries (Percy H.
Grimshaw, 
Burley-in-Wharfedale, and W.
Cecil Scott, Leeds), the retiring Hon.
Librarian (Charles Brownridge, F.G.S., Leeds), the ten retiring mem- 
bers of the Executive (S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., Leeds ; Wm. Cash, 
F.G.S., Halifax; J.
W. Davis, F.S.A., Halifax; G.
C Dennis, York; 
John Emmet, F.L.S., Boston Spa; Rev. Wm.
Fowler, M.A., Liver- 
sedge; Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., Dewsbury ; Benjamin Holgate, 
F.G.S., Leeds; H.
T. Soppitt, Bradford; and J.
J. Stead, Heck- 
mondwike), and the two retiring Auditors (J.
E. Bedford and 
C. D.
Hardcastle, both of Leeds).
The Committees of Research were then appointed.
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee was re-appointed, consisting 
of Prof A.
H. Green, M.A., F.R.S., Leeds (chairman) ; C.
D. Hard- 
castle, Leeds (vice-chairman) ; S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., Leeds (hon.
secretary) ; J.
E. Bedford and C.
Brownridge, F.G.S., Leeds ; 
S. Chadwick, Malton ; Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., Wetwang ; 
J. W.
Davis, F.G.S., Halifax; W.
Gregson, Baldersby ; John Hill, 
Morley; B.
Holgate, F.G.S., Leeds; Wm. Home, F.G.S., Leyburn ; 
Prof.
L. C.
jNIiall, F.L.S., Leeds ; James Spencer, Halifax; Thos.
Tate, 
F.G.S., Leeds ; and J.
AV.
Woodall, F.G.S., Scarborough.
The Yorkshire ^Marine Zoology Committee was also re-appointed, 
to consist of the following members : — Dr. H.
C. Sorby, F.R.S..
Sheffield (chairman) ; Rev. E.
H. Smart, B.A., Kirby-in-Cleveland 
(hon.
secretary); George Brook, F.L.S., Huddersfield ; J.
Darker 
Butterell, Beverley; Wm. Cash, F.G.S., Halifax; Wm. Eagle Clarke, 
F.L.S., Leeds; John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U., Great Cotes; Rev. W.
C. 
Hey, AI.A., York; Baker Hudson, ]\I.C.S., Coatham ; T.
H. Nelson, 
M.B.O.U., Redcar; O.
T. Olsen, F.L.S., Grimsby; and Rev. H.
Smith, Redcar; with George ^Lassee, F.R.M.S., Kew, as Botanical 
Referee.
In addition to these, it was unanimously resolved, on the 
recommendation of the Executive, and the motion of Mr. W.
Cash, F.G.S., that a Committee be appointed for the investigation of 
the Fossil Flora of the county of York, and that it consist of the 
following members : — Prof W.
C. Williamson, F.R.S., ^L^nchester 
April 1888.
122 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALTON.
(chairman); W.
Cash, F.G.S., HaUfax (hon.
secretary): S.
A. 
Adamson, F.G.S., HaUfax ; Thos.
Hick, B.A., B.
Sc., Manchester : 
B. Holgate, F.G.S., Leeds; Robert Kidston, F.G.S.: Prof.
L. C.
Miall, Leeds; James Spencer, Hahfax: John Stubbins, F.G.S., 
Leeds: and William AVest, F.L.S., Bradford.
It being in the power of the General Committee to add to its 
own number ten Permanent Members annuahy, this power was used, 
Messrs.
F. Boyes, Beverley ; James Carter, ^Lasham : William 
Foggitt, Thirsk • Alfred Harker.
M.A..
F.G.S., Hull and Cambridge 
L'niversity ; Wm. Home, F.G.S., Leyburn ; Baker Hudson, ^LC.S., 
Coatham : J.
C. I"Anson, F.G.S., Saltburn-by-the-Sea : Rev. Wm.
Jessop, F.A.S., Rawdon ; T.
H. Xelson, }vLB.O.L'., Redcar: and 
John Stubbins, F.G.S., F.R,M.S., Leeds.
The unanimous election of Messrs.
Robert Barnes, Saltburn-by- 
the-Sea : Geo. S.
Gibb, LL.B..
York : the Hon. H.
W. Fitzwilliam, 
^vLP., Malton: Zechariah Waite, Whitby : A.W.Walker, Mahon : 
and William Young, ^LD., Zvlalton, as members of the Union, 
followed, all having been duly proposed in writing.
The next business was the selecdon of the place of the next 
Annual ^Meeting, for which invitations were submitted from Shemeld 
and Halifax — the former town being eventually selected — and the 
date fixed for Friday, i6th of November next.
This concluded the 
business of the General Committee, which then adjourned.
The sections then met and elected their officers as follows : — 
B. Vertebrate Zoology.
— Rev. E.
Ponsonby Knubley, ^I.A., 
^I.B.G.L'.j Rector of Staveley.
re-elected president, and !Mr. James 
Backhouse, jun., F.Z.S., ^NLB.O.U..
of York, re-elected secretary, 
and a second secretary elected in the person of ^Ir. Thomas Bunker, 
Goole.
C. Conchology.
— Rev. W.
C. Hey. M.A., M.C.S., York, 
re-elected president ; Mr. John Emmet, F.L.S., Boston Spa, re-elected 
secretary, and Mr. Baker Hudson, IVLCS., Coatham, chosen secretary 
in place of Mr. Butterell, resigned.
D. Entomology.
— All the officers re-elected, viz..
IMr. X.
F. 
Dobree, Beverley, president, and ^lessrs.
G. C.
Biennis and Samuel 
AValker, York, secretaries.
E. Botany.
— All the officers re-elected, viz., Mr. F.
Arnold 
Lees, L.R.C.P., Leeds, president ; ^Ir. P.
F. Lee, Dewsbur}-, phanero- 
gamic secretary, and Mr. B.
Slater, Malton.
cr}-ptogamic secretar}-.
F. Geology.
— All the officers re-elected, viz., Rev. E.
^laule 
Cole, ^LA., Wetwang, president, and Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., 
Leeds, and ^Ir. S.
Chadwick, Malton, secretaries.
Nacuraiis:, 
IN MEMORIAM — THOMAS LISTER.
123 
G. Micro-Zoology and Micro-Botany.
— Dr. H.
Clifton 
Sorby, F.R.S., Sheffield, president, and Mr. J.
M. Kirk, Doncaster, 
secretary, both re-elected.
Afterwards tea was served at the Talbot Hotel, and at 7 p.m. the 
Annual PubHc Meeting was held in the Theatre of the Malton 
Institute, when there was a large audience.
The chair was taken by 
the president.
Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey, Bart., M.B.O.U., who, after 
the annual report and excursion -programme had been read for the 
benefit of the members generally, delivered the annual address.
He took for his subject, 'Yorkshire Decoys and the Method of 
Decoying Ducks,' illustrating his remarks by a series of lantern-slides.
During the delivery of the address the chair was occupied by the 
Rev. R.
W. Elliott, M.A., one of the vice-presidents of the Malton 
NaturaHsts' Society.
A vote of thanks to the president for his 
services as such and for his address was cordially voted, on the 
motion of Mr. John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U., seconded by the Rev. W.
C. Hey, in a couple of happily-expressed speeches, and afterwards 
a similar and well-deserved compliment was paid to the Malton 
Society for its reception of the Union and to the Rev. R.
W. Elhott 
for presiding, on the motion of the new president, Mr. Wilfrid H.
Hudleston, M.A., F.R.S., seconded by the Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A.
An excellent and most interesting exhibition, which had been 
arranged by the members of the Malton Society, was open through- 
out the afternoon and evening, and engaged the attention of the 
members and associates during the intervals between the various 
meetings.
The objects shown were of a varied character, and were 
contributed by numerous local gentlemen and ladies, hardly any 
branch of natural history, art, or antiquities being unrepresented.
In addition to this the splendid little museum of the Malton Society 
was open to inspection.
THOMAS LISTER.
In the death of Mr. Thomas Lister, of Barnsley, Yorkshire naturalists 
have lost a veteran and enthusiastic comrade, while the Barnsley 
Naturalists' Society and the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union have to 
mourn the passing away of an old office-bearer.
Thomas Lister was born at the Old Mill Wharf near Barnsley, on 
the nth February, 1810.
A member of the Society of P^iends, he 
received his education at the Friends' School at Ackworth, afterwards 
working with his father, who was a gardener and small farmer.
In 
1839 he accepted the postmastership of Barnsley.
He remained post- 
April 1888.
124 
IN MEMORIAM THOMAS LISTER.
master till 1870, when he retired on a pension, and received a hand- 
some testimonial from his fellow-townsmen in appreciation of his long 
and faithful services.
In his youth he was active and athletic, fond of 
travel, and occasionally performing remarkable pedestrian feats when 
visiting the English lake-country, and prolonging his journey into 
Scotland, where he made many friendships amongst literary men.
This was in 1837, and in the following year he visited the Continent, 
w^here, after crossing Mont Cenis, he rambled leisurely through the 
great valleys of Piedmont and the plains of Lombardy, visiting Milan, 
Turin, and other Itahan cities.
He then skirted the shores of the 
Italian lakes, and passing over the Alps, visited Switzerland and then 
the Netherlands.
Then intervened the thirty years of official life, but 
after his retirement in 1870 the old travelling instincts re-appeared, 
and' Mr. Lister seldom or never failed to accompany the British 
Association, of which he became a member, wherever it went, even on 
the occasion of the Canadian gathering, which gave him the oppor> 
tunity of visiting relatives of his own who had settled in the colony.
Mr. Lister was of a bright and happy disposition, and well-known 
to hosts of appreciative friends.
His reputation was both literary 
and scientific.
He occupied a fairly high position among the local 
poets of Yorkshire, his principle productions being the ' Rustic 
Wreath' (1834), 'Temperance Rhymes' (1837), and 'Rhymes of 
Progress' (1862), each of these being collections of short poems.
Mr. Lister was a field-ornithologist who knew well (none better), 
by ear and by eye, the birds which inhabited the woods and hedge- 
rows of his beloved valley of the Dearne.
On several occasions he 
has published lists of the birds of the Barnsley district.
Beyond this 
sound practical acquaintance with the familiar birds of his native 
district, he made no pretensions to ornithological fame.
He was a 
regular and diligent frequenter of the meetings of the old West Riding 
Consolidated Naturahsts' Society, and when this became the Yorkshire 
NaturaHsts' Union of to-day, the new departure had no more staunch 
supporter than Thomas Lister, who was made first Secretary', and 
afterwards became President, of the Vertebrate Section of the Union.
Mr. Lister was married, but childless, and his wife died several 
years ago.
During the past winter he suffered from a bronchial affec- 
tion.
On the 1 6th of ^March he had a stroke, followed by another on 
the 2ist, from which he never rallied, and on the 25th he passed away, 
from congestion of the lungs, aged 78.
He was buried on the 29th 
in the Friends' burial-ground, Barnsley.
His end was conscious 
and peaceful, and a couplet from the last of his own poems, written 
but a day or two before his illness, is singularly appropriate — 
^ APF?
"'^iS'^ And lastly, our day is closed with devotion 
""^ To Him who all space His Majesty fills.
Naturalist, 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
EY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., & WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., s HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
'The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann.
&^ Mag. Nat.
Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — At/iena-nvi.
'NATURALIST' REPRINTS— No. I.
LIST OF 
LAND AND FRESHWATER MOLLUSCA 
LANCASHIRE.
This paper contains not only Mr. Staiiden's own observations, but those of Messrs.
R. D.
Darbishire, T.
Rogers, W.
H. Heathcoie, J.
A. Hargreaves, F.
C. Long, H.
Stephenson, and 
other conchologists, and the observations published in Dyson's list of 1850, and in Hardy's 
lists of 1864 and 1865, are reproduced for comparison.
Price 9d.
(By post, 9^(1.) 
To be had from the Publishers of the 'Naturalist,' Park Row, Leeds.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. EARN.
I^he Chapter on Coleoptera, by Rdward Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching ; boxing female moths ; pairing insects.
How to obtain Larvae by beating ; the Jiignell tray ; sweeping ; searching by night ; how to rear 
the larvae ; sleeving; hybernating larva; ; paraMto ; preserving larva;.
Pupa digging; preterv- 
mg pupae; forcing pupae.
Ihk PHKFfXi Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoi<ing ; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; inites ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxe^.
; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; number of speci- 
mens and manner of placing; tran>mission by post; entomological diary; books.
MiCRO- 
lepidoptera; Coleoptera ; Hvmenoptkka ; Breeding of Gall-Fliks.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN Ik ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BiGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of Hritish Huttcrflies, by 
J; Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all reputed' species, and full 
oibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two ccnfurics, rendering it the most complete work yet Issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
THE :N^ATUII AIjIST.
The Editors hope to publish tJie following papers ivithin the next few inontlis: — 
Notes on Botanical Nomenclatu-e.— Dr. G.
B. de Toni (of Padua).
Evidences of G-lacial Action near Ingletoa.— Robert R.
Balderston.
Insect Migration at Heligoland.— Edm. de Selys-Longchamps ; contributed by 
John Cordeaux.
The Ornithology of Skiddaw, Scawfell, and Helvellyn.— John Watsox.
List of the Flora of Wensley dale— John Percival, B.A.
Coal-Dust and Explosions in Coal-Mines— Rev. Arthur Watts, F.G.S.
Bibliography of Coleoptera for 1885-6-7.
Bibliography of Geology and Palaeontology for 1886.
North of England Specimeas in the British Museum.— T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Notes on th^ Lapwing {Vanelhis vjilga^-is).—] .
A. Jackso> 
Ornithological Notes from Redcar.— T.
H. Nelson, M.B.O.U.
Coachological articles desired.
The Editors are open to receive suitable papers for insertion, particularly on Ichthyology, 
Entomology, Ornithology-, etc.
Naiv ready, complete, %vo, cloth, with Coloured Map, price £i \s.
od.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
Bv FREDERIC ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.S., etc.
This, which forms the 2nd Volume of the Botanical Series of the Transactions, is perhaps 
the most complete work of the kind ever issued for an}-- district, including detailed and full 
records of 1.044 Phanerogams and Vascular Cryptogams, 11 Characeae, 348 Mosses, 108 Hepatics, 
258 Lichens, 1,009 Fungi, and 382 Freshwater Algae, making a total of 3,160 species.
London: LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DENISOX ROEBUCK,|p^^i^j,^^^ Leeds.
W-M.
EAGLE CLARKE.
This day, price One Shilling, %vo, with 20 Engravings, Part I of 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
Bv HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., 
Editor of the yd ami ^th Volumes of Yarrell's ^History of British Birds.' 
Fourth Edition.
To be completed in about 20 monthly parts.
GURNEY JACKSON (Successors to Mr. Van Voorst), i, Paternoster Row.
No. 154.
2 MAY 
MAY 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
, ^ .
> , EDITED BY 
>%iL^M\b}^WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORBESPONDERENDIR MITGLIEU DES ORNITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN, 
Contents: 
The Flora of Wensleydale, North-West Yorkshire— Percival, B.A 125 to 143 
A New Shell-Book (Review) 144 
Coal-Dust and Explosions in Coal-Mines — Rev. Arthur Watts, F.G.S., F.R.C.S. 145 to 151 
The Vertebrata of Sutherland (Review) 152 & 153 
The British Example of Bulwer's Petrel ..
. 156 
Note--Hepatic3e 143 
Jubula Hutchinsiae in Cumberland— C.
H. JVaddell, B.A.
Note— Lepidoptera 151 
Nepticula Serella at Ingleborough — Ceo. T.
Porritt.
Bibliography— Hymenoptera, 1884, 1885, 1886, 1887 153 to 155 
LONDON: 
L0VEI.L Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.C.
McCoRQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, Cardington Street, Euston ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghai.l Street.
All Communications should be Addressed : — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Park Row, Leeds.
tlCE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
1 ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE onlvV .'^«;- nn.;t fr^o 
The NATURALIST.
*^o< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturahsts keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
^x»< 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.
— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-: 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Civico Museo e Ivaccolia Correr in Venezia.
CoUezioni di .Storia Naturale.
I. 
Collezioni Botaniche.
L'Algarium Zanardini — per G.
B. De-Toni e David 
Levi.
Venezia 1888, 8vo, 144 pp.
and portrait of G.
Zanardini.
[The Authors.
Notarisia,Ann.III, No. 10, Aprile 1888.
[G.B. De-Toni e D.Levi-Morenos,Redattori.
Mittheilungen des Omithologischen Vereines inWien, xii Jahrg., Nr. 4, April 1888.
Scottish Naturalist, No. xx, New Series, April 1888.
[Prof.
J. W.
H, Trail, Editor.
Journal of Microsc.
and Nat. Science, April 1888.
[Alfred Allen, Editor.
The Scientific Enquirer, vol.
iii, No. 28, April 1888.
[Alfred Allen, Editor.
Psyche, a joum.
of Entom.
Vol. v, No. 143, March 1888.
[Camb.
Ent. Club, U.S.
Science Gossip, No. 280, for April 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 14.
for April 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
Trans, of the Manchester Geological Soc, vol.
xix.
Parts 16 & 17.
[The Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part lOO, for April 1888.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, Editor.
Trans, of the Leeds Geological Association, Part 3.
1886-7.
[The Association.
The West American Scientist, vol.
iii.
No. 28, August 1887.
[C.
R. Orcutt, Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 124, for April 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
Birmingham N.H.S.
— List of Members and Balance Sheet for 1887.
[The Society.
Yorkshire Notes and Queries, Part ii, April 1888.
[J.
Horsfall Turner, Editor.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 102, April 14, 1888.
[J.
E. Clark & B.B.Le Tall, Editors.
Journal of Concholog)% Vol. v, No. 10, April 1888.
Q. W.
Taylor, Editor.
An Indictment of Darwin.
By Oswald Dawson.
Small 8vo., 36 pp.
[The Author.
NOMENCLATURE OF COLOURS 
FOR THE USE OF NATURALISTS, 
AND ORNITHOLOGISTS' COMPENDITIM.
By ROBERT RIDGWAY, of the Smithsonian Institution.
PRICE 17s., POST FREE.
MAY BE HAD OF THE EDITORS OF THE 'NATURALIST.' 
LITTLE, BROWN & CO., BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larv^as, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVI S (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE, 
NORTH-WEST YORKSHIRE.
JOHN PERCIVAL, B.A., 
S^.
Johns College, Cambridge.
Wensleydale is situated in the north-west division of Yorkshire.
The district over which my observations have extended includes the 
main valley of the Yore, between Hawes and Leyburn, together 
with the smaller valleys which join it between those limits.
The 
chief rocks met with in the district are limestones belonging to the 
Yoredale series.
Small bands of grit occur in the series, but mill- 
stone grit only occurs in isolated patches on the highest points, as 
Penhill, 'Grits' above Carperby, and Stags Fell near the head of the 
dale.
The altitudinal range of the district is between about 350 ft.
and 
2,000 ft.
— the river-bed at Leyburn being about 350-400 ft., and 
the summit of Penhill about 2,000 ft.
above sea-level.
The fruticose 
Rubi are, of course, poorly represented.
I have to thank Mr. F.
Arnold Lees for kindly supplying a good 
many stations referring to the upper part of the dale, and also 
Mr. J.
G. Baker, F.R.S., for kindly examining the Ros^.
Anemone nemorosa L.
Ranunculus Drouetii Schultz.
In bogs under Wegber Scar, 
Carperby, 1,150 ft.
: and in brook near Hawes Railway Station.
Ranunculus heterophyllus Fries.
In stream near West Burton; 
and in Eller Beck, Carperby.
Ranunculus Lenormandi Schultz.
In boggy places above 
Hardraw, on both .sides of the road leading from Hawes to 
Muker : and on Penhill.
Ranunculus Flammula L.
[Ranunculus Lingua L.
Semerwater (Bakers ' North Yorkshire.') 
Not seen by me].
Ranunculus auricomus L., R.
acris L..
R. repens L., R.
bulbosus L., and R.
Ficaria F.
Caltha palustris L.
Trollius europseus L.
Pretty abundant throughout the valley.
Helleborus viridis F.
East end of Leyburn Shawl (Mr. W.
Home !); and in pasture about a quarter of a mile south-east of 
Thoresby Green, Carperby (about 600 ft.).
May 188S.
I 
126 PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Aquilegia vulgaris L.
In Freeholder's Wood, Carperby ; about 
Aysgarth Falls ; and in Shaw Gill, Hardraw.
Actaea spicata L.
On both sides of the stream near the 
Whitfield Gill Waterfall, Askrigg.
Berberis vulgaris L.
Woodhall Scar ( ?
planted) ; possibly 
indigenous on wall south-west of Castle at Bolton, and in fields 
behind church there.
Nuphar lutea Sm. In the Bain, extending about half a mile 
below Semerwater Lake (820 ft).
Papaver Argemone L.
Ascends the valley to Carperby (720 ft.).
Papaver dubium L.
and a.
Lamottei.
Ascends to Askrigg.
Papaver Rhaeas L.
Ascends to Carperby.
[Meconopsis cambrica Vig. Mossdale Head (Mr. Brunton).
Not seen by me].
Chelidonium majus L.
By the roadside between Preston and 
Wensley.
Fumaria officinalis L.
Casual ; up the valley as far as Hawes.
Brassica Napus L.
(?) Occasional; among waste about cultivated 
fields.
Sisymbrium officinale Scop.
Not common.
West of Carperby 
and near Preston.
Sisymbrium Alliaria Scop.
Cardamine amara L.
Pretty abundant.
Ascends Gayledale to 
1,000 ft.
(F.
A. Lees).
Cardamine pratensis L., C.
hirsuta L., and C.
sylvatica Link.
Arabis hirsuta Br.
Barbarea vulgaris Br. By no means frequent ; up as far as 
Hawes.
Nasturtium officinale Br. Ascends to Askrigg (about 600 ft.).
Nasturtium palustre DC.
In abundance by the side of the pond 
at Carperby (about 700 ft.).
The pond is now being drained.
Cochlearia officinalis L.
I?, alpina.
Draba verna L.
a. brachycarpa.
Not unfrequent on old 
walls and rocks in the upper part of the valley.
Draba incana L.
Frequent on nearly all the upper and middle 
limestone scars.
Thlaspi alpestre L.
b. occitanum.
In great abundance along 
the banks of Filer Beck ; near Hawbank lead-mines and about 
the old lead-mines in Ox Close, Carperby.
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
127 
Teesdalia nudicaulis Jjr. Very sparingly at the Leyburn 
flagstone (juarries.
Hutchinsia petraea Br. Pretty evenly distributed on all the scars 
from the head of the valley down as far as Preston.
Capsella Bursa-pastoris Mcench.
Not common higher than 
Askrigg (700 ft.).
[Lepidium campestre Br. Recorded in Baker's 'North Yorkshire ' 
as ascending to Appersett Bridge above Hawes, but not seen by 
Mr. F.
A. Lees or myself in any part of the dale.] 
Reseda Luteola L.
Rare.
Near the railway embankment at 
Redmire Station ; and by road-side above Leyburn Shawl.
Helianthemum vulgare Gaert.
Viola palustris L.
Viola odorata L.
Near river below Thoresby Green ; in the 
Freeholder's Wood, Carperby ; Yore bank above Askrigg 
Station ; and Bain Gill.
Viola hirta L.
Viola sylvatica Fries, a.
Riviniana.
Common.
b. Reichenbachiana.
Frequent in lower part of valley, but 
does not apparently ascend to Hawes.
New to vice-county 
65 of Watson's ' Topographical Botany.' 
c. velutina Lees.
A downy-leaved variety, at first thought to be 
V. arenaria^ until fruit was obtained ; grows very locally on a 
stiff till-slope by the Mossdale stream.
Viola tricolor L.
Occasional ; not permanent.
Viola lutea Huds.
Abundant in moorland pastures, especially on 
the north side of the valley.
Drosera rotundifolia L.
Locker Tarn, Carperby; in bogs north 
of Addlebrough, on Thornton Rust Moor, and higher part of 
dale.
Polygala vulgaris L., and P.
depressa Wend.
Silene inflata Sm. Ascends to 400 ft.
at river-bank, Hawes.
Lychnis diurna Sibth., and L.
Flos-cuculi L.
Cerastium glomeratum Thuill.
Not common.
Cerastium triviale Link.
Stellaria nemorum L.
Li nearly all the gills of Upper Wensley- 
dale.
Stellaria media With., and S.
Holostea L.
Stellaria graminea L., and S.
uliginosa Murr.
Arenaria trinervis L.
Not found higher than Aysgarth, 600 ft.
May 1888.
128 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Arenaria serpyllifolia L.
Arenaria leptoclados Guss.
Sparingly at the Flag Quarries, 
Leyburn.
Alsine verna Bartl.
Very abundant on many of the scars.
Alsine tenuifolia Crantz.
Leyburn Flag Quarries.
Sagina ciliata Fries.
Leyburn Flag Quarries (F.
A. Lees!).
New to vice-county 65 of Watson's ' Top. Bot.' 
Sagina procumbens L., and S.
nodosa Meyer.
Montia fontana L.
Hypericum calycinum L.
In a small wood above Leyburn 
Shawl ; planted.
Hypericum perforatum L.
Hypericum dubium Leers.
By the river Yore about the Aysgarth 
Waterfalls ; in Cotterdale at an elevation of 1,2^0 ft.
Hypericum tetrapterum Fries.
Hypericum humifusum L.
Rare.
Not seen higher up the 
dale than the Leyburn Flag Quarries, and there only a few 
specimens.
Plentiful on sandy cart-track in field between Birk 
Rigg Farm and Mid Mossdale, 1,200 ft.
(F.
A. Lees).
Hypericum pulchrum L., and H.
hirsutum L.
Malva moschata L.
Leyburn Shawl woods, and in woods about 
Scarth Nick, 1,000 ft.
Malva sylvestris L.
Rather rare.
Ascends to Carperby.
Tilia parvifolia Ehrh.
One tree by road-side, near Hawbank, 
Carperby.
Linum catharticum L.
Linum perenne L.
Long known about Leyburn Shawl.
Mr. W.
Horne gathered specimens in 1883 (I), but it has not been seen 
this year (1887).
Geranium sylvaticum L.
Abundant.
Geranium pratense L., G.
molle L., and G.
dissectum L.
Geranium columbinum L.
On banks about Scarth Nick ; and 
near the Upper Aysgarth Falls in Bearpark.
Geranium lucidum L.
Geranium Robertianum L.
Common.
Ascends over 1,900 ft.
at head of Gayle Beck.
Oxalis Acetosella L.
Ilex Aquifolium L.
Euonymus europseus L.
Freeholder's Wood, Carperby; and 
Leyburn Shawl woods.
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
T29 
Rhamnus catharticus L.
Ascends to Havvbank Wood, Carperby.
Acer Pseudo-platanus L.
Acer campestre L.
Ascends to Nappa Scar.
Ulex europseus L.
Near Nappa Scar ; Aysgarth Force ; Castle 
Bolton; and Duerley Brook-side, in Gayledale, 1,800 ft.
Ononis arvensis Auct.
Anthyllis vulneraria L.
Medicago lupulina L.
Medicago denticulata Willd.
In sandy crevices of rocks below 
Aysgarth lowest falls.
Introduced by seed from Yore Flour 
Mills above.
Trifoiium pratense L., T.
medium L., and T.
repens L.
T. procumbens L., and T.
dubium Sibth.
Lotus corniculatus L., and L.
major Scop.
Hippocrepis comosa L.
Not unfrequent in several places in the 
lower part of the dale.
Ascends to Carperby (900 ft.).
Vicia hirsuta Koch, and V.
Cracca L.
Vicia sylvatica L.
In Mill and Whitfield Gills near Askrigg ; 
Bolton Gill (Mr. W.
Robinson); West Bolton Gill; and Thoralby.
Vicia sepium L.
Lathyrus pratensis L., and L.
macrorhizus Wimm.
Prunus spinosa L.
Prunus domestica L.
Three trees in copse by Yore above 
Appersett Bridge (F.
A. Lees).
Prunus Avium L.
Woodhall Scar Woods ; planted ?
Prunus Padus L.
Spiraea Ulmaria L.
Agrimonia Eupatoria L.
Agrimonia odorata Miill.
On Penhill above West Burton; and 
in Bishopdale, west of Thoralby.
New to vice-county 65 of 
Watson's ' Top. Bot.' 
Sanguisorba officinalis L.
Poterium Sanguisorba L.
Alchemilla arvensis Scop.
Not common.
Alchemilla vulgaris L.
Potentilla Fragariastrum Ehrh.
[Potentilla verna L.
Semerdale (Bakers 'North \'orkshire 
not seen by me].
[Potentilla alpestris Hall.
fil.
Main Limestone scars on Haslcn 
Fell, Waldendale (Baker's ' North Yorkshire'): not seen by me].
May 1888.
130 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Potentilla Tormentilla Schenk.
Potentilla reptans L.
Ascends as far as Bainbridge.
Potentilla anserina L.
Comarum palustre L.
In bogs at the foot of Addlebrough ; 
and south of Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Fragaria vesca L.
Rubus Idaeus L.
Up to 1,800 ft.
in 'Swallow holes' on Ten 
End.
Rubus Radula Weihe.
Up to about Preston.
Rubus rhamnifolius W, & N.
Ascends nearly 1,000 ft.
on 
Penhill.
Rubus discolor W.
& N.
Ascends the valley to Woodhall.
Rubus villicaulis W.
& N.
Hawbank Wood, near Carperby.
Rubus diversifolius Lindl.
Up to 1,000 ft.
in Fossdale.
Rubus corylifolius Sm. Up to below Mill Gill, Askrigg.
Rubus csesius L.
Rubus saxatilis L.
Descends to Freeholder's Wood, Carperby, 
630 ft.
Rubus Chamaemorus L.
Geum urbanum L.
Geum intermedium Ehrh.
In Cat Scar near Yore Mills; Bolton 
Gill ; and Cotterdale.
Geum rivale L.
Rosa spinosissima L.
In the lower part of Freeholder's Wood, 
Carperby ; and in Bain Gill.
Rosa involuta Sm. Shaw Gill, Hardraw (F.
A. Lees) !
Rosa mollissima Willd.
and h.
caerulea.
Rosa tomentosa Sm.
Rosa scabriuscula Sm. Freeholder's Wood, Carperby.
Rosa micrantha Sm. In Bearpark near the waterfalls (F.
A. 
Lees) !
Rosa lutetiana Leman.
Rosa sphaerica Gren., and R.
dumalis Bechst.
Rosa biserrata Merat, R.
urbica Leman, and R.
frondosa Stev.
Rosa arvatica Baker, R.
incana Woods, and R.
obtusifolia Desv.
Rosa andevag-ensis Bast, and R.
verticillacantha Merat.
Rosa Kosinciana Bess., and R.
Reuteri Godet.
Rosa subcristata Baker.
Rosa implexa Gren., and R.
coriifolia Fries.
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDaLE.
Rosa Watsoni Baker.
{The best localities for Rosae are Freeholder's Wood, Carperby ; 
and Bain Gill.
Nearly all the above mentioned ca7iina forms 
are found in the former place).
Crataegus Oxyacantha L.
Pyrus Aucuparia Gaert, and P.
Malus L.
Peplis Portula L.
By the river about Aysgarth Falls.
Epilobium angustifolium L.
Head of Gayledale; Ten End in 
'Swallow holes,' i,8oo ft.; and in Mossdale.
b. brachycarpum Leight.
On the Aysgarth side of the river 
above the falls in Bearpark.
Epilobium hirsutum I.., and E.
parviflorum Schreb.
Epilobium montanum L., and E.
palustre L.
Epilobium obscurum Schreb.
Hawes and Simonstone.
Circaea lutetiana L.
Myriophyllum spicatum L.
In ' Strands' pasture, Carperby; and 
Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Myriophyllum alterniflorum DC.
Frequent in many places in 
the river and tributaries of the Yore.
New to vice-county 65 of 
Watson's ' Top. Bot.' 
Hippuris vulgaris L.
In ' Strands ' pasture, Carperby; in Bishop- 
dale Beck, above Thoralby ; and Semerwater.
Callitriche stagnalis Kiitz.
h. platycarpa.
Carperby Moor.
Callitriche hamulata Kiitz.
In brook near Hawes Railway 
Station (F.
A. Lees) !
Ribes Grossularia L.
Ribes alpinum L.
Indigenous ; up Gayle Beck near Aisgill 
Force (F.
A. Lees) !
Ribes rubrum L., and a.
sativum.
r. Smithianum.
Widdale Gill (F.
A. Lees) !
Ribes nigrum L.
Occasional.
Sedum villosum L.
In moist place by the Muker roadside above 
Simonstone ; [damp rocks, Ten End (Baker's 'North Yorkshire'); 
not seen by me].
High up Gayledale near the old Duerley 
ironstone shafts (Albert Crosfield and F.
A. Lees ; 1885).
Sedum album L.
a. teretifolium.
Thoroughly naturalized in 
a small wood above Leyburn Shawl.
Sedum acre L.
May 1888.
132 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Sedum rupestre Huds.
Naturalized in small wood above 
Leyburn Shawl, and on bridge at Newbiggin, near Askrigg.
Saxifraga aizoides L.
On rocks about the Whitfield Gill 
Waterfall, Askrigg.
Saxifraga tridactylites L.
Saxifraga granulata L.
In fields about Scarth Nick ; Thornton 
Rust : Yorber Knott ; and Burtersett ; up to i,6oo ft.
Saxifraga hypnoides L.
Chrysosplenium oppositifolium L.
Chrysosplenium alternifolium L.
Rare.
Near footpath across 
West Bolton Giil ( Mr. W.
Robinson) I : and at Hawes ' backwater.' 
Parnassia palustris L.
Sanicula europsea L.
Helosciadium nodiflorum Koch.
Rare.
In brook near Ley- 
burn ; and below Thoresby Green.
Bunium flexuosum With.
Pimpinella saxifraga L.
Slum angustifolium L.
Rare.
In brook below Thoresby Green; 
and near Leyburn.
^thusa Cynapium L.
Weed in gardens at Hawes.
Silaus pratensis Bess.
Meum Athamanticum Jacq.
Meadows in Mossdale (Mr.
Brunton, about 1805): not seen by me, but found there in 
1 886 by F.
A. Lees.
Angelica sylvestris L.
Peucedanum Ostruthium Koch.
Occasional ; near farm-houses.
Pastinaca sativa L.
Shaw Cote Scar, Askrigg (F.
A. Lees).
Heracleum Sphondylium L.
Daucus Carota L.
In field 100-200 yards east of entrance to 
lowest Aysgarth Waterfalls ; and on Shaw Cote Scar.
Torilis Anthriscus Gaert.
Chaerophyllum sylvestre L., and C.
temulum L.
Myrrhis odorata Scop.
Scandix Pecten-Veneris L.
Rare.
Between Carr End and 
Marsett (C.S.) !
Conium maculatum L.
Not common.
Near Thoralby : Preston ; 
and Shaw Cote Scar.
Hedera Helix L.
Adoxa Moschatellina L.
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Sambucus nigra L.
Sambucus Ebulus L.
Small wood above Leyburn Shawl.
Viburnum Opulus L.
Lonicera Periclymenum L.
Galium cruciatum With., and G.
verum L.
Galium MollugO L.
Ascends to EUergate, Birk Rigg (1,000 ft.).
Galium saxatile and G.
sylvestre Poll.
Galium palustre L.
c. Witheringii.
Frequent.
Galium uliginosum L.
Locker Tarn Marsh, Carperby (F.
A. L.)!
Galium Aparine L.
Asperula odorata L.
Sherardia arvensis L.
Ascends as far as Carperby.
Valeriana dioica L., and V.
officinalis L.
Valerianella olitoria Mcench.
Rather rare.
Preston ; Carperby ; 
and Shaw Cote Scar.
Scabiosa succisa L., and S.
Columbaria L.
Scabiosa arvensis L.
Xot common.
Carduus nutans L.
Frequent in mountain pastures.
Carduus crispus L., G.
lanceolatus L., and C.
palustris L.
Carduus heterophyllus L.
Abundant in several places by the 
Yore and other streams throughout the district.
Carduus arvensis Curt.
Carlina vulgaris L.
Arctium minus Schkuhr.
Serratula tinctoria L.
On the Carperby side of the river Yore 
about Aysgarth Falls.
Centaurea nigra L.
Centaurea Scabiosa L.
Ascends to Carperby.
Centaurea Cyanus L.
Occasional ; not permanent.
In field 
west of Carperby, in 1880.
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum L.
Chrysanthemum segetum L.
Not permanent ; occasionally 
introduced with corn.
Matricaria inodora L.
Casual.
Anthemis Cotula L.
Casual.
Achillea Millefolium L., and A.
Ptarmica L.
Artemisia Absinthium L.
Middleham Moor, above the Quarry 
(Mr. W.
Whitwell).
May 1888.
134 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Artemisia vulgaris L.
Waste ground near Bow Bridge (C.S.)!
FilagO g"ermanica L.
Leyburn Flag Quarries.
Gnaphalium uliginosum L.
Not common ; in damp places 
about Hawes.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum L.
Hawbank, Carperby; and pastures 
near river below Swinethwaite.
Gnaphalium dioicum L.
In pastures above Hardraw ; near 
Preston ; and on hill near Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Senecio vulgaris L.
Senecio erucifolius L.
Ascends to Freeholder's Wood, Carperby.
Senecio Jacobaea L., and S.
aquaticus Huds.
Bellis perennis L.
Solidago Virga-aurea L.
Tussilago Farfara L.
^ , 
Petasites vulgaris Desf.
Eupatorium cannabinum L.
River-side in Freeholder's Wood, 
Carperby.
By stream near Wensley Station (F.
A. Lees).
Lapsana communis L.
Hypochaeris radicata L.
Leontodon hispidus L.
Leontodon autumnalis L., and h.
pratensis.
TragOpOgon pratensis L.
Ascends as far as Carperby.
h. minor.
Ascends as far as Carperby.
Taraxacum officinale Wigg.
Lactuca muralis Fresen.
Sonchus oleraceus L., and S.
asper Hoffm.
Crepis virens L.
Crepis tectorum L.
Casual on railway-banks and by road-sides.
Crepis succisaefolia Tausch.
Bushy places in Bain Gill, at the 
higher end.
Crepis paludosus Moench.
Hieracium Pilosella L., and H.
murorum L.
Hieracium Gibsoni Backh.
On scars about the foot of Penhill.
Hieracium caesium Fr. Var.
Smithii.
Sparingly on sandy 
shale rock in larch wood above Leyburn Shawl ; and Gayle 
Beck ; abundant about Jack Wood, Penhill.
Hieracium vulgatum Fr.
Hieracium tridentatum Fr. Near the Yore about Aysgarth 
Middle Falls ; Fossdale ; Bain and Mill Gills ; and woods north 
of Semerwater.
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Hieracium prenanthoides Vill.
Single specimen gathered on 
Eastholme Bridge, 1884 ; abundant on banks of Yore near 
Cotterdale.
Hieracium corymbosum Fr.
{H.
Eupatorium Griseb.).
With 
the preceding in plenty by Yore at Birk Rigg (F.
A. Lees), 
Hieracium crocatum Fr. Up Gayle Beck.
Hieracium boreale Fr. Common.
Ascends to 1,100 ft.
in 
Cotterdale.
Campanula latifolia L., and C.
rotundifolia L.
Vaccinium Oxycoccos L.
Locker Tarn, Carperby ; Wether 
Fell ; Ten End ; and Thornton Rust Moor.
Vaccinium Vitis-idsea L., and V.
Myrtillus L.
[Vaccinium uliginosum ' In a pasture called " Rough Earth," 
Mossdale Head, Mr. Brunton ' ; MS.
Note in Joseph Woods' 
handwriting in Townsend's copy of Old Bot. Guide.
Not 
seen by me].
Erica Tetralix L.
Krica cinerea L.
On moor above Preston.
Calluna vulgaris Salisb.
Pyrola minor L.
In Mill Gill and Whitfield Gill, Askrigg >' 
Bolton Gill ; and near Thoralby.
Fraxinus excelsior L.
Erythraea Centaurium Pers.
Very rare.
In pastures near 
Aysgarth Force ; and below Swinethwaite.
Gentiana Amarella L.
Ascends to 1,800 ft.
on Ten End.
Gentiana campestris L.
Rare.
On Penhill above West Burton.
Menyanthes trifoliata L.
Locker Tarn ; Freeholder's Wood, 
Carperby; and Widdale.
Convolvulus arvensis L.
Rare.
Ascends to Carperby.
Convolvulus sepium L.
Rare.
Up the valley as far as Hawes.
Verbascum Thapsus L.
Frequent in waste places in lower part 
of the dale.
Scrophularia aquatica L.
[Scrophularia umbrosa Dum. By the road-side near the Haw- 
bank Lead Mines, Carperby (Baker's 'North Yorkshire'): not 
seen by me].
Scrophularia nodosa L.
Digitalis purpurea L.
At an elevation of 1,800 ft.
in 'Swallow 
holes ' on Ten End.
Linaria Cymbalaria Mill.
Naturalised on walls near Nappa 
Scar.
May 1888.
136 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Linaria vulgaris Mill.
' Town's Field,' Carperby.
Linaria italica Angl.
Auct.
In larch wood above Leyburn Shawl j 
perhaps not native, as there are several introductions in the 
same wood.
Mimulus luteus L.
Islets in river Yore below Hawes; and in 
'Strands' Pasture, Carperby.
Veronica hederifolia L., and V.
polita Fr.
Veronica agrestis L., V.
arvensis L., and V.
serpyllifolia L.
Veronica officinalis L., V.
Chamaedrys L., and V.
montana L.
Veronica SCutellata L.
Not common.
In Bearpark near the river; 
Locker Tarn ; in bogs on moor above Carperby; and at Hawes 
Backwater.
Veronica Beccabunga L.
Euphrasia officinalis L., and E.
gracilis Fr.
; 
Bartsia Odontites Huds.
v^'ith a.
verna.
and b.
serotina.
Pedicularis palustris L.
Pedicularis sylvatica L.
Rhinanthus Crista-galli L.
Melampyrum pratense L.
c. montanum.
Pretty common 
throughout the valley.
Specimens with white flowers among 
the heather on summit of Dod Fell, 2,000 ft.
(F.
A. Lees).
Melampyrum sylvaticum L.
South-west bank of Whitfield 
Gill, at an elevation of 1,200 ft.
Lathraea squamaria L.
In Mill Gill ; and Leyburn Shawl Woods.
Cotter Force (VV.
Whitwell).
Orobanche rubra Sm. On the Main Limestone scar of Leyburn 
Shawl as far as Preston ; and on the same series of rocks above 
Carperby, over 1,200 ft.
[Mentha sylvestris L.
Near Eastholme Bridge (Ward in Baker's 
' North Yorkshire ') ; not seen by me.] 
Mentha viridis L.
By Gayle Beck.
Mentha piperita Huds.
In Cotterdale ; and at Carperby.
Mentha hirsuta L., M.
sativa L., and M.
rubra Sm.
Mentha arvensis L.
Near Appersett Bridge, Hawes.
Thymus Serpyllum Fr.
Origanum vulgare L.
Calamintha Clinopodium Sp.
Nepeta Glechoma Benth.
Prunella vulgaris L.
Naturalist 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Stachys Betonica Benth., and S.
sylvatica L.
Galeopsis Tetrahit L.
' Town's field,' Carperby; and Leyburn.
Lamium purpureum L.
Lamium album L.
Ascends to Bainbridge (about 750 ft.).
Ajuga reptans L.
Teucrium Scorodonia L.
Lithospermum officinale L.
In Freeholder's Wood, Carperby, 
near the river.
Myosotis caespitosa Schultz.
Myosotis palustris With, and h.
strigulosa.
Myosotis repens Don., and M.
sylvatica Ehrh.
Myosotis arvensis Hoffm., and M.
collina Reich.
Pinguicula vulgaris L.
Utricularia minor L.
In peat -bogs on moor north-west of 
Addlebrough (1,400 ft.).
Primula vulgaris Huds.
b. variabilis Goup.
Primula officinalis L.
Primula farinosa I- Abundant in many places in the valley, 
especially about Aysgarth Force ; Locker Tarn ; and Rabbit 
Warren, Carperby.
Trientalis europaea L.
Widdale Carr plantation (F.
A. Lees) !
Lysimachia vulgaris L.
In boggy place near the river in the 
Freeholder's Wood, Carperby.
A starved form with facies of 
Z. ciliata L.
Lysimachia nemorum L.
Anagallis arvensis I^.
Rare.
Pasture near Aysgarth Force ; and 
near river below Swinethwaite.
Armeria maritima Willd.
Abundant about Woodhall Lead- 
mines.
[Plantago maritima L.
Semerdale, at Carr End (Baker's 
' North Yorkshire ') ; not seen by me].
Plantago major L.
Plantago intermedia Gilib.
Plantago media L.
Plantago lanceolata L.
Littorella lacustris L.
Rare ; in small quantity at Locker Tarn, 
Carperby.
Chenopodium album L., and C.
Bonus-Henricus L.
May 1888.
138 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Atriplex erecta Huds.
In waste places, not unfrequent.
Atriplex hastata L.
Casual.
Rumex conglomeratus Murr.
Rumex nemorosus Schrad.
a. viridis.
Rumex obtusifolius Auct., and R.
crispus L.
Rumex aquaticus L.
Near Appersett ; in lane near Thornton 
Rust ; and at Semerwater.
Rumex Acetosa L., and R.
Acetosella L.
Polygonum Convolvulus L., and P.
aviculare L.
Polygonum Hydropiper L.
In 'backwater' at Hawes ; and 
Semerwater.
Polygonum Persicaria L.
Polygonum amphibium L.
b. terrestre.
Polygonum Bistorta L.
Polygonum viviparum L.
In pastures about Whitfield Gill, 
Askrigg.
Empetrum nigrum L.
Euphorbia Helioscopia L., and E.
Peplus L.
Mercurialis perennis L.
Parietaria diffusa Koch.
On Bolton Casde.
Urtica dioica L., and U.
urens L.
Ulmus suberosa Ehrh.
Planted in various places.
Ulmus montana Sm.
Quercus Robur L., a.
pedunculata and b.
sessiliflora.
Fagus sylvatica L.
Corylus Avellana L.
Alnus glutinosa L.
Betula alba L., a.
verrucosa, b.
glutinosa, and c pubescens.
Populus tremula L.
By river west of Bearpark ; in Hawbank 
Wood ; and Skelgill.
Salix pentandra L., and S.
alba L.
Salix purpurea L., and S.
viminalis L.
Salix cinerea L., b.
aquatica, and c.
oleifolia.
Salix aurita L., and S.
caprea L.
Salix phylicifolia ' Linn.' Frequent throughout the valley.
k. Borreriana.
Salix nigricans Sm. Gayledale.
Salix repens L.
Locker Tarn, Carperby; and moor south-west 
of Addlebrough.
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLKYDALE.
Juniperus communis L.
Beldon Gill, Carperby Peat Moor ; and 
on Grit's Moor above Carperby.
It is interesting to notice tliat 
in the adjoining dale — Swaledale — this shrub is abundant, 
whereas in Wensleydale it only occurs in one or two places, and 
then only quite a few bushes.
Yore bank near iVskrigg Station 
(F.
A. Lees).
Sparganium ramosum Huds.
' Strands ' pasture, and by Eller- 
beck, Carperby.
Hawes Brook and Backwater {/lo^S.
neglectum) 
(F.
A. Lees).
Arum maculatum L.
Lemna minor L.
Rare.
Potamogeton natans L.
(true).
Common.
New to vice-county 
65 of Watson's ' Top. Bot.' 
Potamogeton polygonifolius Pour.
Locker Tarn and bogs near.
Potamogeton rufescens Schrad.
Bog in ' Strands ' pasture, 
Carperby, and in stream on Thornton Rust Moor, east of 
Addlebrough.
Potamogeton perfoliatus L.
Potamogeton crispus L., and var.
serratus Huds.
Potamogeton pusillus L.
In bog in ' Strands ' pasture, Car- 
perby.
Potamogeton pectinatus L.
Semerwater.
Triglochin palustre L.
Alisma Plantago L.
Alisma natans L.
South side of Semerwater (F.
A. Lees, 
Herb.
1866).
Orchis pyramidalis L.
Bearpark, near Carperby.
Orchis ustulata L.
Common at Carperby.
Orchis mascula L.
Orchis incarnata L.
Locker Tarn, Carperby, and higher parts of 
valley.
New to vice-county 65 of Watson's ' Top. Bot.' 
Orchis latifolia L.
Birk Rigg ; Locker Tarn ; and Bearpark, 
Orchis maculata L.
Gymnadenia conopsea Br.
Gymnadenia albida Rich.
Many places in the upper part of the 
dale.
Habenaria viridis Br. In Bearpark, near Carperby.
Habenaria bifoHa Br. Birk Rigg.
Habenaria chlorantha Bab. In meadows about Mill (;ill, 
Askrigg; and in woods near Aysgarth Waterfalls.
Common in 
thejupper part of the dale (F.
A. Lees).
May 1888.
140 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Ophrys muscifera Huds.
Near Aysgarth Force ; and Hawbank 
Wood, Carperby.
Listera COrdata Br. Carperby Peat Moor (Miss Todd!); and on 
moor about ij miles above Hardraw, near the Swaledale Road; 
on moors south of Semerwater.
Listera ovata Br.
Neottia Nidus-avis Rich.
Rare.
In pasture by the river on the 
Thoresby Green side, opposite Easthohxie.
Epipactis latifolia Auct.
Near bed of stream in Bolton Gill, 
200-300 yds.
from the entrance at lower end of valley.
Iris Pseudacorus L.
Near river in Bearpark ; by the ditch at 
Throstle Nest near Carperby; and at Hawes Backwater.
Tamus communis L.
Frequent.
Ascends to Askrigg.
Paris quadrifolia L.
Gagea lutea Ker. Near Ley burn end of Shawl Wood (Mr. W.
Home !), and in woods near Eastholme, Aysgarth.
Scilla nutans Sm. Aysgarth.
Allium Scorodoprasum L.
In ' Town's field,' Carperby.
Allium vineale L.
'Town's field,' Carperby; Upper Aysgarth 
Falls, in Bearpark ; and on the west scar of Addlebrough, at 
an elevation of over 1,500 ft.
Allium oleraceum L.
Freeholder's Wood, and near waterfalls in 
Bearpark.
Stream-side in Bain Gill (F.
A. Lees).
Allium ursinum L.
Narthecium ossifragum Huds.
Colchicum autumnale L.
Pastures near Aysgarth Force ; and 
meadows near river at Leyburn.
Luzula pilosa Willd., and L.
sylvatica Beck.
Luzula campestris DC, and L.
multiflora Koch.
Juncus conglomeratus L., and J.
effusus L.
Juncus diffusus Hoppe.
Between Bainbridge and Semerwater?
near the footpath ; and at east end of Semerwater.
Juncus glaucus Sibth., and J.
acutiflorus Ehrh.
Juncus obtusiflorus Ehrh.
Rabbit warren, Woodhall; and Locker 
Tarn, Carperby.
Juncus lamprocarpus Ehrh., and J.
supinus Moench.
Juncus bufonius I>., and J.
squarrosus L.
Blysmus compressus Panz.
Heleocharis acicularis Sm. Muddy south and south-west side 
of Semerwater (F.
A. Lees) !
Naturalist, 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
141 
Scirpus palustris L.
Scirpus pauciflorus Lightf.
Carperby side of the river above 
lowest Aysgarth Falls ; Locker Tarn ; and Bain Gill.
Scirpus caespitosus L., and S.
setaceus L.
Eriophorum vaginatum L., and E.
angustifolium Roth.
Eriophorum latifolium Hoppe.
In bogs at foot of Addlebrough ; 
and Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Carex dioica L., and C.
pulicaris L.
Carex paniculata L.
Rare.
In bog at lower part of Hawbank 
Wood, Carperby, near the lead-mines ; and below Askrigg.
Carex muricata L.
West Burton, about waterfall ; and Preston 
Scar.
Carex stellulata Good.
Carex curta Good.
Head of Bolton Gill, and in boggy place on 
the moor above Simonstone ; Birk Rigg.
Carex ovalis Good., and C.
acuta L.
Carex vulgaris Fries.
Peculiar forms of this occur at Locker 
Tarn ; and in ' Strands ' pasture, Carperby.
Carex glauca Scop., C.
pilulifera L., and C.
praecox Jacq.
Carex pallescens L., C.
panicea L., and C.
sylvatica Huds.
Carex binervis Sm., and C.
Hornschuchiana Hoppe.
Carex flava L.
a. genuina Towns.
b. lepidocarpa Tausch.
Near Locker Tarn, Carperby.
This 
was verified by Mr. Arthur Bennett.
c. minor Towns.
Carex hirta L., C.
paludosa Good., and C« ampullacea Good.
Carex vesicaria L.
A hybrid — vesicaria x ampullacea — at Hawes Backwater.
Anthoxanthum odoratum L.
Digraphis arundinacea Trin.
Alopecurus geniculatus L., and A.
pratensis L.
Phleum pratense L.
Var. flavescens Moore.
With yellow anthers on till-banks by 
the Yore at/fhoresby, as low as 400 ft.
Sesleria caerulea Scop.
Agrostis canina L.
Agrostis alba L., and stolonifera.
Agrostis vulgaris With.
May i888.
K 
142 
PERCIVAL : THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE.
Calamagrostis Epigejos Roth.
Spinney by Blackburn Sike just 
below Hawes, 750 ft.
(F.
A. Lees).
An addition to Baker's 
^ North Yorkshire' for district vii, and an extension of its 
upward range.
Phragmites communis Trin.
Locker Tarn, Carperby; and 
Semerwater.
Aira caespitosa L., and A.
flexuosa L.
Aira caryophyllea L.
Leyburn Flag Quarries ; Rail track, 
Askrigg Station.
Aira praecox L.
Leyburn Flag Quarries ; Rail track, Askrigg 
Station.
Avena flavescens L., and A.
pubescens L.
Avena pratensis L., and A.
elatior L.
Holcus mollis L., and H.
lanatus L.
Triodia decumbens Beauv.
Koeleria cristata Pers.
Molinia caerulea Mcench.
Melica nutans L., and M.
uniflora Retz.
Glyceria fluitans Br.
Glyceria plicata Fr. Near Yore Mills, Aysgarth ; and Widdale 
Gill.
Sclerochloa rigida , Link.
In Bearpark near the falls ; and 
Leyburn Flag Quarries.
Poa annua L., and P.
nemoralis L.
Poa pratensis L., and P.
trivialis L.
Briza media L.
Cynosurus cristatus L.
Dactylis glomerata L.
Festuca sciuroides Roth.
Yore-side below Aysgarth Middle 
Waterfalls.
Casual.
Festuca ovina L., with b.
tenuifolia, and c.
glauca.
Festuca rubra L., a.
duriuscula.
Festuca elatior L., and F.
pratensis Huds.
Bromus giganteus L.
Bromus asper Murr., a.
serotinus.
Bromus sterilis L.
Bromus secalinus L.
Casual.
By Yore-side below the middle 
waterfalls at Aysgarth.
Bromus commutatus Schrad., and B.
mollis L.
Naturalist, 
JUBULA HUTCHINSI^ IN CUMBERLAND.
Brachypodium sylvaticum R.
& S.
Triticum caninum Huds., and T.
repens L.
Lolium perenne L.
Lolium italicum Br. Casual about the river at Yore Mills, 
Aysgarth.
Lolium temulentum L.
By river-side at Aysgarth Waterfalls.
AHen.
Nardus stricta L.
Pteris aquilina L.
Cryptogramme crispa Br. Grits moor above Carperby ; and on 
the grit tumble above Simonstone.
Lomaria spicant Desv.
Asplenium Ruta-muraria L.
Asplenium Trichomanes L., and A.
viride Huds.
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum L.
Not common.
Flag rock 
at Leyburn ; scar above Carperby ; and on grit near Preston.
Athyrium Filix-fcemina Bernh.
Scolopendrium vulgare Sm. Ascending nearly 1,000 ft.
on 
Penhill.
Cystopteris fragilis Bernh.
Aspidium aculeatum Sw., and b.
lobatum.
Nephrodium Filix-mas Rich., and c.
Borreri.
Nephrodium dilatatum Desv., and N.
Oreopteris Desv.
Polypodium vulgare L.
Polypodium Phegopteris L., and P.
Dryopteris L.
Polypodium calcareum Sm. Scar above Carperby (J.P-) ; and 
Gayle Beck (F.
A. Lees) !
New to vice-county 65 of Watson's 
' Top. Bot.' Both these stations are at an elevation of about 
1,200 ft.
Equisetum variegatum Schl.
By the Bain side above Bainbridge, 
and at intervals in stony wet places by the Yore down to 
Aysgarth Lower Falls.
NOTE—HEPATIC.-E.
Jubula hutchinsicB in Cumberland.
— Among some Scale Mosses gathered 
at Lodore, Cumberland, in 1884, I have found a piece of Jubula huh /iinslu- 
Dumort.
and am not aware that it has been recorded before for the North of 
England.
I have also gathered it at Tollymore Park and Rostrevor, co.
Down.
The distribution of this species is remarkable.
It seems to be very local, growing 
for the most part near our western coasts in moist localities.
— C.
II.
\Valu)EL1., 
B.A., Kendal.
May 1888.
144 
A NEW SHELL-BOOK.
The Shell-Collector's Handbook forthe Field.
By J.
W. Williams.
M. A., D.Sc, 
Editor of 'The Naturalists' Monthly.' London: Roper & Drowley, 29, Lud- 
gate Hill, E.G. 1888.
Small 8vo, 148 pages, interleaved.
The idea of this little book is an excellent one, as a handy 
manual for the pocket, with concise and tersely-worded descriptions — 
or rather diagnoses — is one calculated to conduce to the convenience 
of every working conchologist.
Such a work from the pen of a 
conchologist of large experience — both in the field and in the study 
— would be of much value.
We are afraid, however, after examina- 
tion of the one before us, that in spite of the excellence of its plan, 
the manner of its execution requires much emendation before it can 
become the guide which field-conchologists require.
Its inaccuracies 
are somewhat too numerous for the book to be considered satisfactory.
For instance, the author describes two varieties of Arion ater thus : 
V. bicolor ( V.
Brock) Moq, : Animal dark brown or blackish, sides yellowish 
or orange, 
V. albolateralis {Ashford) : Animal dark brown or blackish, with the sides 
white, and the foot-fringe orange ; the two last colours being sharply defined from 
one another.
Here are various errors.
By what principles of nomenclature one 
name is ascribed to v.
Brock and the other to Ashford we do not 
know.
The two descriptions read too much alike, and neither of 
them is accurate ; when our author speaks of the two last colours 
being sharply defined from one another, the innocent reader naturally 
supposes this statement to refer to the white side and the yellow 
fringe, whereas in the true albolateralis the sharp contrast is between 
the black of the back and the white of the sides, and the colour of 
the fringe has nothing whatever to do with the specific character.
The writer has seen examples with the fringe whitish as well as with 
it yellow.
The descriptions ought to read thus : 
V. bicolor Moq. Animal with the back brown and the sides yellow or orange, 
the two colours being sharply defined from each other.
V. albolateralis Roeb.
Animal with the back black and the sides pure white, 
the two colours being sharply defined from each other.
We notice that in two instances at least our author gives forms 
twice over, Arion bourguignati figuring as a species on p.
87, and 
as a variety of A.
horteiisis on p.
86 ; and Succinea virescens as a 
species on p.
97 and also as var.
vitrea (Moq.) on p.
96, and var.
vitrea (Jeff.) on p.
97.
The tenacity of errors is shown by the 
retention of the mythical Arion flavus.
And why is Limax made a 
i-w/^genus?
Our author speaks oi^'Ainalia {Liiiiax) gagates,' send of 
Eulimax {Li7nax) Icevis," and so throughout the genus.
A. glossary 
is given at the end, a full index at the beginning, and two chapters on 
anatomy are also given, followed by directions for collecting, and a 
conspectus of the classes, orders, famihes, and genera.
— W.D.R.
Naturalist, 
145 
COAL-DUST AND EXPLOSIONS IN 
COAL-MINES.
Rev. ARTHUR WATTS, F.G.S., F.R.G.S, 
Vice-PrviciJ>al, Bede College, DicrJinvi.
An explosion in a coal-mine, whatever the cause, is a sudden, and for 
a short time a continuous, demand for more space in certain or all 
passages of a mine.
It must be borne in mind that space is, in 
mines, limited in all directions save one, viz, that towards the shafts.
This demand for more space is consequent on the presence and 
propagation of such heat as will produce incandescence in certain 
materials present ; for example, that developed in the firing of a shot 
or of a local accumulation of gas.
The demand arises from expan- 
sion of the air already filling the passages, and wherever dust 
participates, from the generation of new gases by the act of combus- 
tion, which thus increases the pressure by making an addition 
through the conversion of what was solid, into a gas.
When some 
or most of these thus-formed gases are themselves fiercely com- 
bustible, the character of the combustion is so intensified that it is 
called an explosion.
Hence the varying nature of coal-mine 
explosions, and hence initial causes, at one time operative, are at 
another time inoperative, not from lack of cause, but from lack of 
proper material on which the cause can act.
Hence too, frequently, 
not the whole mine, but certain passages only are invaded, because 
combustion can only go where inflammable material is found.
The 
inflammable materials in coal-mines are, firsts fire-damj^, usually 
spoken of as gas, found, more or less, in all such mines ; and second^ 
coal-dust, found chiefly in dry mines, which are mostly the deep 
mines.
This second must be in considerable quantities to become 
an effective agent.
Now, these two materials do not ignite with 
equal ease or under precisely the same conditions.
Gas fires much 
more readily than dust, and under different conditions.
The conditions 
under which fire-damp can produce an explosion may be considered 
settled ; not so those under which coal-dust may.
Indeed, until 
lately the latter was not considered capable of i^roducing an explosion, 
and there' are still some who do not think it is, in spite of apparently 
irresistible facts.
Yet the gas which is the cause of explosion in the 
one case, is the cause in the other too, for the main difterence will 
be found to be one of time— of /rz.v/ and of present release of the 
same substance.
The gas in the one case is already free, whilst it is 
iM.iy 1888.
146 WATTS : COAL-DUST AND EXPLOSIONS IN COAL-MINES.
yet, in the other case, locked up in its coaly prisons, the dust 
particles.
In the one case it has obtained its freedom from the 
unbroken seam by changes of atmospheric pressure and other causes 
than local heat, whilst in the other case combustion opens the 
prison doors at the moment when the coal-dust becomes coked.
Gas is ready-made in the one case, and has to be made at the 
time in the other.
The danger from the presence of the free gas 
is fully recognised ; not so that of the gas imprisoned in the particles 
of coal-dust.
The kinetic energy is feared and watched; the potential 
has been hitherto largely ignored or despised.
To the latter the 
present inquiry is directed.
There are evidently two factors in the combustibility of the dust 
of coal-pits, viz., material and degree of fineness.
These will be 
considered separately.
The degree of fineness of the dust exercises 
both a direct and an indirect influence on that combustion which 
results in an explosion.
Direct, in rendering ignition easier, by 
bringing a larger surface under the influence of the agent ; indirect, 
in favouring what we may call the saturation of the air-current with 
inflammable material.
The direct influence is in favouring the 
transmission of heat ; the indirect, in favouring the dispersion of the 
particles both before and after being heated.
This indirect influence 
is very important, and especially so far as the lighter material is 
concerned, for the finer it is, the slighter need the shock be that 
causes its primary displacement, thus loading the air-current with 
combustible material, and making that prolongation of flame possible, 
which alone, in the absence of fire-damp, can make an explosion 
possible.
As regards composition, ordinary coal-dust consists partly of coal, 
partly of dant, and partly of extraneous and incidental matters.
The coal, however fine, retains its cubical character roughly, and so 
can be identified with tolerable certainty under the microscope.
The dant demands a little more care and attention.
Among the 
rough cubes are seen, in larger or smaller numbers, many needle- 
shaped bodies, varying much in size, but all forming oblongs or 
rhomboids, and also certain triangular and polygonal bodies of slight 
thickness.
These find their origin in that substance variously known 
by miners as ' Dant,' ' Mother of coal,' and ' Mineral charcoal' 
Dant is of a deep dull black to the naked eye, soft to the touch, and 
is that portion of the coal which soils the fingers when coal is handled.
Its dulness disappears under the microscope, and its long splinters, 
often delicate as needles, render it easily recognised.
A piece of 
charcoal is so like it in appearance and physical condition that the 
name ' Mineral charcoal' seems peculiarly appropriate.
This ' Dant' 
Naturalist, 
WATTS : COAL-DUST AND EXPLOSIONS IN COAL-MINES.
1 47 
is found usually in very thin layers, but sometimes the layers are an 
inch thick.
More rarely it appears in pockets of considerable size.
The thin deposits are very numerous and come between the layers of 
bright coal in planes parallel to those of the stratification of the 
adjoining rocks.
Its softness, abundance, and appearance along 
these planes makes it form a considerable percentage of all pit -dust, 
and especially of the more dangerous kinds.
The readiness with 
which ordinary charcoal absorbs oxygen may be significant as regards 
this dant or mineral charcoal.
The presence of spiral vessels and 
strings of cells, entire or fractured, clearly prove the vegetable origin.
Pitted cells, uncommonly like those characteristic of conifers, are 
occasionally met with.
Ordinary pit-dust mainly consists of these two substances-— coal 
and dant, varying widely in their ratios, and also of foreign matter, 
which varies over a far wider range.
I have conducted many 
experiments with coal and dant, and they prove conclusively that 
dant ignites most readily, and that coal burns with most energy.
The finer either of these ingredients is, the more easily does it 
ignite, and the more perfecdy is the mass consumed before going out.
Conduction of heat is rendered easy by minute subdivision.
Thus, 
coal-dust, collected from the screens at the pit-mouth, will not take 
fire from a match, when piled in a little heap on a slab of wood ; 
it is comparatively coarse ; but when pounded in a mortar it will do 
so, and burns with much smoke.
This dust consists mainly of coal, 
but there is an admixture of dant.
Coal, carefully selected, so as to 
be as free from dant as possible, will burn in like manner, but only 
when crushed very fine.
With dant, the degree of fineness is of less 
moment, since it lights readily whether roughly scraped from the 
coal by a knife or pounded fine in a mortar ; still, the ultimate com- 
bustion of the heap is perfect in proportion to the fineness.
The ' material ' is the other factor, and remains yet to be con- 
sidered.
The microscope shows that it consists of coal, dant, shale, 
or other stone dust, and what may be called incidental matter, as 
brick-dust, whitening, lime-plates, animal and vegetable refuse, and 
the results of the wear and tear of the haulage and winning apparatus.
We vv'ill consider these — first, separately ; and second, in the natural 
combinations in which they exist in coal-mines.
The incidental matter varies much, is mostly small in amount, and 
so far as this question is concerned, is of no importance, so may be 
briefly dismissed.
Its influence, whatever it may be, is almost in- 
variably deterrent.
The shale and other stone-dust may, however, 
in some cases be found assisting exi)losions.
Usually its amount is 
small, often very small, except in the bottom dust of return air-ways 
M.'iy 18S8.
148 WATTS : COAL-DUST AND EXPLOSIONS IN COAL-MINES.
or horse-roads, and in these latter cases it so acts as a deterrent, that 
such passages are rarely invaded by explosions.
When this dust is 
mostly shale, it may be dangerous, for some oily shales have yielded 
much volatile matter.
Thus, I have found some, on being roasted 
on an iron plate, to turn from grey to black, and fall in weight 
from twenty grains to ten, thus indicating as much as 50 per cent, of 
volatile matter.
Dust is found in pits (ist) on the floors of the road-ways, 
(2nd) on the upper faces of the roof timbers and on natural ledges, 
and lastly, on the vertical sides of the passages, the vertical props 
and faces of the roof timbers, and even on the under horizontal faces 
of such timbers.
It facilitates the examination of pit-dust, to con- 
sider the dust of these three indicated localities separately, for they 
differ certainly much in constituents, especially in their proportions, in 
physical condition, and perhaps in chemical too.
That found on the 
floors and lower parts of the sides has been called by Messrs.
Atkinson 
('Explosions in Coal-mines,' by W.
N. & J.
Atkinson, H.
M. 1.
of 
Mines.
Longmans, 1886) ^Bottom' dust, and that on the upper faces 
of timbers and ledges ' Upper'' dust; that on the upper vertical faces 
and on the under side of roof timbers I propose to call ' Flocculent' 
dust.
It felts and hangs together with that peculiar ropy aspect seen 
in ' soot,' and hence has been so called by miners.
As regards 
fineness, for example.
Bottom dust is coarsest, Upper dust inter- 
mediate, and Flocculent dust the finest.
My examination points to 
a similar conclusion as regards the percentage of dant.
Dant is present in all pit-dust — bottom, upper, and flocculent ; in 
the former to a small extent, in the two latter to a very large extent.
From the microscope I estimate its percentage to vary in bottom 
dust between nothing and 50 per cent; in the upper and flocculent 
dust between 40 and 70 per cent, or even 80 in the latter.
Got as free from coal as possible, and piled in a little conical 
mound on a slab of wood, it takes fire most readily when an ordinary 
match is lighted and applied to it, burning steadily, with little smoke, 
but with a strong smell (a smell quite characteristic of coal-mines), 
through the entire heap, and with such energy that it scorches a deep 
pit in the wooden slab on which it is burned.
Even on a marble slab 
it burns through the entire heap, giving the stone the appearance of 
having been wetted.
This is very significant, when the high con- 
ductive power of the marble, compared with the wood, is considered.
On being burned on an iron plate, it begins to glow before the iron 
plate is red, and burns on with a steady glow.
The fumes it gives 
off will not ignite.
The mass changes from its ordinary deep black 
to a pale fawn-coloured dust, and is reduced in weight from 20 to 
Naturalist, 
WATTS : COAL-DUST AND EXPLOSIONS IN COAL-MINES.
T49 
grains.
Burned in a retort, it gives off no gas at the nozzle capable 
of supporting flame, but is reduced in weight from 41 grains to 38 
It leaves the retort as it entered it, a loose mass of dust.
Dant once 
thoroughly dry is not readily wetted but the water runs off, as 
usually with very fine dust, in little spherules.
It is much better wetted 
by a moist atmosphere than by a direct application of water, and 
hence in my letter to 'Nature' (12th Oct., 1886) I suggested that 
keeping the ventilating air-current saturated with aqueous vapour 
might be found the best practical means of rendering it innocuous.* 
Dant clearly, therefore, is not itself dangerously explosive, yet is 
admirably fitted to act the part that tinder used to do when it handed 
on the spark from the flint and steel to the old-fashioned brimstone 
match.
Doubtless, in mine explosions wholly or chiefly due to 
dust, this is the tinder^ as the shot flame or other initial cause is the 
spai'k.
Coal supplies a considerable portion of upper and flocculent 
dust, and the great mass of ' bottom ' dust, along intake haulage- 
ways, which are the usual tracks pursued by those explosions which 
we believe to be essentially ' dust explosions.' 
When very fine, this coal-dust (got as pure as possible), piled in 
a small heap, as was the dant, can be hghted with some little trouble 
by a match, and burns at first somewhat fiercely and with considerable 
smoke, then with less smoke and less energy, for it goes out before 
consuming the entire heap, and only scorches the wooden slab to a 
small extent.
On the limestone slab it goes out before reaching the 
bottom of the heap.
Burned on an iron plate, it does not show a 
glow till the plate is red, and then burns with small scintillations.
Its fumes take fire when a light is applied, and a pale blue flame, 
occasionally tipped white, flickers over the heap.
Its ash is reddish- 
brown, and only weighs half a grain from 20 grains of dust.
Burned 
in a retort it gives off at first much smoke, which will not light.
Soon, however, the smoke lessens, and then it at once lights, and 
burns with a long bright flame, which dwindles down after awhile 
to a small pale blue flame, and very reluctantly goes out.
On 
opening the retort, the dust comes out a solid core of compact 
whitish coke with a metallic lustre.
Sucli coal-dust is manifestly capable of producing an explosion.
Under favourable conditions it can produce a considerable amount 
of ordinary illuminating coal-gas, whose ])resence will convert tlie 
* I am glad to see that Mr. Stratton (late manager of Seahani Colliery 1 has 
made a preliminary trial of this method in a South Wales Colliery, with such 
success that he is, at special request, pursuing this plan, witli the ol)ject of sub- 
mitting a full report at the next meeting in this great coal-field (May 1887'!.
M.ny 1888.
150 watts: coal-dust and explosions in coal-mines.
air-current into an explosive mixture.
Therefore, adopting the 
former simile, as the dant is the tinder^ so this is the sulphur match.
So far, artificial dusts have been considered ; now we will deal 
with dust natural to deep dry pits.
The dust in such pits is mainly- 
produced within the pit itself, but some is brought (you may readily 
see it sparkle in the sunshine over the pit-mouth) by the intake air- 
current from the screens.
As this does not differ in composition 
from that which has never left the pit, it need not be dealt with 
separately.
It needs only to be mentioned that it is but the very 
finest particles that are thus borne back on the wings of the wind 
into the pit.
The dust produced within the pit itself is formed during the 
processes of hewing and hauling, especially the latter.
The working 
face is troubled by no large amount, and it is entirely bottom dust.
The haulage ways are the special homes of the dust.
, Here it exists, 
in the greatest quantities and in all the varieties of bottom, upper, 
and flocculent.
It is partly shaken out of the moving tubs, partly 
blown out by the strong ventilating current.
It must be remembered 
that the force of this wind can only be appreciated by adding together 
the speed of the current and the rate of the haulage.
That which is 
shaken out goes mainly to form bottom dust ; only the finest particles 
getting lodged on roof timbers and natural ledges.
That which is 
blown out goes much more largely to form upper and flocculent dust.
The mechanical force necessary to render the coal very fine is greatly 
in excess of that needed to reduce the dant to the same degree of 
fineness ; indeed, great force is necessary in the one case and a mere 
touch or jolt is sufficient in the other.
This must be borne in mind 
when the relative amounts of coal and dant are compared in the 
solid coal and in the pit dust.
The proportion of dant in the finest 
dust is very largely above that in ordinary coal.
Falls of stone, the making of refuge holes, and the natural wear 
of the floor, cause an admixture of stony matter, and the constant 
passage of horses and men, the carriage of timber, bricks, &c., 
introduce other extraneous and incidental matters ; but all these 
latter are small in amount and do not materially affect the character 
of the dust in intake haulage- ways.
The dust in return airways is usually only bottom dust in all 
essentials, and here the efl"ects of falls from roof and sides, and from 
the beating-up of the floor, are found at their maximum, so that the per- 
centage of stone is usually in the ascendant.
It is not, therefore, here 
that the dust is dangerous.
The great danger here is gas, since the air in 
these returns has circulated through the mine.
It is a most significant 
fact that in the great majority of late disastrous explosions, the track 
Naturalist^ 
NEPTICULA SERELLA AT INGLEBOROUGH.
pursued by the blast is not the return, but the intake air-ways ; and 
yet there are those who wall persist in attributing such explosions to 
gas, and not to the manifestly true cause — dust.
Nearly all dusts include yellowish, reddish, or purplish fragments, 
very often triangular in shape, and with more or less clearly marked 
conchoidal fractures.
They are tolerably abundant — for example in 
the Herrington Maudlin Coal.
If these coloured bodies originate in 
Lycopodian spores (and they certainly closely resemble those seen in 
the well-known spore coals of the Bradford 'Better bed' and Leicester- 
shire ' Moira ') they may play an important part in the production of 
explosions, for the resinous nature of the spores of the Selaginella 
selaginoides of our northern hills is so well known that they were 
formerly used in theatres to produce artificial lightning.
Recent 
German experiments have conclusively shown that some dusts are 
exceptionally dangerous, and in such these spores may play a by no 
means unimportant part.
The following conclusions seem to be warranted by the foregoing 
facts and experiments.
All dusts are not alike dangerous.
The 
most dangerous dust really is the finest^ viz., the flocculent and 
upper, less because of its composition than on account of its fineness.
This, therefore, should be watered rather than the bottom dust.
Dant always enters largely into the composition of such dust, but 
the most dangerous contain a high percentage of exceedingly fine 
coal, and even other more combustible matters as Lycopodian fossil 
spores.
The flint and steel of olden times finds its counterpart 
in modern coal-pits, in the shot-flame or other start-point of an 
explosion, as it finds in the dant of dry dusts a natural tinder to catch 
the spark and hand it on to the sulphur match — the coal dust.
Bottom dust, both from its coarseness and its very mixed 
character, is much less dangerous.
All parts of the pit are not alike 
dangerous.
The most dangerous parts of pits, as regards dust explo- 
siofis, are the haulage-ways, and as regards gas explosio7is^ the working 
face and the returns.
This should be remembered in watering.
The formation and accumulation of dust may be largely checked 
by improved tubs or slower hauling, and by saturation of the intake 
air-current with aqueous vapour, which latter means too will render 
dust already formed innocuous and easy of removal.
NO TE—LEPID OPTERA .
Nepticula serella.
— This is the name under which Mr. Stainton describes 
the Poteiitilla iormeutilla feeding insect taken by Mr. E.
R. Bankes at Ingle- 
borough (see Nntnralist, March 1888, p.
82), in the current (April) number of 
the ' Entomologists' Monthly Magazine,' at p.
260.
—('.KG.
T. Porri tt, Iludilers- 
fiel d, Apr il 1888.
M.-iy 1 888.
152 
THE VERTEBRATA OF SUTHERLAND.
A Vertebrate Fauna of Sutherland, Caithness, and West Cromarty.
By 
John A.
Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., and T.
E. Buckley, B.A., F.Z.S.
Edinburgh: David Douglas, 8vo, xii-r344 pages, illustrated title-page, 
numerous plates, plain and coloured, and map.
Although its typographical errors are somewhat too numerous, the 
work before us is one of the most superbly got-up of its kind that 
Ave have seen.
It is handsomely printed, tastefully bound, and most 
appropriately illustrated.
There is not only an excellent map on 
paper tenacious enough to make it capable of being unfolded, and a 
couple of panoramic views of scenery on tracing-Hnen, but illustrations 
of scenery associated with bird-life, of birds, nests and eggs from local 
specimens, and two exquisite reproductions of monochrouie sketches 
accompany the chapter on fishes.
The work itself is based upon the personal experience of its two 
well-known authors, and embodies also such information as they have 
been able to gather from other sources — including in particular the 
posthumous notes of Henry Osborne of Wick (of whom a brief 
memoir is given).
The work includes the whole vertebrate fauna of 
the district, and the plan of giving a list of the whole British 
vertebrate fauna, and indicating those species which occur in the area 
dealt with, is here adopted.
This plan has the manifest advantage 
of demonstrating the relationship of the smaller fauna to the larger 
one of which it is but a part — and of recalling to mind the directions 
in which further research should be prosecuted.
The information is 
given separately for each county under each species, excepting only 
in cases where the species is expressly stated to be common in both.
The information is very fully given, with details of occurrence, notices 
of the local names, and many interesting notes of all kinds.
An 
interesting account of the nesting of the Snow Bunting at Coire nan 
t' sneadhaidh is accompanied by a view of the place, a coloured figure 
of the bird, and a list of the alpine plants growing near.
Full 
attention is given to the bibliography of the subject, and no pains 
are spared by the authors to elucidate in the fullest manner every 
aspect of their subject, the physical aspect and the faunal position of 
their district, an elaborate account of their sources of information, 
and references are also made to the extinct species.
We should like, 
however, to have seen a summary, numerical and -otherwise, of the 
whole fauna as compared with that of Great Britain or of Scotland ; 
and we note in the preface, that the work, ' unlike most local Faunas, 
' lays aside to a great extent political boundaries, and is marked out 
' by otliers, much more natural, such as watersheds.
This, w^e think, 
' is a new departure," but one which we imagine will commend itself 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: hymenoptera, 1884-5-6-7.
153 
' to the favourable notice of most naturalists.' For our own part we 
thoroughly appreciate the wisdom of this new departure, based as it 
is upon sound principles, although it is not perfectly clear to us that 
the authors have taken it.
The work itself seems to deal with the 
counties as politically defined, each county being taken in successive 
paragraphs.
Had we undertaken the compilation of this work we 
should not only have adopted the river-basin province of 'Sutherland' 
as marked out on the map, but we should have subdivided it into 
minor faunal areas with natural boundaries, and given successive 
paragraphs to each under the various species.
The fullness of the 
information as actually given compensates however for whatever 
imperfection the work may exhibit under this head.
Altogether the 
work is one which we cannot conceive of any Scottish vertebrate 
zoologist being without, and we note with pleasure from a slip at the 
end that the authors have a further work of the same kind in 
preparation, to deal with the ' Outer Hebrides,' a volume to which all 
who have seen the volume now before us will look forward with the 
keenest anticipation.
— W.D.R.
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural history and 
physical features of the North of England.
HYMENOPTERA, 1884, 1885, 1886, 1887.
Citations from The Naturalist are, as usual, not included in this 
paper.
Reference should be made to the Indexes of this journal 
for the years of which this instalment takes cognizance.
Anon, [not signed].
Cheshire.
[Sirex gigas taken at an excursion to Halton Castle, July 12th.] Rej^ 
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc.
for 1884 [pub.
Jan. 1885], p.
35.
Anon, [not signed].
Cheshire.
[Gall-flies found at Holmes-Chapel, Aug. 9th, 1884 ; Cynips rosa:, C.
guo'czis-ge/fn/ur, C.
lotigipeiinis, Neitrobius reani/iiiri , and Cynips kollar{\.
Rep. Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Ass. for 1884 [pub.
Jan. 1885], p.
40.
G. C.
EiGNELL.
? Lancashire.
Macrocentrus infirmus bred from Hydrcecia petasitis [sent by Mr. Pierce, of 
Liverpool; locality not stated].
Ent., April 1887, xx.
114.
BRx\1)FOri) Naturalists' Society.
Yorkshire.
Diary of Natural History Observations for 1884, pp.
28.
[Notes on 
various Hymenoptera.
] 
John B.
Bridgman.
Yorkshire, Durham.
Further Additions to the Rev. T.
A. Marshall's Catalogue of British 
Ichneumonidae [including Cainpoplcx uitiiiuctits Ilolmg.
and C.
triscidptits 
Holmg., both taken by (1.
T. Porritt at Doncaster in May 1884 ; Sagari(i.< 
laticollis Holmg., one bred by Ci. C.
Pigncll, he believes from the larva of 
Mania typica, obtained by Mr. Peter Inchbald from the People's Park, Hull, 
May 1884; and Glypta ccratitcs Gr., var.?, from Sunderland, A.
F. Clriftith] 
Trans.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 1886, pp.
344, 345, 349, and 366.
May 1888.
154 bibliography: hymenoptera, 1884-5-6-7.
[Peter Cameron.] Isle of Man.
[Dolerus fissus very abundant in the Isle of Man].
Proc.
N. H.
S. Glasgow, 
Nov. 27th, 1883, vol.
i. p.
xiv.
P. Cameron.
Lincolnshire.
A Synopsis of the British Species of Cimbicidina, Hylotomina, Lophy- 
rina, and Lydina.
[Stephens' Lincolnshire record of Atnasis obsciu-a 
referred to], Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1885, xxii.
51.
[Peter Cameron].
Lancashire.
[Entorrhiza cypericola Weber, from near Entwistle ; new to England].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Feb. 15th, 1886, xxv.
220.
Peter Cameron.
Cheshire.
[Nematus fag-i Zadd.
and Eriocampa annulipes at Sale ; larvae of former 
(new to Britain) on a beech hedge ; those of latter very destructive to beech and 
hawthorn hedges].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Nov. 8th, 1886, xxvi.
52.
P. Cameron.
Cheshire.
Parthenogenesis in Eriocampa annulipes [at Sale, where the larvae were 
excessively abundant during summer and autumn of 1886 on beech and 
hawthorn hedges].
Ent.
^lo.
Mag., Feb. 1887, xxiii.
195., 
Joseph Chappell.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Obnoxious and Injurious Insects [occurrence of Ciphlorophum (?
Diplorhop- 
tritm) doniesticitin at Manchester].
Young Nat., April 1887, viii.
63.
\^Sirex 
gigas abundant about Dunham Park, and committing great damage to Welling- 
tonias at Bowdon ; occurs freely on Chat Moss, at Manchester and New 
Brighton Ferry, etc.; S.
juvenais occurs at Dunham Park and Manchester, 
and freely on Chat Moss.] Young Nat., Nov. 1887, viii.
211-212.
W. W.
Fowler.
Lincolnshire.
Tapinoma gracilescens, Nyl., at Lincoln.
[In large numbers in a cottage 
in the centre of the city ; the invasion attributed to an old vine which used to 
stand near].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., May 1885, xxi.
276.
C. F.
George.
Lincolnshire.
Sting, Maxillae, and Labium of Melecta punctata [a bee which 'is not 
very common in this neighbourhood (Kirton-in-Lindsey), yet I have fre- 
quently taken it feeding on the small dead nettle '].
Journ.
of Micr.
and 
Nat. Sci., Oct. 1885, p.
259.
C. F.
George.
Lincolnshire.
Bees [and their classification ; in the last paragraph, writer states that he 
has found near Kirton-in-Lindsey representatives of fourteen genera, viz.: — 
Colletes^ Andt-ena, Halictus, Sphecodes, Ccelioxys, Nomada, Epeolus, Melecta, 
Apathzis, Osviia, Megachih, Anthophora, Bombics, and Apis\ Journ.
of 
Microsc, Part 20, Oct. 1886, vol.
v. pp.
243-245.
James Gunther.
Lancashire.
Sirex juvencus near Manchester [at Didsbury, a female, Aug. i6th, 1887].
Ent., Sep. 1887, XX.
233.
A. E.
Hali,.
Yorkshire.
[Microgaster glomeratus absent at Sheffield in 1887].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Dec. 1887, xxiv.
159.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Woodland Rambles in Lincolnshire \_Ffrmica Jlava near Louth].
Young 
Nat., July 1886, vii.
129.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Chrysis ignita preyed upon by Xysticus cristatics [at Grisel-bottom near 
Louth].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 1886, xxiii.
136.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: hymenoptera, 1884-5-6-7.
155 
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Natural History Rambles.
No. I.
In the Woods [near Louth ; Chrysis 
ignita noted in Grisel-bottom].
Sci. Ooss., Feb. 1 887, p.
31.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Field Notes — No. 6.
The Greasy-field and Grisel-bottom.
[Bombus 
terrestris^ Vespa vulgaris^ and Ichneiunon trilineatns].
Nat. World, June 
1886, pp.
102-103.
Lancashire and Cheshire EntomolocxIcal Society.
Lancashire.
Abstract of the Session [refers to Sirex gigas at Liverpool].
Eighth Ann.
Rep, Lane, and Chesh, Ent. Soc, 1885, p.
5. 
W. Maling.
Northumberland.
The Hornet [Vespa crabro] in Northumberland [seen by writer and J, Sang 
at Newcastle-on-Tyne, but not caught].
Young Nat., Jan. 1886, vii.
16.
H. S.
R. Matthews.
Lincolnshire.
A Memoir of Ant-life [The present note deals with 'the wars of the ants,' 
based on observations made upon two very large colonies of Formica rufa in 
a fir-plantation near Skellingthorp in Lincolnshire, June 25th, 1850].
Ent.
Mo. Mag., Feb. 1884, xx.
209-210.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire.
Aculeate Hymenoptera of Cheshire [an important list of 47 species captured 
during the past three years].
Ent., April 1887, xx.
112-114.
Charles Robson.
Northumberland.
Natural History Jottings.
On Wasps, chiefly [with lengthy details of 
actions of Vespa vulgaris^ V.
sylvestris, V.
rtifa^ V.
genuanica^ and V.
britaii- 
nica on Tyneside].
Sci. Goss., Feb. 1885, pp.
41-42; Sep. 1887, pp.
209-211 ; 
Oct. 1887, pp.
219-220.
Charles Robson'.
Northumberland.
Sirex gigas and S.
juvencus [occurrences at Elswick near Newcastle-on- 
Tyne, July 27th,.
1872, and Sep. 4th, 1869, respectively; both fine females; 
details of capture given].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1887, p.
21.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Sirex juvencus [and S.
gigas] at Hartlepool.
Young Nat., Sep. 1887, 
viii.
181.
J. T.
Rodgers.
Lancashire.
Sirex juvencus at Oldham [a pair, July 1887, captured in a cotton-mill].
Ent., Nov. 1887, XX.
308.
W. Denison Roebuck and W.
Storey.
Yorkshire.
Humble Bees and Wasps [ Vespa vulgaris accused of preying upon Bonihiis 
lucortirrt, found dead in large numbers beneath a tree, probably a lime].
Field, Aug. i6th, 1884, p.
246.
A. S.
Rowntree, Yorkshire.
York [Hornet's — ?
wasp'.s — nest in the garden].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Oct. 15th, 
1884, viii.
139.
C. H.
Waddell.
Westmorland.
Scarcity of Wasps [near Kendal in 1886].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1887, p.
21.
C. Wheeler.
Yorkshire.
Sirex juvencus in Yorkshire [at Inglcby Manor near Northalleiton, 
Sep. 29th, 1886].
Ent., Nov. 1S86, xix.
283.
Thos.
Winder.
Yorkshire.
Wasp taken at Sheffield [on 29th Jan., a warm and sunny day; species 
not s tated].
Sci.
(Joss., April 1887, p.
94.
May 1888.
156 
THE BRITISH 
EXAMPLE OF BULWER'S PETREL.
At the Zoological Society on November 15th last, Prof.
Newton 
exhibited the unique British specimen of Bulwer's Petrel [Bulweria 
columbina), remarking that some doubt having been expressed as to the 
occurrence of Bulwer's Petrel in this country, announced by Gould in 
his 'Birds of Europe '(ist of August, 1837), Mr. W.
Eagle Clarke 
determined to investigate the facts; and his search for the specimen in 
question has been successful.
Had it not been for his perseverance 
and that of Mr. James Carter, of Masham, the specimen would pro- 
bably have been for ever lost sight of Gould's statement was that 
the specimen having been found dead on the banks of the Ure, near 
Tanfield in Yorkshire, on the 8th of May, 1837, was brought to 
Captain Dalton, of Slenningford near Ripon, a gentleman who had 
succeeded to a collection of stuffed birds begun by his father.
Colonel 
Dalton, who, curiously enough, sent Bewick the specimen of the 
Stormy Petrel (also found dead in that neighbourhood) figured and 
described in his 'British Birds ' (ed.
i, ii, pp.
249-251).
At the end 
of last May, Mr. W.
E. Clarke applied to Mr. Carter, who found that 
the Dalton collection had been dispersed by sale just a week before.
Fortunately all the cases of stuffed birds had been bought by persons 
living in Ripon ; and having obtained their names from the auctioneer, 
Mr. Carter, after many failures and some loss of time, discovered in 
the possession of Mr. Jacobs, Head-master of the Choir-school in that 
city, the case and specimen labelled ^Procellaria bulwerii^ which he 
had bought with others at the Dalton sale.
Beyond this fact, however, 
there was no note or anything to identify the specimen with the object 
of the search.
Mr. Carter thereupon undertook to inquire of the sur- 
viving members and connexions of the Dalton family, and, fortunately, 
one of the latter, Mr. George Clarke, Tanfield House, Bedale, a son- 
in-law of Captain Dalton, was found, who not only remembered the 
specimen perfectly well, having seen it 'scores of times,' but produced an 
old manuscript note he had made on the margin of a ' Bewick ' (in which 
he had been accustomed to record ornithological observations), to the 
effect that this bird was 'found dead on the Bridge at Tanfield,' and had 
been given to his father-in-law, who had it ' preserved by the late John 
Stubbs of Ripon, fishing-tackle maker and bird-stuffer.' Mr. George 
Clarke also remembered the owner having several times refused the 
offer of twenty guineas for the specimen, and after his death had 
looked in vain for the specimen, which, it appears, had been put away 
in a lumber-room and wholly forgotten.
There can, then, be no doubt 
that this is the very bird found dead at Tanfield.
It is now the 
property of Mr. W.
E. Clarke, whose intention it is that it shall be 
deposited in a Yorkshire museum.
NlumTiist, 
2t I^AY^ :a88 
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contains Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY ASD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 16.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
•cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at "the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
«tc.
;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London: BAILLTERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C 
NOW READY, 224 PAGES, 125 ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY Svo.
PRICE 7s.
6cl.
THE STRUCTURE ASD LIFE-HISTORY OF 
gin Introbudiou to Ibe ^tnbg of |ns£cts.
BY 
L. C.
MIALL AND ALFRED DENNY.
LONDON: LOVELL REEVE & CO.
LEEDS: RICHARD JACKSON.
Just Published, 8w, seiveJ, 6d.
A LIST OF BRITISH BIRDS 
(REVISED TO APRIL 1887), 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., etc., 
Editor of Vols.
3 and 4 of YarrelVs 'History of British Birds' 
For Labelling Specimens, or for Reference ; the various species, whether those 
Breeding in the British Islands, Occasional Yisitors, or of doubtful history, being 
distinctively printed, 
GURNEY & JACKSON, Successors to Mr. YAN YOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Yarieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.— Vol. VII.
commenced January 188S.
Vols.
I., II., III., I v.,' v., & YI.
may still be had.
The Journal, edited by Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Hunslet Road, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, 
THOS.
W. BELL, 10, Reuben Place.
Leed.«..
THE!
^TATUIl ALIST.
The Editors hope to publish tlie folloiving papers within the next feiv months: — 
Notes on Botanical Nomenclature.— Dr. G.
B. de Toni (of Padua).
Evidences of Glacial Action near Ingleton.— Robert R.
Balderston.
Insect Migcration at Heligoland.
— Edm. v>-z Selys-Longchamps ; contributed by 
John Cordeaux.
The Ornithology of Skiddaw, Scawfell, and Helvellyn.— John Watson-.
Notes on 'The Flora of West Yorkshire.'— A.
Craig-Christie, F.L.S.
Bibliography of Coleoptera for 1885-6-7.
Bibliography of Geology and Palseontology for 1886.
North of England Specimens in the British Museum.— T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Notes on the Lapwing {Vanellus vulgaris).
— J.
A. JACKSON.
A List of some Hemiptera-Heteroptera of Lincolnshire.- J.
Eardlev Mason.
Notes on some Diptera collected at Alford and Louth.— H.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S.
CoQchological articles desired.
The Editors are open to receive suitable papers for insertion, particularly on Ichthyology, 
Entomology, Ornithology, etc.
Noiv ready, pj-ice 2.1- (postage 2y^d.).
Report on the Migration of Birds in ,the Spring and 
Autumn of 1886.
By J.
A. HARVIE-BROWN, J.
CORDEAUX, R.
M. BARRINGTON, 
A. G.
MORE, AND W.
EAGLE CLARKE; 
Members of the British Association Migration Cojnmittee.
To be had of W.
Eagle Clarke, i8, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds; 
or any Member of the Committee.
NctlV ready, 2>vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c., of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-Iepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
E AG L,E CLARKE, 18, Claremont Road, Headingley, Leeds.
Now ready, complete, Svo, clot/i, uuith Coloured Map, price \s.
od.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
Bv FREDERIC ARNOED LEES, M.R.C.S., etc.
This, which forms the 2nd Volume of the Botanical Series of the Transactions, is perhaps 
the most complete work of the kind ever issued for any district, including detailed and full 
records of 1.044 Phanerogams and Vascular Cryptogams, 11 Characeae, 348 Mosses, 108 Hepatics, 
258 Lichens, 1,009 Fungi, and 382 Freshwater Algae, making a total of 3,160 species.
LONDON: LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden; 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK,) p t ^ 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, V""'^ ^^^^^^ 
No. 155.
2 viUH iBSa 
JUNE 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
'^'^-l^.L^^^.'i^WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESPONDERENDIR MITGLIEU DES OKNITHOLOGISCHI,i>f VEREINS IN WIEN.
EDITED BY 
Contents : 
Notes on Botanical Nomenclature— Gtovamn' Battista De-Toiti 
The Flora of Wensleydale : Additions and Corrections— yij/^w Percival, B.A 
The Ornithology of Skiddaw, Sea Fell, and Helvellyn— Watso?'..
Irruption of Pallas' Sand-Grouse— JT.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.
, M.B.O.U.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Lower Wensleydale 
Bibliography— Geology and Palaeontology, 1886 
Botany for Children (Review) 
Note -Botany 
Notes on the List of Ingleton Plants—^.
A. Lees.
Notes— Ornithology 
Pied Flycatcher near Alford, Lincohishire — Jas. Eardley Mason ; Birds on Heligoland — 
J. H.
Gtirney, Jiair.
; Nightingale near Beverley, and White Stork near Scarborough — 
W.Eagle Clarke, F.L.S.
, M.B.O. U.
PAGE 
157 & 158 
159 
161 to 169 
170 
171 to 177 
178 to 168 
169 
160 
160 & 169 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
McCORQUODALE & CO.
LIMITED, CaRDINGTON StREET, EuSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghai.i. Street.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
X!0< 
It being the wish of the Editors to make the journal the recognised organ for 
information concerning the natural history of the North of England, they hope 
to rely on Naturalists keeping them supplied with articles and short notes 
from time to time.
xo< 
Communications should be written on one side of the paper only, and 
should be sent as soon after the commencement of the month as possible.
Short Notes of important occurrences will be received up to the 20th of 
the month, and specially urgent ones even later.
Authors' Reprints.— 15 copies of the Naturalist are given to authors 
of papers exceeding 3 pages.
Reprints may be had at the following rates, if the 
order is given on returning proof: 50 copies, 4 pp.
4/-; 8 pp.
5/6 ; 12 pp.
7/-; 
16 pp.
9/-; 100 copies, 4 pp.
6/6 ; 8 pp.
8/- ; 12 pp.
10/6 ; 16 pp.
13/-.
Covers extra.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Journ.
of New York Microscopical Society.
Vol. iv, No. 2, April 1888.
[The Society.
Proceedings of Berwickshire Nat. Club for 1887, Vol. ii, No. 2.
[The Society.
W. Harcourt Bath.
— British Birds and their Nests and Eggs.
8vo., cloth.
[Sonnenschein & Co.
E. A.
Butler.
— Silkworms (Young Collector Series).
8vo, cloth.
[Sonnenschein & Co.
Essex Naturalist, Vol ii, Nos. 3 and 4, March and April i883.
[Essex Field Club.
Revue Bryologique, 15^ Annee, 1888, No. 3.
[Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
British Association Report for 1886 (Birmingham).
[The Association.
Watson Bot. Exch.
Club— Fourth Report, 1887-8.
8vo, 16 pages.
[The Club.
Philadelphia Academy of Nat. Sciences, Proc, 1887, Part 3 (Sep.
-Dec).
[Academy.
Plymouth Institution.
— Annual Reports and Trans.
Vol. 7 (in 3 parts, 1878-81), 
Vol. 8 (in 3 parts, 1881-4), and Vol. 9 (in 3 parts, 1884-7).
[The Institution.
Mittheilungen des Ornithologischen Vereines in Wien, xii Jahrg., Nr. 5, Mai 1888.
Psyche, a Journ.
of Entom.
Vol. v, No. 144, April 1888.
[Camb.
Ent. Club, U.S.
Science Gossip, No. 281, for May 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 15, for May 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part loi, for May 1888.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 125, for May 1888.
[Birmingham -Nat. Hist.
Soc.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 103, May 1 5, 1888.
Q. E.
Clark & B.B.Le Tall, Editors.
Now ready ^ conplele, Svo, cloth, with Coloured Map, price £l is.
od.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
By FREDERIC ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.S., etc.
This, which forms the 2nd Volume of the Botanical Series of the Transactions, is perhaps 
the most complete work of the kind ever issued for any district, including detailed and full 
records of 1,044 Phanerogams .and Vascular Cryptogams, 11 Characese, 348 Mosses, 108 Hepatics, 
258 Lichens, 1,009 Fungi, and 382 Freshwater Algae, making a total of 3,160 species.
London: LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden; 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK,) .
_ , 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, 'j^^nnyBank, Leeds.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
* Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (.side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out 'on approval,' 
J. & W, DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
157 
NOTES ON BOTANICAL NOMENCLATURE.
GIOVANNI BATTISTA DE-TON I, 
AssisfcDif of Botany in the University of Padua, and Co-Editor of Xotarisia.
In No. 289 of the 25th volume of the Journal of Botany (edited by 
James Britten), I have, in collaboration with Dr. Pietro Voglino, 
given some examples of generic names which are common to plants 
and animals, and also seven instances of generic names which have 
a double employ in the vegetable kingdom, viz.: — 
j Ante?i?iana Gaertn.
(Compositae, 1791).
yA?tfe?inaria Link.
(Fungi, 1809).
{ Cha2ivinia Bory.
(Chlorophyceae, 1828).
VChauvinia Steud.
(Graminacece, 1854).
^ CryptodiscHs Corda (Discomyceteae, 1838).
yCryptodisciis Schren.
(Umbelliferae, 1841).
\ Cystophora J.
Ag.
(Melanophyce^e, 1841).
\Cystophora Rabenh.
(Hyphomyceteae, 1844).
{ Didyopteris Ivamour.
(Dictyotaceae, \Zq^^ Halyseris Targ.
Tozz.).
\Dictyopteris Presl.
(Filicaceae, 1836).
^Helicophylliun Brid.
(Hepaticae, 1827).
yUelicophyllum Schott.
(Aroideas, 1856).
^ Lepioirichum Corda (Hyphomyceteae, 1842).
yLepiot7-ichnm Hampe (Musci, 1847).
I now offer another slight contribution, in the hope that the 
newer duplicated names may be (in works of a general nature and in 
monographs) changed in the manner indicated by me in the article 
mentioned above, so that the confusion may be removed.
Acanthococcus Hook.
& Harv.
Acanthococcus Lagerh.
(1883), 
(1845), Cryptogamic Botany of Bidrag till Sver.
Alg.-flora, p.
61 
the Antarctic Voyage, p.
131, { = Glochiococcu s De-Toni) 
t. 181.
Ch. Flahault in Bull.
(Chlorophyceae).
Soc. Botan.
de France (1886), 
Revue Bibliographique, D, p.
157 (Florideae).
Appendicularia DC.
(1828), Appendicularia Peck (1886), 
Prodr.
iii, p.
114 (Melasto- in xxxviii Report Stat.
Mus., 
maceae).
p. 96.
Berlese & A'ogHno, 
Additam.
Sacc.
Syll.
Fungorum, 
P- 354 (Sphi\iropsideir).
June 1 888.
i. 
i:;8 DE-TONI : NOTES OX BOTANICAL NOMENCLATURE.
Contarinia Zanard.
(1843), Sag- 
gio di classificazione naturale 
delle ficee, p.
15.
De Toni e 
Levi in Xotarisia, 1887, No. 6, 
p. xxiv (Florideae).
Crouania J.
Ag.
(1842), Algse 
maris ^ledit.
& Adriat., p.
83.
De Toni e Levi in Notarisia, 
1886, Xo. I.
p. iv (Florideae).
Cymbella Ag.
(1830), Consp.
crit.
dial., i.
p. 9 (Diatomacece).
Diploderma Link (1816) in 
Berl.
Mag., vii, p.
40.
De Toni, 
Syll.
Lycoperd.
in Saccardo 
Syll.
Fung, omnium, vol.
vii, 
p. 92 (Gasteromyceteje).
? Empusa Lindl.
(1824), in Bot.
Reg., X, No. 822.
not., Cfr.
Benth.
& Hook., Gen. Plant., 
iii.
p. 495 (Orchideae).
Inoderma Kutz.
(1833), Alg. aq.
dulc.
German, dec, v, Nos.
39-40 ; Phyc.
German., p.
150 
fChlorophyceoe).
Protoderma Kiitz.
(1843), 
Phycologia generalis, p.
295 
(Chlorophycese).
Contarinia Endl.
& Dies.(i845), 
in Botan.
Zeitung, 1845, p.
289 
(Melanophyceae).
Crouania Fuck.
(1869), Sym- 
bolse mycologicae, p.
320 (Dis- 
comycetese).
Cymbella Patouill.
(1886), in 
Revue mycologique, No. 29, 
p. 27.
De Toni e Levi in 
Notarisia, 1887, No. 5, p.
291 
( = Chromocyphella De Ton. et 
Levi nov.
nomen) ( Hymen 0- 
mycetes).
Diploderma Kjellm.
(1883).
The Alg^ of the Arctic Sea, 
p. 188 (Floridese).
? Empusa Cohn (1854), in xxxii 
Jahresb.
Schles.
Gesellsch.
p. 
43 (Entomophthoraceae).
Inoderma Berk.
(1880), Austra- 
lian Fungi, No. 285.
De Toni, 
Syll.
Lycoperd.
in Saccardo 
Syll.
Fung, omnium, vol.
vii, p.
56 
( = Mesophdlia Berk, nomen 
anter.) (Gasteromyceteae.).
Protoderma Rostaf.
(1875), 
Monogr.
Sluzovce, p.
90.
Cfr.
Schroet, in Colin Krypt.
Flor.
Schles., Pilze, p.
103.
Berlese, 
Syll.
Myxom.
in Saccardo, Syll.
Fung, omnium, vol.
vii, p.
328 
{ = Protodermimn nomen 
emend.) (Myxomycetese).
Naturalist, 
159 
THE FLORA OF WENSLEYDALE: 
ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
JOHN PERCIVAL, B.A.
I FIND that there are several omissions from my paper on Wensley- 
dale plants in The Naturalist for Alay ; and I take the opportunity of 
making an obvious correction.
[Ceterach officinarum Willd.
' Wall in Mr. Willan's [wood] yard 
at Appersett, Moore' (Baker's North Yorkshire).
Gone.
Sought 
for without success by Wheldon about i860, and by Lees 
1884-6.
The old wall still nourishes Aspleniuni triclioinanes 
and A.
ruta-imiraria (F.
A. Lees)].
Nephrodium dilatatum var.
alpina Moore.
In peat-holes on 
Dod Fell summit, at 2,100 ft.
(A.
Crosfield and F.
A. Lees).
Ophioglossum vulgatum L.
Botrychium lunaria Sw. Common in the pastures throughout 
the dale.
Lycopodium selago L.
Lycopodium clavatum L.
Grit-heathery summit of Wether 
Fell; and Lovely Seat (F.
A. Lees).
Selaginella selaginoides Gray.
Equisetum arvense L., and E.
maximum Lam.
Equisetum sylvaticum L., and E.
palustre L.
Equisetum limosum L.
In Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Nitella opaca Ag. In the Yore near Bear Park, Carperby; and 
in Bishopdale Beck near Thoralby.
Chara foetida Br.
Chara hispida L.
In Locker Tarn, Carperby.
Chara aspera AMlld.
In pool near Yore Mills; and in the Yore 
near the Aysgarth ford.
Chara fragilis Desv.
In the Yore at Hawes.
Chara contraria A.
Br. In pool near Yore at Aysgarth Waterfalls.
Erratum.
— In former list (p.
141), the Var. flavescens Moore, 
of Sesleria caerulea, is misreferred to the i)recedmg species 
(Phleum).
June 1888.
i6o lees: notes on the list of ingleton plants.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Pied Flycatcher near Alford, Lincolnshire.— On the 27th April and the 
three following days a male Pied Flycatcher {Aliiscicapa atricapilla L.) was seen in 
and near the same garden where the one reported last year was noticed by me.
This on the authority of Mr. Hargraves, the owner and occupier.
— ^Jas. Eardj.ev 
Mason, Alford, 3rd May, 1888.
Birds on Heligoland.
— Mr. Cordeaux mentions eight resident or breeding 
species of birds on Heligoland, but he does not mention the Oyster-catcher 
{HceJiiatoptis osfralegiis), eggs of which species, I was told by the proprietor of the 
restaurant on Sandy Island, he had found there; and also some Tern's eggs— no 
doubt the Common Tern, as, on walking to the end of the island where it 
terminates in a sandy promontary, we found a few hovering over the waves, 
which we thought might have eggs, but it is needless to say did not find any 
without a dog.
— J.
H. GuRNEY, Junr., Keswick Hall, Norwich, May ist, 1888, 
Nighting-ale near Beverley.
— Mr. Boyes writes me on the 24th inst.
that they had a Nightingale {Daiilias hiscinia) at Beverley for a short time, but he 
fears it has either been caught or disturbed.
— W.
Ea(;i.e Clarke, May 26th, 1888.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Notes on the List of Ingleton Plants (Page 119).— Mr. Leach's list of 
a dozen plants said to have grown about Ingleton fifteen ^ to twenty years ago 
contains the names of two which it is most unlikely (looking to their preferences 
as evidenced by their known distribution) ever grew thereabouts at all.
That 
miscalled '' Aspleniiim germaiiiciifji ' was doubtless the alternate-pinnuled depau- 
perate form of the Wall-Rue {A.
}-Hta-/jiiiraria) into which it sports, though 
rarely; and, again, the ^ Aspidiiim lonchitis'' of Kingsdale, was almost as certainly 
that very narrow, stiff-fronded, spinulose variety of Aspidiutti aciileatiun, which (as 
its name A.
lonchiiidioides shows) has not only a likeness to the true ' Holly' fern, 
but has, in fact, been often mistaken and misrecorded for it before now.
Then, whatever is meant by the ' solitary clump of Epihbmm Jiirsnttim ' in 
Kingsdale, on Gragreth side?
The name belongs to the very common 
' Codlins-and- Cream ' which bedecks the sides of our water-courses in late summer, 
and cannot well be a printer's error.
Probably the lovely wand-like red-spiked 
EpilobiiDn aitgustifoliiint was meant — it grows nearer Ribblehead, in the swallow- 
holes in a few places — but the name, at the least, reveals some faultiness in 
Mr. Leach's memory, and if an error in one name, why not in another I 
Again, the Solomon's Seal of the ' Helks ' is not ' Polygonattini t}niltiflorti!)i^ 
but the indigenous P.
officinale, known there since Gerarde's time (1597).
It 
still occurs in the less accessible clefts.
And yet again, Mr. Leach not being ' aware of any other place in the North 
of England ' where DapJiue 7nezereu7ii grows ' wild,' does not, happily, make it a 
fact.
The Mezereon has been known as a denizen of rocky woods in West York 
since 1805, two localities, Feizor and Linn Gill near Ribblehead being not a dozen 
miles from Ingleton.
The ' Helks ' has probably also nurtured odd and occasional 
plants, possibly truly w ild, but more likely bird-sown, from an equally remote time.
Birds are very fond of the seeds of the berries, which attract at a time when 'hips ' 
and ' haws ' are scarce, and they mostly get the berries in gardens (have done 
certainly for 200 years) to void them in the undergrowth where they roost.
The 
rationale of the Mezereon's increasing frequency is thus explainable, but the whole 
question (like that of the original indigenity of the Ciooseberry and Wild Cherry, 
or the reverse) is full of difficulty.
Lastly, the Fly Orchis {Op/irys nmscifera) has been known at Skirreth and 
Thornton Force since 1746 (Blackstone).
Mr. John Willis found it up to 1873 to 
my laiowledge.
The locality given so vaguely as ' between Ingleton and Kirkby 
Lonsdale" for Cetei-ach is in Westmorland.
Did Mr. Leach know this?
It has- 
been on record since i860, Isaac Hindson the discoverer, I believe ; but Richard 
Clapham reported the fern from Chapel-le-Dale in 1861.
It is not at all unlikely 
that it yet onlingers in sunny inaccessible spots on the scars.
The remaining six 
montane plants named by Mr. Leach all grow about Ingleton still.
— F.
A. Lees, 
Naturalist, 
THE ORNITHOLOGY OF 
SKIDDAW, SCA FELL, AND HELVELLYN.
JOHN ^V A T S O N , 
Fern Lei_s^h, Kendal.
Skiddaw (3,022 ft.), Sea Fell (3,160 ft.), and Helvellyn (3,055 ft.) 
are the three highest mountains in England proper.
Each being 
in the same system, has, generally speaking, faunal and botanical 
species in common, the flora partaking of an alpine character, and 
containing many rare and fast-vanishing forms.
Most of the birds 
are rare, whilst one or two species are almost peculiar to these 
mountains.
One portion of Skiddaw consists of granite, but the 
great mass of the mountain, as well as its neighbours, is composed 
of a dark schistose stone.
Sea Fell is composed of hard shaly 
slate, which structure applies also to Helvellyn, though a portion 
of it is made up of flinty porphyry.
I purpose here to set down some notes on the birds of these 
Lake District mountains, the information contained in which has been 
gleaned by actual observation, extending over many years.
Living 
under canvas among the higher hills during many successive seasons 
has given opportunity of a peculiarly favourable kind for observation, 
and these opportunities have not been missed.
So local is the 
distribution of species on the mountains under notice, that what 
applies to one generally holds good with regard to the other.
When 
this is not so, special reference will be made to the fact.
But little 
order can be observed with regard to the birds to be mentioned, 
though it may be well to begin with those that exist at the lowest 
elevation.
In ascending, from the cultivated belt which borders the 
valley, the first bird that appears is the Water-Ouzel {Cincliis aquaticiis).
Everywhere among the beds of the fell 'becks' it is common, and a 
few hundred yards higher up the stream, and where it becomes a 
torrent with numerous waterfalls, the white crescented form of the 
Ring-Ouzel {Tiirdus torquatiis) is seen.
This bird comes to the fells in 
spring, and is regular in making its appearance.
For four consecutive 
years the arrival of a flock, generally numbering about a dozen, has 
been comprehended betwixt the 24th and 27th of March.
For some 
days after their arrival, the only note heard is a harsh chatter.
At the commencement of the second week the males sing freely, 
though mostly in the evening.
During the early part of May 1 have 
heard five singing at one time, and all within the space of a mile and 
a half.
It builds by the 'becks' — sometimes beneath the very 
June 1888.
l62 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
waterfalls themselves, in such cases being obliged to fly through the 
spray on entering and emerging from its nest.
Although slugs and 
ground-beetles would seem to form its food on the mountains, it 
loves the scarlet-berried fruit of the rowan-tree when this is obtainable.
The provincial names of the Ring-Ouzel are — Fell Throstle, Mountain 
Blackbird, and ^Mountain Crow.
Still ascending the boulder-strewn stream, a few pairs of Pied 
AVagtails {Motacilla lugubris) show themselves near the sheep-folds.
Here they are breeding, and during the summer months, which 
embrace the times of gathering and washing the sheep, insect food 
is always abundant.
Towards the end of August, the Pied Wagtails 
flock, prior to their departure.
But the bird essentially of these mountains— from the lowest 
shoulder to the topmost summit — is the Meadow-Pipit {A?it/ius 
pratensis).
Here it is the tit-lark, titling, moss cheeper, and Ung- 
bird.
This ' mountain lint-white ' ascends to 3,000 ft., and builds 
its nest among the scrub, and at a lower elevation among the heather.
The height of its breeding-season is the first week of July, and its 
young are fed upon a species of small red spider, which abounds 
among the lichens on the mountains.
Ascending even to the cairn of Sea Fell, and nesting above the 
belt where the herbage ceases to grow, is everywhere seen the 
vanishing white form of the Wheatear {Sax 2 cola (X7iajithe).
This is 
another summer visitant to the mountains, returning with the trailing 
green fronds of the stag's-horn moss, and leaving again when nesting 
is over.
Flitting and clacking, and then diving below, the white 
rumped fallow-chat causes a new light and a new interest in every 
lichened boulder.
It has its nest and its pale-blue eggs in the grey 
stone walls, in a cleft of the rocks, or on the lee side of a stranded 
granitic block.
On leaving the mountains in autumn, the Wheat- 
ears descend to the marshes, prior to taking their departure.
Only those can fully appreciate the meaning of the word ' tarn ' 
who have seen these black mountain merelets lying silent and sad, 
from the hill tops.
Their water appears black as ink, owung to the 
soft fringe of peat which encircles the marge.
Such are Red Tarn, 1 
at the foot of Helvellyn ; Burnmoor Tarn, by Sea Fell; Kepple Cove; | 
Sprinkling and Grisedale Tarns — each of these has its pair of Summer ' 
Snipe {Trijigoides Jiypoleucos).
These, with tremulous wings, flit along 
among the peat and pebbles, and breed and find their food among 
the drift-stuff.
Their wild whistle is peculiarly in keeping with the 
still solitudes of the mountains, and only serves to make the silence 
more intense.
In addition to this whistle, the Summer Snipe has 
a continuous and lively song, and upon its first arrival in spring 
Naturalist, 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
is quite loquacious.
Like the last-named, the Sandpiper makes for 
the low-lying Cumberland marshes ere starting on its return 
migration.
The downy young one figured by Yarrell, was sent by 
T. C.
Heysham, of Carlisle, and was probably from the neighbour- 
hood of these mountains.
During its spring and summer migrations, the Osprey {Fandion 
haliaetus) is fond of resting for a time by the still mountain tarns ; 
and scarcely a year passes but that one or more of these birds may 
be seen fishing for the trout that abound in most of the meres.
When the fish are seen swimming near the surface, the Osprey dashes 
down into the water, raising a jet of spray, and usually ascends with 
a fish in its talons.
This is firmly held by the wondrously-adapted 
feet, and is eaten at some little distance among the rocks.
At the 
end of last century the Osprey bred in the Lake District, and notably 
in Whinfield Park.
Before the invasion of tourists and the action of the shepherds 
ridded us of the Golden and White-tailed Eagles {Aquila chrysa'etns 
and Haliaetus albicilla), the former, as Wordsworth tells us, used to 
wheel and hover round the head of the solitary angler as he plied his 
silent trade in Red Tarn.
Certainly at one time eagles bred commonly 
—at least, as commonly as the larger birds of prey in any one district 
ever do — in these mountains and their environments.
Upon the shoulders of the mountains a few pairs of Merlins 
{Faico cesalon) nest annually, preying for the most part on larks, 
pipits, wheatears, and young ouzels in autumn.
These little falcons, 
the arabs of the air of these wilds, hunt in consort and maraud 
through the whole district.
In summer their bright red eggs are 
laid in a depression among the heather, and near the nest are usually 
found the remains of various mountain birds.
To see a pair of wild 
Merlins lark-hawking here, where nothing obstructs the view, is one 
of the most fascinating sights in nature.
It often happens that 
chasers and chased, circling against the sky, rise higher and higher 
until they become mere specks in the cloud-caps that overtop the 
mountains.
To see this falconer's favourite, too, rush past on the 
wings of a mountain storm, as we have often done, is a sight not 
soon to be forgotten.
A bird which constitutes a considerable part of the Merlin's 
prey is the Twite, or Mountain Linnet {Linota fJavirostris).
This is 
a species characteristic of the Fells, resembling a linnet, but having 
a long forked tail.
Its bent-built nest is found on broken heathery 
or peaty ground, and always in elevated situations.
On Helvellyn, 
Sea Fell, and Skiddaw it commonly breeds, descending to the lowlands 
at the approach of winter.
This species is another of the 'ling birds' 
June i8S8.
164 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
of the fell folk.
It is one which is gradually diminishing in the 
north, for whilst it was once not uncommon and widely distributed, 
it is now both rare and local in its distribution.
There is no sufficient cover on any of the higher mountains for 
Black Game ; but the indigenous Red Grouse {Lagopus scoticus) is 
sparsely scattered up to above 2,500 feet, at which height the peat 
suddenly ceases.
These birds are somewhat less in size and more 
hardy than those on the lowland moors.
They rarely have more than 
six or seven young, and generally four or five.
This is probably owing 
to the severe climatic conditions with which they have to contend j 
their spring and summer at this altitude being only of about four 
months' duration.
The coveys are late hatched, and the birds lie 
closely, but disease is almost wholly unknown.
Pied varieties of the 
red grouse, and others almost white, occur commonly among the 
Lake hills.
The Ptarmigan is not found on any of these mountains, 
although the experiment of establishing them on S^iddaw was tried, 
and failed.
It is probable that the number of grouse found on the higher 
ranges may be very much kept in check by the great number of 
Carrion-Crows {Corvus corone) which everywhere exist among the 
fells.
These impale the eggs of the Red Grouse upon their bills 
and carry them away to eat at leisure.
Under some wail or rock 
great numbers of egg-shells may often be found, testifying to the 
havoc which these sable marauders commit.
This bird is one of the 
features of the fell fauna, and is well known to the dalesmen and 
shepherds, who give it a bad character.
In spite of much persecution, 
however, it is still a common resident, keeping to the sheep-walks 
in search of food, and breeding among the mountains.
Although 
a great carrion feeder, it will kill weak and ailing lambs, picking 
out the eyes and tongues of these when they are reduced to a 
helpless condition.
They are resident birds, and only the snows of 
winter drive them to the lowlands in search of food.
The Hooded Crow {Corviis comix) only comes as an occasional 
visitant, though sometimes hybrids between it and the Carrion-Crow 
are shot among the hills.
Once only, as we were passing a wild ghyll at the head of 
Eskdale, a pair of Missel-Thrushes {Tardus viscivorus) flew high 
above, and straight across the mountain.
This was somewhat 
remarkable, as the storm-cock is rarely seen on the highest mountains 
themselves, in spite of ' Mountain-throstle ' being one of its 
Cumbrian names.
After the snows of last year (1886), the fell sheep of the higher 
runs perished by hundreds, and the farmers (four in number) of the 
Naturalist, 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
165 
farms lying contiguous to Sea Fell alone lost 1,500 sheep out of a total 
of 6,000.
The Peregrines {Falco peregrifius) and Ravens (Corvus 
corax) which find an asylum in the recesses of the mountains are the 
only creatures which benefit by the great loss.
In winter a few Snow 
Buntings {Pledrophaties nivalis) appear on the mountains, but never 
long to remain ; they soon pass on to the lower feeding-grounds.
Bean and other Geese occasionally stay for a time on some of the 
tarns already mentioned, but this is only en route.
Either upon the Lake mountains or elsewhere the Dotterel 
{Eudromias morinelhis) was probably never common, nor even fairly 
plentiful.
The small flocks which come in May are called ' trips,' 
and immediately upon reaching the coast they strike inland, follow 
the backbone of the country, and are brought up by the mountains 
of Westmorland and Cumberland.
Here, upon the spurs of the 
highest mountains, and among the mists, they nest.
Hewitson 
spent many annual vacations searching for a breeding site, but never 
found one.
Five or six pairs frequently breed at no great distance 
from each other, but make not the slightest attempt at building a 
nest.
They are exceedingly tame, and if frightened from the nest 
run only to a short distance.
The Dotterel rarely lays more than 
three eggs.
Its call is a low plaintive whistle, which cannot be heard 
at any great distance, and this it often utters when alarmed.
The 
sitting bird will return to its nest even whilst an eye-witness is near ; 
or, if the nest be undiscovered, the bird may be seen quietly watching 
the intruder.
In the past this has been a most persecuted species 
owing to the great value of its feathers for fishing.
Both miners and 
shepherds sought out its breeding haunts, and, on account of its 
tameness, often destroyed great quantities.
Some of the latter even 
trained dogs to find the nests, and in this they were most successful.
From this and various causes the bird has become exceedingly scarce, 
until now it is one of our rarest British plovers.
Last season it bred 
sparsely on Helvellyn, Grassmoor, and Sea Fell.
Here the old and 
young birds stay through sumnier, but in autumn commence their 
autumnal migration.
It may be mentioned that out of eleven nests 
found by an old friend, two were in the last week in May, the 
remaining nine in June ; the May nests contained one and three eggs 
respectively.
The Golden Plover {Charadrins pluvialis) is a beautiful moun- 
tain-bird, spending its summer among the hills, and retreating to the 
mosses and marshes at the approach of winter.
Here it lives 
gregariously, mixing with various sand- and shore-haunting birds.
One of the most remarkable traits in the bird's economy is that of 
changing its plumage in the breeding season.
The breast — a dull 
June 1888.
i66 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
greyish white— now becomes black, which, set off against the gold of 
the back, renders this Plover a handsome species.
As we stood 
amid the nesting colony, and the birds ran or wheeled, plaintively 
piping, round our heads, it was not inappropriately remarked that 
they looked as though in evening dress, only with the colours 
reversed.
The breeding station referred to was covered with thick 
tussocky grass, with here and there bog holes, containing abundance 
of water.
In some cases the young were hatched, the shells being 
left in the nest.
Of the larger birds of prey, the Buzzard (Biiieo vulgaris) is the 
most common among the hills.
Often upon the mountains it sits 
upon some commanding crag and remains motionless for hours.
Probably at this time it is digesting the prey which it has secured 
during the hours of hunting.
This must sometimes amount to a 
vast bulk, for it is said that sixty mice have been taken from the 
crop of a single bird.
It feeds upon moles, beetles, and field-mice, 
but rarely destroys birds and then only slow-flying ones.
Grouse 
which are weakly or ailing, it picks out, and in this way does much 
towards stamping out disease.
The shepherds destroy many Buzzards 
in winter, taking them in fox-traps, set near a dead Herdwick, and 
buried beneath the heather.
When the buzzards are foraging for food 
they fly low over the ground, and systematically work the valleys of 
their neighbourhood.
They are such omnivorous feeders that they 
always seem to have abundance of food.
At the same time we 
would remark that among the hills they feed much more frequently 
upon carrion than birds of the same species which live in the valleys.
No less than seventeen Buzzards were taken by the shepherds upon 
one allotment in the manner indicated above.
On a cloudless 
summer day it is beautiful to see these birds circling high in the air, 
until they become as but specks against the blue.
Sometimes half- 
a-dozen birds may be seen indulging at the same time in these 
gyrations, which have evidently no other object than pleasure.
Although naturalists have described the Buzzard as builfling in trees, 
this is not the case with the birds of the Lake District, as in every 
instance that has come under my personal notice the nests have been 
built among the rocks and crags.
These are composed of sticks, 
twigs of heather, bents, and are lined with wool.
The eggs, however, 
are as variable as the plumage of the birds themselves, which is 
saying much.
Cream-coloured specimens are hot at all uncommon, 
these being for the most part birds of the year.
At the farm-houses 
of the dalesmen and yeomen lying contiguous to the mountains 
named, one of the orthodox ornaments is a case of 'stuffed' birds.
In these the Common Buzzard is generally the most conspicuous, 
Naturalist, 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
167 
and in examining the cases referred to we have discovered four 
Rough-legged Buzzards (Air/iibiifeo lagopus).
The Common Buzzard 
is an early breeder, and not unfrequently two broods are produced in 
a season.
An authentic anecdote anent this species may be worth 
reproducing.
William Pearson, a friend of Wordsworth's, was a close 
observer of the birds of his valley.
When a lad, he was in the habit 
of setting 'gins' for Woodcock, and one morning, on going to 
examine his snares, he discovered a Buzzard near one which was 
struck.
The bird attempted to escape, but being evidently held fast, 
could not.
A Woodcock had been taken in one of the snares, which, 
whilst fluttering, had been seen and attacked by the Buzzard.
Not 
content, however, with the body of the Woodcock, it had swallowed 
a leg also, around which the noose was drawn, and the limb was so 
securely lodged in its stomach that no force that the bird could exert 
was sufficient to withdraw it.
The Cormorants {Phalacrocorax carbo) come to the tarns, 
especially Crummock Water, but are most difficult to approach.
They either spend their time in fishing, at which they are great 
adepts, or sit solitary upon a huge black rock which just rises above 
the water.
Sometimes in autumn a small flock will make its appear- 
ance, w^hen, from the white breasts of the birds., it will be seen that 
the majority are those of the year.
More rarely, but in company 
Avith the last-named species, a few Shags or Green Cormorants {Ph.
graculus) will make their appearance.
When the weather is rough, the Black-headed and Lesser Black- 
backed Gulls {Lams ridibimdns and L.fusais) seem to find food on 
the edges of the elevated mountain merelets, and daily in late 
summer and autumn visit the tarns.
On wild and stormy nights the 
Curlews {Nutiienins arquafa), attracted by the lights of our bell-tent, 
flew and screamed in the darkness.
These breed upon the plashy 
shoulders of the mountains, and in autumn make off to the low- 
lying mosses and estuaries.
Whilst camping, and when we emerged 
from the flaps of the canvas, it was sometimes seen that a great many 
birds were around, and our lights certainly had the effect of keeping 
the ' ling-birds ' cheeping all night.
And we noticed that this 
continued when the short sharp bark of a fox was coming from out 
the crags.
The bird essentially of the mountains, however, is the Peregrine 
{Falco peregri7ius).
Since the Eagles have become extinct, this is our 
noblest bird of prey.
It still nests high in the beetling crags, and its 
nest is most difficult of access.
It marauds and plunders the whole 
district.
The gulls and summer snipe of the tarns afford it food, 
as do also moor-game, ducks, and wood pigeons.
A\'e have seen 
June 1888.
i68 
WATSON : ORNITHOLOGY OF SKIDDAW, ETC.
the female Peregrine liy with a Rock-Dove in its talons without its 
flight being impeded in the least.
But the Rock-Dove is a strong 
flyer, and the Falcon Crag Peregrines we saw strike thrice, ascending 
betwixt each, l^efore pulling down their plucky game.
There can be 
no doubt that Peregrines are very destructive to grouse ; but it is 
just as true that they pick off the slowest and weakest birds.
When 
food is scarce on the mountains, they descend into the valleys, and 
here they obtain leverets and partridges, as well as the larger non- 
game birds.
During the past season two pairs of Peregrines bred in 
the immediate vicinity of Sea Fell, one of which was not at all 
difficult to come at.
In another locality, where there has been an eyrie 
time out of mind, we found the Raven and Peregrine building within 
about thirty feet of each other, and both had eggs as early as the 
last week in March.
This bird, with its swift-whirring wings, bringing 
death and devastation, is in keeping with the spirit of the mountains.
But, like all the rarer birds of prey, it is fast becoming extinct.
In a few years it, too, will have passed from the mountains and from 
our fast-diminishing fauna.
The Hobby {Faico siihbuteo) is the rarest of the Falcons, and 
only birds occur at long intervals, when on their autumnal migra- 
tion.
Not unfrequently in autumn and during rough weather, the Storm 
Petrel {Procellaria pelagica) is picked up dead or exhausted among 
the hills.
So many examples of these interesting little Ijirds have 
occurred in this way that the fact may be worth recording.
It may be well to give the provincial names used in the Lake 
District for those species already named : — 
Dipper — -Water Crow, Bessy, Bessy Douker, Water-Ouzel.
Ring-Ouzel — Mountain Blackbird, Fell Throstle, Ring Black- 
bird, Rock-Ouzel.
Pied Wagtail— Water Wagtail, Wattie Willie, Willie Wagtail.
Meadow Pipit — Lingbird, Titlark, Titling, Moss-cheeper, Lint- 
white, Heather Lintie, Moor Titling, Field Titling, Meadow Lark.
Wheatear — Stonechat, Fallowchat, White-rump, Chackbird.
Common Sandpiper — Summer Snipe, Willy Wicket, Sand Snipe, 
Sand Lark.
Osprey — Eagle Fisher, Fishing Eagle, Grey Eagle, Silver Eagle, 
Fish Hawk, Bald Buzzard.
Merlin — Blue Hawk, Small Blue Hawk, Stone Hawk.
White-tailed Eagle — Cinereous Eagle, Erne, Arn, Sea Eagle> 
Twite — Lingbird, Heather Lintie, Forktail, Mountain Linnet.
Black Grouse — Black Game, Black Cock, Grey Hen.
Red (jrouse — Moor Game, Moorbird, Moor-fowl.
Naturalist, 
CLARKE : WHITE STORK NEAR SCARBOROUGH.
169 
Carrion Crow — Corbie Crow, Dope, Doup, Ket Crow, Cobier, 
Black Neb.
Hooded Crow — Norway Crow, Grey Crow, Grey-backed Crow.
Missel Thrush— Churr Cock, Storm Cock, Mountain Throstle, 
Screech Thrush, Shrite.
Snow Bunting — Snow-flake, Snow-fowl, Snow-bird, Pied Finch, 
Fell Sparrow, Mountain Bunting.
Bean Goose — Grey Lag, Wild Goose.
Dotterel — Mountain Plover, Foohsh Dotterel.
Ciolden Plover — Grey Plover, Whistling Plover, Yellow Plover.
Buzzard — Buzzard-hawk, Shreak, Bustard, Puttock, Gled.
Cormorant — Scart, Black Cormorant, Black Diver, Elder.
Black-headed Gull — Sea Mew, Black-head, Red-legged Gull.
Lesser Black-backed Gull — Black-back (fisher-folk).
Curlew— ^Vhaup, Jack Curlew.
Peregrine — Big Blue Hawk, Falcon.
Storm Petrel — Sea-Swallow, Mother Carey's Chicken.
BOTANY FOR CHILDREN.
Flower-Land : an introduction to Botany for Children, and for the use of 
Parents and Teachers, By Robert Fisher, M.A.
(Vicar of Sewerby).
Cr. Svo, boards, pp.
62.
Heywood: Manchester and London.
1887.
The aim of this little work is as simple as its method of treatment, recalling to 
one's mind Browning's dictum — 
That low man goes on adding one to one — 
His hundred's soon hit, 
but so far as it goes — it is verily the alphabet of botanology — we have nothing but 
praise to accord to it.
As a sample of the happy way in which 'the little ones' are 
to be led into the decoys of cotyledonous terminology, we cannot do better than 
cite from the Ruskinesque paragraph with which the author opens : ' I am,' he 
says to the children, ' going to write you a little book, which I hope will help you.
Perhaps you will be disappointed when I tell you that there will not be any 
pictures in it.
But you are to find the pictures for yourself.
This will be much 
the best plan, for first, you will have all the fun of looking for them, and then 
u<he7i you have fou7td t/iem, they will be better than any pictures /lave ever seen J 
This is delightful, and there are more naive remarks with the same quaint sim- 
phcity about them.
Those anent umbelled blooms — the hollow-stemmed Kex, 
the Earth-nut, etc.
— are especially good, but surely all youngsters know the 
Angelica ' Kex," the thick, pink, hollow juicy stem of which furnishes the tube for 
the rustic's first whistle.
Most country-bred children, too, have dug for pig-nuts 
and eaten their farinaceous root-knobs (they are not ' bulbs ' — vide p.
49 — by-the- 
byei alluded to by Geo. Eliot alone among the poets, in her ' Brother and Sister ' — 
Here were earth-nuts found 
And here the Lady-fingers in deep shade.
The little book is well printed in clear type, but we nowhere see its price 
stated.— L.
XO TE - ORNITHOL OGY.
White Stork near Scarborough.
— Mr. Frederick Boyes writes me on the 
24th inst.
that a White Stork {Ciconia alba) was picked up recently near Scar- 
borough.— \V.
Ka(;i K Clarke, May 26th, iSSS.
June i383.
I70 
IRRUPTION OF PALLAS' SAND-GROUSE.
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
Senior Assistant in the Muse/on of Science and Art, Edinburgh.
Onxe more — after an interval of a quarter of a century — Europe 
and the British Isles are the scene of an irruption of Pallas' Sand- 
Grouse {Syrrhaptes paj-adoxus Pall.), large flocks of which, leaving 
their home in the Steppes of Central Asia, have been making their 
way westward during the past month or two.
On the 21st of April 
they appeared in various localities in Poland; on the 27th they 
reached Saxony; on the 5th of May they were seen in the Island of 
Riigen, and on the 7th in Holstein.
They reached England about ten days later.
On the 17th of May 
a specimen was brought in the flesh to me at the Leeds Museum, which 
was said to have been shot in Dewsbury Road, Leeds.
On the i8th, 
Mr. Philip W.
Lavvton saw five at Spurn, and the same day (as Mr.
Lawton informs me) a man at Patrington saw a party of about a score.
Since then Mr. Lawton has had numerous examples brought to him for 
preserving.
On the 19th Mr. Donkin saw a party of twenty in a field 
adjoining the Ardsley reservoir, near Leeds.
On the 20th large flocks 
— as reported in the newspapers — were seen in Oxfordshire, and at 
Hoddesdon, in Hertfordshire ; and others — the date of which I have 
not seen noted — were reported from Clifton, Nottinghamshire.
On the 
24th Mr. Thos.
Bunker wrote me that one had been captured alive near 
Goole, and on the same date Mr. Frederick Boyes, of Beverley, wrote 
me that about fifty or sixty had been seen at Flamborough, and that 
Mr. Harper, of Scarborough, had called to tell him that he had seen 
about thirty at Spurn.
In a note in The Field of May 26th, Mr. Boyes 
remarked that these birds appeared on the East Coast of Yorkshire 
on the anniversary of the day on which they were first observed a 
quarter of a century ago, and that a flock seen on the 20th, at an East 
Yorkshire locality, the name of which he does not give, contained at 
least a dozen birds.
In the same note he states further, that a friend 
saw about thirty at Spurn, on the 25th of the month.
On the 24th 
one was telegraphed on the Boroughbridge Road near Norton-le-Clay, 
and eight others are said to have been seen in the neighbourhood.
As it is desirable that an ample record should be kept of this 
most noteworthy and interesting ornithological event, I hope all 
readers who have it in their power will communicate to this journal 
full details and particulars of such occurrences in Northumberland, 
Durham, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire (including the 
details of the Clifton instance), Derbyshire, Cheshire, Lancashire, 
Westmorland, Cumberland, and the Isle of Man, as may come within 
their observation.
NimlTaHlt, 
171 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
IN LOWER WENSLEYDALE.
In brilliantly fine and sunny — not to say hot^ — weather, the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union opened their excursion season of 1888 on AVhit- 
Monday, the 21st of May, when they visited Leyburn, for the exami- 
nation of so much of the picturesque northern escarpments of Wens- 
leydale as lay between Bolton Castle and Leyburn.
Only one line of 
route was planned out, and all the members, amounting to about 
eighty in number, assembled at Redmire Station about mid-day, some 
having been in the district over the week-end.
The party was in 
charge of Messrs.
Wm. Home, F.G.S., Arthure (President of the 
Leyburn Society), J.
A. Rod well (manager of the Keldheads Mines), 
,and Edward Chapman, of Carperby (from whose pen emanated the list 
of Wensleydale birds published in The Naturalisi for June 1886).
The party first made their way to Bolton Castle, and there examined 
the little museum of ethnological and arch^ological objects formed 
by the Hon. W.
T. Orde-Powlett.
The route was then taken by the 
main body for Redmire Scars, a few ornithologists making their way 
to Locker Tarn above Carperby, and the conchologists pushing on 
direct for Scarth Nick, where they were rejoined by the main body.
The Keldheads Mines were then inspected, and then the whole party 
Vv'orked their way along the Shawl to Leyburn.
Permission had been 
most kindly granted by Lord Bolton for members to visit his estates.
Arrived at Leyburn, a substantial tea was provided at the Golden 
Lion Hotel, and the sectional and general meetings were held at the 
Public Hall, for the use of which the Union were indebted to the 
local Society.
The general meeting was held ten minutes before the 
announced time, most of the members being present, and as there was 
a wide-spread desire to be out in the fine evening, the business was 
curtailed.
In the absence of the president and of all the vice- 
presidents, Prof.
A. H.
Green, M.A., F.R.S., of Leeds, Chairman of 
the Yorkshire Boulder Committee, was voted to the chair.
The 
minutes of the preceding meeting were then taken as read, and 
passed.
The Hull Scientific Club, and the Ellesmere School Natural 
History Society (Harrogate) were then unanimously admitted into 
the Union.
The following new members were then elected by an 
unanimous vote, each having been first duly proposed and seconded : 
— Rev. T.
G. Butterworth, M.A., Headingley near Leeds ; Robert 
Kidston, F.R.S.E., F.G.S., Stirling ; Robert Law, F.G.S., Halilax ; 
Angus Macpherson, Coatham ; Charles Oldroyd, Snainton near 
Heslerton ; Rev. W.
Hunt Painter, Knyi)ersley Hall near Congleton ; 
C. Arth ur Payne, Baldersby ; Sir H.
Beresford Peirse, Bart., Bedale 
June 1888.
172 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IX LOWER WENSLEYDALE.
Hall ; ReY.
T. Powell, Healey Mcarage near IMasham ; Mrs. Pulleine, 
Clifton Castle near Masham ; Simon T.
Scrope, J.P., D.L., Danby- 
super-Yore ; George Silabon, Hull ; Christopher W.
Smith, Harome 
near Nawton ; Edgar R.
Waite, Leeds ; and Henry Weetman, F.Z.S., 
Howden Hall, Derwent near Sheffield.
The roll of Societies was 
not formally called OYcr, but it was ascertained that representatiYes 
from the following 17 Societies were present : — Leeds (4 societies), 
York, Malton, Hull, Halifax, Rotherham, Cleveland, Harrogate (2), 
Craven, Middlesbrough, Leyburn, Scarborough, and Practical 
Naturalists' Society.
Thanks were unanimously voted to Lord 
Bolton for permitting members to wander over his estates, and to 
the Hon. W.
T. Orde Powlett for permission to see his Ethnological 
and Arch^ological museum at Bolton Castle, to Messrs.
W. 
Home, F.G.S., Arthure, J.
A. Rodwell, and E.
Chapman for their 
services in guiding the party during the day ; and to the Leyburn 
Society for securing the use of the Public Hall for the meeting.
Thanks were also given to Prof.
Green for presiding, and it was 
determined to dispense with the Sectional reports on account of the 
fineness of the evening and the desire of members to be in the open 
air.
The Sectional Reports which should have been given were the 
following : — 
For the Entomological Section, its senior secretary, Mr. G.
C. 
Dennis, of York, reported that only very few members were present, 
no doubt on account of it being too early in the year, and but four 
captures were made — viz., Pieris i-apcR^ Vaiiessa urticce, Thera 
obeliscata^ and larvae of IVudaria imindana.
The Conchological Section was strongly represented, both its 
secretaries — Messrs.
John Emmet, F.L.S., of Boston Spa, and Baker 
Hudson, M.C.S., of Redcar — being present, and the shell-collectors 
on the ground also included Messrs.
\V.
Cash, F.L.S., Halifax; Wm.
Coates, M.C.S., Middlesbrough; W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., 
Leeds; T.
x\.
Lofthouse, Middlesbrough, and others.
Mr. Baker 
Hudson furnished the report, as follows : — The conchological 
members, after a brief survey of the museum at Bolton, descended 
to the lower portions of the castle, where they commenced operations 
by securing Helix rotimdafa, H.
rufesce?is, Pupa uvibilicata^ Arion 
afer, Limax agresiis, and a good specimen of its uncommon variety 
7iigra.
The direct route was then taken for Scarth Nick, and although 
the heat had dried up the road-sides, hedge-bottoms, and mossy walls, 
yet finds were rapidly made.
H. arbiistorum was to the fore, quickly ( 
followed by H.
lapicida and H.
riifescens.
H. rupestfis was abundant : 
even in the driest situations.
Zo?iifes came slowly to hand, but before \ 
the Nick was reached Z.
cry stall inns, Z.
piirus and its var.
margaritacea | 
Naturali-st, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IN LOWER WENSLEYDALE .
I 73 
were noted down.
Balea perversa was twice taken, and Buliniiis 
obsciirus was not uncommon.
The other species observed were — 
Zua ludrica, Vitrina pellucida, Helix hispida, II.
toiundata^ H.
Jior- 
te?isis, If. pulchella, H.
ericetoriwi^ and Clausilia riigosa.
Near the 
Nick, Mr. Braim, of Pickering, was lucky enough to secure an 
immature specimen of the rare Umax cinereo-fiiger, which was 
undoubtedly the event of the day.
Keeping along the scars above 
Preston, Zonites 7-adiaiiiliis was met with under stones on the ledges, 
a somewhat unexpected locality.
H. rupest7'is was still abundant, 
and H.
ericetorum not uncommon.
B2ili7mis obscurus was frequent 
under stones, associated with H.
I'upestris and H.
pulchella.
The 
list for Preston Scar, in addition to those already mentioned, included 
H. rofmidafa, H.
7iemoraIis (dead), H.
horfeTisis, Pupa U77ibilicata^ 
Clausilia rugosa,Ario7i hortensis^ and in a small drinking-trough on the 
moor, Ii77incea tr2i7icatula (fine) was secured.
On reaching Leyburn 
Shawl, Clausilia lami7iaia, ZoTiites 7iitidulus^ Vi/ri7ia, Azeca, Helix 
horte7isis, and Ario7i bou7'guig7iati were boxed, and on meeting with 
a contingent who had worked along the valley through Bolton Woods, 
Helix aspersa, SucciTiea elega7is^ ZoTiites cellarius^ Z.
alliariiis, and Zua 
were reported, whilst Mr. Wm.
Cash, F.G.S., F.L.S., stated he had 
observed ^//^y'/z/j fluviatilis,Ii77i7icEa pe7-egra, 2iY\<\ A7wdo7ita {a7iati7ia?) 
in the River Ure near Leyburn ; and later on, the ornithologists 
brought Z.
7iitiduliis, found near Locker Tarn.
The Section had there- 
fore to report, a total of thirty-five species as having been observed 
during the day, of which four were fluviatile and thirty-one terrestrial.
For the Geological Section, Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., of Leeds, 
secretary, the only sectional officer present, reported that from 
Leyburn Station, Mr. WiUiam Home, F.G.S., pointed out the 
character of the section through which the railway passed.
It was 
composed of a tough boulder clay, the included stones being local 
in their origin, the whole being produced by a glacier, which 
descended from the head of the dale, grinding and polishing the 
rocks as it passed along.
From Redmire Station, where the members 
alighted, Mr. Home conducted the party to Bolton Castle, the 
famous feudal stronghold of the Scropes, and although geologists 
in the field have little time to spare for archaeology, yet here was 
something specially interesting.
Mr. Home had, in March 1884, 
discovered the remains of a human skeleton on the hill-side west of 
Leyburn, and near it found a bone implement made of a deer's horn.
In xMarch 1885, he found another skeleton in the same locality, and 
then succeeded in discovering the entrance to a cave, where a 
number of human and other bones were i)icked uj).
This cave he 
has named the ' Lady Algitha Cave,' and the pre-historic relics found 
June 1888.
M 
174 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IN LOWER WENSLEYDALE.
he has placed in a room at Bolton Castle, thus constituting a small 
but valuable museum.
Mr. Horne attributes this cave to a period 
long before that of the Romans.
The specimens were examined 
carefully and with great interest by the party, and the explanations 
of the leader were evidently appreciated.
The object of this 
excursion v/as to study those beds of limestone, shales, and sand- 
stone which the great Yorkshire geologist, Professor Phillips, has 
named the 'Yoredale series,' and many opportunities were offered 
during the day of effecting this purpose, as well as of studying the 
physical geology of one of Yorkshire's finest dales.
Perhaps a 
section of the beds carefully taken by Mr. Rodwell, engineer and 
agent of the Keld Head Lead-mines, which he has kindly allowed 
to be used, will not only simplify present remarks, but, as being 
thoroughly authentic, will be most useful for future reference, as it 
shows the relative position and the thickness of the beds so well.
SECTION OF STRATA TAKEN AT THE KELDHEAD MINES, 
WENSLEYDALE.
ft.
in.
ft.
in.
2 
Grits 
36 
0 
Undersett Limestone 
o 
Plate or Shale 
6 
0 
(fish remains) ...
13 
0 
Grit 
36 
0 
Plate or Shale 
27 
0 
Hasle Grit 
6 
0 
Soapy Gritstone ...
21 
6 
Plate and Girdles...
24 
0 
Plate or Shale 
27 
0 
Stone Plate or Shale 
6 
0 
ui 
Thin Limestone ...
9 
0 
hJ 
Coal ...
...
6 in.
to 3 
6 
W 
Preston Grit 
36 
0 
^Grit and Shale 
66 
0 
SER 
Plate and Shales ...
6 
0 
/^Crow Chert 
19 
0 
Limestone (fossiliferous) 
58 
0 
Crow Limestone 
16 
0 
W - 
Sandstones and Shales ...
60 
0 
Grit 
36 
0 
Keldhead Limestone...
64 
0 
Plate or Shale 
18 
0 
<l 
Q 
Flagstone (Gilbert Scar)...
18 
0 
K 
Girdles and vShales 
12 
0 
Plate or Shale 
II 
0 
Main Chert or Red Beds 
0 
Gritstone and Shale 
53 
0 
S 
(Harmby Quarries, 
Grit and Limestone 
13 
0 
fish remains) ...
42 
0 
Plate and Shale ...
24 
0 
Thin Limestone ...
7 
0 
Ash Bank Limestone...
42 
0 
< 
Q 
Shales (Black Quarry) ...
7 
0 
Shales and Sandstones 
w 
Main Limestone (Ley- 
alternately 
60 
0 
o 
burn Shawl) 
63 
0 
, Six Fathom Limestone 
61 
0 
Giit 
30 
0 
'Shales and Limestone 
30 
0 
Plate or Shale 
24 
0 
11 
Limestone...
90 
0 
Sandstone and Coal 
16 
0 
Grit (West Burton) 
24 
0 
Plate or Shale 
28 
0 
0 E 
Limestone (thickness not 
known).
As Mr. Davis has so well observed, the alternations of limestone, 
shale, and sandstone in the Yoredale rocks indicate repeated changes 
in the level of the land.
At one time the water was deep enough 
for the existence of the animal forms of life which originated the 
limestone ; at others, the mud, brought from some adjacent land, 
formed accumulations represented by the shales, probably in much 
shallower water.
The sandstones again point to extensive shore 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IN LOWER WENSLEYDALE.
deposits and the immediate proximity of land.
Mr. Horne now 
conducted the geologists by a mercifully easy gradient, considering 
the high state of the thermometer, to the summit of Redmire Scars, 
some 1,100 ft.
above sea-level.
And now ample opportunity offered 
of grasping the physical geology of the wide expanse before us.
We were now on the escarpment so prominent from the valley, and 
upon the bed known as the ' Main Limestone,' and Mr. Horne 
pointed out, directly in front, but on the opposite side of the valley, 
an escarpment just below the grit-capped summit of Pen hill, and 
forming part of that gigantic elevation, the same bed of limestone 
dipping gradually eastwards, a conclusive proof that Wensleydale is 
a valley of denudation.
The view from this point was expansive 
and beautiful.
To the left, above the historic pile of Middleham, 
rose the wooded heights of East Witton Fell.
Then before us 
rose the giant mass of Penhill, and to the west, peeps of Bishopdale 
and Waldendale were afforded, whilst more to the right, the flat- 
topped summit of Addlebrough was conspicuous.
Heights in Craven 
and North-western Yorkshire bounded the view.
Below was the 
verdant smiling valley, rich in pastoral beauty, with the silvery Ure 
meandering through it.
This was a scene not only conveying 
splendid practical lessons in denudation, but also inspiring an ardent 
love for nature.
We now traversed the summit of the escarpment 
in an eastwardly direction, the fresh mountain breeze being a 
pleasant contrast to the murky, smoke-laden atmosphere of the 
West Riding.
A descent was then made, when the party, under the guidance of 
Mr. Rod well, visited the Keld Head Lead-mines, when the debris 
at the mine was carefully examined, and ample explanations given as 
to the working, etc., of the mine by the conductor.
The hill was 
again ascended, and half-way between the river and the summit 
Mr. Horne pointed out the remains of small homesteads, alleged to 
be of early British origin ; whoever the builders were, they had a 
large stock of common sense.
These homesteads are always on the 
gritstone.
Gritstone is not only drier in its nature than limestone, 
but also easier to build a rude wall with.
Agani, these grits always 
rest upon shales which throw out the water which liad percolated 
through the upper beds : thus they were sure of good water close at 
hand.
Another easy ascent brought the party to the top of Leyburn 
Shawl, that splendid terrace of limestone overlooking Wensleydale.
Its highest part is about 870 ft.
above sea- level, and as the whole 
length is traversed by carefully-kei)t paths, fine views of the dale are 
readily obtained.
Mr. Horne now called a halt to inspect the ' Lady 
Algitha ' Cave, but an amusing delay was occasioned by the dis- 
Jiiiie 1888.
176 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IN LOWER WENSLEYDALE.
coYeiy that some mischieYOUs vertebrates had devoured the candies 
necessary for exploration.
When a fresh supply was obtained, the 
party entered it by two at a time to inspect the interior : the entrance 
is only 4 ft.
4 in.
wide by 4 ft.
high, but inside it is ft.
high and 
5 ft.
to 7 ft.
wide.
The lower part of the cave, when discovered,, 
was filled with clay, the upper part with cave-earth and stones, and 
throughout were found teeth and bones of animals, also some 
charcoal.
At the bottom of the cave there is a fissure varying from 
7 in.
to 12 in.
wide, filled with clay : in this, bones were also found.
Inside the cave likewise were found broken pieces of slightly-burnt 
pottery — some only dried — and several millstone grit rubbing-stones.
At the keepers lodge a detour was made to the left by a few knights 
of the hammer to visit the Black Flags Quarrv', when they were 
gravely informed by the workmen it was the only one of the kind in 
England !
Here the ' main hmestone ' is quarried extensively, which 
is overlaid by some extremely variable beds.
Some are impure, 
earthy limestones ; others hard, irregularly bedded sandstones ; whilst 
others again are sandstones of a flaky, micaceous character.
Some 
l)eds are very fissile, and intensely hard and durable ; they are thus 
well adapted for roofing and flagging purposes.
Some large slabs, 
five or six ft.
square, were noted as having been obtained from this 
quarry.
The beds are in places very bituminous.
The hungry 
geologists now made a determined attack upon the resources of the 
' Golden Lion' Hotel, with marked success, after which an adjourn- 
ment was made to the Public Hall, where Prof Green, with 
celerity, disposed of the business of the General Meeting.
The evening was far too fine for indoor debate, and moreo\"er 
a splendid section remained to be seen at the Harmby Limestone 
Quarries, about a mile east of I>eyburn.
Thither the section departed, 
to work until the time approached for return.
Here there is a truly 
imposing section of the 'main chert," or upper portion of the 'main 
limestone, or what is locally known as the 'red beds,' exposed.
The 
latter name is owing to the limestone having a reddish hue in many 
places, from oxidation.
It is very massive and cr)-stalline, presenting, 
when weathered, a very coarse exterior ; this, under a lens, showmg 
an infinite multiplicity of broken crinoids and shells.
Mr. Home 
has obtained many of his most beautiful fossils at this quarry.
The 
fossils contain, amongst others, teeth and spines of fishes, and several 
specimens were obtained.
On the return to Leyburn Station, Mr.
Home showed to the members a fine glaciated surface of limestone; 
he has had it carefully preserved, and properly too, for it is easy of 
access, and the stria; on the surface are well defined.
They are in 
an easterly direction, showing clearly the direction of the glacier 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS IN LOWER WENSLEVDALE.
177 
which once descended Wensleydale.
The geologists felt, on parting, 
that the examination of the sections alluded to, and the instruction 
they had received on the geology of Wensleydale from so experienced 
a geologist as Mr. Horne, had added largely to their practical know- 
ledge, and constituted the day's work most valuable.
For the Botanical Section the following report was given by Mr.
M. B.
Slater, of Malton, who was the only officer of the Section 
present : — A short ramble of four hours' duration is only sufficient 
to give a glimpse of the fine and extensive district of Wensleydale.
The ' Flora of Wensleydale,' by Mr. J.
Percival, given in the May 
number of The Naturalist^ includes a large list of plants that have 
been found growing in the district.
At this early season of the year 
comparatively few are yet in flower.
About eighty plants were seen 
during the excursion, many of them of general distribution, and all 
enumerated in Mr. PercivaFs list.
The following include the rarer 
plants seen : — Cardamine amara^ Codilearia officinalis^ Viola liitea 
(very abundant in some of the high pastures), Geraiiiiuii lucidiun 
{plentiful on old walls, etc.), Saxifraga gra?inlata (not uncommon in the 
high pastures above the Scar), Priinus padus^Myrrhis odoi'ata^ Adoxa 
inoschatellina^ Parietaria diffusa^ Orchis mascula.
(the only species 
of this group seen), Saxifraga hypnoides^ and Lathrcca squamaria.
For the A^ertebrate Section, its senior secretary, Mr. James 
Backhouse, jun., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., reported that, owing to the 
exceptionally fine weather, those belonging to the Vertebrate Section 
had capital opportunities of observing birds, about forty-six species 
in all being noted during the day.
The zoological programme, care- 
fully prepared by Mr. Carter, of Masham, indicates a rich avi-fauna 
for Wensleydale generally, and the species noted during the day 
show that the Leyburn district is a rich corner for research.
Among 
the most satisfactory discoveries of the day must be mentioned the 
nesting-place of the Black-Headed Gull {Larus ridibinidus), at least 
one pair of which were seen, but no nest found.
In the same place, 
too, four pairs of Redshanks evidently had eggs or young, and a 
Curlew's nest was noticed hard by, containing two eggs.
Some of 
tlie migratory species proved very common (notably the Willow 
Warbler), whilst others again appeared scarce, but possibly the late 
season may account for it in measure.
The Redstart was seen nesting, 
and all three Wagtails noted.
Three or four i^eewits' nests repaid the 
careful watchfulness of our collectors, all with eggs, most of which 
were fresh.
The Section for Micro-Zoology and Mi(TO-Botany was not 
represented, its secretary, Mr. J.
M. Kirk, of Doncaster, being 
absent, from ill-health.
June 1888.
178 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the natural history and 
physical features of the North of Eng-land.
GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1886.
We are again indebted to Messrs.
S. A.
Adamson, F.G.S., and 
Alfred Harker, M.A., F.G.S., for the geological bibliography ; to 
both gentlemen for contributing the titles and abstracts, and to the 
former for arranging and preparing the material for the printer.
Titles are cited of such papers pu])lished in 1884 and 1885 as have 
escaped notice in former instalments of the bibliography.
Papers 
which have appeared in TJie A^aturalist itself are cited but not 
abstracted.
S. A.
Adamson.
- Yorkshire, 
On the Discovery of a Stone Implement in Alluvial Gravels at Barnsley, 
[Details of a section exposed in excavating a gasholder tank in the gravel ; a 
singular implement of Mica-schist discovered.] Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and 
Polyt.
Soc, 1S86, pp.
281-2S2.
S. A.
Adamsox.
Yorkshire.
On * Recent Discoveries of Carboniferous Vegetation in Yorkshire ' 
(al)stract).
[The line examples of Stigmaria ficoidcs at Clayton near Bradford, 
and the group at Bradford reviewed ; accurate measurements of the roots, 
with details as to their geological horizon given.
A fossil tree {Dadoxyloii ?) 
at Ilkley in the Third Grits similarly described.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 
Part 2, 1885-6, pp.
71-75 ; see also Naturalist, 1886, pp.
252, 284, 309, 316, 
336, 348.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
[Reports of] Excursions (Leeds Lower Coal Measures, Nos. i, 2, and 
3).
[Description of the beds in descending order from the Beeston Bed to 
the Better Bed Coal.
Careful detailed measurements of the sections, 
by B.
Holgate, F.G.S., included.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 
1885-6, pp.
77-80.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
[Report of] Excursion to Draug-hton.
[The contortions of Mountain Lime- 
stone at l3raughton described, with angles of dip given.
Abstract of address, 
by J.
E. Bedford on causes of above included.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 
Part 2, 1885-6, pp.
80-81.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire, 
[Report of] Excursion to Bingley (Aire Valley).
[Gravel -mounds of 
Airedale described, the Aire turned out of its course by these deposits, so 
that it flows Kp the valley for a short distance and cuts a new channel through 
sandstone.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1885-6, pp.
82-83.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
[Report of] Excursion to the Shibden Valley.
[Geology of the district 
described ; characteristic fossils obtained from 'coal balls' and ' baum pots.'] 
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1S85-6, pp.
83-85.
S. A.
Adamson.
Yorkshire.
[Report of] Excursion to Wensleydale.
[Geology of the dale described, 
also an account of the discovery of the ' Lady Algitha Cave ' by W.
Plorne.] 
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1885-6, Part 2, pp.
85-87.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOORAPHV : GEOLOGY AND PAL/EONTOLOGY, I 886.
I 79 
S. A.
Adamso.v. Yorkshire.
[Report of] Excursion to Crummockdale [Fine glaciated surfaces of 
Silurian Grit observed].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1885-6, pp.
87-88.
S. A.
Ada.m.^ox.
Yorkshire.
[Report of] Excursion to the ' Hitching-stone,' Keighley Moors.
[Ol^ject 
of this excursion to solve whether this rock is a true erratic or in situ.
After 
detailed examination, result Ijeing conclusive that it is a portion of the original 
strata of Rough Rock, which once covered the moors ; therefore, a wreck 
caused by denudation, and not due to glacial action.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., I'art 2, 1885-6, pp.
88-90; see also Naturalist, 1886, pp.
333-336.
Anonymous [not signed].
Yorkshire.
Cave-hunting" in Yorkshire [Describing the well-known Wethercote (Chapel- 
le-dale), Hull and Hunt Pots (on Penyghent), Alum Pot (Ingleborough), an 
Goyden Pot fXidderdale).] Chambers' Journal, Oct. i6th, 1886, 5th series, 
iii.
657-660.
H. C.
Eea.slf:v.
Cheshire.
A Section of the Upper Keuper Beds recently exposed at Oxton 
[.Section in Wellington Road, Oxton, minutely detailed].
Proc.
Liverpool 
Geol.
Soc, vol.
V. l*art 2, 1886, pp.
134-136.
A. Bf:!,!,.
Northern Counties g-enerally.
The Succession of the Later Tertiaries in Great Britain [A compre- 
hensive discussion of the question, treating, among other deposits, of the 
Great Chalky and Purple Boulder-clay, the i^ridlington shelly patches, the 
Hessle Sanrls, the Hessle Clay, and the Upper Boulder-clay of the North- 
west, and various post-glacial formations].
Geol.
Mag., Feb. 1886; Dec. iii., 
vol.
iii., pp.
67-78.
W. Boyd Dawkins.
North of England generally.
On the Geography of Britain in the Carboniferous Period [The great 
horizontal tract of forest clad alluvia (the cause of the coal-fieldsj wa.-.
the 
delta of a mighty river, and its enormous extent implies a river of great mag- 
nitude and a continent of corresponding extent for drainage area.
Such 
continent he names Archaia, from the original massive being composed of 
Archaian rocks.
To this Archaia may be traced the pebbles and groups of 
pebbles found in the coal-seams, and which have prol^ably been brought 
down in flood -time by the roots of trees.
They are, without exception, 
quartzites, and have probably been derived from a shingle l^each of a sea 
which Ijeat against Cambrian or Silurian rocks.
The north-western continent 
of Archaia occupied the North Atlantic area, stretching from the west coast 
of Ireland and the Highlands of Scotlanrl to Greenland and the St. Lawrence 
region from the Cam];rian age, through all the succeeding periods, down to 
the close of the Miocene, and on its ever-oscillating coast-lines the British 
primary and secondary strata were accumulated].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc.
xix.
37-47.
V. B.
Bkodik.
Derbyshire.
On a Remarkable Section in Derbyshire [A sand-pit at Longcliff shows 
a series of variegated sands and clays resembling those of Alum Bay. They 
lie in a hollow of the Carboniferrjus Limestone, and the question is whether 
they are referable to the Bunter, or whether they may be remnants of 
Tertiary beds].
Geol.
Mag., .September, 1886, Decade iii., vol.
iii.
p. 432.
Dii'TON Burn.
Westmorland, Cumberland, Yorkshire.
Discovery of the Remains of Extinct Animals in Westmorland [and 
Cumberland, also at Sedbergh : remains of numerous extinct cave mammals, 
Bos pri7)ii!re)iius and B.
lon^lfrons, brown and cave Ijears, wolf, boar, cat, 
badger, horse, weasels, deer, and human bones and implements : large and 
perfect skull of beaver at Sedl)ergh].
Sci. CJoss.
, July 1886, p.
166.
June 18S8.
I So bibliography: geology and PAL/EONTOLOGY, 1886.
Samuel CiiAinvicK.
Yorkshire.
Geological Report to Malton Scientific Society [A long and interesting 
list of Fossils collected from the Cretaceous and Oolitic iormations of the 
Malton district is included, comprising many sponges and detached spicules, 
a fine spine of Asteracanihiis ornaiissifuus^ palatal teeth of Gyrodiis and 
Fycnodiis, numerous Zoophyta, Echinodermata, Lamellibranchiata, Cephalo- 
poda, and some specimens of fossil fruit named Carpolilhes cojiicus, exhibiting 
distinctly kernel, shell, and outer rind].
Malton Field Naturalists' and 
Scientific Society's Third Annual Report, 1885-6.
S. Chadwick.
Yorkshire.
Asteracanthus ornatissimus in the Middle Oolites near Malton.
Naturalist, 1886, p.
102.
F. Clowes.
Notting-hamshire.
Barium Sulphate as a Cementing- Material in Sandstone [the first record 
in the British Lsles.
The sandstone occurs near Nottingham, forming Staple- 
ford and Bramcote Hills and the Hemlock Stone.
A specimen analysed gave 
30 per cent, of barium sulphate.] Brit.
Assoc.
Report, 1885, Aberdeen, 
pp.
1038, 1039 ; Chem.
News, vol.
lii.
p. 194, Oct. i6th, 1885 ; Journ.
Chem.
Soc, Abstracts, vol.
ii.
p. 35, 1886; and Midi.
Nat., ix.
48.
E. M.
Cole.
, Yorkshire.
Geology of the Hull, Barnsley, and West Riding Junction Railway and 
Dock [Reviewed in Naturalist, June 1886, p.
191].
Hull, 1886, 60 pp., 
with sections and map.
W. G.
CoLLixGWooD.
Westmorland.
On Lake-basins of the neighbourhood of Windermere [opposing the ice- 
erosion theory of their origin].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., No. x.
1884-5.
John Cordeaux.
Lincolnshire.
Lincolnshire (General review of its Geology).
Naturalist, 1886, pp.
6-8.
J. W.
Da^ is.
Yorkshire.
On some remains of Fossil Trees in the Lower Coal Measures at 
Clayton, near Halifax [Short description of the fossil trees found at 
Clayton, Wadsley, and Queensbury].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Society, 
1886, pp.
253-256.
J. W.
Davis.
Yorkshire.
On the Exploration of the Raygill Fissure in Lothersdale [Brief 
account of the latest operations].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Society, 
1886, pp.
280, 281.
J. Vr. Davis.
Derbyshire.
Carboniferous Fish-remains from the Mountain Limestone of Derby- 
shire [Twelve species are new to Derbyshire, and five have not previously 
been described.
The specimens are from near Chapel-en-le-Frith].
Geol.
Mag., April 1886, Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
148-157.
R. M.
Deeley.
Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, etc.
The Pleistocene Succession in the Trent Basin [In this valuable con- 
tribution to the correlation of the British glacial deposits, the author divides 
the Pleistocene of the Trent Basin into three epochs, the oldest being marked 
by the absence of chalk-debris.
These three epochs are subdivided, and the 
deposits discussed in detail, with particulars of many interesting sections.
Abstract.
Proc.
Geol.
Soc, May 12th, 1886].
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Society, 
vol.
xlii.
pp.
437-480.
C. E.
De Range.
Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, etc.
Eleventh Report of the Committee, consisting of ...
. [20 names] ....
a])pointed for the purpose of investigating the Circulation of Underground 
Waters [etc.].
[Particulars are given of borings near Grimsby, Goole, Raw- 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1886.
181 
cliffe, Snaith, Selby, Donington, and Scarle or Collingham.
Prof.
Green 
furnishes particulars of the intercalated sandstones in the Yorkshire Coal- 
Measures.
G. J.
Symons quotes a numlier of ol^servations concerning 
the effect of the (bought of 1884 on the levels of wells].
Brit.
Assoc.
Report, 1885, Al)erdeen, pp.
382-390 and 394.
Crispin Dugdale.
Lancashire.
General Section of the Lower Coal Measures and Millstone Grit Rocks 
in the Forest of Rossendale, with remarks on some of the fossiliferous 
beds contained therein [General section of beds in descending order, com- 
mencing about 220 yds.
below the Arley Mine.
This succeeded by details 
of each bed and fossils pointed out.
The sandstones, with their intervening 
shales, marked the different conditions under which they were respectively 
deposited, the former containing the remains of land plants ( Ferns, Calamites, 
Sigillaria, etc.), while the shales contain a marine fauna of well-known car- 
boniferous types (Orthoceras, Goniatites, Productus, Lingula, Aviculopecten, 
etc.].
Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Soc.
, xix.
220-233.
T. W.
Embletox.
North of England generally.
Notes on Ancient Coal Mining-.
[Interesting account of the use of coal, 
etc., in Roman, Saxon, and Early English times.] Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and 
]'olyt.
Soc, 1886, pp.
257-265.
J, D.
Everett.
Lancashire.
Seventeenth Report of the Committee, consisting of .
. .
. [17 names] 
....
appointed for the purpose of investigating the Rate of Increase of 
Underground Temperature downwards [etc.
; contains observations taken in 
the Mersey Tunnel, in Denton Colliery, and at Ashton-under-Lyne].
Brit.
Assoc.
Report, Aberdeen, 1885, pp.
96, 97.
J. Starkie Gardner.
Yorkshire.
On Mesozoic Angiosperms [Describes WilUavisonia from the Yorkshire 
Oolites, and figures a supposed Monocotyledonous fruit from the same, and 
also the stem of the so-called Calainiies Beanii from Scarborough, ' one of 
the Arborescent Gramineae' (Williamson)].
Geol.
Mag., May 1886 ; Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
193-204, with plates v.
and ix.
A. II.
Green.
North of England generally.
On *The Drift of the North of England' (Abstract).
[Varieties of drift 
described, likewise its distribution and origin.
Yorkshire dales filled by 
glaciers, but these were local.
Immense quantity of drift in Lancashire and 
Cheshire accounted for, also classified.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 
1885-6, pp.
64-66.
C. D.
Hardcastle.
Yorkshire.
On * Metamorphic Rocks' (Abstract).
[Process of metamorphism in difierent 
stages described ; Sandstones from Meanwood Road, Leeds, Middle Grits of 
Bolton Woods and Potternewton, examined.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., 
Part 2, 1885-6, pp.
62-64.
C. D.
Hardcastle.
Yorkshire.
Inaugural Address to Leeds Geol.
Assoc.
(Abstract).
[Describes geology 
of Ingleton and district.
The Ingleton coal-field, the unconformity at 
Thornton Force, the Thornton Hall and Tow Scar faults, and the Trap-dikes 
crossing the Ingleton Beck, detailed.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 
1885-6, pp.
66-69.
At,fred Harker.
Yorkshire.
Jointing in the Mountain Limestone of the Austwick District.
Nauiralist, 
1886, p.
102.
Alfred Harker.
Yorkshire.
Joints cutting through Pebbles.
Naturalist, 1886, p.
102.
June 1888.
i82 bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1886.
W. Hewitt.
Lancashire.
Notes on the Topography of Liverpool [Brief geological account including, 
localities of Boulder Clay and list of quarries].
Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc, 
Part 2, vol.
V. 1886, pp.
145-155.
B. HoLGATE.
Yorkshire.
On *The Leeds Lower Coal Measures' (Abstract).
[Outcrops of following 
beds of coal noted at Leeds, viz., the Better Bed, the Black Bed, the Crow- 
Coal, and the Beeston Bed.] Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1886, 
pp.
49-50.
B. Holgate.
Yorkshire.
Leeds Lower Coal Measures [Detailed measurements of sections occurring 
at Hunslet, Newtown and Dolly Lane, Leeds, given].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1885-6, pp.
77-80.
T. V.
Holmes.
Cumberland.
Purple-grey Carboniferous Rocks and the Whitehaven Sandstone 
[Rocks similar to the Whitehaven Sandstone occur on almost every horizon 
throughout the Carboniferous System in Cumberland].
Trans.
Cumb.
and 
Westm.
Assoc., No. xi.
1885-6; pp.
146-148.
Wm. Horne.
' Yorkshire.
On Pre-historic Remains recently discovered in Wensleydale [The 
geology of the Leyburn district briefly described, and an account given of the 
discovery of the Lady Algitha Cave].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc, 
1886, pp.
175-179- 
T. McKenny Hughes.
Yorkshire, Westmorland.
On some Perched Blocks and associated Phenomena.
[A discussion of 
certain erratic blocks on limestone pedestals, which they have protected from 
weathering.
They occur near Cunswick Tarn (W.
of Kendal), on Farleton 
Knot (between Carnforth and Kendal), and on Norber Brow (in Craven).
The author supposes them to represent the last push of the retreating great 
glacier].
Abstract, Proc.
Geol.
Soc, June 23rd, 1886.
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xlii.
pp.
527-539.
See also Geol.
Mag. Aug., 1886, Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
375-376.
Osmund W.
Jeffs.
Cheshire.
Notes on the occurrence of Copper in the Keuper Sandstone at the 
Peckforton Hills [Geology of the region briefly described ; references 
to localities where Copper has been found given, also analyses of specimens].
Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc, Part 2 of vol.
v., 1886, pp.
139-145.
T. Rupert Jones and J.
W. Kirkry.
Northern Counties and Isle of Man.
Notes on the Distribution of the Ostracoda of the Carboniferous 
Formations of the British Isles [Contains tables showing the strati- 
graphical distribution of these entomostracans through the Carboniferous 
formations, preceded by some notice of the classifications of these strata].
Quart.
Journ.
Cieol.
Soc, 1886, vol.
xlii.
pp.
496-514.
T. R.
Jones and J.
W. Kirkbv.
Northumberland, etc.
On Some Fringed and other Ostracoda from the Carboniferous Series.
[Records a new genus Beyrichiopsis, and figures and decribes species of it 
from Plashetts and other locahties.] Geol.
Mag., Oct. 1886 ; Dec iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
433-439, and plates xi.
and xii.
Westmorland, Furness, Northumberland, 
T. Rutert Jones and James W.
Kirkky.
Durham, Cumberland.
Notes on the Paleozoic Bivalved Entomostraca.
— No. xxii.
On some 
undescribed Species of British Carboniferous Ostracoda \Bythocypris 
phillipstana Jones & Holl., var.
nov.
carbouica J.
& K.
, B.
cimeola J.
& K., 
B. cornigera J.
& K., B.
pyrnla sp.
nov., B.
thraso J.
& K., Cyther: 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1886.
183 
gyripiinctata J.
&. K., Lepei'ditia armsfi'ongiana J.
& K.
, L.
scotoburdigahfisis 
(Hibbert), L.
obesa].
& K., L.
covipressa J.
& K.
, L.
lovicensis sp.
nov., L, 
CLCJita J.
<ic K., Beyrichia radiata J.
& K., B.
longispina sp.
nov,.
^5".
tiiberculos- 
piiiosa sp.
no\-.,B.
biarsa sp.
nov., BcyricJiiella ventricoriiis ] .
& K.
, Kirkbya 
tficollina \.
& K.
, Cythcrella reticjiiosa J.
& K., C valida ].
K. var.
nov.
affiliata^ Bythocytherc aiitiqiia sp.
nov., yoioigiaita sp.
nov., Argillcecia 
ceqitalis J.
Os: K.
, Aglaia cypi-idiforniis T.
c\: K., XcSiOlcberis stibcorbiiloides 
J. (N: K., Cythere obtusa sp.
nov., Bairdia legnmcii J.
.N: K.
, ^.
siibclongata 
J. & K.
, var.
major ^ cited from numerous localities in Xurthumberland, Cum- 
berland, Furness, and Westmorland].
Ann.
& Mag. Xat.
Hist., Oct. 1886, 
Series 5, vol.
xviii.
pp.
249-269, and plates vi-ix.
A. J.
Jl'kes-Browne.
Northern Counties in general.
The Student's Hand-book of Historical Geology, xi-^597 pp., London, 
1886.
[This manual is illustrated ijy many well -selected sections, and the 
matter brought well up to date.
Adopting Lapworth's tripartite division of 
the Lower Paleozoic, the author gives a good resume of the Cambrian, 
Ordovician, and Silurian rocks of the Lake District.
In the Carboniferous 
he inclines to Tate's classihcation of the Xorthumbrian type, as adopted by 
the Sur\'ey (pp.
207, 208).
The Dyas and Trias of the North of England 
are well summarised ; also the Jurassic rocks — which are presented under 
unfamiliar divisions — and the Cretaceous.
In describing the Glacial deposits 
of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, the author adopts the two-fold division, for 
which he has given reasons elsewhere.] 
A. J.
Jukes-Browx.
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire.
On the Application of the term Neocomian [The author attempts to 
correlate the Lower Cretaceous strata of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire with 
their equivalents in other areas].
Geol.
Mag., July 1886, Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
311-319.
J. D.
Kendall.
The Iron Ores of the English Secondary Rocks.
Trans.
North of 
England Inst, of Mining and Mech.
Eng., vol.
xxxv.
p. 105, 1S86.
Percy F.
Kendall.
North of England generally.
On the Carboniferous Volcanoes of Great Britain.
[The toadstone of 
Derbyshire alluded to.
and the fact of a bed of baked mud lying between 
this and the Mountain Limestone, in Tideswell Dale, having assumed a 
columnar structure.] Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Soc, vol.
xix.
Parts 6 and 7, 
PP- 133-151- 
H. ^VALLLs Kew. Lincolnshire.
A Post-Glacial Ravine [at ^Velton Yale near Louth, described and plan given].
Nat. World, Feb. 1886, iii.
21-22.
Robert Kidstox.
Northern Counties generally.
Catalogue of the Palaeozoic Plants in the Department of Geology and 
Palaeontology, British Museum (Natural History), pp.
288, with list of 
works quoted and index.
[This invaluable work of reference for pala^o- 
botanists is an enumeration of the Palceozoic Plants with their synonymy.
The classification employed is that at present adopted by the majority of 
palreo-phytologists, with slight modifications.
The plants are treated under 
the four great divisions of the Paleozoic rocks, viz., Permian, Carboniferous, 
Devonian, and Silurian.
In the Botanical arrangement the Family is first 
given, following which is the Genus, with its author's name, date of its 
publication, and reference to the work in which it first appeared.
The 
specific name adopted follows, with its synonymy, the oldest name of the 
plant in question being used.
The geological horizon of the specimen then 
follows, after which the locality ; there are many hundreds of references to 
localities in the North of England.
In the Index, the accepted names of 
genera and species are printed in ordinary type, the synonyms in italics].
lune 1888.
1 84 bibliography: geology and PAL.tONTOLOGY, 1 886.
L. G.
DE KoNiXi K and yi.
Lohest.
Yorkshire.
Notice sur le Parallelisme entre le calcaire Carbonifere du nord-ouest de 
I'Angleterre et celui de la Belgique [Compares the beds which uncon- 
forniably overhe the Sihirians in the Ingleborough district with the Carbon- 
iferous Limestone of Belgium].
Bulletin de I'Acad.
Roy. de Belg.
, 3me ser., 
torn.
xi.
No. 6, i886.
Noticed in Geol.
Mag., October i886; Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
463, 464.
G. AV.
Lamplugh.
Yorkshire.
On Glacial Shell-beds in British Columbia [with discussion ; these deposits 
are pointed out as closely resembling those at Bridlington].
Abstract.
Proc.
(ieol.
Soc, April 7th, 1886.
G. A.
Lebour.
Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire.
Outlines of the Geology of Northumberland and Durham.
1886, New- 
castle-upon-Tyne ; 156 pp.
and 5 plates.
Second edition as regards Northum- 
berland.
[Reviewed in Nature, Jnly 26th, 1887, and in Naturalist for Sep- 
tember 1887.
G. A.
Lebour.
Durham.
On some recent Earthquakes on the Durham Coast, and their probable 
cause [see Bibliography for 1885 for Abstract].
Brit.
Assoc.
Report, 1885, 
Aberdeen, pp.
1013-1015.
H, Carvill Lewis.
Northern Counties generally.
Comparative Studies upon the Glaciation of North America, Great 
Britain and Ireland [Abstract of paper read before British Association.
The southern edge of the great ice-sheet, as marked by a great terminal 
moraine, is traced from Macclesfield, by Burnley and Skipton, to Whitby.
Great glaciers descended Airedale and Wensleydale.
A branch of the ice- 
sheet was forced eastward through Stainmoor Pass.
The author does not 
believe in any submergence of more than 450 ft.].
Nature, Nov. 25th, 1886, 
vol.
XXXV.
pp.
89-91.
E. LovETT.
Yorkshire.
Notes on the Glacial Deposits and other interesting Geological Features 
of North Yorkshire.
Proc.
and Trans.
Croydon M.
and N.
H. Club, 
vol.
iii.
p. 37, 1886.
Frank E.
Lott.
Derbyshire.
[Remarks upon the Geological features of the district within 20 miles of 
Burton-on-Trent, introductory to a list of] the Lepidoptera of Burton-on- 
Trent and neighbourhood.
Entomologist, July 1885, vol.
xviii, pp.
178.
[Editor of Maxx Note-Book].
Isle of Man.
Geological Survey of the Island [of Man : merely a note that Prof.
W. Boyd 
Dawkins has commenced one].
Manx Note-Book, No. 8, Oct. 1886, vol.
ii.
p. 191.
P. H.
^L\RR0^v.
Cheshire.
On 'Triassic Sandstones of West Cheshire' (Abstract).
[These rocks 
result from re-deposition of the palaeozoic rocks after denudation.
Beautiful 
examples of current-bedding noted, particularly in a section running through 
Wallasey.
Conditions of deposition reviewed, and composition of the 
triassic rocks described.] Trans.
Liverp.
Geol.
Assoc., vol.
xi.
1885-6, pp.
18-21.
R. ^^ELDOI.A. Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, Cumberland.
The Great Essex Earthquake of the 22nd of April, 1884 [felt as far as 
Ijrigg and Leeds ; reference made to previous earthquakes ; a terrible one in 
A.D. 261 in Cumberland ; one in April 1185, in Lincoln, damaging the 
Cathedral].
Trans.
Herts Nat. Hist.
Soc, vol.
iv.
Pt. i (May 1886), pp.
23-32.
HutiH Miller.
Cumberland.
On the Geology of the Silloth Dock.
Proc.
Edinb.
Roy. Phys.
Soc, 
Session 1884-5, p.
338, 1885.
Naturaiis 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALtEONTOLOGY, i886.
185 
Hr(;ii Mii.LKR.
Northumberland.
On the Classification of the Carboniferous Limestone Series ; Nor- 
thumbrian Type [reasserts the classitication proposed twenty years back 
by Tate].
Abstracts of Brit.
Assoc.
J^apers, Nature, Sept.
23rd, 1886, \-oI.
xxxiv.
p. 515.
J. H.
Mo.\(jK>[A.\.
Yorkshire.
On * The Volcanic History of Eng-land ' (Abstract).
[Castle Rigg, in the 
Lake District, shown to l)e the neck of an ancient volcano].
Trans.
Leeds 
Geol.
Assoc., Part 2, 1886, pp.
56-58.
J. R.
Mortimer.
Yorkshire.
On the Habitation Terraces of the East Riding- [A descrii)tion of the 
lance-pointed terraces or platforms, which are visible on many of the steei> 
hill-sides of the Yorkshire Wold valleys].
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc, 1886, pp.
221-224.
H. Alleyne Nicholson.
Yorkshire, Derbyshire, and Northumberland.
On the Genus Fistulipora, M'Coy, with Description of several species 
[including F.
incriistans from Bolland, Derbyshire, and Redesdale].
Ann.
and Mag. Nat.
Hist., 1885, 5th Series, vol.
xvi.
pp.
496-517, and plates 
xv-xviii.
[pp.
500-505].
H. M.
Or-Meroi).
Cheshire.
On some markings upon a sandstone flag- at Tyldesley.
[The flag from 
the Lower Coal Measures ; the markings seemed to Mr. Ormerod to be that 
of a reptilian animal — like that of Keraterpeton\ Trans.
Manchester ( leol.
Society, Part 12, vol.
xviii.
pp.
293-295.
R. Owen.
Northern Counties, etc.
British Earthquakes and their Seismic Relations [Of the 399 P3ritish 
earthcjuakes recorded in Mallet's Catalogue, 315 are connected with a great 
circle drawn through Stromboli and Hecla, and passing near Colchester, 
Lincoln, and York].
Proc.
Amer.
Assoc.
Advancem.
Sci. for 1884, pp.
438- 
433, with map : 1885.
Horace Pearce.
Westmorland.
Glacial Action near Grasmere [Great number and size of glacial moraines 
near the outlet of Easdale Tarn briefly alluded to].
Sci. Goss.
, Aug. 1886, 
p. 189.
J. Petersen.
Northumberland.
Analyses of Enstatite and Labradorite from the Enstatite-Porphyrite 
of the Cheviot Hills.
[The rock is the Hypersthene-andesite described by 
TealL] Zeitschr.
fiir Krystallogr.
u. Mineral, vol.
\i.
pp.
69-70.
(Quoted in 
abstr., Journ.
Chem.
Soc, vol.
1. p.
211 : 1886.
G. H.
Philii'sox.
Northern Counties.
[Review of Excursions, in Presidential Address; Hexham and district; 
Alston, for Cross Fell and llartside (the ' Clreat Sulphur \'ein " noted) : Low 
Row and district ; Leyburn, Loftus, and Staithes (Boulder of Shap noted at 
Hammersea, decription of Rockcliff ) ; Seaton Delaval and Blyth].
Nat.
Hist.
Trans, of Northumb.
and Durh., vol.
viii.
I'art 2, pp.
278-291.
J. PosTi.ETHw'AiTK.
Cumberland.
The Mineral Springs near Keswick [comprise saline waters at BrandLy 
Mine and Saltwell Park, and a chalybeate spring at Wood-end Mine.
| 
Proc.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc., No. xi.
(1885-6), \^\^.
142- 145.
Joseph pREsrwrcK.
Northern Counties generally.
Geology, Chemical and Physical : vol.
i, j^p.
472.
with maps, plates, and 
diagrams.
[This magnilicenl work contains many references to the physical 
geology of the North of luiglantl, amongst which may be noted Carboniferous 
Limestone of Derbyshire, Durliani.
and Xorthmnberland, p.
145 ; faults in 
June 188S.
1 86 BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1 886.
the Manchester coal-field (with section), p.
252 ; Jointed Limestone at Rich- 
mond, Yorkshire, p.
273 ; slate of Patterdale quarries (with section), p.
262 ; 
mountain system of North of England, p.
292 ; slates of Kirkby Lonsdale, 
p. 279 ; unconformable strata in Westmorland (with section), p.
297 ; Coal- 
measures near Appleton, Yorks.
(with section), p.
299 ; Derbyshire (Fluor 
spar with fossils, p.
315 ; galena veins, pp.
321-330 ; clay altered by toad- 
stones (with section), p.
401) ; Cumberland (Jointed Triassic rocks, p.
273 ; 
mineral veins of Alston Moor, with ground plan and sections, pp.
319, 320 ; 
clay veins, p.
321 ; lead lodes, pp.
321-330; mineral veins, p.
335 ; iron 
ore, p.
349); iron ores in Lincolnshire, pp.
355-356; igneous rocks near 
Borrowdale, p.
382 ; old volcanic neck at Castle Head, Keswick, p.
382 ; 
old volcanic ash of Skiddaw, p.
382 ; intrusive basalt of Northumberland, 
p. 400 ; coal altered in Durham, p.
401 ; granite of Eskdale and Skiddaw, 
P- 425]- 
J. Prestwich.
Northern Counties generally.
On Underground Temperatures ....
[A complete record of temperature 
observations in mines, wells, bore-holes, etc., including many in Lancashire, 
Durham, and other northern counties.] Proc.
Roy. Soc, vol.
xli, pp.
1-116, 
1886.
T. Mellard Reaue.
Northern Counties generally.
The Origin of Mountain Ranges, pp.
359, maps, plates, and diagrams.
[This valuable work is full of descrijDtions of remarkable geological features 
in the North of England, amongst which may be named the Pennine Chain, 
pp.
32, 76, 77, 171, 320; Vale of Eden, pp.
79, 80, 321 ; denudation of 
Lancashire and Cheshire since Trias, p.
79 ; Craven fault at Giggleswick 
Scar (witli plate), pp.
80, 81 ; fault in Mersey Tunnel, p.
104 ; Yorkshire 
Coal Field, sections exhibiting characteristic features of normal faulting (with 
plate), pp.
106, 107 ; Synclinal at Wheetam near Skipton (with plate), p.
179 ; 
Anticlinals at Draughton near Skipton (with plate), p.
179, and at Aldecar 
Wood (Notts.), p.
219; effects of pressure on Scar Limestone, p.
179; con- 
tortions in Chalk at Staple Nook, Flamborough Head, pp.
218, 219 ; 
Slickensides in Keuper sandstone (Cheshire, Liverpool, etc.), pp.
275, 276; 
destruction of all beds above New Red in N.W. of England, p.
324.] 
T. Mellard Reade.
Lancashire.
Notes on a Bed of Fresh-water Shells and a Chipped Flint lately 
found at the Alt Mouth.
[The shells, consisting of Lymneics lyvinea, L.
peregra, Cydas cornea^ and Planorbis spiroj'bis, were crowded in a bed of 
mixed peat, sand, and mud ; immediately under the sandhills, close to this 
bed, a small flint flake was found].
Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc, Part 2 
of vol V.
(1886), pp.
137-139.
Charles Ricketts.
Cheshire.
On Footprints and Plants in the Trias at Oxton Heath.
[In the making 
of a sewer at Oxton many slabs of Keuper sandstone were exposed, bearing 
upon them casts of the footprints of quadrupeds and of the impressions of 
leaves of plants.
The bird-like imprints of Rhynchosaiiyiis exceedingly 
plentiful.] Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc, Part 2 of vol.
v. (1886), pp.
168, 169, 
A. S.
Stevenson.
Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire, Westmorland.
[Review of Excursions in Presidential Address ; Talkin Tarn (remark- 
able row of pot-holes in red sandstone) ; Settle and district (pot-holes in 
conglomerate at Kirkby Stephen, Victoria Cave, Malham, Ingleborough 
Caves, and Gaping Ghyll) ; Crag Lough ; Barnard Castle (Balderdale inves- 
tigated) ; Otterburn (some fossil footprints examined) ;• and Morpeth].
Nat.
Hist.
Trans, of Northumb.
and Durham, Part 2 of vol.
viii.
pp.
225-239.
W. Stevenson.
Yorkshire.
A Post-Glacial Forest in Hull.
[Remains of a forest of Scotch fir and 
oak, found about low- water level, covered by 12 or 13 ft.
of warp].
Eastern 
Morning News, Aug. 1886 ; and anonymous article in Sci. Goss., Sep. 1886, 
P- 214.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1886.
187 
M. Stirrup.
Lancashire.
Fall of Roof in a Mine at Little Lever.
[A huge mass of fine-grained, 
slightly micaceous sandstone, with a polished carbonaceous coating (said in a 
newspaper to be a meteorite), fell from the roof and killed a workman.
In 
discussion, Mr. Wild said this was not a boulder, but a pocket of sandstone.] 
Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Society, vol.
xix.
Part 5, pp.
109-114.
M. Stirrup and H.
H. Bolton.
Lancashire.
Boulder and Fossil Plant from the Gannister Coal, Bacup.
[Boulder 
embedded in the roof, close to the top of the coal, in the Old Meadow Pit.
P'ossil identified by Prof.
Williamson as a terminal bunch of leaves of a species 
of Cordaites, and found in the same mine ] Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Soc, 
vol.
xix, Part 10, pp.
233-235, with photograph.
H. B.
Stocks.
Yorkshire.
On a Concretion called Acrespire.
[A local name for some curious con- 
cretions in the Millstone Grit.
Analyses of specimens from Ringby and 
Lightcliffe, near Halifax ; also for comparison, one of a white sandstone 
from Halifax.
The essential difference is that the acrespire contains 
about 32 per cent, of carbonate of lime.] Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc, 1886, pp.
149, 150.
A. Strahan.
Lancashire and Cheshire.
On the Glaciation of South Lancashire, Cheshire, and the Welsh 
Border.
[About Liverpool the average direction of glacial striae is N.
28° W.
; 
further up the Mersey there is a slight deflection towards the east.
The 
materials of the drift, both matrix and boulders, have come from the north- 
west.] Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, 1886, vol.
xlii.
pp.
369-391.
Abstract in 
Geol.
Mag., June 1886, Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
Zi'^'ZZZ- 
A. Strahan.
Lincolnshire and Yorkshire.
Notes on the Relations of the Lincolnshire Carstone.
[The author 
makes the Carstone conformable to the Red Chalk above, and probably 
unconformable to the Tealby Series below, thus forming the basement-bed of 
the Chalk.
It thins out and disappears to the north].
Abstract, Proc Geol.
Soc, June 23rd, 1886; Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xlii.
pp.
486-493.
Frederick Swinnerton.
Isle of Man.
Flints at Port St. Mary [detailed description of a find of a deposit denoting 
an ancient settlement].
Manx Note-Book, No. 6, April 1886, vol.
2, pp.
91,92.
J. E.
Taylor.
North of England generally.
Our Common British Fossils and where to find them, pp.
336, with index 
and 331 woodcuts of fossils.
[This work, invaluable to fossil collectors, is 
divided into the following chapters : — Fossil sponges, etc.
; Corallines, Corals, 
Encrinites, Star-Fishes and Sea Urchins, Annelids, Trilobites and other 
Crustacea, Polyzoa, Brachiopoda, Mollusca (Bivalves and Univalves), Cepha- 
lopods.
Throughout the entire volume, localities given where above fossils 
may be readily found.] 
J. J.
H. Teall.
Derbyshire, Yorkshire, and Northumberland.
British Petrography.
[This valuable work gives descriptions of typical 
British rocks, illustrated by coloured plates of thin sections.
Among the 
rocks already figured are the Olivine-Dolerite of Tidcswell Dale, Dolerite 
dyke of Tynernouth, Enstatite-IJolerite (Whin Sill) of Middleton, and 
Felspar- Augite rock of Shankhouse, Xortliumljcrland.
The wt)rk is adver- 
tised to be completed in 25 monliil)' parts.] Parts I -10, with Plates i.-\.\.
February to Novem])er 1886, 410, Biriniiigliam.
R. H.
Tra(,)Uair.
Lancashire and Derbyshire.
New Palaeoniscidae from the English Coal-measures [describing new 
species of Elonic/itJiys, including Ji. aitkciii].
Geol.
Mag., (Jcl. 1S86, 
Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
i)p.
440-442.
W. Turner.
Cumberland.
On Fossil Bones of Mammals obtained during Excavations at Silloth.
_ Proc.
Edinb.
Roy. Phys.
Soc, Session 1884-5, PP- 333 secju., 1885.
June 1888.
iS8 bibliography: geology and pal.eoxtology, iS86.
J. Stanley Tute.
Yorkshire.
The Cayton Gill Beds.
[A bed of highly fossihferous rocks, immediately 
underlying the Plompton Grit, described.
Localities of outcrops and fossils 
given.] Prcc, Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc, 1886, pp.
265-267.
F. F.
Walton.
' Yorkshire.
Geology of the District between Market Weig-hton and the Humber.
[Describing the Liassic, Oolitic, and Cretaceous strata of the district, and 
indicating the localities of instructive sections.] Hull, 1886, 24 pages.
[Re^-iewed in Xaturalist, March 1887, pp.
88, 89.] 
Thomas Ward.
Cheshire, Yorkshire.
On Rock Salt, [Deposits of rock salt in various parts of the world and in 
all geological ages described in detail.
Borings at Middlesbrough, North- 
wich, and other places given.
Method of deposition of rock salt adduced.
The geology of the Great Cheshire Triassic Salt Lake described.
Conclusion^ 
arrived at : that our beds of rock salt have been cr)-stallized out of the 
saturated waters of salt lakes, and that their admixture of marl has been 
caused by streams running into the lake during the wet seasons, and that the 
peculiar amorphous mixture of marl and salt, known as rock salt, is the 
result of the continual growth of pure salt crystals, and their partial destruc- 
tion by mud -bearing fresh waters.] Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Society, vol.
xviii.
Part 15, pp.
396-419.
Thh..
\Vard.
Cheshire.
On the Subsidences in the Salt Districts of Cheshire : their history 
and cause.
[Subsidences of two classes, i.
Those taking the form of a 
funnel-shaped hole of var}-ing diameter and depth.
2. Those forming 
trough-shaped hollows, varying in breadth and depth.
The history of sub- 
sidences in Cheshire given.
Causes : mining of rock salt, pumping of brine, 
and also from a combination of the two.] Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Society, 
vol.
xix.
Parts 6 and 7, pp.
152-172.
T. C.
^^'ELCH.
Cumberland, Durham.
Analyses of Some Iron Ores [including Haematite from Ulverstone with 
60 "2 p.c. metallic iron, and Limonite from Weardale].
Chem.
News, Jan.
29th and Fel).
5th.
vol.
liii.
pp.
52-53, 65 : 1886.
AViLLiAM AVatts.
Lancashire.
Geologfical Sketches at Piethorn and Denshaw [The glacial phenomena, 
stratigraphy, and physical features of this district noticed in detail].
Trans.
Manchester Geol.
Soc, vol.
xix.
Part 2, pp.
47-58.
George Wild.
Lancashire.
On Section of Shaft sunk throug-h the Middle Coal Measures at 
Bardsley CoUiery, and an interesting discovery of Calamite.
[Measured 
section given, showing general character of strata passed through, also 
mineralogical and paleontological characteristics.] Trans.
Manchester Geol.
-Society, vol.
xviii.
Part 16, pp.
446-464.
A. >.
Woodward.
Yorkshire.
Notidanus Amalthei (Oppel) [describes a tooth probably belonging to this 
Selachian genus, from the Middle Lias, Whitby].
Geol.
Mag., Nov. 18S6, 
Dec. iii.
vol.
iii.
pp.
525, 526.
T. Wright.
Yorkshire.
Monograph on the Lias Ammonites of the British Islands [concluding 
part, with description (pp.
482, 483) oi AvialtJieiis loiticidaris from the iron- 
stone beds at Eston, Upleatham, and Hawsker, near Whitby.] Palceonto- 
graphical Society's vol.
for 1885, jxib.
1886.
[Yorkshire Xaturalists' Union].
Yorkshire.
[Excursion to Askern, May 24th — Xaturalist, 1886, p.
190 ; Excursion to 
Flamborough Head, June 14th — Naturalist, 1886, pp.
217-219; Excursion 
to Upper Nidderdale^ July 17th — Xaturalist, 1 886, pp.
254, 255 ; Excursion 
to Pickering for Xewtondale, August 2nd — Xaturalist, 1886, pp.
274.
275.
* NATURALIST' REPRINTS 
No. I.
— List of Land and Freshwater Mollusca of Lancashire, by Robert 
Stan DEN.
No. IL — Bird-notes from Heligoland for the year 1886, by Heinrich Gatke, 
C.M.Z.S.
No. IIL — Heligoland, by John Cordeau.x, M.B.O.U.
(with autotype plate of 
views of Mr. Gatke's garden).
NINEPENCE EACH, POST FREE.
From the Editors of 'The Naturalist,' Leeds.
This day, price One Shilling, Svo, with 20 Engravings, Part I of 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., 
Editor of the 2,rd and ^th Volumes of Yarrell's ' History of British Birds.' 
Fourth Edition.
To be completed in about 20 inonthly parts.
:FR.os:E^:Eca?TJS oisr ^:p:f'XjIC.a.'X'io2<t.
GURNEV A' JACKSON (Successors to Mr. Van Voorst), i, Paternoster Row.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural Histor}', conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G. ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
J. W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all 'reputed' species, and full 
oibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BV A.
B. EARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by Edward Aeicman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by se.arching ; bo.\ing female moths ; pairing iii>ects.
ow to obtain Larv^ by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; searching by night ; how to rear 
he larvae ; sleeving; hybernating larva: ; parasites; preserving larvae.
Pi ia uiggi.sc;; proerv- 
ing pupae; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing: relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould; cabinets and store boxes; painting; arrangement and nomenciaiurc ; number of speci- 
mens and manner of placing; transmission by post; entomological diar>' ; books.
Micko- 
lepidoptera; Coleoptera; Hv.menoptera ; Breeding of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN .'v: ALLEN, PATERNO.STER SQUARE.
THE IN^ATTJH AIjIST.
The Editors hope to />?tblish the follo7vi)ig papers within the next fexv i/io?iths: — 
Insect Migration at Heligoland.— Edm. de Selys-Longchamps ; contributed by 
John Cordeaux.
Nortli of England Specimens in the British Museum.— T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Evidences of Glacial Action near In gleton.— Robert R.
Balderston.
Conchological articles desired.
Notes on the Lapwing {Vancllns zmlgnris).—} .
A. Jacksox.
Botanical articles desired.
Bibliography of Coleoptera for 1885-6-7.
A List of some Hemiptera-Heteroptera of Lincolnshire.— J.
Eardlev Mason- 
Notes on some Diptera collected at Alford and Louth.
— H.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S, 
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is los.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s, per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c., should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
Croion 2>vo, Cloth, Illustrated.
TOPOGRAPHY AND NATURAL HISTORY 
LOFTHOUSE AND ^NEIGHBOURHOOD.
By GEORGE ROBERTS.
CONTENTS: Vol. I.
— Antiquities; Field-nomenclature; Ancient Houses; Registers; 
Charities ; Industries ; Surveys ; Statistics ; Ancient Leases ; Natural History Diary from 
1862 to 1875 ; Essays on Natural History ; Lists of Plants and Shells.
CONTENTS: Vol. II.
— Flora and Fauna; Customs; Notes on Church Sun-dials; 
Memoir of Charles Forrest ; Notes on Old Families ; Rothwell Registers ; Observations on 
Domed Nests : Natural History Diary from 1876 to 1883 ; Additional Lists of Plants and Shells.
Price of First Volume - - 5s.
Od.
,, Second Volume • 3s.
6d.
To be obtained from the Author, Lofthouse, Wakefield.
Post Free in Cardboard Covers, Is.
; Cloth, Is. 6d.
Address: — 'Flower-Land,' Sewerby Vicarage, Hull; or can be ordered through any 
Bookseller, or from the Publisher, John Hevwood, Deansoate, Manchester.
AN EASY INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY, 
FOR CHILDREN, AND FOR THE USE OF PARENTS AND TEACHERS.
Vicar of Sewerby, Hull.
' Few works are written in such a plain manner as this, especially when dealing with Botanj'.
It is one of the easiest introductions to the subject we have come across.' — Horticultural Times.
' Parents or Teachers who are able to take their children for country rambles will find here a 
No. 156.
5 JUL 
'88 
JULY 1888.
o 
(n 
"O 
v> 
a> 
u 
ito 
Edi 
Z' 
O) 
JC 
OQ 
>• 
bD 
S- 
Z 
z 
C 
CO 
Ed 
•{5 
a 
< 
CO 
0) 
I. 
c 
"O 
ti 
o 
o 
u 
a> 
c 
0) 
JO.
'o 
(U 
CO 
3 
^- 
3 
o 
E 
C 
3 
(U 
T3 
Mus> 
shoul 
he 
T3 
C 
w 
en 
ed 
3 
-J 
•a 
(A 
i 
Ro 
a. 
3 
en 
Pa 
i 
o 
c 
c 
c 
u 
"> 
«s 
ne 
c 
o 
o 
u 
t- 
V 
X 
o 
X. 
o 
1 
c 
CO 
> 
CO 
u 
O 
to 
o 
< 
t- 
3 
o 
Na 
LU 
O 
j: 
z 
I- 
< 
I 
o 
^VS^^J^ i WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
\''' 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U.
CORRESPONDERENDIR MITGLIED DFS ORNITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN.
fonfenfs: 
Evidences of Glacial Action near \x\^\e\.ox\— Robert R.
Balderston 189 to 193 
Notes on the Occurrence of Pallas' Sand-Grouse in the Spurn District in the 
Spring of ^BQB—Joh7l Cordeaux, M.B.O.U. 195 to 197 
Occurrences of Pallas' Sand-Grouse at He\\^o\a.nd— John Cor(iea7ix, M.B.O.U .
197 & 198 
The Irruption of Pallas' Sand-Grouse 198 & 199 
Denmark — y.
S. IVood; Flamborough — Matthezv Bailey; "^VxXhy — Thovias 
Stephe7iso}i ; Pickering — Herbert Prodhatn ; Nidderdale — Rd. Pnver-Crow.
Sparganium ramosum var.
microcarpum in Yorkshire— A i^.
Z^*- 200 
Notes on the Birds of the Lake District— J^^/iw IVatsofi 201 & 202 
Notes from the Spurn in the Spring of ^QSQ—Johtt Cordea7ix, M.B.O.U. 202 
Bibliography— Coleoptera, 1884, 1885, 1886, 1887 203 to 210 
Yorkshire and Lancashire Naturalists at Saddleworth ..
211 to 216 
Diptera from Alford and Louth, Lincolnshire—//^.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S.
.. 217 & 218 
Insect Migration at Heligoland — John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U 219 & 220 
Baker on Fern Allies (Review) 193 & 194 
Note-Botany 193 
Varieties of Viola odorata — W.
A .
Gain.
Note— Lepidoptera 199 
Hermaphroditism in Saturnia carpini — H.
Goss, Sec. E7it.
Soc.
Note— Coleoptera 220 
Carabus nitens in Swaledale— M^.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., M.B.O.U.
Notes and News 20* 
I 
LONDON : 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
MCCORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, GARDINGTON StREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghali, Street.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist," 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free 
The NA TURALISr.
>ccX 
TARIFF OF CHARGES FOR REPRINTS.
50 copies.
100 copies.
200 copies.
4 pages 4/6 7;- ...
...
9/6 
8 pages 5 '6 8 6 11- 
12 pages ...
...
7/- II - 16 - 
16 pages 8 6 13 6 18, - 
Covers charged extra as below — 
Plain Covers -/9 1/6 2/6 
Printed Covers ...
2/- ...
...
3/- ...
...
4/6 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds, by Howard Saunders.
I'ans 1-3.
[jNIessrs.
Gurney and Jackson.
Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club — Proceedings for the year 1887.
[The Society.
The Zoologist, June 1888.
Third Series, Vol. 12, No. 138.
[Mr. J.
E. Harting, Editor.
Charles Bailey — Obituary Notices of Anton De Bary, Asa (iray, and J.
T. Boswell, 
8vo.
Reprint, 1888, 4 pages.
' [The Author.
Manchester Geol.
Soc — Trans., Vol. 19, Parts 18 and 19.
1887-8.
[The Society.
Grevillea for June 1888, Vol. 16, No. 80.
[Dr. M.
C. Cooke, Editor.
British Assoc.
— Report of 57th [Manchester] Meeting, 8vo cloth, cii.
-7-972+ 116 pp.
[The Association.
T. D.
A. Cockerell.
— On the Nature of Seasonal Dimorphism in Rhopalocera 
(Canadian Entomologist, May 1888, xx.
86-89.
[The Author.
Natural History Transactions of Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle-on- 
Tyne, Vol. 9, Part 2, 1888.
[The Society.
Manchester Microscopical Society.
— Trans, and Ann. Rep.
for 1887.
[Society.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Society.
— Trans., Vol. 4, Part 8, April 1888.
[Society.
The Voung Collector Series.
— British Reptiles, by C.
C. Hopley.
Small 8vo, 
cloth, 94 pages.
[Swan Sonnenschein & Co.
Psyche, a Journ.
of Entom.
Vol. v.
No. 145, May 1888.
[Camb.
Ent. Club, U.S.
Science Gossip, No. 282, for June 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 16, for June 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part 102, for June 1888.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 126, for June 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 104, June 1 5, 1888.
[J.
E. Clark & B.B.LeTall, Editors, York.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Wanted.
— Living examples of Limax arborum, L.
/cvvis, and L.
tenelhis.
British Land and Freshwater Shells in exchange.
— W.
A. Gain, Tuxford, Newark.
Yorkshire Neuroptera and Orthoptera.— I am anxious during the 
present and several future seasons to work up the Neuroptera and Orthoptera of 
our county as much as possible, with a view to publishing a list of .species, with 
their localities, etc., and shall be very grateful to all entomologists (or other 
naturalists) who, when out collecting their own particular groups of objects, will 
kindly kill and pin (of course they need not trouble to set them) one or tw^o or 
three specimens of any species they may come across, and send them to me at the 
end of the season — or oftener if it be not too much trouble.
The families in the 
Neuroptera wanted are the Libellididcr {Y^x2Lgon-'^\t.%),Perlid(E {'i^\oxiQ:-K\t'&),SiaUdcr, 
Raphidiida: (Snake-flies), Ostnylidce^ Hetnerobida:, ChrysopidcB (Lacewing-flies), 
Coniopterygida, Panorpidce (.Scorpion-flies), and the Trichoptera: (Caddis-flies).
The two other British ^xow.^?,, .
Psocidce and Epheineridce (May-flies), I do not 
propose to touch at present.
The Orthoptera include the Forfcnlidce (Earwigs), 
Blattidcc (Cockroaches), Acrididic (Gra.sshopper and Locusts), and the Acheiida 
(Crickets), all of which, with the exception of the severcil universally abundant 
and distributed species, are wanted.
— Geo. T.
Porri i t, Greenfield Hou.se, 
Iluddersfield, May i8th, 1888.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pup?e, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, (S:c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalist s), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, ^Nloths, Foreign Shells, 
etc.
.is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
189 
EVIDENCES OF GLACIAL ACTION 
NEAR INGLETON.
ROBERT R.
BALDERSTON, 
Ingle ton.
The evidences of glacial action, as indicated by drift-formation, are 
very considerably manifested in the neighbourhood of Ingleton, in 
the valleys of the Greta, Twiss, and Doe. Ingleton itself stands on 
Drift 70 feet thick, whilst on the opposite side of the river, in Enter 
or Tenter Banks, the accumulation is at least 140 feet from top to 
bottom.
This deposit consists of boulders 6 feet and less in diameter, 
for the most part derived from formations seen in the neighbouring 
hills, or from others situated elsewhere, but presenting a similar 
character.
These boulders, when in situ, are found lodged indiscrim- 
inately in earth varying to some extent in character, according to the 
locality examined.
In certain places — as, for instance, the neighbour- 
hood of the church — there is a preponderance of sand and gravel as 
compared with clay ; in others, the latter substance is more inclined 
to predominate.
In the cutting between the Cemetery and Yarlsber, 
a good section of the lighter and finer description of Drift was 
recently exposed; in some places there were pockets or local deposits 
of sand, a little of a light colour, but the greater part of very dark 
hue, and mixed with small pebbles of quartz, spar, and other sub- 
stances ; few boulders of material size were to be seen, whilst the 
constituents of the gravel element, where this was predominant, were 
small in size, and not approaching the nature of shingle.
The 
general situations in which the constitution of the Drift is most satis- 
factorily examined are the river's bed or the banks immediately 
adjacent, the streams having cut their way between slopes of Drift 
towering above to the height of 100 feet to 150 feet, whence they 
have rolled or gradually been dislodged by the undermining action of 
water, so as to collect below, conveniently for the geologist's inspection.
The description of boulders prmcipally observed are: (i) Sandstones 
from the Yoredale Millstone Grit series ; (2) Black Marble occa- 
sionally from the Yoredales; (3) Productus Limestone from the same 
series ; (4) Crinoidal Limestone from the upper portion of the last- 
named formation ; (5) Mountain Limestone, upper and lower ; 
(6) Blocks and boulders from the grainless, non-fissile, Lower 
Llandeilo beds, locally known as 'Calliard'; (7) Numerous examples 
of the coarse-grained, derivative, green porphyry, found in situ in 
patches — not dykes or beds — at a point two miles distant from 
Ingleton, on the S.E. side of the Doe; finer-grained examples of 
July 1888.
N 
190 BALDERSTON : GLACIAL ACTION NEAR INGLETON.
these boulders assume the appearance of a lava-trap ; (8) One small 
and another very small block, derived from the Red-dyke, consisting 
of micaceous syenite, but none evident as having come from the 
dyke or ridge of hornblendic grey-granite; (9) Two boulders of silver- 
grey trap, specially described to the Yorkshire Boulder Committee ; 
(10) A few of the limestone examples may be referable to the Coniston 
Calcareous bed; (11) The stratum of Silurian conglomerate is also 
sparingly represented in the boulder system.
The Limestone and Sandstone boulders are usually smoothed 
and rounded; the hard, non-fissile Silurians are in many cases 
broken and angular, in others smooth and somewhat polished, and 
in a few, striated or marked by traces of glacial grooves and scratches.
The same remarks regarding angularity and the absence of rounding 
and scratching apply to the blocks of derivative, green Porphyry — 
* Silurian grits.' The small blocks of micaceous syenite have both 
been smoothed, whilst one boulder of silver-grey trap has been 
distinctly rounded, but appears to some extent to have weathered 
again rough, so as to have lost some of its smoothness ; on the other 
hand, another example is decidedly angular, yet has retained a great 
degree of smoothness.
Above the Drift, lying upon it or in the 
watercourses below its slopes, are the porphyritic boulders of class 
7, sometimes found in considerable abundance, especially in the 
last-named situation, or along the edges of the old glacier-line of the 
Doe, even up to an altitude of 800 feet on the S.E. boundary, or 
550 feet on the N.W., where the Twistleton promontory reaches its 
highest level, and where the line of junction of the glaciers of the 
Doe and Twiss must have been.
As the glaciers receded, the 
boulders falHng from the edges of that in the Doe valley were left 
on ground at a lower level, but not so in the Twiss.
Why not?
Because none of these boulders descended the Twiss valley, the 
porphyritic patches, if any, not being exposed in this dale, the 
prolongation of the strata in which those of the Doe occur, lying 
below the limestone of Kingsdale even now, for a time at least, safe 
from erosion and denudation.
How is it then, that in the lower 
part of the Twiss ravine the same blocks and boulders are found ?
The answer appears to be that the glacier of the Doe being the 
longer and stronger of the two, overlapped its partner, or drove 
it to some extent to the west, and so let fall some of its freight in 
this region.
Good examples of the green porphyritic erratics may be 
seen opposite the mouth of the Catleap stream, but a few yards further 
down the Doe, a little to the N.W. of the road on Storrs Comm.on, 
at a point near the Bull-copy, and in Fell-end pasture, above the 
same Common.
Naturalist, 
BALDERSTON : GLACIAL ACTION NEAR INGLETON.
I9I 
Clay Foruiation.
— To the E.S.E. of the Twiss, below Broad wood 
Weir, is a slight outcrop of a well-defined, grey-blue, firm boulder-clay 
of homogeneous composition and texture ; the exposure is only 
meagre, so that a perfect examination at this point is not easily made.
In a corresponding situation in the valley of the Doe, also below the 
mill-weir in that place, at the base of a steep bank called the Strands 
Waste, is an outcrop of the same bed of boulder-clay from below the 
Drift ; here, however, it appears somewhat dingier in colour, owing 
to refuse that has been thrown on to the bank above.
In Kingsdale, 
in that section called Sandymires, very thick and hard beds of clay 
may be observed in a deep and angular pool of the river, where they 
have been formed in this upper region as a basement to the lacus- 
trine basin above the ford — a basin that appears to have been cut 
through by natural agencies.
Returning to the low land in the vicinity of Ingleton, clay is also 
found in certain places above the general Drift, and is, no doubt, 
referable to the Upper Boulder Clay ; and from what I remember of 
its appearance, it is of a much darker blue than that characteristic of 
the stratum already described as lying below the glacial aggregation 
of heterogeneous rock.
From the outline of facts here presented, it may be concluded 
that the components of the Drift at Ingleton consist almost exclu- 
sively of local material, brought down by the two glaciers descending 
the valleys, and not by Icebergs, Iceflows, or the extension of larger 
glaciers from more distant and elevated mountains.
That foreign 
material in the form of ' erratics ' may from time to time have been 
added to the local deposit, when variations in physical conditions 
occurred, as in the case of the boulders of section 9, is undoubted ; 
but, although this has been most unquestionably the case, yet the 
arrivals have been so rare as not materially to have affected the con- 
stitution of the formation.
It must be noted that the extreme height to which the glacier of 
the Doe carried its porphyritic burden is 800 feet, an altitude which 
approximately corresponds to that to which the original patches or 
beds, from which the former were derived, attained ; and that these 
blocks have in some cases travelled about four miles from their 
original position.
In the instance of a few limestone and sandstone 
boulders, the distance may even be as much as seven to ten miles.
Lower down the river, at a point one or two miles from Ingleton, 
are rounded masses of soft Red Sandstone, some of which may have 
been subjected to the action of the lower extremity of the combined 
glacier, but others are undoubtedly concretionary.
The Red and 
Grey Dykes may possibly give evidence to the experienced eye of 
July 1888.
192 
BALDERSTOX 
GLACIAL ACTION NEAR INGLETON.
some glacial action, the former being crossed obliquely and the latter 
longitudinally by the course of the respective glaciers, but the signs 
are doubtful, not that there is any lack of a manifestation of the 
rounding and smoothing of the rock, but the exact agent is uncertain 
and appears in a great measure to have been purely fluviatile, whilst 
at the joints or veins, sometimes grooves, at others ridges, are con- 
spicuous as the result of variation in the chemical agents, which in 
their turn have brought about the slow decomposition of the upper 
surfaces of the dyke.
As in the case of Crummack Dale on the south-eastern slopes of 
Ingleborough, so at Ingleton, a kind of Silurian ridge, which has 
interposed itself in the way of the glacier, may be observed about 
two miles above the village at this place, where the patches of green, 
porphyritic rock appear : here, however, the rocks are massive, or if 
showing indications of dip, denote it as only slightly deviating from 
the perpendicular, whilst above Austwick the dip of the beds is in a 
contrar)- direction and as much as 45° (N.E.) from the horizontal line.
These two ridges are fine situations, in situ, for viewing the direct 
traces of glacial erosion ; the rocks, especially in Crummack Dale, 
are in many parts reduced to an almost glassy smoothness, with 
traces of striation in various places, and so high is the polish that it 
is more easily detected by the foot than by the eye, as, when wet, it 
is dangerous for a person to walk upon the inclined surfaces.
The striation of the boulders at Norber is much more notable 
than at Ingleton, where the smoothing and rounding of the somewhat 
smaller masses is a stronger feature, speaking comparatively.
At 
Ingleton the story told is not so limited to one place, is not so con- 
centrated, but, perhaps, on the whole gives a fuller history of general 
glacial action.
The Silurians of Crummack Dale are to a certain extent 
of a more impressionable character than those which have been the 
chief subject of erosion in the \'alley of the Doe, being of a somewhat 
calcareous composition, effervescing with Ho SO 4, and not 'grits'— 
although occasionally flecked with mica — as they have erroneously 
been designated, yet sufficiently proof against the weather as to have 
retained their lines and furrows for a protracted period : they appear 
referable to the Coniston-Bala series, belonging to a portion of a fold 
of the contorted strata now lying beneath the Carboniferous beds 
somewhere about Chapel-le-Dale and Weathercote, the other portion 
having been removed prior to the Carboniferous era, wdth the excep- 
tion of the lower part, now buried below^ Ingleton and stratigraphically 
above the Coniston limestone and shales here exposed, and appearing 
again in the inverted flexure of the duplicature above Austwick with 
these hard, calcareous Silurians actually overlying them.
Naturalist, 
VARIETIES OF VIOLA ODORATA IN NOTTS.
If the view regarding the derivative nature of the green, porphy- 
ritic patches of stone found in the Dale, two miles above Ingleton — 
notwithstanding certain signs of concretionary bodies and weathering 
of inherent particles — be discarded, these masses of highly crystalline 
and coarse-grained rock may be regarded as a kind of boss of igneous 
formation, occupying the centre of the fold in the Silurians, which in 
the case of the Doe and Crummack valleys vve find, either fully or in 
part, offering itself as an obstacle to the course of one or other of the 
glaciers that we observe in our mental vision traversing and grooving 
the glens of the ancient hills : but this leads us to something else, a 
total thickness of blue slates and hard non-fissile Lower Llandeiloes 
of 6,600 feet to 7,000 feet.
It is with some diffidence that certain views, here set forth, have 
been explained, when the ground has been so well explored by 
geologists already; yet the appearances are such as I have attempted 
to show them to be, whether the conclusions which one has been 
induced to form, as a result of their study, be sound or not ; it may, 
however, be added that doubtless a much greater fund of valuable 
information may be culled from the deposits of the district than the 
few notes here set down, should such, as may take advantage of the 
hints given, endeavour more arduously to do a really valuable work 
for the geological brotherhood.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Varieties of Viola odorata.
— In the neighbourhood of Tuxford, in Notts., 
the sweet violet is extremely abundant, and of great variety of colour ; various 
shades of light blue are found occasionally, though rare ; many are of a peculiar 
red, somewhat like the colour of the common red primrose — this is probably the 
variety mentioned in Ann Pratt's ' Plowering Plants of Great Britain,' where the 
following passage occurs : ' The Rev. W.
T. Bree found this flower of a red colour 
at Castle Hill, Allersley, and on the mount of "Warwick Castle.' Some years ago 
I sent several roots to Devonshire, where they increased rapidly, and no change of 
colour took place.
These occur at the commencement of the violet season, when 
the blues are the most plentiful ; afterwards the white violets are the most common, 
and with these appear flowers of a beautiful pearly-grey tint.
— W.
A. Gain, 
Tuxford, Newark, Notts., April i8th, 1888.
BAKER ON FERN ALLIES.
Handbook of the Fern Allies : A Synopsis of the (Jenera and Species of the 
Natural Orders Equisetaceae, Lycopodiace?e, Selaginellaceae, and Rhizo- 
carpere.
By J.
G. Baker, P\R.S., F.L.S., etc.
London: G.
Bell & Sons.
1887.
Demy 8vo., pp.
159.
Price 5s.
This work, the learned author's latest monograph, supplies a dis- 
tinct want.
Planned upon the same lines as Hooker and Baker s 
Synopsis Filiciim, it su])plies the systematist with a diagnostic guide 
to the whole known Fern-Allies, — the Horsetails, Club-Mosses, and 
Pilhvorts; and the two books now overview ^/// the Vascular Cryp- 
I July 1888.
194 
BAKER ON FERN ALLIES.
togams.
In' some of the genera the species are suggestively few in 
number.
Of the Horsetails, for example, — an order gigantically in 
evidence in the carboniferous era — there are now only twenty known 
in the whole world, ten being British ; a dying-out genus this one, 
clearly, under the conditions of historic times.
Per contra, the work 
before us shows there to be 334 species of Selaginella (many beautiful 
though small in size), of which only one, Selaginella spmosa^ is British, 
this being a latter-day order so to say, sub-tropical in its distribution 
for the great part, the product of some mysterious inscrutable 
environment to which modern science has not, as yet, found the key.
The fossil types of the Fern AlUes are of course not included in 
this work, since they have gradually been fully dealt with by Prof.
W. C.
Williamson in the Philosophical Trafisactions from 1871 
onwards, although truly, to quote the Preface, a study of these fossil 
types is quite needful to a correct understanding of their relations to 
one another and other plants ; and there is an excellent general 
summary of what is known about them in a translation by Goebel, of 
the systematic portion of Sachs' Text-book amplified, recently issued 
from the Clarendon Press.
The orders and genera are as follow : — II.
Equisetaceae.
One 
genus (Equisetum — 20 species, 10 of them British).
III.
Lycopodiaceae.
Four genera, i.
Phylloglossum (i species, Australasian).
2. Lyco- 
podium (94 species, 6 British).
3. Tmesipteris (i species, Polynesian).
4. Psilotum (2 species).
IV, Selaginellacese.
Two genera, i.
Sela- 
ginella (334 species, the first one only being British).
2. Isoetes 
(49 species, only two of the aquatic and one of the terrestial forms, 
and none of the amphibious, being British).
V. Rhizocarpeae.
Four 
genera, i.
Salvinia (13 species).
2. Azolla (5 species).
3. Mar- 
silea (40 species, 2 European, none British).
4. Pilularia (6 species, 
I British).
Errors, of course, as in all that Mr. Baker does, are conspicuous by 
their absence ; and but very few omissions of recently brought up 
names, etc., strike us.
Wahlenberg's beautiful variety capillare of 
Equisetum sylvaticuni does not appear to be considered worthy of 
notice.
Misprints and printer's errors are few, though there is a rather 
funny one in the (as often happens) larger conspicuous type of the 
Preface — ' amplication ' in place of ^amplification'; and Kuhlwein's 
Equisehnii litorale is usually spelled with a single, not a double, t.
Under species No. 26 on page 40, the surname ' Spruee ' should be 
' Spruce.' These are points indeed ; that they are the only ones the 
reviewer can find to descant upon is, perhaps, the highest praise that 
could be given to a work that from cover to index (which is full), 
alike in matter, type, and get-up, is both sightly and good.
— F.
A. L, 
Naturalist, 
195 
NOTES ON THE 
OCCURRENCE OF PALLAS' SAND- GROUSE 
IN THE SPURN DISTRICT IN THE 
SPRING OF 1888.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes, Ulceby, Lincohishire.
The Sand-Grouse {Syrrhaptes paradoxus) were first seen by Mr. Philip 
Loten and his father on Kilnsea Warren, on May i8th, at about 
4.30 p.m.
— wind S.E.
(4) — four birds travelling overhead, and within 
easy gunshot.
They came from the direction of the sea on to the 
Warren.
At the same time, between four and five o'clock, C.
Hopper, 
near Spurn Lighthouses, saw five arrive in the same manner, and 
pitch near the chalk embankment on the Humber side.
In the after- 
noon of this day Mr. Sergent, of Welwick, saw a covey of twenty on 
his farm in that parish (these were also subsequently seen by others); 
and at the same date also, a single male bird was obtained at Irby, 
six miles south-west of Grimsby, in Lincolnshire.
This, I sub- 
sequently found, was one of three, shot from a small band of five, by 
a boy who was employed in tenting birds, on the Wold.
I rescued it 
some days afterwards by chance, the other two having been plucked 
and eaten.
These four separate occurrences mark their time of 
arrival very clearly on the i8th of the month.
Mr. F.
Boyes, who 
has been at much pains to ascertain the number visiting Flam- 
borough, informs me that they also arrived there on the i8th.
A flight of twenty was seen near the Spurn Point on the 22nd, 
and another of twelve on the 23rd, about thirty near Kilnsea 
Warren, on the 24th; and on the 25th C.
Hopper, of Spurn, states 
that he saw about the same number flying directly south — probably 
these may have been the same flock seen on the previous day.
A considerable number also, from a single bird to five, have been 
seen at various times, between the 18th and 26th, in the parishes of 
Kilnsea, Easington, Skeffling, and Welwick, all near the Spurn.
No 
doubt flocks have been seen more than once, so I have endeavoured 
to mention only those in which the evidence appears sufficient to in- 
dicate separate and distinct occurrences.
One, a male bird, was shot 
from four on Swallow Wold, near Caistor, Lincolnshire, on May 23rd ; 
and on the 26th I saw two small bands, of four each, rise from the 
sea side of the Spurn sand-hills, between Kilnsea and the Point.
Exclusive of the two Lincolnshire birds, seven were shot between 
the i8th and 26th; of these five are males and two females.
Also, 
another, a female, was washed up opposite to Easington.
This had 
July 1888.
196 CORDEAUX : PALLAS' SAND-GROUSE.
the scalp partly separated from the skull, probably having come in 
contact with the coast telegraph-wire, fallen into the sea, and sub- 
sequently washed up by the tide.
The number of Sand-Grouse actually arriving at the Spurn may 
be estimated at about seventy, but I admit this may be considerably 
below the mark ; when flights are seen in so many places it is 
impossible to give more than an approximate estimate of their 
number.
Two which I saw in the flesh, said to have been shot by a farmer 
at Easington, on the 26th, were both males.
One of these had the 
lateral or outside rectrices the natural length, but the intermediate 
feathers were only about one-half the length, and without any trace 
of the two long filamentous ends.
These Sand-Grouse flew very straight and direct, and with extra- 
ordinary velocity.
Their long sharply-pointed wings and tail are 
suggestive of rapid dashing flight, and the whole contour of the bird 
seen on the wing seems a model of grace and restless activity.
Their 
small daintily-shaped head and dark-hazel eye are also very pleasing 
features.
In flight, with a bright sunlight, they have quite a pink or 
rosy appearance, and the dark markings, or belt, on the abdomen 
and flank may be seen at a great distance.
Their flight has been 
compared to that of the golden plover, but it struck me as more 
resembling that of driven grouse when in full swing.
The four birds 
which, on the 26th, rose from the sand-hills, flew high and with great 
rapidity out to sea in a straight line for more than a mile ; then, with 
the glass, I saw them make an immense circuit, apparently shaping 
their course for the Point, two miles away to the south.
The second 
lot of four rose suddenly beyond a bank of tide-tossed sea-weed, and 
flew directly out to sea, till they became invisible in the extreme 
distance.
I found places in the sand-hills where flocks had evidently been 
basking or dusting like partridges.
All round were the rat-like 
paddings of their small flat feet, and numerous holes scratched or 
excavated in the loose sand, sufficiently deep to hold the whole of 
their body.
As a man remarked, who had flushed them, they 
appeared to rise out of the sand, and not from the surface.
Another 
said, 'they came from holes in the sand like rats.' 
The crop of one from Spurn on the 19th was crammed with 
wheat and linseed, washed to shore in the last winter from a wreck 
near Hornsea.
The gizzard of another, shot near Patrington on the 
2 1 St, I found filled with numerous small, dark, flinty fragments and 
turnip seed.
The crops and gizzards of three males shot on the 26th 
contained a large amount of small agricultural seeds, as red and white 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX : PALLAS' SAND-GROUSE.
clover, trefoil, Italian rye-grass, a few barleycorns, and some seeds of 
weeds, as the common dock ; also fragments of the leaves of the 
white clover plant.
The gizzards also contained many small sharp 
fragments of white quartz.
The call-note I only heard once, and then indistinctly ; it was 
a loud guttural cluck, and I put it down as resembling the word 
' cur-ruck.^ Those who have had better opportunities of hearing 
it at Spurn compare it to the call-note of the turnstone.
Colonel Prjevalski says that in the air the male birds utter a 
peculiar note, like ^ truck-iuruck^ truck -turuck^^ especially when m 
small flocks, and this probably will be found as closely to resemble 
their call as anything that can be given on paper.
In a freshly-killed bird the iris was dark hazel, the beak lavender- 
grey, darker at the tip.
The parasite of the Sand-Grouse is the largest 
I have seen on any species — it is a huge acarid.
Two examples, 
taken from the head of a male bird, have been sent to the Rev. O.
Pickard-Cambridge for determination.
The Sand-Grouse which have reached the East coast of England, 
as far as can at present be ascertained, represent but a very small 
proportion of the 'great horde' which, from May 8th to the 25th, 
passed Heligoland, and it is fair to presume that the main body of 
this Tartar host swept onward in a south-westerly direction along 
the coast-line of Europe, in which case we may expect to hear of 
them again in some parts of France.
That any should have visited 
our shores is the more remarkable when we consider that they not 
only started, but persistently followed up for some hundreds of miles, 
a line of flight which, in their case at least, was across an unknown 
sea, and might, for anything they knew to the contrary, have been 
an Atlantic.
Perhaps, however, experiences gathered in crossing the 
waters of their own Caspian proved all-sufficient for their purpose.
May 3 1 J/, 1888.
OCCURRENCES OF 
PALLAS' SAND-GROUSE AT HELIGOLAND.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes, Ulceby, Lincolnshire.
In a letter dated the 25th of May, Mr. Gatke has given me the 
following dates of the occurrence of the Sand- Grouse {Syrr/ui/^fcs 
paradoxus) at Heligoland.
' May 8th, twelve birds ; 13th, a score ; 14th, some ; 1 51)1, some ; 
i6th, flights from five to twenty — twenty-five shot; 17th, L , 
early th is morning, on Sandy Island, shot eighteen; iSth, fliglns 
July 1888.
198 
PALLAS SAND-GROUSE.
from twenty to two hundred head; 19th, a few; 20th, small flocks, 
from five to twenty; 21st, fog, none seen; 22nd, hundreds, many 
females; 23rd, flocks from ten to forty; 24th, many great flights, 
from fifty to one hundred ; 25th, many flights from five to twenty — 
very cold northerly wind blowing rather fresh.
' This is principally to tell you to look after the birds in sandy, 
gravelly places, the flat beach at foot of the sand-dunes, like our 
Sandy Island ; on the top of our cliff, the cultivated ground, they are 
met with in far less proportion, not ten to one hundred.
To see the 
birds when squatting on ground composed of sand, stones and some 
dry seaweeds, is scarcely possible — and they know this well, because 
they lay so close.
' What flyers they are !
They beat all we ever have seen here.' 
THE IRRUPTION OF PALLAS' SAND-GROUSE.
Denmark.
— In 1863 comparatively large flocks of this interesting 
bird settled in Denmark in the neighbourhood of Ringkjobing, 
where it built and lay, but the eggs being collected, many eaten, 
others procured for public and private collections, disturbed the bird 
so that it did not have the peace and protection requisite to encourage 
it to settle down and breed.
This year, 1888, it has appeared here again ; the first I saw was one 
that had killed itself by flying against the telegraph wires near Assens 
in Fiinen on the ist of May, and since that date they have been 
observed in flocks in various districts over the country.
Last week 
a large flock of over one hundred were seen in the neighbourhood of 
Thisted in North Jutland, Denmark.
Its Danish name is Steppe- 
honen.
— J.
S. Wood, Nyborg, Denmark, June 19th, 1888.
Flamborough, Yorkshire.
— Friday morning, June 15th— 
Fifty in a flock were seen flying in a westerly direction.
Several 
flocks, from ten to twenty in a flock, seen at a radius of twenty miles 
from the Headland.
One found dead on the beach, probably fallen 
in the sea and washed on shore.
A gentleman farmer also picked 
up one in his field minus its head ; another one found wounded, no 
doubt it had been in contact with the telegraph wires.
From the 
reports, a great many have been shot to preserve.
I have had 
several sent in for that purpose.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, 
June i8th, 1888.
Since writing to you on the i8th, several more flocks of Pallas' 
Sand-Grouse have been seen on the Headland.
— Matthew Bailey, 
Flamborough, June 22nd, 1888.
Naturalist, 
HERMAPHRODITISM IN SATURNIA CARPINI.
Whitby, Yorkshire.
— On the 28th May last, two (a male and 
female) out of a flock of about twenty Sand-grouse were shot at 
Carr Hill, near Whitby, whilst feeding on some clover ; the female, 
which I saw in the flesh, has been preserved by Mr. J.
H. Wilson of 
this town, who found the crop full of clover.
It is exactly a quarter 
of a century since the specimen in our local museum was shot when 
in company with three others feeding on recently-sown barley at 
Newholm near Whitby, viz..
May 1863.
— Thomas Stephenson, 
I, Haggersgate, Whitby, June i8th, 1888.
Pickering, Yorkshire.
— It may be of interest to know that 
the Sand-Grouse have reached the neighbourhood of Pickering.
A lot of ten birds was seen on Allerston Warren Farm on Sunday, 
3rd June ; and again on Tuesday, the 5th June, by another observer, 
ten or twelve were seen near the same spot, most probably the same 
birds.
The birds were seen on my brother's farm here by his foreman 
hind on the first occasion, and by two of the men on the second.
I think they had taken their departure on the Tuesday, as I had a 
long look for them that day and on the two following days without 
seeing anything of them.
The foreman, who is a keen observer of 
natural history subjects, had a close and long observation of the 
birds, and gave me a capital description of them, which left no 
doubt as to their identity.
— Herbert Prodham, Allerston, near 
Pickering, June 12th, 1888.
Nidderdale, Yorkshire.
— On the 8th June (Friday) I received 
a letter from Mr. Wm.
Smorfitt of Darley, Ripley, Yorks., regretting 
that he had not seen me on the previous Wednesday, as he had shot 
two birds and did not know what they were, but he was having them 
preserved.
I wTOte him by return, suggesting that they were probably 
Sand-Grouse, and giving him a description of the bird.
In reply 
he wTOte — ' The two birds I shot are undoubtedly what you have 
described, Sand-Grouse.
Five were on some oats and tares sown 
with clover and hay seeds in a field near the dam.
From their note 
or scream I could imagine I saw one near the dam two years ago.' 
The ' dam ' he alludes to is on the edge of the moors, and in his 
former letter he told me he shot the two birds not very far away 
from it.
— Rd. Paver-Crow, Ornhams Hall, Boroughbridge, June loth.
NOTE—LEPIDOPTERA.
Hermaphroditism in the Emperor Moth.
— At the meeting of the EiUonio 
logical Society of London, on May 2n(l, 1888, Dr. Philip Brooke Mason, K.L.S., 
exhil^ited an hermaphrodite specimen of Sacuniia carpitit from Lincoln.
— H.
Cioss, 
Hon. Secretary.
July i883.
200 
SPARGANIUM RAMOSUM VAR.
MICROCARPUM 
IN YORKSHIRE.
p. FOX LEE, 
Secretary for Phaficrogaviia to the Botanical Sectioti of the Yorkshire Naturalists Union; 
President of the Deivsbiiry Naturalists' Society; Member of the Botatiical Record Club, etc.
When Mr. W.
H. Beeby a few years ago demonstrated to the 
botanical world that Sparganium neglectum was no longer confined 
to the Continent only, but was a true British species, many gatherings 
of what had hitherto been regarded typical Sparganium ramosum 
were sent to him from all parts of the country with the hope that the 
new segregate {S.
negledirm) might be detected amongst them.
During last autumn I found a new patch of Spargania (for the 
Dewsbui-y district) in the marshy corner of a small thicket near 
Bretton in S.
W. Yorkshire, only a few miles from Dewsbury, the form 
of whose fruit (i.e. each drupe in the globose heads) seemed to 
approach the new segregate, and I sent some specimens labelled 
Sparganium neglectum^ Beeby, to the Watson Bot. Exch.
Club.
Mr. Arthur Bennett, one of the Club's referees, submitted them 
to Mr. Beeby, who states in the Fourth Annual Report, 1887-8, 
p. 13, of the Watson Club recently issued, that my gathering is not 
S. neglectum^ but a var.
of S.
ramosum called microcarpum of 
Neumann.
Mr. A.
Bennett, in a letter just received, says: — 'The 
var.
of Sparganium ramosum is a continental one, not yet in our 
manuals ; it will be published in a Swedish Monograph of the Order 
separately, and conjointly with the new edition of Hartmann's 
Handbook of the Scandinavian Flora (ed.
12).
It is the form of 
ramosum that is {\) continually mistaken for neglectum.
NOTES AND NEWS.
It is a pleasure to geologists, not only in Yorkshire but throughout the country, 
to hear of the birth of another geological society, namely, at Hull.
Hitherto, 
Leeds only in Yorkshire has possessed a local society established purely for the 
study of geology ; now it has a friendly rival at Hull.
Long may they co-operate 
and flourish!
It would appear that from the good work the Leeds Association 
has done throughout Yorkshire, the 'golden opportunities' of its members have 
been envied ; hence a desire that in the large and prosperous borough of Hull, so 
well placed in many ways for the study, an association of this nature should be 
formed.
This is now an accomplished fact, as a week or two ago a preliminary 
meeting of gentlemen interested in the science was held, at which the society 
was constituted, and the first officers elected.
The executive are: — President, 
Dr. F.
F. Walton ; vice-presidents, the Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., Mr. W.
Hunt 
(editor of the ' Eastern Morning News'), and Dr. J.
Walton; secretary, Mr. J.
W, 
.Stather ; treasurer, Mr. W.
Dixon ; committee, Alessrs.
J. Stears, E.
A. Peake, 
J. Carter (late of Leeds), M.
Carmichael, and G.
Silabon.
Naturalist, 
NOTES ON THE 
BIRDS OF THE LAKE DISTRICT.
JOHN WATSON, 
Ferfi.
Leigh, Kendal.
Greenland Falcon {Fako candicans).
— So far as I have been 
able to make out, only a single bird of this species has occurred 
in the Lake District.
This is an adult male, and is now in the col- 
lection of the late Sir Richard Musgrave, Bart, at Edenhall.
It was 
shot near Crosby Ravensworth, in Westmorland, about 1864, and is 
a beautiful creamy-white individual, exhibiting the characteristics of 
the Greenland race of Jer Falcons.
In a privately-printed note 
kindly sent me, Mr. J.
G. Goodchild has put the occurrence of this 
specimen upon permanent record, as also that of the Iceland 
Falcon below.
These notices are each illustrated by a woodcut of 
the bird they describe.
Iceland Falcon {Falco isla?idus).
— An immature female Iceland 
Falcon was shot by Mr. John Dodd, at Winton, Westmorland, about 
1842, Mr. Goodchild says that when first seen the bird was perched 
upright on a wall, and so intent was it upon the doings of some 
magpies and other birds, that it was approached without difficulty 
and shot.
A second occurrence of this bird was that of a female, shot near 
Cross Fell, on the 13th October, i860.
This specimen was preserved 
by Mr. Blackett Greenwell, of Alston, who still retains the bones 
and some of the wing feathers of the bird (Duckworth, in Trans.
Cumb.
and West.
Assoc., No. viii, p.
206).
Peregrine Falcon {Falco peregrinns).
— The Peregrine is the 
largest of our resident Falcons, and though much more rare than 
formerly, is still by no means extinct.
From our note book we learn 
that at one time and another there have been not less than seventeen 
nesting-places of the Peregrine in the Lake District, about half of 
which number we have visited.
To these the birds return year after 
year, and do not leave unless much persecuted.
The breeding sites 
are invariably among the rocks of the crags, and generally in the 
most precipitous and inaccessible parts.
Peregrines are early breeders, 
and usually have young by the middle of April.
These the shepherds 
and dalesfolk are careful to destroy whenever practicable, from a 
mistaken notion that the ' big blue hawk ' is injurious to the lambs of 
the fell sheep.
We have known two instances in which the Peregrines 
had their nest in close proximity to that of a Raven — in one case 
July 1888.
202 
CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE SPURN.
within thirty feet, and this continued year after year.
On the Lake 
mountains the prey of the Peregrine consists of golden plover, grouse, 
ring-ouzels, and the water-fowl that stay by the tarns.
When it 
descends to the valleys, ringdoves, rabbits, leverets, and the larger 
thrushes constitute its chief food ; though, in autumn and winter this 
is more varied.
At these times we have, in addition to the resident 
birds, those which appear on migration, and which are usually seen 
about the low-lying mosses and marshes.
Here they feed upon 
shore-haunting birds, especially dunlins.
NOTES FROM 
THE SPURN IN THE SPRING OF 1888.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes, Ulceby, Lincolnshire.
Ring-Ousel {Tardus torquatiis).
— May 6th.
A fine old cock 
bird, now in my possession, was picked up dead near Easington.
There was, I am told, a very great immigration of the species 
in the first week in May, at Kilnsea, and as many as twenty were 
seen in one field.
Wryneck {Tynx torquilld).
— One, a male, was obtained near 
Kilnsea in the spring.
The Wryneck maybe considered one of 
the rarest visitors to the Spurn district.
Hoopoe {Upttpa epops).
— One, a female, was found dead near 
Easington, on May nth.
It had been observed in the neigh- 
bourhood for two or three days previously.
Dotterel {Eudromias mofinellus), — A small trip of eight were seen 
in a field between Easington and Kilnsea, on the 25th.
Bartailed Godwit {Limosa lapponka), — I did not see any on 
the Lincolnshire side of the Humber in May. At Spurn, how- 
ever, they were very numerous on the sands near Kilnsea 
throughout the month.
Also, unusual numbers of Oyster- 
catchers {Hceniatopus ostt'nlegus) and Curlews {Nufuenius 
arquata).
Shelduck {Tadoma cornutd).
— I was very pleased to find three 
pairs of these nesting on the Kilnsea Warren^ and another pair 
nearer the Point.
They were extremely tame, continuing to feed 
when I stood within thirty yards and watched them through 
a glass, and it was difficult to realise that they were really 
wild birds.
ftine 1st, 1888.
Naturalist, 
203 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of Eng-land.
COLEOPTERA, 1884, 1885, 1886, 1887.
Anox.
[not signed].
Yorkshire.
Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association [Clylus arietis, Cicindela 
campesij-is, and PyrocJiroa cocciiiea in Nidderdale].
Nat., June 1884, ix.
197.
Anon, [signed B.
B. L.
T.].
Yorkshire.
[Carabus violaceus at York, and Cicindela canipestris at Strensall and 
Langwith].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May 15, 1886, x.
80.
[T.
R.] BiLLurs.
Lincolnshire.
[Agapanthia lineatocolHs Don., from Lincoln, exhibited to South London 
Ent. Soc, Feb. 4th, 1886].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., March 1886, xxii.
242; Ent., 
March 1886, xix.
71.
[T.
R. BiLLUPS.] Lincolnshire, Durham.
[Meligethes exilis Sturm, and Anthicus schaumi Wool., from Lincoln ; 
Hydnobiiis perrisi Fair., Mycctoporiis na)ius Grav.
, and Ouialiuvi rugidipenne 
Rye, from Hartlepool ; all exhibited to South London Ent. Soc.].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 1886, xxii.
267 \ Ent., April 1886, xix.
94.
[Subsequent notes 
in Ent. Mo.
Mag., xxiii.
24; and Ent., July 1886, xix.
191, state that the 
Aleligethes and Anihictis were not from Lincoln, as the record implies.] 
W. G.
Blatch.
Notting-hamshire.
Teredus nitidus, F.
, Rhyncolus gracilis, Rosen.
, &c.
[viz.
, Dryoaites villosits, 
Entheia clavaia, Elaici-- coccinattis^ and Ptenidnnn gressneriX^ in Sherwood 
Forest [details of captures and habitat given].
Ent. Mo.
^lag., July 1S84, 
xxi.
36.
W. G.
Blatch.
Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire.
Notes on the British Species of the Genus Euplectus, including a 
description of E.
niibigeiia, Reitter, a species new to Britain [taken in Sher- 
wood Forest, May 1884 and Sep. 1885 ; records also of E.
diipo)iti Aube, 
Scarborough, R.
Lawson ; E.
pnnctaiiis Muls., E.
karsteiii Reich., E.
signatus 
Reich., j£".
na^iiis Reich., nigricans Chaud., sanguineus Denny, and 
E. bicolor Denny — all from Sherwood Forest ; and E.
minutissinius Aube, 
Repton, 1879; details of capture given in several cases].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Feb. 1886, xxii.
203-209.
\V.
G. Blatch and A.
C. Horner.
Nottinghamshire.
An Entomological Trip to Sherwood Forest [in mid -Oct. 18S6 ; numerous 
species recorded].
Ent.
^^o.
Mag., Feb. 1887, xxiii.
212-213.
W. G.
Blatch.
. Nottinghamshire.
Coleoptera in Sherwood Forest [in Sep. 1885 ; six species mentioned ; 
and in June 1886, eight species].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1887, xxiv.
155.
George Bolam.
Northumberland.
On the Occurrence of the Cockchaffer {Melolonthn vulgaris Fab.) in 
Northumberland [rarely seen in the district ; instances cited].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 1886 [pub.
1887], xi.
558.
Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Cumberland, Westmorland, Yorkshire.
[Reports of Meetings, with notices of occurrence of Coleoptera in 
Cumberland, Westmorland, and Yorkshire].
Nat., Jan., June, and July 1SS4, 
ix.
106, 196, 214.
July 1888, 
204 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : COLEOPTERA, 1 884-5-6-7.
Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Yorkshire.
Diary of Natural History Observations for 1884, pp.
29 [including some 
notes relating to beetles].
J. W.
Carter.
? Yorkshire.
Coleoptera [capture of Cychrus i-ostrahts and Othins fulvipeJiiiiSy presumably 
near Bradford].
Young Nat., March 1884, v.
95.
[A.
J. Chalkley.] Yorkshire'.
[Meloe violaceus near Sheffield, female].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 
1886, X.
102.
Northumberland, Isle of Man, Lancashire, Cheshire, 
Joseph Chappell.
Yorkshire, Cumberland, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire.
Obnoxious and Injurious Insects S^Sphodrus leucophthabmis, Carpophilus 
fmctilatus, Lcenwphidtis pusilliis, Aiiommatiis ii-striatiis^ Derjfiestes vulphttis, 
D. lardarms, Ptiiius sexpitnctatiis, Gibhmin (species undetermined), Anobiuni 
doniesticuvi, Xestobium tessellatnvi, Ptilinus peciinicnrnis, have North of 
England localities assigned to them ; numerous other species are mentioned 
in a general manner].
Young Nat,, April 1887, "^'iii- 65-69.
\^Blaps sulcata^ 
Hypophlxus depressiis^ Tcnebrio obsciinis, T.
jnolitor, Briichiis pectinicornis^ 
B. -nifinianiis^ have Northern localities cited].
Young Nat., May 1887, viii.
92-94.
[The next instalment treats of Wood- and Bark-feeding Insects : 
iVe/nosoma elongata.
Sinodoidi-on cylindriciuii, Ly?7iexylon iiavale, Hylecatus 
derviestoides.
Priobiiim casianeiuji, Ptilimis pectinicornis^ Ochina IiedeTcc, Bos- 
trichtis capiicimis, Pkhvotrya Stephens?, and Hylobiiis abietis referred to from 
specified localities in the North].
Young Nat., June 1887, viii.
98-102.
{Pissodes Hotatiis, Cryptorliynchiis lapathi, Hylastes Irifolii, hyhirgiis JiederiBy 
Scolytiis priini, S.
ijttrica/us, Trypodendroii doiiiestiann, T.queraiSy Dryoccetus 
buhneriuqrii, Torniais sexdentattis, T.
aciiuiijiatus referred to from precise 
localities].
Young Nat., Aug. 1887, viii.
155-159.
{^Callidiiiui variabile, 
Sherwood Forest; Clytiis arciiatus, Newcastle and Cumberland; Mo7iohamimis 
sartor and M.
s7itor, frequent about Manchester ; Astino/nus cedilis at Astley 
deep pit, Dukinfield ; Saperda scalaris, several places about Manchester 
cited ; Stenostola ferrea, Dunham Park, its only locality, referred to].
Young 
Nat., Sep. 1887, viii.
168-171.
[P/iag/znu bifasciatmn at Staly-brushes ; 
Pachyta cerambyciformis near Manchester, and Strangalia quadrtfasciata in 
Sherwood Forest].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
200-201.
S^Grammoptera 
afra?
at Castle Mill, on Unibellifcra:\ Young Nat., Nov. 1887, viii.
211.
Tom Duckworth.
Cumberland.
[Scarcity of Melolontha vulgaris in Carlisle district].
Trans.
Cumb.
and 
Westm.
Ass., No. xii.
(1886-87, pub.
1887), p.
98.
John W.
Ellis.
Yorkshire.
Hibernation of Cetonia aurata [in April 1884, f^^'- EH'^ received one alive, 
which had been captured in the thatch of an old house at Helmsley ; Editors 
append a note that there is little doubt that it assumes the perfect state in the 
autumn, but does not emerge till the year following, except a few brought out 
by an autumnal 'burst' of hot weather].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1884, xxi.
36.
John \Y.
Ellls, Yorkshire.
Amara fusca, Dj., at Doncaster [A male specimen found under stones in 
August 1884, together with a number of Pterostichiis V2ilgaris and Harpaliis 
ruficornis\ Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1884, xxi.
1 12.
J. ^V.
Ellis.
- Cheshire, 
.^gialia rufa, Fab.
[captured at Wallasey Sandhills, June 2nd].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1885, xxii.
62.
J. W.
Ellis.
Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire.
Coleoptera for beginners.
\_Carabiis niteus used to occur plentifully at 
Southport ; and Ncbria livida occurs abundantly in crevices of the clay cliffs 
at Scarborough].
Young Nat., Oct. 1885, pp.
19 and 20 of Appendix.
Naturalist 
bibliography: coleoptera, 1884-5-6-7.
205 
\Metablettis foveola very common about Liverpool ; Oodes helopioides taken 
near York by Mr. Smedley].
Young Nat., Nov. 1885, Appendix, pp.
25 and 
29.
[Amara spijiipes used to be taken freely on thistle-flowers near Liverpool 
by F.
Kinder].
Young Nat., Dec. 1885, p.
39 of Appendix.
[CilleJtum 
laterale, habitat in Liverpool district stated].
Young Nat., Feb. 1886, p.
49 
of Appendix.
J. W.
Ellis.
? Lancashire or Cheshire.
Apion annulipes \Yenck, [near Liverpool, a male].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 
1886, xxii.
266.
John W, Ellis.
Cheshire.
Homalium rugulipenne, Rye [and three Aphodii], at Wallasey.
Ent. Mo.
Mag., June 1886, xxiii.
16.
John W.
Ellis.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Entomological Localities near Liverpool [a most valuable and useful paper, 
dealing with the lepidoptera and coleoptera which occur on the Lancashire 
coast sand-hills, at Wallasey sand-hills, at Bidston Hill, and on Simmonswood 
Moss ; very numerous species cited with notices of their numbers and 
habitats].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1886, xxiii.
57-63.
E. A.
F[iTCH].
Cheshire.
The Willow Beetle \_Phrafora vulgatissiina\ at Lymm [, Statham, Thelwall, 
and other localities in Cheshire ; great damage done amongst the extensive 
willow-beds].
Ent., Oct. 1884, xvii.
239.
W. W.
Fowler.
Derbyshire.
The Genus Cercyon [ ; in this useful paper the only North Country record 
given is: C.
ohsoletus Gyll, ('I 1:)elieve, near Burton-on-Trent ')].
Ent., 
March 1884, xvii.
54-59.
W. W.
Fowler.
Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Northumberland.
The Genera Hydrochus, Octhebius, and Hydraena [the North of England 
records given are : Hydroclms hrevis Ilerbst.
(of late years has occurred in the 
North of England), H.
elongatiis Schall.
(Askham Bog, York) ; Octhebiits 
riifimarginniiis Steph.
(Repton ; Scarborough) ; Hydrc^7ta palustn's Er.
(Askham Bog) ; H.
augtistata Sturm, (the Wansbeck, Wallington, Northum- 
berland) ; H.
iiigrita Germ.
(North of England) ; H.
atricapilla Wat.
(Scarborough ; the Wansbeck, Northumberland) ; //.
pygimna Wat.
(Scar- 
borough ; the Wansbeck, Northumberland) ; //.
pidchclla Germ.
(Scarborough ; 
Derbyshire; the Wansbeck)].
Ent., July 1884, xvii.
156-163.
W. W.
Fowler.
Lincolnshire.
Captures of Coleoptera near Lincoln [at Langworth Wood, where numerous 
Beetles (47 species) noted ; other notes of this season for Nocton Wood and 
other places near Lincoln given].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1884, xxi.
162.
W. W.
Fowler.
Cheshire.
Tachys parvulus, Dej., a species new to Britain [taken on the Wallasey 
sand-hills in Sep. 1884, by J.
H. Smedley; full descriptions given].
Ent.
Mo. Mag., July 1885, xxii.
43-44; and Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond.
Nov. 4th, 
1885, p.
xxvii.
W. W.
Fowler.
Lincolnshire.
Agapanthia lineatocollis, Don.
[at Langworth Wood] near Lincoln.
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1885, xxii.
61-62.
Northumberland, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, 
W. W.
Fowler.
Derbyshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire.
The Nitidulidae of Great Britain [the Northern notes are: Cercus bipustiilalus 
Payk., Nocton near Lincoln, beaten in sonic numbers from Carcx pauicuhta ; 
also found on Spinea, and has occurred in Cossns burrows in Sherwood 
July 188S.
o 
2o6 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: COLEOPTERA, 1884-5-6-7.
Forest (p.
57) ; Carpophihis imttilatiis Er.
(p.
58), taken by Mr. T.
R. 
Hardy of Manchester, very commonly at the bottom of old wheat-stacks 
in his neighbourhood.
He has also taken it at Sherwood Forest in 
Cosins burrows, which fact goes a long way towards establishing its claim 
to be regarded as indigenous].
Ent. Mo.
Mag,, Aug. 1884, xxi.
54-58.
\Epuraa decemguttaia Fab., Dunham Park near Manchester, and Sherwood 
Forest (p.
93) ; E.
diffusa Brisout, Mr. Chappell has taken at sap of oak 
exuding from Cossus burrows in Dunham Park, with E.
lo-gntiata ; and Mr.
Reston has taken it at Stretford near Manchester (p.
95) ; E.
vielina Er., 
Bowdon near Manchester ; Amberley ; Bretby near Repton (p.
94) ; E.
oblonga Herbst., Dunham Park, in cracks of Scotch fir, Mr. Chappell (p.
95); 
E. florea Er., Robin's Wood, Repton; Mr. Reston has taken it on Chat 
Moss, on umbelliferous plants (p.
96) ; E.
deleta Er., very common in fungi, 
especially boleti, near Lincoln, where it generally occurs in company with 
GyrophcEncB (p.
96) ; Epiiriia pai-vida Sturm, 'A very local species, but 
soiiiewhat plentiful where it occurs ; I have found it in numbers in Sherwood 
Forest with Mr. Matthews, by shaking faggots over a sheet, also a smaller 
variety by beating faggots of a species of Tilia (called ' bass ' by the 
country people) in Langworth Wood, near Lincoln ; Stretford, flying over old 
wood-yard, Mr. Reston; .
. .
. ; also taken near Scarborough' (p.
97); 
E. im?jiu?2da Er., very rare species ; has been taken at Scarborough by 
Messrs.
Wilkinson and Lawson (p.
97); E.
variegata Herbst., very rare; 
Scarborough, etc.
(p.
97) ; E.
obsoleta Fab., ' Dunham Park, Manchester, 
under chips in the midst of exuding sap' (p.
98) ; E.
augustida Er.
, 'very 
rare ; Scarborough, Mr. Lawson and Mr. Wilkinson ; .
. ; one specimen 
under bark of beech in Dunham Park, Mr. Chappell ; Mr. Reston has taken 
it by sweeping on Chat Moss' (p.
98)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep. and Oct. 1884, 
xxi.
92-98.
\_Micriiriila melanocephala Er.
, I have beaten from wild cherry 
blossom in early spring, at Foremark, near Repton (p.
142) ; Omosiphoi'a 
Hmbata Er., Nocton, Repton, etc.
(p.
142); Nitidnia flcxtiosa Fab., very 
rare and doubtful as British ; Scarborough, Mr. Lawson ; Northumberland, 
Mr. Bold ; very probably imported with hides or bones ; Mr. Bold himself 
•considered his species taken near Newcastle-on-Tyne to have been not truly 
indigenous (p.
144) ; S.
piinctatissbna 111., Dunham Park, Manchester, in 
oaks and alders, Mr. Chappell (p.
145!
; S.
grisca L., Stretford, Manchester, 
under bark of old apple-trees, Mr. Reston ; Prestwich.
under bark of alders 
near Cossjis burrows, Mr. Chappell ; I have beaten it from hawthorn blossoms 
near the banks of the Trent at Repton, and in Bretby Wood near the same 
place, and have also taken it in flood- refuse (p.
145) ; Omosita depressa L., a 
local species, common in the North of England .
. .
; North Derbyshire 
(p.
147)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. and Dec. 1884, xxi.
142-147.
[Meliget/ies 
htmbaris Sturm., Repton (p.
217); M.
fulvipes Bris., Askham Bog (p.
218)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Feb. and March 1885, xxi.
213-219.
{Meliget/ies dijfficilis Heer., 
Manchester, Lincoln, and Repton (p.
261); A^ar.
kunzei Er., Repton (p.
261); 
M. nwrosits Er.
, Repton (p.
262); M.
menuionius Er., Repton, Chat Moss 
(Mr. Chappell), (p.
262); M.
viduatus Sturm, Mablethorpe, on Galeopsis 
ietrahit \zx.
"versicolor at Chat Moss, Mr. Chappell, and occurs commonly in 
Langworth Wood near Lincoln, on AJiiga reptans, and by general sweeping, 
and also on strawberry flowers in author's garden, Lincoln (p.
264) ; M.
pedicularius Sturm, occurs to author commonly on the same plants and in the 
same localities in and near Lincoln as the last-mentioned (p.
264) ; J/, ovatus 
Sturm, Chat Moss, flowers of Galeopsis (p.
266) ; M.
flavipes Sturm, on broom 
near Lancaster].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 1885, xxi.
260-267.
[Mcligethes 
syviphyti Heer, on Galeobdoloit liitewn, near Bowdon, Manchester, Mr.
Chappell ; Studley Royal, Yorkshire, Mr. Waterhouse (p.
33)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1885, xxii.
33-36.
[Meligeihes erythropus Gyll., abundant in 
Langworth Wood near Lincoln, on Potentilla tor?nefitilla, and sparingly on 
strawberry flowers in author's garden at Lincoln ; Repton and Chat Moss ; 
and Castle Mill, near Manchester, on Galeobdolon lutejifu, Mr. Chappell 
(p.
69) ; M.
exilis Sturm, Isle of Man, Rev. R.
P. Murray (p.
70) ; M.
brcvis 
Sturm, and its var.
7mitabilis Rosenh., on Helianthettmrn viilgai-e at Scar- 
borough, where the type is rare, only one or two — out of a series of nearly 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: coleoptera, 1884-5-6-7.
207 
forty — showing no trace of the red spot which characterizes the variety (p.
71) ; 
Cryptarcha sirii^ata, Dunham Park, Manchester, and author has taken it by 
sweeping in Bretby Wood near Repton (p.
73) ; C.
h/iperiaizs, Dunham Park 
(p.
73) ; Ips quadriguttata P'ab.
, Ripon, ]\Ianchester (p.
73) ; /.
qjiadripuuctata 
Herbst., under oak chips where the trees have recently been cut down, near 
Manchester, and in fungi on Chat Moss (p.
74) ; Pilyophagus ferruginciis 
Fab,, Northumberland, Dr. Power (p.
74); Rhizophngiis cribratiis Gyll., 
Stretford, Mr. Reston ; on decayed roots of lime-trees, Withington Common 
near Manchester, Mr. Chappell ; Studley Park, Ripon, in fungus, G.
R. 
Waterhouse (p.
75) ; R.
parallelocollis Er., once taken by late Archdeacon 
Hey in numbers near York in fungus in company with Atoniaria Jimeiarii 
fp.
76); R.
nitidiihis Fab., Sherwood Forest, Dr. Power (p.
77) ; R.
dispar 
Gyll., Newcastle; under bark of pines and in fungus growing on decayed 
trees, Chat Moss, Dunham, etc., Mr. Chappell ; under poplar bark, Stretford, 
Mr. Reston (p.
77); R.
politus Hellw., Manchester; and Stretford, Mr.
Reston (p.
78).].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. and Sep. 188,5, ^^i'- 69-78.
W. W.
Fo\vlp:r.
Yorkshire.
Coleoptera at Tenby [refers to Cassida hemisphcerka, of which the only other 
specimen the author ever met with was at Filey, Yorkshire].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Nov. 1885, xxii.
139.
W. W.
Fowler.
Yorkshire, Derbyshire.
Harpalus calceatus, Sturm, re-established as British, v.'ith notes on other 
Harpali [captured at Bridlington when searching for A^ebria livida ; reference 
also made to once capturing upwards of two hundred //.
nifibarbis at Repton 
from a spot a foot square].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1886, xxii.
172-174; also 
see Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 1886, p.
iii ; Ent., March 1886, xix.
70 ; and Young 
Nat., March 1886, vii.
53.
Northumb., Durham, Yorksh., Lincolnsh., Notts., Derbysh., 
W. W.
Fowler.
Cheshire, Lancash., Westm., Cumb., I.
of Man.
The Coleoptera of the British Islands.
A Descriptive Account of the 
Families, Genera, and Species indigenous to Great Britain and Ireland, with 
notes as to Localities, Habitats, etc.
[many relating to the Northern Counties].
Vol. i.
Adephaga — Hydrophilidoe.
. .
. 1887 [8vo., pp.
270.] 
W. W.
Fowler.
Lincolnshire.
Tachinus elongatus, Gyll.
at Lincoln [running on a pavement in the city, 
June 1887].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1887, xxiv.
46.
W. W.
Fowler.
Yorkshire, Derbyshire.
On certain species of Coleoptera new to Britain, or reinstated {BUdius 
dissi7nilis Er., Bridlington, 1878 and 1884, with details of its occurrence 
there ; B.
arenarius also abundant there ; Bythimis validiis Aube, Iketby 
Wood, near Repton].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1887, xxiv.
49-53.
J. Gardner.
Durham.
Hydnobius Perrisii, &c., near Hartlepool [The H.
piinctatissimHs^ 
tive species of Anisototna, Colon dctUiculatunt^ and Bryoporus hardy i\ Ent.
Mo. Mag., Jan. 1886, xxii.
185.
S. E.
Gill.
Yorkshire.
N. H.
Society, Ackworth [Notices of captures of beetles], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Oct. 15th, 1884, viii.
134.
R. W.
GouLDiNG.
? Lincolnshire.
Beetles' [Geotrupes stercorarius] Burrows [juesumably at or near Louth, 
though not stated].
Sci. CIoss., March 1885, p.
70.
[R.
W. GouLDiNc;].
Lincolnshire.
Louth Naturalists' Society \Barynotus marcns woKki^X for Haugham Pat-ture], 
Nat. World, Aug. 1886, iii.
158.
July 1888.
208 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : COLEOPTERA, 1884-5-6-7.
James Hardy.
Northumberland.
Report of Meetings of Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the year 
1885 [C/o;tus scrophularicc (larvae) and Cicindela cainpestris noted at Roth- 
bury, 24th June ; Orchestes fagi as very frequent on Tyneside ; and Batophila 
rubi Fab., and Agelastica halensis noted at Dunston].
Proc, Berw.
Nat.
Club for 1885 [pub.
1 886], xi.
38, 42, 59, and 63.
John Hill.
Derbyshire.
Cryptorhync[h]us Lapathi [in Derbyshire ; account of its infesting a sallow 
tree].
Young Nat., Feb. 1887, viii.
39.
A. C.
Horner.
Nottinghamshire.
[Sherwood Forest Beetles : a Rhizophagus, probably new, and Holopedina 
polypori Forst., in company with, and probably parasitic on, Cis vestitus ; all 
from Sherwood Forest ; exhibited to Ent. Soc.
Lond., July 6th, 1887].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1887, xxiv.
72; Ent., Aug. 1887, xx.
215 ; Young Nat., 
Aug. 1887, viii.
160 ; and Zool., Aug. 1887, xi.
313.
H. Wallls Ke\v.
Lincolnshire.
Food of the Whirlwig Beetle [Gyrimis natator) [at Louth].
Nat. World, 
April 1885, ii.
80.
H. Wallls Kew.
' Lincolnshire.
Louth Naturalists' Society [capture of Cerais bipusUdatus at Burwell].
Nat.
World, Aug. 1885, ii.
155.
H. Wallls Kew. Lincolnshire.
Rambles near the Coast [of Lincolnshire ; notices of XantJwlinus glabratus , 
Phyllopertha hordeola, Lagria hirta, and Agelastica halensis\.
Nat. World, 
Oct. 1885, ii.
190.
H. Wallls Kew. Lincolnshire.
Some Cole[o]pterous Larvae \_Chilocoriis renipustulatiis, Cassida viridis, 
Cocciiiclla ']-piinctata, and Adiinonia tanaceti, found near Louth ; all 
described].
Young Nat., Oct. 1885, pp.
232-234.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Aphis-eating- Insects {Coccwella *j-ptmctata and Chrysopa, near Louth].
Nat. World, Dec. 1885, ii.
232.
H. Wallis Kew.
. Lincolnshire.
Another Postglacial Ravine [Hubbard's Valley, near Louth] and its 
inhabitants [including mention of Melolonfha vulgaris^ Alelo'c violaccus, and 
Staphylinus ca:sarhis\.
Nat. World, March 1886, iii.
42.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
The Greasy-field and Grisel-bottom [near Louth ; Adimonia tanacetiy 
Meligethes nifipes, Badister bipushdattis, DroiniTis qjiadrimaciiiattis, Leina 
cyanella, Philonthus aneus, Helophortts aquaticiis, Hydroporus palustris, 
Hydi'obins fuscipes^ and Gyriims natator mentioned].
Nat. World, June 
1886, iii.
101-103.
H, Wallls Kew. Lincolnshire.
Woodland Rambles in Lincolnshire [in Maltby and Haugham Woods near 
Louth, 23rd April, 1886 ; numerous species of beetles are mentioned].
Young Nat., July 1886, vii.
1 29-1 31.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
In the Woods [near Louth] in Summer \_Necrophorus hninator, N.
ruspator, 
N. inortiionnn, SilpJia rugosa, Nitidtila bipiinctata, Hister cadaverinns, Der- 
mestes lardarius, D.
jjiuri^nis, Silpha thoracica, Cliilocorus renipusttilatii<:^ 
Phyllopertha horiicola, Strangalia ar?nata, and Coccinella 1-punctata referred 
to].
Nat. World, July 1886, iii, 121-124.
Naturalist, 
-5-6-7.
209 
H. Wai.lis Kew. Lincolnshire.
On the Lincolnshire Wolds [at Donington-on-Bain ; Acilius siilcatus, 
Calaihus melanocephalus L., Anchomcnus prasimis Fab., Arnara plebeia Gyll., 
Pterostuhiis ?nadidus Fab., Ocypus olens Miill., Fhilonthiis ceneus Rossi, 
Agriotes lineatiis L.
, and Aphodhis fiinetarms L., noted].
Nat. World, Aug.
1886, iii.
141-143.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
[Beetles on the Coast of Lincolnshire : Lagria hirta.
Age last ica haiensis, 
Cryptorhynchus lapathi^ Cncorhiniis geminatiis, and Otiorhynchus ovaius, all 
mentioned as common, and their food-plants specified].
Sci. Goss., Sep.
1886, p.
208.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Evenings in Spring [near Louth ; Dromius qiiadrimaciilatus^ Chrysomela 
po/Ua, Otiorhyncfuis siilcaUis^ Ocypus olens, Nebria brevicollis, Leisius Julvi- 
barbis, Phyllobius iiniformis, P.
argentatus, P.
alneti, Necrophoncs hiimator, 
Silpha riigosa, Creophilus fnaxillosus, p.nd Bembidiiim rufescens noted].
Nat. World, Sep. 1886, iii.
161- 162.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Note on Adimonia tanaceti L.
[and its occurrence near Louth].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1886, xxiii.
107.
H. Wallis Kew. Lincolnshire.
Natural History Rambles.
No. i.
In the Woods [near Louth ; Cassida 
viridis (' I believe') noted in Giisel Bottom].
Sci. Goss., Feb. 1887, p.
31.
E. Lam PLOUGH.
Yorkshire.
Dytiscus marginalis in a Draper's Shop [at Hull, where the species is 
stated to be very scarce].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1887, p.
19.
Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society.
Yorkshire.
[Reports of Meetings; Cetonia anrata from Leeds.] Nat., June 1884, 
ix.
197.
Thomas Ludgrove.
Nottinghamshire.
Choleva spadicea near Nottingham [at the root of a tree, Jan. 1885 ; 
named by Rev. W.
W. Fowler].
Ent., April 1885, xviii.
124.
J. E.
Mason.
? Lincolnshire.
Rhipiphorus paradoxus [presumably near Alford].
Nat. World, Dec. 1885, 
ii.
236.
A. Matthews.
? Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire.
Synopsis of the British Species of Orthoperus \_0.
brunnipes Ciyll., the 
only British example is in P.
B. Mason's collection, and appears to have been 
taken by the late Mr. Wilkinson, of Scarborough, presumably at that place ; 
and 0.
corticalis Redt., two found by author some years ago in Sherwood 
Forest].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Oct. 1885, xxii.
107-110.
J. J.
Nixox.
Derbyshire.
Great Capture of Water Beetles [in a dyke near Little Eaton, ([uite 
dry, hundreds of Dyticus marginalis, with A'epa, A^otonecia, and Hydrous 
caraboides : anecdote of capture of D.
niarginalis\ Young Nat., Feb. 1885, 
vi.
36-38.
A. Reston.
? Lancashire.
Notes upon the capture of Coleoptera during flight [numert)us species 
referred to].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1886, xxiii.
39-40.
George Roberts.
Yorkshire.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its neighbourhood 
[etc.].
\^ol.
ii.
[Lampyris noctilitca (pji.
27, 246) ; r/iudon titmiduluni 
(p.
134) ; Timarcha (p.
183)].
Leeils : })rinteil for the Author.
1885.
ipp^viii + 258].
July 18R8.
2IO BIBLIOGRAPHY: COLEOPTERA, 1884-5-6-7.
W. A.
Robinson.
Yorkshire.
[Blaps mortisag'a taken at 20, Bootham, York].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 
15th, 1886, X.
41.
J. T.
RoDGERs. Lancashire.
Lepidoptera [and two Coleoptera — Carabus nemoralis and Nebria gyllen- 
halit] observed in the neighbourhood of Oldham, in 1884.
Young Nat., 
March 1885, p.
69.
J. H.
Salter.
Yorkshire.
Scarbro' \_CtcindeIa campe^tris swarming on the moors].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
May 15th, 1885, p.
79.
J. Sang.
Durham.
Luciola italica at Darling-ton [in one of the streets, June, two seen, one 
captured, and determined by C.
O. Waterhouse as a South European species 
whose occurrence so far north is rather remarkable].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov.
1885, xxii.
138.
Joseph Sidep.otham.
Cheshire.
The Story of CEcophora Woodiella [with incidental mention of the 
occurrence of Lyinexylon itavale in Dunham Park, Cheshire, where it is 
found in scores and seen in hundreds].
Ent., March 1884, xvii.
54.
J. ^V.
Slater.
Yorkshire.
A Swarm of Aphodii [on Skircoat Moor near Halifax, some years ago ; 
the species named as^^.
sphacclaiins\ Sci. Goss.
, Jan. 1887, p.
21.
E. Stott.
Lancashire.
Acanthocinus cedilis [a fine male taken in a Bolton cotton-mill in Oct. 1887 ; 
and one down a coal-pit about three years before].
Ent., Dec. 1887, xx.
327.
Hubert L.
Terry.
Nottinghamshire, Lancashire.
Coleoptera [Astino?jnis cedilis in a coal-mine at Cossall, Notts., August ; 
Cyclirus rostratus near Manchester, September].
Nat. World, Nov. 1885, 
p. 220.
R. Wilding.
Cheshire.
iEg-ialia rufa, F., at Wallasey [single specimens in May and in June 1883, 
found crawling on the bare sand of the Wallasey sand-hills, Cheshire, in com- 
pany with AL.
arenaria\.
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1884, xx.
191, 
R. Wilding.
Lancashire, Cheshire.
Ocypus fuscatus at West Derby [near Liverpool ; the species seems to 
occur in various places round Liverpool ; Philontlms fumigaUis and abundance 
of Bejnbidium ^-striatum at West Derby, also noted].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
Jan. 1885, xxi.
192.
R. Wilding.
Cheshire.
Cymindis vaporariorum at Heswell, Cheshire [several found under heath 
in Sep. 1883 and Oct. 1884].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1885, xxi.
192.
R. Wilding.
Lancashire.
Amara fusca at Preston [a male taken, together with three A.
rufocincta^ 
under rejectamenta of the Kibble].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1885, xxi.
192.
R. Wilding.
Cheshire.
iEgialia rufa Fab.
[and its occurrence at Wallasey Sand-hills].
Ent, Mo.
Mag., July 1886, xxiii.
40.
Naturalist, 
21 I 
YORKSHIRE AND LANCASHIRE NATURALISTS 
AT SADDLEWORTH.
The June Meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union was held 
close to the Lancashire and Cheshire border of the county on the 
1 6th of the month, for the purpose of exploring a district which, 
although politically in Yorkshire, is drained by a Lancashire river.
On this occasion the excursion was joined in by a number of 
Lancashire naturalists, including Messrs.
W. H.
Pearson, of 
Eccles, and F.
Bower, of Manchester, E.
Collier, of Manchester, 
John R.
Byrom, of Fairfield, Councillor James Nield, of Oldham, 
J. B.
Robinson, F.R.M.S., of Mossley, and Thomas Hick, B.A., B.Sc, 
of the Owens College, the latter an old and valued member and 
former vice-president of the Union.
The morning opened in an 
inauspicious manner, the black clouds appearing to threaten a 
downfall, but as the day wore on matters improved meteorologically, 
and the day's explorations were carried out with comfort.
Two 
parties were arranged.
One, a geological one, was the most 
numerous, and under the able charge of Mr. W.
Watts, F.G.S., the 
engineer to the Oldham Waterworks, worked round by Castleshaw 
and Denshaw from Diggle to Uppermill.
The narrative of this route 
is given further on in the report of the Geological Section.
The 
other party started from Greenfield Station, and had for its object the 
investigation of the Greenfield Valley.
The ground over which this 
party was to work is grouse moor, and Mr. Lees, of Oldham, to 
whom the shooting rights appertain, gave permission to the Union to 
investigate it.
He also instructed one of his keepers to accompany the 
party, and this added much to the enjoyment of the members and 
the success of their investigations.
The keeper was an intelligent 
companion and an efficient guide, and not only did he protect his 
master's game, but did so without hindering in the least the careful 
search for plants and insects which was kept up throughout the day.
The line of route, after a brief halt at Bill's-o'-Jack's, was along the 
bottom of the valley up to the Seal Bark Rocks and over the moor 
to Bill's-o'-Jack's again, and thence over the Church Moors to 
Uppermill.
On the way was passed the curious pile of stones called 
' Pots and Pans,' where the keeper informed the members, to the 
undisguised interest of one at least, that at the time of the repeal of 
the Corn Laws, the largest hollow, a capacious one withal, was filled 
with brandy-punch.
Further on were the Fairy Holes, a narrow cleft 
in the rocks which runs underground for about forty yards.
At this 
point the investigation ceased, for there was now but time to reach 
Uppermill.
July 1888.
i 
2 12 
NATURALISTS AT SADDLEWORTH.
Here, at the Hare and Hounds, both parties met, and all the 
straggling groups of independent investigators joined them.
Tea — 
a truly welcome and substantial Yorkshire tea — awaited the hungry 
scientists, and over constantly-replenished plates of beef, ham and 
tongue, and steaming cups of tea, notes were compared and captures 
discussed.
The room was a large upper chamber in which were several 
quaint canopies of wood with various mottoes emblazoned thereon.
Under one of these sat a burly geologist with the solemn injunction 
over his head * do justice,' a precept which he and his hungry 
comrades, with mutual exhortation, faithfully carried out.
Near them 
were the botanists, who had to stoutly deny an assertion by the 
hammer-men that they had got Malaxis paludosa^ a plant which, with 
all their labour, the plant-men had been unable to find in its recorded 
station.
On this point appeal was made from the tea-table to the 
sectional meetings, with the result that the mountain in labour 
brought forth Orchis i7iaculata for Malaxis.
The Sectional and General Meetings were held in the Lee Street 
Schoolroom, which had been kindly lent by the Rev. Mr.
Doig, vicar 
of Uppermill.
The chair at the general meeting was taken by an 
old friend and ex-president of the Union, Prof.
W. C.
Williamson, 
LL.D., F.R.S., of the Owens College, Manchester.
The minutes of 
the Leyburn meeting having been confirmed, the Hull Geological 
Society was admitted into the Union by a unanimous vote, and Mr.
and Mrs. J.
W. Bilbrough of Ben Rhydding were elected Members.
The roll-call showed that the forty or fifty members present repre- 
sented ten societies.
Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., B.Sc, of the Owens 
College, proposed a vote of thanks to Messrs.
Lees and Abel Buckley 
for granting permission to visit their estates, and to the Vicar for the 
use of the schoolroom, to the leaders of the parties, and to all who 
had co-operated with the secretaries in arranging the meeting.
The 
sectional reports were then taken.
For the Vertebrate Section, Mr. Thomas Bunker, of Goole, 
secretary of the section, reported that very few vertebrates were 
noticed, and those in the Greenfield Valley only.
These were the 
Song Thrush, Blackbird, Ring Ouzel, Water Ouzel, Robin, Hedge 
Accentor, Skylark, Yellow Bunting, Common Bunting, Starling, 
Grouse, Magpie, Wheatear, Tree Pipit, and Cuckoo— fifteen in all.
For the Conchological Section, in the absence of all its officers, 
Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., reported that conchologically the 
day was a blank, only two species having been seen by himself and 
Messrs.
E. Collier and J.
Conacher, the highly unfavourable geological 
character of the district being against molluscan life.
The two 
species were Avion bourguig?2aii^ found on the canal-side at Green- 
Naturalist, 
NATURALISTS AT SADDLEWORTH.
213 
field, and Limncea peregra, which was abundant at Saddleworth, both 
in the canal and in the river Tame.
After the meeting was over, and 
the Yorkshire members had left, Mr. Collier worked the canal 
from Uppermill down to Greenfield, and added a third species, Z.
auricularia^ of which he found several specimens, in addition to a 
very peculiar inflated variety of Z.
peregra with the lip turned back.
For the Entomological Section, in the absence of all its officers, 
Mr. G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S., of Huddersfield, reported that 
Hadena glauca had been found commonly around Bill's-o'- Jack's, 
also Phoxopteryx fnyrtillatia, Clepsis rusticana^ and various other 
lepidoptera.
He had taken a good many Neuroptera, including 
Perlidae, Hemerobidse, and Trichoptera, but several of the species 
v/ould require future examination for determination.
The report for the Botanical Section was given by Mr. P.
F. Lee, 
•of Dewsbury, Phanerogamic Secretary, who enumerated and exhibited 
some of the best flowering plants and ferns gathered during the day.
In several places on the higher flanks of the moors, Rubus chain<x- 
morus^ the Cloudberry, presented a sight to be remembered, as it was 
in full bloom ; but it was stated that the greatest number of observa- 
tions had been made near water-courses and in the grand ravine 
leading to Seal Bark from Bill's-o'-Jack's.
The plants thought worthy 
of special mention were : — Cardamine af/iara, Viola palustris, 
Epilobium angnstifolium (several plants on the rocky stream-bank 
under Seal Bark), Vaccinmm vitis-idcea (with leaves like box and 
beautiful waxy racemes of flowers), Enipetnim nigrian, Scirpus 
£(Espitosus^ Narthecium ossifragum, Eriophoruin a?igusti/a/iia/i var.
elatius Koch (the broad-leaved uncommon form of the Cotton-grass), 
Drosera rotmidifolia^Luzula cajfipestris var.
erecia Desv.
(the moorland 
form of the Field Wood-rush), Carex pilulifera^ and C.
flava v^x.vii?ior 
Towns.
Eight species of Ferns were noted, amongst them being 
Polypodium dryopteris and Cystopteris fragilis at Seal Bark only, 
Nephrodhwi oreopteris on the wooded bank below Bill's-o'-Jack's, 
and N.
filix-mas var.
borreri Newm.
m fair abundance near the 
stream at Seal Bark.
Hyvienophylluvi iinilaterale occurs at Seal 
Bark Rocks, and had been gathered there a day or two before the 
Union's visit.
The plant upon which the botanologists were most 
intent was the rare bog orchis, Malaxis paludosa, long known at 
Gulliver's swamp in the neighbourhood of Bill's-o'-Jacks, its only 
West Yorkshire habitat.
A worthy vice-president of the Y.N.U.
almost crept over every inch of the swamp, but even his lynx eye 
failed to detect the slightest trace of the rarity.
Had it been August 
instead of (this year) cold, dull June, the ardent representatives of 
this section might have been better rewarded.
July 1888.
214 
NATURALISTS AT SADDLEWORTH.
Mr. W.
H. Pearson and Mr. F.
Bower had collected the following 
Hepatics, most of which are common : Diplophyllum albicans^ 
Scapania imdtilata^ Cephalozia bicuspidata^ C.
divaricata^ Chiloscyphus 
polyanthus^ Kantia arguta, and Pellia epiphylla, all at Uppermill, and 
JiingermaJiia riparia at Saddleworth.
For the Geological Section, Mr. Councillor Nield, of Oldham, 
gave an address on the geological features of the district, after 
which Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., secretary, the only officer of 
the Section present, said that the objects of the excursion may 
be briefly stated to have comprised chiefly, a personal observation 
of the continuation of the great Pennine anticlinal which runs 
directly down the Saddleworth Valley; a more extended idea of 
the powers of denudation in carving out the deep valleys and 
creating the rugged escarpments on every hand ; and a practical 
acquaintance with the Lower Millstone Grits and Upper Yoredales.
These, happily, were all obtained, constituting the day one of the 
highest value in field work.
The section had also the inestimable 
privilege of being conducted by thoroughly practical and experienced 
leaders in the persons of Mr. Watts, F.G.S., manager to the Oldham 
Corporation AVater Works, who had prepared horizontal and vertical 
sections of the rocks met with, and Mr. Councillor Neild, of Oldham, 
one of the ablest lieutenants of Prof.
Wilhamson, F.R.S., in his 
discoveries of fossil plants.
The geologists alighted at Diggle Station, were there received by 
Mr. Nield, and lost no time in making the ascent of the dark and 
lofty hill, right before them, known as Harrop Edge.
This is capped 
like Diggle Edge, Millstone Edge, the Noddle, and other adjacent 
hills, with the Kinderscout Grit.
On the road, a little above the 
Preston's Arms, a halt was made, when a comprehensive view of the 
beautiful scenery of the Saddlew^orth Valley was obtained.
The fine 
escarpments of Diggle and Millstone Edges bounded the view on the 
north east, whilst directly in front, on the other side of the valley, 
stretched the lofty plateaux of the grit moorlands, in places i,8oo to 
1,900 ft.
in height, extending southwards into Cheshire, and broken 
only by the picturesque valley of Greenfield.
Mr. Watts here met the party, and with the aid of his carefully 
prepared contour map, gave very practical instruction in the physical 
geography of the district.
On Harrop Edge being crossed, a descent 
was made in the direction of the ancient village of Castleshaw, where 
Mr. Watts showed the party the site of an old Roman camp, and 
also the direction of the Roman road which crossed the hills of 
Standedge from Slack to it.
The party had been passing over the 
Upper Yoredale Shales on the slopes of the descent, thence arriving 
Naturalist, 
NATURALISTS AT SADDLEWORTH.
at the Yoredale Grits in the lower reaches of the valley.
The 
upheaval of the beds which caused the great anticlinal referred to, 
threw off the overlying Yoredale shales and Grits which were 
formerly capped by the Kinderscout Grits, and created dips east and 
west, known more expressively as the Yorkshire and Lancashire dips.
Then denudation came in attacking and conquering easily the 
openings made by this dislocation, thus forming a wide and ever- 
increasing valley.
The shales are easily carried away, thus under- 
mining the grits, which fall off at the jointing of the rocks.
All the 
way up the ascent were noted huge masses of grit, which certainly 
are the relics of ancient escarpments.
Some of these blocks, from 
long weathering, showed admirably current-bedding on their sides.
The party now ascended Millstone Edge to view the Cudworth 
Quarry, where the Kinderscout Grit is being extensively quarried for 
the use of the new waterworks.
The stone is much intersected by 
joints, but is well adapted for rough work.
In many places it is quite 
of a conglomeritic character, having large pebbles enclosed of white 
quartz.
They then entered the navvies' cabin (the tropical heat of the 
interior being a painful contrast to the fresh breeze outside), where 
Mr. Watts unfolded a large diagram showing the succession of beds 
from the summit of Pule Hill (a lofty elevation to the north east), to 
their present position.
As this is such a valuable and important section, the description 
given by the Geological Survey may be profitable if quoted for 
reference : ' The Kinderscout Grit is very well shown along the road 
to Huddersfield, where it crosses Millstone Edge.
There are here 
three principal beds of grit, separated by two beds of shale.
Further on 
we reach a series of dark shales interposed between the Kinder-scout 
Grit and the Third Grit.
Then the second shale with coal, forming the 
flat partially occupied by Redbrook Reservoir.
Then a bed of sand- 
stone, quarried for road material at Great Nab End, encircling the 
lower flank of Pule Hill.
The steep slopes of the hill are formed of 
the first shale series, containing a coal seam half a foot thick, formerly 
worked by tunnelling.
At the top of the hill we reach what we suppose 
to be the Flagstone, and finally the Rough Rock.' This gives, there- 
fore, a general view of the succession in this part of Yorkshire.
The party then crossed a tract of boggy ground, and ascended 
another grit-capped eminence named the Noddle.
Ever since they had 
crossed Harrop Edge, nearly three hours before, they had observed on 
the very top of this lofty and breezy hill a solitary figure, perched like 
a monument ; when they arrived at the summit they found this to be 
Mr. Brierley, the historian of Saddleworth.
A pleasant conversation 
was then held with that gentleman, during which he described the 
July 1888.
NATURALISTS AT SADDLEWORTH.
salient points of the scenery around them.
The view was most expansive 
and magnificent, and ever and anon bright flashes of sunhght would 
illumine the dark summits and escarpments encircling them.
The head 
of the valley from this point appeared like a gigantic amphitheatre, 
or as may be said, the half of a circular basin with gradually sloping 
sides scooped out by denudation.
A few miles away on the east, 
was a long escarpment stretching across, known as ' Helpet Edge,' in 
which Mr. Neild said the outcrops of several coal-seams of the 
Gannister series occurred, and where some notable discoveries of 
fossil plants had been made by him.
The party now descended the 
steep side of Noddle to Mr. Watts' residence in the valley, where he 
displayed to them a splendid set of specimens of erratic blocks he 
had obtained on the drainage areas of the Oldham Waterworks.
They were certainly varied in their character, and must, when com- 
pleted, throw much light upon the glaciation of the district.
To 
name a very few, they comprised Criffel and Eskdale granites.
Lake 
district felsites, syenites, etc.
; Permian nodule containing Schizodus, 
Silurian grits and schists, etc.
The specimen which occasioned most 
controversy and speculation was an almost perfect example of a 
famihar Liassic fossil {Gryphcea iiicurvd) he had obtained from the 
drift.
Could this be a relic of an ancient Liassic area, now altogether 
removed by denudation, as many other deposits have undoubtedly 
been ?
Mr. Watts most kindly presented each member with a list of 
the specimens exhibited.
He also showed a fine example of a 
neolithic axe, found in a cleft of the grit at Cudworth Quarry.
Mr. Watts now conducted the party to inspect the gigantic puddle 
trench now being constructed for the new reservoir at Lower 
Castleshaw.
He described the character of the strata met with in 
excavating to the depth of 90ft., viz., surface soil, i ft.; gravel, 13 ft.; 
sandy loam, 12 ft.
; laminated marl, 3 ft.
; yellow loam, i ft.
; followed 
by blue shale.
Some of the party now made a short detour to inspect 
an erratic block in the centre of a field.
It was examined and 
measured, but beyond saying that it was a trap-rock, its exact deter- 
mination must be deferred for a more minute consideration.
It was 
5 ft.
by 8 ft.
6 in., and its longest axis north and south.
And now Mr.
Watts was obliged to leave the party, but before doing so, Messrs.
Adam son, F.G.S., and Hemingway expressed on their behalf the great 
obligations all were under for the care and ability with which he had 
acted as conductor.
The Section for Micro-Zoology and Micro-Botany was not 
represented, and the proceedings were concluded by a vote of thanks 
to the Professor for presiding, moved by Mr. W.
H. Pearson, and 
seconded by Mr. J.
B. Robinson, F.R.M.S.
Naturalist, 
217 
DIPTERA FROM THE ALFORD AND LOUTH 
DISTRICTS OF LINCOLNSHIRE.
H. WALLIS KEW, F.E.S., 
Lo7uio7i ; late Hon, Sec. to Louth Naturalists' Society, Lo7iik.
In February last, Mr. Jas.
Eardley Mason sent to me a box of flies 
casually collected by him when in search of insects of another Order 
in the Alford district, and they have now been examined by Mr. E.
Brunetti.
Previously, Mr. Verrall had kindly identified others, 
which I had collected in the neighbourhood of Louth.
They are as 
follows : — 
ALFORD DISTRICT.
Chloromyia formosa, Chapel, 26th July, 1885 ; Sandhills, Chapel, 
5th July, 1886.
Microchrysa polita, Alford, two; Well, one, June 1887.
SargUS cuprarius, Claythorpe, 6th July, 1887 ; Chapel, two, July 
1887.
Haematopota pluvialis, Alford, one ; Well, one, 3rd July, 1887.
Chrysops csecutiens, Alford.
Thereva annulata, Chapel, 19th July, 1886.
Eutolmus rufibarbis, Chapel, 12th July, 1886.
Empis borealis, Well, 6th June, 1885.
Eristalis tenax, Greenfield, 8th June, 1887 ; Alford, three, Sep- 
tember and December, 1886.
Eristalis arbustorum, Rigsby, 13th September, 1886; Chapel, 
August 1887.
Volucella pellucens, Claythorpe, 6th July, 1887.
Helophilus pendulus, Chapel, August 1887.
Syritta pipiens, Alford, ist September, 1887.
Xylota segnis, Greenfield, 8th June, 1887.
Rhing-ia campestris, Well, 5th June, 1887.
Chilosia cestracea, Chapel, 26th July, 1885.
Syrphus ribesii, Chapel, 25th July, 1887 ; Alford, 27th June, 1887 ; 
Well, 5th June, 1887.
Piatychirus clypeatus, Chapel, August, 1887.
Baccha obscuripennis, Rigsby, 13th September, 1886.
Musca corvina, Chapel, August 1887.
Pollenia rudis, Rigsby, two, 3rd April, 18S7 ; Alford, 29th 
December 1886; Claythorpe, 6th July, 1887.
Morell ia hortorum, Chapel, 26th May, 1885.
July i838.
2t8 
KEW : DIPTERA FROM ALFORD AND LOUTH, 
Cyrtoneura stabulans, Alford, 28th February, 1887.
Spilog"aster communis, Well, June 1887.
Limnia marginata, Sutton-le-Marsh, three, 5th August, 1885 ; 
Chapel, one, August 1887.
Scatophaga stercoraria, Chapel, 26th July, 1885 Chapel, 9th 
August, 1886; Well, June 1887.
Palloptera arcuata, Well, June 1887.
Platystoma seminationis, Well, 27th June, 1886.
Sepsis cynipsea, Well, 22nd September, 1886; Claythorpe, 6th 
July, T887.
Themira putris, Well, June 1887.
Micropeza corrigiolata, Well, 6th June, 1885.
Opomyza germinationis, Claythorpe, 6th July, 1887.
Phora rufipes, Alford, January 1887.
Ptychoptera contaminata, Rigsby, 3rd August, 1885.
Limnobia flavipes, Greenfield, two, 8th June, 1887.
Trichocera regelationis, The Sycamores, Alford, 2nd December, 
1887.
Tipula gigantea, Well, June 1887.
Hippobosca equina, Well, 8th September, 1886.
LOUTH DISTRICT.
Chloromyia formosa Scop., Horncastle Road, 24th July, t886.
Dysmachus trigonus Mg., Mablethorpe, June 1887.
Empis livida L., near Louth, 1887.
Empis tesseliata F., Burwell Wood, 1887.
Dolichopus seneus Dg., near Louth.
Erfstalis tenax L., Louth, 27th March, 1887.
Eristalis pertinax Scop., Kenwich Lane, 1887.
Eristalis arbustorum L., Kenwich, 12th August, 1886.
Volucella bombylans L., near Louth.
Chrysophilus auratus F., three, near Louth.
Borborus equinus Fen., near Louth.
Scatophaga stercoraria L., two, near Louth.
Chilosia pubera Ztt., Haugham Wood, 1887.
Cyrtoneura stabulans Fen. and Blepharoptera serrata L., 
7, Lee Street, Louth, February 1887.
Bibio johannis L., Hallington.
Bibio marci L., two, near Louth, 1887.
Mr. Yerrall pointed out that Chilosia pubera Ztt. is not a common 
insect, but is probably widely distributed.
I took my specimen on 
a flower of Caltha palustris.
Naturalist, 
2T9 
INSECT MIGRATION AT HELIGOLAND.
Contributed r,v JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U.
In the notice of Heligoland as given in the January number of T/ie 
Naturalist I have very briefly alluded to the insect migration as 
observed on that island.
I am not aware that any list, partial or 
complete, of the diurnal and nocturnal lepidoptera in Mr. Gatke's 
collection has been published, excepting a short notice by M.
Edm.
de Selys-Longchamps in a paper which originally appeared in the 
' Bulletin de la Societe Zoologique de France,' t.
vii.
1882, under 
the title of ' Excursion a File d'Helgoland en Septembre 1878.' 
This paper, of which, through the kindness of the author, I possess 
a separate copy, has reference almost exclusively to the migratory 
avi-fauna of Heligoland ; in the concluding paragraph, a translation 
of which is here given, there is a short notice and list of butterflies 
and moths which have from time to time occurred.
M. de Selys-Longchamps says ' Mr. Gatke is not an entomologist, 
but he has collected all the insects that he has been able to meet 
with in Heligoland.
Subjoined is a list of the Diurnal Lepidoptera 
and the Sphingidae that I saw in his cases.
I took the names very 
hurriedly ; however, I do not think there is any serious error.
The 
species of Diurni which are preceded by an asterisk are those 
found as a rule nearly every year.
The others have been collected 
only very accidentally.
DIURNI (RHOPALOCERA).
*Papilio machaon.
Vanessa antiopa.
Papilio podalirius.
* Vanessa C -album.
Aporia cratsegi.
*Vanessa atalanta.
* Pier is rapce.
*Vanessa cardui.
*Pieris napi.
Argynnis dia.
*Pieris brassicoe.
Argynnis lathonia.
*Leucophasia sinapis.
Argynnis aglaja.
Colias palfieno.
Argynnis paphia.
Colias hyale.
Melitrea didyma.
Colias ecUisa.
*Satyrus semele.
*Rhodocera rhamni.
Melanargia galatea.
Polyommatus phlreas.
I'arargc mivra.
Polyommatus hippothoe.
Pararge mega^ra.
Lycrena acis.
Pararge xgeria.
Lycrena arion.
Coenonympha pamphilus.
LycDsna icarus.
C(ienonyn-)j)ha tiphon.
Apatura iris.
Crenonympha iphis ?
Limenitis sibylla.
Epinephele janira.
Vanessa polychloros.
Epincphcle tithonus.
*Vanessa urticre.
Epinephele hyperanthus.
^Vanessa io.
Hesperia comma.
July 1888.
220 
CARABUS NITENS IN SWALEDALE.
CREPUSCULARIA (SPHINGID.^).
Sphinx ligustri.
Deilephila celerio.
Sphinx convolvuli.
Smerinthus ocellatus.
Sphinx pinastri.
Smerinthus populi.
Deilephila galii.
Smerinthus tilioe.
Deilephila euphorbice.
Acherontia atropos.
Deilephila elpenor.
Macroglossa stellatarum.
Deilephila porcellus.
Zygaena minos.
Among the Bombycidse we must notice the singular melanism 
of Spiloso7na lubricipeda named zati7na Cramer (radiata Steph.), 
almost exclusively peculiar to Heligoland.
Mr. Gatke has raised 
a point which proves, by the variation of examples, that it is a 
variety and not a distinct species.
It is met with, but very rarely, in 
Holland and on the east coast of England.
The list of butterflies is composed chiefly of species which 
exist in Southern Norway, to which may be added some others 
which are found in Germany.
In reply to some questions I asked Mr. Gatke in reference to 
migratory Lepidoptera, he writes me : — ' I can assure you that my 
cases only contain those that I have obtained here, the greatest part 
taken by my own hands.
The specimens were often very faded and 
ragged, and in those instances I procured good specimens from the 
Continent, which I have placed side by side with those caught here.
' Those I was not able to identify I sent to friends good enough 
to determine them for me.
Such was the case with Meiifcea didyma 
(whose appearance so much surprised you, also its freshness), and 
which has been determined on good authority.
' Of Deilephila celerio I took one very fresh example.
I took 
twice in my own garden the pretty little nacreous white Pyrahd, 
which I was told is the Margarodes unionalis Hiibn., and the habitat 
of which is the South of France.' 
The information given by Mr. Gatke, sincere and frank as is 
everything he writes, shows that if there is any error in this list, it 
must not be attributed to him.' This concludes the remarks.
I am 
aware that anything connected with the migration of insects at 
Heligoland must be of considerable interest to English entomologists, 
and, as there are doubtless many who have not seen, or who would 
not be able to obtain a copy of M.
de Selys-Longch amps' paper, 
I have ventured to give an English translation of ,it.
NOTE—COLEOPTERA.
Carabus nitens in Swaledale.
— On the 20th of May, a bright and sunny 
day, while Mr. Roebuck and I were investigating the plateau on which, at an 
altitude of 1,620 ft., Birkdale Tarn is situate, I found a couple of examples of 
this handsome beetle.
On the previous evening we noticed C.
violacetis on a 
mountain path near Keld.
— W.
Eagle Clarke, Leeds, May 22nd, 1888^^ 
5 JUL.
1888 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals.
Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, sliowing 
what species are or.have, within liistorical periods, been found in the county.
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., & Vm. DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
lAIAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
'The authors of this catalogue ma.y take a pride ni their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.'— .4 Mog. Nat.
Hist 
' The work is an excellent one of its kind.'— A i/icu^t-u?;!.
Just Published, ^vo, served, 6d.
A LIST OF BrTtISH BIRDS 
(REVISED TO APRfL 1887), 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., etc., 
Editor 0/ Vois.
3 and 4 of YarrelVs '  Hisiory of British Birds,'' 
For Labelling Specimens, or for Reference ; the various species, whether those 
Breeding in the British Islands, Occasional Visitors, or of doubtful history, being 
distinctively printed.
GURNEY & JACKSON, Successors to Mr. VAN VOOl^ST, i, Paternoster Row.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. t, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
AflTords a medium through which infonnation on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
containsQueries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, E.xtracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Cohunn.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AHD MATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in everj- department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchauses," c^c.
Both Journals are edited and published hy -Mr. Ai.i rki) .Allex, Hon.
.Sec. P.M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King WiUiam St., Strand, W.C.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by JOHN W.
TAN" LOR, F.L..S.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by ihe 
leading Conchologists of the day.
—Vol. VII.
commenced ]anuary 1888.
X'oi.s.
I., IL, III., IV., v., & VI.
may still be had.
This Journal, edited hy Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addresseil c o Taylor 
I'rothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Hunslet Road, Leeds), i.s the organ 
)r the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in reluni for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of j^roj^osal of new members may be hail from the Secretary, 
THOS.
W. BELL, 2, Carr Lane, Leeds.
THE N^ATTJRAIjIST.
The Editors hope to publish the /ollowiug papers ivithiii the 7iext /eiv tjtonths: — 
North of England Specimens in the British Museum.— T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Conchological articles desired.
Notes on the Lapwing {J'anell7ts zndgaris).—] .
A. Jackson.
Botanical articles desired.
A List of some Hemiptera-Heteroptera of Lincolnshire.— J.
Eardlev Mason.
Geological articles desired.
NOW READY, 224 PAGES, 125 ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY 8vo.
PRICE 7s.
6d.
THE STRUCTURE AND LIFE-HISTORY OF 
%.\\ |ntr0hTcti0n to i\t ^ttibg of Ingetts.
L. C.
Ml ALL and' ALFRED DENNY.
LONDON: LOVELL REEVE & CO.
LEEDS: RICHARD JACKSON.
WORKS BY 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
First-Assistant in the Herbarium of the Royal Gardens, Kew.
Will shortly be published, price 5s., 
A HANDBOOK OF THE AMARYLLIDE^ 
(Including the ALSTRCEMERIE.E and AGAVE.E), containing descriptions 
of 61 Genera and 670 Species, with their Yarieties, Synonyms, and Geographical 
Distribution.
A HANDBOOK OF THE FERN-ALLIES, 
Containing descriptions of all the Genera and Species of Equisetace.^;, 
Lycopodiace.^;, Selaginellace.^e, and Rhizocarpe^.
Price 5s.
{See Revieio in this numbey of ' The Naturalist.^) 
A FLORA OF THE ENGLISH LAKE DISTRICT, 
With the Yertical Range of all the Species, and Localities for the Rarities.
Price 7s.
6d.
LONDON: GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN.
In Preparation, under the auspices of the Yorkshire Naturalists^ Union, to be 
published as part of their Transactions, a SECOND EDITION OF 
NORTH YORKSHIRE: 
STUDIES OF ITS BOTANY, GEOLOGY, CLIMATE, AND PHYSICAL 
GEOGRAPHY.
The first edition was published in 1863, and has long been out of print.
No. 157.
AUGUST 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
-NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF KNGLANI).
Xi'/sof/, M.B.O.U.: 
; Boroughbridge.
— 
W EDITED BV 
W_ \ y^r^ DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
WM.
EAGLE CI>ARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESJ'ONDEKKNDIK i\tITGLIED DF.S () U N IT HOI.OG ISC H E.N VEKEINS IN WIEN.
Gloutcufs : 
The Irruption of Pallas" Sand-Gi ouse 
Co. Diirliain, Isle of ]\[an, and Cleveland, Yorkshire — /'.
H. 
Derbvshiie and Nottin^hainshire — />.
IVhitlock 
Rev.'E.
Ponsonby Ktnibiey, J\1..A..
M.B.O.U.
Gyrfalcons in the Lake District— iv^r/.
H. A.
Macpherson, M.A., M.B.O.U.
Crossbills in He.\\^o\a.x\A— Contributed by Jolm Cordeniex, M.B.O.U.
.. 
Notes on 'The Flora of West Yorkshire' — A.
Craig Christie, F.L.S.
North of England Specimens in the British Collection at the British Museum 
T. D.A. Cocke ret I, M.C.S 
Helix hortensis and its variation — George Roberts, 31.
C.S.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Robin Hood's Bay 
Newts near Warrington — Liiuicens G^-eeving ..
Some Ingleborough Coleoptera — J.
W. Carter 
Bibliography— Mollusca, 1886 and 1887 
A New Manual of British Birds (Review) 
Westmorland and Its Natural History (Review) 
Notes— Ornithology 222, 224, 234.
236 
Cuckoo in Berwick Town — P.
Maclngan, M.D.; Arrival of Crossbills on the 
Yorkshire Q.oVi%X.— W .
Eagle Clarke.
F.L S., M.B.O.U.; Siskins in North 
Derbyshire — F.
IV.
Dickinson; The Eared Chat not a British Bird — 
W. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., M.B.O.U.
; Nesting of the Hawfinch near New- 
castle — Thos.
H. Hed^vort/t ; The Solan Goose near Bridlington — JSTatthciv 
Bailey; Black - throated Diver near Bingley — E.
P. P.
Buttcrfield ; Alarm 
Note of the Woodcock— A'cz/.
J. C.
Atkinson, D.C.L.
; Notes from Flam- 
boroiigh — Matthew Bailey; Bittern near Ripon — H.
S. Byers ; The Ornith- 
ology of Skiddaw, Sea Fell, and Helvellyn — //.
A. .Macpherson.
Note— Mammalia 
Capture of a Seal in the Aire at Rawclifte — 7'.
Bunker.
Note — Hemiptera 
Hemiptera-Heteroptera in the Isle of Man — Jas. Eardley Maso7t.
Note— Conchology 
Reappearance of Canal Shells at Agbrigg near Wakefield — Geo. Roberts, M.C.S.
Note— Geology .
The Evidences of Glacial Action near Ingleton^ — Robert B.
Baldeiston.
Notes— Lepidoptera 
Lepidoptera near Halifax in 1887 — G.
F. Harding; Thecia lubi on Harden Moor, 
Wharfedale — E.
/'.
P. Bntterjield ; Stigmonota dorsana at Axwell — Titos.
H. 
Hedivorth.
Note— Coleoptera 
Carabus glabratus and other Beetles in the Lake District — J.
]V.
Carter.
Notes -Botany 
Varieties of Viola odorata — F.
B. IVhitlock ; Ceterach officinaruni in Wensley- 
dale still — /''.
A. Lees.
Notes and News 
I'AGE 
222 
224 
225 & 226 
227 to 231 
232 
237 to 242 
243 & 244 
245 & 246 
247 to 252 
233 & 234 
235 & 236 
242 
226 
232 
234 
J44 & 246 
246 
246 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C".
McCORQUODALE & CO.
LIMITED, CaRDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basingham.
Street.
All Commtsnications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
ICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only).
5s^,__gost_f!:fi£^ 
The NATURALIST.
>co< 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Smithsonian Institution.
— Report for 1885, ^^^^ 2.
[The Institution.
Revue Bryologique, 1 5® Annee, 1888, No. 4.
[T.
Husnot, Redacteur.
Philadelphia Acad.
Nat. Sci.— Proc.
1888, No. i, Jan., Feb.
[The Academy.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Soc.
— Trans., vol.
iv., Part 9, June 1888.
[The Society.
Flora of Ashton-under-Lyne and District.
8vo., 84 pp.
[Mr. J.
Whitehead.
The Zoologist, vol.
12, No. 139, 3rd Series, July 1888.
[J.
E. Harting, Editor.
The Mineralogical Society.
— List of Members, March 1888.
[The Society.
The Mineralogical Magazine, vol.
8, No. 36, May 1888.
[The Society.
W. Cash.
— Fossil Fructifications of Yorks.
Coal Measures, 8vo, reprint.
[Author.
Essex Naturalist, vol.
ii, Nos. 5 and 6, May and June, 1888.
[Essex Field Club.
Notarisia, Ann.III,No. ii,Luglio 1888.
[G.
B. deToni eD.
Levi- Morenos, Redattori.
Journal of Conchology, vol.
v. No. 11, July 1888.
[J.
W. Taylor, Editor.
Scottish Naturalist, No. 20, New Series, July 1888.
[Prof.
J. W.
H. Trail, Editor.
Yorkshire Notes and Queries, Part 12, July 1888.
[J.
Horsfall Turner, Editor.
Journal of Microscopy, New Series, vol.
i, No. 3, July 1888.
[Postal Micr.
Soc.
Leeds Philosophical and Lit. Soc, — Annual Report for 1887-88.
[Society.
John Watson.
— A Year in the Fields ; 8vo, boards, 118 pp.
[D.
Douglas, Publisher.
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds, by Howard Saunders.
Parts 1-3.
[Messrs.
Gurney and Jackson.
Flora of North-east Ireland, by Stewart and Corry.
Crown .8vo, pp.
331.
[Belfast Naturalists' Field Club.
Psyche, a Journ.
of Entom.
Vol. v, No. 146, June 1888.
[Camb.
Ent. Club, U.S.
Science Gossip, No. 283, for July 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 17, for July 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part 103, for July 1888.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 127, for July 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Wanted.
— Living examples of Limax arborum, L.
Iccvis, and L.
tenellus.
British Land and Freshwater Shells in exchange.
— W^.
A. Gain, Tuxford, Newark.
Yorkshire Neuroptera and Orthoptera.
— I am anxious during the 
present and several future seasons to work up the Neuroptera and Orthoptera of 
our county as much as possible, with a view to publishing a list of species, with 
their localities, etc., and shall be very grateful to all entomologists (or other 
naturalists) who, when out collecting their own particular groups of objects, will 
kindly kill and pin (of course they need not trouble to set them) one or two or 
three specimens of any species they may come across, and send them to me at the 
end of the season — or oftener if it l)e not too much trouble.
The families in the 
Neuroptera wanted are the Z/<^<f//////(/(-<^ (Dragon-fliesK/'<?r//^/<?
(Stone-flies), 
RaphidiidcB (Snake-flies), Ostnylidce, H enter obidce., Chrvsopidce (Lacewing-fiies), 
Cojiioptetygidce, Pa^iorpidce (Scorpion-flies), and the Trichoptera (Caddis-flies).
The two other British groups, Psocidce and Epheinerida (May-flies), I do not 
propose to touch at present.
The Orthoptera include the ForficulidiB (Earwigs), 
BlattidcE (Cockroaches), Acridida: (Grasshopper and Locusts), and the Achetida 
(Crickets), all of which, with the exception of the several universally abundant 
and distributed species, are wanted.
— Geo. T.
Porritt, Greenfield House, 
Huddersfield, May i8th, 1888.
Conchology.
— I have several specimens of Vefius exoleta which I should 
like to exchange for other Marine specimens.
— Arthur Smith, 103, Freeman 
Street, Grimsby, July nth, 1888.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free- 
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shellf, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
THE IRRUPTION OF PALLAS' SAND-GROUSE.
Co. Durham.
— Six were noticed in a field between Bishop 
Auckland and Byers Green, on June 3rd.
— T.
H. Nelson, Redcar, 
13th July, 1888.
Derbyshire.
— A specimen of this bird came to grief by striking 
the telegraph wires at Breaston, a village near the Derwent, and a 
second bird was reported at the same time ; both occurrences were 
noted at the end of May.
— F.
B. Whitlock, Attenborough, 3rd July, 
1888.
Isle of Man.
— A correspondent residing in the Isle of Man 
informs me that a large flock of about fifty visited the Island early 
in July.
— T.
H. Nelson, Redcar, 13th July, 1888.
Nottinghamshire.
— Mr. Whitaker, of Rainworth, writing to 
The Field, records the occurrence of a single specimen on June 14th.
When first observed it was flying towards him.
He describes it as 
looking like a gigantic Swift.
He also states that it uttered a loud 
note, like ' teck, teck, teck.' — F.
B. Whitlock, Attenborough, 
3rd July, 1888.
Cleveland^ Yorkshire.
— According to the information I have 
been able to collect, it appears that Sand-Grouse {Syrrhaptes para- 
doxus) were seen here in the second week in May, the precise date I 
could not ascertain ; a flock of six was first noticed at the Tees mouth, 
and frequently observed until June.
Most probably all these birds 
perished, as several were found dead on the neighbouring salt- 
marshes ; the tail and a foot of one were brought to me on the 12th 
of June.
On May 22nd a female, in good condition, was picked up 
on the sands east of Redcar ; the ovary contained eggs the size of 
No. I shot.
About the same date another specimen was washed up 
by the tide ; I saw the remains of this bird as late as the 28th of 
June.
On the 7th June five were shot from a large flock near 
Marske.
I had an opportunity of examining them shortly after- 
wards, and secured two ; there were four females and one male ; all 
the females had eggs in the ovaries, and one had evidently nested, as 
the ovary had only two eggs, one the size of a hazel-nut.
On June the 
10th a flock of twelve was seen on the Redcar sand-hills ; on the 
1 2th a flight passed one of the fishing-boats at sea, heading towards 
land.
Other flocks have been reported at various times, but probably 
they formed part of those already mentioned, although, on the other 
Aug. 1888.
p 
222 
CUCKOO IN BERWICK TOWN.
hand, it is not improbable that fresh arrivals may have come over 
June 25th, a pair were seen near the Tees mouth ; 30th, wind N.
strong, I found one on the sands near Redcar ; it had been in the 
water for some considerable time, for the head was gone and the 
body sodden with water.
Same date, a flock of thirteen was flushed 
near the Tees mouth.
July ist, a flock of about a dozen, and an 
odd bird, were on Coatham sands.
3rd, one on the sands near 
Redcar ; it remained within a hundred yards of the town, picking 
amongst the gravel at high-water mark, until disturbed by a passing 
dog.
4th, eight at the Tees mouth, flying W.
9th, two flew past 
Redcar at 6.30 a.m., going N.W., and calling loudly.
Other instances in Cleveland : — 
About the end of May one was picked up at Battersby, on the 
railway, killed by flying against the telegraph wires.
May 23rd, twelve near Whitby, and a male and female shot.
June I St, a female found below the telegraph wires, between 
Hinderwell and Kettleness.
June loth, a flock of twenty near Ormesby.
— T.
H. Nelson, 
Redcar, 13th July, 1888.
Boroughbridge.
— Mr. Christopher Clarke, of Minskip, near 
Boroughbridge, informs me that on the 20th of June he flushed a covey 
of about twenty Sand-Grouse in a clover field between Minskip and 
Staveley.
The birds alighted again in the same field, and so gave 
him a further opportunity of identifying them.
On the 27th of the 
same month he saw a single bird near his farm buildings, within a 
few yards of a spot where some pigeons and poultry were feeding.
When this bird rose he called it, whereupon it turned and flew over 
his head, within easy gunshot.
The birds were not to be found 
yesterday, though a careful search of the field was made.
— 
E. PoNSONBY Knubley, Stavelcy Rectory, July 6th, 1888.
NOTE—ORNITHOLOG Y.
Cuckoo in Berwick Town.— It is seldom that dwellers in towns have the 
pleasure of hearing the unmistakable note of this summer wisiiov [Cticiihcs canorus).
This morning about five o'clock I listened to it with pleasure for some time, the 
bird being in a tree behind my house.
I had a similar expeiience three or four 
years ago at the same season : returning from one of those night expeditions to 
which country doctors are liable, I heard, on going to my bedroom about four a.m., 
the note of the Cuckoo from the same trees.
Rather apprehensive that I might 
not be credited if I related this at the breakfast table, I awoke two or three 
members of my family in order to bear witness to the unusual phenomenon.
I suspect that in both cases the birds had just arrived from their continental 
winter resorts, for my house is within half a mile of the sea, with nothing but 
green fields intervening, and the trees in the little garden must no doubt be a 
welcome resting-place after a flight across theNorth Sea.
— P.
Maclagan, Berwick, 
May 1st, 1888.
Naturalist, 
GYRFALCONS IN THE LAKE DISTRICT.
Rev. H.
a. MACPHERSON, M.A., M.B.O.U., 
Carlisle; Joint-Author of ' The Birds of Cumber Iniut.'' 
I NOTICE that the July number of The Naturalist contains some 
remarks on the three Gyrfalcons well known to have been obtained 
in the Lake district.
Particulars regarding such rare birds are so 
important that I may fairly claim to add a few words to what has been 
there said ; especially as I have personally interviewed all the persons 
<:oncerned, and carefully examined the specimens on many occasions.
As regards the statement of Mr. John Watson, that Mr. Goodchild 
sent him ' privately printed notes,' I may point out that not only are 
two of the specimens already mentioned in ' The Birds of Cumber- 
land,' but all three birds were recorded in detail in the ' Transactions 
of the Cumberland and Westmorland Association,' of which I have 
the honour to be the zoological recorder.
The Greenland Falcon is, as Mr. Watson states, preserved in the 
fine collection of the Musgrave family at Edenhall, Penrith, and 
a grand bird it is.
The skin of the Iceland Falcon, killed at Winton, was deposited 
some years ago in the Carlisle Museum by my friend Mr. J.
G. Good- 
child.
There it remains, and only about six months ago I called 
Mr. Duckworth's attention to the fact that we had omitted this 
specimen from notice in the ' Birds of Cumberland.' I was myself 
responsible for draughting our Httle book, and how I forgot this 
specimen, which was in my charge, I cannot say, but I was working 
under high pressure.
The remains of the Iceland Falcon, killed on Cross Fell, have been 
in my own possession for the last four years.
The late Mr. Greenwell, 
their original owner, had a long talk with me about the specimen, some 
two years previous to his lamented decease ; he showed me all his 
notes, and handed over to me this bird's sternum and feathers.
To conclude, it is perfectly true that the three Gyrfalcons above 
mentioned are the only authentic ones that we know to have been 
obtained in the Lake counties.
But both Mr. Hodgkinson of Preston, 
and the late James Fell of Carlisle (who only died about six weeks 
ago), described to me how they each met with a white Gyrfalcon in 
the north of Cumberland, though neither of the birds were shot.
Mr. Harris of Cockermouth also favoured me with some information 
regarding an Iceland Falcon caught near Workington, but this is 
believed to have been an escaped bird.
V'arious ' white hawks," which 
have been reported to me from time to time by keepers, have proved 
to be light-coloured l^uzzards and Rough-legged P)Uzzards.
Aug. 1888.
224 
CROSSBILLS IN HELIGOLAND.
Contributed by JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U.
In a letter dated July ist, Mr. Gatke sends the following interesting 
notes of the occurrence of the Crossbill on migration at Heligoland 
' Have you seen any Crossbills {Loxia curvirostrd) ?
We are 
swarming here with them.
Since the i6th of June there have been 
flights from to, 20, 50 — -and sometimes all the hawthorns in my 
garden you know so well are crammed with them.
There must 
during some days have been hundreds dispersed amongst the foliage.
When they are feeding they remain quite dumb, and only when 
taking wing the whole chorus begins, calling " ciit, ciit, cut." I have 
just mounted an old male, almost as red all over as a male Frin- 
gilla erythriniis : a few with white bars have beet?
reported, but 
I have not seen one.
They are of all shades, from lemon rump to 
orange scarlet, and almost carmine, but the greater number, as you 
may fancy, are grey birds, but not a single striped young one amongst 
them.
These birds are rather out of date ; they are not regular 
visitors to this island, years intervene without any being seen, and 
when they do appear it has almost invariably been in August, with 
boisterous north-westerly winds and rain ; this year flight has been 
two months too early, and came with fine sunny weather.
All are in 
excellent plumage — wings, tail, and all.' 
Mr. Thos.
Winson writes from the Spurn under date of July 17th — 
' Some Crossbills were shot here last week, and one caught alive and 
kept a week on board the Bull Lightship, when it escaped and flew 
away.' ===== 
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Arrival of Crossbills on the Yorkshire Coast.
— Crossbills, I have just 
heard, have arrived on the Holderness Coast.
This is a most interesting fact, and 
especially so when taken in conjunction with Mr. Gatke's excellent note on 
this species at Heligoland on this page.
I hope to have further informa- 
tion furnished, and invite others to send in any notes they may have on the 
appearance of this species in the North of England.
— VV.
Eagle Clarke, 
Edinburgh, July 20th, 1888.
Siskins in North Derbyshire.
— While on the moors of North Derbyshire 
on the 8th December, 1887, Mr. West (curator to the Rotherham Naturalists' 
Society) and myself had the good fortune to come across a small flock of Siskins 
{Chrysomitris spinns), consisting of three males and two females, all of v^^hich we 
secured on account of their rarity, although it seemed a pity to take such harmless 
lives.
There was a heavy fall of snow on the ground at the time, and the birds 
were feeding in a small clump of alders which we were beating through in search 
of Woodcock.
I had never met the bird wild before, although I had seen it in 
a caged state.
Mr. Cordeaux speaks of it as very rare, so I thought the occurrence 
worth recording.
— F.
W. Dickinson, Rotherham.
Naturalist, 
225 
NOTES ON THE 
'FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.' 
A. CRAIG CHRISTIE, F.L.S., 
Edinbicrgh ; Hoji.
Sec. Scottish Natnrnl History Club.
I HAVE only had time to glance over Mr. Lees' magnum opus, and now 
send a few notes which I have jotted down in the course of doing so.
Thalictrum alpinum L.
(Page m).
This is certainly in the 
vicinity of Settle, but as the plant is very common with us in 
the North I do not recall the exact locality ; ' hills at the back 
of Settle ' is the most exact definition.
I have no doubt it is on 
Ingleborough and your other big hills.
Sagina eu-apetala E.B.
(Page 169).
Settle.
Sagina ciliata Fries.
(Page 169).
Settle.
Sagina nodosa (The S.
glandulosa Bess.).
(Page 170).
I have 
found this on the river side above Settle, on sand.
Melilotus alba Lam.
(Page 192).
In very large quantity in an 
old quarry near Skipton ; was there for a number of years.
Prunus padus (Page 206) is called 'hagberry' in many parts of 
Scotland, where the rough furrows in a peat moss are called 
^haggs'; as the species grows on that kind of ground I have 
no doubt the name originated in that way.
Alchemilla airvensis Scop.
(Page 208).
Is found on the hills 
above the Victoria Cave, and also at Malham Cove.
Linaria minor Desf.
(Page 338).
On dry ground at Settle, also 
on the railway-line.
Asplenium septentrionale Hull.
(Page 502).
This will 
probably be found on the south side of Ingleborough.
In all 
the Scotch stations that I know this plant grows on trap rocks, 
and if there are any trap dykes on Ingleborough they should 
be carefully examined.
Asplenium adiantum-nigrum L.
(Page 504).
Malham, Settle, 
and Giggleswick, on Limestone.
Aspidium lonchitis Sw.
(Page 507).
1 have seen nothing like 
the true plant near Settle, and forms of ' aculeatuni ' are often 
confounded with it ; it is more likely to be on Ingleborough, 
Penyghent, etc., than at a lower elevation.
No record for this 
plant ought to pass unless the specimen is in good fructification.
Nephrodium aemulum Newm.
(Page 511).
Willi us in Scotland 
this plant occurs on sandstone ; the Settle district is a \ ory 
unlikely one for it, being far too dry.
Aug. 1888.
226 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
Polypodium phegopteris (Page 513).
I have seen this near 
Bradford, but do not know the name of the locality.
Ophiog"lossum vulgatum L.
(Page 515).
At Malham Cove 
in quantity.
Lycopodium inundatum L.
(Page 517).
Is I believe more 
common than is usually supposed, but is often hidden by 
surrounding vegetation.
I know one locality which has been 
on record for over forty years.
Note.
— To Mr. Christie's positive impression (which, however, cannot rank a& 
accepted fact) as to the occurrence of Thalictrmti alpinuin ' on the hills behind 
Settle,' I might fairly reply in the very words used with regard to my record of 
Nep]irodiu})i iCJinilii/n in Settle Woods, that the district is ' an unlikely one,' being 
' far too dry/ but my record rests on the imimpeachable testimony of Edward 
Newman, an authority on Ferns ; whilst as against Mr. Christie's — a comparative 
stranger's — opinion, there is the fact that the Alpine Rue is a plant of wet boggy 
mountain-.
and rill-sides; that bogs over the fissured limestone area of Settle are ill 
developed, and that not one of the many lynx-eyed botanists, from Ray, Lister, 
Blackstone, and Dickson downwards, to Tatham, Hovvson, and others of latter 
days, have ever observed the alpine Thalictnini thereabout.
Mr. Christie's lack 
of doubt, and attempted justification for not having made a precise note of where 
he saw it, cannot, under the circumsiances, be allowed to have any real weight.
I am unwillingly constrained to add that the remarks upon the probability of 
AspleniuDi septejitrioiialc being ultimately found 'on the south side of Ingleborough 
if there are any trap dykes' there, must come under the same imponderable 
category, Mr. Christie being clearly unaware that there is no irap or l^asaltic rock 
anywhere in West York.
— F.
A. Lees.
Duplicated Generic Names.
— As a supplement to the list given on pp.
157-8, 
the following instances of generic names duplicated either in the Animal or 
Vegetable kingdoms may be given, and doubtless research would add many 
others: — Gaihis, in Pisces and Mollusca (iJentaliidrej ; Argiope.
in Brachiopoda and 
Araneida ; Troglodytes, in Primates and Aves ; Diplotaxis, in Phaenogamia and 
Coleoptera (Melolonthidce) ; Liparis, in Lepidoptera and Orchide?e ; Microphysa, 
in Mollusca (Helicidae) and Heteroptera ; Oncidiiim, in Mollusca and Orchideoe ; 
Patitla, in Mollusca and Lepidoptera ; and Corydah's, in Neuroptera and Phseno- 
gamia.
Li such cases, unless a synonym can be brought forward for use, I should 
be disposed to alter the termination or otherwise amend the later name, instead of 
proposing an entirely new one.
— T.
D. A.
Cockerell, West Cliff, Custer Co., 
Colorado, June i6th, 1888.
Phyllodoce in Annelida and Ph^enogamia is another duplication.
— F.
A. Lees.
Lincolnshire Natural History.
— Co-operation in collecting information 
respecting the Marine Mollusca of Lincolnshire is desired.
Lists and 
specimens may be forwarded to the care of Mr. H.
WaL[JS Kew, 19, Stonenest 
Street.
Tollington Park, London, N.
NO TE— MAMMALIA .
Capture of a Seal in the Aire at Rawcliffe.
— A ^>hort time ago a large 
.Seal made its appearance in the Aire at Rawcliffe, having come up the Ouse.
It 
was first seen passing through Hook Bridge.
After rounding Howden Dyke, it 
was lost sight of, but reappeared in passing Boothferry, and was followed from 
Airmyn to Rawcliffe by a crowd of people on the banks.
At Rawcliffe it was 
shot, and it afterwards drifted with the tide towards Howden Dyke Sands, where 
it stranded.
It was found to be a large dog seal, measuring six feet from nostrils 
to tail.
It was skinned by some of the villagers, and the skin had no defect but 
the gunshot wound.
— T.
Bunker, Goole, 24th March, 1888.
Naturaiist, 
227 
NORTH OF ENGLAND SPECIMENS 
IN THE BRITISH COLLECTION AT THE 
BRITISH MUSEUM.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL, M.C.S., 
JVc'si Cliff, Custer County, Colorado, U.S.A.
For many years, since they were removed from their old quarters in 
Bloomsbury, the specimens illustrating the fauna of these islands 
have been inaccessible to the public gaze, and it was not until a short 
time ago that the British room was opened, and the now much- 
improved collections made visible.
On one of my visits I went 
carefully through the entire collection, and noted all the north-country 
specimens, thinking that it might interest the northern naturalists to 
know how they were represented in the Museum.
T use the Museum 
nomenclature throughout, any other being indicated in square 
brackets.
MAMMALIA.
There is the well-known tail-less cat from the Isle of Man, a fine 
specimen, and a Halichoerus grypJms from the Fame Islands (P.
J. 
BIRDS.
Anser brackyrhyiic/ms, Lanes.
Bernicla leucopsis and B.
cana- 
densis, Cumberland.
FalcG cesalon, Lanes., and a 
young one from Derbyshire.
Coracias garnda, York.
Merula torquata., Yorks.
Pagophila ebwiiea., Yorks.
Tringa ca7itttus and 
Philoviachus ptignax, Lines.
Sterna cantiaca, Farne Islands.
Tringa siibarquata, Lytham, 
Lanes.
Himantopus Candidas, Lines.
Tctrao tefrix, Wallington, New- 
castle.
Salnw, hybrid between Com- 
mon River Trout and Sea Trout, 
Sol way.
FISHES.
Salnio salar (male), length Brama rati, Berwick.
46 inches, weight 46 lbs..
River 
Tweed, July.
Myliobatis aquila, Berwick-on- 
Tweed (Yarrell Coll.).
MOLLUSCA.
These are very nicely mounted on black pai)er in glass-topped 
boxes.
The collection is fairly complete, but one cannot help 
regretting much the absence of Dr. Jeffreys' collection, which the 
authorities refused, and which was subsequently purchased by the 
Museum at Washington for ^50 more than the sum refused by 
the British Museum, though the collection was essentially a British 
one, and contained the types of very many British sj^ecies and 
varieties.
Most of the north-country specimens are from \onhum- 
berland, Sunderland, and Scarborough.
Aug. 1888.
228 COCKERELL: specimens in the BRITISH MUSEUM.
Trophon barvice?isis.
Chrysodomus \Fiisus\ turtoni.
Chrysodomus norvegicus (with 
egg -capsule on valve of Mytilus 
modiolus.
Chrysodomus gracilis.
Chrysodo??ius propinquus.
Lioviesus \Buccinopsis^^ dalei 
(with egg-capsules).
Buccinum undaliwi, vars.
Marsenia [ Velutina] fiexilis.
Natica inojilagui.
Natica o-roenlandica.
Northumberland.
Natica islandica (one, broken).
Scalar ia trevelyana.
Litter ilia literal is.
Acfjma virgin ea.
Patella vulgata var, 
athletica.
Chiton Icevis.
Pupa anglica \ringens\ 
Pupa muscorum \j?iargi?iata\ 
Vertigo antivertigo.
Planorbis glaber [parvus].
Scrobicularia piperata.
Moutacuta substriata.
Odostomia ujiidentata.
Odostomia intersti?icta.
Eulima bilineata.
Littorina neritoides.
Lacuna pallidula.
Rissoa parva var.
interrupta 
Rissoa pu7ictura.
Rissoa inconspicua.
Trochus helicinus.
Sunderland, 
Patina \Helcio7{\ pellucida var.
Icevis.
Chiton cinereus.
Chit 071 ruber.
Chiton fascicular is.
Phili7ie scabra.
Cylich)ia cylindracea.
Atys [Bulla] ntriculus.
Chrysodojnus gracilis.
JVatica cate7ia.
Odosto7nia rissoides.
Littori7ia 7'udis^ and vars.
te7ie- 
hrosa and saxatilis.
Littorina litoralis.
Rissoa seniistriata.
Trochus 77io7itagui.
Act7icea [Tectura\ testudinalis.
Chitoji ruber.
Chiton fascicularis.
Aplysia pufictata.
Helix horte7isis [ooooo and 
lutea (123) (45)].
LLelix virgata.
Helix hispida [all the co?ici7t?ia 
are united with hispida in the 
Museum as one species].
Helix sericea [granulata].
Scarborough.
Helix fusca.
Helix aculeata.
Helix lar/iellata.
' 
Hyalinia excavata.
Hyali7iia 7iitidula var.
helniii.
Vertigo pusilla.
Vertigo substriata.
Lit7incea auricularia var.
[shaped 
like rather elongate L.
pe7'egra].
Lini7icsa peregra var.
si7iistrorsa.
Linuicea peregra var.
[Ii7ieata].
Liinncea gluti7iosa.
Pla7iorbis /lautileus.
Pisidiuni ci7iereui7i.
Pholas crispata.
Mya truncata.
Mya are7iaria.
A7io7nia aculeata.
Naturalist, 
COCKERELL: SPECIMENS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
229 
Vo; 
Bythinia tentaculata.
Bythinia leachii.
Valvata piscinalis var.
depressa.
Helix caperata.
Helix fusca.
Helix aculeata.
Helix pulchella.
Helix lamellata.
Sty lifer ttirtoni, Durham.
Aporrhais pespelemni, Yorks.
Littorina rudis var.
jugosa, 
North of England.
Chiton cinereiis^ Whitby.
Chiton ruber ^ Cullercoats.
Diaphana \_Utriculiis\ hyalina, 
Cullercoats (J.
Alder).
Atys utriculus, Berwick.
Helix nemo7'olis [var.
libeliula 
....], Malton (T.
Glover).
Helix nen I oralis [vars.
libedula 
and petivcria 12345], Lytham, 
Lanes.
Helix 7ienioralis 123 x 45, Nor- 
ton, Yorks.
Helix hortensis 123x45, ]Mal- 
ton, Yorks.
Helix rufescens, Preston (D.
Cooper).
Helix hispida^ Preston.
Helix sericea [granulata], New- 
castle.
Helix rupestris, Yorks.
Hyalinia excavata and H.
nitidula var.
helniii, Preston.
Hyalinia nitidula, Newcastle 
(J.
Alder).
Hyalinia glabra (Jeffreys), 
Preston.
Zua [Azeea~\ tridens, Newcastle.
Vertigo edentula, Newcastle 
and Preston.
Aug. i8S8.
K. 
Hyalinia cellaria.
Vertigo a?igustior.
Succiftea putris.
Physa fontinalis [very pale 
variety].
Planorbis spirorbis.
Ancylus oblongus \lacustris\ 
SphcBrium rivicola.
Vertigo niinutissima, Durham.
Vertigo substriata, Preston.
Vertigo pygmcea, Yorks.
and 
Preston.
Clausilia rugosa var.
[nearly 
smooth], Newcastle; var.
dubia, 
Preston and Yorks.
Acfne lineata, Preston.
Limncea peregra var.
[lacusfris\ 
i Cumberland; var.
[small and 
I thin], Westmorland, 
i Physa fontifialis.
Lake Hawes- 
water.
Planorbis jnarginatus monst.
\terebruni\, Rochdale.
Planorbis fontanus, Rochdale.
Planorbis dilatatus, Man- 
chester.
Ancylus fiuviatilis^ \\xstmor- 
land ; var.
\albida\ near Bolton 
Abbey.
Sphariuni lacustre, Yorks.
Pisidiuni henslowanuni^ Pres- 
ton.
Solen ens is, Liveri)ool.
Limnica glabra, Birkenhead.
PanopLca noiTegica, Dogger 
Bank.
Anodonta cygncca var.
[^zellensis\ 
Liverpool, 
j Arion ater [var.
albolateralis\ 
j Isle of Man.
COCKEREL!-: SPECIMENS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
There are also a few species of Mollusca from other districts 
that I have taken note of, as follows : — 
var.
imbri 
Pu rpu ra I a pill us 
cata], Anglesea.
Paludijia cojitecta, Norfolk (the 
geographical range of this species 
in eastern England is peculiar, it 
seems to favour the parts drain- 
ing into the Wash, but north 
and south it appears to be 
extremely rare).
Neriiina fiuviatilis, Orkneys.
Trochiis amabilis, Shetland 
Islands, five specimens.
Testacella haliotidea, Brighton.
Helix nemoralis^ Galway 
(bleached white, one with a 
formula 0030 5).
Helix Jiortensis [var.
lutea 
00305 and 10045], Chichester 
(C Dickens).
Helix pisana [var.
albida\ 
Tenby; var.
\alba\ Falmouth.
Helix virgata^ var.
\leiicozona\, 
Exmouth.
Coclilicella acuta ^ Edmburgh 
(this, as an east-coast locality, is 
remarkable).
Zua lubrica^ Shetland Islands.
Vertigo 
moulinsiana , South- 
ampton (H.
& J.
Groves).
Ve7'tigo pygnma, Suffolk and 
Norwich.
Succinea obloiiga, Battersea (a 
long series, Mr. Smith does not 
know aught of their origin, and 
the locality is so remarkable that 
I cannot help fancying that it 
may be erroneous).* 
Succinea pfeiffen\ Arran and 
Killarney.
Clausilia riigosa «[var.
albi??os\ 
Coggeshall, Essex.
Ccecilioides [Achatina^ acicula, 
Dublin.
Physa hypnorum (small and 
almost colourless var.), Killarney.
Plaiiorbis glaber, Dagenham, 
Essex.
Unio pictorum [large speci- 
mens], River Bure, Norfolk.
Unio tuniidus var.
\^pojiderosa\ 
Highgate.
Limax niaximus \y2iX.ferussaci\ 
Starston, Norfolk.
Ommatostrephes pteropus, North 
Sea [a huge species].
ANNELIDA.
Glossiphonia granifera, North- 
umberland (J.
Alder).
Meckelia anmilata^ Berwick.
Phyllodoce lamelligera^ Pectin- 
aria belgiaca, and Arenicola pisca- 
torum^ Berwick Bay.
HVDROZOA.
PlwntUaria frutescens E.
& S., Northumberland (Dr. Johnston^ 
POLYZOA.
Retepora beaniana King, Northumberland.
ALCYONARIA.
Pennaiula phosphor ea L., Northumberland.
*  Alien to the locality ; brought with laid-down mud, as was tlie case with 
hundreds of exotic plants between 1850 and 60.
— F.
A. L.
Naturalist, 
LEEDS GEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION.
23 1 
PORIFERA.
Halichondria panicea Johnst.
(id.
loc).
Isodictya permollis Bowerb., 
Scarborough (Bowerbank collec- 
tion).
INSECTA.
Entomologists have not hitherto thought it necessary to affix 
localities to their specimens in most cases, and so I have none to 
record.
It seems, however, very desirable that each insect should 
have a locality label, as is always done in other classes of animals.
CRUSTACEA.
Balanus hameri and B.
por- 
Arcturus longicoruis Sby., 
Cullercoats.
Cypris tristriata Baird, Isle of 
Man (Rev. H.
Stowell).
BalaniLS porcatus DaC., on 
Mytihts modioItLs, Northumber- 
land.
catus^ on Fiisus antiquiis, Dogger 
Bank.
Balanus tintinnahdniii, Scar- 
borough.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Amongst the recent elections to the fellowship of the Geological Society of 
London we note the name of Mr. J.
E. Bedford, the newly-elected President of 
the Leeds Geological Association, 
XXX 
The annual meeting of the Leeds Geological Association was recently held 
under the presidency of !Mr. C.
D. Hardcastle.
A report' of the year's work was 
submitted wherein it was staled that the Association is still increasing in strength, 
extending its influence, and consolidating its position.
As some evidence of this, 
the roll of membership which stood four years ago at 39 is now 105.
The autumn 
and winter were profitably employed in evening meetings for the reading of 
papers and the exhibition of specimens.
The field excursions, which are, without 
doubt, the backbone of any geological association, have received unremitting 
attention.
The varied geology of our splendid county has thus been cxlensively 
studied, with corresponding Ijenefit to those who attended.
The attendance at 
meetings and excursions has been most encouraging.
The third part of the 
'Transactions' has met with unqualified approbation.
Whilst relating with 
pleasure the progress of this Association, it is gratifying to know that the pub- 
lished accounts of its work have resulted in a strong geological society being 
formed at Hull, while at I luddersfield a similar step is in contemplation.
Leeds has 
hitherto possessed the only local geological society in ^'orksl lire, and, it rests with 
the members to retain the laurels they have won.
The (hitics of the secretary 
having been too onerous for one individual, it was decided lliai tlic trcasurership 
should no longer be a nominal office, but that its holder should now receive all 
subscriptions and conduct all the financial busint-ss of tlie Association.
An 
assistant secretary was also appointed.
The election of the Executive for the 
coming year resulted a^ follows: — rresidi'nt, Mr. 1.
E. Bedforil, E.G.S.
; vice- 
presidents, Messrs.
T. \V.
P>ell, William Chcelhani, C.
D. Hardcastle.
anil 15.
Holgate, F.G.S.
: treasurer, iM r.
\V.
11.
(lill, Park Collage, Slourton, Ilunslet ; 
librarian, Mr. C.
ISrow ni iilge.
I' .C.S.
: council.
Professor Green, ?»I.A..
l'M\.S., 
Messrs.
C, Brownridge, 1' .
( i.
S. , J ohn Hill, E.
Hawkesworlh, and John Ingleby ; 
assistant secretary, Mr. I.
1''.
Appleby; and secretary, ^Tr. S.
.\.
Adamson, 
F.G.S., 52, Wellclose Terrace, Leeds (fifth time of election), 
Aug. 1888.
232 .
HELIX HORTENSIS AND ITS VARIATION.
GEORGE ROBERTS, M.C.S., 
Lofthoiise, Wakefield.
This species is more common about Lofthouse than Helix nemoralis.
The variety with the three upper bands and the two lower fused, 
making two broad brown bands, and the variety with all the bands 
fused (coaiifa) are the most prevalent.
The type with five bands is 
not common.
Amongst the brown shells a few bandless yellow ones 
occur, and it is probably from these that the variety lilacina is 
produced.
Last year I collected a considerable number of the 
variety lilacina — some of a darkish hue, approaching the brown shells 
in colour, but many more of the lilac colour from which they are 
named.
Many are rosy-lipped, but this feature is not a constant 
concomitant of the lilac colour.
The base is usually yellow, but 
I have some in which the base or ground is white.
Some are banded, 
but the banding is generally obscure.
The individuals of lilacina 
with the bands clearly defined only count about one per cent.
But 
I am informed that it is unusual to find them banded at ail.
It is 
perhaps worth noting that, although the same ordinary colour- 
varieties, brown and yellow, of H.
nemoralis are found together — the 
same as in H.
hortensis — the lilac variety studeria is rarely produced.
I have never seen more than one or two specimens from this neigh- 
bourhood that could be called lilac or purple.
Among the hortensis 
last year I found a small colony of sub-albida (shell nearly white), and 
one specimen among the brown shells with a brown or fuscous lip — 
the variety named by Von Martens fusco-labiata.
NOTE—CONCHOLOGY.
Reappearance of Canal Shells at Agbrigg near Wakefield.— On June 21st 
I examined the Wakefield and Barnsley Canal at Agbrigg, about a mile from 
Wakefield, and dredged up about twenty specimens of Unio Uuuidjis and ten of 
Paludina vivipara., but none of the latter were full-grown.
These two species 
seem to be plentiful this year, but have been scarce for ten years back.
They 
were in the same places in the canal thirty years since, as recorded by Mr. C.
F. 
Tootal in Morris's ' Naturalist.' Along with the above-mentioned species I found 
four specimens of Anodonta anatina, two of Bythiiiia Icachii, two of Neritina 
fliiviatilis, and one of Sphtirium rivicola.
On June 25th I paid another visit to 
Agbrigg Canal and got a dozen more Unio tumidns, six Paludina vivipara, six 
Sphczriiini rivicola, three Anodonta anatina, and two Neritina fiuviatilis.
The 
shells of four of the Unio tumidus are constricted, that is, drawn in or crushed at 
the lower margin as if they had been jammed and grown a' considerable time 
between two stones.
It often happens that several individuals are found together 
all deformed alike.
On June 26th one of the Pahuiina vivipara excluded six 
young about the size of a small pea.
— Geo. Roberts, Lofthouse, June 27th, 1888.
[Mr. Roberts mentions Mr. Tootal's record as being in Morris's 'Naturalist.' 
I have not, however, been able to find his List of Wakefield Shells in that journal, 
or in any other publication to which I have access.
Can any reader state definitely 
where Mr. Tootal's list did appear P—W.D.R.] .
Naturalist, 
233 
A NEW MANUAL OF BRITISH BIRDS.
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds.
By Howard Saunders, F.L.S., 
F.Z.S., &c- With illustrations of nearly every species.
London: Gurney 
and Jackson, I, Paternoster Row. Parts I, 2, and 3, 1888.
Those who are familiar with the literature of the general subject of 
British ornithology will admit that the student of our avifauna is now 
well supplied with most excellent text-books.
The last few years have 
witnessed the completion of the fourth edition of Yarrell's standard 
book, and of the issue and completion of Mr. Seebohm's extremely 
useful work on British Birds, with coloured illustrations of their eggs; 
then we have now appearing at mtervals Lord Lilford's excellent 
coloured illustrations, which form a most desirable companion to 
either of the books just named, and to which we have had from time 
to time to speak of in high terms of praise in these pages.
These are 
fairly exhaustive, and somewhat bulky and expensive works, hence a 
manual on the subject, giving in an epitomised form all that it is 
essential the field -naturalist and student should know about our 
feathered animals — their plumage in all seasons and ages, their life- 
history, their distribution at home and abroad — in as concise a manner 
as possible, is, and has been for many years, a great desideratum.
Such a work commanding the appreciation of naturalists has not, we 
believe, appeared since the excellent little volumes of Mr. Macgillivray, 
issued in 1846.
The book now under consideration supplies this want, 
and supplies it admirably.
The production of such a book requires 
for its successful compilation an accurate and well-read author, and 
it is a matter for sincere congratulation that such a really excellent 
ornithologist has been secured for the task.
We are well aware that 
Mr. Howard Saunders requires no recommendation at our hands, but 
some of our readers are not ornithologists, and we would remind these 
that Mr. Saunders edited Volumes III.
and IV.
of the last edition of 
Yarrell's ' British Birds ' in a fashion that earned for him the gratitude 
of all British ornithologists ; for six years, too, Mr. Saunders filled 
the honourable and most important position of one of the editors of 
the ' Ibis,' the leading journal of scientific ornithology, and it is only 
just to him to say that during his term of office the high standard of 
excellency which has always characterised the pages of that classical 
publication has been most fully maintained.
It must be manifest to 
all that such a desirable book by such an excellent author is a most 
valuable addition to the faunal histories of our islands.
It supplies, 
at a price which places it within the reach of all, a well-illustrated — 
for nearly all the excellent woodcuts of the complete Yarrell are 
given — and thoroughly reliable book, one alike indispensable to the 
naturalist, since it aftbrds him the very essence of British ornithology, 
Aug. 1888.
234 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
and to the tyro because it is cheap and good.
We strongly advise 
all our readers interested in a popular subject to furnish themselves 
with a copy of this excellent work, of which three parts have appeared.
The price is only a shilling per part, and twenty parts are to complete 
the work.— E.
C. 
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
The Eared Chat not a British Bird.
— The reference at p.
24 of the 
* Manual of British Birds,' by Mr. Howard Saunders, to my being responsible for 
including, erroneously, the Eared Chat(6"^zx/cci/a albicollis Vieill.) in the British List 
of Birds pubhshed in the 'Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire,' demands from me 
some notice.
The inclusion of this species was obviously due to the unsatisfactory 
state of the synonymy of several species of Saxicoliiia existing at the time of 
publication, and which is alluded to hy Mr. Saunders and explained iit sup.
I was 
aware that Saxicola stapazina had occurred in Lancashire, and on referring to 
that species in Mr. Dresser's admirable work on the ' Birds of Europe' (ii.
p. 203) 
found that the Black-Eared Chat was there so named.
In 1881, just as we were 
going to press, there appeared Mr. Dresser's 'List of European Birds,' in which 
the nomenclature had been revised to date.
In this list stapazina had no place, 
but the Black-Eared Chat — the stapazina of the ' Birds of Europe ' — appeared as 
Saxicola albicollis (Vieill.
), and thus found its way into our list.
I feel in duty 
bound to make this somewhat detailed explanation, as attention has also been 
called elsewhere to my responsibility for the addition of a bird to the British list 
which has not occurred in our islands.
— W.
Eagle Clarke, Edinburgh.
Nesting- of the Hawfinch near Newcastle.
— You will be glad to learn 
that the Hawfinch has again successfully nested at Axwell Park, the seat of Sir 
Henry Clavering, on the Derwent.
Mr. Battensby, the joiner on the estate, told 
me that three nests of young birds were now on the wing.
— Tiios.
H. Hed worth, 
31, Spoor Street, Dunston-on-Tyne, July 2nd, 1888.
The Solan Goose near Bridlington.
— In the ' Bridlington Free Press ' 
is a paragraph that, as Mr. R.
H. Veitch, gamekeeper at Sewerby House, was 
going his usual rounds, he observed something lying in a fallow field.
On pro- 
ceeding to it, he found it to be a specimen of the Solan Goose or Gannet [Siila 
bassana) ; it was dead, and had about twenty yards of fishing-line entangled about 
it, having swallowed the hook with the line attached.
The bird is supposed to be 
over four years of age, and is in splendid plumage.
— Matthew Bailey, Flam- 
borough, April 3rd, 1888.
NOTE— GEOLOGY.
The Evidences of Glacial Action near Ingleton.
— In my report on the 
above subject, written in October last, I surmised that the thickness of the Lower 
Llandeilo slates at Ingleton does not exceed 6,600 — 7,000 ft., a thicknes deduced 
from the strike of the Coniston shales below Norber and Crummock Dale on the 
one hand and that of the same shales on the reverse side of the fold at Ingleton.
As these shales, however, are very much contorted and dislocated the apparent 
strike is not always exact for any great distance.
At last a band of scoriaceous 
grit has, by its recurrence and association with felspathic ash, given me the exact 
thickness of the Lower Llandeiloes, and what I now recognise as massive syenitic 
Gneiss, as being 5,800 ft.
The succession of Lower Silurian folds, I have also 
identified, the first at Ingleton, the junction of first and second in Crummock Dale 
and near Gods Bridge ; the junction of the second and third close to Horton, 
Helm Gill, and Gawthrop ; and of the fourth and fifth near Sally Beck and Rawthey 
Bridge.
The dip of the Silurian ridge of ' grits ' in Crummock Dale must not be 
taken as 2x\ exact clue to the dip of the Coniston shales, &c., below, owing to a 
considerable degree of uncomformity between the Upper and Lower Silurians.
In relation to the term 'grits,' I must add that I do not for a moment raise the 
question as to the ridge not being an equivalent of grits found elsewhere, but 
personally, I must refuse to call a rock ' grit ' when it presents no lithological 
character of a grit.
— Robert B.
Balderston, Ingleton, July 28th, 1888^ 
Naturalist, 
235 
WESTMORLAND AND ITS NATURAL HISTORY.
The Westmorland Note-Book and Natural History Record.
A quarterly 
magazine, in two divisions.
Demy 8vo., 3s.
per annum.
London : Elliott 
Stock.
Kendal : E.
Gill.
Part I, March 1888.
Part II, June 1888.
Although this new serial, combining Natural History with notes 
on local Archaeology, Dialect, and Folk-lore, might be thought, with 
some warrant, to trench upon the province of The Naturalist as the 
organ of record for the eleven northern counties of England, we have, 
nevertheless, nothing but commendation for the actual performance 
of the natural history work in the two first parts before us.
Agreeably 
unusual, both in the inception and the reahsation, the projectors 
appear to have been far-sighted and felicitous ; they have had clearly 
before them at start what was wanted, and that want they have com- 
menced to supply with care and perspicuity.
Each part of the Note-book is divided into two sections — paged 
separately — with the hindmost of which, the Natural History Record, 
we are, of course, only concerned.
It fills some fifty clearly-printed 
pages, embellished by a judicious use of thick-letter type for species- 
names, in the two parts ; and is edited by Mr. J.
A. Martindale, 
whose name is a quite sufficient guarantee that precision of statement 
and scrupulous accuracy in matters of detail, will be preferred to that 
more showy copiousness which is so often, alas !
the vitiating factor 
in natural history lucubration.
The papers are somewhat fragmentary 
(e.g., the isolated, tentative or rather provisional 'List of Sedges,' 
which might have been made fuller for District 6 at least by easy 
references) as must needs be where the raison d'etre of the whole 
endeavour is ' to work out in full ' what is far from thoroughly known 
at present ; but each paper is, after all, a genuine instahnent — ^a stone 
of known weight and proportion added to the cairn that shall some 
day by such additions become a lasting monument to the labours of 
the early workers.
The first paper is, appropriately, ' Our District,' in 
which the editor briefly sketches its salient features, and it is accom- 
panied by a map (on a sufticient scale, 4 miles to the inch) of the 
Watsonian coaiital area 69, that is to say, Westmorland with that 
detached portion of Lancashire known as Furness, which — drained 
by the Leven, Crake, and Duddon — is phyto-geographically one with 
it.
This map is a good one, showing with commendable clearness 
the six very unequal river-basin districts into which the area is divisible.
The limitations of the Tees district as regards the Troutbeck tributary 
seem not to he quite accurately indicated by the coloured area, but 
this is the only sliortcoming a[)parent.
An instalment of a List of the Larger Kendal b'ungi (by Rev. C.
H. 
Waddell), enumerating 138 species down to Dacrymyces ; a List of 
Aug. 1888.
236 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES.
the Cambrian and Silurian Fossils in the Kendal Museum (by Rev.
Geo. Crewdson) ; a List of the Birds of the Lake District (by Mr.
John Watson) — a too-brief instalment again, and some Meteorological 
Returns, complete the tale of papers in the two first parts.
In conclusion, we can sincerely aver that this serial serves a well- 
considered end, and should reap the success it plainly deserves.
It 
only remains to say — for our part without jealousy — Floreai.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOGY.
Black-throated Diver near Bingley.
— I saw a Black-throated Diver 
{Colyrnhiis arcticus) a week or two ago, which had been shot at Manywells the last 
winter.
It had not attained its full plumage, being probably in its second year's 
moult, and is the only specimen recorded for this district.
— E.
P. P.
Butterfield, 
Wilsden near Bingley, April loth, 1888.
Alarm Note of the Woodcock (Scolopax rusticola).
— On or about 
June 15th, last year, I was walking in a wild place some six or seven miles 
from Dumfries, and about two from New Abbey, where it was said a hamlet had 
once found a site, and in which what might have been the ruins of dwellings 
and their containing enclosures were mingled up with grassy glades and 
straggling groups of natural wood-growth and underwood, when my attention was 
arrested by frequent bird-notes reminding one of the cry of the Curlew when 
suddenly disturbed, and yet, with all their resemblance, distinctly different.
Curlews were there certainly ; for the wood-grown space I was in was separated 
on one side by one of the customary dry granite walls of the district from the moor 
lying at the foot of a considerable range of granite hills.
I was looking for a 
plant or two I was told grew near, or for a butterfly or the like, for some very 
juvenile naturalists of my acquaintance, and I thought I saw a Woodcock go down 
under a holly-bush about ten yards from where I was standing.
Going forward 
quickly to see if I could flush it, I disturbed rather a good moth, which flew out 
into the open and settled among the rough herbage of what would have been a 
damp or boggy place but for the prevalent droughty weather.
Pursuing it, I was 
immediately greeted with a repetition of the notes which had caught my attention 
shortly before.
They came from a pair of Woodcock which were flying about 
just above the tops of the trees, precisely as do the Lapwing, the Redshank, or 
any other of the birds whose habit it is to ' mob ' the intruder upon their nesting 
precincts.
During some fifteen or twenty minutes this was continued, only 
pausing when I went back under cover of the woodland growth.
The moment I 
reappeared in the open, these vociferous attentions were renewed, both birds 
coming within twenty yards of me times without number.
I was already aware 
that the Woodcock bred in considerable numbers in some woods barely a mile 
distant, but I had never before seen anything like this on the part of a nesting 
Woodcock.
Certainly on one occasion, about three years ago, I had heard a 
Woodcock giving utterance to a series of short, rather peculiar, notes (two or three 
of them emitted in quick succession) while on the wing.
There was some 
pigeon-shooting going on in a low meadow about a third of a mile from where I 
was standing, and on the hill-side rising from this meadow to the level of our 
Dan by 'Low Moors,' was a five-and-forty acre bit of young wood which has 
always been a safe place for a cock or two if there were any in the country.
The 
Woodcock I speak of continued to fly round and round in wide circles for a con- 
siderable space of time, and was ' left ' so flying.
It came within shot of me 
half-a-dozen or half-a-score times, and during the whole space of time I continued 
to observe it, the notes I have mentioned continued to be uttered at intervals of a 
minute or two.
I have not seen any notice of either of these habits of the Wood- 
cock in any account or monograph of the bird I have met with, and they may be 
worth recording.
The low note emitted as the birds fly in the gloaming to their 
feeding-places seems to be quite distinct from either of those I have here noticed.
— J.
C. Atkinson, Danby-in-Cleveland.
Naturalist, 
237 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT ROBIN HOOD'S BAY.
The excursion to Robin Hood's Bay, arranged for Monday, July 
1 6th, had long been anticipated by the members of the Union, 
particularly those in the geological section, with the liveliest feelings 
of pleasure.
Alas !
when the long expected day arrived, our phenom- 
enal summer dealt hardly with those who, many of them from a 
distance, had travelled to the classic region of the Peak, the southern 
cheek of Robin Hood's Bay. All day the rain fell most heavily and 
relentlessly, and worse, a dense sea fog obscured the majestic cliffs 
and beautiful scenery which they had hoped to explore.
Upon 
arrival at Peak Station, the whole party, with two or three exceptions, 
ranged themselves under the leadership of the President of the Union 
(Mr. W.
H. Hudleston, M.A., F.R.S.), and attempted, in spite of the 
terrific rain, a little held work, but were very soon compelled to 
discontinue and return to Scarborough.
Upon arrival it was judged 
best to resort at once to the Museum of the Scarborough Philosophical 
Society, where the members thoroughly inspected the grand collection 
of geological specimens, natural history objects, and antiquities 
there, by the kindness of Mr. Phillips, thrown open to them.
The 
typical specimens of the Oolitic and Liassic fossils of the district were 
closely examined, and one object which attracted much attention was 
a fine specimen of the egg of the Great Auk, which on account of its 
rarity is now of such great value.
One most pleasurable reminiscence 
will be the examination of the specimens collected by AVilliam Smith, 
*the father of geology,' for many years a resident in the neighbourhood.
No sectional meetings were held, but the general meeting was duly 
held with the President of the Union in the chair.
The following new 
members were then unanimously elected : Miss Gertrude Walker, Lees 
House, Thornhill Edge, Dewsbury ; J.
W. Woodall, M.A., F.G.S., 
St. Nicholas' House, Scarborough ; Oswald Dawson, Caledonian 
House, Leeds ; J.
W. Abram, Foston, via Hull ; and Francis Augustine 
Grimston, Mosergh, Kendal.
Upon the roll of Societies being called 
over, it was found that representatives from the following were 
present — Leeds Naturalists' Club, Goole Scientific Society, York and 
District Field Naturalists' Society, Leeds Geological Association, Brad- 
ford Scientific Association, Malton Naturalists' Society, Keighley Scien- 
tific and Literary Society, Ackworth School Natural History Society, 
Scarborough Philosophical Society, and Hull Geological Society.
The Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., President of the Geological Section, 
then moved a vote of thanks to the gentlemen who had conducted 
the excursion, viz., Messrs.
W. H.
Hudleston, M.A., FR.S., M.
B. 
Aug. 1888.
,> 
23S YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT ROBIN HOOD's BAY.
Slater, and Thomas Bunker, and remarked that after all the discomfort 
and disappointment, the geologists had had an excellent opportunity 
of studying denudation.
The resolution was seconded by Mr. S.
Chad- 
wick, and carried by acclamation.
The President, in returning 
thanks, said that of course it would have been much more satisfactory 
if the weather had permitted the programme to be fully carried out, 
for at no point in England could grander geological lessons be 
obtained.
He paid a tribute to those who had accompanied him 
thus far, despite the adverse circumstances, and complimented them 
on their true Yorkshire pluck and spirit.
He then alluded in most 
sympathetic terms to the absence of their valued senior secretary, 
Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., who had met with a severe street 
accident, causing a fracture of the left thigh, and was deeply gratified 
to inform them that ^Ir. Roebuck was progressing very satisfactorily.
Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., then proposed, and Mr. M.
B. Slater 
seconded, a vote of thanks to the Scarborough Philosophical Society^ 
for the use of the museum and for the hearty kindness with which 
they had been received.
The museum that day, in addition to its 
classic stores of geology, had been a real 'refuge in the storm.' 
Mr. Phillips responded for the Scarborough Society, and gave a 
sincere welcome to the members present.
He too, deeply regretted 
the unfortunate weather as he was sure that if the whole programme 
could have been carried through, the visit to the Peak would never 
have been forgotten.
He urged that another visit should be made.
A vote of thanks was then passed to the gentlemen who had 
contributed to the excursion circular, viz., the President, Messrs.
T, 
Nesvbitt, J.
T. Sewell, W.
Denison Roebuck, W.
Cecil Scott, 
and the Rev. AV.
C. Hey. The sectional reports were then presented.
For the Vertebrate Zoology section, Mr. Thomas Bunker, the 
sectional officer present, reported that his party consisted of himself, 
but that the weather being so bad, very few birds had been observed ; 
amongst those seen were mentioned the Jackdaw, Blackcap, Yellow 
Bunting (with nest and eggs).
Blackbird, Thrush, Starling, Lapwing 
(already in flocks), Hedge Accentor, Sparrow^, Whitethroat, and 
]Meadow Pipit.
For the Botanical section, Mr. M.
B. Slater of Malton, one of the 
secretaries, reported : — From the list of plants seen, it will be observed 
that the flora of the district, although varied, is composed mostly of 
plants of general distribution throughout our island.
The soil of the 
district examined is of a stiff clayey nature, retaining moisture, and 
evidently fairly fertile by the variety of plants seen in so small an 
area.
Only the chffs and the lower portion of the valley were 
explored ; the higher ground was to have been gone over on Monday ; 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT ROBIN HOOD'S BAY.
little, however, could be done, owing to the torrents of rain and 
dense fog, which fairly caused the visitors to beat a retreat.
Fortunately, some few of the members got to Robin Hood's Bay 
on Saturday, which enabled them to explore some portion of the 
district.
The cellular cryptogams seen from the following list are, like 
the flowering plants, mainly of general distribution.
The district is 
evidently not so rich in variety, and has not the rare plants in this 
group that are met with in the Esk valley and its tributaries.
Flowering Plants.
Ranunculus auricomus.
Sanicula europaea.
Ranunculus acris.
Bunium flexuosum.
Ranunculus repens.
Heracleum sphondylium.
Cardamine pratensis.
Chserophyllum sylvestre.
Sinapis arvensis.
Chserophyllum anthriscus.
Capsella bursa-pastoris.
Galium cruciata.
Polygala vulgaris.
Galium aparine.
Lychnis vespertina.
Asperula odorata.
Lychnis diurna.
Sherardia arvensis.
Stellaria graminea.
Eupatorium cannabinum.
Stellaria holostea.
Tussilago farfara.
Cerastium glomeratum.
Hieracium pilosella.
Sagina procumbens.
Leontodon hispidus.
Hypericum perforatum.
Hypochaeris radicata.
Linum catharticum.
Crepis virens.
Oxalis acetosella.
Carduus lanceolatus.
Ononis arvensis.
Carduus palustris.
Medicago lupulina.
Myrrhis odorata.
Trifolium pratense.
Melampyrum pratense.
Trifolium repens.
Erica cinerea.
Anthyllis vulneraria.
Vaccinium myrtillus.
Lotus corniculatus.
Lysimachia nemorum.
Centaurea nigra.
Myosotis sylvatica.
Vicia hirsuta.
Scrophularia nodosa.
Vicia sepium.
Veronica chamaedrys.
Lathyrus pratensis.
Veronica beccabunga.
Spiraea ulmaria.
Stachys sylvatica.
Geum rivale.
Teucrium scorodonia.
Agrimonia eupatoria.
Ajuga reptans.
Fragaria vesca.
Prunella vulgaris.
Potentilla reptans.
Daphne laureola.
Epilobium hirsutum.
Orchis maculata.
Epilobium parviflorum.
Epipactis latifolia.
Circa;a lutetiana.
Sedges and 
Grasses.
Carex vulpina.
Festuca pratensis.
Carex sylvatica.
Lolium perenne.
Trisetum flavescens.
Dactylis glomerata.
Holcus lanatus.
Arrhenatherum avenaceum, 
Alopecurus pratensis.
Poa trivialis.
Cynosurus cristatus.
Aug. 1888.
240 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT ROBIN HOOD's BAY.
Ferns.
Lastrea filix-mas.
Lastrea dilatata.
Polystichum aculeatum.
Scolopendrium vulgare.
Athyrium filix-foemina.
Equisetum maximum.
Mosses.
Trichostomum tophaceum Brid.
Barbula muralis L.
Barbula unguiculata Dil.
Ulota bruchii Hornsch.
Orthotrichum affine Schrad.
Bryum capillare L.
Bryum pallens.
Weisia viridula Brid.
Thuidium tamariscinum Hedw.
Brachythecium rutabulum L.
Eurhynchium striatum Schreb.
Eurhynchium prielongum Dill.
Rhynchostegium confertum Dicks.
Amblystegium serpens L.
Hypnum filicinum L.
Hypnum commutatum Hedw.
Hypnum molluscum Hedw.
Hypnum cuspidatum L.
Hypnum purum L.
Hypnum resupinatum Wils.
Hypnum stellatum Schreb.
Hylocomium triquetrum L.
Hylocomium loreum L.
Hepatic.^;.
Fegatella conica (L.
). 
Frullania dilatata (L.).
Radula complanata (L,).
Lophocolea bidentata (L.
). 
Jungermania riparia Tayl.
Jungermania turbinata Rad.
Aneura sinuata Dicks.
Pellia epiphylla (L.).
Kantia trichomanis (L.).
The sections of Conchology, Entomology, and Micro-Zoology and 
Micro-Botany were not represented.
For the Geological section, the President of the Union delivered 
a most instructive address, drawing attention to the development of 
the strata in the district visited, and successively describing the Sand- 
stone or Moor Grit capping the cliffs, the Scarborough or Grey 
Limestone series, the Middle shales and sandstones, the Millepore 
bed, the Lower Estuarine shales and sandstones, the Dogger (with 
its divisions — the true Dogger, including the Nerinaea bed, the Yellow 
sandrock and the Grey sandrock), the ' striatulus ' or passage beds, 
and the alum or ' communis ' shales of the Upper Lias.
He also 
drew attention to the stratigraphy of the coast between the mouth of 
the Tees and the Humber, where, passing southwards, we come upon 
newer strata, with a slight dip to the south-east, except where faults 
break the continuity, of which that at the Peak is the most remarkable.
Mr. Adamson, F.G.S., the senior secretary of the section, also 
thus reports upon the work actually accomplished during the day.
Upon arrival at the Peak Station Mr. Hudleston would, considering the 
storm then beating, have advised the total relinquishing of the pro- 
gramme, but at the urgent entreaties of several members he consented 
to lead the way down the line and visit the Crag Hall Quarry, of 
course, further willing, if possible, to carry out the full day's work.
Accordingly the path was taken along the line to show the effects of 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT ROBIN HOOD's HAY.
241 
the great fault at the Peak.
No clear section of this was seen beyond 
the decided curve of the beds of the Middle Estuarine sandstones, 
which are thrown, a little further on, against the beds of the Upper 
Lias.
Mr. Hudleston still further indulged the enthusiastic hammer- 
men by visiting the Crag Hall Quarry, where a notable section was 
examined and a lucid description given.
This quarry is simply a 
giant excavation left by the alum-workers of former days, when the 
shales of this coast were valuable, commercially considered.
Now, 
by the rapid development of modern chemistry, the residuals from 
our gasworks have entirely supplanted this industry of the Yorkshire 
coast, and hence we see the immense heaps of shale, debris, and 
calcined material left.
And now an arduous ascent was made from 
the railway, and shortly afterwards, by an unctuous and yet pre- 
cipitous descent, the Crag Hall Quarry was inspected.
The Crag Hall section is a very instructive one.
Here were 
shown the Lower Estuarine shales and sandstones resting upon the 
Dogger series, which again rested upon the alum shales, or 'com- 
munis ' beds of the Upper Lias.
The ' striatulus ' beds, which may 
fairly be considered as passage beds between the Oolite and the Lias, 
are wanting in this quarry, and, indeed, the Dogger, which at the 
other side of the fault attains a thickness of nearly loo ft., including 
the Yellow and Grey sandrocks, is here attenuated to 4 ft.
only.
This 
remarkable difference in the thickness of the strata in such a short 
distance is a most important geological problem, and must be duly 
considered.
To use the words of the President, ' it can hardly be 
supposed that, the distance being short, this is due to non-deposition.
It really looks as if the bed of the Liassic sea was lifted on the 
upthrow side of the great fault, and thus brought under the influence 
of denuding currents, or that the downthrow side sank so as to be 
preserved from such action.
It is a remarkable coincidence that on 
the westward or upthrow side of the great fault there should be such 
a disappearance of beds in so short a space.
The subject, when 
more thoroughly investigated, may serve to throw more light upon 
the changes of level and of other physical conditions which marked 
the close of the Liassic epoch and the commencement of the 
Oolitic' The heavy rain now beat more pitilessly than ever, and 
with extreme reluctance and regret a return had to be made to 
the station, although if Mr. Hudleston had considered it safe to 
descend the wet and slippery shales to the shore, the members 
would loyally have followed him.
\c\.
enthusiasts, if wise, will 
always submit to experience and knowledge ; therefore the train 
for Scarborough was regained.
It was certainly a most acute 
disappointment that, from the violence of the storm, the most 
Aug. 1888.
242 
NOTES ORNITHOLOGY.
valuable part of the day's work had to be deferred, but still we must 
look to a better and brighter day, when Mr. Hudleston will once 
again give Yorkshire geologists the benefit of his experience, and 
thoroughly describe to them that wonderful feature in Yorkshire 
geology, the Peak.
This immediate district must, without fail, be 
made the centre of another excursion.
Mr. Stears, of Hull, and Mr. Phillips, of Scarborough, respectively 
moved and seconded a vote of thanks to the President of the Union 
for his valuable address, and for the great kindness he had shown in 
coming so far to give them the benefit of his experience.
This was 
enthusiastically carried, after which the President moved, and the 
Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., seconded, a vote of thanks to Messrs.
Adamson and Scott for the admirable way in which, during the 
enforced and regretted absence of Mr. Roebuck, they had con- 
ducted general matters, whereby the circular had not been delayed, 
nor the interests of the Union caused to suffer.
Mr. Adamson, in 
replying, stated he would do his utmost for the Union in this 
emergency, and would assist his valued and dear friend Mr. Roebuck 
in every way possible.
The members afterwards had tea together at 
Bearup's Station Hotel.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG V.
Notes from Flamborough.
— Great arrivals of our summer visitants this 
season on the Headland, Flamborough : Redstart {Rtiticilla pha-niciiriis) and 
Wheatear {Saxicola cciianthe) first seen April 6th ; no more arrivals for several 
days.
April 24th, I saw four Swallows {Hirundo rtistica) ; April 25th, first 
appearance of the Cuckoo {Cucidus canorus) ; April 26th and 27th, large numbers 
of the Flycatchers were to be seen in nearly every field ; April 28th, great arrivals 
of the Ring Ouzel ( Turdus torqtiatiis) : April 29th, I also observed the Swift 
{Cypsehis apus).
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, May 12th, 1888.
Bittern near Ripon.
— I saw a fine stuffed Bittern {Botaiirus steUaris) late in 
January of 1887, and I was told that it had been shot during the first week of 
January 1887, at Norton Conyers near Ripon.
— H.
S. Byers, Stockton-on-Tees.
The Ornithology of Skiddaw, Sea Fell, and Helvellyn.
— As a 
student of the ornithology of the Lake district, I have waited for weeks for 
the appearance of Mr. Watson's long-promised paper.
I felt certain that his 
* peculiarly favourable ' opportunities for observation ' during many successive 
seasons ' would supply us with new and interesting facts.
My expectations have 
been realized.
I had often wondered where the downy nestling of the common 
Sandpiper, figured by Yarrell, was captured.
It is mentioned in letters of June 
28th, 1837, and January loth, 1838, from Mr. Yarrell to Mr. Heysham, but these 
letters, now on my table, throw no light on the locality concerned.
It is gratifying 
to learn from Mr. Watson that it was ' from the neighbourhood of these mountains.' 
I had always supposed, from observation and dissection, that the Peregrine fed 
entirely on live prey.
But we learn from Mr. Watson that this falcon is a carrion- 
bird, for he tells us at p.
165 that the Peregrines ' benefit ' by mortality among the 
sheep.
This is a new light to me, and I am thankful for it.
I had always found 
that the Golden Plover abandoned its gregarious habits in the nesting season, but 
as Mr. Watson has found a ' nesting colony,' my experience must have been unfor- 
tunate.
I have never seen the Shag inland, nor is it a common bird on the Cum- 
berland coast.
It is therefore due to Mr. Watson to say that he is the first to detect 
its presence on Crummock Water.
I trust that Mr. Watson's ready pen will give 
us some more of his picturesque sketches of bird-life.
— H.
A. Macpherson.
Naturalist, 
243 
NEWTS NEAR WARRINGTON.
Some time ago we received a copy of Mr. Linnaeus Greening's paper 
on ' British Newts,' read by him before the Warrington Field Club 
on the 2ist January, 1887.
It is a most detailed and exhaustive 
paper, dealing with structure, development, habits, life-history, etc., 
and from it we take the liberty of extracting the faunistic information 
which falls within the scope of our journal.
Of the Smooth Newt {Molge vulgaris), Mr. Greening says : — 
* This newt is the commonest, being found almost everywhere in the 
British Isles ; but at the same time it is exceedingly local ; it may be 
found in one pit, although in the adjoining pits it does not occur.
It is never found, so far as I know, in swift running streams or dirty 
waters.
I have taken specimens at Stretton Hill Clifife, Dallam, 
Bewsey, Stockton Heath, Walton, Arpley, and Hartford.' 
Of the Great Warty Newt {Molge cristata), he remarks : — 'This 
species is not so common as M.
vulgaris.
I have caught it at 
Frodsham, Stretton, and Hartford, and I have had specimens from 
Soham and Scarborough.
In a pool at Hartford these newts abound, 
and are of all sizes, from 3 in.
to 6 in.
long ; out of a large quantity 
taken the majority were small.' 
Of the Palmated Newt {Molge palmata), it is written : — ' This 
•certainly is the rarest of our British species, though possibly its rarity 
has been exaggerated, as it has been sometimes mistaken for the 
common newt {M.
viilgaris).
It had never been recorded as existing 
in Lancashire till Mr. J.
A. Jackson caught in a small mill dam, near 
Garstang, what were locally thought to be the common smooth newts, 
and he having kindly brought me a few of these, I found them to be 
M. palmata, and had the pleasure of recording this fact in the 
'Zoologist' for June 1886.
It is curious that all these newts were 
caught within an area of two yards square ; and that in other parts 
of the pool the net was tried in vain.
I have noticed this peculiarity 
in many pits, but have been unable to find a perfectly satisfactory 
reason for it, though it is probably owing to a greater abundance of 
food and suitable vegetation over that particular area.' 
Some of our readers will be interested in Mr. Greening's table 
of specific characters, which we accordingly reproduce : — 
'Molge cristata (Great Warty Newt).
— Skin covered with minute 
warty excrescences, ground colour black or dark brown, with black 
spots.
Belly deep orange, with black spots.
Throat black, covered 
with small white spots.
Colours of female as male — but distinguished 
by yellow line along lower surface of tail.
Length 5 in.
to 6 in.
Female in this as in other species larger than male.
Summer crests 
of males broken.
Aug. 1888.
244 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
'  Molge vulgaris (Smooth Newt).
— Skin smooth, ground colour 
dark brown, with black spots.
Belly bright orange, with black spots.
Throat light yellow, with black spots.
Female — ground colour 
greenish brown, belly pale yellow (which is continued to end of tail 
on the under side, as in other species), with small black spots.
Summer crests of males unbroken.
Length 3-|- in.
to 4 in.
' Molge palmata (Palmated Newt).
— -Skin smooth, ground colour 
greenish brown, with small black spots.
Belly pale yellow, with few 
black spots.
The throat in both sexes is creamy white, and quite free 
from spots.
Female lighter colour than male, characterised by yellow 
line at base of tail.
Summer crests low, dorsal lines very prominent, 
hind feet of both sexes webbed, much more so in male, which also 
has truncate tail in summer.
Length 2\ in.
to 2f in.' 
NOTE—HEMIPTERA.
Hemiptera-Heteroptera in the Isle of Man.
— The following were my 
captures in September 1887, all in the south near Castletown.
Although the 
number of species is small, the individuals of some swarmed, notably Lygus 
pratensis and Piestna qiiadrata in their respective habitats.
Peutatonia verbasci.
Lygus kalmii.
Piezodonis lihiratus.
Lygus pastinacce.
ScolopostetluLS ericetoriim.
Lygus cervinus.
Stygndcoris sabiilosus.
Monalocoris filicis.
Scygnocoris arenarius.
ALtorhinus angiilatus.
Piesjua qiiadrata.
Chlamydatus aiiibulans.
Monanthia cardui.
Psallus sajiguineus.
Acalypta parvitla.
Antkocoris nemorum.
Miris calcaratiis.
Antkocoris nemoralis.
Miris Icevigatus.
N'abis ferns.
Megalocercea.
erratica.
Nabis riigosus.
Lygus pabiilinus.
Salda saltatoria.
Lygus pratensis.
Velia currens.
— Jas. Eardley Mason, Alford, Lincolnshire, June 23rd, 1888.
NO TES—LEPID OF TEE A .
Lepidoptera near Halifax in 1887.
— The only rare captures made in this 
district last season were three specimens of CymatopJiora ridens and one of Sphinx 
convolvuli.
C. ridens came to light.
— G.
F. Harding, 4, Back Crib Lane, 
Halifax, April i6th, 1888.
Thecla rubi on Barden Moor, Wharfedale.
— On Monday, May 21st, 
I took Thecla mln commonly on Barden Moor.
In crossing the moor a few years- 
ago, on the 7th of May, I took an odd specimen about the same locality, which 
seemerl to me a strange habitat for this species, but thoughf at the time it had got 
there by accident.
The conditions, however, under which the above specimens 
were taken this year suggested no otlier alternative than that they had been bred 
from larvoe fed upon plants on the moor, though a search revealed no plants other 
than the commoner moorland species.
Its presence in any abundance seemed ta 
be confined to one particular spot, my boxes being filled without moving many 
paces, and they were evidently fresh out.
— E.
P.^ P.
BUTTERFIEI.D, Wilsden, 
May 28th, 1888.
Naturalist' 
245 
SOME INGLEBOROUGH COLEOPTERA.
J. W.
CARTER, 
Entomological Kcco7-der, Bradford Nat7iralists Society, etc.
During two ascents of Ingleborough — one on the nth of April, 
1884, in company with Mr. H.
T. Soppitt, of Bradford, and Mr. J.
A. 
Butterfield of Lewisham, and again on April 3rd, 1885, also in 
company with Mr. Soppitt — several species of coleoptera, some of 
exceptional interest, were collected, the following list of which may 
be of interest to some of the readers of The Naturalist.
Those marked * are new county records.
Carabus arvensis F.
One on the side of Ingleborough at an 
elevation of about 2,000 ft., April 1884 (J.A.B. and H.T.S.).
Only once previously taken in the county, viz., at Strensall 
Common (Ent. Trans.
Y. N.
U.).
Notiophilus aquaticus L.
In boggy ground at the foot of Ingle- 
borough, April 1885.
A blue-black variety occurred with the 
type.
Notiophilus palustris Duft.
One at the base of Ingleborough, 
April 1885.
This and the preceding species are new to the 
north-west portion of the county.
Notiophilus biguttatus F.
Common about Ingleborough and 
the neighbourhood, 1884 and 1885.
Nebria gyllenhalii Sch. Very abundant on the summit of Ingle- 
borough, April 1884.
Amongst them were three or four 
examples with the elytra ' entirely rust-red,' a form mentioned 
by the Rev. Canon Fowler in his admirable work on ' British 
Coleoptera.' 
Clivina fossor L.
At the base of Ingleborough, 1885.
*Patrobus assimilis Chaud.
In great abundance on the summit 
of Ingleborough, April 1884.
I think that everyone who has 
examined large numbers of this form from varying altitudes 
cannot but agree with Mr. Fowler in regarding it as ' merely a 
highland variety ' of P.
excavatiis Payk.
I have taken it at an 
elevation of from 900 to above 2,000 ft., those taken at the 
highest point being the most pronounced assimi/is, while at 
lower elevations, forms not agreeing exactly with either, but 
partaking of the characters of both, are often met with.
Pterostichus nigrita V.
Common in the neighbourhood of 
Ingleborough, 1884 and 1885.
Aug. 1888.
. 
246 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
*Pterostichus asthiops F.
One each by Mr. Soppitt and myself, 
at the base of Ingleborough, April 3rd, 1885.
Badister bipustulatus F.
One given me by my friend, Mr. T, 
Hey of Derby, taken on Ingleborough, 1887.
Calathus melanocephalus L.
Common in the neighbourhood 
of Ingleborough.
^Var. nubigena Hal. On the sides and at the foot of Ingle- 
borough, 1884 and 1886.
Anchomenus albipes F.
At the foot and in the neighbourhood 
of Ingleborough, common.
Byrrhus fasciatus F.
Not uncommon on the summit of Ingle- 
borough, 1884.
NOTE—LEPIDOPTERA.
Stigmoilota dorsana at Axwell.
— On the 27th May I observed several 
specimens of a pretty little Tortrix [Stigmottota dorsana) on the wing, in a field 
at Hagg Hill, near Axwell.
— Thos.
H. Hedworth, 31, Spoor Street, Dunston- 
on-Tyne, July 2nd, 1888.
NOTE—COLEOPTERA.
Carabus glabratus and other Beetles in the Lake District.
— Amongst a 
number of beetles kindly given me by our energetic friend, Mr. W.
West, F.L.S., 
and taken by him in the Lake District in June 1884, were four specimens of the 
rare Carabus glabrattis Payk., three of which were taken on Scawfell Pike, and 
one on Serjeant Mann, 2,000 ft.
There were also several examples of Nebria 
gyllenhalii Sch., Carabus catenulatus Scop., very fine, Geotrupes sylvaticiis Panz., 
Let7ia cyanella F.
, and Corymbites cupreus var.
ceriiginostis F., all taken on the 
above-mentioned hills and on Helvellyn.
For the names of some of them I am 
indebted to the kindness of Dr. Ellis, F.E. S., of Liverpool, who is ever willing 
to assist his co-workers.
— ^J.
W. Carter, Bradford, July 14th, 1888.
NOTES— BOTANY.
Varieties of Viola odorata.
— I have found the red variety alluded to by 
Mr. Gain, in South Notts, in two localities, but in very limited numbers in each 
place.
The red colour is very similar to that in the common Mallow.
The white 
and blue varieties are abundant with us on the heavy lands, but the white is most 
plentiful.
I believe the blue to be decreasing.
— F.
B. Whitlock, Attenborough, 
Notts., 3rd July, 1888.
Ceterach officinarum in Wensleydale still.
— A friend of John Percival's 
having stated that specimens of the above rare Yorkshire fern were growing on the 
masonry of a certain bridge, Mr. Percival last week (July 1st — 7th) visited the 
locality, and had the satisfaction of confirming the report.
It would be unwise to 
indicate the spot more precisely than this : the station is in the Askrigg (middle) 
third of Wensleydale, and it is not the Coverdale-head locality recorded by 
Mr. M.
B. Slater, nor is it the same as the Appersett Bridge and wood-yard wall 
station of Baker's ' North Yorkshire.' In this latter place it has long been extinct, 
and in Mr. Percival's station it may possibly have been planted.
I examined both 
walls of the bridge many times when resident at Hawes, and am quite positive it 
was not there in 1884-6.
Mr. Percival adds the satisfactory information that there 
are six or seven roots of the fern, and that being high up on the wall, it would 
require a ladder to extirpate it.
— F.
A. Lees.
Naturalist, 
247 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
MOLLUSCA, 1886 and 1887.
The present instalment, containing 183 titles of papers, is for the 
two years 1886 and 1887, and covers a period of much greater con- 
chological activity than the preceding two years, for which the Biblio- 
graphy was published at pages 144-149 of this journal for May 1886.
Several of the papers are of high interest, notably the very complete 
county-lists for Lancashire and Lincolnshire, two areas hitherto much 
neglected conchologically, and several lists for smaller areas, mostly 
in Yorkshire.
The Marine Shells — although they are the subject of five times 
as many papers as in the previous biennial period — still account for 
but an infinitesimal part of the attention which has been paid to 
Conchology in our North Country, as only twenty-one of the titles 
contain any reference to them, and not one of these is of any par- 
ticular importance.
The twenty-one titles are those by Anon, [not 
signed], T.
D. A.
Cockerell (three titles), W.
Shewell Corder, R.
D. 
Darbishire, B.
S. Dodd, W.
Gain, Carleton Greene, W.
H. Heathcote, 
W. A.
Herdman (two), W.
C. Hey (three), H.
Wallis Kew (four), 
J. T.
Marshall, and P.
L. Simmonds.
Since former Bibliographies were published, the opinion of the 
Editors as to the desirabiHty of including titles of papers printed 
in The Naturalist has changed, and they now think that each Biblio- 
graphy ought to be a full and complete record of titles for the period 
of time which it includes.
Accordingly, the present instalment 
embraces not only the complete record for the two years 1886 and 
1887, but also the titles of papers published in this journal for 1884 
and 1885, and designedly omitted at the time from the Bibliography 
published for those years.
This new departure having been taken, 
the present and former instalments, taken together, present a full and 
complete record of the conchological literature of the eleven northern 
counties (or eighteen vice-counties) for the four years they embrace.
Conchological work being based, like botanical, on the recognition 
of the equalised comital areas defined in 'Watson's Cybele Britannica,' 
it will not be out of place here to enumerate those with which this 
journal concerns itself : — Isle of Man, Cumberland, Westmorland 
with Furness, Lancashire West, Lancashire South, Cheshire, Derby- 
shire, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire South, Lincolnshire North, 
Aug. 1888.
248 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1 886-8 7.
Yorkshire South-East, Yorkshire South-West, Yorkshire Mid-West, 
Yorkshire North- West, Yorkshire North-East, Durham, Northumber- 
land South, and Cheviotland.
To these areas the amount of attention 
paid by conchologists has been very unequal, for while Lancashire 
and Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Notts., and Cheshire have of late been 
ardently investigated, a deep lethargy seems to have settled on the 
Northumbrian area which of old could boast of Alder, Hancock, 
Johnston, and others of like fame, while Cumberland seems to 
depend upon the annual reporting of Miss Donald's additions, and 
the Isle of Man and Derbyshire, in spite of their accessibility and 
attractiveness, receive next to no attention.
Anon, [not signed].
York S.E.
[Helix lactea at Filey, Aug. 5th, 1885].
Voung Nat., Jan. 1886, vii.
15 
(copied from N.
H. Journ., Dec. 15th, 1885, ix.
187).
Anon, [signed L.
R. and B.
B. L.
T.].
York N.E., York N.W.
York, Bootham.
School News [Helix arbnsforum, H.
caperata, and H.
erice- 
toriim taken at Castle Howard, and H, riifescens and H.
lapicida in Wensley- 
dale, by O.
Morland].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1886, x.
102.
Anon, [not signed].
Line.
N. 
Louth Naturalists' Society [report on mollusca ; the list now amounts to 
58 species ; Anodonta cygnea, Paludina cofitecta, Bythinia leachii^ Planorbis 
rornens, Ariofi siibfiiscus, Cyclostoma, and Carychium noted ; estuarine shells 
noted are Melampus myosotis^ Hydrobia ulvcz^ Littorina littorea, L.
riidis\2S%.
te?tebrosa and similis found in the salt-marsh at Saltfleet].
Nat. World, Aug.
1886, iii.
158.
Axon, [not signed].
York S.W, 
Ackworth Reports.
— Natural History Society [Acjne at Went Vale ; 
Vertigo mimitissiina at Smeaton Crags ; P.
antivcrtigo and Carychium in 
grass fields ; Fisidium rosenm at Hessle ; and enormous specimens of an 
Anodonta in Stapleton Park].
Nat. Hist.
Journ, Sep. 15th, 1887, xi.
128.
Anon.
[Editorial].
Cheshire, Isle of Man, 
Bulimus acutus ; a query [as to whether it occurs in Lancashire, Westmorland, 
or Cumberland ; and noting that it is on record for Cheshire and Isle of Man].
Nat., Dec. 1884, p.
112.
JOK Bates.
Lane.
S, 
Planorbis dilatatus at .Burnley [identified by Thomas Rogers].
Nat. World, 
May 1887, iv.
83.
J. Bates.
Lane.
S. 
Additional Note on Planorbis dilatatus and P.
g-laber at Burnley [dis- 
covered June 1886 amongst Valvata piscina/is, and afterwards found in 
another place near Burnley].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
221.
T. W.
Belt .
York S.E.
[Helix rufescens and vars.
albida and rubens, H.
nemoralis and H, 
aspersa from Driffield].
Jomn.
of Conch., Jan. 1885, iv.
260.
[T.
W. Bell.] York Mid W., Line.
S. 
[Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Mollusca : Helix rotiindata v.
alba, Pupa 
umbilicata and Helix rzipestris from Crina Bottom, Ingleton, H.
Shaw ; 
Clausilia dubia, Pupa secale and Zua from W^hite Scar, Ingleborough, 
H. Shaw ; and Litnn(za stagnalis, L.
peregra, L.
palustris, Planorbis corneus, 
P. marginains, P.
albus, P.
vortex, Pahtdina cofttecta, and Bythinia tenta- 
ciilata from Crowland Wash].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
134.
Natur.alist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1 886-87.
W. D.
Braithwaite, Secretary.
York S.W.
Ackworth School Natural History Society [with notes of LifnncBa glabra— 
erroneously recorded as Planorbis glaber — in great quantity in a small pond near 
Primrose Vale, and of Limncea stagnalis of normal shape at Wintersett, 
Oct. 17th].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov, 15th, 1886, x.
169, and Erratum, Dec.
15th, 1886, X.
188.
W. D.
Braithwaite, Secretary.
York S.W.
Ackworth Natural History Society {^Limncca auriciilaria^ L.
pabistris and 
Paludina contecta at Askern, May 26th, 1887].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 
1887, xi.
106.
[J.
Darker Butterell.] York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Pocklington [June 24th, 1885 ; Arion 
ater, A.
hortensis, Limax agrestis, L.
lavis, L.
maximus, L.
Jiavus, Anodonta 
cy onea, Pisidium pusilUon, Planorbis albus, PL complanatus, Limncea peregra, 
L. truncatula, Zonites nitidulus, Z.
alliaritis, Helix aspersa, H.
nemoralis^ 
H. hortensis, H.
cantiana, H.
hispida, H.
rolundata, Bulimus obscurus^ 
Clausilia j'ugosa, C.
laminata, Zua, and Carychium, noted].
Nat., Aug.
1885, p.
308.
S. C.
CocKERELL.
Lanc.
W., Furness.
Mollusca of Coniston and Carnforth, Lancashire [April 6th et seq., 1887; 
three species of Limax, two oi Arion, Vifrina, eight of Zonites, Helix aspersa, 
H. nemoralis, H.
aculeata, H.
ericetortim, H.
nifescens, H.
pulchella, //.
I'otiindata, H 7'upestris, H.
hispida, Bulimus obscurus, Zua, Pupa jnnbilicata.
Vertigo edentula, Clausilia rugosa and vars.
, Valvata piscinalis, Physa fontinalis, 
Ancylus Jluviatilis, and Limncea peregra v.
lacustris noted].
Nat., June 1887, 
p. 190.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Lanc.
S., Cheshire.
A September Walk through Lancashire, Cheshire, and Staffordshire [made 
from Sep. 9th to 12th, 1885 ; the route was from Liverpool by Prescot, Rainhill, 
Warrington, Knutsford, Chelford.
and Congleton to Leek, etc.
; numerous 
species noted, with interesting remarks].
Nat., Feb. 1886, pp.
55-59.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
York N.E.
Marine Shells at Whitby [criticising the nomenclature of W.
C. Hey's record 
of Trochus cinereus ; editorial explanation appended].
Nat, March i886,p.l78.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Northumberland.
Arion subfuscus [Northumberland (Sutton)].
Sci. Goss., May 1886, p.
114.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Linc.
N. 
Chameleonic Arions [a variety of A.
hortensis with orange slime at Louth].
Sci. Goss., June 1886, p.
140.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Durham.
Mollusca from Seaton Carew, Co. Durham [collected by Rev, J.
W, 
Pattison ; the marine shells mentioned are species and varieties of Pecten, 
Mactra, Cardiji»i, Tellina, Solen, Lucinopsis, Mya, Saxicava, Tapes, I^utraria, 
Venus, Capulus, Einarginula, Patella, Helcion, Littorina, L.acuna, Trochus, 
LLydrobia, Natica, Buccinicm, Purpura, Nassa, and Melampus — 35 forms in 
all ; the land and fresh-water ones are Bythinia tentaculata, Planorbis 
spirorbis, Liinutra peregra (2 vars,), Helix nenioralis and H.
asprrsa\ Nat., 
June 1886, p, 163, 
T. D, A.
COCKERELL, York N.W.
Shells in Coverdale and near Markington, N.W. Yorkshire [collected by 
I\.
C. Chaytor ; I'itrina, six species of Zonites, Helix arhusto) urn and vars., 
//.
loncinna, H.
rupestris, H.
rufescens and v.
rubcns, H.
hortensis v, lutea, 
II.
rotinidata, J^upa uuthilicata, Balea, Clausilia rugosa, CI.
laniijuita, Bulimus 
obscurus, Z;/^r and var.
ovata, Azrra, Caryeh/ion , Lii/nida truneatula, Anodonta 
analina, Splucriuiii corneu/n, S.
lacusire, Pisidium pulchelluni, I^ythinia 
tentaculata, JViysa hypnoriuii , Ancylus Jluviat His, and Sttccinea putris\ Xal., 
June 1886, p.
163.
250 
bibliography: mollusca, 1886-87.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Lanc.
S. 
Some varieties of British Shells [including Avion ater var.
atra Dum.
& 
Mort., Lancashire, near Warrington].
Nat. World, Sep. 1886, iii.
179.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Yorlc Mid W., York N.E.
Slug Variation [with mention of Liniax cinereo-niger var.
luctuosa found at 
Shipley Glen and of Arion bourguignati at Middlesbrough].
Sci. Goss., 
Jan. 1887, p.
16.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
York S.W., Line.
N. 
Helix virgata [var.
nov.
subdeleta, from Pontefract (G.
Roberts) ; and 
H. caperata var.
lutescens Pasc, from near Louth (H.
W. Kew)].
Nat. World, 
Jan. 1887, iv.
19.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
Cheshire, York S.W.
Helix ericetorum [var.
monozojia Pascal, near Chester (Tomlin) ; Arion 
hortensis v.
ttigra Moq., Wakefield, as new to Britain, also noted].
Nat., 
Feb. 1887, p.
38.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Yorkshire.
On Melanism [based in part upon Yorkshire records of Limax agresiis var.
nigra\ Ent., March 1887, xx.
58-59.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
York S.E., York N.E.
Variation in Helices [G.
Roberts has found trochiform H.
nejuoralis and 
//.
arbiistortim living together near Wressle ; and Rev. W.
C. Hey has found 
reversed U.
virgata at Coatham within a few yards of the spot where he had 
previously taken reversed ZT.
aspersa\.
Sci. Goss., March 1887, p.
67.
Durham, Line.
N., Cheshire, 
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
York S.W., York N.E.
Practical Naturalists' Society.
— Conchological Recorder's Report for 
1886 [the rare Scalaria trevelyaiia^ Seaton Carew (Rev. J.
W. Pattison) ; 
Li?fincEa peregra vars.
laciistris and inter??iedia, L.
auriailaria var.
acuta, and 
Anodojita anatina var.
rostrata, all from Louth (H.
W. Kew) ; H.
nemoralisy 
Beeston, Cheshire (H.
Friend), and var.
albolabiata, Kiveton Park (H.
Friend); 
Arion siibftiscus, Wakefield ; Sticci^iea viirea, Wressle ; Arion bozirguignati^ 
Wakefield and Lofthouse].
Nat. World, March 1887, iv.
43-44.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
York S.E.
Notes on Some Species of Inland Mollusca [with woodcut of Succinea 
vitrea Jeff, from Wressle, Yorks.].
Ann.
& Mag. Nat.
Hist., March 1887, 
Fifth Series, xix.
175.
T. D.
A. COCKERELL.
York S.W.
The Variation and Abnormal Development of the Mollusca [referring 
to Kiveton Park specimens of Helix ne?noralis].
Sci. Goss., Aug. 1887, p.
178.
[E.
Collier.] Lanc.
S. 
[Planorbis dilatatus from Canal at Reddish, and P.
spirorbis, curiously 
distorted, from a ditch at Rusholme, Manchester].
Journ.
of Conch., July 
1887, V.
202.
Edward Collier.
Lancashire (absence).
Bulimus acutus .
. [absent from Lancashire].
Nat., March 1885, p.
181.
[W.
E. Collinge.] York Mid W.
[Limnaea palustris from Clapham Common, and Clausilia dnbia from 
Ingleborough, exhibited to Conch.
Soc, July 1st, 1886].
Journ.
of Conch., 
Jan. 1887, V.
133.
[W.
E. Collinge.] York Mid W.
[Arion ater var.
brunnea found between Ripon and Kirby Malzeard].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
134.
Naturalist, 
BILLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1886-87.
W. E.
Colli NGE.
York Mid W.
Additions to the * MoUusca of Clapham ' {^Helix concimia, Pisidiiim pzisilhim, 
Plaiiorbis voriex, Physa hypiioru?n, Linuma glabra and L.
Irimcatula, for all 
of which localities are given].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
195.
[W.
E. CoLiJNGE.] York Mid W.
or S.W.
[Small Limnaea palustris from Bingley].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
204.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E.
The Spurn [the kitchen middens of Kilnsea contain Helix nevioralis — ' no 
doubt used as food ' ; H.
nenioralis and H.
ericetoriim abundant on the sand- 
hills].
Nat., Aug. 1884, pp.
1-8.
W. Shewell Corder.
Lane.
W., Furness.
The Lancaster Sands [refers to the Cockles and the method of their collection 
for the market ; also to ancient ballad anent the cocklers, and to their 
superstitions].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Dec. 15th, 1886, pp.
182-186.
R. D.
Darbishire.
Northumberland.
Astarte borealis [from the beach at Warkworth, one valve, epidermis very 
fresh].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1885, iv.
270; copied in Sci. Goss., May 
1885, p.
115.
R. D.
Darblshire.
York S.W.
Achatina acicula at Knottingley [found in accordance with John Emmet's 
suggestions].
Nat., Sep. 1885, p.
320.
B. Sturges Dodd.
Line.
N. 
Paper on the Discovery of a new Marine Shell {Terebratula papulosa 
Marshall] found at Skegness and Sutton-on-Sea [figured].
Trans, and 34th 
Rep. of Nottingham Nat. Soc.
for 1886 [pub.
1887], p.
76 and litho-plate.
[B.
Sturges Dodd.] York S.W.
Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire Naturalists at Anston Stones [April 30th, 
1885 ; Achatina, Vertigo minutissifna, three Sphceria, Fisidijim a?nniawty 
P.fontinale^ both Anodo7ita, Neritina, Bythinia tentaailata^ Valvata piscinalis, 
Planorbis albzis, P.
vortex, P.
carinatus, Physa fontinalis, Lirniicea peregra, 
L. stagnalis, Ancyhis fluviatilis, Arion ater, A.
hortefisis, Liinax agrestis, 
Vitrina, Zonites cellai'ius, Z.
nitiduhis, Z.
crystallinus, Z.purus, Helix aculeata, 
H. nemoralis, H.
hortensis, H.
concinna, H hispida, H.
piclchella, H.
rotiindata, Pupa umbilicata, Clausilia rJigosa, and Zua\ Nat., June 1885, 
p. 260.
J. Donald, Cumberland.
Notes on the Land and Fresh-water Shells of Cumberland [Plaiiorbis 
vortex and PL spirorbis, PL carinatus, PL coiitortus, Clausilia dnbia, and 
C. laminata ; the number of Cumbrian species remains at 78, PL ca7-inat7is 
as an addition balancing PL vortex, struck out as misnomer].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Ass., No. xi.
(1885-86, pub.
1886), pp.
150-151.
Ed[itor]s., Nat. Hist.
Journal.
Nottinghamshire, York S.W.
Ackworth Reports [of fine Limncva glabj-a in brick-ponds near Nostell, an 
Anodonta cygiiea ']\ inches long in Clumber Lake, and var.
rostra ta found in 
Walton Hall Lake].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. 15th, 1886, x.
167.
John Emmet.
York Mid W.
Achatina acicula (the Needle Agate Shell) and its occurrence and distribution 
over the Magnesian Limestone of Yorkshire.
Nat., July 1885, pp.
270-274.
John Emmet.
York Mid W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Blubberhouses [Sep. 26th, 1885 ; 
only three species found, Af'ion hortensis, Li max agrestis, Zonites cellartus; 
reference made by W.
Denison Roebuck to the addition of Liinax Levi*, 
L. cinereo-niger, L.
maxiimis, Limncea auricnlaria, L.
triincatula, Pisidium 
pitsillum, and Zua bringing up the total recorded fauna for the Dale to 20 — 
_ a meagre total, but a most unfavourable district].
Nat., Nor. 1885, p.
380.
Aug. 1888.
252 bibliography: mollusca, 1886-87.
[John Emmet].
York S.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Askern [20th May, 1886 ; species noted 
were SpJucrhim coj-neu/zi, Bythinia tentaculata, Planorbis co?nplanatus, P.
carinatiis, P.
allms, Liimuca ovata, L.
auriciilaria, L.
trimcatzila, Valvata 
piscinalis, Unto ttit nidus, Anodonta cygnea, L.
stagnalis, PL corneus, three 
Aj'ions, Li max maximus, L.
Levis, L.
agrestis, two Stuciiiece, Vitrina, Zonites 
cellarius, Z.
iiitidulus, Z.
oystallimis.
Helix aspersa, U.
nenioralis, H.
cantiana, H.
hispida, H.
I'otitndata and var.
alba, Btili/nus obscuriis, Pitpa 
21/nbilicata, Clausilia nigosa, Z2ia, and Carychiuiu\ Nat., June 1886, pp.
189-190.
[John Emmet.] York Mid W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Upper Nidderdale [July 1886; Azeca 
and Zonites radiatithis added to the Upper Nidderdale list; Z.
crystallimcs, 
Z. cellarius, Z.
nitidtilus, Clausilia rugosa, Helix hispida, H.
rotundata, 
Arion ater, and Liinax agrestis (with v.
nigra) also noted].
Nat., Aug. 1886, 
pp.
253-254.
W. W.
Fowler.
Line.
N., Line.
S. 
Helix arbustorum v.
cincta and Limnaea glabra near Lincoln [city ; but in 
North and South Lincolnshire respectively].
Nat., May 1886, p.
149, 
[F.
G. Fryer].
York N.E.
[Helix cantiana on the way from York to Nova Scotia Wood].
Nat.
Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1886, x.
102.
W. Gain.
Nottinghamshire.
Unio pictorum at Ossington, Nottinghamshire [in abundance and of large size 
as were also Anodonta cygnea ; measurements given].
Nat., Aug. 1884, p.
20.
W. Gain.
Line.
N. 
Marine Shells at Mablethorpe \Solen, Mya, and Pholas plentiful ; an odd 
valve of Pholas dactylus measured 4I inches].
Nat., Sep. 1884, p.
31.
W. Gain.
Nottinghamshire.
Unio pictorum at Ossington, Nottinghamshire [of large size ; dimensions 
given].
Nat., Dec. 1884, p.
112.
W. Gain.
Nottinghamshire.
Amalia gagates [var.
plumbea] in Nottinghamshire [tolerably abundant 
in writer's garden at Tuxford, 36 miles from nearest coast].
Nat., Sep. 1885, 
p. 321.
W. A.
Gain.
Nottinghamshire, York S.W.
Paludina contecta in Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire [near Bawtry ; and 
Balea perversa found at the junction of three Notts, parishes — Darlton, East 
Markhain, and East Drayton].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1886, v.
80; and 
Nat., July 1886, p.
213.
Carleton Greene.
York S.E.
A List of Marine Shells obtained at Filey in August and September 1887 
[giving first a list of 27 shells found on the beach, then a list of 12 brought 
by fishermen from the Dogger Bank, and a notice of a fine Crepidula procured 
from a fisherman, and stated to have come from the neighbourhood in the 
course of trawling].
Journ.
of Conch., Oct. 1887, v.
233-235.
J. A.
Hargreaves.
York Mid W.
or S.W.
Scalariform Planorbis spirorbis near Bingley [22nd Jan. 1887].
Nat., 
March 1887, p.
86.
W. Hy. Heathcote.
- Lane.
W. 
Lancashire Notes [made at Moreeambe and Heysham, Sep. 7th, 1886 ; 
Helix aspersa and var.
minor, H.
rufescens, H.
caperata and vars.
ornata and 
gigaxii, H nemoralis, H.
hortensis, H.
hispida, Zonites cellariiis, Z.
alliarius, 
Z. Iiitidulus, Vitrina, Cochlicopa hcbrica and var.
hyalina, Helix rtipestris, 
H. pulchella and var.
costata, H.
rotundata, and Pupa umbilicata, among land 
shells ; and Littorina littorea, Mytilus edulis, Cardium edule and var.
rustica, 
Telli7ia, Mactra stultorum, Solen siliqua, and Buccinum undatu)n\ Nat.
World, Feb. 1887, iv.
38.
Naturalist, 
This day, price One Shilling, Svo, with 20 Engravings, Parts /, //, arid III of 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., 
Editor of the yd and ^th Volumes of Yarrell's * History of British Birds.' 
Fourth Edition.
To be completed in about 20 monthly parts.
CURNEY JACKSON (Successors to Mr. Van Voorst), i, Paternoster Row.
(SEE REVIEW IN THIS NUMBER.) 
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
O. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G. ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
J, W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all reputed' species, and full 
Ibibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
Crown Svo, Cloth, Illustrated.
TOPOGRAPHY AND NATURAL HISTORY 
LOFTHOUSE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
By GEORGE ROBERTS.
CONTENTS : Vol. I.
— Antiquities; Field-nomenclature; Ancient Houses; Registers; 
Charities ; Industries ; Surveys ; Statistics ; Ancient Leases ; Natural History Diary from 
1862 to 1875 ; Essays on Natural History ; Lists of Plants and Shells.
CONTENTS: Vol. II.— Flora and Fauna; Customs; Notes on Church Sun-dials; 
Memoir of Charles Forrest ; Notes on Old Families ; Rothwell Registers ; Observations on 
Domed Nests : Natural History Diary from 1R76 to 1883 ; Additional Lists of Plants and Shells.
Price of First Volume - - 5s.
Od.
,, Second Volume - 3s.
6d.
To be obtained from the Author, Lofthouse, Wakefield.
36 pp.
Cut, in cover.
Price 4d.
AN INDICTMENT OF DARWIN.
.By OSWALD DAWSON.
Chapter I HISTORICAL COUNTS.
Chapter II RELIGIOUS COUNTS.
London : 
•REETHOUGHT PUBLLSHING COMPANY, 63, FLEKT ST., E.C.
May be had of 1.
Greevz Fisher, i, Koburg Terrace, Toi' of Wadk Lank, 
Leeds.
THE NATTJIIALIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next fezv months: — 
A few additional localities to the Vascular Plants of the West Biding 
Flora, and some remarks thereon.— Wm.
^VEST.
Conchological articles desired.
19'otes on the Lapwing {Vanellus z'ulgayis').--'\ .
A. Jackson.
Botanical articles desired.
A List of some Hemiptera-Heteroptera of Lincolnshire.— J.
Eardley Mason 
Geological articles desired.
List of the Mosses of Westmorland.— George Stabler.
Post Free in Cardboard Covers, Is.
; Cloth, Is. 6d.
Addcess: — 'Flower-Land,' Sewerbv Vicarage.
Hill; or can be ordered through any 
Bookseller, or from the Publisher, John Heywood, Deansgate, Manchester.
AN EASY INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY, 
FOR CHILDREN, AND FOR THE USE OF PARENTS AND TEACHERS.
Vicar ok Sewerby, Hull.
' Few works are written in such a plain manner as this, especially when dealing with BotaHy.
It is one of the easiest introductions to the subject we have come across.' — Horticultural Times 
' Parents or Teachers who are able to take their children for country- rambles will find here a 
capital basis provided for conversational lessons in the rudiments of Botany.' — Teachers Aid.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence with the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is los.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London: JOHN VAN VOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c., should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
N0W ready, co?jipiele, Svo, cloth ^ with Coloured Map, price £\ \s.
od.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
By FREDERIC ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.S., etc.
This, which forms the 2nd Volume of the Botanical Series of the Transactions, is perhaps 
the most complete work of the kind ever issued for any district, including detailed and full 
records of 1.044 Phanerogams and Vascular Cryptogams, 11 Characeae, 348 Mosses, 108 Hepatics, 
258 Lichens, 1,009 Fungi, and 382 Freshwater Algae, making a total of 3,160 species.
London: LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden; 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, \^ r 1.
t .-^ 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, | ^^"">' 
1 SL^ 1888 
No. 158.
SEPTEMBER 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
^^-£a3,^M.
DENISON roebuck, F.L.S., 
^M.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
COHRESFONDERENDIR MITGLIEU DES OKNITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN.
(Contents 
I 
Bibliography— Mollusca, 1886 and 1887 
Utility of the Barn Owl— J.
//.
Gur7iey, Jun., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U 
List of Plants noticed at Fylingdales (Robin Hood's Bay) in September 1882 
— C C.
Babmgton, M.A., F.J^.S.
New West Yorkshire Plant (Pyrola rotundifoWa)— F.
A. Lees, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
Notes on the Lapwing near Garstang — J.
A. Jackson 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Market Weighton 
Harcourt Bath on British Birds (Review) 
Notes— Mammalia 
Whale at Flamborough — Rlattkeiv Bailey; Lincolnshire Bats— Denisoti 
Roelntck, F.L.S.; Water Shrew and Field Vole near Ripon — W.
Denisoii 
Roebuck, F.L.S.
Notes — Ornithology 
Unusual Nesting-site for Missel Thrush — E.
P. P.
Butterjield and F.
A. Lees, 
M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
; Fieldfares near Halifax in July— C.
C. Hanson ; 
Osprey near Alford — Jas. Eardley Mason : Food of Crossbills — Johtt 
Cordeaux, M.B.O.U.
; Crossbill at the Fame Islands— 7- Gitrney, Jun., 
F.Z.S., M.B.O.U.
Notes — Lepidoptera 
Deilephila galii at Bradford — J.
IV.
Carter; Deilephila galii at Harrogate — 
Major B.
B. Thompson; Deilephila galii at Alford, Lincolnshire — Robert 
Gar/it \ Deilephila galii at Hartlepool — J.
Gardner.
Note— Conchology 
Occurrence of Dead Shells of Crepidula fornicata on Grimsby Beach — Arthur 
Smith.
Note— Geology 
Calverley Wood Quarries, Leeds — 3".
A. A damson, F.G.S.
Notes— Botany 
Thalictrum alpinum L.
at Settle — A.
Craig Christie, F.L.S.
; Dichroism in Viola 
odorata — 7".
D.A. Cockereli, M.C.S.
; Carduus acaulis in North Lincolnshire 
— yas.
Eardley Mason.
Note— Mollusca 
Arion ater var.
nov.
cinerea at Nottingham — IV.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S.
Notes and News 
PAGH 
253 to 263 
264 
265 to 267 
267 
269 to 275 
277 to 282 
283 & 284 
263 
264 & 276 
275 
876 
268 & 284 
284 
LONDON : 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
E.C.
McCoRQUODAi.E & Co. LIMITED, Cardington Street, Euston ; 
ANO 
Leeds: Basinghai.i. Street.
All Communications should be Addressed : — 
The Edrtors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
^RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence: 
The NATURALIST.
>t:o< 
TARIFF OF CHARGES FOR REPRINTS.
50 copies.
100 copies.
200 copies.
4 pages 
...
4/6 /...
.. 
7/- 
...
9/6 
8 pages 
- 5/6 
8/6 
.. II/-, 
12 pages 
- 
. II/- ...
...
16/- 
i6 pages 
8/6 ...
• 13/6 ...
18/- 
Covers charged extra 
as below — 
Plain Covers ...
...
-/9 ...
. 1/6 ...
2/6 
Printed Covers 
- 2/- 
• 3/- •..
...
4/6 • 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Mittheilungen des Ornithologischen Vereines in Wien.
Juni, Juli, Aug.
,1888.
[Verein.
Science Gossip, No. 284, for Aug. 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
New York Microsc.
Society.
— ^Journal, vol.
4, No. 3, July 1888.
[Society.
Trenton Nat. Hist.
Soc— Journal, No. 3, Jan. 1888.
[The Society.
Research, monthly illust.
journ.
of science, vol.
i. No. 2, Aug. 1888.
[A.
N. Tate, Ed.
The Young Naturalist, Part 104, for Aug. 1888.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, Editor.
The Zoologist, vol.
12, No. 140, 3rd Series, Aug. 1888.
[J.
E. Harting, Editor.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 128, for Aug. 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
South London Ent. Soc— Abst.
of Proc.
for 1887.
[The Society.
Flora of Herts., by R.
A. Pryor.
8vo.
cloth, 1887, 588 pp.
[Herts.
N. H.
Soc.
Geo. Massee — A monograph of the genus Calostoma Desv.
[Mitremyces Nees).
8vo.
reprint, 22 pp.
and plate.
[Author.
Geo. Massee — On the presence of sexual organs in ^cidium.
8vo.
reprint, 5 pp.
and plate.
[Author.
Plymouth Institution — Ann. Rep.
and Trans.
Vol. 10, part i, 1887-88.
[Institution.
Manchester Geol.
Soc— Trans.
Vol. 19, part 20, 1887-88.
[The Society.
Yorkshire Notes and Queries — Index Part.
Aug. 1888.
Q. H.
Turner, Editor.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 18, for Aug. 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
Penzance Nat. Hist, and Antiq.
Soc.
— Rep. and Trans., 1887-88.
[The Society.
Journal of Conchology, vol.
v, No. 12, August 1888.
[J- W'.
Taylor, Editor.
Journal of Microscopy, New Series, vol.
i, No. 4, August 1888.
[Postal Micr.
Soc.
Scottish Naturalist, No. 21, New Series, August 1888.
[Prof.
J. W.
H. Trail, Editor.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Wanted.
— Living examples of Limax arborum, L.
Iccvis, and L.
tenellus, 
British Land and Freshwater Shells in exchange.
— W.
A. Gain, Tuxford, Newark.
Concliology.
— I have several specimens of Venus exoleta which I should 
like to exchange for other Marine specimens.
— Arthur Smith, 103, Freeman 
Street, Grimsby, July nth, 1888.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out * on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORP, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc, is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
Every Naturalist should read the ' Historical Counts ' of Oswald Dawson's 
Indictment of Darwin.
4d., of Greevz Fisher, Koburg Terrace, Leeds.
Chapter ii, ' Religious Counts.' 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1886-87.
\V.
Hv. Hkathcote.
Lane.
S. 
Lancashire Notes [made at Tarleton, etc., near Preston ; 27 aquatic 
mollusca mentioned as taken].
Nat. World, March 1887, iv.
57-58.
W. H.
Heathcote.
Lane.
S. 
Physa fontinahs var.
albina at Faring-ton, South Lancashire [two found 
March 4th, 1887].
Journ of Conch., April 1887, v.
185.
[\V.
H. Heathcote.] Lane.
S., Lane.
W. 
[Bythinia tentaeulata, curiously and extensively eroded, from Tarleton, 
S. Lancashire, Helix hispiua and var.
aibida from Penworthan ; CoLhlicopa 
lubrica var.
hyaliiia from Morecambe, W, Lancashire].
Journ.
of Conch., 
July 1887, V.
205.
[W.
H. Heathcote.] Lane.
W. 
[Unio margaritifer from the Lune at Halton].
Tourn.
of Conch., Oct.
1887, V.
248.
[W.
A. Herdmax.] Cheshire.
[Address on the Work of the Liverpool Marine Biology Committee : 
referring to a nudibranch — De)idronotiLs arborescens — which is particularly 
abundant at Hilbre Island at certain times of the year, and almost absent at 
others].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc. Dec.
7th, 1885, xxv.
103.
[\V.
A. Herdmax.] Cheshire.
Liverpool Microscopical Society {Gojiiodoris castanea, three species of 
Ascidiicm.
from Hilbre Island, and other species, referred to].
Sci. Goss.
, 
Jan. 1886, p.
17.
W. C.
Hey. York N.E., York S.E.
The Marine Shells of Yorkshire [the list, which is prefaced by introductory 
remarks, includes 115 species].
Xat., Sep. 1884 and Jan. 1885, pp.
25-31 
and 129-133.
[\V.
C. Hey.] York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Helmsley [4th Aug., 1884 ; LiDuicea 
peregra.
Helix sericea, H.
fiisca, H.
lapicida, H.
j'lipestris, and Claiisilia 
laminata noted].
Nat., Sep. 1884, p.
42.
[W.
C. Hey.] York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Spurn Point [3rd Sep., 1884 ; Helix 
aspersa, H.
nemoralis, H.
virgata (not observed), H.
caperata and v.
ornata, 
Pupa viarginata, Vitrina, Zua, Vertigo edentttla, Hydrobia Jilvcv, Littorina 
littorea.
Chiton niarginatus, Tellina solidula, Pitrpiira lapillns, Biiccimun 
iindatiim, and Tropluvi tnincatiis noted].
Xat., Nov. 1884, p.
92.
W. C.
Hey. York Mid W.
Conehological Notes from Settle [April 28th ; Helix mpestn's, Claiisilia 
ni'^^osa, H.
arbiistornni and var.
/iavescejis, Zonites nitidiihis, Z.
radiatiilits, 
H. hispida, H.
conci}ina, Z.
alliariiis and v.
vin'diila, Vitrina, Zua, H.
nemoralis.
Pupa iinibilicata, Z.
crystallinus, Pupa secale, H.
ericetonivi, H.
rtcfescens, Z.
cellarius, Ancylus fliiviatilis, Limnc?a peregra, Buliviiis obscurus, 
and Clausilia dubid\.
Nat., June 1885, p.
258.
W. C.
Hey.] York Mid W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Boroughbridge [May 25th, 1S85 : 
Linimea glabra, Piano rbis spirorbis, both Physa:, both Ancyli, PI.
albus, PL 
contortus, Bytliinia tentaeulata, Anodonta cygnea, L.
truncatula.
Avion ater, 
A.- hn)iensis, Li/fiax agrestis, L.
lavis, Succinea putris, Zonites crystallinus, 
Z. cellarius, Z.
nitidulus.
Helix aspersa, H.
hortcnsis, H.
eantiana, H.
rufescens, H.
hispida, H.
concimia, H.
rotundata, Clausilia n/gosa, Zua, 
SphcEriufti corneuni, Pisidiuni pusilluni, P.
fontinale, PL corneus, PL com- 
planatus, PL carinatus, Limnaa peregra, L.
palustris, L.
stagnalis, L.
auricularia].
Nat., July 1885, p.
280.
Sept.
1888.
R 
254 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : 
MOLLUSCA, 1886-87.
[W.
C. Hey.] York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Whitby [August 3rd : Pisidhim 
pjisilhim^ Unio margaritifer, Flanorbis nautileus, Liumcca peregra, L.
tmncatula, Aftcyhis jinviatilis.
Avion ater, Limax agrestis^ L.
maximiis^ 
Siiccinea pntvis, Zonites cellarius, Z.
allia7-iiis, Z.
nitidtihis, Helix aspeisa, 
H. nemoralis, H.
hispida, H.
concinna, H.
rotimdata, Ztia, and of marine 
shells Littorina saxatilis, L.
littorea, L.
littoralis.
Chiton inargi^iatjis , 
Trochiis cinereiis, Modiola modiolus, Anomia ephippitim, and Patella vulgata\ 
Nat., Oct. 1885, p.
348-349.
[W.
C. Hey.] York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Flamborough Head [14th June, 
1886 ; SphiErium lacicstre, three Fisidia, Limnaa peregra, L.
pahistris, L.
truncatitla, Pla]iorhis nautileiis, P.
coniplanatus, Physa fontinalis, three 
Ariotis, three Limaces, Siiccinea putris, four Zonites, Helix aspersa and var.
exalbida, H.
neuioralis and var.
albolabiata, H.
cantiana, //.
rufescens, H.
hispida and var.
stibj-tifa, H.
virgala, H.
caperata, Clansilia rugosa, Ztia, and 
CarycJmnn noted].
Xat., July 1886, pp.
216-217.
AVm. C.
Hey. York N.E.
Reversed Specimen of Helix virgata at Coatham [within a few yards of 
the spot where the writer had some years before found a reversed H.
aspersa ; 
coincidence of station noted as suggestive].
Nat., Jan. 1887, p.
20.
W. C.
Hey.
« York N.E.
The River Foss [and its molluscan inhabitants; SpJuvriinn (all four), both 
Anodontcs, Unio picioyiun, U.
ttpuidiis, Palndina vivipara, Liumcca aiiricii- 
laria, L.
palnstris.L. stagnalis, both BytJiinics.
both Valvatce, Physa fontinalis, 
Plaftorbis carinatiis, P.
coinplanatus, P.
corneics, Ancylns fiuviatilis, Neritina, 
and the Succinece].
Nat. World, Feb. 1887, iv.
22-23.
[W.
C. Hey.] York N.E.
Yorkshire Naturalists at Gormire Lake and Thirkleby Park [July 1887 ; 
Planoj'bis albns, PI.
naiitiletis, Physa fo7itinalis, Pisidinm pusillnni, Litnncca 
glabra, L.
peregra, Spha-riwn co7-neiim.
Helix lapicida, H.
rotimdata, H.
arbns- 
torum, H.
hortensis, H.
hispida, H.
rufescens, Zonites alliarius, tupa 
umbilicata, Clansilia rugosa, Pisidiiun fontinale, and Limax agrestis observed; 
Helix aspersa is also noted as found by W.
Cash, but this is an error ; the fact 
being that W.
Cash threw away a specimen he happened to have in his 
pocket, and this was picked up by someone else].
Nat,, Aug. 1887, p.
237.
W. C.
Hey. York S.E.
Notes on Land and Fresh-water Shells near 'Qx\6Xvi\%ton'^Anodonta cygnea, 
Planorbis corneus, Limncea stagnalis in Boynton Fish-pond ; Helix virgata and 
H. caperata at Auburn, and var, ornata at Bridlington ; Pupa marginata near 
Bempton ; Planorbis vortex and Valvata piscinalis at Driffield ; H.
arbustoruin 
at Speeton Cliffs; earthy marls at the back of Bridlington Harbour contain 
iovit Limncect:, three Planorbes, Siiccinea putris, Bythinia tentaculata, Sphtvrium 
corneum and Pisidiiun piisillum ; the blue marls contained the two last-named 
with Valvata piscinalis and Ziia ; an excavation in pre-glacial clay at Sewerby 
yielded marginata.
Helix piilchella, send H.
hispida sub-fossil; singularly, 
the same three occurred together at Bempton alive].
Nat., Dec. 1887, p.
374.
[Richard Howse.] Northumberland S.
[Limax arborum from Akeld ; L.
hvvis, Arion bourguignati, Zonites radiatulus, 
Z. purus, and Z.
crystallinus from West Woodburn, Northumberland], 
Journ.
of Conch., Oct. 1887, v.
249, 
Baker Hudson, , Durham.
Land and Fresh-water Shells collected in County Durham, 1883 and 1884 
[45 species (besides varieties) mentioned, with localities], Nat,, Dec, 1884, 
p. 112, 
Baker Hudson.
York N.E.
[A very peculiar example of Limax maximus from Airy Holme Wood, 
N.E, Yorkshire], Journ.
of Conch,, Jan, 1885, iv.
261.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: mollusca, 1886-87.
259 
C. H.
PiERSON.
York Mid W.
Clausilia rug^osa var.
gracilior at Clapham, Yorkshire [found Aug. 1884, 
not far from the Church].
Journ.
of Conch., April and July 1887, v.
183 
and 205.
[C.
H. PiERSON.] York Mid W.
[Shells at Addingham, April nth, 1887; Zojtites cellarhis, Z.
nitiduliis, Z.
puriis and v.
margaritacea, Z.
glaber, Azeca tridens and var.
crystallina, and 
Ziio].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
207.
[C.
H. PiERSON.] York Mid W., York S.W.
[Unio tumidus and Anodonta cygnea from mud-heaps on the banks of the 
Canal at Kirkstall ; and A.
cygnea and var.
rostrata from Roundhay, near 
Leeds].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
209.
H. Pollard.
York N.E.
Land and Fresh-water Shells in the neighbourhood of Whitby [a full and 
detailed list, with localities and introductory remarks, of five slugs, twenty-six 
land and ten fresh-water shells (altogether forty-one species) found in the 
valley of the Yorkshire Esk. which is on the whole an unfavourable district].
Nat., May 1887, pp.
134-138.
T. Mei.lard Reade.
Lane.
S. 
Notes on a Bed of Fresh -water Shells and a chipped flint lately found at 
the Alt Mouth.
[The shells, consisting of ^ Lyninezis lymiied!
^ L.
periger\ 
Cyclas cornea, and Planorbis spirorbis, were crowded in a bed of mixed peat, 
sand, and mud ; immediately under the sand-hills, close to this bed, a small 
flint flake was found.] Proc.
Liverpool Geol.
Soc.
, Part 2 of vol.
v. (1886), 
PP- 137-139- 
Hugh Richardson.
York Mid W.
Mollusca of the Neighbourhood of Clapham, Yorkshire [found by 
J. R.
B. Tomlin, M.
C. Plughes, and the writer ; the list includes 41 species 
and one or two varieties].
Journ.
of Conch., April 1886, v.
60-61.
Hugh Richardson.
York N.E., York S.W., York Mid W.
Hints to Shell-Collectors [with notes on Achatina in Ouse rubbish at Clifton 
Ings, York, Vertigo mimdissima near Ackworth, Azeca and Pupa timbilicata 
found at York, Clausilia dubia at Ackworth, Physa Jiypnortim at Bishopthorpe, 
Uiiio, Anodon, Neritiiia, Pahuiina, and all four species of Sphc€riti7n at York, 
and Helix lapicida near Ackworth].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1886, x.
89-93- 
Hugh Richardson.
York S.W.
The Shells of Ackworth and Went Vale [The first part is devoted to 
explanation, nomenclature, verification of records, and varieties, and a copious 
resume of authorities, not only bibliographical, but with indications of con- 
tributors of hitherto unpublished notes].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Feb. 15th, 1887, 
xi.
1-4.
[The second instalment defines the district, and describes the various 
localities within and closely adjoining, with notice under each of what is 
there found].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 15th, 1887, xi.
27-30 (with ma]:) of 
district).
[The list of species includes 83 species and 16 more within square 
brackets as found immediately outside the district].
Nat. Hist.
Journ, April 
15th, 1887, xi.
50-53; May i6th, xi.
76-77; June 15th, xi.
101-104 ; Sep.
15th, xi.
122-125; Oct. 15th, xi.
147-153; Nov. 15th, xi.
176-179; 
Dec. 15th, xi.
200-203.
Geo. Roberts.
York S.W.
Achatina acicula and its occurrence near Wakefield [at Newton, and in 
the town, on Carboniferous Sandstone].
Nat., Sep. 1885, p.
321.
G. Roberts.
York Mid W.
Conchological Difficulties [in continuation of discussion on naming variations; 
reference made to diflerence in colour of Helix rufescens, due to environment, 
in Craven and other parts of Yorksliire, etc.].
Zool., Jan. 18S6, pp.
31-32.
Sept.
1888.
26o 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: MOLLUSCA, 1886-87.
George Roberts.
York S.W.
Garden Slugs [at Lofthouse, near Wakefield, are Arion nter, A.
Jiortensis ; and 
at Wakefield, Liniax agrestis var.
nigi-a\ Sci. Goss.
, May and June 1886, 
pp.
1 18 and 140.
Geo. Roberts.
Lane.
S. 
Lancashire Helices [referring to published notes and lists, as Cockerell's, 
Standen's, and Dyson's, mentioning species, and urging publication of detailed 
and further information].
Nat., June 1886, p.
163.
George Roberts.
York S.W.
Arion subfuscus and Helix hispida var.
fusca in Yorkshire [at Lofthouse, 
near Wakefield, June 2nd, 1886].
Zool., Aug. 1886, x.
341.
George Roberts.
York S.E.
MoUusca of Wressle and neighbourhood [being a full and detailed list — 
with localities — of twenty-one fresh-water mollusca, two slugs, and fifteen land 
mollusca, besides numerous named varieties].
Nat., Oct. 1886, pp.
311-314.
Geo. Roberts.
York S.W.
Planorbis complanatus var.
submarginata in Yorkshire [at Sharleston near 
Pontefract].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
347.
Geo. Roberts, York S.E.
Addition to Wressle List of Mollusca [of Sphicrinm comae /n var.
regularis 
Pasc.].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
347.
George Roberts.
York S.W.
Supplementary Notes on the Mollusca of Pontefract and Neighbour- 
hood [in which Sphce^'iutn, Pisidium^ Planorbis, Bythinia, Fhysa, Lininaa, 
Arion, Liniax, Succinea, Helix, Claiisilia, and Achatina are treated of, the 
notes chiefly dealing with Varieties not included in the author's former papers].
Zoo]., Nov. 1886, X.
448-453.
George Roberts.
York Mid W., York S.W., Lane.
S. 
Notes on Varieties of Bythinia tentaculata [with descriptions of monst.
scalarifornie, Milford near Pontefract, var.
major Loc, Fairburn and Bradford, 
var.
nov.
angiilata, canal near Bradford, var.
1 pj'oducta Menke, Fairburn, 
var.
zonata Baud., near Bradford, var.
fulva Loc, Apperley near Bradford, 
and monst.
dccollaiiiin Jeff., Kirkthoi-pe near Wakefield, near Bradford, and 
at Prestwich].
Nat., Jan. 1887, pp.
19-20.
George Roberts.
York Mid W., York S.W.
Arion flavus [at Harrogate and at Wakefield].
Sci. Goss., Nov. 1887, p.
260.
[These were doubtless juvenile specimens of one of the other Arions, Arion 
flavns being merely a name, a myth.
— W.D.R.] 
George Roberts.
York N.E.
Planorbis Nautileus var.
[from Scarborough, the smooth form].
Sci. Goss., 
Nov. 1887, p.
260.
Wm. Denison Roebuck.
Durham.
Slugs in County Durham [collected by Baker Hudson at Durham ; Liviax 
arboritm.
L. maxinuis var.
ccUaria, L.
ag7rstis and vars.
sylvalica, albida, and 
tristis, Arion aier vars.
rtifa and niarginata, and A.
Jiortensis ; and Limax 
ai'boruni from ]\Iiddleton-in-Teesdale].
Nat., Aug. 1884, p.
20.
[W.
Denison Roebuck.] York N.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Hawes [28ih June, 1884; Limax hivis, 
L. nrboriim, Succinea pnti'is, ZoJiiics fulvus, LLc/ix scricea, Clansilia laminata, 
C. dnbia, Azeca, and Anodonta anatina mentioned, with localities].
Nat., 
Aug. 1884, p.
18.
W. D.
Roebuck.
York Mid W.
[Limax maximus, type, Headingley, Leeds].
Joum.
of Conch., Jan. 1885, 
iv.
260.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: iMOLLUSCA, 1886-87.
Baker Hudson.
York N.E.
Notes on the Land and Fresh-water Mollusca of the Lower Tees 
[Yorkshire ; 24 species mentioned, with locahties, as additional to Ashford's, 
Hey's, and Watson's lists ; and a note as to the successful introduction of 
LijiiiHva stagnalis 2iX\d Plajiorbis comeiis in a pond on Redcar sand-hills].
Journ.
of Conch., April 1886, v.
46-48.
[Baker Hudson.] York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Pickering [Aug. 1886 ; Pisidiuni 
pusilliLm, Planorbis spirorbis and monst.
scalare^ Liimicca ovata, L.
palustris, 
L. glabra, Amylus fliiviatilis, three species of Avion, five of Zzwizx (including 
Z. cinereo-nigcr), Siicciiiea piiti-is, seven of Zonites, Helix aspcrsa, H.
7te?noralis, H.
arbiistoriini, H.
concinna, H.
hispida, H.
virgata, H.
caperata, 
H. roiiindata, Bidimus obsciirits, Pupa itmbilicafa, Claiisilia rtigosa, CI.
laviinata, and Zua noted].
Nat., Sep. 1886, pp.
273-274.
Baker Hudson.
York N.E.
The Conchological Stigma removed from Yorkshire [by the discovery — 
by T.
A. Lofthouse — oi Anialia gagates zX Middlesbrough, in company with 
A. niarginata\ Nat., Oct. 1886, p.
314.
[B.
Hudson.] Durham, York N.E.
[Mollusca from N.
E. Yorkshire and co.
Durham ; Limiu2a ovata.
River 
Leven near Hutton Rudby ; Pisidiiun foulinale, Linthorpe ; Planorbis 
spirorbis, Pisidinm pusilluin, and Liinna:a palustris, pond near Levisham ; 
Ancylus flitviatilis and Helix rotiindata, Levisham ; H.
aspej'sa, Sunderland ; 
H. co7iciiina^H.
rotundata, H.
liispida, Zonites cellarins, Zna, Clansilia riigosa 
and CL iaininata from Farwath Bridge, Newtondale ; H.
virgata var.
siibal- 
bida, Coatham ; Livincva ovata, Marton ; and Planorbis spirorbis monst.
scalare from Levisham].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
136 and 137.
[Baker Hudson.] York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Saltburn [30th May, \%%'] ; Livuuca 
peregra.
all the four species of Arion, three of Liinax, six of Zonites, Helix 
nejiioralis, H liispida, H.
caperata, Zna, H.
rotnjid.ita^ H.
acideata, Clansilia 
rngosa, CI.
Iaininata, Vertigo edentiila, Carychiiiin, Vitrina, Succinea putris.
Helix ai-biistoruin, H.
sericea,H.
Iiortensis var.
lutea, H.
conciiuia, Azeca, and 
Pnpa ninbilicata were observed ; and information as to the range in Cleve- 
land of H.
hortensis is given].
Nat., July 1887, pp.
218-219.
Baker Hudson.
Durham.
Description of a New Variety [albida] of Planorbis carinatus MilU.
[taken in the mill-race.
Bluestone Mill, near Norton, co.
Durham, April i8th, 
1885 ; where also were LiDincca pereg)-a (pale), and Bythinia tentaculata vars.
cxcavata and albida'].
Journ.
of Conch., Oct. 1887, v.
249.
[Baker Hudson.] York N.W.
Yorkshire and Westmorland Naturalists at Sedbergh [Zonites fuhns, 
Azcca, Helix rnpestris, Vertigo pygnuca mentioned].
Nat., Sep. 1887, p.
279.
[Henry] Hyde.
Cheshire.
[Cyclas rivicola from the Marple Canal].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Sep. 20th, 1886, xxvi.
6. 
J. M.
Jeffcott.
Isle of Man.
[One of] 'The Seven Sleepers,' according to Manx Tradition [was the 
crannnag, or snail : elym.
ci-auuiuDi = \\\vc\\> or bulb].
Nat., Aug. 1884, p.
14.
H. Wallis Ke\v.
Line.
N. 
Another Post-glacial Ravine [Hubbard's Valley near Louth] and its 
inhabilanls [willi mciUion of Liniax arboruni, Arion liorteus:s var.
grisca, 
IJniax agre.dis and \ar.
sylvatica.
Helix ericetorinn and var.
aft", alba, H.
rnfescens, and //.
caperata and var.
ornata\ Nat. World, March 1886, iii.
42-43.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Mollusca at Louth, North Lincolnshire [notes on thirty-one species ami 
their varieties, the results of a few months" work].
Nat., March 1886.
p. 79.
Sept.
1888.
256 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1 886-87.
H. Wallis Kew.
Line.
N. 
Shells of the Ponds and Streams [near Louth ; Aiiodonta cygnea, Ancylus 
Jiitviatilis, Plaiiorbis vortex, Sphceriiiiii coriieu/n, Linificea pahtstris, L.
ovata, 
L. stagnalis, Planorbis corneiis, Bythinia tentaciilata, Valvata piscinahs, 
Plaiiorbis spirorbis, PL carinattis, PL contortus, and Physa fontmalis\.
Nat.
World, April 1886, iii.
61-62.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Old Chalk-pits [near Louth ; Helix ericetonim, Arioii ater, A.
hortensis, 
H. neiiioralis and varieties (of which 003(45) is said to be characteristic of 
Louth), Limax agresiis, H.
riifescens, H.
rotiDidata, and H.
hispida 
mentioned].
Nat. World, May 1886, iii.
81-82.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
A Half-Day's Ramble on the Lineolnshire Coast [at Mablethorpe, 3rd 
April, 1886; Helix aspersa, H.
iie?noralis, H.
caperaia, H.
hispida, H.
piilc/iella, Ptipa ti/nbilicata var.
alba, P.
viai-ginata, Zit-a and var.
minor 
noted, with remarks on the variation of H.
nemoralis ; marine shells on the 
beach were species and varieties of PJiolas, Mya, Solen.
Maara, Tellina, 
Scrobicidaria, Cardiiiin, Mytilns, Pecten, Ostrea, Patella, Trochns, Hydrobia, 
and Biicciuuui — \^ forms ; and high-water rejectamenta produced SpJuvriujii 
corneiini, Bythinia tentaciilata, Valvata piscinalis, six Planorbes, Physa 
fontinalis, and Livimea ovata].
Nat., June 1886, pp.
1 7 1- 173.
H. Wallis Kew.
' Line.
N. 
The Greasy-field and Grisel-bottom [near Louth ; Limnaa peregra var.
ovata, and Balia perversa mentioned].
Nat. World, June 1886, iii.
101-103.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Woodland Rambles in Lineolnshire [in Maltby and Haugham Woods near 
Louth, Aprd 1886 ; numerous species of mollusca mentioned].
Young Nat., 
July 1886, vii.
1 29-131.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Estuarine Shells at Saltfleet, Lineolnshire [i6th June, 1886; Melamptis 
viyosotis, Hydrobia ulvcc, Littorina littorea, L.
riidis and two varieties].
On the Lineolnshire Wolds [at Donington-on-Bain ; Arion ater, Zonites 
glaber, Z.
fnlviis, Cochlicopa hibrica.
Helix ericetonim, H.
caperata.
Limna^a 
triincatula, Arion Jiortensis, Limax agrestis, H.
nemoralis (vars.), H.
hispida, 
L. peregra v.
ovata, and Zonites crystallinus noted].
Nat. World, Aug. 1886, 
iii.
141-143- 
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Evenings in Spring" [near Louth ; Helix nemoralis (varieties), H.
aspersa.^ 
H. hispida, H.
riifescens, H.
ericetonim, Limax arboriim, L.
agrestis and var.
sylvatica, L.
maximns x^rs.
fasciata and cellaria, and L.
flavus noted].
Nat.
World, Sep. 1886, iii.
161-162.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
[Hydrobia ulvae mentioned as abounding in the salt-marshes at Saltfleet].
Sci. Goss., Sep. 1886, p.
208.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Cyelostoma elegans re-diseovered in [Martin Lister's] North Lineoln- 
shire [locality, Burwell Wood, for which it was first recorded in 1678].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
347.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Estuarine Shells at Tetney, Lineolnshire [12th July, 1886 ; Cardinm 
ediile, J/ya arenaria, Littorina nidis, L.
littorea and var.
paupercnla, and 
Hydi'obia nlv(C found ; Melampiis myosotis searched for.
but unsuccessfully].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
347.
Nat., Aug. 1886, p.
251.
n. Wallis Kew.
Line.
N. 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: mollusca, 1886-87.
257 
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Notes from the Green-sand YAnodonta cygiiea and Li/muca aiiriciilaria noted 
at Benniworth Haven ; and Helix arlnistoriiiii^ H.
nenioralis^ H.
ericetoriun, 
H. caperata.
H. concinna, Zonites glaber, Z.
fiilvtis, Z.
radiatulus, and Zita 
hibrica at Donington-on-Bain].
Nat. World, Nov. 1886, iii.
201-202.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Natural History Odds and Ends [scarcity of Helix hortensis near Louth ; 
occurrence of H.
virgata in raisins, H.cespiiuDi in nuts, and TrocJuis zizyphimis 
in 'Irish Moss,' in Louth shops].
Nat. World, Dec. 1886, p.
222.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Natural History Rambles.
No. i.
In the Woods [near Louth ; Martin 
Lister's records for Cycloslovia elegans and Zonites Jiilvits quoted, and the 
capture of BytJiinia teniae nlata^ Cyciostorna, Avion ater v\x.x. ricfa, and Liinax 
niaxiinus var.
fasciata noted].
Sci. Goss., Feb. 1887, p.
31.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Zonites fulvus [and Cyclostoma elegans] re-diseovered in its ancient 
locality in Lincolnshire [at Burwell Wood, for which it was recorded in 1678 
by Martin Lister].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
199.
B. B.
L[e].T[all, Secretary].
York N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [albino Avion atev at York, 
LirniKva giabva near Bootham Stray, Spluvviiini ovale in the Foss, noted].
Nat. Hist.
Tourn., Nov. 15th, 1886, x.
172.
[J.
Madison.] York S.W.
[Vertigo minutissima from Sheffield (no doubt Kiveton Park)].
Midi.
Nat., 
June 1886, ix.
171.
[J.
Madison.] York Mid W.
[Limnaea stagnalis var.
fragilis-variegata from Malham Tarn].
Midi.
Nat., 
Aug. 1886, ix.
227.
J. T.
Marshall.
Line.
N. 
On some New British Shells ITci-ebvatuIa papulosa described and figured as 
new ; found at Skegness and at Sutton-on-vSea, Lincolnshire].
Journ.
of 
Conch., April 1887, v.
186-190, and plate i.
figs.
1-3.
[Laura and Katherine Mason.] Line.
N. 
[Vertigo pygmaea and Helix eaperata, Chapel Sand-hills, Lincolnshire].
Journ.
of Conch., Oct. 1887, v.
248.
J. G.
Milne.
Cheshire.
Varieties {deeollatal oi Bythinia tentacidata, \vitviua of] Zo?tites excavatus, and 
[hyalina of] Cochlicopa hibvica in N.E. Cheshire [localities stated].
Nat., 
March 1886, p.
78.
J. G.
Milne.
Cheshire.
Seareity of HeHees in N.E. Cheshire \^H.
votundata is the only generally 
distributed one ; //.
neiiiovalis^ H.
aspevsa, H.
aeiileata, H.
Jiispida^ H.
piihdiella, and //.
pygiiuca are all scarce, stations given ; the species of Zonites 
on the contrary, are common everywhere].
Nat., March 1886, p.
80.
J. G.
Milne.
Cheshire.
MoUusea near Ashley, Cheshire \ Vcvtigo pyonnca, Vit) ina, Snccinea elegans, 
eight species of Zonites, Helix actileata, PI.
hispida^H.
j ofinidafa, Zita with its 
var.
liyalina, Cavyehitim, Linuicea peirgva, P.
ti-nnea/n/a, two species of .•^r/c// 
and three of Liviax are enumerated].
Nat., Aug. 1887, p.
228.
J. Moore.
Isle of Man.
Arion ater v.
albolateralis [found at Kirk T.raddan and Onchan, and one of 
v. albidn at Onchan].
Sci. Goss., X\n\\ 1886, j).
94.
C. T.
MussoN.
Nottinghamshire.
Large Anodons in Nottinghamshire [at Sutton-in-Ashlicld ; - /.
eygnca, 
dimensions given].
Nat., Lcc. 1884, p.
112.
Sept.
18S8.
258 bibliography: mollusca, 1886-87.
C. T.
]\rrssox.
Nottinghamshire.
Mussels \_A7iodonta cygnea, Unio ttunidus, U.
pictoriiui, and Dreissend\ eaten 
by animals and birds [Nottinghamshire evidence adduced in proof].
Nat., 
March 1885, p.
181.
C. T.
Mi'ssox.
Nottinghamshire.
Discovery of Hehx cantiana in Nottinghamshire [not previously recorded, 
plentifully found at Staunton in S.E. Nottinghamshire].
Journ.
of Conch., 
July 1886, V.
65 ; and Nat., Aug. 1886, p.
251.
Wm." Nelson.
York S.E.
Paludina contecta in East Yorkshire [between Breighton and Wressle ; 
previous records recapitulated].
Nat., Aug. 1884, p.
20.
Wm. Nelsox.
York Mid W., York S.W.
Zonites radiatulus var.
viridescenti-alba in West Yorkshire [at Hud- 
dersfield (Whitwham), Shipley Glen (W.
West), and Crossgates, Leeds].
Nat., 
Aug. 1884, P- 20.
W. Nelsox.
Cumberland.
[Limnaea peregra v.
acuminata from Carlisle, and L.
glabra from Corby].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1885, iv.
265.
[W.
Nelsox.] ' York Mid W.
[Limnaea glabra from Castleford and Planorbis marginatus from Black 
Hills, 'Leeds].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
136.
[W.
Nelsox.] " ~ York S.E.
[Subfossil Planorbis parvus from Hornsea mud-cliffs, exhibited].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
138.
[W.
Nelsox.] York Mid W.
[Zonites nitidus and Helix rotundata from Headingley, Leeds, exhibited].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
139.
[W.
Nelsox.] " York Mid W.
[Limnaea glabra at Swillington Common, near Leeds].
Journ.
of Conch., 
July 1887, V.
206.
[W.
Nelsox.] York Mid W., York S.W.
[Large Planorbis albus from near Harrogate (F.
R. Fitzgerald), measuring 
9 mm., and var.
draparnaidi itom Sandal, 9 mm.], Journ.
of Conch., Oct.
1887, V.
247.
Charles Oldham.
Cheshire.
Fresh-water Shells near Manchester [in a pond at Baguley, Cheshire, 
Paludina contecta, Bythinia tentaciclata, Planorbis conietis, Anodonta cygJtea, 
LimncBa atiricularia, L.
peregra, L.
ovata, and PlanoTbis cari}iatiis\.
Nat., 
Feb. 1885, p.
156.
Charles Oldham.
Lane.
S. 
Fresh-water Shells eaten by Rats [at Birch near Manchester, the shells 
eaten being Paludina contecta zxv^ Planorbis corneiis\ Nat., July 1885, p.
274.
Chas.
Oldha^l Derbyshire.
Helix arbustorum monst.
sinistrorsum in Derbyshire [at Ash wood Dale 
near Buxton, Aug. 1st, 1887 ; this is the first recorded British example].
Nat., Sep. 1887, p.
272.
Charles Oldham.
Cheshire, Derbyshire.
[Helix arbustorum, with vars.
alpestris and flavescens and monst.
sinistrorsum, from Buxton ; and type from Marple, Cheshire].
Journ.
of 
Conch., Oct. 1887, V.
247.
Ed(;ar Pickard.
York S.W.
Mollusca at Anston Stones \^Pupa umbilicata, Clausilia rugosa, Zna hibrica 
and var.
viridida, Zonites glaber, Z.
nitidjdus, Z.
purus, H.
hispida, H.
rotun- 
data^ Planorbis albus, Vertigo antiveriigo, V.
viinutissi/na, and H.
acicleata].
Nat., May 1885, p.
227.
' 
Naturalist, 
^ NOTES — MAMMALIA.
263 
JNO.
W. Taylor.
York S.W.
Occurrence of Vertigo alpestris Alder in Yorkshire [at Cottingley near 
Bingley, discovered by H.
T. Soppitt, and found associated with Helix 
rit/escens, Zonites crystallinus, Vitrina, and Clazisilia riigosd\.
Journ.
of 
Conch., Oct. 1887, V.
238.
[J.
R.] Brockton Tomlin.
Cheshire.
L.[imnaea] pereg^ra m.
decollatum and Bythinia tentaculata m.
decollatum 
in Cheshire [locaHty stated and remarks made].
Nat., March 1886, p.
79.
[J.
R.] Brockton Tomlin.
Furness, Lane.
S. 
Monstrosities of various Lancashire Shells {terebrmn of Planorbis covi- 
planatiis, Rochdale, sinistrorsiivi and another monstrosity of Helix aspersa 
from Ulverstone].
Nat., Jan. 1887, p.
20.
Q. R.] Brockton Tomlin.
Cheshire.
Variation in Helix ericetorum near Chester [a var.
corresponding to sub- 
albida of H.
virgata ; monst.
scalai'iforme also occurred, and with the species 
occurred H.
caperata and two of its varieties ; all oh the banks of the Dee].
Nat., Jan. 1887, p.
20.
J. Russell Wildman.
Lane.
S. 
Lancashire Notes.
— Conchology [ ; a list of 26 fresh-water mollusca found 
in the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Burnley; also of 15 terrestrial shells 
found on the margin].
Nat. World, April 1887, iv.
79.
J. Russell Wildman.
Lane.
S. 
Lancashire Notes.
— Conchology [list of 20 species of Vitrina, Zonites, 
Helix, Biilimns, Ancyhis, Liniuira, Splueriiiin, and Carycliiitin, taken at 
Simonstone and Whalley, besides varieties].
Nat. World, May 1887, iv.
100 ; 
and Erratum, June 1887, iv.
116.
J. W\ Williams.
Line.
N. 
The Variation and Continental Distribution of the British Slugs {^Anon 
ater var.
bicolor mentioned as having been found at Louth].
Sci. Goss.
, 
March 1886, p.
55.
J. W.
Williams.
York S.W.
Slugs and their Varieties [refers to ^rzcw subfiisais and ^.
bonrguignati at 
Lofthouse near Wakefield].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
190.
J. W.
Williams.
Durham.
Slug Gossip [in which the Allansford record of Limax tenelhis is repeated].
Sci. Goss., Nov. 1887, p.
244.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Whale at Flamborough.
— I have had a report of another Whale having 
been seen by one of our fishermen not far from the place where the other one was 
washed ashore.
The fisherman informs me that this Whale is white or cream- 
coloured, and much larger, with the dorsal fin in the same place as the other.
When seen, it was swimming about in a very wild sort of manner, perhaps in searcli 
of the one washed ashore.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, April 3rd, 1888.
Lincolnshire Bats.
— Mr. J.
W. Chandler, of Gosberton near Spalding, has 
sent me a couple of Bats taken in Gosberton Church.
They are the Long-eared 
Bat [Plecotus anrifiis) and the PijMstrelle ( Vespenigo pipistrellits), and are small, 
evidently young, specimens.
— W.
Denisox Rokisuck, Leeds, August 2ist, 188S.
Water Shrew and Field Vole near Ripon.
— I have received to day from 
the Rev. R.
A. Summerfield, vicar of North Stainley, near Ripon, a specimen of 
the Water Shrew [Crosscpiis fcnliens) and one of the Common or Field ^'ole 
{Arvicola agrestis), both out of a hay-field at North Stainley.
The Vole is a fine 
adult male, the largest example of the species that I have ever seen.
The speci- 
mens are now in the Edinburgh Museum.
1 record them because micro-mammals 
are not very often examined in the flesh, and definite records of them are of interest.
— W.
De nison Roeuuck, Leetls, 9lh August, 1888.
Sept.
1888.
264 
UTILITY OF THE BARN OWL.
J. H.
GURXEY, JuN., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., 
Kcs7vick Hall, Noriuich.
In the autumn of 1865 a Barn Owl {Strix flaminea) was brought to 
a naturaUst at Tonbridge, Kent, to be stuffed, which belonged to a 
gentleman at Leigh near Tonbridge, whose wife stated that she had 
picked up the owl, dead, on their barn floor, and that beside it lay a 
very large rat, also dead.
There is little doubt, adds my informant, 
that an encounter had taken place between them, the injuries received 
by each being sufficient to cause death, for the Owl had been severely 
bitten by the rat.
This is only one more instance of the utility of the Barn Owl, 
which does not obtain the protection which by law it is entitled to.
It would have been much better if only the Barn Owl had been 
included in the schedule of Protected Birds, and not all Owls, as it 
is impossible to restrain gamekeepers — at any rate in Norfolk — from 
killing the Tawny and Long-eared Owls, and the law as it stands 
becomes a dead letter as far as Owls are concerned, and thus the 
Barn Owl — the most useful ally the farmer has — is rapidly becoming 
a very rare bird in the eastern counties.
A still greater anomaly in 
the Act is that any sort of legal protection should be afforded to the 
farmers' enemies, the Sparrow and Ring Dove, which do far more 
harm than good, and are quite undeserving of it ; yet only persons 
expressly appointed by owners and occupiers are legally entitled to 
kill them in the close-time [43 and 44 Vict., c.
35, 7th Sep., 1880].
NOTE—ORNITHOLOG Y.
Unusual Nesting-site for Missel Thrush.
— One of my boys found a nest 
of the Missel Thrush ( Turdiis viscivorus) in a wall which formed part of the 
boundary of a pasture bordering upon Barden Moor.
If I had not had autoptical 
proof of this record I should have surmised either that the nest was not in situ, 
or, what would have appeared more probable, a nest of the Ring Ouzel.
Whether 
this departure from its usual habit had been induced with a view to its greater 
safety I am unable to say, but when passing through an adjoining plantation we 
were struck with the many remains of birds v/hich had undoubtedly fallen victims 
to birds of prey.
We noted the Pied Flycatcher {Miiscicapa hichiosa) nesting in Barden Tower.
— E.
P. P.
BUTTERFIELD, Wilsden, ^lay 28th, 1888.
In the 'Fell' district of Upper Wensleydale, I, my son, and others, used 
frequently to find the Missel Thrush nesting in stone walls, or in fissures of vertical 
crags on the open moor-slopes.
We assigned the fact to super-abundance of the 
bird relatively to tree supply ; still, though far from proven,' one cannot fail to be 
struck by the theory Mr. Butterfield adumbrates — that ' inherited memory ' (to use 
Romanes" word) of disaster following on the practice of a time-honoured custom, 
has led the older and wiser birds to a protective variation in habit.
The eggs of 
the crag-breeding birds were, I am sure, larger and finer in character ; the eggs 
of the plantations (used presumably by the younger generations) less boldly 
marked and smaller.
The matter is well worth patient investigation.
— F^ A.
L ees.
Naturalist, 
265 
LIST OF PLANTS NOTICED AT 
FYLINGDALES (ROBIN HOOD'S BAY) 
IN SEPTEMBER 1882.
C. C.
BABINGTON, M.A., F.R.S , 
Professor of Botany in the University o/ Cambridge \ and Aicthor of tlie 
' Matncal of British Plants.' 
My district included the edge of the high moorland all round the 
bay, as well as the low country of the bay.
I have put a to those 
which are included in Mr. Slater's list given on p.
239.
This list 
may be worth printing as an appendix to that list.
It will be seen 
that nearly all the earlier plants are wanting in this list.
If they could 
not be easily determined at that late season I did not mark them ; 
many things were omitted of which I was dubious at the time.
I did 
not mark any brambles, but believe that I have a few specimens.
Ranunculus flammula.
^^Ranunculus acris.
^Ranunculus repens.
Papaver rhceas.
Meconopsis cambrica, doubt- 
ful native.
Fumaria pallidiflora.
^Sinapis arvensis.
Sinapis alba.
Sinapis nigra.
Nasturtium officinale.
^Capsella bursa-pastoris- 
Viola riviniana.
^Polygala vulgaris.
*Saponaria officinalis, native.
*Lychnis diurna.
Stellaria media.
*Stellaria holostea.
"^Stellaria graminea.
Stellaria uliginosa.
Sagina procumbens.
Hypericum tetrapterurn.
Hypericum humifusum.
Hypericum pulchrum.
Malva sylvestris.
Geranium rotundifolium.
Ilex aquifolium.
Sept.
1888.
Acer campestre.
*Medicago lupulina.
^Trifolium arvense.
^Trifolium repens.
Trifolium minus.
^Lotus corniculatus.
Lotus major.
Vicia cracca.
Prunus spinosa.
Potentilla fragariastrum.
*Potentilla reptans.
Potentilla anserina.
Fragaria vesca.
Geum urbanum.
Rosa mollis.
Pyrus torminalis.
Pyrus aucuparia.
^Epilobium hirsutum.
^Epilobium parviflorum.
Epilobium montanum.
Epilobium obscurum.
Callitriche vernalis.
Parnassia palustris.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris.
./Egopodium podagrana.
^^thusa cynapium.
Angelica sylvestris.
266 
BABINCxTON : PLANTS AT FYLINGDALES.
*Heracleum sphondylium.
Daucus carota.
Hedera helix.
^Galium cruciatum.
Galium verum.
Galium saxatile.
Galium palustre.
^Galium aparine.
Scabiosa arvensis.
Carduus crispus.
*Carduus lanceolatus.
Arctium minus.
Centaurea nigra.
Chrysanthemum leucanthe- 
mum.
Matricaria inodora.
Achillea millefolium.
Gnaphalium uHginosum.
Senecio vulgaris.
Senecio sylvaticus.
Senecio jacobaea.
Senecio aquaticus.
Solidago virga-aurea.
^Tussilago farfara.
^Eupatorium cannabinum.
Leontodon autumnalis.
Taraxacum officinale.
Lactuca muralis.
Sonchus oleraceus.
Sonchus asper.
^Hieracium pilosella.
Hieracium boreale.
Campanula rotundifolia.
^Vaccinium myrtillus.
Erythraea centaurium.
Convolvulus arvensis.
''^Scrophularia nodosa.
Veronica agrestis.
Veronica buxbaumii.
Veronica serpyllifolia.
Veronica officinalis.
* Veronica chamjedrys.
^Veronica beccabunga.
Pedicularis sylvatica.
Rhinanthus crista-galli.
Calamintha menthaefolia, i.e.
officinalis.
^Brunella vulgaris.
^Stachys sylvatica.
Galeopsis tetrahit.
Lamium purpureum.
Myosotis repens.
Myosotis arvensis.
Pinguicula vulgaris.
Lysimachia vulgaris.
^Lysimachia nemorum.
Anagallis arvensis.
Anagallis tenella.
Plantago lanceolata.
Chenopodium bonus-henricus.
Atriplex angustifolia.
Atriplex erecta.
Rumex conglomeratus.
Rumex pulcher.
Rumex obtusifolius.
Rumex crispus.
Rumex acetosa.
Polygonum convolvulus.
Polygonum aviculare.
Polygonum hydropiper.
Polygonum persicaria.
Euphorbia peplus.
Mercurialis perennis.
Urtica dioica.
Quercus robur.
Corylus avellana.
Alnus glutinosa.
Salix cinerea.
Salix caprea.
Arum macu latum.
Potamogeton polygonifolius.
Tamus communis.
Juncus conglomeratus.
Juncus effusus.
Juncus glaucus.
Juncus acutifiorus.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: mollusca, 1886-87.
261 
W. D.
Roebuck.
York Mid W., York N.W.
[Helix lactea, living, from Pateley Bridge ; and Swaledale captures, 
six species].
Journ.
of Conch.
, Jan. 1885, iv.
261, 
W. Denison Roebuck.
York Mid W.
Occurrence of Limax cinereo-niger in Washburndaje [July 5th, 1885, 
with L.
agresiis, L.
Levis, L.
inaxiiiuts var.
rellaria, An'on atcr var, rufa, and 
Zonites fulvus\ Nat., vSep. 1885, p.
320.
W. Denison Roebuck.
Line.
N. 
Amalia gagates [and var.
plumbea] in North Lincolnshire [in gardens at 
Alford].
Nat., Nov. 1885, p.
366.
W. Denison Roebuck.
Cheshire.
Testacella haliotidea v.
scutulum at Chester [in the green lanes near 
nursery gardens, but not in them (G.
W. Shrubsole)].
Nat., March 1886, 
p. 80.
W. Denison Roebuck.
York Mid W.
Upper Nidderdale and its Fauna .
. .
Mollusca [a full list of forty 
species (besides varieties), only one of which {LiiiunFa peregra) is not a land 
shell; localities cited for all].
Nat., July 1886, pp.
206-208.
Wm. Denison Roebuck.
York Mid W.
Limax cinereo-niger at Shipley Glen [the var.
i/iaiira found by J.
A. 
Hargreaves, vSep. 30th, 1S86 ; same locality where W.
West found the var.
htctiiosa some years ago].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
347.
W. Denison Roebuck.
York Mid W.
[Limax cinereo-niger collected by J.
A. Hargreaves at Shipley Glen, 
exhibited].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
138.
W. Denison Roebuck.
Line.
N., Line.
S. 
Materials towards a List of the Land and Fresh-water Mollusca of 
Lincolnshire [being a full and detailed enumeration of eighty-eight species 
(eleven slugs, Ihirty-nine land and thirty-eight fresh-water shells) known to 
inhabit the county, preceded by a description of the investigated districts and 
by a full historical summary of the investigations made].
Nat., Aug. and 
Sep., 1887, pp.
245-272.
Thomas Rogers.
Lane.
S. 
On Planorbis dilatatus, P.
glaber, and Sphaerium ovale [their introduc- 
tion into canals near Manchester and at Burnley, and the conditions under 
which they flourish].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
218-220.
George W.
Shrubsole.
Cheshire.
On the Erosion of Certain Fresh-water Shells [clean Staffordshire speci- 
mens of Planorhis corneiis from the Trent Canal at Stone, became very much 
eroded in water from the Dee at Chester ; attributed to the different propor- 
tion of lime in the respective waters].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1886, v.
66-71 ; 
and see review in Americ.
Nat., 1886, p.
1065.
P. L.
Simmonus.
Isle of Man, Furness, Lane.
W. 
The Animal Food Resources of Different Nations, with mention of some 
of the Special Dainties of Various People derived from the Animal Kingdom 
[at p.
425 it is stated that there are large beds of Scallops {/'ecfi'ii, ?
species) 
off the Isle of Man ; and at p.
432 are given sialistics of sales of Mussels 
{Mytilns ednlis) taken in Morecambe Bay].
London : E.
and F.
N. Spon.
. .
1885 ; 8vo.
cloth, 461 pages.
R. Standen.
Lane.
W., Lane.
S. 
Lancashire Helices [being detailed notes on the occurrence of //.
nemoralis, 
H. hortensis, H.
capcrata, II.
ericctoruni , H.
virgafa, H.
aspersa, II.
r/zfrscYf/s, 
H. rcfi/ndafn, H.
ar/uisionuji , and H.
Jiispida, in various localities round 
Preston, at Manchester, Blackpool, and Formby].
Nat., March 18S6, p.
80.
Sept.
1888.
262 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : MOLLUSCA, 1 886-8 7.
R. Standen.
Lane.
S., Lane.
W. 
Lancashire Land and Fresh-water Mollusca [a detailed enumeration of 
the forty-one fresh-water and thirty-nine land shells and seven slugs recorded 
for Lancashire, based upon Dyson's 1850 and Hardy's 1865 lists, and upon 
the observations of the author and of W.
H, Heathcote, F.
C. Long, R.
D. 
Darbishire, T.
Rogers, and others ; at p.
176 are noted intentional intro- 
ductions of species into fresh localities].
Nat., May and June 1887, pp.
155-176.
John W, Taylor.
Northumberland S.
Shells at Riding- Mill on Tyne \_Pisidhitu amnicum, LimncEa ovata, Ancyhis 
fluviatilis, Vitrina^ Zonites cellarius.
Helix rotiindata, Bjilimiis obscurus, 
Clatisilia laniinata, C.
rugosa, and Ztta hibi-ica var.
hibric aides, collected by 
Rev. H.
H. Slater].
Nat., Jan. 1885, p.
139.
J. W.
Taylor.
York N.E.
Pupa marg-inata var.
brevis (Baudon) in Yorkshire [at Runswick Bay, 
near Whitby, 27th June, 1885].
Nat., March 1886, p.
79.
J. W.
Taylor.
Cumberland.
Shells at Millom, Cumberland [Sep. 1882, collected by C.
T. Musson ; 
Helix rufescens, H.
aspersa, H.
rotundata, H rupestris, Pupa iiinbilicata^ 
Claiisilia rtigosa, Balia and var.
simplex, Zonites cellaj-iiis, Z.
ftilvns, and Z.
radiatiihts\ Nat., March 1886, p.
78.
J. W.
Taylor.
Nottinghamshire.
Vertigo moulinsiana in Nottinghamshire [with V.
pygnuva and V.
pusilla in 
rejectamenta at Carlton-on-Trent, April 1883, C.
T, Musson].
Journ.
of 
Conch., April 1886, v.
45.
J. W.
Taylor.
Nottinghamshire.
Extension of the rang-e of Pupa ringens fefif.
[to Nottinghamshire ; found 
at Kirkby-in-Ashfield by C.
T. Musson].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1886, v.
81.
Jxo. AV.
Taylor.
York Mid W.
Helix lactea [at Pateley Bridge] in Yorkshire [Aug. 1884, probably brought 
with shingle from the coast].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1886, v.
81 ; and Nat., 
Aug. 1886, p.
251.
[J.
W. Taylor.] Lane.
S., York S.E.
[Planorbis dilatatus from Gorton Canal, Coll.
T. Rogers ; and Helix 
nemoralis with straw-coloured bands, found at Bridlington by W.
Denison 
Roebuck].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
134.
[J.
W. Taylor.] Lane.
S. 
[Distorted speeimen of Planorbis spirorbis found at Tarleton, S.
Lancashire, 
by W.
H. Heathcote, exhibited].
Journ.
of Conch., Jan. 1887, v.
140.
[J.
W. Taylor.] York S.W.
[Helix rotundata, Zonites exeavatus, and Z.
alliarius at Bramley Fall, near 
Leeds].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
709.
Jxo. W.
Taylor.
Line.
N. 
Diseovery of Clausilia Rolphii in North Lineolnshire [in three distinct 
localities in old oak woods near Louth].
Journ.
of Conch., July 1887, v.
220; 
also Oct. 1887, V.
245.
John W.
Taylor.
York S.W.
Pisidium roseum in Yorkshire [found near Bawtry by W.
A. Gain ; the 
only previous Yorkshire record is for Bentley near Doncaster].
Nat., Sep.
1887, p.
272.
JNO.
W. Taylor.
Derbyshire.
Helix arbustorum monst.
sinistrorsum in Derbyshire [at Ashwood Dale, 
near Buxton, Aug. ist, 1887; of the var.
flavescens\ Journ.
of Conch., 
Oct. 1887, V.
225.
Naturalist, 
LEES 
A NEW WEST YORKSHIRE PLANT.
267 
Juncus lamprocarpus.
Juncus bufonius.
Juncus squarrosus.
Phleum pratense.
Agrostis canina.
Aira csespitosa.
Aira caryophyllea.
Triodia decumbens.
Briza media.
^Cynosurus cristatus.
^Dactylis glomerata.
Festuca ovina.
Festuca elatior.
Bromus giganteus.
Bromus asper.
Brachypodium sylvaticum.
Triticum repens.
Nardus stricta.
^Athyrium filix-fcemina.
"-''Scolopendrium vulgare.
*Aspidium aculeatum.
Aspidium spinulosum.
Aspidium dilatatum.
Polypodium vulgare.
Equisetum arvense.
^Equisetum maximum.
A NEW WEST YORKSHIRE PLANT 
(PYROLA ROTUNDIFOLIA).
F. ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.S., Eng.; L.R.C.P., Lond.
; 
Author of ike 'Flora 0/ West Yorkshire' ; Presidefit of the BotaiUcal Section of the 
Yorkshire Natiirnlists Union; etc.
By favour of Air. Trevor Basil Woodd I am glad to be able to place 
on record an observation of that gentleman's, which makes a genuine 
addition to our list of West Riding plants.
In my ' Flora ' I 
considered it justifiable to express grave doubts whether true Pyrola 
rot undif alia L.
occurred in W.
York at all, seeing that every previous 
record made under that name had turned out, upon investigation of 
herbarium specimens or plants growing in the assigned stations, to 
be either Pyrola media or P.
mmor — species either confused with or 
classed under ' rotimdifolia' by early botanists.
Now, however, 
Mr. Woodd has kindly sent me green flowering examples of a Pyrola 
which grows ' on the damp slopes of the wood at Outershaw (in 
Langstrothdale), sloping down to the Wharfe, 1,200 ft.
above the sea.' 
This is a new station, not one of those previously recorded for either 
P. media or P.
minor ; and by its much decurved pink styles, with a 
raised ring at the tip bounding the base of the stigmatic cone, its 
small round leaves, and longish fine-pedicelled flowers, the petals of 
which open out more than in P.
minor, the species is undoubtedly 
true Pyrola rotundifolia.
The altitude at which it grows is fully 
300 ft.
greater than any known hitherto for the round-leaved section 
in Yorkshire, but in the highlands of Scotland, according to Hooker, 
Mr. Woodd's plant is found as high as 2,000 ft.
August 20ih, 1888.
"Sept.
1888.
268 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
NOTE— BOTANY, 
Thalictrum alpinum L.
at Settle.
— As Mr. Lees, in trying to throw doubt 
on my record for Thalictriini alpuiiiui, has fallen into some very amusing mis- 
takes, I claim a little of your space while I correct them.
In the first place, 
I have no ' impression ' in regard to T.
alpinuvi.
I only possess a very clear, 
distinct, and somewhat extended knowledge of it.
/ have seen it on the hills at 
the hack of Settle.
As one who is, according to Mr. Lees, ' a comparative 
stranger,' I need no apology for being unable to indicate to him the exact square 
yard of ground on which he may find it ; enough for him to learn that the hills in 
the Settle district ai-e not too dry for this plant.
Mr. Lees labours under a 
delusion when he imagines that T.
alpimiin is a bog plant ; it is not so, but is 
found on wet or on dry ground.
I have seen it in the crevices of the driest rocks 
on Ben Lawers, Ben Lui, Ben Ledi, and many other of our hills, as well as on the 
wet ledges.
In the Shetland Islands I have seen it on very dry ground, as well 
as on still more dry gravel ; indeed, I do not know any alpine plant which thrives 
under a greater range of conditions.
Mr. Lees reminds me of the Irishman who, 
being accused of a crime, stated that he could bring fifty men to prove that they 
did not see him do it, and so he drags forward six names to prove that they did 
not see the plant in question.
And now one word in regard to Nephrodiuni 
(tvfmlnfn, a plant Mr. Lees seems as familiar with as with T.
alpimim.
Will Mr.
Lees kindly inform your readers where Edward Newman states that he (Edward 
Newman) saw this plant (A'', tetmihun) in Settle Woods.
In conclusion, I have 
seen T.
alpiniDu on the hills near Settle, and I have no doubt that it will be 
found on Ingleborough and some of the other hills by those who know where to 
look for it.
If, however, your botanists follow the advice of Mr. Lees and look 
for it in a bog, they will remain as familiar with it as he is at present.
— A.
Craig 
Christie, Edinburgh, August 12th, 1888.
NO TES—LEPID OPTERA .
Deilephila galii at Bradford.
— Mr. J.
Holmes, a collector of lepidoptera 
here, brought me this morning a specimen of this rare hawk-moth for identification, 
which had been taken from a wall in Manningham Park on July 22nd last.
Considering that the captor had carried it in his hat — which although it has often 
done good service as a botanical vasculum, is not so convenient a receptacle for 
insects — it is in very fair condition, being only slightly ' rubbed ' on the thorax.
Previously, only two specimens had been recorded for the Bradford district — 
one having been captured at Cleckheaton, the other in 1878 at Wibsey.
— 
J. W.
Carter, Bradford, August 5th, 1888.
Deilephila galii at Harrogate.— On the 26th of July last I took a specimen 
(male, I think) of Deilephila galii, hovering over a plant oi DelphinitLvi fojvnosiwi 
in a garden in Harrogate, about 9.15 p.m. The occurrence of this species is so 
rare in England that its capture in Yorkshire is worth recording.
— Ben. Blaydes 
Thompson, ii.
Franklin Parade, Harrogate, 13th August, 1888.
Deilephila g'alii at Alford, Lincolnshire.
— A fine specimen of Deilephila 
galii was brought to-day to me to be named.
It was taken here by Mr. T.
P. 
Richardson on the evening of the 2nd instant, in his garden at a clump of ' Sweet 
William.' — Robert Garfit, Alford, i6th August, 1888.
Deilephila galii at Hartlepool.
— I had brought to me on the 24th July a 
specimen of Deilephila galii, which had been taken amongst some pit timber by 
a labourer upon the quay side.
The specimen had evidently been in beautiful con- 
dition when first seen, but the man who discovered it unfortunately thought it was 
dead, and took hold of it by one of the wings, rubbing it somewhat ; the other 
side is, however, quite undamaged.
Mr. J.
E. Robson also had a specimen 
brought to him about a week previously ; this had been taken in a hotel yard.
— 
J. Gardner, 8, Friar Terrace, Hartlepool, August 19th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
269 
NOTES ON THE LAPWING NEAR GARSTANG.
J. A.
JACKSON, 
Warringto7i.
(Read before the Warrington Field Club, February 3rd, 1888.) 
The following notes all refer to the district near Garstang, unless 
specially mentioned otherwise.
The bird to which I wish to call 
attention is no doubt familiar to all — at least at a distance — 
and is known commonly as the Lapwing, or Tewit, and its scientific 
name is Vanellus vulgaris.
It is a handsome bird when closely 
examined, being black on the head, crest and breast, white on the 
sides of the neck and lower parts, yellowish red under tail coverts, 
and dark green above, slightly mottled and shot with purple ; tail 
white, with a black patch on all except the outer feather at each side.
In winter the chin and throat are white, changing to black during 
the breeding season, beginning about April.
Bill dark, legs reddish, 
the eye large and full.
Length, i2jin.
; width from tip to tip of 
wings, 28 in.
Weight, 8 oz.
to 9 oz.
Plumage of male and female 
is similar, except that the latter is not quite so bright, and the crest 
shorter.
The crest is a very conspicuous feature in this species, and 
in a fine specimen is some three inches long.
This bird is widely 
distributed, being found in most parts of Europe, in Egypt, and 
East and West from Ireland to Japan.
It breeds in all our English 
counties, but is least common in the Midland and South-Western.
They are partially migratory, in some districts regularly so ; and I 
find them mentioned several times in the migration reports from the 
lighthouses, and also in Mr. Gatke's notes from the Island of Heligo- 
land.
The young are led by the parent birds in search of food, but 
not fed by them.
Their principal food is worms, slugs, and insects.
On the shore they get sandhoppers, shrimps, and other small 
Crustacea.
They are good to eat in autumn and winter, and in 
some districts large numbers are netted for the market ; but, so 
far as I know, this is never practised in this part of the country.
In 
'The Fowler in Ireland' there is a very interesting account of this 
bird ; its eggs are not sought for there, or regarded as a dainty, as in 
England.
A full description is given of the method to be pursued 
in netting it : ' From thirty to forty dozen birds per net per week 
would be an average take in January if the weather be mild (this 
being the best month).
The dealers give from 4d.
to 6d.
each for 
the birds, and as many as 150 are sometimes taken at one fall of 
the net.' 
Sept.
1888.
s 
270 JACKSON : NOTES ON THE LAPWING NEAR GARSTANG.
Of course so common a bird has many provincial names (see 
* Provincial names of British Birds,' by Rev. Chas.
Swainson, M.A., 
English Dialect Society, 1885), a few of which it may be interesting 
to notice.
First from its mode of flight, Lipwingle (in Bedfordshire), 
Lymptwigg (on Exmoor), Flopwing; second from its cry, Pee-wit 
(generally), Piewipe, Peeweep (in Norfolk), Puit (Essex, Suffolk, 
Norfolk), Pease weep (Stirling and Forfar), Weep or Wype, Tewhit 
and Teewheep (Kirkcudbright, Orkney), Teufit (Cleveland, East 
Yorkshire), Teuchit (Forfar), Tuet (Westmorland, Lancashire, West 
Riding), Dix-Huit (France) ; third from its plumage, Hornpie 
(Norfolk, East Suffolk), Horneywink (Cornwall), Green Plover 
(Ireland), Cornwillen (Cornwall).
' The Lapwing is almost universally 
held in bad esteem, as is shown by the various titles and legends in 
which it plays a part.
In the South of Scotland the peasantry bear it 
a traditional antipathy, arising from the raids upon the Covenanters 
by Claverhouse and Dalyell of Binns, whose troopers were directed 
to their hiding-places by its cries of alarm.
Hence its name of " the 
ungrateful bird." Leyden alludes to this in the lines : — 
And though the pitying sun withdraws his light, 
The Lapwing's clamorous whoop attends their flight j 
Pursues their steps where'er the wanderers go, 
Till the shrill scream betray them to the foe.
Poor bird !
where'er the wandering swain intrudes 
On thy bleak heath and desert solitudes, 
He curses still thy scream and clamorous tongue, 
And crushes with his foot thy moulting young.
In Eastern story the Lapwing is mentioned as having the power 
of finding water under ground in the desert.' This is, no doubt, from 
its always resorting to a damp spot, if there be one, because of the 
food to be found there.
The first few days of 1887 the ground was so hard with frost that 
with the exception of three or four birds flying over, no Lapwings 
were to be seen.
When flying in a flock no regular form is observed, 
such as many other birds assume under the same circumstances.
If a flock is observed flying across a dark background of cloud, the 
silvery white of the feathers when the wings are raised has a very 
striking effect, especially if the sun happens to be shining.
On the 
22nd January, the weather having moderated, a small flock of 
Lapwings had returned to the pasture-fields, and were busy running 
about in company with some Starlings, as is often the case.
On 
February 6th the ground was frozen hard, and in a wheat-field at 
Burtonwood about twenty of these birds were resting on the ground, 
not standing on their feet or running about, but apparently waiting 
for the ground to soften.
February 26th — Plenty of birds running 
Naturalist, 
JACKSON: Nf)TES ON THE LAPWING NEAR GARSTANG.
271 
about the grass fields ; saw some forty in one field, mostly about 
twenty yards apart, and busy sticking their bills into the ground.
Also saw a few pairs which had to all appearance chosen their field 
to nest in, although there was no appearance of the wild flying up 
and down which they exhibit in the breeding season, nor any attempt 
at making nests.
On March 19th Tewits were abundant, not more 
than two together, and spread about over all the localities where they 
usually nest, but no sign of nests yet, and the weather very cold, 
with east wind, whilst much snow still remains on the high ground.
March 25th — Birds still in plenty, scattered over the fields, but no 
trace of nests.
April 2nd — Tewits very noisy, seeming never to rest, 
shouting and flying about night and day.
They were scattered over 
the fields, mostly in pairs, but saw one small flock of about seven ; 
no nests to be seen as yet.
April 8th — During a day's walk near 
Bakewell, in Derbyshire, we saw only three Tewits, but the ground 
was not specially suitable for them, and they are evidently not very 
numerous just there.
April iith^ — Tewits in great plenty, and when 
the night happens to be warm, they are very noisy.
If the night is 
cold it seems to check their exuberance.
Several nests are now 
made, but saw no eggs.
The nest is a shallow depression in the 
ground, generally scratched out by the bird ; in some cases lined 
with short straws, but in many nests no straws are to be seen.
We 
may note here that very many nests are made which never seem to 
have eggs laid in them, and this seems especially to be the case in 
ploughed fields, where the nests are almost on the bare earth.
April 22nd — Tewit's nest, with four eggs in, 'hard sat.' The birds 
are very plentiful, and apparently never rest at this season of the 
year, day or night ; the noise of their wings as they rush close over 
you in the dark gives you the idea that each separate feather will be 
torn out of the wing by the strain on it.
We heard several birds 
making the peculiar grating noise they produce when on the ground, 
and in many cases whilst scratching a hollow for a nest ; the weather 
cold and nests not plentiful.
In early spring the eggs run the danger 
of being frozen, and in this case the shell cracks and the egg is 
spoiled.
Rooks may be often observed flying over the fields where 
the Lapwings are nesting, keeping close to the groimd, and they are 
sure to be attacked by the Lapwings and driven away.
No doubt the 
Rook likes Plovers' eggs raw as well as we do boiled.
Lapwings 
have at least four distinct notes: (1st) The usual call of ' pee-wit,' 
from which so many of its local names are derived ; (2nd) the 
exaggerated form of this which they give forth with such vigour 
whilst performing all sorts of gyrations in the air over their nesting 
places at the beginning of the breeding season ; (3rd) the grating 
iSept.
1888.
272 JACKSON : NOTES ON THE LAPWING NEAR GARSTANG.
noise already mentioned which cannot be heard at any great distance ; 
and (4t]i) the kind of contented short whistle which they indulge in 
when a number are feeding together.
These birds seem to feed 
either by day or night, usually the latter if not very rough and 
dark ; and during the day they may be sometimes seen sitting quietly 
m the grass fields, all heads turned to the wind, and evidently resting.
The Lapwing lays almost, if not invariably, y^/^r eggs ; they are large 
for the size of the bird, and it seems strange that the number should 
be so fixed unless it is that any more would be simply wasted from 
fitting badly into the nest, and not getting covered by the bird when 
sitting.
Nests have been found with five eggs in (see ' Zoologist,' 
July 1887), but these cases are so very rare as to warrant the assump- 
tion that two birds have laid in one nest.
The eggs are always placed 
in the nest with the small ends together, and fit admirably in this 
position.
The eggs vary a little in size and colour, and in rare cases 
varieties are met with.
The eggs are much sought after in this country 
as dehcacies for the table, and large numbers are sent to market, in 
many cases fetching a higher price than ordinary hen's eggs.
The 
white of the egg when boiled is not chalky white, like that of a hen, 
but a semi-transparent jelly.
The nests are not usually very near 
together, although many may be in the same field, and seem to be 
placed on all kinds of ground, and are most sought for in ploughed 
and stubble fields.
During the breeding season the birds are 
scattered all over, and nesting even on the tops of the highest fells, 
but the most favourite places are the rough pastures on high ground 
where the grass is coarse, the ground often damp, and in places 
growing rushes.
These fields never fail to produce eggs if carefully 
searched, but no careless glance will be likely to detect the nest, even 
though it is open to your gaze, and the best plan to find them is 
systematically to quarter the ground section after section, or to drive 
your stick in as a mark and walk round it ; even this way a practised 
eye is required to detect them with certainty, and some persons seem 
to have a special 'knack' of finding them.
It is not easy to detect the 
bird leaving its nest unless you come on one suddenly over a hill-top^ 
in which case you can sometimes walk straight to the nest.
Certain 
spots are sure to be selected as nesting sites year after year, not the 
very same inch of ground, perhaps, but somewhere near.
In one 
field we know of, there is a shallow reedy tarn in the middle, and 
round this is a strip of land covered with rough grass, the field itself 
being ploughed.
On this strip of grass there have been one or more 
nests for several years now, and this year we kept watch on a nest 
here, and the time of incubation seemed to be about twenty-one 
days.
It is a difficult matter to get the exact time of incubation in a 
Naturalist, 
JACKSON : NOTES ON THE LAPWING NEAR GARSTANG.
273 
wild State, as so many chances are that the nest may be disturbed, 
more especially if you have not the opportunity of visiting it at very 
short intervals.
May 14th — Saw one young Tewit, about a fortnight old; observed 
it with the glass running about the field, and on going to the place 
had some difficulty in seeing it, although knowing where to look.
The young are covered with a soft down of a greyish colour on the 
back, mottled with darker markings ; the neck and under parts are 
rather lighter in colour.
They lie so close, and have such incon- 
spicuous colouring on the upper part that they are not easy to see.
This young bird, when hiding, made itself look very small, although 
when running about its legs seemed long, and it looked a considerable 
size.
Though the old and young birds walk about in the fields 
together, I never saw any attempt on the part of the old birds to feed 
the young.
The tradition is that the young leave the nest with the 
shell on their back, and they certainly leave it at a very early stage, 
as I have found them a foot or two away, even before they could 
stand upright on their legs ; of course, if they have to seek food for 
themselves they must of necessity move about early.
May 2ist — Wretchedly cold weather for the time of year, and 
the young tender shoots and leaves of beech and sycamore trees 
much injured and disfigured by the wind during the last few days, 
being left hanging black and withered on the branches.
Found 
three young Tewits in a pasture-field, all close together, and apparently 
almost benumbed with the cold ; they were very small, not more than 
three or four days old, and although so close together, we were 
unable to find the nest they had come from.
The two old birds 
came flying round us very close before we found the young ones.
Once, when passing along a country-lane, I was surprised to see a 
Tewit standing in the middle of the road quite still, but as we came 
nearer it flew away and four very small young ones hastened to hide 
themselves in the grass at the side, which they can do in a very 
short time.
May 28th — Was informed that four pairs of Tewits had been 
frequenting Arpley Fields near Warrington, and that two pairs bred 
there this year.
June 4th — Went to the Moat House Farm, Burtonwood, in the 
fields near which Tewits were evidently breeding, as six or seven 
came screaming around in close proximity, although I only passed 
along the road.
They used to breed in these same fields many 
years ago.
June 1 8th — The earliest young birds seem now able to fly, and 
observed one small flock of about a dozen, but was not near enough 
Sept.
1888.
274 JACKSON: NOTES ON THE LAPWING NEAR GARSTANG.
to distinguish how many of these were young birds ; this being the 
earhest attempt at flocking it seems that some six weeks elapse before 
the young are able to fly, and during all this time they appear to be 
altogether unprotected, as they are on the ground, cannot fly, and do 
not attempt to run away, but seem to rely solely on their admirable 
skill in keeping out of sight.
We carefully searched a large pasture 
field for young birds, but were unable to find one although there were 
certainly some in it, as six or seven old birds were flying around all 
the time.
We afterwards found one in the same field by seeing it 
walking about with the old one and going to the spot.
In such cases 
the young birds disappear long before you can get near them, and even 
before the old bird takes to flight.
On the same date we also took 
three eggs which were only slightly incubated, so that there will be 
at least eight weeks between the early and late hatches, the latter are 
probably birds which have had their first lot of eggs taken.
These 
small young ones are most active on their legs, and if lifted up and 
again placed on the ground will run a few yards, then stick their bill 
to the ground and run on again in exactly the same fashion as the 
old birds ; they seem to do this whether there is anything to pick up 
or not.
July 9th — Very few single birds left in the fields now, and we saw 
one flock of about sixty, but too far off" for minute examination.
We also saw during the daytime two or three birds, apparently asleep 
and not standing on their legs.
July 1 6th — Saw only two or three single birds about the fields, 
but several large flocks — one which was in a rough pasture-field con- 
tained not less than 200 birds, and more than half of them appeared 
to be birds of the year.
August ist — Almost all the Tewits in flocks now.
After careful 
search over a grass field with the glass, we discovered one young bird 
walking about, being evidently about the latest of its kind.
On going 
to the place we found it ' squat,' and took two photos of it in this 
position, which give some slight idea of the admirable protective 
power of unobtrusive colour and marking when no movement what- 
ever is made by the bird.
This young bird could fly well for twenty 
or thirty yards and no doubt would be fairly on the wing in three or 
four days.
August 20th — During the morning spent some time trying to get 
near a large flock of Tewits in a pasture-field : there were about 200 
birds and all seemed to be resting, some pruning their feathers, some 
sitting down, but none appeared to be feeding.
They seem to have 
a kind of daily migration, and just as dusk comes on and the first star 
appears they leave the fields they have frequented duringthe day, 
Naturalist, 
CREPIDULA FORNICATA AT GRIMSBY.
275 
and visit some damp or marshy spot, where no doubt food is plentiful.
If you wait in some spot which is a kind of high road to these feeding- 
places you may be sure of several coming over before it gets quite 
dark.
In the very early morning they are much scattered over the 
fields, but soon gather up again into flocks as the day advances, and 
are exceedingly wary.
At this time of year they seem to be well 
distributed over the country, or at least the lower-lying land, as I saw 
numbers of them in the fields up to the sea bank between Pilling 
and Fleetwood.
September loth — Newly manured grass land appears to be the 
most attractive locality at this date.
November 12th — A very dark night, and going down Legh Street, 
Warrington, was astonished to hear two or three Tewits shouting ; 
they were evidently flying round, attracted by the bright light from 
the Fair Ground and Market.
November 19th — The ground was rather hard with frost, and we 
put up several Tewits from sheltered spots and places under trees 
where the cold had not rendered the ground so hard.
November 26th — Ground soft, and almost every field held several 
Tewits, and some favoured ones had many hundreds.
December iith — We had a walk up the hills and on the higher 
ground, but saw no Tewits after leaving the low-lying land ; they seem 
to desert the higher ground as soon as the breeding-season is over.
December 26th — Ground frozen hard, with a slight sprinkling of 
snow ; almost all the Tewits driven away in consequence, and 
although we kept a careful look-out, only saw nine in three days.
The frost continued till the end of the year, and the Tewits absolutely 
deserted this part of the country.
The birds seem much more 
plentiful during the last few years, and possibly this is owing to the 
operation of the Wild Birds' Protection Act, as the close season is 
the only time that they appear to lose any of their wariness.
NOTE—CONCHOLOG V.
Occurrence of Dead Shells of Crepidula fornicata on Grimsby Beach.
— 
While searching for specimens on the Grimsby Beach I found a shell which I did 
not recognise as being British, nor had I found or seen such a shell before.
This 
was in November 1887.
Some weeks after I found another.
I sent one to the 
Natural History Museum at South Kensington.
It was kindly returned to me as 
Crepidula fornicata, a native of the east coast of North America, and I was told 
that it had possibly been thrown out of some ship with ballast, and then washed 
ashore; but as I continued to find specimens I could scarcely think this to be the 
case.
After making inquiries I have learnt that they are brought from America 
with the American Oysters, which are deposited at Cleethorpes for the use of 
visitors to this seaside resort in the summer season.
As yet I have not found living 
specimens, although a friend assures me they are often adhering to the shells of 
the Oysters when first brought here.
—Arthur Smith, 103, Freeman Street, 
Great Gri msby, February 29th, 1888.
Sept.
1888.
276 
MISCELI-ANEOUS NOTES.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Fieldfares near Halifax in July.
— Walking in the fields on Sunday morning 
the 1st of July, I heard the well-remembered ' chack-chack ' of the Fieldfare [Tzirdus 
pilaris), and, turning round, saw a flock of eight or nine flying in a north-westerly 
direction.
They settled in a field a few hundred yards further on.
— C.
C. Hanson, 
Greetland, near Halifax, July 17th, 1888.
Osprey near Alford.
— On the 3rd of May, 1888, an Osprey {I^andion hahaeiJis) 
was shot at Chapel Marsh, in the parish of Alumby Chapel, near Alford, by a son 
of Mr. J.
N. Robinson, of Anderby.
I have seen the bird, which is one of last 
year's brood apparently.
When shot its stomach was found full of fish.
— 
Jas. Eardley Mason, Alford, 8th August, 1888.
Food of Crossbills.
— The stomachs of two of these birds, obtained on the 
Yorkshire coast near Kilnsea, on the 14th and 15th of July, were crammed with 
the nymph of Philcvnus sptima}-i?{s , the ' cuckoo-spit ' insect, no doubt picked 
from the blades of sea-grasses growing on the sand-dunes.
— John Cordeaux, 
Great Cotes, Ulceby, August 9th, 1888.
Crossbill at the Fame Islands.
— You ask for occurrences of the Crossbill 
[Loxia curvirostra) in the North of England.
About July 17th a male was 
picked up dead on the Farne Islands and shown to Mr. H.
"G.
Barclay, of 
Norwich, who was on the islands at the time.
Whether it was a solitary example, 
or whether any others were seen at the time on the mainland, I know not, but 
Mr. Barclay did not see any others.
— J.
H. GuRNEY, Jun,, Keswick Hall, 
Norwich, 14th August, 1888.
NOTE— GEOLOGY.
Calverley Wood Quarries, Leeds.
— The Council of the Leeds Geological 
Association, upon the invitation of Mr. J.
Cameron Rowan, paid a visit to the 
above-named quarries, to inspect a fine section of the Rough Rock, the uppermost 
bed of the Millstone Grit series.
The day was most unfavourable for any geological 
work, an incessant rain falling throughout, but still the observations were most 
perseveringly carried through.
Upon arrival at Apperley Bridge Station, the 
party made the best of their way along the pleasant road intersecting Calverley 
Wood, until they were met by Messrs.
Gray and Rowan, and conducted to the 
quarries.
The first quarry visited did not present any striking features beyond the 
manner in which the rock had been disturbed by one of the numerous smaller 
faults in this neighbourhood.
The second quarry was more interesting and prac- 
tical, and certainly was a fine section.
Here could be seen in descending order 
the well-known rough rock, then a ragstone, followed by a good flagstone.
A good 
opportunity was in this quarry offered of observing the cause of the disturbance 
which had so dislocated the superincumbent strata.
The beds, which were once 
deposited horizontally, or at all events with a slight dip in one direction, were 
noted as dipping in opposite directions over a boss of solid sandstone.
This has, 
no doubt, been produced by tremendous lateral pressure operating in the most 
gradual manner ; still this extremely slow but incalculably powerful force has rifted 
and cracked the solid sandstone above.
Some remarkable instances of this force 
were observed in a quantity of flags which had been obtained from this quarry, 
which were not perfectly flat, but slightly concave.
In one part of this quarry was 
noted a good example of a fault, with a wedge-shaped mass of sandstone between.
The next quarry visited showed also a good section of the rough rock, and also 
afforded an opportunity of studying the composition of this well-known and most 
valuable stone.
Just where it had been bared it was of a conglomeritic character, 
being full of large pebbles of whitish quartz.
These were mixed with rapidly 
decomposing felspar.
This showed undoubtedly the origin of this rock, its 
materials being furnished from the wear and tear of pre-existing rocks, such as 
granite.
— S.
A. Adamson, Leeds, July 28th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
277 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT MARKET WEIGHTON.
The Bank Holiday excursion (August 6th) of the Yorkshire 
Naturahsts' Union had been arranged to take place in the interest- 
ing and picturesque neighbourhood of Market Weighton, including 
Goodmanham, Londesborough Park, and Houghton.
Nature was 
on this day in one of her sunniest aspects, the long reign of Jupiter 
Pluvius seemed to be at an end, and altogether our scientists were in 
far different spirits than upon the unfortunate visit made recently to 
the Peak.
The whole party assembled at the Market Weighton 
Railway Station, from whence the geologists, under the leadership of 
the Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., President of the Geological Section, 
proceeded in the direction of Goodmanham, Enthorpe, and Londes- 
borough, whilst the second party, under the direction of Mr. Boyes, 
examined the district including Houghton Park and North Cliff 
Woods.
After the investigations of the day, a substantial tea was partaken 
of at the Londesborough Arms Hotel, Market Weighton, at the con- 
clusion of which the sectional and general meetings were held at the 
National Schoolroom.
The general meeting was presided over by the Rev. E.
Maule 
Cole, M.A. After the adoption of the minutes of the previous 
meeting, the following new members were unanimously elected : — 
Edward J.
Lloyd, Manager, York Street Gas Works, Leeds ; 
Rev. Alfred Clarke, M.A., Kirkby Malzeard, Ripon.
The attend- 
ance included representatives from the following societies, viz.: — 
Leeds Naturalists' Club, York and District Field Naturalists' Society, 
Goole Scientific Society, Leeds Geological Association, Malton 
Naturalists' Society, Hull Field Naturalists' Society, Harrogate 
and District Naturahsts' and Scientific Society, Ackworth School 
Natural History Society, Hull Scientific Club, and Hull Geological 
Society.
Thanks were then voted — upon the motion of the 
Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., seconded by Mr. C.
H. Bould — to the 
Rt. Hon.
the Earl of Londesborough, and to the Hon. C.
Langdale, 
for permission to visit their estates ; to the Rev. R.
Digby French, 
for the use of the schoolroom ; to the Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., 
and Messrs.
F. A.
Lees, J.
D. Butterell and Frederick Boyes, for 
assistance rendered on the circular ; to Mr. Proudlock, for his 
efficient guidance of the geological party in a topographical capacity ; 
and to the Rev. E.
M. Cole, M.A., Messrs.
M. B.
Slater, T.
Bunker, 
and F.
Boyes for their leadership of parties.
Sept.
i888.
278 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT MARKET WEIGHTON.
Upon the proposition of the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A., seconded 
by Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., and supported by the Chairman, the 
Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., Messrs.
S. Chadwick and M.
B. Slater, it was 
unanimously resolved that the Secretary be requested to enrol the 
Union as a member of the International Geological Congress, by 
a subscription of los., which will secure the publications of the 
Congress, and also to make a donation of two guineas to the 
Guarantee Fund.
Mr. Knubley had previously described the objects 
of the Congress, which meets every three years, and is shortly to 
hold a meeting in London, after the conclusion of which several 
geological excursions will be made, Yorkshire being honoured with 
two, one in the Craven district, the other along the Yorkshire coast 
from Saltburn to Speeton.
Mr. Adamson reported upon the continued improvement and 
favourable condition of the secretary, Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, 
F.L.S., and was requested to convey the sympathy of the members 
to him.
The sectional reports were then presented.
For the Vertebrate Zoology Section, which was represented by all 
its sectional officers, Mr. J.
Backhouse, jun., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., York, 
reported that only thirty-three species of birds had been met with, 
i.e. twenty-five residents and eight migrants.
The small number of 
the latter is probably accounted for by the fact that a large number 
of our migrating birds are now moving towards the sea-coast, pre- 
paratory to their long southern voyage.
It is interesting to notice, 
on referring to last season's reports, that on August 27th, at Welton 
(Brough), a few miles further south, three migrants only were observed, 
notwithstanding the exceptional fineness and w^armth of the season.
A sharp look-out was kept during the day, but without avail, for 
Pallas' Sand-Grouse, which species has been observed this summer 
in fair numbers on the lowland in the vicinity of Market Weighton.
The chairman, Rev. E.
M. Cole, remarked that the Norfolk Plover 
has been found nesting of recent years on the wolds to his knowledge.
In York Museum is a bird of this species, in immature dress, which 
was killed at or near KipUngcotes a few years ago, and must have 
been reared in the neighbourhood.
For the Conchological Section, the Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., 
York, president of the section, reported that all the species of 
mollusca observed were terrestrial.
Helix cantiana was very abun- 
dant in hedge-banks.
H. aspersa and H.
nemoralis in a quarry at 
Sancton.
H. caperata under chalk, with H.
hispida.
A small form 
of Succinea piitris was the only other shell collected.
Among the 
specimens of H.
caperata were some examples of the variety or?iata.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT MARKET WEIGHTON.
279 
For the Entomological Section, its president, Mr. N.
F. Dobree, 
Beverley, reported that there was a fair muster of entomologists, but 
the united effort merely succeeded in finding one EutJwnonia russtda^ 
a species known to exist on the moor there, and a few quite fresh 
specimens of Bryophila perla on the walls of houses in Market 
Weighton, which latter is only noteworthy as proving the lateness of 
the season.
Mr. Dobree had taken them on the Rhine and Moselle 
at the end of July this year.
It was not a favourable day for diurnal 
lepidoptera.
The Rev. W.
C. Hey reported that of Coleoptera he met with a 
fair number of species, chiefly by shaking refuse.
Among them were 
Quedius violochi?iiis^ Phiionthus vai'ians, and Tachinus margijiellus.
In dung occurred Phiionthus ?nargtfiatus, Cercyon hce??i07'rhoidalis, 
C. melanocephalus^ etc.
Telephorus fiilvus abounded on umbelliferous 
plants.
For the Botanical Section Mr. M.
B. Slater reported that the 
botanists, under the guidance of Mr. Boyes, fortunately favoured by 
fine weather, were enabled to explore the route mentioned in the 
programme.
At their sectional meeting, the total number of plants 
reported was 201 Flowering Plants, 7 Ferns, 20 Mosses and 
5 Hepaticae.
The most interesting and rare plants seen during the 
ramble were the following : — Papaver arge7none\ the double-flowering 
form of Chelidoniiim inajus^ growing by a hedge-side at Sancton, 
evidently a stray from the adjoining garden; Corydalis daviculata; 
Erysimtim orienia/e, a single specimen growing amongst potatoes 
near to a disused brick-yard, probably introduced with seeds or 
manure ; Reseda lutea ; Siletie nodiflora ; Malva mosdiata var.
alba ; 
Melilotiis officifialis, probably an alien, introduced with flower-seeds ; 
Spircea filipe7idula^ new to the East Riding; Epilobiuin aiigustifolium, 
a large mass seen in a wet situation in Houghton Wood ; Bryonia 
dioica (White Bryony) reported as growing in the district ; Apiuni 
graveolens (Alien inland).
The Black Bryony {Tamils coinmu?iis) also 
occurs in the district.
The rarer Thistles seen were : Onopordiuni 
acanthium, Carduus 7mtafts, and C.
hete7-ophylli(s, whilst C.
eriophonis, 
mentioned in the circular as occurring in the district, was not met 
with.
The only Heaths seen were Calluna vulgaris and Erica 
teiralix.
Only two Orchids were seen, Listera ovata and Spira7ithes 
aidu7n7ialis , the latter near Houghton Wood, and one of the most 
interesting finds of the day.
Digitalis purpurea, a commonly dis- 
tributed plant on sandy-heathery tracts, whereas on the coralline 
limestone about Malton it is never seen except in cultivation.
Humulus lupidus^ the hop-plant, was reported to have been seen, 
perhaps not truly wild ; it is often introduced, and easily establishes 
Sept.
1888.
28o YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT MARKET WEIGHTON.
itself.
Hydrocharis morsiis-rajicE^ Typha latifolia^ T.
angusfifolia, 
Narthecmm ossifraguin, on boggy ground.
Apera spica-venti seen 
growing by the road-side near Sancton ; it is a species that hkes a 
sandy soil, and is only recorded as occurring in eighteen of the 
vice-counties ; Baker, in his ' North Yorkshire,' records it from the 
vale of York at Catton, Alne, and Sutton-on-the-Forest, and it is also 
reported by Teesdale from Bulmer near Castle Howard.
The Ferns 
seen included Lastrea Jilix-jnas, L.
spinulosa^ and L.
dilatafa, the 
latter of which was by far the most abundant, and is the most 
common fern in the woods on the chalk wolds.
Athyrium jilix- 
fcemina, Lomaria spicaiit^ Pteris aquilina, and Polypodium vulgare 
were also seen.
Two members, interested in Mosses, spent the time at their 
disposal in Houghton Wood, as the most likely place in the district 
for the growth of these plants.
They were fortunate in finding one 
moss i^Hypnum imponens Hedw.) which has only hitherto been 
recorded for Riccall Common in the East Riding.
In the wood the 
trunks of the trees were very free from cortical mosses, no Orthotricha 
were seen, and Cryphcsa, which has been found growing on trees in 
the neighbourhood of Sledmere, was not met with.
The following Mosses and Hepaticae were gathered, all but one 
of them, however, of general distribution in moist shady woodlands : — 
Mosses.
Sphagnum cymbifolium Ehrh.
Eurhynchium prselongum Dill.
Sphagnum acutifolium Ehrh.
Rhyncostegium confertum Dicks.
Dicranum scoparium L.
Plagiothecium sylvaticum L.
Dicranum bonjeani DeNot. Plagiothecium denticulatum L.
Ceratodon purpureus L.
Plagiothecium undulatum L.
Webera nutans Schreb.
Amblystegium serpens L.
Mnium undulatum Hedw.
Hypnum purum L.
Leucodon sciuroides L, Hypnum schreberi Ehrh.
Thuidium tamariscinum Hedw.
Hypnum cupressiforme L.
Eurhynchium striatum Schreb.
Hypnum imponens Hedw.
This last moss is very closely allied to H.
cupressiforme^ differing in 
the narrower cellular tissue of the leaves, etc.
It was found growing 
amongst heath adjoining Houghton Wood.
It has been gathered on 
Strensall Common by Wilson and other muscologists, and is men- 
tioned in the ' Catalogue of British Mosses ' as occurring in only 
three vice-counties.
Hepatic^.
Radula complanata (L.).
Lophocolea heterophylla Schrad.
Cephalozia divaricata Sm. Ptilidium ciliare Nees.
Lophocolea bidentata (L.
). 
The Geological Section was numerously attended and also 
represented by all its sectional officers, the report being given by 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT MARKET WEIGHTON.
281 
Mr. Samuel Chadwick, one of the secretaries.
Upon our arrival the 
line to Beverley was traversed until, upon the south side of the 
cutting, those beds of the Lower Lias, belonging to the zone of 
Ammonites angulattis^ or the 'grey stone,' were examined.
They 
were extremely fossiliferous, and, had time permitted, the wallets 
might have been filled at the beginning of the day's work.
The line 
was still continued until we arrived at a fine section of the grey or 
upper division of the lower chalk.
Here ample work was found for 
the hammers, and some good results ensued.
Among the fossils 
found were Terebratula gracilis^ T.
biplicata, T.
semi-globosa^ Rhyn- 
conelloe, Inocerami, a tooth of Otodus, etc.
Reddish bands were 
observed in this chalk.
This chalk is denoted by the Government 
geological surveyors as flintless, but numerous specimens of a whitish 
flint were obtained in situ (of quite a different character to those of 
the middle chalk), a circumstance which occasioned much incredulity 
and speculation.
Of course, some were strongly inclined to be 
orthodox in believing the lower chalk to be flintless, whilst the 
discoverers of the flints, fresh with their spoils from the living 
rock, triumphantly refuted this idea.
The way was now taken by 
a gentle and pleasant ascent to the ancient village of Goodmanham, 
the ' Godmundingaham' of the venerable Bede, where, according 
to tradition, some most remarkable events in connection with the 
introduction of Christianity into our island have taken place.
Some 
extensive earthworks were carefully walked over and examined, but 
the general opinion was that although some parts may have been 
due to the perseverance of our forefathers, yet they were really the 
debris of a modern chalk-pit.
The pleasant gardens of the palatial 
rectory were then passed through to the village, and a little detour 
made from the geological track to inspect the venerable church, 
which displayed in its chancel arch and doorway its Early Norman 
origin.
This church was viewed with great interest, as, with the 
greatest probability, it stands upon the site of ' the place where the 
idols were ' of Bede, or the ancient heathen temple.
There was 
always an idea in those early days to efface Paganism by erecting 
upon the site of the destroyed heathen temple a Christian church.
And now a long walk was taken in the direction of Enthorpe to view 
the cutting now being made on the new railway intended to connect 
Market Weighton and Driffield.
This new line has a peculiar interest 
to West Riding people, as, when completed, the necessity of travel- 
ling from Leeds to Bridlington either by way of Hull or Seamer will 
be at an end, and a more direct route secured, which will shorten 
the journey by about twenty miles.
An immense embankment is 
being formed from the material obtained from the deep cutting 
Sept.
1888.
282 
NOTES AND NEWS.
a little farther on, and from the freshly-cut blocks of chalk and flint 
some of our friends reaped a rich harvest.
Mr. Chadwick, of Malton, 
ever on the alert in his special subject, was most assiduous, and was 
rewarded by the discovery of some fine hexactinellid and tetracti- 
nellid (or six-rayed and four-rayed) sponges.
We now came into the 
cutting in the middle chalk, some 70 ft.
in depth, which certainly 
was a magnificent section.
Three bands of flint and several of 
fuller's earth were noticed traversing the chalk.
This fuller's earth 
was continuous, the chalk above and below never uniting.
This 
would point to a break now and then in the deposition of the chalk, 
and the influx of mud, in a greater or a lesser degree, into the 
cretaceous sea.
Bank holiday was not observed on the new railway, 
as the busy bands of men were hard at work, and their operations 
were noted with great interest.
In the immediate neighbourhood 
several tumuli were pointed out by the leader.
From Enthorpe 
a devious but pleasant route was taken across the fields to Londes- 
borough Park.
Here and there outcrops of the Lower Lias were 
noted and attentively examined.
The finely wooded park was then 
traversed, to the delight of all present, the fine old trees and majestic 
avenues attracting much admiration.
Upon emerging from the park 
the course of the East Beck was followed some little distance to dis- 
cover, if possible, those interesting passage beds between the Lower 
Lias and the Keuper Marls of the Trias known by the name of Rhsetic.
Patient search was upon this occasion of no avail, and their discovery 
must remain over for a further visit.
A lengthened walk brought 
the party again to Market Weighton, during which many fine views 
of the broad and fertile valley were obtained.
Holme-on-Spalding 
Moor was a prominent object, whilst far away Bray ton Barf and 
Hambleton were discerned.
The section of Micro-Zoology and Micro-Botany was not repre- 
sented.
A vote of thanks to the chairman concluded the proceedings.
NOTES AND NEWS.
We have received from Mr. A.
Norman Tate, F.I.C., etc., of Liverpool, the 
two first numbers of a new monthly illustrated journal of science, which he is 
editing, under the title of ' Research.' It is in quarto form, well printed and 
nicely illustrated, and several of its articles are of special local interest to 
naturalists resident in the north.
One special feature is ' Our Portrait Gallery ' — 
the first two portraits of which are those of the Rev. H.
PI.
Higgins, M.A., 
the well-known Liverpool naturalist, and Sir H.
E. Roscoe, M.P. Another 
feature is a series of articles on 'The Scientific Aspects of Health Resorts,' 
dealing at its outset with Harrogate and with Buxton.
Another series of 
articles deals with ' Geological Rambles,' the first being in Charnwood Forest.
Special prominence is given also to ' Local Museums,' and to the proceedings 
of local scientific societies, and altogether the journal is eminently readable and 
full of interest.
Naturalist, 
^83 
HARCOURT BATH ON BRITISH BIRDS.
The Young Collector's Handbook of British Birds, and their Nests and 
Eggs.
By W.
Harcourt Bath; with a Chapter on Collecting and 
Preserving Birds, by R.
Bowdler Sharpe, F.
L. S., F.Z.S., &c.
1 12 pp.
and Woodcuts.
London: Swan Sonnenschein, Lowry & Co. 1888.
Under this title we have a Httle book which aims at furnishing in 
eighty 8vo pages a history of our native birds, some 400 strong.
Whether it is possible to supply in so small a compass what this book 
pretends to do, we will not concern ourselves.
But as the book is 
specially and wholly designed for the ' Young Collector,' we must 
insist that strict accuracy — the cardinal merit of such a manual — be 
afforded, however small the store of knowledge to be gleaned from 
it may be.
We regret to say that such a primary attribute is entirely 
wanting in the book before us ; indeed, the book is a veritable 7nultu?n 
in parvo of errors.
Here are a fe^v specimens of Mr. W.
Harcourt 
Bath's knowledge of British ornithology: — 
Page 23.
T\)x\x'^ {Turdus varius) .
. .
is supposed 
by some to be a mere variety of the Song Thrush.' Mr. W.
Harcourt 
Bath does not tell his readers that it is a perfectly genuine species.
[The italics are ours in this and the following extracts.] 
Page 33.
'The Shore Lark {Otocorys alpestris) inhabits the sea- 
coast and estuaries of rivers, and always breeds in the vicinity of its 
habitat.' Marked as a bird known to breed in the British Islands at 
page 72.
Page 35.
'The Ortolan Bunting {Emberiza horiuland) is also by 
no means common in this country.
It is principally an inhabitant 
of the eastern counties, and is resident throughout the year' Marked 
as a bird known to breed in the British Islands at page 72.
Page 35.
'The Brambling {Fringilla montifringilla) .
. .
. 
sometimes stays to breed.' Marked as a bird known to breed in the 
British Islands at page 72.
Page 45.
'The Capercaillie {Tetrao urogallus) 
It is supposed by some ornithologists once to have been an iiidigenous 
inhabitant of this country.'' 
Page 46.
' The Ptarmigan {Lagopus mutus) is another vioor- 
loving bird.' 
Page 47.
' The Red-legged Partridge {Perdix rufa) ....
has on several occasions been known to breed here.' 
Page 49.
'The Dotterel {Ettdromias niorinellus) is a summer 
visitor to this country.
// breeds on moors and conujwns.' 
Page 49.
'The Ringed Plover {.-Egia/itis hiaticula) is another 
summer visitor, but is generally considered to be very rare' 
Sept.
1888.
284 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
Page 50.
'The Spotted Redshank {Totaniis fusciis) is also a 
resident species' Marked as a bird known to breed in the British 
Islands at page 75.
Page 51.
'The Dunhn {Tringa alpind) is also a winter visitor, 
and so?neti?ues stays to breed.' 
Page 52.
' Bartailed Godwit {Limosa lapponica) is a regular 
winter visitor, ivhich so?neti?nes remains to breed' 
Page 53.
' The Whimbrel {Nianenius phceopus) is a winter visitor' 
As a specimen of Mr. W.
Harcourt Bath's accuracy in descriptions 
of plumage, we note— The Nuthatch (p.
30): 'The plumage of 
this bird is dusky brown, and the breast greyish.' 
It is, we are sorry to say, a thoroughly harmful little book ; the 
result of the author's gross ignorance of his subject, and of an unpar- 
donable neglect on his part to consult the many and easily accessible 
books on British Birds for information.
Mr. Sharpe's portion of the 
book is in every way a satisfactory production, but we believe we have 
seen it issued in another form by the same publishers.
— W.
E. C.
NOTES—BOTANY.
Dichroism in Viola odorata.
— Mr. Gain, on p.
193, records a very interesting 
variety of Viola odoTata, in which the normal bkie colour is replaced by pinkish- 
red.
It appears that this blue colouring-matter, both in Viola and in other 
plants, is dimorphic, and presents two phases: — blue and pink.
In this locality 
a pink-flowered Oxytropis occurs, which always goes blue in drying, and on the 
other hand, the violet- blue flowered Clematis douglasii presents a somewhat rare 
variety rosea, in which the blue is replaced by pink, and similar varieties occur of 
Anemone patens var.
7aittalliana (var.
rosea) and Aster paucijloriis rosaceiis), 
in both of which pink takes the place of violet.
These varieties occur in Colorado, 
and others like them are recorded from other countries, fully bearing out the close 
relation between pink and blue in flowers.
— T.
D. A.
CocKERELL, West Cliff", 
Colorado, July 19th.
Carduus acaulis in North Lincolnshire.
— On Bank Holiday, the 6th inst., 
Mr. Joseph B.
Davy found this thistle on the Chalk Wolds at South Ormsby, and 
brought me a specimen, which I sent to Mr. F.
A. Lees for confirmation.
— 
Jas. Eardley Mason, Alford, loth August, 1888.
NOTE— MOLL USCA.
Arion ater var.
nov.
cinerea at Notting-ham.
— Mr. G.
W. Mellors, of 
Nottingham, has lately forwarded me a number of slugs from that neighbourhood.
His last consignment was of specimens from the Corporation Gardens, Wells 
Road, Nottingham, 25th June, including a juvenile specimen of Limax jnaxinnis 
yz.x. fasciata, a few of L.
agrestis, type and var.
sylvatica, ono.
Arion boiirgiiignati 
and a few typical A.
hortensis, several full-grown typical A.
ater, and one fine 
adult of that species which is of a colour that I have never before seen in A.
ater, 
viz., dark cinereous, uniform in colour, and having the foot-fringe dull brown with 
the usual dark cross-streaks.
The cinereous colour is exactly that so prevalent in 
L. maximus.
— W.
De.mson Roebuck, Leeds, 26th June, 1888.
1 8F:^ 1888 N^ii^, 
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. EARN.
The Chapter on Co/eoptera, by Edtvard Neunnan.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching ; boxing female moths ; pairing insects.
How to obtain Larv^ by beating ; the Bignell tray; sweeping; searching by night; how to rear 
the larv^ ; sleeving; hybernating larvae ; parasites; preserving larvae.
Pipa digging; preserv- 
ing pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities ; net ; mothing ; honeydew ; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; number of speci- 
mens and manner of placing; transmission by post; entomological diary; books.
?»IiCRO- 
lepidopteka; Coleoptera ; Hymenoptera ; Breeding of Gall-Flies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
'NATURALIST' REPRINTS— No. I.
LIST OF 
LAND AND FRESHWATER MOLLUSCA 
LANCASHIRE.
This paper contains not only Mr. Standen's own observations, but those of Messrs.
R. D.
Darbishire, T.
Rogers, W.
H. Heathcote, J.
A. Hargreaves, F.
C. Long, H.
Stephenson, and 
other conchologists, and the observations published in Dyson's list of 1850, and in Hardy's 
lists of 1864 and 1865, are reproduced for comparison.
Price 9d.
(By post, 9id.) 
To be had from the Publishers of the 'Naturalist,' Park Row, Leeds.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., & WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
' The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have beea guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their in%'estigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann. Mag^.
Nat. Hist, 
' The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athenceum.
On 'Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on every Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contams Queries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AMD KATURAL SCIEKCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Spjecial features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S.
, F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memora'nda, " Exchanges," S:c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P. M.S.
London : BAILLIEEE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
THE :N^ATXJIIAIjIST.
The Editors hope to publish the following papers within the next few months: — 
A few additional localities for th.e Vascular Plants of the West Hiding 
Flora, and some remarks thereon.— Wm. West, F.L.S.
A List of some Hemiptera-Heteroptera of Lincolnshire.— J.
Eardley Mason.
List of the Mosses and Hepatics of Westmorland —George Stabler.
Notes on the Food and Habits of Slugs and Snails.— W.
A. Gain, M.C.S.
Notes on the West Yorkshire Flora— F.
Arnold Lees.
NOMENCLATURE OF COLOURS 
FOR THE USE OF NATURALISTS, 
AND ORNITHOLOGISTS' COMPENDIUM.
By ROBERT RIDGWAY.
of the Smithsonian Instituiion.
PRICE 17s., POST FREE.
MAY BE HAD OF THE EDITORS OF THE 'NATURALIST.' 
LITTLE, BROWN & CO., BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDEN TS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by'jOHN W.
TAYLOR, F.L.S.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. VIL commenced January 1888.
Vols.
I., IL, IIL, IV., v., & VI.
may still be had.
This Journal, edited by Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Hunslet Road, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, 
THOS.
W. BELL, 2, Carr Lane, Leeds.
Croiun Svo, with Map^ atjd Coloured Plate by Keulemans.
Price 7s.
6d.
net.
THE BIRDS OF CUMBERLAND.
BY 
REV.
H. A.
MACPHERSON, M.A., M.B.O U., 
AND 
WILLIAM DUCKWORTH.
CARLISLE - - - - Messrs.
THURNAM, English Street.
This work, warmly praised in 'Nature' and 'The Ibis,' is not a dry catalogue, but an account 
of the habits of the Dunlin, Dotterel, Sandwich Tern, Pied Flycatcher, and other birds charac- 
teristic of the Lake counties, written from the authors' field-notes.
It is the only modern hand- 
book to the birds of the North-West of England.
Only a few copies remain unsold, and the price 
will be raised shortly to 12s.
Single copies can be obtained from Messrs.
Thurnam, or direct 
No. 159.
OCTOBER 1888.
T M '% 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESPONDIRENDIR MITGUEU DES OKNITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN.
Bibliography— Neuroptera and Trichoptera, 1884, 1885, 1886, and 1887 
A List of some Henniptera- Heteroptera of Lincolnshire, with notes on 
Collecting— y^w^j Eardley Mason 
Deilephila galii in ^QZ^— George T.
Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S 
Additional Localities for the Vascular Plants of the West Riding Flora 
William West, F.L.S 
Notes on the West Yorkshire Flora— ^.
Arnold Lees, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
The British Association at ^dA\\—Rev. E.
P. Kmihley, M.A., M.B.O.U.
.. 
On the Hepaticae and Musci of Westmorland— G^<7r^«' Stabler 
Note— Lepidoptera 
Larvjfi of Deilephila galii at Hartlepool — J.
Gardner.
Note— Ornithology 
Sand -Grouse near Whitby, Yorkshire — Thomas Stej>kensou.
Note— Geology 
Glacier Work in Airedale— 6\ A.
Adamson, F.G.S.
Notes— Botany 3c6 
The Hound's -Tongue at Skipton -in -Craven — T.
IV.
Edmondson ; Spiraea 
filipendula in South-East Yorks\nT&—Matthe'zv B.
Slater; Notes on Settle 
Plants — William Whitwell; Goodyera repens near Market Weighton — 
W. West and M.
B. Slater.
PAGE 
285 & 286 
287 to 297 
298 
299 to 302 
303 to 306 
308 to 312 
313 to 316 
286 
397 
297 
, 307 & 312 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
McCoRQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, Cardington Street, Euston ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghali.
Street, 
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
»RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
TARIFF OF CHARGES FOR REPRINTS.
50 copies.
100 copies.
200 copies.
4 pages 
...
4/6 
7/- 
...
9/6 
8 pages 
5/6 
8/6 
...
II/- 
12 pages 
7/- 
. II/- ...
...
16/- 
i6 pages 
8/6 
. 13/6 ...
...
18/- 
Covers charged extra 
as below — 
Plain Covers ...
••.
-/9 
1/6 ...
2/6 
Printed Covers 
- 2/- 
3/- ...
...
4/6 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Bristol Naturalists' Society.
— Proceedings, N.S., vol.
v, Part 3 (1887-8).
[Society.
Societe Royal Malacologique de Belgique.
— Proces-verbaux, Juillet — Dec. 1887.
[La Societe.
Esse.\ Naturalist, vol.
ii, Nos. 7 and 8, July and August 1888.
[Essex Field Club.
Grevillea, vol.
xvii, No. 81, for September 1888.
[Dr. M.
C. Cooke, Editor.
Royal Dublin Society.
— Scientific Proceedings, vol.
v (N.S.), Parts 7 and 8, and 
vol.
vi, Parts i and 2.
[The Society.
F. Jeftrey Bell.
— The Echinoderm Fauna of Ceylon.
4to, 18 pages and 2 
coloured plates.
[Royal Dublin Society.
J. W.
Davis.
— Fossil-fish Remains from New Zealand.
4to, 62 pages and 
7 plates.
[Royal Dublin Society.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 19, for Sep. 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 129, for Sep. 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
Science Gossip.
No. 285, for Sep. 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
Society.— Trans., vol.
v. Part i, Aug. 1888.
[The Society.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 105, Sep. 15, 1888.
[J.
E. Clark & B.B.Le Tall,Editors, York.
Ornithologischen Vereins in Wien.
— Mittheilungen, xii Jahrg., Nr. 9, Sep. 1888.
[Verein.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free .
of charge to Subscribers.
Wanted.
— Living examples of Limax arbor iivi^ L.
Icsvis^ and L.
tenellus.
British Land and Freshwater Shells in exchange.
— W.
A. Gain, Tuxford, Newark.
Concliology.
— I have several specimens of Venus exoleta which I should 
like to exchange for other Marine specimens.
— Arthur Smith, 103, Freeman 
Street, Grimsby, July iith, 1888.
Now ready, 8vo, cloth, price 6/- post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA, 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c., of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, Edinburgh Museum.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
* Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
285 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of Eng-Iand.
NEUROPTERA and TRICHOPTERA, 
1884, 1885, 1886, and 1887.
Joseph Ch appell.
- Lane.
S. 
Obnoxious and Injurious Insects [Atropos pulsatoriiis^ etc.].
Young Xat., 
April 1S87, viii.
64.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Lanc.
S, 
A September Walk throug-h Lancashire ....
[Sep. loih, 1S85, Hcmero- 
hius iiei-vosiis and Li»niop]iilus luiiatiis from near Rainhill ; named by 
R. McLachlan].
Xat., Feb. 1886, p.
59.
A. E.
Eaton.
Derbyshire, Cumberland, Westmorland.
A Revisional Monograph of Recent Ephemeridae or Mayflies [The only 
notes referring to the North of England in this exhaustive treatise are 
the following: — Cicnis diinidiata Steph., var.
riviiloruin Eaton, the Uove, 
near Mayfield, Ashbourne, Derbyshire, June (page 144), and the Eden in 
Cumberland, profusely abundant at Langwathby on certain evenings towards 
sunset, so as to produce an appearance as of mist or dense haze hovering over 
the course of the river (p.
320) ; Bactis scandnis Eaton, Ashbourne and 
Norbury, Derbyshire, in the Dove and in the Henmoor Brook, June and 
September (p.
160), and aljundant in Briggle Beck and in the Eden near 
Little Salkeld in Addingham, Cumberland (p.
320) ; B.
teiiax Eaton, rills 
and streamlets on Ashbourne Green, Derbyshire, in June (p.
165); Rhithrot^ena 
seniicolorata Curt., the typical race in Cumberland ascends on Cross Fell to 
about 1,500 ft.
(p.
258); Ecdyuriis insignis Etn., England, in rapid parts of 
rivers, such as ...
. the Eden p.
289); E.
lateralis Curt., nowhere has the 
author found it more abundant than it was along the shore of Ullswater, in 
Westmorland, under Kailpot Crag, on 1st July (p.
295) : EpJie»ierella notata^ 
sp.
nov., locally common by shallow and swift parts of the river Eden in 
Cumberland during June, near the villages of Langwathby and Salkeld 
(p.
306)].
Linnean Transactions, 2nd Series, Zoology, vol.
3, parts I 
(Dec. 1883, pp.
1-77), 2 (July 1884, pp.
77-152), 3 (April 1885, pp.
153-230), 
4 (Dec. 1885, pp.
229-281), 5 (Dec. 1887, pp.
281-319), and 6 (Feb. 1888, 
pp.
320-352), with 65 plates.
J. E.
Fletcher.
Westmorland.
Drag-on-flies near Worcester [a specimen of Leucon-hinia dubia V.d.L.
mentioned as captured with SynipetniDi scoticiiia Donov.
at Witherslack, 
some three or four years since, by Mr. J.
H. Threlfall].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
May 1884, XX.
273-4.
James Hardy.
Cheviotland.
Boreus hyemalis [among mosses on the porphyry rocks behind Wooler].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club, vol.
x, part 2 (1885), p.
608 ; and Scott.
Nat., April 
1885, viii.
64.
n. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Shells of the Ponds and Streams [near Louth ; with mention of the 
caddis-cases of Liifuiephilus flavicornis and Fliryganea grandis in canal].
Nat. World, April 1886, iii.
62.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
A Half-Day's Ramble on the Lincolnshire Coast [at Mableihorpe, 3r(l 
April; cz.>^ oi J^uiuicphiliis Jlavicornis noted].
Nat., June 1886, j).
173.
II.
Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
On the Lincolnshire Wolds [caddis-cases of Limnephilus Jiavii ontis noted 
as very plentiful in a drain near Louth].
Nat. World, Aug. 1886, iii.
142.
Oct. 1888.
T 
286 
DEILEPHILA GALII AT HARTLEPOOL.
Robert McLachlax.
* North of England,' 'Lincolnshire.' 
The British Dragon-flies annotated {Lencoj-rhima diibia V.d.L. is certainly 
common on some of the extensive moors of the north of England, and Mr.
J. C.
Dale also recorded it from Lincolnshire (p.
252)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., 
April 1884, XX.
251-256.
R. McLachlan.
Cumberland, Derbyshire.
Tinodes dives, Pict., in Cumberland [Cross Fell and Onsby ; previously only 
known from Derbyshire, as recorded in Ent. Mo.
Mag., v.
277, as T.
scJwiidtii 
Kolenati].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., June 1886, xxiii.
17, 
R. McLachlax.
Westmorland.
Micromus aphidivorus Schrk.
{angiilaUts Steph.
), near London [writer 
possesses also one taken by J.
E. Hodgkinson at Witherslack, 1863; one of 
the rarest of the British Hemerobiidce].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 1886, xxiii.
138.
R. McLachlax.
Westmorland.
Hydroptila femoralis, Eaton, and H.
longispina, McLach., .probably only 
one species [the latter was taken commonly at Ambleside by J.
J. King].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., July 1887, xxiv.
44-45.
[E.
N. Mexxell.] York N.E.
[Mayfly — species not stated — caught, in a torpid state, in a room at 20, 
Bootham, York].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., April 15th, 1887, xi.
60.
Kexxeth J.
MoRTox. Westmorland.
Drepanopteryx phalaenoides, L., in Scotland : a re-discovery [refers also to 
previous records, thus : Bowness, taken by jNIr. Allis (Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 
New Series, vol.
i. p.
xlvi.
Jan. 6th, 1851) ; Windermere, taken by Mr.
Strouvelle, and in McLachlan's Collection (R.
McLachlan, Monog.
Brit.
Neuropt.
Planip.)].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 1885, xxii.
I40' 
Geo. T.
PoRRLiT.
York N.E.
Lepidoptera, etc.
[=Neuroptera and Trichoptera] on the North-East 
Coast of Yorkshire, in August 1886 [about Saltburn and Redcar ; Chrysopa 
tenella, C.
f ava, He)}ierobhis viicans, H.
hiimuli, Micropterna seqiiax^ 
Steiiophylax lafipeiiiiis, Linmophihis affinis, L.
hirsiitiis, L.
sparsus, and 
L. o'ittatiis noted, with observations].
Nat., March 1887, p.
69.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
Yorkshire Neuroptera and Orthoptera [also Trichoptera ; asking for assistance 
in the study, partly with a view to publication of a hst].
Nat., June 1887, p.
180.
Geo. T, Porritt.
York N.E.
Hemerobius concinnus at York [at Warthill, July i8th, 1887 ; particulars 
given].
Nat., Oct. 1887, p.
290.
George Roberts.
York S.W.
Topography and Natural History of Lofthouse and its Neighbourhood 
[etc.].
Vol. ii.
Leeds: printed for the Author.
1885 [viii.
-f 258 pages, 
8vo.
; reference at p.
91 to ' Dragon-flies ' (species not stated)].
J. Saxg.
? Durham or York N.E, 
Hemerobius inconspicuus, McLach., bred [along with 'Retiiiia pinivorana 
from Scotch fir ; locahty not stated— query near Darlington ?].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Jan. 1885, xxi.
192.
NOTE— LEPIDOPTERA.
Larvae of Deilephila galii at Hartlepool.
— I had the pleasure of taking 
two full-grown larvee oi Deilephila galii on the sand-hills here on the 23rd inst.
They were feeding, quite exposed, upon Galium veruui, during bright sunshine.
With the exception of one taken over thirty years ago, they are the only ones 
which have been taken in our district in the larval state.— J.
Gardxer, 8, Friar 
Terrace, Hartlepool, September 25th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
287 
A LIST OF SOME HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA 
OF LINCOLNSHIRE, 
WITH NOTES ON COLLECTING.
JAMES EARDLEY MASON, 
Alford.
This paper records the results of scattered and much -curtailed 
collecting-days in the district of the Alford Naturahsts' Society in 
the years 1885-6-7, and one or two in 1888.
Notices of a few species from other localities in the county — to 
which the word ' also ' is prefixed — and by other collectors, are incor- 
porated herewith.
The Alford district hes in Watson's ' Lincoln North ' and is 
about ten miles square.
Its eastern face skirts the shore of the 
North Sea, with its wind-blown sand-hills and peculiar flora ; the 
western verge just tops the first rise of the Chalk Wolds; Mable- 
thorpe at the north-eastern corner, and Mumby Chapel at the south- 
eastern, lie open to the .German Ocean ; while South Ormsby and 
Skendleby at the corresponding corners to the west look out from 
fair woods over the flat alluvial tract below them to the sea.
It will be observed that the natui-al features indicate mainly 
a Limestone Fauna and Flora modified by proximity to the sea and 
exposure to the biting north-east winds of winter and early spring.
Except where otherwise stated, each species has been taken by 
myself, and verified by Mr. Edward Saunders, F.L.S., to whom I am 
much indebted.
The nomenclature and arrangement are those of 
his Synopsis, published 1876.
' E.M.M.' refers to the volumes of 
the ' Entomologists' Monthly Magazine,' and ' Brit.
Hem.' to the 
' British Hemiptera-Heteroptera ' of Messrs.
Douglas and Scott, 1865.
From Mr. Douglas I have also received help and information.
GYMNOCERATA.
GEODROMICA.
CVDNIDrK 
Sehirus picipes Fall.
Mablethorpe (T.
V. Wollaston, E.M.M., 
xii.
154).
ARTHROPTERID.K.
Acanthosoma haemorrhoidale Linn.
Well Vale ; not uncommon 
on hawthorn, June and September.
^ Tropicoris rufipes Linn.
Well Vale ; on various trees, June.
Also Muckton Wood, on oak, July.
Common.
Oct. 1 888.
288 mason : Lincolnshire hemiptera-heteroptera.
BERYTID/E.
Berytus pygmaeus Reut.
Mumby Chapel ] land-foot of sand- 
hills amongst moss; abundant in one spot, August 1887.
LYG^ID^.
Scolopostethus adjunctus D.
& S.
Well; some, August 13th, 
1887 (Charles O.
Waterhouse).
It would appear that this is 
the ' affinis ' of continental authors, but further discussion and 
comparison of specimens is needed before the matter can be 
considered as settled.
Meanwhile I should be glad of specimens 
of any of the genus for comparison with those of the Alford 
district.
Scolopostethus affinis Schill.
Well, Mumby Chapel, Sutton-le- 
Marsh ; common under moss and at grass roots, April to 
August.
Drymus sylvaticus Fab. Well; one, May 21st, 1888.
This is 
of the var.
ryei.
Rhyparochromus chiragra Fab. Mumby Chapel sand-hills; 
not abundant, August to October.
Stygnocoris sabulosus Schill.
Mumby Chapel and Sutton-le- 
Marsh sand-hills ; common under moss, August to October.
Stygnocoris arenarius Hahn.
Same as the preceding.
TINGIDID.^.
Piesma capitata Wolff.
Well; at grass-roots, one, 3rd March, 
1885.
Monanthia ampliata H.-Schff.
Mumby Chapel sand-hills; 
abundant on thistles, August to October.
Sutton-le-Marsh 
sand-hills, ist June, 1888.
Monanthia dumetorum H.-Schff.
Well Vale; old hawthorn, 
six, 25th May, 1885.
Derephysia foliacea Fall.
Mumby Chapel ; land-foot of sand- 
hills, amongst moss; plentiful in one spot, 25th August, 1887.
Acalypta parvula Fall.
Mumby Chapel and Sutton-le-Marsh ; 
amongst moss on the sand-hills, plentiful August to October.
Also at Skegness, two, 8th April, 1887.
ARADID/E.
Aradus depressus Fab. Well Vale ; under moss on stump of 
felled ash, six, 22nd September, 1886.
CAPSID^.
Miris calcaratus Fall.
Abundant on long grass and generally 
distributed, but less plentiful near the sea, March to September.
Naturalist, 
MASON : LINCOLNSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
289 
Miris laevigatus Linn.
Same as the preceding.
Megaloceraea erratica Linn.
Claythorpe, Mumby Chapel, 
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; a few.
Also at Muckton.
Megaloceraea longicornis Fall.
Not yet recorded for the 
Alford district.
At Muckton; two, 3rd August, 1885.
Megaloceraea ruficornis Fall.
Mumby Chapel sand-hills ; 
abundant on the flower-spikes of Elymus arenarins and 
Psamina arenaria in July and August.
Most are of the 
variety noted by Prof.
Reuter (E.M.M., xiii.
87).
Well Park, 
one, 13th July, 1887.
The protective mimicry of these five species is very striking.
Both in shape and colour they resemble the glumes of the 
flower-spikes of the grasses among which they live, as well green 
as ripened.
Teratocoris viridis D.
& S.
Mumby Chapel, foot of sand-hills ; 
off Ononis arvensis, one, 25th July, 1887.
Mr. Saunders writes : ' I do not feel sure that this is not a 
female saundersi.
The two species are very closely allied in the 
female.' 
Leptopterna ferrugata Fall.
Mumby Chapel sand-hills; one, 
19th July, 1885.
Well; plentiful, 1 6th August, 1888.
Pantilius tunicatus Fab. Rigsby-with-Ailby; hazel, one, 30th 
October, 1886.
Well Vale; abundant on hazel, 22nd Sep- 
tember, 1886.
Phytocoris longipennis Flor.
Well Vale ; several, 30th July, 
1885, and 22nd September, 1886.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; one, 4th 
October, 1886.
Also at Muckton, 3rd August, 1885.
Phytocoris tiliae Fab. This and its variety 7narnioratus are 
common ; Alford, Rigsby-with-Ailby, Well.
Note the mimicry 
of lichen-covered bark which the markings of this and other 
species of the genus exhibit.
Phytocoris reuteri Saund.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; two, 6th and 
13th September, 1885.
Phytocoris ulmi Linn.
nec.
D. & S.
Alford ; one, 5th Sep- 
tember, 1885.
Oncognathus binotatus Fab. Well; one, 13th August, 18S7 
(Chas.
O. Waterhouse).
Calocoris striatellus Fab. Rigsby-with-Ailby; oak {Quercus 
robur), two, 28th June, 1885.
Calocoris chenopodii Fall.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; on Ononis an'ensis 
in one spot, plentiful, 4th September, 1886.
Oct. i838.
290 MASON : LINCOLNSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
Calocoris bipunctatus Fab. Alford, Rigsby-with-Ailby, Mumby 
Chapel.
Sutton-le-Marsh : on herbage, common.
Also at 
Muckron.
3rd Aug..
1S85.
Rhopalotomus ater Linn.
Mumby Chapel sand-hills : plentiful 
in one place, July 18S6 and 1SS7.
Few found vrith perfect 
antenna.
Liocoris tripustulatus Fab. A common and pretty species.
Claythorpe, ^Nlumby Chapel.
Rigsby-with-Ailby, Sutton-le-Marsh, 
Well.
Mostly on nettle ( Urtica dioica).
Dichrooscytus rufipennis Fall.
Well Yd^rV^ ovi Pinus sylvesfris \ 
plentiful, 13th July, 1SS7.
Piesiocoris rugicollis Fall.
Well.
Willow i^Salix ?), 
SIX, 8th July, 1 885.
Lyg"US pabulinus Linn.
Common.
Alford, ]\Iumby Chapel, 
Rigsby-with-Ailby.
Well.
Lygus contaminatus Fall.
Alford ; one.
14th July, 1887.
AVell 
Vale : two, 30th July, 1S85.
Also at Muckton, 3rd August, 18S5.
LygUS pratensis Linn.
Very common.
A well-marked reddish 
variety abounds on larch [Larix europcea) in Well woods.
LygUS pastinaCce Fall.
Well Vale : Finns sylvesiris, one, 
3cth July, 1885 : one, 13th July, 1887.
LygUS kalmii Lmn. Well : beech (Fagus sylTaiica) and haw- 
thorn : several.
25th May, 1885.
Mumby Chapel, one, 13th 
July.
1885.
Rigsby-with-Ailby: one, 23rd August, 1S85.
LygUS cervinus H.-Schfi.
Well ; hawthorn and sloe [Frunus 
spi?iosa) five, 13th June, 1885 ; four, 22nd September, 1886.
Rigsby-with-Ailby : ash, one, 26th September, 1886.
Monalocoris filicis Linn.
AVell : one, 29th September, 1886.
Pithanus markeli H.-Schff.
Alford; several, 13th July, 1887.
Mumby Chapel; one, 22nd July, 1887.
Also at Muckton, 
3rd August, 1885.
Cyllocoris histrionicus Linn.
Rigsby-vv-ith-Ailby ; oak, four, 
28th June, 1885.
Well Park: oak, 3rd July, 1887.
Note how 
the beetle Malthodes sangui?iole?iius mimics this species.
Campyloneura virgula H.-Schff.
Well : several, ash {Fraxi?ius 
excelsior) and oak, 30th July and icth September, 1885.
-^^torhinus angulatus Fall.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; sloe, three, 
9th August, 1886; one, 30th September.
1S87 ; maple {Acer 
campestre), three, 2nd August, 1885.
Well; three, 30th July, 
1885.
Also at Muckton, 3rd August, 1885.
Naturalist, 
.MASON ; LINCOLNSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
291 
Byrsoptera rufifrons Fall.
Well; several, 13th August, 1887 
(C.
O. Waterhouse).
Also at Muckton Wood ; one, 3rd August, 
1885.
Dicyphus globulifer Fall.
Well Vale, on low herbage or on 
Lychnis diurjia; four, 3rd June, 1888; several, i6th June, 1888.
Dicyphus constrictus Boh. Well ; two - — one undeveloped.
This species hitherto has been recorded only for Perth, N.B., 
where it occurred on Symphytum.
Here it was beaten from 
ash, willow, or low herbage in a small holt.
Malacocoris chlorizans Block.
Well ; abundant on hazel and 
ash, loth September, 1885.
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; one, 30th 
September, 1887.
Orthocephalus saltator Hahn.
Mablethorpe (T.
V. Wollaston, 
Brit.
Hem., 431).
Orthotylus bilineatus Fall.
Not yet recorded for the Alford 
district.
At Muckton ; plentiful on aspen {Poptilus tremiila), 
3rd August, 1885.
Orthotylus striicornis Kirsch.
Well Vale; off ash, three, 22nd 
September, 1886.
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; one, 13th September, 
1886.
Orthotylus prasinus Fall.
Well Vale ; several, probably off ash, 
8th and 30th July, 1885.
Orthotylus diaphanus Kirsch.
Well ; ash, four, 29th Sept., 1886.
Orthotylus nassatus Fab. Rigsby-with-Ailby ; one, 9th August, 
1886.
Also at Muckton; a few, 3rd August, 1885.
Orthotylus tenellus Fall.
Well Park; oak, two, 13th July, 1887.
Orthotylus bicolor D.
cS^ S.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; on furze {Ulex 
europcBus)^ one, 13th September, 1886.
Asciodema obsoleta D.
& S.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; on furze, under 
a willow, two, 13th September, 1886.
Heterotoma merioptera Scop.
Common.
Alford, Rigsby-with- 
Ailby, Well, Mumby Chapel.
Also at Muckton.
Phylus melanocephalus Linn.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; one, 28th 
June, 1886.
Also at Muckton; some, 3rd August, 1885.
Phylus palliceps Fieb.
Well Vale; hazel, two, 30th July, 1885.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; maple, 2nd August, 1885.
Phylus avellanae Schiiff.
Well Vale; two, 30th July, 1885.
Psallus ambiguus Fall.
Alford ; abundant on apple {Pyriis 
malus)^ 9th July, 1885.
Well Vale; plentiful on oak, 3rd July, 
1887 ; some on the same, loth September, 1887.
Oct. 1888.
292 -AIASON : LINCOLNSHIRE HEr^IIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
Psallus variabilis Fall.
Alford ; one, 14th July, 1887.
Well, and 
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; abundant on oak, June and July, 1886 and 
18S7.
Also at ^vluckton, 3rd August, 1S85.
Psallus obscurellus Fall.
Well Park : Finns sylvestris, seven, 
13th July, 1SS7.
Psallus sanguineus Fab. Rigsby-with-Ailby j sloe, one, 28th 
June, 1885 : one, 9th August, 1886.
Also at ]Muckton, 3rd 
August, 1S85.
Psallus lepidus Fieb.
AVell ; ash, several, 8th July, 1885.
Psallus varians H.-Schff.
Well, Rigsby-with-Ailby ; abundant on 
. .oak, June and July, 1885 and 1887.
Also at Muckton.
Psallus salicis Kirschb.
Well: willow, two, 8th July, 1885.
Plagiognathus viridulus Fall.
Claxby and Well ; herbage in 
chalk-pits, several, September 1885 and 1886.
Plagiognathus arbustorum Fab. Claythorpe, Mumby Chapel, 
Rigsby-with-Ailby, Well ; more common than the preceding.
Also at Muckton.
Fond of nettle-beds.
MICROPHYSID-1-:.
Microphysa pselaphiformis West.
Alford; on sycamore 
trunks, females plentiful, July 1SS7.
Microphysa elegantula Baer, Alford; on sycamore trunks, some 
males and many females, July 1887.
Well; on oak trunks, 
several males and females, 13th July, 1887.
Myrmedobia coleoptrata Fall.
Not recorded for Alford district.
Spridlington ; males (T.
V. Wollaston, Brit.
Hem., 485).
AXTHOCORID.E.
Tetraphleps vittata Fieb.
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; larch, four, 4th 
October, 1886.
^^'ell : larch, several, 23rd October, 1886.
Also at Donington-on-Bain, one, 25th October, 1886.
Acompocoris pygmaeus Fall.
Well; Fitius sylvestris, three, 
13th July, 1887.
Temnostethus pusillus H.-Schff.
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; larch, one, 
4th October, 18S6.
Anthocoris nemorum Linn.
The most common species of the 
district — found everywhere, but less abundant near the sea.
Anthocoris nemoralis Fab. Also very common, but more 
abundant near the sea, and especially so on Hippopha'e rhain- 
7ioides (Sea Buckthorn ).
The var.
sarotham?ii D.
^: S.
is not 
uncommon.
Naturalist, 
MASON : LINCOLNSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
293 
Triphleps minutus Linn.
Alumby Chapel sand-hills ; two, 
20th August, 1886; one, 25th August, 1887.
Lyctocoris campestris Fab. Alford; pigeon-cote, one, loth 
June, 1886 ; office-table, one, 25th October, 1886.
Mumby 
Chapel sand-hills; three, 5th July and i8th August, 1886.
ACANTHID.E.
Acanthia lectularia Linn.
Alford; five, 9th May, 1887.
Acanthia columbaria Jen. Alford; in pigeon -cote, abundant, 
17th April and loth June, 1886.
REDUVID.^:.
Ploiaria vagabunda Linn.
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; elder bush, 
{Sanibjicus nigra), one, 4th October, 1886; furze, two, 13th 
September, 1886.
Reduvius personatus Linn.
Not yet recorded for Alford district.
Lincoln ; one, July 1885 (H.
T. Sills, E.M.M., xxii, 115).
NABID.^.
Nabis major Costa.
Generally distributed.
Nabis flavomarginatus Scholz.
Sand-hills ; ^lablethorpe, Mumby 
Chapel, Sutton-le-Marsh ; August ; not uncommon.
Nabis limbatus Dahlb.
Well Vale ; some, July 1885, and 
September 1886.
Rigsby-with-Ailby; two, 30th October, 1886.
Also at Muckton, 3rd August, 1885.
Nabis lineatus Dahlb.
Trusthorpe sand-hills ; one male, 24th 
August, 1885.
Nabis ferus Linn.
Alford, Rigsby-with-Ailby, Well ; common.
March to October.
Nabis rugOSUS Linn.
Rigsby-with-Ailby, ^^'ell ; not uncommon.
June to September.
The food of this family appears to be other insects, especially 
small lepidopterous larvae and aphides.
They hold firmly and 
boldly to them, and even in the sweeping-net will again seize 
them after being once detached.
SALDID.i:.
Salda lateralis Fall.
Mumby Chapel; outmarsh, a few, 25th 
July, 1887.
Salda littoralis Linn.
Mumby Chapel ; abundant on the dried-up 
bed of a delph, among reeds, July 1887.
Oct. 1888.
294 
MASON : LINCOLNSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
Salda pilosella Thorns.
IVIumby Chapel ; outmarsh, abundant 
on the mud by the brackish water, July 1887.
Also South 
Ferriby (T.
V. Wollaston, Brit.
Hem., 528).
Salda orthochila Fieb.
Not yet recorded for Alford district.
Spridlington (T.
V. Wollaston, Brit.
Hem., 522).
Salda saltatoria Linn.
Mumby Chapel ; outmarsh and delph 
banks; affects mud less than S.
pilosella ; common, July 1887.
Salda cincta H.-Schff.
Mumby Chapel; outmarsh, one, 25th 
July, 1887.
HYDRODROMICA.
HVDROMETRID-E.
Hydrometra stagnorum Linn.
Alford, Well, Mumby Chapel.
Common on stagnant water.
Gerris thoracica Schum.
Generally distributed and common.
Gerris gibbifera Schum.
Alford; one, 2nd April, 1885.
Rigsby- 
with-Ailby; one, 7th July, 1886.
Gerris lacustris Linn.
Generally distributed and common.
Gerris odontogaster Zett.
Sutton-le-Marsh ; delph, one, i6th 
April, 1886.
Gerris argentata Schum.
Farlesthorpe, brick-pit; two, 14th 
May, 1887.
Microvelia pygmaea Duf Well ; three, undeveloped, 30th 
May, 1888, Chas.
O. Waterhouse.
Velia currens Fab. Generally distributed and common on all 
running water.
CRYPTOCERATA.
NEPID.E.
Nepa cinerea Linn.
Generally distributed.
One, walking on a 
drain-bank among reeds, Mumby Chapel, 25th July, 1887.
NAUCORID.E.
Naucoris cimicoides Linn.
Not recorded for Alford District.
Lincoln ; Arboretum ponds (W.
W. Fowler).
XOTONECTID.E.
Notonecta glauca Fab. Common in all stagnant water.
Var. maculata Fab. Lincoln ; Arboretum ponds (W.
W. Fowler).
Naturalist, 
MASON : LINCOLNSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
295 
CORIXID^.
Corixa geoffroyi Leach.
Common.
Corixa prseusta Fieb.
Mumby Chapel; one, i6th August, 1886.
Well; one, nth April, 1887.
Corixa hieroglyphica Duf. Well and Alford ; also at Muckton ; 
common.
Corixa linnaei Fieb.
Sutton-le-Marsh ; delph, one, i6th April, 
j886.
Corixa sahlbergi Fieb.
Rigsby-with-Ailby ; three, 8th May, 
1887.
Well; some, nth April, 1887.
Corixa striata Fieb.
Sutton-le-Marsh ; delph, one, 5th August, 
1885.
Mumby Chapel; delph, one, i6th Aug., 1886.
Corixa fallenii Fieb.
Well; some, April 1886 and 1887.
Corixa distincta Fieb.
Well; some, nth April and 5th June, 
1887.
Corixa fabricii Fieb.
Alford; one, 5th May, 1885.
Rigsby-with- 
Ailby; one, 8th May, 1887.
Corixa fossarum Leach.
Farlesthorpe ; brick-pit, two, 25th May, 
1887.
Cymatia coleopteata Fab. Sutton-le-Marsh; delph, one, i6th 
April, 1886.
Sigara minutissima Linn.
Lincoln ; Arboretum ponds (W.
W. 
Fowler).
The list thus shows Lincolnshire to have records for 122 species 
out of some 420 known to occur in Great Britain and Ireland.
All 
are for Lincoln North ; not one is yet recorded for Lincoln South, 
so far as I know; but I have not searched all the entomological 
publications of the century to see whether more than the six Lincoln- 
shire records contained in the books I have cited do exist.
So few have been the students of the order that I do not think 
many, if any, more Lincolnshire species of the sub-order have been 
noted.
It is to be hoped that fresh interest may be awakened, and that 
some of the energy devoted now to Lepidoptera and Coleoptera may 
be given to the Hemiptera.
Can it be that the name attaching to the Heteropterous section 
has acted as a deterrent ?
In delicacy of structure some of the bi^gs 
vie with anything in nature.
Their capture, moreover, requires no 
very special skill or complicated apparatus, and in the hope of 
inducing some to turn their attention to collecting and studying 
them, I give a few details, for which I trust the experienced will 
pardon me.
Oct. 1888.
296 
MASOX ; 
LIXCOLXSHIRE HEMIPTERA-HETEROPTERA.
An umbrella and a sweeping-net, with a stout pocket-knife for 
ground exploration, not forgetting a camel's-hair pencil for the 
pygmies, are tools enough.
The vapour of a few shred leaves of 
laurel in a small wide-mouthed bottle quickly kills the captures.
Let 
the laurel be covered with a piece or two of thick wrapping paper, 
cut to ht evenly and closely to the sides of the bottle, and fill it up 
with bits of muslin or crumpled blotting-paper to provide retreats for 
the insects and prevent their being shaken together, thereby 
endangering the legs and antennc^ of the more delicate.
A quill 
passed through the cork and cut oft square at the bottom, but 
sloping at the upper end so as to be readily placed over an insect, 
provides access to the interior of the bottle for all but the larger 
species.
Take care that a stopper, a full inch or more in length and 
having a knob, is provided to ht — not too tightly — the quill.
On 
taking hold of the knob with the teeth, the stopper can be 
extracted, and yet both hands left free for work.
None but the 
more robust species should be touched with the fingers.
In two or three days the insects should be mounted with gum on 
narrow parallel-sided strips of stout white card, or on a piece -svhich 
can be so cut with them upon it.
A specimen dropped sideways on a dab of gum so as to show 
both the upper and the underside is much better for work than the 
trim arrangement of the tidy man.
The larger species may well be 
gummed across a narrow slip, the insect then lying to the right and 
left of the pin and having ahnost the whole of the underside free for 
examination.
Use pins of the same size (I use No. 5), and let every 
slip be at the same height from the bottom of the cabinet-drawer.
Above all things keep an accurate record of the date, the locality, 
and the circumstances of every capture.
It is a safe plan to mark 
the two first items on the underside of each slip.
Hundreds of 
collections of insects are almost valueless for want of these details.
Particulars given in the list show that almost eveiywhere bugs 
may be looked for.
On trees of all kinds, on low herbage, under 
moss, and on water both stagnant and running, and also in it and at 
bottom, and even on mud.
Many of the tree-loving kinds are very active, and a supplementary 
net about the width of one's expanded palm will be found very useful 
to intercept their escape from the umbrella or beating-net.
Most of 
the Saldidcd are very hard to catch.
For their especial wariness and 
activity I have devised a very ettective weapon which I can commend 
for trial to Coleopterists when hunting on mud or soft ground out of 
arm's reach, such as is found about and in the delphs, which, generally 
speaking, are the deep pits or mere hollows made at the land-foot of 
Naturalist, 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY AND GEOLOGY.
297 
the sea-banks by excavating clay for their raising or repair.
A thick 
vegetation of reeds and other marsh-loving plants soon hides the 
water where less deep, and the sand blown over from the beach, with 
the mud formed by the decay of vegetable matter, slowly fills up the 
shallower parts.
Many of the rarer plants are there to be found.
But let me describe the piece of apparatus I mentioned.
Take the neck of a clear glass wine- or beer-bottle broken off at 
the shoulder, grind the broken end to an angle of some 45 degrees 
or so, and insert a walking-stick at the other.
With this a dive is 
made at the insect sitting or running on the mud or soft ground, and 
if the aim be good enough to cover it, a little careful pushing ensures 
a stopper of like material, between which and the end of the stick it 
is safe.
For SaldidcE a net of any kind is almost useless.
The district and county have been too little worked as yet to 
render any deductions or speculations as to relative abundance or 
geographical distribution worthy of being submitted for consideration.
Meanwhile, a word or two in season from such of my readers as 
may agree with me, may be profitably expended in directing attention 
to this and the other less studied branches of entomology, in which 
there are more discoveries to be made and more need of labourers 
than in the well-worked tribes which first attract the notice of the 
young insect-hunter.
_ 
NOTE—ORNITHOLOG V.
Sand-Grouse near Whitby, Yorkshire.
— Six Sand-Grouse {Syrrhaptes 
paradoxus) were shot on the ridge between Stonegate and Lealholm Bridge, the 
latter part of June, out of a flock of about eighty.
— Thqs.
Stephenson, Whitby, 
September 13th, 1888.
NOTE— GEOLOGY, 
Glacier Work in Airedale.
— A few members of the Executive of the Leeds 
Geological Association have just paid a visit to a quarry at Greengates, near 
Apperley Bridge, which had been reported by Mr. Wm.
Thornton, of Calverley, as 
deserving of some attention.
This quarry is near the Old Lane, and a little west of 
the ravine which the Carr Beck has cut for itself through the shales and sandstones 
of the Lower Coal Measures.
The Rough Rock (the uppermost bed of the Millstone 
Grit series) is here quarried, and the stone is very massive and of a good character.
It is capped by about six feet of very stiff and tough yellow Boulder Clay, full of 
rounded and sub-angular blocks of gannister and other local sandstones, with frag- 
ments of coal and shale interspersed here and there.
These vary in diameter from 
a few inches to about two feet.
Many of these blocks, particularly the gannister, 
show fine examples of glacial strice.
This Boulder Clay had been removed in order 
that the underlying stone might be quarried, and the bared surface of the Rough 
Rock presented most strikingly that characteristic ice- worn feature of being rounded, 
polished, and engraved with well-defined stride and groovings.
A finer moutonneed 
surface is not often seen.
The stride run in a N.W. and S.E. direction, showing 
clearly the line of travel of the Airedale glacier.
The quarry is about 300 ft.
above 
sea-level, and immediately to the south is some rising ground, which would impede 
the course of the glacier, and render its pressure and grinding j'jower greater at this 
spot.
This fine evidence of glacial erosion possesses additional value from the fact 
that we l)elieve it is the furthest point down the valley of the Aire where such an 
observation has been noted and recorded, and great credit is due to Mr. Thornton 
for reporting the same.— S.
A. Adamson, 22nd September, 188S.
Oct. 1888.
29S 
DEILEPHILA GALII IN 1888.
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S..
F.E.S..
Huddersficld ; Aitthor of the List of YorksJiirc LfJ>ido*>tc7-a , etc.
It is satisfactory to note the occurrences of DeilepJiila galii in 
Yorkshire this season, specimens being already recorded from Scar- 
borough, Harrogate, and Bradford.
The species seems this year to 
have been scattered pretty well over Britain, though more imagines 
appear to have been taken on the Kent coast than anywhere else.
After the advent of the moths in July, it was natural that the larva?
should be eagerly looked for as soon as they were big enough to be 
readily seen, and as was anticipated they have already been taken in 
some numbers.
On August 30th and 31st, I had the pleasure of 
taking twelve on Galium growing on the shingle near Deal, and one 
in St. Margaret's Bay, and my friend, Mr. W.
H. Tugwell, who was 
with me, and to whom I was indebted for the information that a 
number of the moths had been taken there several weeks previously, 
secured ten more, making twenty-three between us.
They varied 
much in size, some being quite small, others apparently almost full- 
grown.
Unfortunately, I had to return to Huddersfield early next 
morning, or should no doubt have taken more.
Two of mine have 
•gone down." and except one, the remaining eleven appear to be 
doing well, so that next summer I hope to breed a nice series of this 
beautiful moth.
Since my return home I have been informed of the 
capture of about 400 larvce near Deal by several collectors together.
But not only on the south-east coast, but also on the opposite coast 
and much furtlier north has searchins; been rewarded with success.
As several moths had been taken near Liverpool, the Lancashire and 
Cheshire entomologists were eager in anticipation of again seeing the 
large spotted larva?
on the Wallasey sand-hills, where they were taken 
in abundance in 1S70, but I believe had never been seen there since.
One collector, I am told on good authority, has already secured 150 
larva?
there, and two others have also taken it in some numbers.
Probably more ^"^7/// larvae will be taken this year than ever were 
found in any previous season in Britain.
Notwithstanding the 
numbers taken, on the Kent coast at any rate, from the extent and 
nature of the ground, only a very small proportion of the larv:s which 
must be there, can possibly be found, and yet, why, as is most likely, 
hardly a moth will be seen at large in Britain next summer ; and still 
further, why they are here this year, and where they have come from, 
are enigmas I will leave for others to try and explain.
Sept cm ber 15///, i S S S .
Naturalist, 
2 99 
ADDITIONAL LOCALITIES 
FOR THE VASCULAR PLANTS OF THE 
WEST RIDING FLORA.
WILLIAM WEST, F.L.S., 
Lectitrcr in Bota7iy a7id Materia Medica at the Bradfo7-d Technical College.
In glancing through the pages of this welcome book, it struck me 
that several other localities for some of the more uncommon plants 
might be cited with advantage.
Ranunculus auricomus I- is hardly an uncommon plant.
I mention it simply with regard to my experience of the form 
depauperata^ which I generally find to be almost the sole form 
on our shady banks in the Mid-Aire district, as about Gilstead 
and Cottingley, while the form with large petals is the one I 
have noticed chiefly on ' barren calcareous soil,' as in Gordale.
Ficaria verna Huds.
Var. incumbens F.
Schultz.
' If not a 
hybrid with Caltha' Is it possible for a plant of the Ranunculece 
to hybridise with one of the Helleborece % 
Meconopsis cambrica Vig. occurs between BeU Busk and Airton 
in the Aire drainage, but within a stone's throw of a farm-house.
Corydalis claviculata DC.
is abundant west of Doncaster.
Draba muralis L.
was still frequent in Upper Wharfed ale in 1887.
Silene noctiflora L.
Several plants occurred in waste ground 
near Frizinghall in 1886.
Cerastium glomeratum Thuill.
I have seen fine plants at 
Bingley, and I would go beyond the author's assertion, ' not one- 
tenth as abundant as C.
triviale^ and say ' not one-hundredth.' 
Claytonia perfoliata Don. is frequent as a weed.
I have it from 
Ilkley and Bramham.
Hypericum dubium Leers, is frequent E.
of Doncaster.
Hypericum elodes L.
I have from Grassington, collected by 
Wm. Nuttall.
Althaea hirsuta L.
This has occurred as a casual this year at 
Frizinghall.
Geranium sylvaticum L.
Aire.
In plenty a few miles N.
of 
Skipton.
Airton to Hanlith.
Euonymus europaeus L.
This occurs at a good elevation at 
Hawkswick, and flowers abundantly.
Rhamnus catharticus L.
The range of this is given up to 
750 ft.; it occurs in a well-grown condition at about 1,100 ft., 
between Malham Cove and the Tarn.
Oct. 1888.
300 WEST : LOCALITIES FOR WEST RIDING PLANTS.
Ornithopus perpusillus L.
This is fine in old quarries E.
of 
Doncaster.
Poterium sanguisorba L.
is one of the commonest plants on 
Hawkswick Ciouder, Wharfe drainage.
It is also common from 
Skipton to Malham.
Alchemilla alpina L.
descends below i,ooo ft.
at Cautley Spout ; 
certainly to 800 ft.
Potentilla procumbens Sibth.
I gathered fine specimens of this 
at Greenfield, in August 1880.
Comarum palustre L.
is plentiful in Malham Tarn Bog.
Geum intermedium Ehrh.
is common in great variety between 
Bell Busk and Airton.
I have gathered it also in Heaton 
woods.
Geum rivale L.
is fairly abundant about Esholt, quite away from 
the river.
Dryas OCtopetala L.
This was as abundant as ever in its old 
station in 1887 ; my sons and I saw hundreds of flowers.
Ly thrum salicaria L.
I have seen specimens of this from Helks 
Wood, Ingleton, gathered by Messrs.
Soppitt and Butterfield.
Epilobium roseum Schreb.
I gathered several fine plants of this 
a few years ago at Frizinghall, in waste ground.
Epilobium tetragonum L., mentioned (and properly bracketed) 
from Bingley, was given under the collective name of Bentham's 
Flora ; the plant was E.
obscurum Schreb.
Epilobium alsinifolium Vill.
comes down to about 800 ft.
at 
Cautley Spout.
Myriophyllum spicatum L.
I have seen very fine plants of this 
species in the pools at Goole.
Myriophyllum alterniflorum DC.
This is abundant in Austwick 
Beck above Wharfe, between Moughton Fell and Ingleborough, 
as well as in Dale Beck, towards Chapel-le-Dale.
Hippuris vulgaris L.
This plant is in plenty in the ditches of 
^Malham Tarn Bog, at 1,250 ft.
I noticed it in the stream 
between Hambleton and Bishop's Wood, and mentioned its 
occurrence on the occasion of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union 
meeting there in 1878.
Sedum villosum L.
occurs on shales on ascending Baugh Fell 
from Hawes Junction.
Saxifraga hypnoides L.
This occurs plentifully at about the 
highest elevation given on the flat top of Ingleborough, and 
Naturalist, 
WEST : LOCALITIES FOR WEST RIDING PLANTS.
301 
200 ft.
at least lower than ' 900 ft.' in several places between 
Kilnsey and Arncliffe.
It occurs at a lower elevation still below 
Janet's Cove, in Gordale.
Parnassia palustris L.
' Adel Bog— perhaps now gone.' It is 
there yet (1888).
(Enanthe phellandrium Lam. This grows luxuriantly between 
Hambleton and Bishop's Wood.
Chaerophyllum anthriscus Lam. is common about Baildon.
Viscum album L.
This grew in a dwarfed state within the present 
borough of Bradford forty years ago, so an old resident informed 
me, who also gave detailed particulars.
Galium mollugo L.
occurs near Sedbergh.
Galium uliginosum L.
I have gathered this in Heaton woods.
It has since been gathered near Keighley by several members of 
the Bradford Naturalists' Society.
Carduus nutans L.
This occurs between Kilnsey and Grassington, 
where it can be seen in the same view with the more abundant 
C. heterophyllus L.
Anthemis arvensis L.
Occurs plentifully in corn-fields near 
Hems worth.
Gnaphalium dioicum L.
is frequent on the top of Gordale and 
Hawkswick Clouder.
Petasites hybrida Hook, is abundant from Shipley to Bingleyalso.
Leontodon hirtus L.
I have gathered this at Eldwick at 
800 ft.; this is 500 ft.
higher than the upward limit given.
It 
grows with Ge?itiana ainarella L., Limim caiharticiun L., 
Euphrasia officinalis L., and other xerophilous plants.
Lactuca virosa L.
This is not mentioned for the Don district.
I have collected it on walls at Womersley.
Jasione montana L.
This was shown to me at Wilsden by 
Mr. Butterfield, in fair quantity.
Vaccinium oxycoccos L.
In several places on Baildon Moor.
Menyanthes trifoliata L.
'Adel Bog — now gone.' It is still 
there (1888).
Myosotis collina Hoffm.
is abundant about Grassington.
Polygonum amphibium L.
is an uncommon plant about Brad- 
ford ; it occurs in the canal below Shipley and at Arthington.
Polygonum viviparum L.
I have gathered in the upper part of 
Gordale, and Mr. Pawson brought me some fine specimens 
from Penyghent.
Oct. 1888.
u 
302 WEST : LOCALITIES FOR WEST RIDING PLANTS.
Sparganium simplex Huds.
is common both in the river and 
canal about Saltaire and Shipley.
Lemna g"ibba L.
I found abundantly in a pond on Rawcliffe 
Common.
Orchis UStulata L.
I have seen from Kettlewell and with Ophrys 
viiiscifera Huds.
at Collingham.
Luzula pilosa Willd.
is abundant in the woods from Keighley to 
Apperley.
Juncus obtusiflorus Ehrh.
occurs abundantly between Church 
Fenton and Towton.
Scirpus pauciflorus Lightf.
I have gathered near the edge of 
Malham Tarn.
Scirpus setaceus L.
occurs plentifully in the Hebden valley.
Carex sylvatica Huds.
is hardly ' infrequent,' but abundant about 
Shiple}^, Keighley, and Hawksworth.
Melica nutans L.
is an abundant plant in the woods at Grassington.
Sclerochloa rigida Link.
I have gathered on walls between 
Giggleswick and Austwick.
Brachypodium sylvaticum R.
& S.
is common in Mid-Airedale.
Hordeum pratense Huds.
This I have seen in some quantity in 
meadows near Kildwick.
I afterwards saw it in ' Gill Grange," 
not knowing at the time that this was another name for Holden 
Gill.
When I was told that these localities were synonymous, 
I remembered that Mr. J.
Eastwood had previously reported to 
me that he had seen this grass in Holden Gill.
The station in 
the Gill will extend its upward range at least 300 ft.
Asplenium adiantum-nigrum L.
is certainly 'rare' in W.
York ; 
I have gathered it between Sedbergh and Cautley Spout.
Ceterach officinarum Willd.
I had the pain of seeing a fine 
tuft of this in a tree-pot exultingly shown to me by a person 
who had got it on a hill near Settle.
Aspidium angulare Willd.
My friend Mr. Nuttall has this from 
Burley-in-Wharfedale.
Nephrodium oreopteris Desv.
is not 'rare in Airedale,' but 
common in sub-alpine glens like those of Baildon, Keighley, 
and Hawksworth.
Equisetum hyemale L.
I have gathered this about a mile 
below Shipley, so sparingly that I think it had been washed 
down from higher up the vale.
[Chara vulgaris L.
(not a vascular plant) is also common above 
Clapham village ; also at Kilnsey.] 
Naturalist, 
303 
NOTES ON THE WEST YORKSHIRE FLORA.
F. ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.S.Eng.
; L.R.C.P.Lond.
; 
A^ithor of the ' Flora 0/ West Yorkshire' ; Presideiit of the Botanical Section of the 
Yorkshire Naturalists Ufiio9c; etc.
The Rev. W.
A. Shuffrey, M.A., of Arncliffe, kindly furnishes 
me with some information and emendation additional to my 
West Yorkshire Flora, which I think ought to be printed.
The 
concluding note anent the Iris made by Miss M.
Morton, and those 
with Mr. Friend's name appended, are added-in here for convenience 
sake.
The serial numbers within parentheses following the names 
agree with those in the West Yorkshire Flora.
Ranunculus hirsutus Curt.
(Flora, No. 22, p.
122).
A single 
specimen in fruit on hills behind Sedbergh, Oct. 1887 ; Hilderic 
Friend.
If no misnomer, then it must have been a casual plant 
brought with hay-seed ; it cannot be indigenous on those inland hills.
I have not examined the s^^ecimen.
Cerastium glomeratum Th.
(Flora, No. 124, p.
164).
Shire- 
oaks and Anston ; Hilderic Friend.
Record for T.
district.
Rhamnus catharticus L.
(Flora, No. 183, p.
186).
Seen by 
me as high up as 1,100 ft.
in Arncliffe Woods; W.
A. Shuffrey.
So have I on Hawbank, near Carperby, out of the riding.
An un- 
published station, and the nearest spot to Leeds in which it can be 
found is 'the limehills ' beyond Roundhay : I noted two or three 
non-fruiting bushes there lately.
Ononis arvensis Auct.
(Flora, No. 194, p.
190).
In Arncliffe, 
as high as 900 ft.; W.
A. Shuffrey.
Saxifraga granulata L.
(Flora, No. 352, p.
249).
Field near 
to Burnsall Rectory, and m Arncliffe churchyard ; W.
A. Shuffrey.
New records for W.
district.
iEgopodium podagraria L.
(Flora, No. 363, p.
254).
At 
Buckden, and near Litton at 800 ft.
; W.
A. Shiffrey.
Scabiosa arvensis L.
(Flora, No. 430, p.
277).
At 800 ft.
near Litton ; W.
A. Slmffrey.
Senecio saracenicus L.
(Flora, No. 475, p.
293).
One station 
(to be kept secret) in Upper Wharfedale, at about 700 ft.; W.
A. 
Shuffrey.
No need to fear the eradication of such a tenacious-lived 
plant as this : most certainly an introduction to Wharfedale (for which 
district it is additional) ; this particular station may be the sequel 
of roots washed from some garden adjoining a beck by a flood.
Pyrola rotundifolia (vera) (No. 540A).
Wooded bank sloping 
to Wharfe at Outershaw {T.
B. Woodd) !
New to West Riding Flora.
See record in September number of this journal, p.
267.
Oct. 1888.
304 
LEES : WEST YORKSHIRE FLORA.
Hieracium Friesii Hartm.
(Flora, No. 517, pp.
309-10).
Ingleborough (coll.
F. A.
Lees) ; F.
J. If anbury in Journ.
Bot., 
1888, xxvi, 205.
Mr. Hanbury has identified some plant I sent 
to him, under another name (probably as gothician or broad- 
leaved trideiitatwn)^ as being Hartmann's friesii^ about which 1 
know no more than that Nyman in his Conspectus places the name 
twelfth in his arrangement, in the Umbellata group, as a synonym of 
H. rigidiim Htn. The Ingleborough and Settle scars, carefully 
reinvestigated by patient observers resident in their vicinity, would 
doubtless add much to our knowledge of the precise names, accord- 
ing to the modern lights, of the species occurring there, and their 
range of variation.
Information has reached me of new localities 
for both H.
aiigliaim and H.
gibsoni on the Settle hills, whilst 
Gibson's maculate-leaved Hawkweed has turned up on Penhill, 
Witton, and other spots in Upper Wensleydale (Percival, spns.
!), and 
has been known to me in Summer Lodge Gill near Gunnerside in 
Swaledale for a couple of years ; and in the present transition state 
of our hawkvveed-knowledge any species is worth the trouble of 
carefully gathering and preserving, with full notes, made in the field, 
of colour of styles, phyllary and peduncle character, etc., however 
' common ' the collector may himself imagine it to be.
Lamium album L.
(Flora, No. 643, p.
363).
Mr. W.
A. 
Shuffrey avers this to grow near Hesleden (Heseltine) at 900 ft.
elevation.
This will be, I think, quite the highest point to which it 
ascends, naturally, in Yorkshire.
I do not mean to say it would not 
exist on the Malham Tarn plateau at 1,200 ft., if put there, but it 
seems a species that thins out very rapidly as the warm sheltered 
hedge-banks of the lowlands are left behind.
Chenopodium bonus-henricus L.
(Flora, No. 691, p.
385).
Grows plentifully at Halton Gill, 1,000 ft.; W.
A. Shuffrey.
Surely 
planted, or out-thrown from farm garden, there !
Erythraea centaurium Pers.
(No. 547).
At quite 800 ft.
in 
Hawkswick Wood ; W.
A. Shuffrey.
Yes, the 600 ft.
limit given in 
Flora (p.
324) was a slip for 900 ft.
I have a note, I find, of having 
seen it myself on Arncliffe or Hawkswick 'clouder,' along with 
Poteriuin sangnisorba, Gymnadenia conopsea, etc., at fully 1,000 ft., 
i.e., clearly into the super-agrarian zone.
Ophrys muscifera Huds.
(Flora, No. 809, p.
430).
Near 
Arncliffe, at 800 ft.
; W.
A. Shuffrey.
Yes, both this and the 
Narcissus mentioned below might be regarded as going quite up to 
the limit of the mid-agrarian zone in our Yorkshire latitude, in other- 
wise suitable spots, of course.
Naturalist, 
LEES : WEST YORKSHIRE FLORA.
Epipactis palustris Crantz.
(Flora, No. 817, p.
434).
A fresh 
specimen sent August i6th by Mr. R.
E. Leach, from Ingleton — 
' Both sides Beesley's Woods ' — to show it still exists in that neigh- 
bourhood.
Narcissus pseudo-narcissus L.
(Flora, No. 823, p.
438).
Plentifully at about 900 ft.
near Arnclifife ; JV.
A. Shuffrey.
This 
doubles our previous information as to its range.
Colchicum autumnale L.
(Flora, No. 841, p.
448).
At 800 ft.
near Arncliffe ; W.
A. Shuffrey.
This is astonishingly high, though 
clearly well within the upper limit of middle zone.
Probably it 
nowhere in England runs up higher, or as high, finding here in 
Wharfedale-head the lime-soiled pasture and climatic protection it 
needs, coexisting conditions which show it not to be a 'cold-fearer' 
if in other respects a ' weak ' species.
Asplenium adiantum-nigrum L.
(Flora, No. 1006, p.
504).
An untypical non-fruiting frond sent from the Ingleton neighbourhood 
by Mr. R.
E. Leach, with somewhat the facies of robust Asplenium 
pseudo-germanicujji Milde, turns out on inquiry to have been gathered 
in Lancashire^ outside our Riding limit, on the road between Ingleton 
and Kirkby Lonsdale.
[I may here say that the first three miles of 
this road, going from Ingleton, is in West Yorkshire, the next three 
miles crosses that tongue of Lancashire which, here wedged in, forms 
Leek Fell; and the last mile of the highway is in Westmorland.] 
Ceierach officinaruni^ sent at the same time, is in the same case : it 
was from a spot within Lancashire bounds ; whilst five other species — 
Seduni tekphiujn, Daphne mezereon, Epipactis latifolia^ Eriophoruni 
latifolium^ and Nephrodiuni aculeatiun var.
lonchitidioides — were all 
from Ingleton.
Aspidium lonchitis Sw. A fresh specimen-frond just 
beginning to fruit, has been sent me by Mr. R.
E. Leach (since the 
above lines were written).
It was got off a scar or fell 'near Feizor 
{not Moughton) on the right going from Austwick east, and the hill 
faces Ellersbridge," which would be Oxenber Wood Scar, the eleva- 
tion of which is under 1,000 ft.
This seems a very low station — I 
might write suspiciously low — but the plant is right.
Ophioglossum vulgatum L.
(Flora, No. 1028, p.
515).
Found as high as 1,100 ft.
near Litton; W.
A. Shuffrey.
A con- 
siderable extension of its West Yorkshire range : INIr. Baker gives its 
upward limit for North Yorkshire at 150 yds., i.e., 450 ft.
I have 
seen it at 850 ft.
at Hawes.
Botrychium lunaria Sw.
(Flora, No. 1029, p.
516).
This 
grows near Arncliffe ; W.
A. Shuffrey.
An addition for the Wharfe 
Oct. 1888.
3o6 
NOTES — BOTANY.
river-basin district.
I did not doubt its growing therein, but never 
having seen it myself, and there being no record in print, I did not 
venture to assume anything not proven.
Iris fcEtidissima L.
(No. 82 ib).
Not extinct, as stated by me 
in Flora (p.
437).
Miss M.
Morton gathered it in Brunton's old 
station — the bank, very near the river Yore, at the back of the house 
known as Little Nunwick — or rather a woman brought that lady 
some plants for her garden, and told her w^here they grew, which led 
to Miss iMorton getting some flowers for herself.
In this connexion, with the double view of pointing a moral as 
well as reciting a significant tale, I may here say — with regard to 
my quotation from Slater's Flora of the Ripon neighbourhood 
(Flora W.Y., p.
437) to the effect that Miss Morton had sought the 
Iris at Little Nunwick for years in vain — that Miss Morton informs 
me she gave Mr. Slater a list of the Flora thereabouts, which he 
thought was Miss Morton's own^ whereas that lady admittedly copied 
it from an old History of Rip07i.
This is a fair example of how 
misconceptions undesignedly lead to false statements, for want of that 
directness and caution which should insist on candid answers to 
plain questions.
Reticence and reservation, where records of fact 
are to be made, should be above all things swept away and eschewed.
In this matter of Iris extinction I quoted positive, unquaUfied words 
from what seemed to be a reliable source, and two years afterwards 
I am shown to be a repeater of absolute error !
Verbtun sapienti.
NO TES—B OTA NY.
The Hound's -Tongue at Skipton-in-Craven.
— I had the pleasure of 
gathering last week, on one of the old rubbish-heaps in the Hawbank Quarry, 
the Cynoi^lossjim officinale.
It was discovered there a few days previously by 
Mr. L.
Rotheray, of Skipton.
There is only one plant ; much eaten off by sheep.
No record appears in Mr. Lees' ' West Yorkshire Flora ' for the Aire river-basin, 
for which area, therefore, it is an addition.
I also noted Gentiana ama7-ella (very 
common all over the old spoil-heaps and workings about the quarrj-), and likewise 
the Parsley Piert {AlcJieniilla a7"oe7isis).
Skipton is not given for the two latter 
in the P'lora above-named, but Mr. Lees has seen specimens.
— T.
W. Edmondson, 
September 13th, 1888.
Spiraea filipendula in South-East Yorkshire.
— In the botanical report of 
the Market Weighton excursion there is added after Spircva filipendula ' new to 
the East Riding.' This remark was certainly not in my manuscript, for I 
gathered the plant forty years ago near Flamborough, on the road-side at Danes- 
dyke, and we have also a locality for it about two miles from Malton, on the 
Settrington road, which is also in the East Riding, and I gathered it in the latter 
locality this summer, where it has been known to local botanists for many years.
I presume the remark has got in through some printer's error, and think it should 
be corrected in next month's number.
The report being put as mine, it is 
probable some botanists wdll call attention to it, and I could hardly have 
described it as new to the East Riding when I have known it so long.
—   
Matthew B.
Slater, Malton, September i6th, 1888.
Naturalist.
WHITWELL : NOTES ON SETTLE PLANTS.
Notes on Settle Plants.
— Yorkshire botanists must, many of them, 
have read Mr. Craig-Christie's notes {Natttralist, August 1888, p.
225) with 
surprise, and particularly that throwing doubt upon the presence of the Holly Fern 
near Settle.
The name of the late Mr. John Tatham, of Settle, has long been 
held, by competent judges, to be an amply sufficient guarantee for any record to 
which it is attached, and I am sorry that Mr, Craig-Christie should have so 
expressed himself as to seem to throw doubt upon his accuracy in identifying 
Aspidiu?n lonchitis Sw., and also upon that of the careful author of the ' Flora 
of West Yorkshire,' merely because a tyro in his first year usually blunders over 
var.
lonchitidioides oiA.
aciileatnm.
As a matter of fact, I have in my possession four fronds of A.
lo)ichitis, given 
to me twenty years ago by my late friend, Mr. Silvanus Thompson, as having been 
collected at Settle by his father-in-law, Mr. Tatham, and to make assurance 
doubly sure, these have been submitted to Mr. F.
A. Lees ; also, Mr. John 
Tatham's own herbarium contains an 1844 specimen marked 'Attermire,' and 
another, dated 1845, from ' Settle Scars.' In Mr. Silvanus Thompson's collection 
is one from ' Attermire Scars,' collected July loth, 1847 ' > Mrs, Silvanus Thompson 
recollects gathering the species, which then grew in some abundance on Attermire,.
with her father, Mr. Tatham, more than forty years ago.
Mr. Wilson, gardener 
at Feizor, frequently gathered A.
lonchitis on Moughton Scars between 1840 and 
1883 ; his grandson, Mr. Robert Wilson of Settle, obtained it there in 1883, and 
on Attermire in 1882.
Dr. Buck, of Settle, has fronds gathered on Attermire by 
the late Mr. Joseph Jackson during the period 1870-5 ; and Mr. Herbert Sturdy, 
of Settle, states that he has collected the fern on Attermire and other hills above 
Settle, in most years between 1874 and 1887.
Dr. Silvanus Phillips Thompson, 
the well-known principal of the Technical College, personally obtained true 
A. lonchitis on Moughton Fell a few years ago ; he also remembers his father and 
grandfather (Mr. Tatham) bringing specimens home from Attermire.
Other 
evidence might be cited, but I will only add that a fresh frond of A.
lonchitis lies 
before me, just received from the Misses Thompson, which is from a root obtained on 
Moughton Scar a year or so ago, by Mr, Timothy Green, a Settle gardener.
The 
fern has, however, become very rare, through the rapacity of collectors for sale.
Then we have the personal evidence of Mr, F.
A. Lees, who — as shown in the 
'Flora' — met with a few plants at Linn Gill, Ribblehead (also a locality fairly 
within the Settle district), in 1879.
Surely he does not need the tyro's caution 
against lobattivi and similar forms !
I have also just learned that Mr. Lees has received within the last month, 
from Mr. R.
E. Leach, M.A., of Beccles, a newly-gathered frond, just beginnings 
to show fruit, only 4 in.
long by f-in.
broad, of true A.
lonchitis, obtained by 
that gentleman himself on a scar or fell near Feizor {not Moughton Scar).
— 
Nephrodiiini cemnhim Baker.
No specimens of this fern are found in Herb, 
Tatham or Thompson.
As was already remarked in the ''Flora,' this fact is- 
suggestive of error.
But, on the other hand, Mr. Newman distinctly names Settle 
as a locality for N.
(e)mihwt {recurviim) in his ' British Ferns.' And Mr. J.
G. 
Baker, F.R.S.,who was intimately acquainted with the Tatham-Thompson family,, 
without any expression of misgiving, in ' Supplement Flora of Yorkshire ' (1854),.
p. 142, quotes Mr. Newman's name in conjunction with Mr. Tatham's as having; 
certified a record for 'hills about Settle.' That accurate cryptogamist, Dr, B, 
Carrington, in his and Prof, Miall's 'West Riding Flora' of 1862, gives an 
additional confirmatory record — 'Settle,' 
Thalictrum alpiniini L, Negative evidence has usually little weight against a 
positive statement, but I may say that in the course of various wanderings over the 
Settle hills (and Penyghent) in search oi Hieracia and other plants, I met with nO' 
trace of this.
Were I to see it there, my first thought would be — who planted it?
Sir J, D.
Hooker (' Student's Flora,' ed, iii, p.
2) gives for habitat ' alpine and 
sub-alpine bogs.' Mr. Lees tells me that he has collected T.
a/pinia/i in North 
Yorkshire (Cronkley Fell), Westmorland ( Helvellyn), and Durham (Widdy Bank), 
and in each case it grew in peaty wet ground, best described as boggy, though it was 
most frequent by the stony rillets on Widdy Bank.
Surely, therefore, it would be 
most natural to look for the plant in similar places in West Yorkshire.
May I suggest 
that possibly dwarfed examples of T.
win us var.
montanuin, growing on vSettle Crags, 
have simulated luxuriant Scottish forms of alpimon.
— William \Vhit\vell.
; 
Oct. 1888.
3o8 
THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION AT BATH.
Rev. E.
p. KNUBLEY, M.A., M.B.O.U., 
Rector of Staveley ; Delegate represc7iti)ig tJie Yorkshire Naturalists Ujiion on the 
General Committee of the Association.
To the Executive Council of the Yorkshire Naturalists Union.
Gentlemen, — Your delegate has to report that the fifty-eighth 
meeting of the British Association commenced at Bath, under the 
presidency of Sir Frederick Bramwell, D.C.L., F.R.S., M.Inst.C.E., 
on Wednesday, September 5 th, 1888.
Your delegate was elected to serve on the Committees of the 
Geological and Biological Sections.
The Council nominated Dr. John Evans, Treasurer R.S., chair- 
man ; Mr. W.
Whittaker, F.R.S., vice-chairman ; and Prof.
R. 
Meldola, F.R.S., secretary to the Conference of Delegates of Corres- 
ponding Societies for the Bath meeting.
The Conference met on 
Thursday, September 6th, and again on Tuesday, September nth.
Most of the delegates also attended a dinner on the former day, 
for which arrangements had been made by the secretary.
At the first meeting the Report of the Corresponding Societies 
Committee was presented.
It showed that thirty-two delegates were 
Tiominated for the Manchester meeting.
The following matters were 
referred to as having engaged the attention of various committees 
of the Association during the past year.
Prehistoric Remains Committee.
— This is a committee formed 
for the purpose of ascertaining and recording the localities in the 
British Islands in which evidences of the existence of prehistoric 
inhabitants of the country are found.
Mr. J.
W. Davis, secretary, 
stated that this committee had been carrying on its work during the 
past year.
Two reports had been obtained relating to the bronze 
-implements of the East and West Ridings of Yorkshire, and several 
others had been promised.
Preservation of Stonehenge.
— Ancient Monuments Act.
—It was pointed out that the local societies could do good service in 
inducing the proprietors of prehistoric remains to communicate with 
General Pitt -Rivers, the Inspector of Ancient Monuments, with 
the object of placing these remains under Government protection.
Sir John Lubbock explained what Parliament had done in the 
matter, and laid his own views before the committee.
Provincial Museums Committee.
— Mr. F.
T. Mott stated that 
this committee had been engaged during the past year in collect- 
Naturalist, 
KNUELEY : THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION.
3^9 
ing particulars respecting museums other than those in London.
Considerable assistance had been given by the secretaries of many 
of the local societies.
Earth - Tremors Committee.
— This is a committee for the 
purpose of considering the advisability and possibility of establishing 
in other parts of the country observations upon the prevalence of 
earth-tremors, similar to those now being made in Durham in con- 
nection with coal-mine explosions.
Prof.
Lebour, the secretary, said 
that the corresponding societies, if they would interest themselves in 
the matter, might be the means of establishing a great network of 
seismoscopes with a few seismographs in suitable localities, and 
results of value would by this means Ije in all probability obtained.
A sufficiently good seismoscope might be had for about £^2, a seismo- 
graph for ^14 to ^15, and the cost of keeping them in order would 
not be great.
He hoped the delegates present would help in 
establishing such a network of observing stations all over the 
country, and he would be happy to communicate with anyone 
interested in the subject.
Prof.
Ewing said that it certainly seemed to him that no bodies 
could more appropriately undertake that work than the local societies 
represented at the Conference acting in conjunction with a committee 
of the Association.
From recent observations it appeared probable 
that tremors would be found wherever they were tested for with 
sufficient delicacy, so that a society undertaking the search was not 
likely to be disappointed.
Temperature Variation in Lakes, Rivers, and Estuaries.
— 
This committee, of which Mr. John Murray is the secretary, is 
appointed to arrange for an investigation of the seasonal variations 
of temperature in lakes, rivers, and estuaries in various parts of the 
United Kingdom, in co-operation with the local societies represented 
at the Association.
Dr. H.
R. ^Lll proposed that the Societies situated in the neigh- 
bourhood of rivers and estuaries, which were willing to undertake 
this work, should appoint some member to observe the temperature 
daily or weekly, as the case might be, in accordance with the rules 
to be drawn up by the committee.
r^Ir. T- W.
Davis raised the question whether it would be of use to 
extend the observations to the streams in manufacturing districts.
He 
also asked what the committee proposed to consider an estuary.
Dr. Mill, in reply, said that the temperature of streams in manu- 
facturing districts should certainly be ascertained in as many cases as 
possible, in order to find whether the increase of temperature of a 
river passing through a manufacturing town is in any sense permanent.
Oct. 1888.
KNUBLEY : THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION.
The term ' estuary " should, in his opinion, be used as meaning all parts 
of a tidal river between the upper limit of the tide and the open sea.
The Underground Water Committee requires information as 
to the depth of wells, the sections passed through, the height at which 
the water stands before and after pumping, daily records of the 
height and chemical analyses of the waters.
The Erratic Blocks Committee wants information as to the 
position, size, and character of boulders of foreign origin that may 
occur in drift-covered areas, and is anxious that the position of the 
same should be noted on the one-inch map of the Ordnance Survey, 
with a view to taking steps for their preservation.
It was mentioned 
that Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., had rendered valuable assistance 
to this committee on behalf of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
The Sea Coasts Erosion Committee — With reference to the 
work of this committee, Mr. Topley stated that but little assistance 
had as yet been received from the local Societies, those in maritime 
counties might greatly assist the committee by local observations as 
to present changes, and by researches as to past conditions of the 
coast.
Life- histories of Plants.
— Prof Bayley Balfour forwarded a 
communication in which he stated that the discovery and description 
of new forms, and the distribution of our indigenous plants is, in 
Botany, the line upon which most of the energies of local societies 
are principally spent, whilst habit, construction, and generally the 
features of life-history of plants come in for attention in quite a 
secondary way.
This arose, he thought, in great part from the 
prevalent notion that the facts of the life-history of our common 
plants are all well known, and that there was little, if anything, more 
to find out about them.
This was an erroneous idea.
He thought 
that 2;ood results would follow if the members of their societies were 
to Study the life-histories of indigenous plants in their entirety, i.e.^ 
from the stage of embryo in the seed up to the production of fruit 
and seed again.
Anyone who would take up this line of study would 
assuredly derive great pleasure from it, and would be able to add a 
great deal to the sum of our knowledge of plant-life.
Such work 
could be well combined with the more usual systematic work, it 
could be easily accomplished, and it would be found to give much 
additional interest to the study of British Botany.
Status of the Conference of Delegates.
— At the Manchester 
meeting of the Association an important resolution was framed, at the 
instigation of Sir Douglas Galton, with the object of conferring addi- 
tional powers upon the Conference.
According to the former rules, the 
delegates had no power of submitting resolutions or recommendations 
Naturalist, 
KXUBLEY : THE BRITISH ASSOCIATIOX.
to the Committee of Recommendations, but tlie resolution referred 
to is calculated to give them the necessary power, and thus to put the 
Conference on the same footing as the Sectional Committees.
The 
resolution, which is now a rule of the Association, is as follows : ' That 
the Conference of Delegates of Corresponding Societies be empowered 
to send recommendations to the Committee of Recommendations for 
their consideration, and for report to the General Committee.' 
The Leeds Geological Association has been enrolled for the 
first time as a corresponding society.
At the second sitting of the Conference, in addition to the 
matters already alluded to, the following subjects were brought 
before the delegates : — 
Geological Photography.
— The value of collecting photo- 
graphs of geological strata was pointed out, especially of those 
which were not likely to be permanent, and depositing them m 
local museums, where they could be consulted.
DiSAPPEARAX'CE OF LocAL Plaxts.
— Prof.
Hillhousc gave some 
account of the work of the committee which was appointed for the 
purpose of collecting information as to the disappearance of native 
plants from their local habitats.
He stated that, in order that the 
work might be done thoroughly, the committee had hitherto con- 
fined their work to Scotland.
He thought that local societies might 
render valuable assistance.
It was stated that it would add to the value of the Annual 
Report if many more local societies which published reports, etc., 
were affiliated as Corresponding Societies, in order that the titles of 
the papers which they published might appear in the index.
Ixterxatioxal Geological Coxgress.
— Owing to the impend- 
ing meeting of this Congress, a large number of foreign visitors 
attended the Geological Section.
The great value of the official 
reports of the meeting and excursions was urged upon the delegates.
It was stated that the meetings of the Congress would be held at 
Burlington Gardens between the 17th and 22nd of September.
Six 
excursions were arranged to take place in the week after the 
meeting.
Two of these have a direct bearing upon the geology of 
the county, for the first was arranged to embrace a survey of the 
Yorkshire coast from Speeton to Saltburn, and the second was 
directed to an examination of the rocks in the Craven district.
The following papers, which are of interest to Yorkshire naturalists, 
were read in their respective sections : — 
Dr. H.
W. Crosskey.
— Sixteenth Report of the Erratic Blocks 
Committee, which included a great number of reports sent up by 
the Boulder Committee of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
Oct. 1888.
312 
GOODYERA REPFNS IN S.E. YORKSHIRE.
James Spencer.
— On the occurrence of a boulder of Granitoid 
Gneiss or Gneissoid Granite, in the Halifax Hard Bed Coal.
G. W.
Lamflugh.
— Report on an Ancient Sea Beach near 
Bridlington.
Prof.
W. C.
Williamson.
— Report on the Flora of the Carbon- 
iferous Rocks of Lancashire and West Yorkshire.
Prof.
Newton.
— On the Irruption of Syrrhaptes paradoxus.
In 
the course of his remarks, Prof Newton stated that he had evidence 
that Pallas' Sand-Grouse had nested this year in the neighbourhood of 
Beverley.
Prof.
Newton.
— Report of the Committee on Migration of 
Birds.
The Report stated that the inquiry had been continued for 
nine years, and that an immense number of facts had been collected 
and brought together in the Annual Reports in connection with the 
seasonal movements of birds on the British coasts.
They now 
wished to utilize, digest, and classify the mass of information at their 
disposal.
The committee had much pleasure in stating that one of 
their number, Mr. William Eagle Clarke, of the Museum of Science 
and Art in Edinburgh, had undertaken the laborious task of thus 
reducing the mass of observations collected.
At a subsequent 
meeting of the Biological section, the name of your delegate was 
added to the committee.
The General Committee of the Association unanimously accepted 
the invitation of Leeds to hold their 1890 meeting in that town.
September \^th, 1888.
NOTES— BOTANY, 
Good vera repens near Market Weighton, S.E. Yorks.
— Mr. J.
Beanland 
has shoN.a me a plant gathered in Houghton Hall Woods on the occasion of 
the Market Weighton meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union ; thirty or 
forty plants of it were seen.
It is undoubtedly Goodyera repens R.Br., which 
Mr." Beanland thought it might be, as he found that it did not agree with 
Spiranthes aiitiunnalis, which I believe it was thought to be.
It will, no doubt, 
have been accidentally introduced with coniferous plantings.
— W.M. West, Brad- 
ford, August 29th, 1888.
Goodyera repens near Market Weig-hton.
— Although in my report of 
plants collected at the excursion I included, under the name di Spiranthes autiiin- 
nalis, the rare orchid gathered in Houghton Hall Wood by Mr. J.
Marshall, I was 
suspicious that it would prove to be another plant.
Since then I have re-examined 
it.
and Mr. George Webster has compared it with Goodyera repens K.
Br._(a.
plant 
I have myself never seen either growing or dried) ; he confirms me that it is that 
species.
It is thus a much rarer plant than the Spiranthes, and being of a northern 
and arctic type, the find is of great botanical significance.
This appears to be the 
first record for Yorkshire ; Mr. Baker, however, in his Lake Flora, mentions it — 
on the authority of Mr. F.
Arnold Lees— as growing in a fir plantation near the 
Eden at Armathwaite.
Bentham and Babington cite it as in the fir forests of the 
North of Scotland, and in Bouvier's Flore des Alpes, its habitat is thus given : 
Bois du Jura et des Alpes, et dans les bois de Sapins a la faucille, au Colombier.
— 
>L B.
Slater, ^Lllton, 26th September, 1888.
Naturalist, 
3'3 
ON THE HEPATIC^ AND MUSCI 
OF WESTMORLAND.
GEORGE STABLER, 
LeveJis, Milnthorpe.
So far as I am aware, no detailed list or account of the hepatics and 
mosses of Westmorland has yet been published ; this fact, and the 
solicitations of some of my botanical friends, have induced me to 
undertake the task.
The county of Westmorland is situated in the north-west of 
England, between 54° 10' and 54° 42' N.
latitude, and between 2° 9' 
and 3° 10' W.
longitude.
Roughly speaking, it is about forty miles 
in length and thirty miles in width, and its area is 786 square miles.
Its outline is very irregular.
The mean annual temperature at Kendal is 4676° Fah., the 
mean day maximum being 64-018° Fah., and the mean night minimum 
26-745° Fah. January is the coldest month, with a mean temperature 
of 36-130° for the last sixty-five years, and July the warmest, with a 
mean of 59*45° for the same period.
For these data I am indebted 
to Mr. Richard Nelson, of Ivy Garth, Kendal.
A considerable 
amount of snow covers the higher mountains in winter, and some- 
times the remains of drifts are seen in the middle of June ; yet on 
and near the shore of Morecambe Bay it very seldom lies long, so 
that it is possible to botanize there almost all the year round.
The following table shows the rainfall in various parts of the county.
The names of the gentlemen to whom I am indebted for the data, 
and to whom I tender my thanks, appear in the second column : — 
Aver.
Station.
Registrar.
Average 
Number 
No.
of 
• 
For the 
Years 
No.
of 
of Inches.
Years 
Rainy 
Days!
• 
Little Langdale ...
F. M.
T. Tones ...
104-30 
1879-81 
.83 
Patterdale, Greenside ...
T. Taylor' 
92-42 
14 
1874-87 
1879-87 
Ambleside, Lesketh How 
F. M.
T. Jones ...
78-32 
9 
210 i 
(irasmere, High Close ...
, , ...
69-33 
10 
1878-87 
1S7 
Windermere, P'all barrow 
A. Rawson ...
62-90 
0 
1877-86 
210 
Orton 
Rev. E.
Holme 
53"37 
10 
167 !
Kendal 
R. J.
Nebon 
52-41 
100 
1778-87 
181 
48-47 
10 
1878-87 
Kirkby Lonsdale...
G. J.
Symons, F.
R. S.
A. Parkin ...
46-20 
10 
1870-79 
Ulleswater, Sharrow Bay 
43'io 
10 
1870-79 
z 
Arnside ...
J. P.
Drewitt 
42-17 
4 
1884-87 
167 ' 
Kirkby Stephen ...
T. Mason ...
39-82 
10 
1878-87 
165 
Penrith, Blencowe School 
T. Fawcett ...
38-44 
10 
1878-S7 
Penrith, Lowther Castle 
T. Clark 
37-36 
5 
1SS3-S7 
124 
Appleby ...
Dr. Armstrong 
33-71 
7 
18S1-87 
iSi ^ 
Oct. 18SS.
314 stabler: hepatic.*: and musci of Westmorland.
I have not been able to obtain statistics for one of my favourite 
valleys, that of Alardale, except for the last dry year (1887), when 
Mr. G.
J. Symons registered in three different parts of the valley the 
following quantities, 76-55, 68-95, 45 "5° inches (Naddle Forest).
Just over the western boundary of the county is one of the wettest 
parts of the island, over 220 inches having been recorded in one 
year at Seathwaite in Borrowdale.
Around the head of Morecambe Bay and across the southern 
part of the county, the principal rocks are those of the Carboniferous 
formation.
The same system of rocks also occupies an extensive 
district in the north-east part of the county, stretching along each 
side of the Eden Valley from Mallerstang and Ravenstonedale to the 
borders of Cumberland, the limestone of the middle of the valley 
being overlaid on both sides of the river from Kirkby Stephen 
northward by Permian strata, chiefly sandstone.
The rest of the 
county, to the north and south-west of these two limestone areas 
respectively, is occupied by Silurian rocks.
The boundary between 
the upper and lower Silurians is marked by the very narrow strip of 
Coniston Limestone running in a N.E. direction from the head of 
Wmdermere across the upper part of the valleys of Troutbeck, 
Kentmere, and Long Sleddale towards Shap Fell.
The Conglomerate, 
which in a similar manner marks the division between the Carbon- 
iferous and Silurian formations, appears here and there, as at the foot 
of Ulles water, Shap Wells, by the river Lune at Barbon, and in the 
valley of the river Mint near Kendal.
The summits of Wild Boar 
Fell and of the higher portions of the Pennine Hills are of millstone 
grit ; basalt appears at Caldron Snout in the upper Tees Valley, 
and along the western slope of the Pennine Hills ; and a small 
exposure of granite occurs about the centre of the county to the 
S.W. of Shap.
Commencing at the sands around the head of Morecambe Bay 
and the estuary of the river Kent in the south-west, the county rises 
very irregularly to an elevation of about 3,000 ft.
in its north-western 
part.
On its eastern side the Pennines reach over 2,000 ft.
in height.
The main watershed runs east and west.
The northern slope is 
drained by the Eden, and the southern by the Lune, the Kent, and 
some smaller streams.
Within the boundaries of the county are numerous scars, crags 
and screes,^ lakes and tarns, glens and ghylls, extensive peat-mosses 
and alpine bogs, water-falls and rocky streams, as well as remains of 
ancient forest.
* Scree : the sloping masses of debris at the base of a precipice.
Naturalist, 
stabler: HEPATICi*: AND MUSCI OF WESTMORLAND.
315 
All these, together with the position of the county, its temperature, 
its excessive and varied rainfall, its geological constitution, the 
altitude of its mountains, and its proximity to the sea, combine to 
make it a district peculiarly well adapted as a home for mosses.
When thoroughly explored, it should stand amongst the foremost 
English counties from a bryological point of view, and occupy no 
mean position when compared with other parts of the British Islands.
It will perhaps not be out of place here to give a short account 
of Westmorland bryology.
In this part of the subject I have been 
greatly assisted by the generous permission of Mr. Harry Arnold, of 
Arnbarrow, to consult his valuable library containing several old and 
rare books, especially connected with local botany.
The works 
herein mentioned will be found arranged in chronological order.
From the older writers, the few Westmorland mosses with their 
habitats are extracted, and I have to the earlier references added 
synonyms when necessary.
The record commences with Polytrichum coinmiifie (L.), that 
handsome giant among acrocarpous mosses.
It was first described in 
a catalogue of plants found around Geissen (1718) by Dillenius, at 
which time Ray had been dead thirteen years.
As Dillenius edited the 
3rd edition (1724) of Ray's Synopsis, he is answerable for the 
insertion of the Westmorland locality, although in his Historia 
Muscorujii of 1741 it is not mentioned.
1724.
Dillenius (Ray).
Synopsis Methodica Stirp.
Brit., ed.
3. 
' Polytnchiim vidgare et inajus capsula qiiadrangulari .
Great 
Golden Maiden-hair or Goldilocks.
\Polytrichujn commutie L.] 
In paludosis et putrido copiosissime in montosis.
— Westmor- 
landicis, etc' 
1777.
Stephen Robson.
The British Flora.
^ Fontinalis squajHosa L.
In brooks in Westmorland.' p.
272.
^ Fontinalis pennata L.
Huds.
\Neckera fotitinaloides (Lam.).
N. pumila Bry. Brit] On trunks of trees in woods between 
Troutbeck and Ambleside in Westmorland.' p.
272.
Phase U7n pedunculatum Huds.
\Splach71um pedtmculatum 
(Huds.) Lindb.
S. sphcericuvi Bry. Brit.] On moist heaths in 
• Westmorland.' p.
272.
^ Bryum apocarpuin L.
YGriminia apocarpa Sch. Syn.
{Schistidiuin Bry. Brit.).] In Westmorland.' p.
281.
Obs.
— It may be observed that at least two out of the four fore- 
going mosses are probably in the first edition of Hudson's 
Fl. Angl., 1762, in which case the Fl. Angl.
should precede 
Robson's Brit.
Fl. I have only had access to the 2nd and 
3rd editions of Fl. Angl.
Oct. 1888.
3l6 STABLER: HEPATICiE AND MUSCI OF WESTMORLAND.
1778.
Wm. Hudson.
F1.
Angl, ed.
2 (also ed.
3).
Fontitialis pennata L.' fontinaloides (Lam.).] ' In arborum 
truncis in sylvis inter Troutbeck et Ambleside.' 
' Bryiim criidum L.
\_Pohlia cruda (L.).
Webera cruda Sch.
Synop.] In sylvis circa Rydall in comitatu Westmorlandico.' 
SplachnuJH vasculosum Huds.
Fl. Angl.
(1798).
\^Phasaim pedwi- 
culatum Huds.
Ed. i, 1762.] In ericetis montosis et humidis 
in comitatibus Eboracensi et Westmorlandico passim.' 
^ Jungerinania nenwrosa Dill.
[^Martineliia 7ie?/iorosa 
Scapania neniorosa Nat. E.] In sylvis et umbrosis udis 
in comitatu Westmorlandico.' 
^ Junge7']nania ciliaris L.
\Ti'ichocolea to7nenteIla (Ehrh.) Dum.] 
Habitat in sylvis et ericetis udis et ad rivulos in comitatibus 
Eboracensi, Cumberlandico et Westmorlandico passim.' 
1796.
W. Withering.
An Arrangement of British Plants, ed.
3. 
Hypnu7n pe7j7iatu77i.
With.' [Neckera fo7iti7ialoides (Lam.).] 
Withering gives Hudson's habitat, and makes the mistake of 
giving the same plant under the name of Fo7iti7iaIis pe7i7iata 
(L.) as another species.
M7iiu77i fo7ita7iiii7i L.
\_Philo7iotis fo7ita7ia (L.) Brid.] Cold 
clear streams in Westmorland on the sides of hills ; Mr.
' Bryii77i criidM77i L.
Huds.
[ ^ Pohlia cruda (L.).] Woods 
about Rydal ; Hudson.' 
^ Ilyp7iu77i crispii77i With.
\_ = Neckera crispa (L.
) Hedw.] About 
Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland ; Dr. J.
E. Smith.' 
^ Hyp7iw7i viticulosu77i L.
- A7W77iodo7i viticulosns (L.) H.
& T.] 
By north-west corner of the bridge at Kirkby Lonsdale; 
Dr. J.
E. Smith.' 
Hypjiu77i loreii77i L.
\_ = Hyloco7iiiui7i loreiwi (L.) Br. Eur.] Near 
Ambleside, Westmorland; Dr. J.
E. Smith.
^ Ju7iger77ia?iia 7ie77iorosa Dill.' \_ = Scapa7ita 7ie77iorosa?\ 
Jii7iger77ia7iia ciliaris With.' \Trichocolea t077ie7ttella?\ The 
habitats of the two last are from Hudson : see above.
1804.
J. E.
Smith.
Flora Britannica.
' Gri77i77iia ptisilla Smith.
\_Seligeria reciL7-vata Hed\s'.
(1787).
6".
setacea (Wulf.) (1781).] In palustribus montosis.
Near 
Ambleside, Westmorland.' 
' Trichosto7/iii)7i fonii7ialoides Hed.
\Sekra 77iinor (L.), Ci7iclidotus 
fo7iti7ialoides (Lam.) P.B.] On rocks in the river at Kirkby 
Lonsdale, Westmorla^^'^^'^al^.ye the bridge, June 1783; 
(J.) Gough.' 
Dr. J.
E. Smith.' 
Naturalist, 
Now I'eady, complete, Svo, cloth, with Coloured Map, price £l is.
od.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
By FREDERIC ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.S., etc.
This, which forms the 2nd Volume of the Botanical Series of the Transactions, is perhaps 
the most complete work of the kind ever issued for any district, including detailed and full 
records of 1,044 Phanerogams and Vascular Cryptogams, 11 Characeae, 348 Mosses, 108 Hepatics, 
258 Lichens, 1,009 Fungi, and 382 Freshwater Algae, making a total of 3,160 species.
London : LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden ; 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, \ e u 1 t 1 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, ') Sunny Bank, Leeds.
In Preparation.
A Monograph of the Land and Fresh-Water Mollusca 
of the British Fauna.
The work is intended to be full, detailed, and exhaustive, and adequately 
illustrative of Variation, Development, and Geographical Distribution.
Co-operation is invited from ail interested, and any information or specimens 
(the common species of every district are particularly desired) will be welcomed 
and carefully acknowledged.
The Authors may be addressed — c/o Mr. John W.
Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Hunslet New Road, Leeds.
Information is at present specially required on the Slugs {Testacella, Limax^ and 
Arion), of which living specimens from every district are desired.
NOW READY, 224 PAGES, 125 ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY Svo.
PRICE 7s.
6d.
THE STRUCTURE AND LIFE-HISTORY OF 
gill litlrobuctiou to i\z ^tubg of Insects.
BY 
L. C.
MIALL AND ALFRED DENNY.
LONDON: LOVELL REEVE & CO.
LEEDS: RICHARD JACKSON.
Just Published, Svo, sewed, 6d.
A LIST OF BRITISH BIRDS 
(REVISED TO APRIL 1887), 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., etc., 
Editor of Vols.
3 and 4 of YarreWs 'History of British Birds' 
For Labelling Specimens, or for Reference ; the various srpecies, whether those 
Breeding in the British Islands, Occasional Visitors, or of doubtful history, being 
distinctively printed.
GURNEY & JACKSON, Successors to Mr. VAN VOORST, i.
Paternoster Row.
THE l^^ATTJUALIST.
The Editors hope to pnhlish the follo'ivmg papers zvithin the next few months: — 
List of the Mosses and Hepatics of Westmorland— George Stabler.
Notes on the Food and Habits of Slugs and Snails.— W.
A. Gain, RI.C.S.
Yorkshire Boulder Committee— Second Year*s Work.— S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S 
Bibliography: Geology and Palaeontology, 1887.
The Watterjack Toad in Cheshire and Lancashire.— Linn^us Greening.
Natural History of Lincolnshire.— The next instalment of this is to be upon the 
Mammalia, by John Cordeaux.
Schedules have been prepared for obtaining informa- 
tion : one will be sent to anyone willing to furnish notes.
Short Not^.S.
— It is the wish of the Editors to give in each number about a page of short notes 
in each of the various subjects of which the Naturalist takes cognisance.
To this end they 
rely upon their friends keeping them well supplied.
At present short notes on Botany, 
Entomology, Palaeontology, Microscopy, Conchology, &c., are particularly desired.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
Price 6d.
monthly, 24 pages 8vo, with occasional illustrations.
Conducted by C.
G. Barrett, F.E.S., J.
W. Douglas, F.E.S., 
Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., R.
MacLachlan, F.R.S., 
E. Saunders, F.L.S., H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., &c.
This Magazine, commenced in 1864, contains Articles and Notes on all subjects 
connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of the British Isles.
Subscription 6s.
per volume, post free.
The volumes commence vi^ith the 
June number in each year.
The early volumes are out of print, but can be occasionally obtained by pur- 
chasers of the entire series.
In this case the price of vols I.
to V.
is los.
per vol.
The succeeding vols, (strongly bound in cloth) can be had separately or together 
at 7s.
per vol.
London : JOHN VAN VOORST, i, Paternoster Row.
N.B.
— Communications, &c., should be sent to the Editors at the above address.
Noiv ready ^ price il- (postage 2^2.^^).
Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and 
Autumn of 1886.
By J.
A. HARVIE-BROWN, J.
CORDEAUX, R.
M. BARRINGTON, 
A. G.
MORE, and W.
EAGLE CLARKE ; 
Members af the British Association.
Migration Committee.
To be had of W.
Eagle Clarke, Museum of Science and Art, Edinburgh ; 
or any Member of the Committee.
Crown Svo, with Map, and Coloured Plate by Keiilemans.
Price 7s.
6d.
net.
THE BIRDS OF CUMBERLAND.
BY 
REV.
H. A.
MACPHERSON, M.A., M.B.O.U., 
AND 
WILLIAM DUCKWORTH.
CARLISLE - - - Messrs.
THURNAM, English Street.
This work, warmly praised in ' Nature' and ' The Ibis,' is not a dry catalogue, but an account 
of the habits of the Dunlin, Dotterel, Sandwich Tern, Pied Flycatcher, and other birds charac- 
teristic of the Lake counties, written from the authors' field-notes.
It is the only modern hand- 
book to the birds of the North-West of England.
Only a few copies remain unsold, and the price 
will be raised shortly to 12s.
Single copies can be obtained from Messrs.
Thurnam, or direct 
T?^..
TJ \ -- - - — _ ..
. .
No. 160.
4 f.Oy 1388 
NOVEMBER 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
EDITED BY 
.-^Vr-lS^'V/vM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
_ .
- ' AND 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESFONDIKENDER MITGLIEU DES OKNITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN.
€onfcnf5 : 
On the Hepaticae and Musci of Westmorland — George Stabler 
Fungus Foray at Bramham and Harewood Parks 
The Yorkshire Boulder Comnnittee and its Second Year's "^or)f.—S.A.Adamsou, 
F.G.S 
Note — Coleoptera 
Coieoptera at Market Wcighton, August 6th, i8S8— 7?.
G. Bay/ord.
Note — Fungi 
j^lcidium cakhse Grev.
near Kendal — Rev. C.
H. VVaddell.
Note — Arachnida 
Lincolnshire Spiders— /r.
Wallis Kew, F.E.S.
Notes — Ornithology ..
Crossbills (Loxia curvirostra and L.
pitvopsitacus) on the East Coast of England 
~y.
H. (,ur»ey, 77m., F.Z.S.,M.B.O. U.
; Purple Heron in West Yorkshire— 
W. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., M.B.O.U.; Black Guillemot near Whitby 
— T.
Stephenson ; Reed Warbler nesting in the VVa>hburn Valley — H.
Knight 
Horsfield, M.B.O.U.
; Flamborough Bird-notes— ^/a/^A«t» ^/z/V^y ; Robin 
caught in a Mouse-trap — Basil Carter.
Notes— Botany 
Silene nutans still at Knaresborough — Km. U'.
C. Hey, AT.
A. ; Stratiotes aloides 
at Carlton near Selby — Thotnas Bttnker; Notes on Settle Plants — 
A. Craig Christie.
Notes — Lepidoptera 
Scopula femigalis at Huddersfieid — G.
W. K.
Crosland ; Euperia fulvago and 
Acrunycta aini near Uoncaster — George T.
Porritt, F.L.S.
Note — Mammalia 
Whales off Flamborough — .Mattheiv Bailey.
J'AGH 
317 to 320 
321 to 329 
332 to 348 
329 
329 
329 
330 
331 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.G.
McGORQUODAI.E & Go. LIMITED, GaRDINGTON StREET, EUSTON ; 
ANO 
Leeds: Basinghai.l Street.
All Communications should be Addressed : — 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist." 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
•RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
The NATURALIST.
->co<- 
TARIFF OF CHARGES FOR REPRINTS.
50 copies.
100 copies.
200 cop 
4 pages 4/6 7/- 9/6 
8 pages 5/6 8/6 ...
.. 11/- 
12 pages 7/- ...
...
11/- 16/- 
16 pages 8/6 ...
...
13/6 18/- 
Covers charged extra as below — 
Plain Covers...
...
-/9 ...
...
1/6 ...
...
2/6 
Printed Covers ...
2/- ...
...
3/- ...
...
4/6 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
West American Scientist, Vol. iv, No. 35, March 1888.
[T.
D. A.
Cockerell.
Vol. V, No. I, Sept.
1888.
[Id.
Botanical Exchange Club of the British Isles.
— Report for 1887.
[The Club.
Howard Saunders' Illustrated Manual of British Birds.
Parts 5, 6, 7 ; August, 
Sept., Oct. 1888.
[Gurney & Jackson, Publishers.
Westmorland Note Book and Natural History Record, Vol. i.
Part 3, Sept.
1888.
[Edward Gill, Publisher.
N. H.
Soc. of Glasgow.
— Proc.
and Trans., N.S., Vol. ii.
Part I, 1886-7.
[Society.
The Naturalists' Pocket Calendar, by Stanley Brigg and Arthur HoUis.
[W.
E. Bowers, Publisher.
Manchester Lit. and Phil.
Society.
— Memoirs and Procs., 4th Series.
Vol. i, 1888.
[The Society.
Nat. Hist.
Journ.,No.io6,Oct. 15,1888.
[J.
E. Clark & B.B.Le Tall, Editors, York.
The Young Naturalist, Part 105 for Sept.
1888.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, Editor.
Journal of Microscopy, N.S., Vol. i, No. 5, Sept.
1888.
' [Postal Micr.
Soc.
Scottish Naturalist, No. 22, N.S., Sept.
1888.
[Prof.
J. W\ H.
Trail, Editor.
Research, monthly illust.
journ.
of science, Vol. i, No. 3, Sept.
1888.
[A.
N.Tate, Ed.
Science Gossip, No. 286, for Oct. 1888.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, Publishers.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 130, for Oct. 1888.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
The Zoologist, Vol. xii, No. 141, 3rd Series, Sept.
1888.
[J, E.
Harting, Editor, 
Yorkshire Notes and Queries — Index Part, Sep. 1888.
[J.
H. Turner, Editor.
Revue Bryologique, 15 Annee, 1888, No. 5.
Mons.
T. Husnot, Redacteur.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 20.
for Oct. 1888.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
Mittheilungen des Ornith.
Vereins in Wien, xii Jahrg.
, Nr. 9, Oct 1888.
[Verein.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Wanted.
— Living examples of Limax arboruni, L.
Icevis^ and L.
tenellus.
British Land and Freshwater Shells in exchange.
— W.
A. Gain, Tuxford, Newark.
Conehology.
— I have several specimens of Venus exoleta which I should 
like to exchange for other Marine specimens.
— Arthur Smith, 103, Freeman 
Street, Grimsby, July iith, 1888.
Lincolnshire Natural History.
- -Co-operation in collecting information 
respecting the Marine Mollusca of Lincolnshire is desired.
Lists and 
specimens may be forwarded to the care of Mr. H.
Wallis Kew, 112, Hanley 
Road, Stroud Green, N.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free, 
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Lar\'?e, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggieston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
stabler: hepatic^ and MUSCI of WESTMORLAND.
317 
Neckera pwnila H.' [ — N.
fojiiinaloides (Lam.).] 'On trees 
between Troutbeck and Ambleside, as mentioned by W.
Hud- 
son where I found it in 1782 ; J.
E. Smith.' 
^ Bryiim cnidwn L.' \^ Pohlia cruda (L.).] Hudson's habitat.
805.
Turner and Dillwyn.
The Botanist's Guide.
In this work seven mosses and two hepatics are recorded for 
Westmorland.
They are : — Splachmim sphoericum P Muse.
Hib., Grimmia piisilla Sm., Trichostonium fontinaloides Huds., 
N'eckei'a piimila H., B?'ytim crudum L., Hypniim loreum L..
Fontinalis squamosa L., Jimgermania to/?ientella, and J.
la?iceolaia Weiss.
All of these, except the last, had been previously recorded.
Of J.
lariceolata it is said, ' woods and moist shady places 
(Westmorland) ; Hudson.' This remark would lead one to 
suppose that this species is not rare.
Twelve years ago 
I found it near Windermere with its characteristic siphon-like 
colesules.
In no other place have I seen it growing.
It will 
be seen that I have doubt as to the plant of Hudson being 
the true one.
In this I am supported by a remark of Sir 
W. J.
Hooker's in the British Flora, vol.
ii (1833), p.
108, in 
which he says : ' Of this {J.
lanceolata) I have never seen 
British specimens \ and I suspect the authors just mentioned 
(Hudson, Withering, and Lightfoot) may have mistaken 
some other species for it,' and Dr. Carrington remarks 
that Mylia anomala was long confounded with J.
lanceolata 
Brit.
Hep.
812-16.
W. J.
Hooker.
British Jungermanniae.
In this work the following six species are given as Westmorland 
plants : — 
^ Juiigermania lanceolata L.' \_- LiochlaJia lanceolata^ pi.
18.
Under this.
Hooker says : " I am induced to represent the 
species in this work rather with a view of calling the attention 
of botanists of my country to what I conceive to be the true 
J. lanceolata of Linnaeus than from the conviction of its ever 
having been found in Britain." The true plant was afterwards 
found by Borrer at Tun bridge Wells and by Dr. Spruce in 
the upper part of the vale of the Yorkshire Esk (Cronkley 
Gill), December 1847, and was first figured and described 
from British specimens by him in Eng. Bot.
Supp., Oct.
1848.
i8 stabler: hepatic^: and musci of Westmorland.
^ Jungermania Taylori Hk.
\_Mylia Taylori (Hk.)] pi.
57.
Two 
miles from Ambleside to the north of the Penrith road, and 
on the rock behind the hill at Patterdale.' 
Ju7igermania radicans [ = Alarsiipella einarginata\ with J.
Taylori.^ 
^ Jungermania barbata with J.
Taylori.^ 
Junger7nania hyalina Lyell \_Nardia hyalina], PI.
63.
Amongst 
the rocks immediately above Stock Ghyll Force near Amble- 
side (Mr. Lyell).' 
Junger7na?iia Orcadensis Hk. PI.
71.
Ambleside (Mr. Lyell).' 
818.
Hooker and Taylor.
Muscologia Britannica.
^ HypTiiwi Crista-castrensis L.
[ = Fiiiimn Crista-castrensis (L.) 
DeNot.] In a wood at the head of Haweswater (Rev. Jas.
Dalton).' 
841.
J. E.
Smith.
English Botany, 2nd edition.
Hypnum incurvatum Brid.
— Stereo don incurvahis (Schrad.)].
Near Kendal, on the way to Ambleside.' Vol. viii., p.
104.
The figure is dated ist July, 1839, so I infer that this is the 
locality where Mr. Wilson found it on the 14th of July, 
1838.
843.
R. Spruce.
On the Mosses and Hepaticae of Teesdale.
In this paper we find recorded from Caldron Snout and Maize 
Beck, seven mosses and four hepatics.
They are : — Bryiwi 
julaceiwi V.
coiicitmatum — B.
C07ici7inatu7n Spruce] ; Bryii77i 
Zierii Dicks.
[ = Plagiobryiwi Z/Vr/V (Dicks.)] ; Gri77i77iia spiralis 
H. & T.
[ = 6^.
fiinalis (Schwaeg) Schpr.] ; Fhysco77iitriu77i 
ericeior7i77i DeNot.
[ = Fimaiia obtiisa (Dicks.)]; Splachfiu77i 
77i7iioides L.
fil.
[= Tetrapiodo7i bryoides (Zoeg.)]; Tetradontiu77i 
Brow7iia7iu77i (Dicks.) [- Georgia B7'0W7iii (Dicks.)]; Zygodon 
Lapp07iicus B.
& S.
= A7i£Ecta7tgiii77i Lapp07iiai77i (Hedw,)] ; 
Jii7ioerma7iia i7icisa Schrad.
; J.
setacea Web.
[ = Lepidozia 
setacea (Web.)]; J.
spitiulosa Dicks.
\_ = Flagiochila spi7iulosa 
(Dicks.)]; J.
U7iduiata L.
Scapa7na undulaia (L.)].
[845.
J. SiDEBOTHAM in The Phytologist, vol.
ii., p.
316.
In July of this year the following sixteen mosses were collected 
in Westmorland by Mr. Sidebotham.
For the sake of brevity 
I here omit the localities, which will be given in the list under 
their respective species.
ATidrecea alpi7ia Dill.
; A.
Rothii Web. et M.
; A.
rupestris L.
; 
Bartra77iia Halleria7ia Hedw.
; Bryiwt crudu77i Schreb.
; Bry.
Naturalist, 
STABLER : HEPATIC^ AND MUSCI OF WESTMORLAND.
elongatum Dicks.; Bry. julaceum Sm.
[ = ^.
Jiliforjne Dicks.]; 
Bry. ticrbinatuHi Hedw.
(?) ; Bry. pseudotriqiietruDi Schwg.
; 
Bry. erythrocarpiim (?) ; Dicramini scopariiim Hedw.
; Diphy- 
sciiini foliosum Web. et M.
; Hedivigia cestiva Hk. S^Anactangiuni 
compactum Schwg.] ; CEdipodiiun Griffithianiim Schw.
; Ptero- 
gojiiufji gracilc Sw.
; Weissia fugax Hedw.
= Rhabdoweisia 
striata Schrad.].
Obs.
— Mr. Sidebotham does not say whetlier his plant is 
Bryum erythi^ocarpiim Schwaeg \3ry.
sanguineiDii Brid.] 
or Bry. erytlirocaipiim Brid.
\Bry. atropiiipureitm Web.
et M.].
If it be the former it is the only record for 
Westmorland.
1846.
W. BoRRER in The Phytologist, vol.
ii., p.
435.
Mr. Borrer's list of ten mosses, collected m 1845.
They are : — 
CEdipodiiLJii G7'iffithianuin Schwg.
; Griminia torta Hsch.
[ ~ 
G. torquata Hsch.] ; G.
spiralis H.
& T.
; Orthotrichiim 
riipincola Funck.
\0.
rupestre Schleich.] ; Hypjiiim Crista- 
castrensis L.
; Bryum albicans Wahl.
; Bry. jidaceiini Sm.
; Bry.
Zierii Dicks.
; Bry. acuminatum B.
& S.
; Bry. m?iioides AVils.
\_ ~ Mnium subglobosum B.
& S.].
1855- William Wilson.
Bryologia Britannica.
Mr. Wilson in his classic Bryologia has given Westmorland 
habitats for the following ten mosses : — Griminia spiralis 
H. & T., Grimmia torta Hsch., Orthotrichum crispulum Hsch., 
O. crispum Hedw., O.
Bruchii Brid., Bryum concinnatum 
Spruce, Antitrichia curtipendula Brid., Hypnum palustre jB 
Bry. Brit., {/I.
e ugy rium Schpr.), If. Crista-castrensis L., H.
incurvatum Brid.
[{Stereodon incurvatus (Schrad.) Mitt.] 
1855.
Harriet Martineau.
A Complete Guide to the English 
Lakes, 
The List of ' Flowering Plants, Ferns, and Mosses ' of ' Winder- 
mere and its Neighbourhood' in this work was drawn up 
by Dr. Clowes, and comprises several mosses, which are 
divided into two sections ; first, those of which localities 
are given, viz., Zygodon Mougeotii B.
tv: S., Gymuostomum 
rupestre Schwgr,, (Edipodium Griffithianum Schwgr., Diphys- 
.cium foliosum W.
& M., Weissia deiiticulata Brid., ]]\ tenui- 
rostris H.(Jv: T.
\Mollia tenuirostris {W.^^ 'W) l^indb.], Grimmia 
spiralis H.
T., 6".
torta Hsch., OrthoiricJium rupincola 
Funck., O.
aristatum 'I\irn., Sm.
((9.
diaphanum Schrad., 
320 STABLER : HEPATIC^ AND MUSCI OF WESTMORLAND.
Bryum jiilaceiim Sm., B.
Zierii Dicks., B.
acuminatum B.& S., 
B. mnioides Wils.
{Mnium subglobosum B.
& S.), Hypniun 
flagellare Dicks., H.
Crista-castrensis L.
; and secondly, 
other species mentioned as in the Windermere district, but 
without any exact stations : — Bryum albicans Brid., Hook., 
B. alpijium^ Lin., Ancectangium ciliatum Hedvv.
(ffedwigia 
ciliata H,), Anomodon curtipendulus H.
&: T., Bartramia 
pomiformis Hedw., B.
Halleriana Hedw., B.
arcuata Brid., 
Hypnufii brevirostre Ehrh., H.
imdulaium (L.), Neckera 
crispa (L.), Polytrichum alpi?ium (L.), P.
urnigerum (L.), 
Trichostomum {Racomitrium) aciculare W.
& M., T.
ca7iescens 
Hedw., T.
fasciculare Schrad., T.
lanuginosum Hedw., 
T. polyphyUiun (Dicks.).
1863.
J. G.
Baker.
North Yorkshire.
From .Caldron Snout and Maize Beck, at the boundary between 
Westmorland and Yorkshire, Mr. Baker mentions A?idrecBa 
Rothii W.
& M.
{A.
rupestris L.), Blindia acuta Hedw., 
Grimmia torta Hsch., Racomitrium protensum Al. Braun, 
Zygodoji Mougeotii B.
& S., Diphyscium foliosum W.
<!^c M., 
Bryum crudum Schreb., B.
alpinum Linn., B.
Zierii 
Dicks., Fissidens osmundoides Hedw., Hyp?mm catenulatum 
Schwgr., Campy lopus longipilus Brid.
; and from Hell Ghyll, 
another part of the boundary line between the same two 
counties, Gym?iostomuin ripestre Schwgr., and Bartramia 
CEderi Sw.
1887.
C. H.
BiNSTEAD.
The Naturalist, No. 140.
In the March number of The Naturalist, the Rev. C.
H. Binstead 
announced half-a-dozen important additions to the Westmor- 
land Moss Flora in the following species : — Grimmia anodon 
B. & S., G.
commutata Hiibn., G.
anomala Hampe, Bryum 
Muhlenbeckii B.
& S., Cinclidium stygium Swartz., Hylocomium 
umbratum Schreb.
In addition to the foregoing, it may be here mentioned that in 
Dr. Carrington's yet uncompleted British Hepaticte, and in the ten 
parts of Dr. R.
Braithwaite's British Moss Flora (1880-87), which 
comprise about half the acrocarpous mosses, several Westmorland 
stations are given.
This completes the literature on the subject, so far as has come 
under my notice.
It now remains to indicate what other workers 
have been engaged in this field.
Naturalist, 
321 
FUNGUS FORAY 
AT BRAMHAM AND HAREWOOD PARKS.
The closing meeting of the Yorkshire NaturaHsts' Union for 1888, 
held on Tuesday, the 25th of September, was organised as a Fungus 
Foray, and as such was a decided success in every way.
Thanks to 
the very kind manner in which Lord Harewood and Mr. George 
Lane Fox allowed the day's investigations to be carried out on their 
respective estates, to the excellent and productive character of the 
ground thus made available, to the abundance of fungi, to the 
favourable character of the weather, and to the presence of 
Mr. George Massee, F.R.M.S., of the Royal Herbarium at Kew, 
who had accepted the Union's invitation to participate, and of a 
goodly number of the keenest and most assiduous of the very few 
Yorkshire botanists who study this group of plants, the excursions 
were both enjoyable and profitable.
The meeting held at Leeds in 
the evening was well-attended, and the Show, which was open the 
same evening and following day, was nearly as extensive and quite 
as interesting as the very successful one laid out in Leeds in 1881, 
on the occasion of the first Fungus Foray ever held in Yorkshire.
Two parties were arranged for the excursion, starting in wagonettes 
from the Leeds Museum at 9 o'clock in the morning.
The larger 
party went to Bramham, under the guidance of Mr. Massee ; the 
smaller, to Harewood, under that of Mr. H.
T. Soppitt, of Bradford.
Mr. Massee was accompanied by the Rev. Wm.
Fowler, M.A., Mr. W.
Norwood Cheesman, Mr. Dewhirst, and other members, and was 
met at Bramham by Mr. Lane Fox, who took a kindly interest in the 
investigation, pointing out the most suitable woods on his estate, 
after ascertaining the requirements most looked for by a fungological 
party.
This party collected about 124 species.
The party headed by Mr. Soppitt, who was accompanied by 
Messrs.
W. West, F.L.S., A.
Clarke, and others, was favoured by the 
assistance of two or three of Lord Harewood's keepers, whose local 
knowledge stood in good stead, and one of whom was of use in 
swarming a tree for a specimen of the Vegetable Beef-Steak.
The 
ground investigated by Mr. Soppitt and his companions was varied 
as well as extensive, including most excellent fir-woods on Wigton 
Moor, and the splendid mixed woods (in which beech predominated) 
of Harewood Park itself.
No list of the species observed on this 
route was kept at the time, but subsequent examination of results 
showed that, with a few interesting exceptions, the majority of the 
species were the same as those collected by the Bramham contingent.
Nov. 1888.
322 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION : FUNGUS FORAY.
By both parties were collected a very large quantity of fungi, and 
they returned to Leeds about five in the afternoon.
Soon after this, 
all hands set to work to arrange and set out the specimens for the 
' Show.' Thanks to the kindness of the Leeds Philosophical Society, 
the Show was arranged in their library, in which also the meeting 
was held.
At the meeting — over which the Rev. Wm.
Fowler, M.A., an 
ex-president, presided — the minutes of the preceding meeting having 
been taken as read, and passed, Mr. Geo.
Massee, F.R.M.S., was 
called upon to state the results of the day's work.
Numerous 
species (over 200) had been collected, many of which (about forty) 
were new to the West Riding Flora, and others had not been seen 
therein since the time of James Bolton, about a century ago.
Among 
the Hymenomycetes, white-spored species largely predominated, and 
the genera Hygrophorus^ Russula, and Lactarius were especially 
abundant.
On the other hand, several of the commonest of fungi 
(such as Armillaria meileus^ Hypholoina fascicularis^ etc.) were 
apparently absent or nearly so.
Amongst the principal finds were 
Lactarius aspidens Fr. and Russula ciiprea — a species included by 
Fries under R.
nitida^ from which it is readily distinguished by its 
copper-coloured pileus and rose-coloured stem — both new to Britain.
Other species of note were Lactarius aurantiacus Fr., collected in 
quantity under fir-trees in Bramham Park, and recorded as 
British for the first time a few weeks previous when gathered in the 
New Forest ; it is a really pretty species, with a deep-orange pileus 
and stem and decurrent gills, and has hitherto probably been con- 
fused with L.
mitissimus ; Russula ccerulea Fr., R, granulata Cke., 
R. expalle?is, Lactarius uvidus^ Leotia lubrica, LLygrophorus hypo- 
thejus Fr., IL.
clarkii Berk., LL.
calyptrcefonnis Berk., Dictydium 
cernimm^ and many other rare species.
Later in the evening, 
Mr. Massee gave an interesting and racy address on the ' Evolution 
of Fungi,' which he treated in a humorous and masterly manner.
Mr. C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., then proposed a vote of thanks to Lord 
Harewood, Mr. Lane Fox, Messrs.
Massee, Soppitt, and all who had 
contributed to the success of the foray, which was unanimously 
adopted, as also was one to the chairman.
The Show, which was kept open the whole of the following day, 
proved of great interest to the visitors to the Museum, and was 
carefully examined by those members (not many, alas!) who take a 
real interest in the study.
For the contribution of specimens to the 
Show the Union was indebted to various members and associates for 
specimens collected at other localities than those visited during the 
excursion.
Mr. Rushforth, of Horbury, brought the Dry-rot {Merulius 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION : FUNGUS FORAY.
323 
lachrymans) from that place; Mr. Edgar R.
Waite sent a large box of 
specimens from Goathland, amongst which were Lycoperdon saccaium^ 
etc.; Mr. Lister, of Ovenden, brought Boletus felleus and several 
other species ; Mr. R.
Dewhirst brought Hygrophorus cossus, Pluteus 
cervinus^ diXid Feziza aurantia from Saltaire; Mr. Soppitt's consignment 
included Collybia distortus and Tricholoma albo-brumieiis from Esholt, 
and Helvella lacimosa from Heaton, near Bradford ; and Mr. A.
Clarke, of Huddersfield, brought a large number of specimens, 
including Tricholoma brevipes, Marast7iius epiphylhis^ etc., and to him 
the Union was much indebted for the use of a number of neatljA- 
written labels of the names of species.
The only regret is that 
for the Show there were not more fungologists of the first rank 
present.
As it was, from shortness of time and abundance of 
material, Mr. Massee and his few assistants were more than fully 
employed, both on Tuesday evening and Wednesday morning, and 
it was simply impossible to keep a record of all the species in each 
consignment, as it is most desirable should be done.
The list of species exhibited at the Show, as far as can be ascer- 
tained, is as follows, species marked with before name being new 
to the West Riding : — 
HYMENOMYCE TES.
AGARICINEAE.
Agaricus (Amanita) phalloides Fr. Bramham.
„ (Amanita) muscarius L.
Bramham.
Harewood.
,, (Amanita) rubescens P.
Harewood.
„ (Amanita) mappa Batsch.
Bramham.
Whitby((7.J/!).
„ (Amanita) pantherinus DC.
Bramham.
Harewood.
,, (Amanitopsis) vaginatus Bull.
Bramham.
Harewd.
,, ^(Lepiota) clypeolarius Bull.
Bramham.
(Lepiota) cristatus L.
Bramham.
,, (Lepiota) granulosus Batsch.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Lepiota) seminudus Lasch.
Bramham.
„ ^(Lepiota) amianthinus Scop.
Bramham.
„ (Lepiota) carcharias Pers.
Bramham.
Harewood.
^(Tricholoma) portentosus Fr. Castle Howard (6^.
J/.) 
„ (Tricholoma) albo-brunneus Pers.
Bramham.
Harewood.
Esholt {^H.
T. Soppitt).
Bulmer {G,M.).
„ (Tricholoma) rutilans Sch^eff.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Tricholoma) imbricatus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ (Tricholoma) terreus Schceff.
Bramham.
„ (Tricholoma) nudus Bull.
Harewood.
„ (Tricholoma) melaleucus Pers.
Nov. 1888.
324 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION : FUNGUS FORAY.
Agaricus (Tricholoma) brevipesBull.
Huddersfield(^.C/^7r^4 
(Clitocybe) nebularis Batsch.
Bramham.
^(Clitocybe) clavipes Pers.
Bramham.
(Clitocybe) odorus Bull.
Harewood.
*(Clitocybe) cerussatus Fr. Bramham.
(Clitocybe) phyllophilus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
(Clitocybe) fumosus Pers.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Clitocybe) infundibuliformis Schseff.
Bramham.
Harewood.
Castle Howard {Geo. Massee).
(Clitocybe) brumalis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
(Clitocybe) fragrans Sow. Harewood.
Filey (6^.
J/".).
(Laccaria) laccatus Scop.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Collybia) radicatus Relh.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Collybia) maculatus A.& S.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Collybia) distortus Fr. Bramham.
Esholt (H.
T. 
Soppitt.) 
(Collybia) butyraceus Bull.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Collybia) velutipes Curt.
Harewood.
(Collybia) confluens Pers.
Harewood.
(Collybia) tuberosus Bull.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Collybia) esculentus Wulf.
(Collybia) dryophilus Bull.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Mycena) purus Pers.
Bramham.
Harewood.
*(Mycena) gypseus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
(Mycena) galericulatus Scop.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Mycena) polygrammus Buh. Harewood.
(Mycena) alcalinus Fr. Bramham.
(Mycena) filopes Bull.
Bramham.
(Mycena) sanguinolentus A.
& S.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Mycena) galopus Pers.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Mycena) epipterygius Scop.
Bramham.
Harewood.
(Mycena) stylobates Pers.
Harewood.
(Omphalia) campanella Batsch.
Harewood.
^(Pleurotus) limpidus Fr. Bramham.
(Pluteus) cervinus Schaeff.
Bramham.
Harewood.
Saltaire (i?.
Dewhirst).
^(Pluteus) nanus Pers.
Bramham.
*(Entoloma) fertilis Berk.
Bramham.
(Entoloma) jubatus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
(Entoloma) costatus Fr. Harewood.
(Entoloma) sericeus Bull.
Harewood.
*(Entoloma) nidorosus Fr. Bramham.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION : FUNGUS FORAY.
^Agaricus (Clitopilus) cancrinus Fr. Bramham.
„ "(Leptonia) lampropus Fr. Harewood.
„ (Claudopus) variabilis Peis.
Bramham.
„ ^(Claudopus) byssisedus Pers.
Bramham.
„ (Pholiota) spectabilis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ (Pholiota) squarrosus Mull.
Harewood.
„ (Inocybe) scaber Mull.
Bramham.
„ (Inocybe) rimosus Bull.
Bramham.
„ ^(Inocybe) asterosporus Quel.
Bramham.
Harewood.
„ (Inocybe) geophyllus Sow. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ (Hebeloma) fastibilis Fr. Bramham.
*( Hebeloma) glutinosus Lindgr.
Harewood.
„ "^(Hebeloma) mesophaeus Fr. Bramham.
„ (Hebeloma) crustuliniformis Bull.
Bramham.
„ "^(Flammula) lentus Pers.
Harewood.
„ (Flammula) carbonarius Fr. Bramham.
„ (Flammula) sapineus Fr. Bramham.
„ (Naucoria) melinoides Fr. Bramham.
(Galera) hypnorum Batsch.
Harewood.
Var. sphagnorum.
Bramham.
„ (Tubaria) furfuraceus Pers.
Harewood.
„ (Stropharia) aeruginosus Curt.
Bramham.
Harewd.
„ (Stropharia) squamosus Fr. Harewood.
„ ^(Stropharia) thraustus Kalehb.
Bramham.
„ (Stropharia) semiglobatus Batsch.
Harewood.
„ (Hypholoma) sublateritius Schaeff.
Harewood.
„ (Hypholoma) capnoides Fr. Bramham.
„ (Hypholoma) velutinus Pers.
Harewood.
„ (Psilocybe) semilanceatus Fr. Bramham.
Harewd.
„ (Psilocybe) spadiceus Fr. Bramham.
„ (Psilocybe) hydrophilus Bull.
Harewood.
„ (Psathyra) corrugis Pers.
Bramham.
„ (Panaeolus) separatus L.
p]ramham.
Harewood.
„ (Panseolus) campanulatus L.
Harewood.
(Psathyrella) atomatus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Coprinus atramentarius Fr. Harewood.
„ micaceus Fr. Harewood.
plicatilis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Cortinarius (Phlegmacium) caerulescens Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
*(Dermocybe) ochroleucus Fr. Bramham.
„ "^^(Dermocybe) caninus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
^(Hydrocybe) paleaceus Fr. Bramham.
326 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION: FUNGUS FORAY.
Cortinarius (Hycjrocybe) acutus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Paxillus involutus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
*leptopus Fr. Harewood.
Hygrophorus eburneus Fr. Bramham.
COSSUS Fr. Bramham.
Saltaire {R.
Dewhirst).
hypothejus Fr. Harewood.
pratensis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
virgineus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
^clarkii Berk.
Harewood.
lactus Berk.
Harewood.
COCcineus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
ceraceus Fr. Harewood.
puniceus Fr. Bramham.
conicus Fr. Harewood.
'"calyptraeformis Berk.
Harewood.
psittacinus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
unguinosus Fr. Harewood.
Lactarius turpis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ ^aspideus Fr. Harewood.
blennius Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
^flexuosus Fr. Harewood.
,, deliciosus Fr. Bramham.
„ quietus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
5, ^aurantiacus Fr. Bramham.
,, rufus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ glyciosmus Fr. Harewood.
mitissimus Fr. Bramham.
„ subdulcis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
uvidus Fr. Bramham.
Russula nigricans Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ *densifolia Seer.
Bramham.
„ depallens Fr. Harewood.
,, "^caerulea Fr. Bramham.
'"lepida Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
,, rubra Fr. Bramham.
„ cyanoxantha Fr. Bramham.
fellea Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ ^granulata Cke. Bramham.
Harewood.
,. emetica Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
- 
OChroleuca Fr. Bramham.
fragilis Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
^expallens Gillet.
Bramham.
"^CUprea Krombh.
Bramham.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION : FUNGUS FORAY.
Russula puellaris Fr. Hare\vood.
lutea Fr. Bramham.
Cantharellus cibarius Fr. Bramham.
„ cinereus Fr.
Marasmius peronatus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ ^terginus Fr. Bramham.
,, erythropus Fr. Harewood.
„ ramealis Fr. Harewood.
,, androsaceus Fr. Harewood.
„ rotula Fr. Harewood.
„ epiphyllus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Hudders- 
field (A.
Clarke).
Panus stypticus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
POL YPORE^E.
Boletus flavus With.
Bramham.
Harewood.
,, felleus Bull.
Ovenden {Mr, Liste?-).
5, badius Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ chrysenteron Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ SCaber Fr. Bramham.
„ edulis Fr. Harewood.
,, versipellis Fr. Harewood.
Fistulina hepatica Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Polyporus intybaceus Fr. Bramham.
„ chioneus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ adustus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
„ betulinus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
,. annosus Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
versicolor Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
vaporarius Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Merulius lacrymans Fr. Bramham.
Horbury ( ]V.
Rushforth).
HYDNE^.
Hydnum repandum L.
Bramham.
Harewood.
THELEPHOREAL.
Thelephora laciniata Pers.
Bramham.
Harewood.
Stereum hirsutum Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
^Hymenochaete tabacina Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
Peniophora quercina Fr. Harewood.
*velutina Fr. Bramham.
^Corticium comedens Fr. Bramham.
Clavaria cinerea Bull.
Bramham.
Harewood.
,. rugosa Bull.
Bramham.
Harewood.
S^ov.
iS88.
328 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION: FUNGUS FORAY.
Clavaria inaequalis Fl.Dan. Bramham.
,, fragilis Holmsk.
Bramham.
Harewood.
argillacea Fr. Harewood.
Calocera viscosa Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
TREMELLE^.
Tremella mesenterica Retz.
Harewood.
Dacrymyces chrysocomus Tul. Bramham.
GASTROMYCETES.
PHALLOIDEyE.
Ithyphallus impudicus L.
Bramham.
Harewood.
Mutinus caninus Fr. Harewood.
L YCOPERDEyE.
Lycoperdon saccatumVahl.
Bramham.
Goathland (^.i?.
JVaik).
„ ^perlatum Fr. Bramham.
pyriforme Sch^ff.
Bramham.
Scleroderma vulgare Fr. Bramham.
Harewood.
ASCOMYCETES.
HEL VELLE.E.
Helvella crispa Fr.
„ elastica Bull.
,, lacunosa Afz. Heaton, near Bradford {H.
T. Soppitt).
Leotia lubrica P.
PEZIZE^.
Peziza.
vesiculosa Bull.
Bramham.
aurantiaCEd. Saltsiire {J^.Dew/iirst).
Esholt (H.T.SoppiU) 
„ ^carbonaria A.
& S.
Bramham.
"^omphalodes Bull.
Bramham.
Lachnea scutellata L.
Bramham.
XVLARIE^.
Xylaria polymorpha Grev.
Bramham.
„ hypoxylon Grev.
Harewood.
J/VCETOZOA.
^Dictydium cernuum P.
Bramham.
The results of the foray may be tabulated as follows : — 
Species collected and determined, 202 ; species new to the British 
flora, 2 ; species new to the AVest Riding flora, 42.
Naturalist, 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
The Fungus Foray of 1888, as a whole, may be regarded as 
highly successful, and it is to be hoped that it will give as much 
impetus to the study of fungi in Yorkshire as was given by that held 
in 1 88 1.
The foray of that year was the first ever held in the 
county, and it can be truly said that the seven years intervening 
between it and the one now chronicled have witnessed more 
practical work than had been done since the day of James Bolton, 
the author of ' The Fungusses of Halifax,' now about a century ago.
We do not know how many fungusses Bolton collected, but the 
Yorkshire list which Mr. Massee contributed to the 'Transactions of 
the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union' after the foray of 1881, included 
318 species, while for the West Riding alone the number cited in 
Lees' 'Flora of West Yorkshire,' published 1888, is 1,009, to which 
forty-one are added as the result of the Foray of 1888.
May it not 
be so many years before the third Yorkshire Foray is held, and may 
it be even more successful than its two predecessors of 1881 and 1888!
NOTE— FUNGI.
i^cidium calthae dev.
near Kendal.
— This cluster-cap, which seems to be 
very local, and which I have often sought for in vain, was growing in abundance 
on one spot on the side of Benson Knot near Kendal, in June ©f this year, on the 
leaves of Caltha pahistris.
It was interesting, from its bearing on the theory of 
dimorphism, to find Pzuchiea calt/uc Lk.
(also rather a rare fungus) growing on 
the same plants in September.
— C.
H. Waddell, Whitewell, Belfast, Oct. 25th.
NOTE—COLEOPTERA.
Coleoptera at Market Weighton, Aug-ust 6th, 1888.
— As a supplement to 
the report in last month's Natitralist^ I may remark that amongst other captures 
were Oxyporus riifiis and Mycetopliagiis qiiadriptistJilahis.
One very noticeable 
thing was the absence of Geodephaga, for, excepting a few Aviam, Calathtis 
cistdoides, and C.
nielanocephahis, I saw none.
— E.
G. Bavford, West Melton 
near Rotherham, September 12th, 1888.
NOTE—ARA CHNIDA.
Lincolnshire Spiders.
— The following three spiders, my specimens of 
which have been kindly examined by the Rev. O.
Pickard - Cambridge, are 
additions to the list of spiders obtained in the county of Lincoln, published 
at pp.
55-59 of The Nahcralist for 1887 : — 
Argyroneta aqtiatica Bl. Two observed in a drain bv Monk's House Lane, 
near Spalding, and another found running upon the beach at Mal)Iethorpe, the 
latter having, doubtless, been washed down from the marnh-drains.
August 1888.
LinypJiia vivax Bl. Taken in an out-lniilding at 7, Lee Street, Louth, 
April 1887.
Lycosa pahistris L.
Cleethorpes, April 1887.
While in Lincolnshire in August last, I found the beautiful Epcira scalaris in 
Bourn Woods, in the south of the county ; and in several places in the marshes, 
and near Gosberton in the fens, observed Epeira corniita numerously by the 
drain-sides.
Near Wragby, three of the dome-shaped webs containing the young 
of Ocyale mirabilis were noticed.
Two of these were upon low herbage, while 
the third was amongst furze fully eighteen inches from the ground.
In each case 
the adult spider was near the web, and one was observed to have a Tipi<!a within 
its grasp.
— H.
Wallis Kfav, London, 8th October, 1S8S.
Nov. i888.
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG K 
Crossbills (Loxia curvirostra and L.
pityopsittacus) on the East Coast 
of England.
— Besides the Crossbills which you have recorded, two were taken 
the last week in July at the Outer Dowsing Lightship, which is far out to sea, and 
almost in the same line of latitude as the Humber mouth.
They were brought 
alive by a sailor into Yarmouth, and taken to Mr. G.
Smith.
In April two 
Parrot Crossbills were shot near iSTorwich.
Mr. Gunn and I compared their beaks 
with the common species, and were satisfied that they were typical examples of 
this form, which has only once occurred before.
— J.
H. Gurney, Jun., Keswick 
Hall, Norwich, September nth, 1888.
Purple Heron in West Yorkshire.
— On the 20th of April last I examined, 
in the flesh, a fine mature male specimen of Ardea picrpurea Linn., which hail 
been obtained the previous day on the margins of Farnley Pool, near Otley.
When first seen, the bird was approaching the water from the direction of Hare- 
wood.
It appears to have been quite unsuspicious of danger, and allowed a 
keeper to approach within gun-range, and this in quite an exposed situation, where 
the bird was shot for a Common Pleron {Ardea cinerea).
This specimen makes 
the seventh occurrence known to me for Yorkshire of a bird which has occurred 
chiefly in the spring and summer in the county.
The bird is now, I believe, in 
the possession of the Rev. F.
Fawkes, of Rothwell.
— Wm. Eagle Clarke.
Black Guillemot near Whitby.— On the 30th August, a Guillemot was shot 
off Sandsend.
It is splashed black and white from the beak, all the underside to 
the tail, also round the head and neck to the shoulder ; the back black, with slight 
splashings here and there ; each wing has two white bars, and the legs and feet 
are a beautiful red.
Can you say what it is?
— T.
Stephenson, Whitby, Sep. 13th.
[There can be little doubt that the bird above described is an adult Black 
Guillemot {Uria grylle), in the transition stage of plumage between summer and 
winter.
The species is a casual visitant on the Yorkshire coast during the autumn 
and spring.
— W.E.C.] 
Reed Warbler nesting- in the Washburn Valley.— On July 5th I found 
the nest of the Reed Warbler {Acrocephaliis streperns), with young ready to fly, on 
the bank of one of the reservoirs.
The nest was in mowing-grass, supported by 
long stems, which were woven in its structure.
This is, I believe, the first note of 
the nesting of the bird in the above-named locality.^ — H.
Knight HorsI'TELd.
Flamborough Bird-notes.
— The late storms have brought several of our 
summer migrants down to the Headland, where they generally stop a few days to 
take rest before leaving our shores.
Several yo\xxv^ Q,\XQkoo% {Ctutihis canonis)^ 
Nightjars [Caprinnilgus europcciis), Wagtails, Redstarts {Riiticilla phain'cui-us), 
and Wheatears [Saxicola ccnanthe), have arrived, ready to book (to use the late 
Frank Buckland's metaphor, who represents Flamborough Head as a railway 
station for birds coming and going) for some other j^lace, probably far remote.
— 
Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, September nth, 1888.
Robin caug-ht in a Mouse-trap.
— On visiting my traps, which were set 
for Red Field Voles amongst a small plot of swede turnips, I was much surprised 
to find in one of them a Robin {Erithaciis 1 uiieciila), which was caught by the 
head, and killed, as a mouse would be.
The traps used were the common spring 
ones, set with thread, and which are struck, as soon as the thread is bitten 
through, death being caused by strangulation.
The one in question, however, 
was set by means of a spring instead of thread, but made on the same principle ; 
it was baited with oatmeal.
The Robin, after releasing the spring, to obtain the 
bait, had evidently, in its struggles, upturned the trap, which remained in such a 
position that the bird could not reach the ground with its feet, and was thus quite 
helpless, being held by its neck, with its body in a perpendicular position.
— 
Basil Carter, Burton House, Masham, October 9th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
NOTES-BOTANY.
Silene nutans still at Knaresborough.
— This plant is by no means exiinct 
in its old habitat at Knaresborough, but quite abundant.
I saw any (juantity of 
it this year, last year, and the year before.
— W.
C. Hey, St. Olave's X'icarage, 
York, October 9th, 1888.
Stratiotes aloides at Carlton near Selby.
— On the nth October inst.
. I 
found in a pond near Carlton, Selby, a number of specimens of the Water Soldier 
{Stratiotes aloides).
I believe this plant has not been recorded previously in the 
district of the Aire.
In the same pond were growing HydrocJiaris iiiorsns-raiuv, 
Siuvi latifoliictn.
Iris, and Riiniex hydrolapathuni.
— Thomas Ruxkkr, Cioole, 
October 13th, 1888.
Notes on Settle Plants.
— I observe that Mr. Whit well puts words into my 
mouth which I did not and could not use.
May I assure him that I did not throw 
doubt on the presence oi A.
lonchitis in the Settle district, or on Mr. Tatham's 
record for the same.
My words were : — ' I have seen nothing like the true plant 
near Settle, and forms of ' aaileatiini ' are often confounded with it ; it is more 
likely to be on Ingleborough, Penyghent, etc., than at a lower elevation.
No 
record for this plant ought to pass unless the specimen is in good fructification." 
These words are the words of caution and of my personal experience — they are 
not the words of doubt.
— A.
Craig Christie, 
NO TES—LEPID OPTERA .
Scopula ferrugalis at Huddersfield.
— I took a specimen of Scopiila fernigalis 
at Grimescar Wood near here on the 31st of August last.
The species is ciuite 
new to this district ; the only other Yorkshire localities for it are Scarborough and 
Harrogate.
— G.
W. K.
Crosland, Ilolmheld, Huddersfield, Sep. 7th, 1888.
Euperia fulvago and Acronycta alni near Doncaster.
— Recently, Mr.
J. N.
Young, of Rotherham, sent me a pair of Euperia fiilvago, part of twenty- 
six specimens which Mr. Young and his friends have secured in Wadworth Wood, 
near Doncaster, this season.
Except in Sherwood Forest, where the species is 
abundant, E.
pilvago has always been considered rare in Britain, and the only 
two previously recorded Yorkshire captures are— one by Mr. Harrison at IJainsley 
in 1875, o'^^ by ^f""- Pr^st at Doncaster in 1881.
In Wadworth Wood also, 
Mr. Young's son beat out of aspen on September 8th, a larva of Acronycta aliii ; 
the food is rather unusual for this species.
In the same wood, Lobophora Jiexap- 
terata was unusually abundant earlier in the season.
— George T.
PoRRiT r 
Huddersfield, October 6th, 1888.
NOTE— MAMMALIA, 
Whales off Flamborough.
— For several days some scores of large Whale>.
which I believe to be Finners, have visited our shores.
They go in shoals, and, 
to all appearance, should any obstacle come in their way, they would tear it limb 
from limb, so monstrous and wild-looking, jumping and plunging for yards, going 
at the rate of about eight miles an hour.
The crew of one of our crab-boats (so the 
men inform me, working their crab-pots) l)eing afraid of them, having hatl to make 
all the noise they possibly could to keep them oH" from molesting the boat.
Two 
very large codfish were picked up near the North Smithwick Buoy, ha\ ing been 
killed by those sea-monsters.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, Sep. 17th, 1S88.
[We submitted the aliove note to Mr. Thomas Southwell, who is inclined to think 
that the Whales ai e some species of J^ahciioptera, which are probably attracted l)y 
the presence of Herring or Whiting otf the coast, and that they are not likely to 
display any viciousness.
being of a very timid disposition, unless wounded.
The\ 
might, certainly, come in contact with the boat accidentally, but that is not ver\ 
probable.
— Eds.] 
Nov. i88S.
332 
THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE 
AND ITS SECOND YEAR'S WORK.
S. A.
ADAMSON, F.G.S., 
Ho7i.
Secretary to the Co7ni)tittee.
This Committee has again received, and, after careful examination, 
approved of, a large number of reports upon the Erratic Blocks of 
Yorkshire.
These have been duly forwarded and presented, through 
Dr. Crosskey, to the Geological Section of the British Association at 
the recent meeting at Bath.
They were warmly received and 
acknowledged to be valuable contributions to our glacial history.
The feeling was expressed, as heretofore, that Yorkshire still showed 
a splendid example in the method and exactitude of the observations 
presented, and also still afforded a type for laudable emulation on 
the part of other counties.
The Boulder Map of Yorkshire, whereon 
are placed the true positions of the various erratics reported, was on 
view before the members of the Geological Section.
The opinion 
was likewise expressed, that considering the large number of returns 
sent in and approved of, some classification of the same should be 
made : this, in due time, the Committee will certainly attend to.
The Committee would again most warmly thank those valued con- 
tributors and observers who have accomplished such valuable work, 
and would impress upon them the necessity of the continuance of 
their efforts, so that the glacial survey of Yorkshire may be an 
exhaustive one.
And, whilst specially acknowledging the efforts of 
the geologists of the North and East Ridings of Yorkshire (evidence 
of which the detailed reports will show) they would also ask that 
their friends in the West Riding should emulate this example and 
supply the information so much needed with respect to this important 
part of the county.
The Committee desire to place upon record the 
personal and self-denying efforts which their eminent chairman, 
Prof Green, F.R.S.
(now Professor of Geology at the University of 
Oxford), has unremittingly made to further their work.
They also 
wish to embody in this report the following resolution passed at a 
recent meeting of the Committee : "That we sincerely congratulate 
our chairman.
Prof Green, F.R.S.
, upon his well-deserved promotion 
to the illustrious position of Professor of Geology at the University 
of Oxford, and trust that his health may long permit him to adorn 
that post, although at the same time we are only too conscious of the 
personal loss to ourselves and to Yorkshire geology by his approaching 
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
333 
removal." The Committee also express their poignant regret at 
the untimely decease of Prof.
H. Carvill Lewis, who entered with such 
enthusiasm and success into glacial investigations connected with 
this country, and who, at the Manchester meeting of the British 
Association, expressed his high opinion of the work of the Yorkshire 
Boulder Committee, looking forward, as he then said, to much 
practical co-operation with them.
Speaking upon coming work, many reports are already in hand 
for consideration, and the Committee desire to emphasise their 
request that all unreported examples of erratic blocks in this county 
may be duly scheduled, for which purpose the hon.
secretar)- 
(Mr. Adamson, F.G.S., 52, Wellclose Terrace, Leeds) will gladly 
supply the requisite form of schedule, or give any information upon 
the work of the Committee and the results they desire.
The details 
of reports received and examined are now presented.
REPORTS UPON ERRATICS IN NORTH AND EAST RIDINGS 
OF YORKSHIRE.
Rev. E.
MAULE COLE, M.A., 
U^ciwang', President of the Geological Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
Stillington, near Easingvvold North Riding.
Gristhorpe, near Filey ...
...
...
Filey Brigg 
Muston, near Filey East 
Bempton ...
...
...
...
...
,, ,, 
Bempton and Buckton ,, 
Stillington, near Easingwold (North Riding).
In the North Skeugh Field, Stillington near Easingwold, is a 
boulder, 4 ft.
3 in.
x 3 ft.
x 2 ft.
7 in.
; rounded ; has not been 
moved; longest axis N.E. and S.W. No striae apparent; a ver}- 
hard Cherty Limestone; about 150 ft.
above sea-level.
Rests upon 
Middle Lias.
Gristhorpe, near Filev (North Riding).
In a field about 350 yards north of Gristhorpe Station, and about 
50 yds.
east of the railway, is an isolated boulder of Basalt.
Sub- 
angular; 4 ft.
7 in.
X 2 ft.
10 in.
x 1 ft.
11 in.
Partially embedded 
in the ground.
Carr Naze, Filev Brigg (North Riding).
I. Rounded block on surface of third field from P'iley Church, 
due north, near cliff; 2 ft.
7 in.
x 2 ft.
5 in.
x i ft.
5 in.
\Vhinstone.
Nov. 1888.
X 
334 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
2. A similar but flatter block, lying at base of Boulder Clay, 
partially exposed, on North side of Naze, just above Oolitic rocks ; 
2 ft.
II in.
X 2 ft.
8 in.
x i ft.
2 in.
; direction E.N.E. Beautifully 
furrowed with ice-marks.
Whinstone.
3. A mass, lying exposed on Oolitic rocks, about 50 ft.
above 
sea-level, evidently washed out of Boulder Clay above ; 3 ft.
8 in.
x 
2 ft.
X I ft.
4 in.
: smooth edges, flat surface.
Mica-Trap.
4. Small block, on ledge, fallen as above.
Quartz-Felsite.
5. In Boulder Clay, on S.
side of the Naze.
Black earthy 
Limestone, with Iron-Pyrites.
6. Fine mass of Lias, with Lower Lias fossils (Gryphsea, Mya, 
etc.) I ft.
X I ft.
5 in.
X 7 in.
Washed out of Boulder Clay on N.
side of the Naze.
7. Mass of Freestone, lying partially exposed, half-way up N.
face of Boulder Clay at Carr Naze; 3 ft.
10 in.
x 2 ft.
4 in.
x i ft.
; 
direction N.
; no markings.
MUSTON, NEAR FiLEY (EaST RiDING).
In and around the village of Muston are the following boulders : 
No. I.
3 ft.
X 2 ft.
X ij ft.
Basalt.
Smoothed.
,, 2.
I ft.
3 in.
X ift.9 in.
x i ft.
6 in.
,, Sharp edges.
3. 2 ft.
X 3 ft.
X I ft.
8 in.
„ Smoothed.
„ 4.
4 ft.
5 in.
X I ft.
10 in.
X 2 ft.
,, Triangular-shaped end.
„ 5.
3 ft.
X 2 ft.
4 in.
X I ft.
8 in.
„ Angular.
„ 6.
I ft.
8 in.
X 2 ft.
6 in.
x 2 ft.
1 1 in.
,, Smoothed on one side.
,, 7.
4 ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
7 in.
X I ft.
3 in.
Grit.
Round the sign-post in the centre of Muston village are two 
boulders.
Basalt; 2 ft.
7 in.
x 2 ft.
3 in.
x 8 in.
(embedded in 
ground), and 2 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
(embedded in ground).
A boulder at the corner of a house close by.
Basalt ; 2 ft.
3 in.
x 
1 ft.
8 in.
X 9 in.
There are at least half-a-dozen others from i ft.
to 2 ft.
cubes.
In a bank surmounted by a hedge, at the Hunmanby end of the 
village, are three Gritstone boulders ; 3 ft.
3 in.
x i ft.
8 in.
x i ft.
i in.
; 
2 ft.
7 in.
X I ft.
8 in.
; 3 ft.
x i ft.
5 in.
In the middle of a grass field, halfway between Muston and 
Hunmanby in a straight line, is an isolated boulder of Basalt; 
rounded : 3 ft.
6 in.
x 3 ft.
x i ft.
i^ in.
Embedded in the 
ground.
Bempton (East Riding).
At Bempton, in the fields known as the 'Leys,' a few yards from 
the top of Bempton Cliffs, opposite Scale Nab, are two boulders, 
which are about 50 yds.
apart.
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
335 
1. 4 ft.
X 3 ft.
X I ft.
6 in.
Sub-angular.
Longest axis, North, 
inclined to West.
Whinstone.
Above sea-level 275 ft.
Isolated.
Rests upon thin Boulder Clay, underlaid by Chalk.
2. 4 ft.
X 4 ft.
X I ft.
6 in.
Sub-angular.
Longest axis, North, 
inclined to AVest.
Whinstone.
Above sea-level 280 ft Isolated.
Rests upon thin Boulder Clay, underlaid by Chalk.
Bemptox and Buckton Ridino;.
At Bennpton and Buckton.
3 ft.
x 2 ft and 2 ft.
cube is the 
ordinary shape : a few angular, a few sub-angular, but mostly rounded.
The ones referred to have all been moved by man : built into 
foundations of houses: set up at corners of streets: also used as 
seats.
There is no doubt whatever the boulders have been removed 
from adjacent fields.
By far the greater number are Whinstone: 
there are many blocks of various Sandstones, but four-fifths are 
Whinstone.
They are about 250 ft.
above sea-level.
They are abundant in the villages of Bempton and Buckton — 
speaking only of the large ones : five may be seen at the well ; ten 
at the pond close by ; ten more in the cottages towards Clift" Lane : 
five forming steps in the lane itself : hundreds in the walls, of smaller 
size, but upwards of i ft.
cube : ten in Buckton.
upwards of 2 ft.
: 
fifteen at least in Old Bridlington, at the corners of streets, upwards 
of 2 ft., some smoothed; twenty-four by the pond at Flamborough, 
removed thither from adjacent fields.
All the above-mentioned are 
Whinstone : it is the characteristic boulder of the Buckton, Bempton, 
and Flamborough Cliffs, and seems ubiquitous.
REPORTS UPON ERRATICS IX XORTPI AND EAST RIDINGS 
OF YORKSHIRE.
SAMUEL CHADWICK, 
Malton\ Joitit Geological Secretary to Yorkshire Xaiaralists L'liion.
Xo. I.
Cropton, near Pickering 
North Riding 
Neswick, ,, Driffield ...
Eas: 
3- 
Grosmont ^^^^itlJy ...
North 
4. 
Sleights 
Kirk by Underdale 
Eait " 
SOS.
6 to 9.
Speeton, near P'iley 
10 to 15.
Hunmanby,, ,, 
,, 16 to 18.
Reighton ,, ,, 
19 to 29.
Cayton ,, Scarborough 
30 to 34.
Lebbersion,, ,, 
No. 35.
P"iley (near) 
„ 36.
Gristhorpe, near Scarborough 
37- 
Seamer ., ., 
Nov. 1888.
336 ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
1. — Cropton, near Pickering.
In the parish of Cropton, four miles from Pickering, North Riding, 
and in a grass field belonging to Mr. James Dixon, Loand House 
Farm ; 3 ft.
4 in.
x 2 ft.
5 in.
x i ft.
10 in.
out of ground.
Rounded, 
but attempts have been made to break it.
Its longest axis is nearly 
E. to W.
Sandstone, approaching Quartzite, not unlike some of the 
Yoredale Sandstones of the Yorkshire dales ; about 200 ft.
above 
sea-level, but considerably below Cropton village.
There are several 
small boulders near, and it rests upon fine loamy soil.
2. — Neswick, near Driffield.
On the farm occupied by Mr. Grundon (estate of Mr. J.
R. 
Grimston), Neswick, south-west of Drifheld ; at present 4 ft.
x 2 ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
3 in., but some portion has been broken away.
Sub-angular.
Not moved by man ; is long shaped, longest axis E.
and W.
Whin- 
stone ; 250 ft.
above sea-level; isolated, and is upon Boulder Clay 
resting upon Chalk.
3. — Grosmont, near Whitby.
Grosmont, near Whitby, on the estate of Messrs.
Bagnall, Gros- 
mont Iron Works; 2 ft.
3 in.
x i ft.
10 in.
x 2 ft.
Well rounded ; 
has been moved ; no striae or groovings.
Shap Fell Granite ; about 
100 ft.
above sea-level.
Was originally found in the bed of the river 
Esk, which is 300 yds.
E. of the railway station, and the boulder was 
found about 50 yds.
to the N.
of the first railway bridge crossing the 
stream.
The boulder rests upon the Alum Shales of the Lias, through 
which the river Esk cuts its way.
4. — Sleights, near Whitby.
Sleights, near Whitby, on the Sleights Hall estate, about 
300 yds.
W. of Sleights Railway Station, and on the E.
side of the 
river Esk ; 2 ft.
x i ft.
6 in.
x i ft.
6 in.
out of ground.
Sub-angular; 
rather long shaped, but has been moved ; no striae or groovings.
Granite; 100 ft.
above sea-level.
Was originally in a small bed of 
gravel, which rests upon the Lias Alum Shale, cut through at the 
making of the railway.
5. — Kirkby LTnderdale.
In a grass field, three-quarters of a mile due E.
from Kirkby 
Underdale and half a mile S.
of Uncleby are two boulders : — 
No. I is 5 ft.
X 3 ft.
6 in.
x I ft.
3 in.
; angular; longest axis, N.
and S.
No. 2 is 6 ft.
3 in.
X 3 ft.
x 2 ft.
6 in.
above ground ; sub-angular; 
longest axis, direct N.
and S.
These are both composed of Ferruginous Oolitic Limestone 
(Inferior Oolite), resting upon the Red Chalk ; no striae or groovings 
are visible upon exposed surfaces ; are about 300 ft.
above sea-level.
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
6, 7, S, 9.
— Speeton, NEAR Filey.
6. On Mr. Wilson's farm, in a field, and going from the high road 
to the house, is a boulder, 2 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
Nearly a 
square, angular block.
Whinstone ; about 350 ft.
above sea-level.
Is isolated.
Rests on Boulder Clay.
7. In a field near the mill belonging to Mr. Plews is a boulder, 
3 ft.
7 in.
X I ft.
3 in.
X i ft.
3 in.
Oblong, rounded at each end ; 
no striae or groovings observed.
Whinstone; about 350 ft.
above 
sea-level.
Rests on Boulder Clay, with Chalk underlying.
8. At the corner of Mr. Wilson's garden are three boulders : — 
No. I.
I ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
6 in.
X i ft.
Angular.
,, 2.
3 ft.
XI ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
Rounded.
„ 3- 3 ft.
X 2 ft.
X 2 ft.
Sub-angular.
No striae or groovings observed.
All are Whinstone ; about 350 ft.
above sea-level.
Rest on Boulder Clay, with Chalk underlying.
9. In the village road leading from the high road are twenty-three 
boulders, the three largest being of the following dimensions : — 
No. I.
2 ft.
XI ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
2 in.") _ , , •, 
„ 2.
I ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
X I ft.
I I'-regularly shaped 
„ 3.
I ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
J '-'"g"'^'-- 
The majority are Whinstone, the remainder fine Sandstone ; about 
350 ft.
above sea-level.
Note.
— In various parts of the village Whinstone boulders may 
be found, some rounded, others angular.
The average size about 
1 ft.
3 in.
X I ft.
Many of them have been moved, and are now 
used for support of stacks and other purposes.
10, II, 12.
— HUNMANBY.
10.
On the farm known as 'Airy Hill,' occupied by Mr. Wood- 
cock, are several boulders in front of the house, which have been 
collected from adjacent fields.
There are five composed of Whinstone, varying in size from 
2 ft.
10 in.
X I ft.
10 in.
X I ft.
4 in.
to i ft.
6 in.
x i ft.
6 in.
x j ft.
There are also three of Shap Granite, and one of Grey Granite, 
the largest being 2 ft.
3 in.
x 2 ft.
2 in.
x 11 in.
They are rounded 
to sub-angular.
The surface in this district undulates, and any 
sections are through Boulder Clay.
11.
On the Glenton Farm, on W.
side of road leading from 
Reighton to Filey are two boulders: — i ft.
7 in.
x i ft.
7 in.
x i ft.; 
Grey Granite; rounded.
3 ft.
x 2 ft.
10 in.
x 2 ft.
; Mountain Lime- 
stone ; rounded.
No strins or groovings.
Have doubtless been taken 
from an adjacent ridge of gravel which runs nearly N.
and S.
Nov. 1888.
338 ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
12.
On Col. Mitford's estate and on a farm occupied by 
Mr. Hornby, i J miles E.
of Hunmanby and 3 J miles S.
of Filey, are 
two boulders, i ft.
3J in.
x i ft.
x 9 in.
; i ft.
10 in.
x i ft.
5 in.
x 7 in.
Both are hard fine-grained Sandstones, and have been removed from 
adjacent land.
They originally rested upon the top of a bank close 
to the cliff.
All the above are from 150 to 200 ft.
above sea-level.
13, 14, 15.
— Hunmanby.
ISOLATED BOULDERS.
13.
On a farm known as 'Airy Hill,' occupied by Mr. Woodcock, 
about I mile E.
of Hunmanby and 2^ miles S.
of Filey.
2 ft.
4 in.
X 2 ft.
2 in.
X 5 in.
; a square angular block, has been moved; no 
groovings or striae.
A hard Sandstone, very like Kellaways Rock ; 
150 ft.
above sea-level; was found on the top of a knoll which is 
composed principally of Boulder Clay.
14.
On the Grafifitoe farm, about 100 yds.
E. of farmstead, 2 miles 
E. of Hunmanby, and 3 miles S.
of Filey, are two boulders : — 2 ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
IT in.
X I ft.
4 in.
; sub-angular, has been moved, but formerly 
rested upon Boulder Clay intermixed with gravel ; no striae or 
groovings ; red sandstone.
4 ft.
i in.
x 3 ft.
2 in.
x 2 ft.
; oblong 
and sub-angular, has been moved, but when found its longest axis 
was direct N.
and S.
; no stri^ ; Grey Granite ; formerly rested on 
same bed as preceding boulder.
15.
At the base of a cutting on the North Eastern Railway about a 
mile S.
of Filey Railway Station, 3 ft.
6 in.
x 2 ft.
11 in.
and projects 
above the ground about i ft.
6 in.
; oblong and sub-angular, has not 
been moved ; longest axis N.
to S.
; no stri^ or groovings ; Dark 
Blue Whinstone ; 150 ft.
above sea-level; is about midway in the 
centre of a ridge of Boulder Clay, sand and gravel.
16, 17, t8.
— Reighton.
16.
On the property of Mr. Gullan, Reighton, near Filey, and on 
the S.
side of St. Helen's Road (2^ miles E.
from Hunmanby, and 
4^ miles S.
from Filey) are two boulders : — 2 ft.
2 in.
x i ft.
7 in.
x 
I ft.
6 in.
and i ft.
9 in.
x i ft.
6 in.
x 10 in.
Both are sub-angular, 
and are Dark Blue Whinstone.
They were taken from a ridge of 
gravel and Boulder Clay close by; about 150 ft.
above sea-level; 
no striae or groovings.
17.
On Mr. Crow's Manor Farm, about 100 yds.W. of Reighton 
village, are two boulders : — 2 ft.
4 in.
x i ft.
7 in.
x i ft.
2 in., 
and I ft.
10 in.
x i ft.
2 in.
x i ft.
Both are oblong and sub-angular, 
and are Dark Blue Whinstone.
They were both taken from a field 
close by, and were exposed on the surface.
No striae or groovings.
Are about the same level as preceding blocks.
Naturalist, 
ADAMSOX : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
339 
t8.
At the entrance to Reighton village are four boulders : — 3 ft.
5 in.
X I ft.
10 in.
x i ft.
; 2 ft.
3 in.
x i ft.
1 1 in.
x i ft.
4 in.
; 3 ft.
5 in.
X I ft.
I in.
X II in.
; 2 ft.
3 in.
x i ft.
4 in.
x 9 in.
All are oblong 
and sub-angular, and are Dark Blue Whinstone ; have no striae or 
groovings.
Have been in present position beyond memory, but there 
is little doubt have been originally upon surface of adjoining fields, 
and removed for agriculture, but could not be broken for repairing 
of roads.
19 to 26.
— Cayton, near Scarborough.
ISOLATED BOULDERS.
19.
On Dr. Taylor's estate, and in the farm-yard of Mr. N.
Smith, 
on the west side of the village ; 2 ft.
8 in.
x i ft.
9 in.
x i ft.
2 in.
; 
angular ; has been moved ; no striae or groovings.
Whinstone.
It is now used as a mounting block ; 150 ft.
above sea-level.
It rests 
upon drift, composed of gravel, sand, and clay.
20.
On Mr. Hodgson's estate.
It is close to Mr. Smith's black- 
smith's shop, and used for a seat, also for a mounting stone ; 2 ft.
x 
[ ft.
8 in.
X I ft.
3 in.
; sub-angular ; has been moved ; no striae or 
groovings.
Whinstone ; 200 ft.
above sea-level.
It rests now upon 
surface soil.
21.
On Mr. Stead's estate.
It now forms the foundation-stone at 
the south corner of an old house inhabited by W.
Fowler, shoe-maker, 
on the side of the village main street ; i ft.
9 in.
x i ft.
6 in.
x i ft.
3 in.; 
flat, angular block ; has been moved ; no stri^ or groovings ; 150 ft.
above sea-level.
Whinstone.
22.
About 100 yds.
E. of the railway station, at the N.
side of the 
road, close to the gate, leading into the Valley Field, occupied by 
Mr. N.
Smith; 2 ft.
2 in.
x i ft.
8 in.
x i ft.; sub-angular; probably 
has been moved; no strise or groovings.
Whinstone; 150 ft.
above 
sea-level.
Rests on surface soil.
23.
In the foundations of an old cottage belonging to Mr.
Stephenson on theE.
side of the street.
This cottage is about 250 yds.
N. of the church ; 2 ft.
7 in.
x i ft.
x i ft.
2 in.; rounded and oblong ; 
has been moved; no striae or groovings exposed; 150 ft.
above sea- 
level.
Rests on surface soil.
Coarsely-grained Dolerite.
24.
On Mrs. Wilson's estate, in the centre of the village on the^^^ 
side of the Scarborough and Filey road ; 2 ft.
5 in.
x i ft.
10 in.
x 
I ft.
3 in.; rounded; has been moved; no strice or groovings.
Dolerite.
200 ft.
above sea-level.
Note.
— The possession of this boulder is at present in dispute.
It originally was in the foundation of some very old thatched 
cottages, and when the new property was built some years ago, a 
Nov. 18S8.
340 ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
large block of Sandstone was given in exchange, and now that the 
Sandstone is a fixture, they dispute the other being taken away.
25.
On Dr. Layton's estate, Cayton Carr, about a mile and a half 
W. of Cayton village.
It was taken out of a ridge of gravel that runs 
through the centre of a field called the ' Six-acre Strip,' in the 
occupation of Mr. Smith.
Its present position is close to the gate 
entering the field in which it was found ; 2 ft.
4 in.
x i ft.
7 in.
x 9 in.; 
sub-angular : no stride or groovings.
Whinstone.
250 ft, above sea- 
level.
Note.
— In a heap close by are several smaller boulders taken 
out of the same field, comprising Grey Granite, Red Granite, 
^Mountain Limestone, Whinstone, and Sandstone.
26.
Is at the S.
corner of a wall surrounding the engine-house of 
the Scarborough Waterworks Co., about one mile E.
of the village of 
Cayton ; 2 ft.
x i ft.
8 in.
x i ft.
3 in.
; rounded ; long-shaped ; no 
stri^ or groovings.
^Mountain Limestone.
Note.
— It was brought from the beach below to strengthen the 
corner of the wall.
27, 28, 29.
— Cayton, near Scarborough.
GROUPS OF BOULDERS.
27.
In a bye-road leading from Cayton to Scarborough are a large 
number of boulders, of w^hich upwards of thirty will average i ft.
4 in.
X 9 in., and over seventy others are over a foot in diameter.
The 
larger ones are sub-angular ; the smaller ones rounded.
All have no 
doubt been conveyed from adjacent fields ; no striae or groovings are 
to be seen on exposed surfaces.
They are different kinds of Sand- 
stone, and are about 150 ft.
above sea-level.
28.
On Miss Craven's estate, in the village of Cayton, about 
300 yds.
N. of the church and on the main road to Scarborough, is 
a group of nine boulders, four of which are Whinstone, and upon an 
average 1 ft.
11 in, x i ft.; the other five are Sandstone, and average 
I ft.
8 in.
X I ft.
2 in.
The Whinstones are mostly sub-angular; the 
Sandstones angular ; there are no striae or groovings exposed ; they are 
about 150 ft.
above sea-level.
Some of them are entirely exposed, 
the rest being partially covered with other stones and soil.
29.
On Miss Craven's estate, in the village of Cayton, and about 
250 yds.
N. of the church in a bye-road called North Lane are a 
number of boulders, the seven largest of which I have noted as 
follows : 
No. I.
I ft.
II in.
X I ft.
4 in.
x i ft.
Red Sandstone.
Angular.
„ 2.
2 ft.
6 in X I ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
Whinstone.
Angular.
„ 3.
ift.
loin.
X I ft.4in.
X ift.
3in.
Whinstone.
Rou nded.
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
No. 4.
I ft.
5 in.
X 1 ft.
3 in.
X I ft.
Hard grey Sandstone.
Sub-angular.
„ 5.
I ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
X 9 in.
Whinstone.
Rounded.
6. I ft.
4 in.
X 9 in.
x 7 in.
Mottled Granite.
Sub-angular.
7. 2 ft.
4 in.
X I ft.
2 in.
x 6 in.
Whinstone.
Angular.
Could not observe any striae or groovings.
The rising ground is 
principally composed of drift, gravel, sand, and clay, whilst the 
hollows are filled with deep peat-bogs.
Note.
— The great bulk of the boulders in this district are 
composed of Sandstone and Whinstone ; of these, thousands have 
been broken up and used to mend the roads from time unknown.
There is no doubt about the roads having received their supply of 
metal from this source.
Those left behind (as above) are those 
which could not be broken up, or which have been taken out of the 
land at a recent date.
30, 31, 32.
— Lebberston, near Scarborough.
ISOLATED BOULDERS.
30.
On Mr. Warden's estate, in a grass field at the E.
end of the 
village, and about 100 yds.
W. of the Scarborough and Filey Road; 
4 ft.
3 in.
X 2 ft.
5 in.
X 2 ft.
7 in., but evidently one-half of it is 
embedded.
Sub-angular ; longest axis, N.W. to S.E.
; should think 
it has not been moved.
There are remains of several groovings 
which are much worn, and there are also striae on the side of the 
block, in the direction of the longest axis.
Whinstone.
Is 200 ft.
above sea-level.
Is near the top of a ridge of gravel-drift.
31.
On Mr. Jackson's estate, at the E.
end of the village, near a 
yard door, on the W.
side of the road ; 2 ft.
3 in.
x i ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
3 in.
Angular, and is used as a stepping or mounting stone.
Has been 
moved, but is known to have been in its present position for more 
than a century ; no striae or groovings ; Whinstone ; 200 ft.
above 
sea-level.
No doubt has been obtained from gravel-drift in vicinity, 
but now rests on the surface soil.
32.
On Mr. H.
Watson's estate.
Is in a grass-field about a quarter 
of a mile north of the Gristhorpe Railway Station, Hull and Scar- 
borough branch ; 4 ft.
2 J in.
x 2 ft.
5 in.
x 3 ft.
6 in., and partiall}' 
embedded; sub-angular; flat on one surface; long-shaped; its 
bearing N.
and S.
There appear to be some striae, which have 
become very faint from exposure, but the stone being grown o\ er 
with Lichen, they are difficult to determine.
Ui)on the under side, 
however, is a well-defined groove about i ft.
long.
Whinstone.
The 
popular tradition is, that it was thrown by his Satanic ALijesty at one 
of his satellites for staying out too long.
An old farmer avers lie 
found it one morning, but the previous evening it was not there 
200 ft.
above sea-level.
Rests on Boulder Clay.
Nov. 7888.
342 adamson : the yorkshire boulder committee.
33, 34.
— Lebberston, near Scarborough.
33.
On Mr. Welburn's estate, and upon a farm in the village 
occupied by Mr. R.
Brown, are two boulders, 150 ft.
above sea-level.
Dimensions of No. i boulder :  — 3 ft.
2 in.
x i ft.
10 in.
x i ft.
2 in ; 
sub-angular; has been moved; Whinstone.
Dimensions of No. 2 
boulder: — 3 ft.
2 in.
x 2 ft.
x i ft.
8 in.; angular; has been moved ; 
Whinstone.
Both have evidently been found in the land.
No. 2 
was dug out of the garden in front of the house, close to the street, 
and moved to its present position.
Lebberston village is situated on 
a ridge of gravel.
34.
In Leys Lane, at the entrance to the village of Lebberston, 
on the north side of the lane, and west end of village, is a group of 
boulders : — 
No. I.
2 ft.
7 in.
X I ft.
6 in.
X 9 in.
Whinstone.
Sub-angular.
2. 2 ft.
3 in.
X I ft.
3 in.
x 10 in.
„ > „ 
3. 2 ft.
I in.
X 2 ft.
I in.
X I ft.
2 in.
Coarsely-grained 
Dolerite.
Rounded.
,. 4.
2 ft.
4 in.
X I ft.
X 9 in.
Sandstone.
Sub-angular.
,, 5.
2 ft.
I in.
X I ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
,, „ 
There are no striae or groovings upon them.
They are about 100 ft.
above sea-level ; are all close together, and exposed on the surface.
35.— Filey.
There is a boulder in the North Eastern Railway cutting about 
one mile N.
of Filey in the direction of Gristhorpe ; 2 ft.
10 in.
x 
2 ft.
3 in.
X I ft.
4 in.
; rounded and pear-shaped ; has been moved ; is 
now at the base of the cutting laid across a gutter or w^ater-way ; no 
striae or groovings.
Dark Blue Whinstone ; 200 ft.
above sea-level.
Was connected with a long ridge of gravel, sand, and clay, which 
was cut through when making the line.
36.
— Gristhorpe.
There is a boulder in the North Eastern Railway cutting about 
200 yds.
N. of Gristhorpe Station, and on the east bank of the 
cutting.
It is in the parish of Gristhorpe, near Scarborough ; 2 ft.
x 
I ft.
10 in.
X I ft.
; angular, almost square ; longest axis N.
and S.
; 
has not been moved ; no groovings or striae can be seen, but it is 
now almost covered with soil, which has fallen from above.
It is a 
light-coloured Sandstone, like the Moor Grit near Scarborough ; 
200 ft.
above sea-level ; it is in a bank of rough gravel, clay, and 
sand.
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
37.
— Seamer.
GROUP.
In the parish of Seamer, near Scarborough (N.
Riding) ; about 
three miles S.S.W. of Scarborough, and about two miles S.E. of 
Seamer village, and close to Seamer Junction (N.E.R.), on the estate 
of Lord Londesborough.
No.
I. 
I 
ft.
X 
9 in.
X 6 in.
Red Granite.
2. 
2 
ft.
6 
in.
X I ft.
10 in.
X I ft.
4 in.
Shap Granite.
55 
3- 
T 
ft.
X 
I ft.
X 9 in.
5) 
5? 
4- 
I 
ft.
6 
in.
X I ft.
X 9 in.
55 
?> 
5- 
I 
ft.
2 
in.
X I ft.
X 8 in.
55 
5 J 
6. 
I 
ft.
8 
in.
X I ft.
6 in.
x 9 in.
55 
53 
7- 
I 
ft.
6 
in.
X I ft.
2 in.
x 8 in.
Mica Schist.
55 
8. 
I 
ft.
6 
in.
x I ft.
6 in.
x i ft.
6 in.
Red Schist.
All are rounded ; they have been moved, but were obtained from the 
Seamer Gravel Drift ; no striae or groovings are visible ; about 200 ft.
above sea-level.
The Gravel Drift of Seamer overlies the Coralline 
Oolite.
REPORT UPON BOULDERS IN THE GROUNDS OF THE 
YORKSHIRE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, YORK.
H. M.
PLATNAUER, B.Sc, F.G.S., 
Ciirator of the Yo7-k Mnsei(ni.
Note.
— The following were obtained from the Boulder Clay that 
was dug out when the York New Station was built, and are placed 
about the grounds as examples of travelled boulders.
1. Shap Granite ; irregular shape ; sm.ooth ; 2 ft.
9 in.
x i ft.
10 in.
XII in.
2. Shap Granite ; irregular ; parallelopiped ; rough surface ; 
I ft.
4 in.
X I ft.
4 in.
X 10 in.
3. Shap Granite ; roughly ellipsoidal ; smooth surface ; 2 ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
I in.
X I ft.
2 in.
4. Shap Granite; irregular mass; rounded, but not smooth; 
3 ft.
I in.
X 2 ft.
8 in.
X I ft.
10 in.
5. Shap Granite ; irregular oval ; smooth ; 2 ft.
9 in.
x i ft.
10 in.
X I ft.
7 in.
6. Whitish Limestone ; flat piece, polished and striated on one 
side ; 3 ft.
x i ft.
3 in.
x 8 in.
7. Estuarine Sandstone ; rounded mass ; i ft.
4 in.
x i ft.
i m.
X 9 in.
8. Dark-coloured Mountain Limestone ; polished and striated ; 
I ft.
5 in.
X I ft.
2 in.
X 9 in.
Nov. 1888.
344 ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
9. Limestone (Oolitic, but of what horizon I cannot say) ; 
smooth ; striated on one side ; i ft.
4 in.
x i ft.
3 in.
x 9 in.
10.
Similar to No. 9 ; i ft.
3 in.
x i ft.
2 in.
x 7 in.
1 1.
Sandstone (probably Estuarine); angular; irregular; i ft.
5 in.
X I ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
I in.
12.
Grey arenaceous Limestone (probably Jurassic) ; irregular; 
smoothed on one side; i ft.
i in.
x i ft.
3 in.
x 10 in.
13.
Similar to No. 12; smooth on one side; i ft.
Sin. x i ft.
4 in.
X I ft.
I in.
14.
Light-coloured Sandstone; smooth; egg-shaped; striated; 
2 ft.
X I ft.
2 in.
X I ft.
6 in.
15.
Lithostrotion ; small, polished, and rounded mass; i ft.
x 
9 in.
X 7 in.
16.
Greenish-grey Trap (probably a Hornblende- Andesite) ; an 
irregular quadrate mass, trapezoidal, in section at one direction ; 
the faces at an obtuse angle are polished and somewhat striated; 
2 ft.
6 in.
X 2 ft.
X I ft.
4 in.
REPORTS UPON BOULDERS NEAR NORTHALLERTON.
Rev. THOS.
PARKINSON, 
Vicar of North Otterhigtoii^ near Northallerton.
Thornton-le-Beans, near Northallerton.
In the centre of the village, at the left or north side of the village 
street, going eastwards ; township of Thornton-le-Beans, parish of 
North Otterington ; length, 3 ft.
10 in., E.
and W.
; breadth, 3 ft.
2 in., 
N. and S.
; above ground, 2 ft.
4 in., and probably about the same 
in the ground ; rounded ; uncertain whether it has been moved or 
not ; longest axis, E.
and W.
; no striae or groovings ; Shap Granite ; 
isolated ; rests on clay.
Thornton-le-Moor, near Northallerton.
In the township of Thornton-le-Moor, parish of North Ottering- 
ton, are three boulders : — 
No. I.
In an open field near a well, named ' Stockeld's Well '; 
about 4 ft.
6 in.
X 2 ft.
8 in.
x 2 ft.
8 in.; somewhat wedge-shaped; 
rounded ; cannot say whether it has been moved or not ; longest 
axis N.
and S.
(nearly) ; ice-worn ; isolated ; rests on clay ; Granite.
No. 2.
In a lane called ' Endecon'; about 300 yds.
from S.
end 
of village of Thornton-le-Moor ; 3 ft.
2 in.
x 2 ft.
x 2 ft.; was con- 
siderably broken a few years ago ; has been moved ; Coarse Dolerite 
or Gabbro ; isolated ; rests on clay.
Naturalist, 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
345 
No. 3.
On the road-side near farm-house called Hill Top or 
Thief Hole Farm; 3 ft.
8 in.
x 2 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
9 in.; all above 
ground; rounded a little, angular in some parts; has been moved; 
taken out when foundation was dug of an adjacent building; isolated; 
rests on clay ; Close-grained Trap or highly altered fine Ash.
North Otterington.
In township of North Otterington ; on Otterington Farm, in field 
near the entrance gate from Northallerton-road, and about 300 yds.
on the road from North Otterington Church; 4 ft.
x 2 ft.
11 in.;, 
height above ground — one side, i ft.
6 in.; the other, 3 to 4 in.
: 
somewhat wedge-shaped ; angles all rounded ; has been moved ; 
there are four ruts running longitudinally on the top and in the 
direction of longest axis; Granite; rests on gravel.
NORTH STAIXLEY, NEAR RIPOX.
Rev. R.
a. SUMMERFIELD, 
Vicar of XortJi Stai7iley.
In the parish of North Stainley, near the hamlet of North Leys, 
and about 100 yds.
from the 'Smithy' (so marked on the 6-in.
Ordnance Map), on the west side of the road to North Stainley, is.
a boulder ; 3 ft.
3 in.
x 2 ft.
5 in.
x i ft.
7 in.
; sub-angular ; it has 
been moved from the adjoining field to the place it now occupies 
about twenty years, being a hindrance to ploughing, etc.
; Carboni- 
ferous Gritstone ; about 170 ft.
above sea-level; connected probably 
with a long gravel ridge, which is about two miles in width, and 
which abuts on the western bank of the River Ure and underlies all 
the parish ; in this ridge are a large quantity of scratched, grooved, 
and polished blocks, varying much in size ; one block — 5 ft.
x 3 ft.
x 
I ft.
3 in.
— is a mass of large producti.
THE NORBER GROUP OF BOULDERS.
J. W.
DAVIS, F.G.S., F.S.A., etc., 
Hoti.
Sec. I 'orkshire Geological and Polytechnic Society.
At Norber near Clapham, Yorkshire, extending over an area of 
three-fourths of a mile square, are several hundreds of boulders.
They are of Silurian Grit resting upon Mountain Limestone, and of 
all sizes up to 16 and 20 ft.
in diameter.
They are angular ; they 
show slight striations on under surface rarely, but are not easily 
determined.
From 800 to 1,250 ft.
above sea-level.
Rock identical 
Nov. 18S8.
346 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
with, that of the boulders is found in the valley to the north, at 
various spots varying from a mile to a mile and a half from the place 
where the boulders are most thickly congregated.
Are all exposed 
on the surface ; in many instances the masses of Silurian Grit have 
protected the Limestone immediately beneath, whilst the surrounding 
surface has been removed and they now stand on pedestals of 
Limestone, 12 to 1 8 in.
in height.
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE NORBER BLOCKS.
Phillips.
Trans.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
iii.,p.
13 ; and Rivers, Mountains, 
and Sea Coast of Yorkshire, p.
in.
Hughes.
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polytech.
Soc.
(1867), iv, 574 ; 
and Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc.
(1886), xlii, 527.
Tiddeman.
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc.
(1872), xxxviii, 477.
Davis.
Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polytech.
Soc, vol.
vii, 266.
Davis and Lees.
West Yorkshire, pp.
200, 201, 267.' 
Adamson.
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc., Part i (1885) pp.
32-34.
SALTBURN, YORKSHIRE (N.
RIDING).
W. Y.
VEITCH, M.D.
M iddlesbrotigh.
Saltburn ; thirty feet from the top of the road leading up from the 
beach ; almost opposite the Zetland Hotel ; 3 ft.
8 in.
high, 14 ft.
in 
circumference ; is entirely out of ground on one side ; rounded ; has 
no long axis, no groovings, or striations ; Shap Fell Granite ; has no 
popular name and is without a legend ; about 150 ft.
above sea-level; 
is not indicated upon any map ; it rests upon Middle Glacial Drift.
REPORT UPON BOULDERS AT FILEY AND HUMMANBY.
WILLIAM HODGSON GILL, 
Stourton, Leeds.
At Filey, Yorkshire, and lies on the beach behind the w^ooden 
piles at the base of cliff, near Ravine Villas; 3 ft.
3. in.
x 2 ft.
2 in.
X 2 ft.
2 in.
; is rounded ; no groovings or striations ; Shap Fell 
Granite ; it rests on Boulder Clay.
At Hunmanby, at the end of the road leading to the beach; 
3 ft.
7 in.
X 2 ft.
3 in.
X 2 ft.
3 in.
; is sub-angular; no groovings or 
striations ; Shap Fell Granite ; it rests on Boulder Clay.
Naturalist 
ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
347 
At Filey, on the beach between Primrose Valley and Hunmanby 
Road ; 4 ft.
i in.
x 2 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
i in.
; angular ; no groovings or 
striations.
Calcareous sandstone with nodules and pebbles.
The 
specimen has been referred to Mr. C.
Fox Strangways, F.G.S., and he 
reports that it resembles so closely some parts of the Dogger that he 
has little hesitation in referring it to that bed.
It rests on Boulder 
Clay.
LINDHOLME fS.W. YCRKS.).
C. BROWNRIDGE, F.G.S., Assoc.M.Inst.CE., 
Leeds.
These boulders are on the west front of Lindholme Hall, which 
is about four miles to the S.E. of Hatfield.
The Hall is upon 
slightly elevated ground in the centre of Hatfield Chase, a wide 
extent of bog.
The deposits in the vicinity of the Hall consist of 
gravel and sand, resting upon Triassic Sandstone.
The boulders 
extracted from the gravel include magnesian limestone, carboniferous 
sandstones of various kinds, gannister and millstone grit, porphyries 
and basalts, quartzite, vein quartz, black flints, chert, etc.
No. I.
1 ft.
10 in.
X I ft.
9 in.
x i ft.
8 in.
; longest axis, N.E. to 
S.W, ; sub-angular; closely-grained Flinty Trap, not unlike some 
Lake country rocks of that character ; no groovings or striations 
observed.
No. 2.
2 ft.
II in.
X 2 ft.
o\ in.
x i ft.
7 in.; longest axis, N.E. to 
S.W.
; rounded ; a coarse grit, almost a conglomerate with large 
quartz pebbles ; no groovings or striations observed.
Lindholme is a perfect solitude, and here a mythical personage, 
half giant, half hermit, known as ' William of Lindholme,' is said to 
have lived, and to have brought the above stones, known traditional!}' 
as the 'Thumb Stone ' and the ' Little Finger Stone,' to their present 
position.
GUISBOROUGH (NORTH RIDING).
WILLIAM GREGSON, 
Baldersby, Thirsk ; Ho7i.
Local Secretary, Yorkshire Geological and Polytechnic Society.
In the Priory Grounds, Guisborough, are two boulders : — No. i 
is 4 ft.
X 3 ft.
6 in.
X I ft.
3 in.
; No. 2 is 3 ft.
6 in.
x 3 ft.
2 in.
x i ft.
; 
both are sub-angular and have no groovings or striations ; they arc- 
isolated and about 300 ft.
above sea-level.
They are composed of 
Grey Granite, and rest on Lower Lias.
Nov. 1888.
348 ADAMSON : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
CUNDALL, NEAR BOROUGHBRIDGE (NORTH RIDING).
T. CARTER MITCHELL, M.R.C.S., 
Topcliffe, Thirsk.
In the parish of Cundall, on the Leckby estate, five miles from 
Boroughbridge, about a quarter of a mile above ' Elmire Ings,' as 
given on the Ordnance Map, is a boulder; it is in the bed of the 
river Swale, close to the Leckby bank ; it is entirely out of the water 
when the river is very low ; 4 ft.
3 in.
x 3 ft.
x 2 ft, 9 in.
; is more or 
less rounded; no striae or groovings ; Shap Granite"; is about 50 ft.
above sea-level.
There is a long ridge of gravel and sand about a 
quarter of a mile from where the boulder lies.
YOULTHORPE, NEAR STAMFORD BRIDGE (EAST RIDING).
ROBERT MORTIMER, 
Fimber.
At Youlthorpe, between Bishop Wilton and Stamford Bridge, is a 
large isolated boulder ; had not been moved by man until recently, 
when it was carted into the farmyard of Mr. Hawkins.
Is now used 
as a mounting block; 3 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
9 in.
x 2 ft.
to in.
Youlthorpe 
is on the Keuper Marl and not far from the foot of the Chalk 
escarpment of the Wolds.
Pure white, very quartzose.
Sandstone.
SEAHAM HARBOUR (Co. DURHAM).
Rev. ARTHUR WATTS, F.G.S., Etc.
Vice-Principal, Bede College, Durham.
This boulder is in the grounds of Mr. R.
L. Hawthorne, Haw- 
thorne Tower, Seaham Harbour, on north side of Hawthorne Drive 
and W.
of the Tower ; was removed from an adjacent field, when 
draining, to its present position ; 5 ft.
10 in.
x 3 ft.
8 in.
x i ft.
3 in.; 
weight, I ton, 18 cwt.
; sub-angular; it originally pointed, by its long 
axis, 20° E.
of N.
magnetic, 42° E.
of N.
true bearing.
There are 
seven grooves across the stone — five perfect, two imperfect; there 
are two sets of striae, the one set of six are nearly obliterated by the 
other numbering about seventy ; the smaller groups of striae are 
nearly in the line of the longest axis, the larger group make an 
angle of about 60° with the long side.
It is Encrinital Carboni- 
ferous Limestone, and the nearest in situ that I know of is twenty-five 
miles due west at Frosterley ; it has no popular name or legend ; is 
about 80 ft.
above sea-level; it was discovered in March 1879, ^nd 
is not indicated on any map ; it formed part of a mass of clay, sand, 
gravel, and boulders, that is seen in a coast section to lie in a hollow in 
the Magnesian Limestone about i,;^y^J^i^|^^d 60 ft.
or more deep.
Naturalist, 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
wha^ species are or have, within liistorical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., & WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS.
'The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most consci^ itious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the physical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the suTimary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable .contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann.
<Sr» Mag^.
Nat. Hist.
'The work is an excellent one of its kind.' — Athenceiim.
THE YOUNG NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of — 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
Q. COVERDALE, London.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
Q. ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
J. W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all reputed' species, and full 
bibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
Crown Svo, Cloth.
Illustrated.
TOPOGRAPHY AND NATURAL HISTORY 
OP 
LOFTHOUSE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
By GEORGE ROBERTS.
CONTENTS: Vol. I.
— Antiquities; Field-nomenclature; Ancient Houses; Registers; 
Charities ; Industries ; Surveys ; Statistics ; Ancient Leases ; Natural History Diary from 
1862 to 1875 ; Essays on Natural History ; Lists of Plants and Shells.
CONTENTS: Vol. II.— Flora and Fauna; Customs; Notes on Church Sun-dials; 
Memoir of Charles Forrest ; Notes on Old Families ; Rothwell Registers ; Observations on 
Domed Nests : Natural History Dinry from 1876 to 1883 : .•\dditional Lists of Plants and Shell.s.
Price of First Volume - - 5s.
Od.
,, Second Volume - 3s.
6d.
To be obtained from the Author, Lofthouse, Wakefield.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD KDITION.
REVISKU AND EXTENDED BY A.
1'..
I'ARN.
The Chapter on Coleoptera, by F.divard Xeivnian.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching ; bo.\ing female moths ; pairing in.-HCCts.
How to obtain Lakv^ic by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; searching by night ; hnw to rear 
the larva; ; sleeving; iiybcrnating lar\ .-t ; parasites; preserving larvit.
Pii-A i)ic;t;iN«;: preserv- 
ing pupa;; forcing pupa;.
Thk Pkkfhct Inskct.
— Localities; net; motiiing ; honeydcw; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; niitcs ; 
mould ; cabinets and store boxes ; painting ; arrangement and nomenclature ; number of speci- 
mens and manner of placing; transmission by post; entomological diary; l)ooks.
MuK.).
LEl'IDOl'TEKA ; CoLnorTKKA ; Hy.ME.NUI'TKRA ; HKKKDINt; OK CiALL-Fl-IKS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN ALLEN, PATERNOSTEK SQUARE.
THE ^^ATTJUAIjIST.
The Editors hope to piiblish the /ollowing papers within the next _fevj tnonths:-   
Th.e Natterjack Toad in Cliesliire and Lancasliire.— Linn^us Greening.
Notes on the Food and Habiis of Slugs and Snails.— W.
A. Gain, M.C.S.
Plants of Langstrothdale— Trevor Basil Woodd.
Museums of the North, of England- British Association Committee.
Bibliography : Geology and Palaeontology, 1887.
Bibliography: Botany.
Bibliography: Dipt^ra, 18S4, 1885, 1888, 1837.
NOMENCLATURE OF COLOURS 
FOR THE USE OF NATURALISTS, 
AND ORNITHOLOGISTS' COMPENDIUM.
By ROBERT RIDGWAY, of the Smithsonian Institution, 
PRICE 17s., POST FREE.
MAY BE HAD OF THE EDITORS OF THE 'NATURALIST.' 
LITTLE, BROWN & CO., BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A.
Post Free in Cardboard Covers, Is.
; Cloth, Is. 6d.
Address: — 'Flower-Land,' Sewerby Vicarage, Hull; or can be ordered through any 
Bookseller, or from the Publisher, John Heywood, Deansgate, Manchester.
AN EASY INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY, 
FOR CHILDREN, AND FOR THE USE OF PARENTS AND TEACHERS.
Vicar of Sewerby, Hull.
' Few works are written in such a plain manner as this, especially when dealing with Botany.
It is one of the easiest introductions to the subject we have come across.' — Horticjtlttiral Tijties 
' Parents or Teachers who are able to take their children for country' rambles will find here a 
capital basis provided for conversational lessons in the rudiments of Botany.' — Teachers Aid.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by JOHN W.
TAYLOR, F.L.S.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leadinii Conchologists of the day.
—Vol. VIL commenced January i888.
Vols.
I., IL"; IIL, IV., v., & VL may still be had.
This Journal, edited by Mr. J.
\V.
Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Culour Printing Works, Hunslet Road, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, 
THOS.
W. BELL, 2, Carr Lane, Leeds.
I L>SO 1888 
No. 161 
DECEMBER 1888.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGL 
AND.
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK.
F.L.S..
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
CORRESHONDIKENDER MITGLIEU DES OKXITHOLOGISCHEN VEREINS IN WIEN.
Contents : 
The Igneous Dykes of the North of England— Alfred //arker, M.A.,F.G.S.
. 
Occurrence of the American Pectoral Sandpiper on the Yorkshire Coast- 
yo/iu Cordeaux, M.B.O. U 
Notes on the Reed Warbler—/".
B. Whitiock 
The Natterjack Toad in Cheshire and Lancashire — LintiiFiis Greening 
Bibliography: Cryptogamic Botany, 1886 and 1887 
Notes— Ornithology 
Rough-legged Buzzard at Meanwood, Leeds — H.
K. Horsjicld, M.P.O.U.
; 
Whitby Notes — TJwvias StepJieJison ; Pallas' Sand-Grouse at Wetwang-on- 
the-Wolds — Rev E.Maide Cole, M.A.
; Pallas' Sand-Grouse in Lincolnshire 
— y.
IV.
Harr{so7i ; Manx Shearw ater r.ear Nottinghani — F.
B. Whitiock.
Not 
Notes and News 
Pre-historic Archaeology .
A Lake-Dwelling in Lar.cash 
l-AGE 
349 to 353 
354 
355 & 356 
357 to 360 
361 to 369 
353.
354,356 
360 
Rev. E.
Maule Cole.
.V..n.
Title-page, Preface, and Index to the Vol -me.
LONDON : 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
McCORQUODALE & CO.
LIMITED, CaRDINGTON StREET, EtSTON ; 
.AND 
Leeds: Basinghali.
Street.
All Communications should be Addressed :— 
The Editors of The Naturalist.' 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
^RICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence .
The NATURALIST.
>ccX   
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Zoological Society's Library Catalogue.
Two Parts.
[Rev. H.
H. Slater.
Mittheilungen des Ornith.
Vereins in Wien, Jahrg.
xii, Nr. ii.
Nov. iSSS.
[Verein.
Abstract of Proc.
Geol.
Soc. London, No. 523, May 9th, iSSS.
[A.
Harker.
A. Harker — Additional Note on the Blue Hornblende of Mynydd Ma\\r.
Svo 
reprint, 2 pages.
October iSSS.
[Author.
A. Harker — Note on Hornblende as a Rock-forming Mineral.
Svo reprint, 
4 pages, iSSS.
[Author.
A. Harker — The Eruptive Rocks in the neighbourhood of Sarn, Caernarvonshire.
Svo reprint.
22 pages.
August iSSS.
[Author.
T. E.
Bedford — Notes ou Fiint-tiake Instruments found in the Isle of Man. Svo 
reprinf.
4 pages.
1SS7.
[Author.
Science Liossip.
No. 2S7.
for N'ov.
iSSS.
[Messrs.
Chatto .^c Windus, Publishers.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 131.
for Nov. iSSS.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
Essex Naturalist, vol.
ii.
Nos. 9 and 10.
Sept.
and Oct. iSSS.
[Essex Field Club.
Mineralogical Magazine, vol.
viii.
No. 37, October iSSS.
[The Society.
ResearchT monthly illust.
journ.
of science, vol.
i. No. 5.
Oct. iSSS.
[A.
N.Tate, Ed.
Natural llisiorv Tournal, No. io6a, Nov. isi.
iSSS : No. 107, Nov. 15th, 1888.
[,[.
E. Clark .V B.
B.Le Tall, Editors, York.
The Wesley Naturalist, No. 21.
for Nov. iSSS.
[The Wesley Scientific Society.
The Young Naturalist, Part 106 for Oct. iSSS.
[Mr. john'E.
Robson, Editor.
Notarisia, Ann. III.
No. i2.0:tobre iSSS.[G.B.deToni e D.Levi- Morenos.
Redattori.
New York Microsc.
Soc.
— Journ..
vol.
iv..
No. 3.
July ; No. 4.
0ct.,rSSS.
[Society.
Tournal of Concho'ogy.
vol.
v. No. 12.
Oct. iSSS.
[J.
\Y.
Taylor.
Editor.
J. W.
Williams— Land and Freshwater Siieils : an introduction to the study of Conch 
Svo. Lond., 112 pp., dated 1SS9 (,pub.
iSSS^.
[Swan Sonnenschein Os: Co., Pubs.
Psyche : journ.
of entom.
,vol.
v.Nos. 149-150.
Sep.
-Oct. iSSS.TCamb.Ent. CI.
, U.S.A.
Societe Royale Malacologique de Belgique — Proces-verbaux, Annee iSSS.
[La Societe.
The Zoologist, Yol. xii, No. 142, 3rd Series, Oct. iSSS.
[J.
E. Harting, Editor.
The Auk : a quarterly journal of Ornithology, vol.
v. No. 4, Oct. iSSS.
[Am. O.Union.
EXCHANGE.
Notices of Exchange inserted free of charge to Subscribers.
Wanted.
— Living examples of Limax arbcruin, L.
/in-is, and Z.
tcncUus.
British Land and Fre.^hwater Shells in exchange.
— W.
A. Gain, Tuxford, Newark.
Conehology.
— I have several specimens of Venus cxcieia which I should 
like to exchange for other Mariiie specimens.
— Arthur Smith, 103, Freeman 
Street, Grimsby, July iith, iSSS.
Lincolnshire Natural History.
— Co-operation in collecting information 
respecting the Marine Mollusca of Lincolnshire is desired.
Lists and 
specimens may be forwarded to the care of Mr. H.
W^allis Kew, 112, Hanley 
Road, Stroud Green, N.
Yorkshire Heronries.
— I should feel greatly obliged if brother naturalists 
and others interested in the history of our Yorkshire Heronries would furnish me 
with what information they may have concerning any of the Heronries of York- 
shire (either existing or those that have cease !
to existl.
Assistance can be 
rendered by sending extracts bxmi old published records, or by calling my attention 
to same.
— F.
R. Fitzgerald, Hon. Sec.
Naturalists" Society, Cliftbrd House, 
Harrogate.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
'Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3id.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidopiera, Ova, Larvae, and Pupee, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, lVc, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
349 
THE IGNEOUS DYKES OF THE NORTH 
OF ENGLAND.
ALFRED HARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
Fellow of St. John 's College, Cambridge.
Among the minor phenomena of field geology, few features are more 
striking than the various igneous dykes of which the British Isles 
afford such numerous examples.
Ranging as more or less vertical 
walls through stratified or other rocks of totally dissimilar character, 
and often persisting for considerable distances in a straight line with 
approximately uniform width and constant lithological characters, 
they are sufficiently distinctive to be at once recognised when found.
Often they stand out slightly above the adjacent rocks at the surface, 
owing to superior durability ; in other cases they have weathered 
more rapidly than the 'country rock,' and figure in the landscape as 
slight depressions or trenches ; in some places, again, small dykes are 
liable to be passed over unless carefully sought.
In many modern volcanoes the filling of fissures with molten 
lava, which solidifies into dykes, is seen to be a common accom- 
paniment of volcanic action.
Many of the dykes exposed among 
the rocks by denudation appear, on the other hand, to be offshoots 
of deep-seated masses of igneous material.
They have been 
injected under great pressure from below, and in most cases probably 
never reached the surface of the earth.
Again, it appears that dykes 
have served as the channels by which molten matter on a very large 
scale has been forced upward and extruded over the surface in 
massive lava-flows.
By Richthofen and others some of the grandest 
out-pourings of lava in Tertiary and possibly in earlier times have 
been ascribed to these 'fissure-eruptions' rather than to volcanic 
vents of the ordinary type.
In the nature of the case, it must be extremely difficult to obtain 
direct ocular evidence of the connexion of dykes in partially 
denuded districts, either with plutonic bosses or reservoirs, or with 
volcanic activity long dead.
It seems probable, however, that much 
may yet be done in this direction by detailed work — by noting the 
localities of dykes (many of which are known, but doubtless many 
more unknown), and by observing their bearing, their width, and 
especially their petrological characters.
The earliest dykes in the North of England must naturally be 
looked for in the Lake District, where the oldest strata in this part of 
the country crop out.
Here volcanic conditions are known to have 
Dec 1888.
Y 
350 HARKER : IGNEOUS DYKES OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
prevailed throughout the time when the rocks of the Borrowdale Series 
were laid down, and we may therefore expect to find dykes of this age 
in the same district.
The most imposing manifestations of vulcanicity 
belonging to this age are the andesitic lavas and agglomerates so 
largely developed in the central zone of the Lake District, forming 
the greater portion of the Borrowdale Series of rocks.
Dykes of 
similar (i.e.
'intermediate') composition do indeed occur intersecting 
the Skiddaw Slates at certain places; but since the sites of the 
andesitic volcanoes are not certainly known (Mr. Clifton Ward 
considered the Castle Head, Keswick, to mark one of these), it is 
impossible to connect the dykes definitely with this period of 
volcanic activity.
It is of course to be borne in mind that, owing 
to their conditions of consolidation, the rocks of the larger dykes 
would take the structure of dolerite or diabase rather than andesite.
The andesitic rocks were succeeded by an out-pouring of acid 
lavas (rhyolites), which are now well seen along the southern border 
of the former series.
The volcanoes which emitted these newer 
lavas are long since destroyed ; but there are good reasons for 
supposing that their basal wrecks are still represented by some of 
the masses of crystalline acid rocks, which break through, especially 
on the boundary of the Skiddaw Slates and the Borrowdale Series, 
in St. John's Vale, in Ennerdale and by Buttermere, and perhaps on 
Caldbeck Fells in the north.
If so, this fixes the date of numerous 
dykes of micro-granite, granophyre, and quartz-porphyry which may 
credibly be linked with the masses in question.
For instance, the 
dykes of spherulitic quartz-porphyry near Armboth and Helvellyn 
seem to belong to the microgranitic boss of St. John's Vale : others 
in Ennerdale are doubtless connected with the granophyre of the 
Ennerdale mass.
A number of dykes of granite and quartz-porphyry 
to the south of Shap Wells may be related to the porphyritic granite 
boss close by ; but these must be of later date than the others 
mentioned, for the Shap Wells boss breaks through the Coniston 
Limestone Series, which overlies the Borrowdales, and perhaps 
through higher strata.
This invasion of acid rocks must, however, 
have taken place during some part of the Silurian period proper, or 
immediately after it, for pebbles of the well-known Shap Granite are 
found in the basal conglomerate of the Carboniferous, the Old Red 
Sandstone of the earlier writers.
Again, granite and quartz-porphyry 
dykes on Kirkfell and near Bootle seem to be allied to the great 
granitic mass of Eskdale and Wastdale ; but there is nothing to 
connect this system of intrusions definitely with the rhyolitic lavas.
Perhaps, as first suggested by Sedgwick, the injection of the molten 
matter was connected with the folding and disturbance of the area 
Naturalist, 
MARKER: IGNEOUS DYKES OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
35 1 
at the close of the Silurian period, and the same conjecture is 
plausible for the granite of Shap Wells and its attendant dykes.
Certain groups of dykes in the Lake District show a parallel 
disposition in evident relation to the strike of the rocks in which 
they occur.
These must clearly be due to more widely operating 
agencies than are the dykes which show no special disposition, or 
radiate in rude order about plutonic bosses.
The red felspathic 
dykes to the west of Windermere and some of those to the north of 
Kendal, although decidedly cutting across the strata, run parallel to 
the strike.
It follows that these dykes were injected at a time 
posterior to the disturbances which gave the beds their present 
direction of dip, that is, later than the close of the Silurian, though 
not necessarily much later.
A very remarkable group of dyke-rocks is that of the lampro- 
phyres or 'mica-traps,' so-called from their large proportion of dark 
mica, occasionally replaced, however, by hornblende.
They may be 
more minutely classed as minette, kersantite, vosgesite, etc., and 
a number of them have been described by Prof Bonney and 
Mr. Houghton.
Such rocks are largely represented among the 
dykes seen east of Windermere, to Kendal, Sedbergh, and Dent; 
they appear also in Swindale and Knock Becks to the north-east of 
Appleby, in Ingleton Dale, and in the little Silurian inlier discovered 
m Teesdale by Messrs.
Gunn and Clough.
From their occurring in 
all the Silurian strata, not infrequently occupying dip-faults, but 
never penetrating into the Carboniferous, the mica-traps may safely 
be referred to the Old Red Sandstone period.
Owing to their 
readily destructible nature, and often their small width, they are not 
always easy to detect.
Going now to the far North, we find in the Cheviot district 
certain quartz-porphyry dykes breaking through andesitic lavas of 
Old Red Sandstone age.
^h.
Teall, who has given a valuable 
description of all the igneous rocks of this district, regards these 
intrusions as probably connected in origin with the Cheviot granites, 
and as constituting the last phase of one general system of igneous 
outbursts during Old Red Sandstone times.
The order of succession, 
acid rocks following those of intermediate comj^osition, is one 
which can be verified in numerous other districts, and which lends 
itself to some interesting speculations.
There is no very clear evidence of the injection of igneous dykes 
in tlie North of England during the Carboniferous period, although 
the 'toad-stones' (olivine-dolerite lavas) of Derbyshire indicate 
a certain amount of contemporaneous volcanic activity.
It is 
probably to the close of this period that we must refer the intrusion 
Dec. 1888.
352 marker: igneous dykes of the north of England.
of the well-known Whin Sill, a great sheet of diabase extending 
from the Eden Valley to the Fame Islands ; and there is little 
doubt that some of the Northumberland and Durham dykes, such 
as that of Hett, belong to the same date.
This, however, raises a 
difficult problem — the separation of these dykes from those of 
Tertiary age.
There are in the North of England a large number 
of dykes of basic and sub-basic characters, cutting Carboniferous 
rocks, but — with one or two exceptions — not entering the Mesozoic 
tracts.
The difficulty is to separate those injected in the interval 
between the Carboniferous and Permian from others which, there 
are good reasons to beHeve, are of Lower Tertiary age.
Of course, 
if a dyke can be seen to rise through the uppermost Carboniferous 
beds and be abruptly cut off at the base of the overlying strata, 
there can be no doubt of its pre-Permian age ; but such relations 
can rarely be verified.
The only large dyke which cuts through 
Mesozoic rocks is that of Cleveland, which intersects the Eower 
Oolites at its eastern extremity, and this may be referred, without 
hesitation, to the only subsequent period which we know to have 
produced igneous rocks in Britain — the Lower Tertiary.
Unfor- 
tunately, the majority of the dykes in question occur only in tracts 
occupied by Carboniferous and older strata, and cannot be traced to 
the edge of the Permians, thus leaving it a matter of doubt to which 
of the two groups any individual dyke is to be referred.
According 
to Mr. Teall, petrological study affords no certain data for separating 
the earlier set from the later.
Perhaps some conclusions might he 
drawn from their bearings, if regarded collectively.
Prof.
Lebour 
places the dykes of Northumberland and Durham in two classes — 
(a) those striking E.-W.
or E.S.E.-W.N. W., and (d) those strikmg 
N.E.-S.W. or E.
N.E.-W.S.W. The former class, which seems to 
have the more uniform direction, probably includes dykes mostly of 
Tertiary age, while pre-Permian dykes may perhaps be looked for 
among those of the second category.
The former are to be linked 
with an enormous development of basic dykes in southern, central, 
and western Scotland ; and they have recently derived a new interest 
from Dr. A.
Geikie's theory, which makes them the channels of great 
fissure-eruptions of basaltic lava in early Tertiary times.
Many of 
these dykes, scattered from Whitby to Stornoway, are remarkable for 
their singular persistence in nearly straight lines for very great 
distances.
For example, the great augite-andesite dyke — variously 
known as the Cleveland, the Cockfield, and the Armathwaite dyke — 
runs from near the coast of North Yorkshire, through Durham and 
Cumberland, to near Carlisle, a length of i lo miles, and possibly to 
near Ayr, eighty miles farther.
Dr. Geikie has also drawn attention 
Nalurali.->t, 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES.
353 
to the manner in which the Tertiary dykes range across the country 
without any respect to strike, faults, or otlier geological accidents in 
the rocks traversed.
In this they differ from many other sets of 
dykes, which have a bearing often clearly dependent on the lie of 
the strata they intersect.
For instance, the post-Carboniferous but 
pre-Permian dykes of the ]Menai Straits run at right angles to the 
strike of the Carboniferous rocks, and often fill dip-faults; and the 
same is true of dykes of like age in some other districts, including 
perhaps the Isle of Man. Dr.
Geikie, however, considers some of 
the Isle of Man dykes as belonging to the great Tertiary outburst ; 
while yir.
Clifton AVard, again, believed some in the south of the 
island to be connected with a volcanic outbreak during the Car- 
boniferous period.
Here is a problem for the Manx geologists to 
solve.
Finally, if it be permitted to theorise in a subject so little known, 
we may perhaps conveniently group igneous dykes under three 
heads, arranged in order of increasing geological importance : — 
firstly, those in connexion with volcanic necks or plutonic bosses, 
commonly presenting a rough radial arrangement about their source ; 
secondly, those injected during or closely subsequent to movements 
of folding, etc., in the strata, sometimes showing a tendency to run 
approximately parallel, or more frequently perpendicular, to the axes 
of movement, and ofien along lines of faulting ; and thirdly, those 
belonging to more extensive geological operations (fissure-eruptions, 
etc.), these dykes sometimes presenting a general parallelism, which 
may be part of a larger radial disposition, and being to a great 
extent independent of any mmor geological features of the rocks 
through which they break.
jVO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Roug'h-legg'ed Buzzard at Meanwood, Leeds.
— When passing along 
the Meanwood Road, on November 6th, just within Leeds borough boundary, niy 
attention was called to a large bird in a stubble-field (apparently feeding), which 
my informant described as a Sea-Gull, When I endeavoured to approach it, it 
rose and flew slowly past me, alighting finally in a low tree.
It was soon after- 
wards shot and proved to be a fine specimen of the Rough-legged Buzzard 
{Archibiiteo /a<^^flpus).
The \md was in excellent plumage, and measured 56 in.
from tip to tip of wings.— H.
Kni(;ht Horsfield.
Whitby Bird-notes.
— The following extracts from my ornithological notes for 
this month may be interesting: — 
November.— Young Golden-eye Duck ( Clangiila glmicion) shot in Whitby Harbour.
,, 3.
— Immature specimen of Eider Duck [So>/iateria luollissivia) killed in 
Whitby Harbour.
9.— Another immature specimen of Eider Duck shot in the harbour of 
Whitby.
,, 10.
— Large Black -backed (iull (Lariis mariniis) shot in the harbour.
— 
Thomas Siei'HENSON, Whitby, 22nd November, 1888.
Dec. 1888.
354 
OCCURRENCE OF 
THE AMERICAN PECTORAL SANDPIPER 
ON THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U..
Gyecit C>'/:'j\ c'iViVm , Z/;icv/;;j-/;/>v.
Ax example of this American Sandpiper [^T?-!/!ga niaculata \'ieillot), 
one of two.
supposed to be of the same species, was shot on the 
coast near Kilnsea on October 2nd.
and left with Mr. Philip Loten, 
of Kasington.
for preservation.
Mr. Loten was good enough to 
forward the skin for identification, with the information that after 
dissection he came to the conclusion it was an adult male ; its 
maturity is also perhaps suggested by the plumage, the feathers being 
much abraded andi worn : the markings on the breast are also of a 
distinctl}' sagittate character, although not so pronounced as in some 
examples of the bird I have seen from America.
This species is readily diagnosed from its near American ally, 
T. Ihiirdi.
as clearly pointed out by Mr. Seebohm in his excellent 
work.
• The Geographical Distribution of the Charadriid^e,' by its 
larger size.
In T.
baii'di also the tarsi and feet are black, and not 
yellowish-brown, and the central tail-feathers not longer than the 
outer, although the intermediate ones on each side are somewhat 
shorter.
In T.
maailata the central rectrices are the longest, and 
i:)ointed.
From the Siberian sub-species T.
acuminata it difters in 
having the lateral rectrices more rounded, but this appears to be a 
somewhat uncertain character, as intermediate forms are known to 
occur.
The Pectoral Sandpiper has previously been recorded in Yorkshire, 
twice m 1S53 and once in 1S54 (^see Clarke and Roebucks ' Hand- 
book of the A'ertebrate P\iuna of Vorksliire." p.
74).
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Pallas' Sand-Grouse at Wetwang--on-the-Wolds.
— On Thursday, 
September 6th, about 4 p.m..
a brace of Palla>" Sand-Grouse [Syrrhaptcs para- 
dox}(s\ flew close to me within 100 yards of Wetwang Station.
They were darker 
than I expected.
The cry was 'tack — tack, tack — tack." — E.
Maule Cole, 
Wetwaui;.
via York, October iSSS.
Pallas' Sand-Grouse in Lincolnshire.
— A remarkably line specimen of 
this rare visitor {Syrrhaptcs p,irad,\xus\ was shot in the parish of Goxhill, on 
Tuesday.
October 23rd.
It w as one of a flock numbering about twenty, which were 
feeding on a piece of wheat stubble.
They had been seen about the same held for 
some days.— J.
W. Harrisox, Goxhill, Lincolnshire, October 24th.
1SS8.
Naturalist, 
355 
NOTES ON THE REED WARBLER.
F. B.
WHITLOCK, 
A ttetiborongh.
According to my observations in Mid-Trent Valley, the spring of 
1888 was noteworthy for the abundance of the Sedge Warbler 
{Acrocephalus phra^mifAs) and Reed Warbler (A.
strepenis).
The 
latter bird breeds with us in scattered pairs up and down the l>ent 
and on the larger ponds every year, but this year we were favoured 
with quite little colonies.
Living near the river gives many opportunities of observing the 
habits of these warljlers.
They are rather late arrivals, and I never 
hear their song until the last few days of April or the beginning of 
May. It is easy, however, to overlook them in rough weather, as 
they are then silent, and the nature of their haunts renders observa- 
tion very difficult.
Their home is made in the half-cultivated willow 
beds, in which the withies have been standing for a year or two ; 
they do not favour the better-cleaned holts, where there is a lack of 
undergrowth.
I sometimes meet with a few pairs wherever the 
banks of the river are lined with bushy willows, but this is not always 
the case.
The feathery reed-beds in which they delight in Norfolk 
are almost absent from this part of the Trent.
In their haunts they are restless, inquisitive little birds, and I find 
the best way to observe them is to take my dog with me, and let him 
wander about whilst I lie down, half concealed by the willows.
The 
Reed Warblers and Sedge W^arblers soon find him out, and when he 
returns some of them are sure to follow.
On their catching sight 
I am usually treated to a burst of defiant song, interrupted with 
numerous changes of position and glances in my direction.
This 
continues until curiosity is apparently satisfied, or perhaps an out- 
break of song from a rival is the signal for a battle, when, r^uite 
heedless of my presence, the little combatants, twittering fiercely, 
chase one another in and out of the willow twigs with great rapidity, 
until the weaker bird is driven away.
The splash of a passing 
boat or a stone thrown into their haunts will also rouse them into 
song.
The call-note is very similar to that of the Sedge Warbler, and 
may readily be imitated by drawing in the breath between the nearly 
closed lips.
Often have I called up both species in this way, but the 
Sedge Warbler is usually first to respond.
The song is difficult to express in words, but it is neither so liarsh 
nor so loud and continuous as that of the Sedge Warbler.
It may 
Dec. 1888.
356 WHITLOCK : MANX SHEARWATER NEAR NOTTINGHAM.
perhaps be described as a not unmusical jerky chatter.
The female 
bird is shy and silent, and not so often seen as the male, except 
during incubation.
They are rather late breeders; I seldom find 
nests containing eggs before the first week in June, sometimes even 
later.
The site usually chosen is some willow twig about 5 ft.
or 6 ft.
from the ground, but I have seen them placed as high as 20 ft.
in a 
tall willow-bush, as well as in a clump of nettle- or hemlock-stalks 
but a few inches from the earth.
The nests are very compact and neat structures.
Compared with 
those of the Sedge Warbler they are very small.
The latter usually 
measure some 5 in.
across, whilst the former measure but 3 in.
Outwardly they are constructed of dark-coloured grasses, fine roots, 
bits of moss, and a little wool and spider-cocoons.
The cup, which 
is rather broader at the base than at the rim, is lined with fine, round, 
and lighter-coloured grasses, the rim being generally finished off with 
this material.
So firmly are the nests bound to the supporting stalks 
or twigs that it is impossible to take one without cutting them away.
The eggs, from three to five in number, vary in ground colour from 
pale French grey to light brown ; the underlying spots are iron grey.
The conspicuous spots or blotches which sometimes nearly cover 
the egg vary from greyish green to dark brown.
Some eggs, in 
addition, have conspicuous black dots on the broader end.
It is 
surprising how rapidly the nests are constructed.
Some years ago 
a pair built where they were much disturbed by boys, and I know 
that three nests were taken, each containing eggs, in as many 
weeks.
The young birds are hatched in about twelve days, and the 
parents may then be observed busily searching the willows and 
herbage for small insects, with which to feed their brood.
On the wing the Reed Warbler may readily be distinguished 
from the Sedge Warbler by its more attenuated appearance, and 
its stouter head and broader tail.
The flight is straight, but not 
long sustamed.
I have found Cuckoo's eggs in the nest of this 
bird.
No doubt the time of arrival, number of eggs, etc., varies with 
locality, but these notes are only intended to apply to the Mid-Trent 
and tributaries.
. ' 
Attcnboroicgh, November ^t/i, 1888.
ATO TE— ORNITHOL OGY.
Manx Shearwater near Nottingham.
— A fine mature bird of this species 
{Puffi.)itis anglonivi) was picked up alive at Bestwood, about the last week in 
August.
— F.
B. Whitlock, Basford near Nottingham, Nov. 5th, 1888.
Naturalist, 
357 
THE NATTERJACK TOAD 
IN CHESHIRE AND LANCASHIRE.
[We liave received a copy of a paper by Mr. Linnaeus Greening, on 
' British Frogs and Toads,' read before the Warrington Field Club, 
November i8th, 1887, and printed for private circulation, from which 
we extract the following interesting account of the Natterjack at 
Wallasey and in two Lancashire localities :] 
Bvfo calami in (Natterjack Toad) ...
is decidedly rarer and more 
local than our other EngHsh toad.
. .
. On the 2nd April, 1887, 
Mr. Gregson, Mr. A.
Jolley, and myself paid a visit to the Wallasey 
sand-hills, where this toad abounds.
Having arrived on the ground, 
the veteran naturalist (Mr. Gregson) soon pointed out the outward 
and visible sign of the den of this creature.
This distinguishing sign 
is the shape of the holes in which the Natterjacks hybernate, and to 
which they return during the daytime, even after hybernation, being 
exclusively nocturnal feeders.
The entrance to each hole is semi- 
circular, just large enough to admit its tenants, of which there are 
usually two, male and female.
It is not very pleasant to put your 
hand down a hole 20 inches deep, and feel soniething cold, which is, 
or should be, the nose of the toad.
After Mr. Gregson had fetched 
a pair out, without suffering death, we set to work and found 
considerable numbers.
. .
. It is a very curious ^act that when 
first takeYi from their holes they are small, but soon seem to expand 
or fill up to their normal size.
The cause of this, I take it, is the 
inflation of the lungs and skin As a matter of course 
respiration is almost arrested during hybernation.
Another curious 
fact is that although they enter their holes head foremost, yet, when 
found, their noses always point outwards.
The reason is obvious, 
for amongst the ever-changing faces of the sand-hills, the mouth 
of the hole may be filled up ; when this happens, the toad lias 
only to follow his nose, and can then work his way out with little 
difficulty.
The fertilization, deposition, and quantity of spawn are as in the 
common species ; though the pools in which the spawn is laid are 
usually devoid of water-plants, and consequently the spawn sinks to 
the bottom.
The development of the embryo and larva is more rapid 
than in the common species.
I repeatedly visited the pcK)ls amongst 
the sand-hills at Wallasey, and found that the adult form was attained 
39 days after the hatching of the egg.
The spawn is usually laid at 
the end of May, or early in June.
The young tadpoles lost their 
gills on the fourth day ; the hind legs appeared first, and six days 
Dec. 1888.
358 
GREENING : THE NATTERJACK TOAD.
later the fore legs were developed.
Of the pools which I was 
observing, several dried up before the spawn had fully developed, and 
from this we may learn the reason of the more rapid development of 
the young of this species.
Those individuals possessing an inherited tendency to mature 
more rapidly than the average could alone survive and reproduce 
their species, in the peculiar situations which the Natterjacks affect.
As a proof that this tendency to a more rapid development is 
hereditary, and not merely dependent on the temperature or 
depth of the water in which they are laid, I may mention that the 
development was equally rapid in the deepest and consequently 
coolest pool.
As an illustration of the enormous destruction of embryonic and 
larval life, in the circumstances under which Natterjacks exist, owing 
to the great tendency of the smaller pools, in sandy places, to dry up 
in the summer months, I found that one small pool, which had shrunk 
to about 6 ft.
by 4 ft., by 6 in.
deep in the middle, was positively 
black with tadpoles.
Having counted a few square inches, we 
estimated that the pool contained at least 30,000 tadpoles ; a few 
days later, this pool was completely dried up, and all the tadpoles 
had perished.
In their wild state, worms don't form much of their diet, 
as they will only take them when nothing else is forthcoming.
They take none but living food, whose faintest movement is 
quite sufficient to catch the quick eye of the Natterjack.
These 
toads are wild, and almost untamable ; mine not at all reciprocating 
the kindly feeling shown to them.
Out of some eighteen specimens, 
only four would feed from the hand ; although, occasionally, if a 
particularly tempting morsel is held in the fingers, a wild one will 
rush at it, seize it, and then be lost amongst the sand.
If anyone 
wishes to see this toad in all its activity, let him take a lamp and visit 
the sand-hills in the evening, more especially in the neighbourhood of 
some pool (in the early summer in the breeding season, the locality 
may easily be found by the croaking of the males), and he will be 
astonished at the numbers round about him.
In the daytime he may 
search in vain, unless he happens to know something of the habits of 
this creature.
It is sometimes called the ' Sand-Toad,' an appropriate 
name, as it is generally found in sandy localities, and its colour is so 
much like that of sand, that, when seen at rest, it is difficult to detect 
it.
It might seem probable that the dorsal line would make it 
conspicuous ; this is not so, however, for the yellow line may be 
easily mistaken for a bit of the dry grass which is so common 
amongst the sand-hills.
On July 23rd, 1887, when ...
at Formby, 
Naturalist, 
GREENING : THE NATTERJACK TOAD.
359 
I found the Natterjacks in their holes amongst the sand-hills ; they 
are abundant there, and owing to their loud croaking are locally 
known as 'Formby Organs.' Mr. J.
A. Jackson has also sent me some 
from Garstang, amongst which were two small ones, in their second 
year, ...
as well as some born this year.
[The whole paper is replete with interesting details as to the 
habits and life-history of the British Frogs and Toads, but we content 
ourselves with reproducing Mr. Greening's table of the most striking 
characteristics of these animals :] 
Rana temporaria (Common Frog).
Skin smooth.
Length of 
body, 2| in.
to 3 in.
Fore legs \\ in.
long.
Hind legs 4 in.
long.
Fore feet not palmated.
Hind feet much palmated.
Legs formed 
for jumping and swimming.
Head triangular, snout pointed.
Dorsal 
ground colour very variable — from light yellow to dark green, from 
pale rufous to brick red, from light to dark brown.
Ventral surface 
pale yellow to light green, irregularly marked with brown.
Upper 
surface of legs persistently barred and spotted with brown.
Dark 
brown patch running from eye to shoulder; this is a constant feature 
in this species.
Two well-marked dorsal ridges.
Ra7ia esculenta (Edible Frog).
Skin smooth, or slightly tuber- 
culated on back.
Length of body, 3 in.
to 3] in.
Fore legs \\ in.
long.
Hind legs 3I in.
long.
Fore feet not palmated.
Hind feet 
much palmated.
Legs formed for jumping and swimming.
Head 
triangular, snout pointed.
Dorsal ground colour generally green, 
variable to brown, with irregular black splashes along the dorsal 
ridges ; well-marked median dorsal line.
Ventral surface milk white, 
spotted or marbled with greenish brown.
Upper surface of legs 
splashed with black, and sometimes barred.
Bufo vulgaris (Conimon Toad).
Skin warty, densely covered 
with tubercles.
Length of body, 3 in.
to 3] in.
Fore legs \\ in.
long.
Hind legs 3 in.
long.
Fore feet not palmated.
Hind feet 
palmated.
Legs formed for running and swimming.
Head rounded, 
snout blunt.
Dorsal ground colour, ashen grey to dark brown, or 
from dull olive green to dirty yellow ; irregularly spotted over back 
and legs with darker markings, sometimes forming irregular bands.
Ventral surface greyish green, speckled with brown.
Bufo calamifa (Natterjack Toad).
Skin warty, densely covered 
with tubercles.
Length of body, 2] in.
to 2\ in.
Fore legs \ \ in.
long.
Hind legs 2.\ in.
long.
Fore feet not palmated.
Hind feet 
palmated.
Legs formed for running and swimming.
Head rounded, 
snout blunt.
Dorsal ground colour yellowish brown, suffused with 
olive, and marbled with black ; well-marked dorsal line of brimstone 
yellow colour.
Ventral surface greenish white, marbled with black.
Dec. 1888.
360 
COLE : A LAKE-DWELLIXG IX LANCASHIRE.
A frog can at once be distinguished from a toad by its smooth 
skin, and jumping powers.
The common can be distinguished from 
:he edible frog by the presence of the brown patch running from the 
eye to the shoulder, and by the absence of the dorsal line.
The common toad can be distinguished from the natterjack by 
the absence of the yellow dorsal line, which is a constant feature in 
the natterjack, and also by its sluggish movements.
In the larval form, the common frog may be distinguished by its 
being speckled all over with gold-coloured spots.
The edible frog 
larva d liters from that of the common frog in being free from gold- 
coloured spots, and in having its ground colour greenish (instead of 
brottm).
marbled with olive.
The toads are of a uniform blackish 
browm.
The natterjack tadpole can be distinguished from that of the 
common toad, by its denser black colour, and smaller size.
^-0 TE—PRE-HISrORIC AR CH.
EOLOGY.
A Lake-Dwelling^ in Lancashire.
— A few years ago Mr. T.
Eoynion 
discovered a lake-dwelling ai Ulrome.
in Holderness.
the first of the kind found 
in England.
I have jusi had an opportunity of exploring the works, which have 
been for some time in progress, for diverting the course of the Ribble at Preston, 
in Lancashire, and constructing large docks in the marshes which border on the 
river-course.
The excavations are a: preser.: at a standstill, and will probably 
remain so for a considerable / .
i \; -- - , ^ed.
30 ft.
deep, are extremely 
interesting.
Every trace c." , v .
: \ c vers the Fylde elsewhere to a 
great a:;;:';-, v - ?
-^es ago removed, by the river, and on the bared new Red Sand- 
stone ;-e r - .
ihick beds of gravel and sand, full of estuarine shells.
In 
these graveis.
a: various depths, lie scores of huge blackened trunks of trees, with 
their ends mostly in the siime direction — down-stream.
Ti.cie is no trace of soil ; 
they have all, without exception, been drifted into their present position — a position 
which does not appear to have been altered by any change in the river s course 
since the gravels were laid down.
Whilst tracing the line of trees I caught sight 
of some piles standing vertically in the gravel beds, and on closer examination 
found that they had been driven in 10 a depth of from 8 ft.
to 15 ft.
The ends 
Avere roughi^ ; a.
For a depth of 2 ft.
or 3 ft.
at the top a quantity of brush- 
wood had i rr; .
i.orizontally between the piles, so as to make a solid and firm 
floor.
The ier.;;::'.
of the floor was about 17 yds., but I could not ascertain the 
width beyond 7 yds., as evidently portions of the platform had been removed in 
the excavations.
The ar-ceararce was e\ac:iv sirai'ar :o the upper platform 
discovered by Mr. i^:y: ;::- ii r.
:..
i ::: ;-.cs:iation in assigning 
it to a lake-dwelii::^.
Ti:c s:.-.::;:c v :s c:^::^,i ::: a aiaisi;.
.iisiant about looyds.
from the present bed of the river.
There were no traces of weapons or implements 
of any kind, but this may be accounted for by the fact that the navvies had no 
instruciions, and no one in authciirv r : viced what they were destroying.
In the 
area of the unfinished dock, howc : .
I learn from the curator of the Preston 
Museum, the Rev. J.
Shortt.
no less li.ac, 52 pairs of antlers of the Red Deer have 
been found.
43 heads of the Urus.
14 human skulls of the type found in our tumuli, 
two ancient canoes hollowed out of the trunks of trees, and a solitary bronze spear- 
head.
Xo flint or pottery seems to have iev ered.
Mr. Shortt has kindly 
promised to have the section photographed .
: .
;:ie works are resumed : but it 
would be more satisfactor}- if the piles and brushwood could be carefully examined 
by competent persons, instead of being left to casual demolition.
Doubtless there 
were many lake-dwellings once in this countn,-, as in Switzerland, but so far, x^-ith 
one or two exceptions, they have escaped notice.
— E.
Maule Cole, Wetwang.
near York, October 4th, iS'SS.
Naturalist, 
36 1 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
CRYPTOGAMIC BOTANY, 
1886 and 1887.
In the preparation of the Jiotanicul Jjil)Hography the Editors have 
obtained the assistance of Mr. P.
Fox Lee, Dewsbury, who has most 
kindly consented to examine botanical literature, and to arrange the 
botanical bibliography for publication.
The present is the first 
instalment which has had the benefit of his supervision ; the second, 
which will be devoted to the Phanerogamia and the Vascular Crypto- 
gamia of the London Catalogue, is ready, and will appear early in 
the next year's volume.
It only remains to add that the Characeat are included in this 
cryptogamic instalment, and that the citations from The NaUiralist 
for 1884 to 1887 are included, so as to render this, with former 
instalments, as complete a record as possible for the years included, 
1884 to 1887.
Anon.
Inot signed].
York S.E.
[Notes made in 1885 by Hull Field Naturalists ; Aicidiinn pimpinell,r 
var.
apii and yJi. prii)iiilif'\.
Nat., Feb. 1886, p.
63.
Andr?:w Amory.
Cheviotland.
Alnmouth Marine Alg-ae [givinf,^ first a List of thirteen Additions to previous 
list, and then detailed notes of Olxservations made on various species].
Proc.
Ikrw.
Nat. Club for 1885 [pub.
1886], xi.
267-268.
[k.
Barnks.] York N.E., York N.W.
[List of 48 Mosses found near Saltburn and in Cleveland, and of two 
{'Hiiiiditiin blandovii and Amhlysti'i^ium sprucei) from Gainford anfl Croft 
respectively; localities stated for all].
Nat., July 1887, ])p.
220-221.
C. H.
BiNSTKAD.
Westmorland, Derbyshire.
Barbula squarrosa in Westmoreland [in various places ; hitherto not further 
N. than Derbyshire].
Nat., Jan. 1886, p.
18.
C. II.
BiNSTKAD.
Westmorland.
Some Rare Mosses in Westmorland {^Grimniia anodon Il&S., G.
com- 
mtctata lililjn., G.
anoviala Ilampe, G.
hart/nafini^ B^yum niiihlenbLckii 
B.&S., Cinclidiitin stygiiim Sw., PPylocomiiini tiiiibratiiiii Schreb., //.
sqtiar- 
rosum, H.
lorenni^ and//, sp/endcns].
Nat., March 1887, pp.
65-66.
Henry Boswri.i..
Isle of Man, Westmorland, Furness, Derbysh.
Notes on Rare British and Irish Mosses [including Dicra7tclla runata 
Hedw.
, new to Isle of Man (lioyd); GriiiDiiia coni»iuta(a Ilueb., rrjcks near 
Rydal Water (Binsteafl); G.
stirloni Sch|)r.
and G.
iunvnala Ilampe near 
Windermere (Binstead) ; an intermediate form from Derbyshire between 
Zy^^odon viridissunus and its var.
/:i ripest n's Lin<lb.
; and Hypuiiin callichj-ouin 
YWid.'^xwd //yioconiinni iinihratiini Schreb.
found in Westmorland by Binstead].
J. of Bot., A])ril 1887, XXV.
111-112.
J[ames].
C[ash].
Yorkshire.
Barbula princeps (a query) [as to where in Yorkshire and by whom it wa.-> 
discovered].
Nat., Dec. 1884, p.
1 14.
Dec. 1888.
362 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: CRYPTOGAMIC BOTANY, 1 886-8 7.
Tame?
Cash.
York S.W., Derbyshire, Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
The Early Botanical Work of the late William Wilson [in York S.\Y., 
Derbyshire, Cheshire, Lane.
S., etc.
; in Seal Bark, Yorkshire, were noted 
Jiingc7-?tiannia taylcri, J.
reptans.
J. trilohaia, IVdssia recui^vaia, JJ'.
striata, 
B?yum marginatum, B.
elongatum^ Hypniini coinmutatiini , Didyniodon 
Hcxifolium, Hyp. jiagellare, Diphyscium folic sum., Tort zt la tortuosa, and 
Splachnum mtiioides ; in Staley Brushes, Discelium nudum, Dicrauuiii 
squarrosum, D.
Jlexuosum, Hyp, stramiiieum.
Juiigermannia minuta, and 
Hyp. aduncum t.
revolvens ; IVeissia nuda, Orthotrichum rivulare, Fon- 
tinalis squamosa and P/iascum serratuin at Stalybridge, Leskea polycarpa 
and Tetraphis az'ata near Middleton, Phascum crispnin and Ph. ojcillai-e near 
Hulme.
yii?iger/na>2nia tomenteila near Cotlerill Clough, Encalypta strepto- 
carpa at Youlgreave, etc., Cynodonttum hruntoni, Grimmia trichophylla, and 
Schjstostega osmumiacea, at Rowter Rocks, Seligeria pusilla, Brachyodus 
irichodes, Bartramia gracilis, Jungermaniiia pubescetis.
J. hyalina, J.
pttmila, 
'Jortula tortuosa, Didyrnodon flexifolius, Mnium serrafu/n, M.
rostratum, 
Seligeria a^utifolia, and S.
pusilla at Buxton, and Hyp. 7-ugosum in Dove- 
dale].
XaL, June 1887, pp.
181-100.
^A^ Eagle Clarke.
' York S.W.
Cynophallus caninus Fr.
. near Leeds [at New \Yortley ; occurs also at 
Saliaire and Bingley].
Nat., Nov. 1S86.
p. 332.
T. D.
A. CocKEKELL.
Cheshire.
A September Walk through .
. Cheshire .
. {^cidium tussilaginis noted 
between Cheiford and Congleion.
Sep. ilth, 1885].
Nat., Feb. 1886, p.
57.
[M.
C. Cooke.: York Mid W., York N.E., Cumbrld.,Westmrld., Furness.
New British Fresh-water Algae \^Merismopedial paludosa, bog -pools, 
Loughrigg ; Sostoc hyalinum, in a bog-pool, Loughrigg Fell ; Pediastrutn 
compactum, bog-pools.
Loughrigg ; Mesocarpus ?
n^aumensis, duck-pond, 
Neaum Crag, Skelwith Bridge : Onychoncma twrdstedtiatia, Strensall 
Common, York].
Grevillea, March 1886, xiv.
97-99 [Mesotcrnium degreyi 
(see Turner, Xat. 1886, 34, t.
f. I.); Tettnemorus penioides, among Sphagnum, 
Fume-s Fells, Lancashire ; Micrasterias cornuta, stream between Codale and 
.Stickle Tarns, at 1,800 ft.
alt.
; Eiiastrum omithocephalum, bog-pool, 
Loughrigg ; E.
lund^Uii among Sphagtium, Loughrigg ; Cos7nariuin 
-vittrockii, C.
oblongum, bog-pools, Loughrigg ; Xanthiaiiim spinulosum, 
stream between Codale and Stickle Tarns : Staurastruin buUosum, stream 
flowini^ out of Loughrigg Tarn: S.
tub€7-culat:nn.
bog-pool, Loughrigg].
Grevillea.
June 1SS6, xiv.
121-123.
M. C.
Cooke.
Cumberland, Lane.
S. and W., York N.E., Cheviotland.
British Sphseropsideae.
Provisional List of Species hitherto found in 
the British Islands \_St2t0Tia pcJu^^rariu: Lasch.
, ow yEgopodiiun, \Yhite- 
haven ; S.
eryngii Pass., on Eryngium, near Liverpool ; Polystigmina rub7-a 
Desm., on leaves oi Prunus domestica and P.
spinosa, Thirsk ; L£ptothy7-iu7ii 
asterinum Berk, on Aster tripdiu/n, Fleetwood ; Leptostroma sci7pinu7n Fr.
on Scirpus, etc., L.
Jiliciuu7u Fr. on /teris, L.
)urbaru77i Link, on herb 
stems, and L.
spircecB Fr. on Spima ultnaria, Berwick].
Grevillea, March 
1886, xiv, 101-108.
\Gl(LOsporiuT7i ribis Lib., on red-currant leaves.
Lauca^ 
shire; Myxospoi-iuiii ci'ocaim Pers.
, on branches, Carlisle; LibeT^ella 7'osiv 
Desm., on rose twigs, Btrxsick ; ^IeIa/ico7iium elevatiti7i Corda, on oak 
branches, Langridge].
Grevillea, June 1 886, xiv.
123-128.
\Pl1lycta71a 
Johnsionii , on ragwort, Berwick], Grevillea, June 1887, xv.
103-106.
M, C.
Cooke.
York N.E., Cumberland.
New British Ftmgi \Agaricus {Plufeus) pellitus Pers., Scarborough].
Gre^-illea, March :S^6.
xiv.
1 13-128.
\Agaricus [Psathyz-a) gyroflexiis Fries, 
Scarborough: / : .
helvus Fries and Russula exp(ille7is near Car- 
iislej.
Gre^d'd-: .
L-i.
1886, xv, 39-43.
^Agariciis {Pantvolus) scitulus 
Massee, Corlinai-ius \Fhleginaciu7ii) atro-vire7is Kalch., and C.
(Hydrocybei 
krombholzii Fr.
— all from Scarborough by G.
Massee].
Grevillea, March 
1887.
XV.
65-67.
\Agaricus [Myce/ia '.
flavipes Quelet, on stumps, Whitbv : 
Naturalist, 
EIBLIOGRAPKY : CRYPTOGAMIC EOTANY.
1SS6-S7.
363 
Ag.
{CUtopilus) siraminipes Massee.
on the gr:ur.d, Carlisle (Dr. Carlyle) ; 
Cortiiiarius {Phlegmaciuni) h£7-pe:i:u: Fr., in woods, near Carlisle (Dr.
Carlyle); C.
{Dermocybe) tepid:: u: Cooke, in heathy ground, near Carlisle 
(1887), Scarborough: C.
( Telaynaiia ; nibellus Cooke, in swampy places 
near Carlisle (Dr. Cir r : C.
iJIydrocybe) toj-tuosiis Fr. in damp pine 
woods, Scarborougi' : I .
szy.') unimodus Britz., in grassy places, Carlisle 
(Dr. Carlyle) ; C.^H).
::.v-.jr Cooke, on ihe ground in mixed woods near 
Carlisle ; Lactarius {Rtis nil aria) crevior Fries, in woods, Carlisle (Dr.
Carlyle) ; CJuztosph^ria pileo-fer?'i(gima Crouan, on roots of Calluna near 
Carlisle <Dr. Carlyle); Ostrei^hnion americanntii Duby Hyst., on pine wood, 
Scarborough 'G.
Massee) ; Ttibercidaria conorum Cke.<ScMass.
, on f.r cones.
Carlisle (Dr. Carlyle]- Grevillea, Dec. 1887.
x%-i.
42-49.
M. C.
Cooke.
' York N.E.
Ag^aricini {^Agaricus {Pameolus) scitidtis (Massee), Scarborough].
Grevillea, 
Sep. 1S87, xvi.
209-224.
M. C.
Cooke.
Derbyshire.
York S.W. and N.E., Cumberland, Lane S.
British Hyphomycetes.
A Catalogue of Known Species lOospora aia-antia 
Cooke, on spen: hozs, Bunon-on-Trenr : Moniiia racemosa Pers., on rotting 
substance^, Halifax: Ce^':ai::p:riuKi acrenwniiim Corda, on , 
Scarborough ; T)'iih:der}i:2 viride Pers., on wood and bark, Carlisle, Man- 
chester ; Rhiitotrichiim .zecipiens Cooke, o-i bark, etc., Carlisle; Botrytis 
argillacea Cooke, on wood, Carlisle ; Bot.
(Polyacfis) vera Fr., on Polypoj-iis 
versicolor, Halifax ; AcrostaJagmus ciiinabarimis Corda, on leaves, branches, 
etc., Liverpool ; Arihrobot?ys rosea Massee, on branches.
Scarborough].
Grevillea, Dec. 1887, xvi, 57-65.
J. M.
Cromeie.
Westmorland, Derbyshire.
Northumberland, Cumberland.
Recent Additions to the British Lichen-Flora \G:fii:ncnia c:}>:pj.:tum 1 Ag.
<, 
Pphebeia iiiartindalti Qiomo,.
ColUina isidioiaes Xyl., Lccaiiora dccincta Xyl.
, 
Lee idea periplaca X'yl., L.
iembrica XyL, and L.
coriacella Xyl. have 
Westmorland localities assigned, JLecajiora conizeeoides Xyl. is from Buxton, 
Derbyshire (Holl.), L.
subradiosa Xyl. from walls, East Allendale, 
Xorlhumberland (Rev. W.
Johnson), Lecidea perco7itigua Xyl. from rocks, 
Whitehaven, Cumberland, and Z.
plumbina Anzi, is parasitic on the thallus 
of Coccocarpia plumhea at Borrowdale, Keswick, Cumberland].
J. of Bot., 
July 18S5.
xxiii.
194-196.
Tho?.
Dexms.
York S.E., Line.
N. 
^(Ecidium pimpinells var.
apii [near Cleethorpes and near Hedon ; staiices 
and Cyst::u: ^c:i^:ni d.i ^ i-iied at Cleethorpes].
Xat., Aug. 1884, P- 21.
D. Embleton.
Durham, Westmorland, York N.W.
A Catalogue of the Place-Names in Teesdale [including some derived from 
' Moss ' ; see pp.
xiii.
and 140 for discussion of the word].
Xat. Hist.
Trans, 
of Xorthd., Durh.
, and Xewc, vol.
ix.
part i.
<i887), pp.
i.-xviii.
and 1-223.
[Wm. Fowler.] York Mid W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists" Union at Blubberhouses :26:h Sep:., 1SS5 : 
the fungi n;:; ".
r , Agaricus i-iitilans, A.
iimbcllijeruj, Pussula 
nigricans, R.
. .
; ..- scaber, B.
ch?ysenteron, Lactarius riifns, and 
Peziza aurantia'^, Xr,:.
, Xjv. 18S5, p.
3S1.
[Wm. Fowler.] York S.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Askern [20th May, 1SS6 ; Mcrchclia 
escuUniz.
Plutcus chrvsj'i-hiZHs. and r.bsence of Truffles noted].
Xat., Tune 
18S6, p.
190.
[HiLDERic Friend.] York S.W.
Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire Naturalists at Anston Stones [joth 
April.
1SS5 : niicro-rV.r.g: o.~seiA-ed — .
E::di:im couipcsitarnDi v.
iiipsa/:i, 
^ £.
yanuncu^iiicaruui, ^-E.
unwa.
UfiJo po'entu'Iarum, Puicinia aner/umis, 
P. uniheiliferarum, Tric/wbasis lapsanti, Erysiphe graminis, Peronospora 
schleideniatia.P. parasiiica, P.
Jicariu, Prctoniyccs ari.
and Uromyces Jican'a:^ 
Xat..
June 1SS5, p.
261.
Dec. 1888.
364 BIBLIOGRAPHY: CRYPTOGAMIC BOTANY, 18S6-87.
HiLDERic Friend.
Derbyshire, Notts., York S.W.
The Micro-Fungfi of North Notts, [recording three species of Jvas/c/Za, one 
of Pcj-idcrnnuni.
and 22 oi ^ ^cidiuiiu for which stations are recorded, some 
of which, however, are in Derbyshire and Yorkshire].
Sci. Goss., Aug.
1SS6, pp.
1 70- 1 7 1.
HiLDERIC FRIEN1\ NottS.
Spots on Sycamore-Leaves [referred to Capnodijun footii Berk., a fungus 
abundant in Sherwood Forest].
Sci. Goss., Aug. 1S86, p.
190 ; but see a 
number of letters in Sep. 1SS6, p.
215.
HiLDERIC Friend.
Notts., York S.W., Derbysh., Chesh.
Notes on the Fungi of North Notts, [numerous species mentioned, with 
localities : and a few references to other counties].
Trans, and 34th Ann.
Rep. of Nottingham Nat. Soc.
for 18S6 [pub.
1SS7], pp.
44-4S.
W, Gain.
Notts.
Hydnura coralloides in Notts, [at Ossington, 1883 and 1884].
Nat., Jan.
18S5.
p. 13S.
W. A.
Gain.
Notts.
A New British Alg^a "^Hildenhrantia i-ivularis on stones in the Poulter, a 
tributary of the Idle].
Sci. Goss., July 1887, p.
165 [in the Aug. number, 
p. 214, ^Ir. W.
Barwell Turner points out that it has ahead}' been recorded as 
British, by Kiiizing and by Carter].
E, Grove.
York Mid W.
Surirella eleg^ans, etc., in West Yorkshire [in the Skell near Fountains 
Abbey.
Sep. 1S84, with Xavicula ycijihardti and N.
trochtis\.
Nat., May 
iSSs.'p.
232.
W. B.
Grove.
York S.W., Cheviotland.
New or Noteworthy Fung^i.
Part III.
\Rhahdospo)-a plcospoi-oides Sacc, 
on old stems of Kumcx acctosa from nests of terns, Farne Islands, in the 
collection of Mr. R.
W. Chase].
J. of Bot..
May 1886, xxiv.
136; also see 
Midi.
Nat., Oct. ic>S5.
p. 29S.
Part III.
\_Tric/iosporiiir)i jiiurifium Sacc, 
on dead wood, Steeton, Yorks., Nov.
(H.
T. Soppitt)].
J. of Bot., July 
1 886, xxiv.
201.
[\Y.
B. Grove.] Yorkshire.
[Arthrobotrynm stilboideum from Yorkshire, collected by PI.
T. Soppitt].
Midi.
Nat., P^eb.
18S6.
ix.
59.
Tames Hardy.
Northumberland.
Report of Meetings of Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the year 
1885.
. .
. Rothbury [24th June : Comerzui rivularis common in Coquet, 
and used as and called ' Ladies" Soap ' (p.
39) ; Sp]mropli07-on toj-alloides, 
Bo}-rcfii ciilata, Leiuobrymn glaucrtni ip.
40) ; Gyninomitrunii concimiafuiu, 
Dicranmn fusccscens, Andncea ri/pc'str/s, Gyrcphora prohoscidca (p.
42)].
Proc.
Berw.'Nat. Club for 1885 [pub.
1SS6], xi.
39, 40, and 42.
C. P.
HoBKiRK.
York S.W.
Physcomitrium pyriforme [near 1 homhill Edge].
Nat., Aug. 1884, p.
21.
C. P.
HoBKiRK.
York S.W.
Freshwater Algae near Dewsbury \_Spirogy7-a por/icalis v.
quinina, S.
jlavescens ?
Mesocarpiis, Frasiola ci-ispa^ Chlorococcnm, Cladophora glomera/a, 
and Draparnaldia plumosa noted].
Nat., June 1S85, p.
259.
E. M.
Holmes.
Cheviotland.
Algse Britannicas Rariores Exsiccatae.
Fas. III.
[Lyngbya luteo-fi/sca 
J. Ag..
Ber\v:ck-o:i-Tweed (E.
Batters)].
Grevillea, June 1887, xv.
115-116.
G. A.
Holt.
Derbyshire.
A British Moss new to Science \^Thatnnini)i anonstifolium Holt, sp.
nov.
, 
found sparingly on shady limestone rocks, associated with T.
alopectiriivi^ in 
Ravensdale, \ierbyshire,' May 1S83 and 1884].
J. of Bot., March 1886, 
xxiv.
65 and tab.
265.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: CRYPTOGAMrC BOTANY, 1886-87.
3-55 
W. Johnson.
Durham.
A New British Lichen [Lecojiora ~uieardaleu:i: Johns., occurring on sand^tone 
in -sulj-alpine places, rare, Lanehead, Weardale, Durham, 1879].
Grevillea, 
March 1886, xiv.
91.
William Johnson.
Cumberland.
Lichenolog"y [with notice of Soiorina saccata at Alston Moor, East Cumber- 
land, and details of its station there].
Wesl.
Nat., June 1887, i.
115.
P. Fox Lee. York S.W.
Chara fragilis var.
fulcrata in Yorkshire [a form not mentioned in the latest 
edition of the Lond.
Cat.
(i886j.
It is a rnon'jrci'v.;^ plant, characterised by 
very short bract-cells and rudimentary stipulode^, resembling the fertile plant 
of C.
cofinivens, a dic^jcious Chara].
Nat..
Sept.
1887, p.
272.
r. Arnold Lee.^.
York N.E.
Yorkshire Naturalists at Gormire Lake and Thirkleby Park [mosses noted 
were Spka'^oium papi/lcuciii type, Seli^eria rernt-vata., Brachyodiis trichodes, 
and Gri/>nnia trichop/iylia, with the fungus Entolouia sencea].
Nat., Aug.
1887, p.
239.
y. A R NOLL Lef.s. York N.W.
Yorkshire and Westmorland Naturalists at Sedbergh [Aug. ist, 18S7 ; 
mosses noted, DithodoiitiuvL jJave:rens, Dicra7iui)i pahctre., iJidymodon 
cylindriciis^ Griiiiinia trichophyiia, G.
comnmtata (this proved erroneous, see 
Nat., Oct. 1887, p.
294), OrlIiot7-ic)m?H saxaJiie, 0.
rupeJ-re, Pla,'^-iot/iechi7}i 
sylvati'Uin Gy»iuostouni})i coniDiiitatiiin., Irichostomwii crisp2clu?>i, Barhiila.
revohifa, BHndice acuta., Ijryiini Jilifoyj/ie, 3Inhi!>i steliai-e, Poly trie hiiiu 
forniosiini, Hed'ui:.{ia ciliala, Heto'ocladiiiui /ieteropler2i??i, Neckera pu;iiila, 
and Hypmini eiigyrmni ; Hepatics, Lejeiinea calcai-ea., Madot/wca Id-vigata, 
Jun:(ermoMia har/'uta, J.
7'iparia, J.
hantrieii'i: , J.
coj-difolia., Nardia 
e>/iar:^^innta, Trichocolea (ovmitella , Mylia tayio)-?, an-^l M-^tzj^eria conjzi^ata ; 
Lichens, CoUe})iodiit)n piiratiie, Par/nelia siibatcy?fera, Lecanora dich:onii, and 
Perttisaria lactea, ' with riotes on the species of Cladma, Parmt^lvr, and 
Lecaiionc) ; Algce, (Jido:^o}iuini princeps, ChlorococrAun /rzistiilosH»i, IIor>/ii:cia 
bicolor, Ceratonei^ atriis, Mesotaniitni chlaffiydo:po7-iim, and Encyoueina 
c<Tspitosiun\ Nat., Sep. 1 887, pp.
281-282.
L. A.
Lees.
York N.W.
A Mythical Moss.— Correction of Error [Griiitmia comtnnfata at Cautley 
recorded in error for var.
coiiniiiitata of Barlnila aa-uirostris ; the source of 
error explained].
Nat., Oct. 1887, p.
294.
11.
\\'.
Let t.
Nottinghamshire.
New British Algae [mentions the Fresh- water k\<g2.
Hildoiirraniia rivulari.
Lieber, found on r^uartz pebbles in the river Poulter, a tributary of the Idle, 
near Retford, hitherto unrecorded fur the British Isles].
Grevillea, June 
1887, XV.
121.
Gus'i AV LiMi'RicH'j.
Cumberland.
Description of a Species of Andreaea new to Science iAudre'ra comnmtata 
Limpricht) [Borrowdale, Cumberland, and rock.i near Buttermere ; details 
given].
Nat., Dec. 1884, pp.
11 3- 11 4.
J. E.
Lord.
Lane.
S. 
Notes on the Rotifera.
(A Prolific Pond.) [at or near Rawtenstall ; in 
addition to the rotifers the genera Sunreila, EncyoJtei/ia, Synedra, and 
A/elosira of Diatoms ; Pandorina, Cosniarniin., Clostej-iiim, and Pediastrum 
of other Alga; ; and Vaiicheria, Spiro:^ynJ, I\iviilaria, and Draparnaldia of 
Conferva;, are citerl].
.Sci. Goss., Aug. 1887, p.
185.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
Westmorland.
Additions to the Lichen Flora of Westmorland [viz.
Calicium rosciditni Flk., 
Lecidea piliilaris Korb., pluDihiiia (An/.ij, Z.
declmascens Nyl., Z.
ruoescens 
Th. Fr.
, Z.
obtiirbans Nyl., Z.
aciitula Nyl., Sc/iizoxylon corticola ' Frs.
), and 
Plalygrapha pericUa {\c\\.), with localities stated].
Nat., Feb. 1886, p.
49.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
Westmorland.
Descriptions of New British Lichens [Lecidea obtiirbans Nyl. and Z.
acntu: i 
Nyl., both from Westmorland].
Nat., April 1S86, p.
loi.
Dec. 1888.
7 
366 bibliography: cryptogamic botany, 1886-87.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
Westmorland, Cumberland.
New British Lichens [from Westmorland and Cumberland ; Pannelia 
isidiotyla Nyl. and Panmilaria lepidiota (Smrft.) Nyl.].
Nat., Sep. 1886, 
p. 279.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
Westmorld., Lane.
W., Cumberld., YorkN.W.
The Lichens of Westmorland [121 species, with a notice of Collema isidioides 
at Warton Crag, Lanes., and other species noted for adjoining parts of 
Cumberland and Yorkshire ; Thaninobia vermiaclaris, Parmelia moiigeotii^ 
P. isidiotyla, and P.
lanata from Cumberland].
Nat., Oct. and Nov. 1886, 
PP- 317-324; and Feb. 1887, pp.
47-54.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
_ Westmorland.
New Westmoreland Lichens {Lecanora flavocitrina Nyl.
, and L.
cremdatella 
Nyl.].
Nat., Dec. 1886, p.
374.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
York N.W., Westmorland.
Sedbergh District Lichens, [a list of 54 species] observed on the occasion of 
the August Meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union [including ten 
additions to the West Yorkshire Flora, and note of Westmorland locality for 
Lecidea periplaca Nyl.].
Nat., Sep. 1887, pp.
285-287.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
Yorksh., Cumberland, Line.
N., Westmorland.
Notes on British Lichens [discussion as to Cladina rangiferina and C.
sylvatica ; as to the Paniielice of the olivacea group, of which there are eight 
British segregates ; and as to the difficulty of apportioning the old local records 
for the aggregate species].
Nat., Oct. 1887, pp.
295-299.
Joseph A.
Martindale.
Cumberland, Yorksh., Westmorland, 
Isle of Man.
Notes on British Lichens : Lecanora murorum and its more immediate 
allies [discussed at length ; Northern localities stated are : L.
dissidefis Nyl., 
in Westmorland, L.
lolmlata Smrft., in Westmorland and Isle of Man, 
Z. muroriun (Hoffm.
), Z.
decipiens (Arn.
), and Z.
tegularis [YXvxh..
) in Westmor- 
land, Z.
cirrochroa Ach., in Westmorland and Cumberland, and Z.
xantholyta 
Nyl., in Yorkshire and Westmorland].
Nat., Dec. 1887, pp.
355-364.
George Massee.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Helmsley [4th Aug. 1884 ; mosses 
r\oi(td.—Brachyodus triciwdes, Phiionotis calcarea, Hypmwi chrysophylhun^ 
Eiirhynchitun striatufu, Amblystegium confervoides, Fissidens pusilhts, and 
Limnobitim paljutre ; fungi — Pluteiis cJnysophmis, Entoloma nidorosiis, 
Russiila heterophylla, R.
vitellina, Gomphidiiis stillatiis, Eccilia carneogrisetts, 
Crepidot2is mollis, Polyportis varitis, Boletus satanas, 2Lnd B.
Jlavus\ Nat., 
Sep. 1884, p.
41.
[George Massee.] York S.E.
Fungus Foray at Selby [a total of 134 species observed, amongst them 
being the following — Tornibia ophioglossoides parasitic upon Elapho^nyces 
granulatiis, Cortina^'ins cinnabarimis, Agaricus nebidaris, Ladarius 
deliciosiis, Gomphidiiis viscidiis, Russula ahitacea, etc.].
Nat,, Jan. 1885, 
pp.
140-141.
George Massee.
York N.E.
Marine Algae of the Scarborough District [a full list, annotated, of no 
species, of which Chlorochytrium immostciii is described as new to science].
Nat., Aug. 1885, pp.
300-306.
[Geo. Massee.] York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Whitby [3rd Aug. 1885 ; ALcidiiim 
peridymeni noted].
Nat., Oct. 1885, p.
349.
York Mid W., York N.E., York S.W., Lane.
S., Derbysh., 
G. Massee.
Cumberland, Chesh., Cheviotland, Northumberland S.
British Pyrenomycetes (a preliminary list of known species) \Xylaria 
cornifo7-mis Mont., on fallen branches, Speke Hal], Lancashire ; TJia?7iJio- 
myces hippotrichoides .Sow., on cocoanut fibres, Scarborough ; Hypoxylon 
fnarginatttm Schw., on dead wood, Chatsworth ; Phylladiora pterides Reb., 
on fronds of Pteris aquili7ia, Wakefield ; Rhytisma and^-omedce Fr.
, on living 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: cryptogamic botany, 1886-87.
367 
leaves of Andromeda polifol/a, Cheshire; Stigmatea tiicholsoii Cke.
, on 
leaves of Portugal laurel, Newcastle ; .V. rannncieli Yr., on leaves of 
r////', Berwick].
Grevillea, Dec. 1886, xv.
33-39.
\^Valsa aiiibiens v\x.
coryli 
Sacc.
, on hazel, and \tvx.
popiiUna Fckl., on poplar at ThirskJ.
(irevillea, 
March 1887, xv.
68-72.
[Pseudovalsa laiuiforinis Fr., on birch, Scarl)orough ; 
P, convo'gens Tode, on A'u/u/s, Berwick (Johnstone); Eutypa spiiiosa Pers.
, 
on branches, Scarborough ; E.
iilicis (Fr.
), on furze, Langridge].
Grevillea, 
June 1887, XV.
1 16- 12 1.
{Diaporthe sa7-othafnni A^d.,o\i Sarof/ianimis, 2indL 
D. lirella M.
& N., on Spinca iel//iar/a, both at Scarborough].
Grevillea, 
Sep. 1887, xvi.
12-14.
\_Ciicurbitaria herberidis (P.), on dead branches of 
barberry, Scarl)orough ; C.
laburtii Pers., on dead l^ranches of laburnum, 
Scarborough, Carlisle; C.
spartii N., on Sarothamims, Scarborough, 
Cumberland; C.
rJiamni N., on J^Jiammts frangula, York; Byssos- 
pha-7'ia thelena Fr.
, on wood, etc., Scarborough; B.
inmiviera B.&Br.
, on 
wood, Carlisle ; B.
plucosti'ovia Mont., on wood, Carlisle, Scarborough ; 
CJuvtosphccria pileo-ferriiginea Crouan, on stems and roots of CalLom vulgaris, 
Carlisle ; Lasiosphcria ovina Pers., on dead wood, Scarborough ; L.
iue//i- 
branacea B.&Br., on wood, Langridge; L.
racodiu/n Pers., on wood, Scar- 
borough ; Veiitiina ilicifolia Cooke, on holly leaves, Thirsk ; Z.
johnstoni 
V,.&iV>r.
,onEpilobin/n a)igustifoliiini, Berwick].
Grevillea, Dec. 1887, xvi.
34-39.
Charles T.
Musson.
Notts.
Luminous Wood [part of a root of hawthorn [CratiCgiis oxyacantha), the 
luminosity thought to be due in some measure to the presence of the mycelium 
of a fungus].
Nat., Sep. 1885, pp.
326-327.
Wm. Nakramoke.
Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
Fresh -water Alg'ae {Tetraspora gelatinosa on the Cheshire side of the 
Mersey ; and Apiocystis brauniana in the pond in the middle of a field at 
Broadgreen, Liverpool].
AVesl.
Nat., July 1887, i.
T41.
M. H.
RoBsoN.
Cheviotland, Northumberland S.
Additions to the Local Fauna and Flora, with Remarks on some New 
Habitats, etc.
\_Uvella noted as found in a pool on Nuns Moor ; iV/tella — 
probably N.
fiexilis — observed in 1874 on Newcastle Town Moor, and found 
in 1883 in Crag Lough (new to Northumberland) ; Nosfoc, BatracJiospeniiiiDi 
mo)iiliforme, CJuctophora elegans, Draparnaidia glo//ierata, Fotitiiialis anti- 
pyretica — all found on Newcastle Town Moor ; Volvox globatcr recorded from 
three localities ; and ChcctopJiora endivifolia at Sugley Field, Leinington].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumberland, Durh., and Newc, viii.
185-189 (1884).
\. of Man, Derbysh., Furness, * Lake district,' 
Thomas Rogers, Sec. Lane.
S., Lane.
W., Chesh.
Manchester Cryptogamie Society \Hedwigidiiini imbcrbc in the Lake district ; 
J hilonotis rigida.
Isle of Man ; Lejcniiea calcarca.
Miller's Dale ; Cosciiiodou 
cribrosiis, Coniston, exhibited].
Nat., Aug. 1884, p.
2r.
[Three notes — 
Tortula priiiCf-ps (Miller's Dale); TricJiostomufii flavovirens (St. Ann's-on- 
Sea and Southport) ; and BracJiyilieciuni albicans (Southport) noted].
Nat., 
June 1885, p.
259.
September 21st, 1885 {Gytn>iostoiHinn rostellatnni and 
P/iys.oi/iitriiii/i spharicuiii from Mere, Cheshire, exhibited].
Nat., Feb, 
1886, p.
60.
January i8th, 1886 [detailed notes by G.
A. Holt, on his new 
species TIia?!iiiiuin a)igiistifolinui from Derbyshire ; and on Cosci)iodoii 
cribrosiis at Coniston].
Nat., April 1886, p.
lOO.
April 19th, 1 886 [note by 
G. A.
Holt concerning 771 11 id in in rccogiiitiirn and Trichostomiiin crispulutn 
var.
nigro-viride from Monk's Dale, the latter new to Derl)yshire, and Baii'ii/a 
Jiornschiichiana at Miller's Dale].
Nat., July 1886, p.
212.
M. B.
Slater.
York Mid "W.
Mosses, [Hepatieae,] etc., at Sherburn-in-Elmete [June 2nd, 1884 ; Jnngcr- 
inania hirbina/a, Lcptohrymn pyri foriiu\ A nisolJuciinn rit/>rn/n, Ilypntnn 
resnpinatniii , II.
cJirysopliyll inn .
Rltviicliostcgiiun innrale, Zygodon viridissinius 
Var. rnpestris, Tortula aioidcs, and I'.
Iionischiichiana ; localities stated].
Nat., Sep. 1884, p.
36.
M. P.
Slater.
York S.'W.
Mosses and Hepaties gathered on the Askern Excursion, May 2oih, iSSo 
[Barbiila viiii-alis var.
inca/ia, B.
ambigi/a, Piinaria Jiygroniet rica, Wcbcra 
Dec. 18S8.
368 
bibliography: crvptoga^iic botany, 1886-87.
nutans, Muiiiiii rostratuni, M.
punctatHni , HoinalotJieciuiii sericeiim, Campto- 
thcciiiiii liifescens, Eurhyncliiiiiii priilougitni , Rhyncostegiiiin jmirale, Ambly- 
stegimn serpens and three varieties, A.
radicale, Campylmm chrysop/iylhun ^ 
Cratoneiiron Jiliciiiitni , and of Hepatics Lu?iulan'a vitlgaris.
Lophocolea 
helerophylla, and L.
btdentata noted].
Nat., July 1886, p.
212.
[H.
T. SoppiTT.] York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Pockling-ton [June 24th, 1885 ; 
Amanita cc'ciliic, StropJiaria nielasperinus and Pholtota prczcox noted].
Nat., 
Aug. 1S85, p.
308.
[H.
T. Sopi'iTT and W.
Wkst.] York Mid W., York S.W.
Plants of the Bradford District [being records — localised — for C/ia!-a fragi//s,, 
Urocystis fisilieri, Ltpiota procenis, Lentiniis procerus^ three Boleti, Rnssnla 
nitiJa, Pucctnia cirsii, P.
antJioxantJii. Pcronospora alta, three Lecidea\ 
Solorina Uuibata, Peltlgera aphthosa, Unibilicaria polyphyUa, Fissidens 
cj-assipes, Seligeria pnsilla, Scapania bartlingii, S.
cinia, Ujeitnea ecJiinata, 
Bazzania trilobata, Cyiindrocystis diplospora, Staurastrinn orthosticliu .
Hvahithcca diss?
Pens, and JPicrastcrias irenata\ Nat., March 1 885, p.
178.
H. T.
SopiMTT and W.
We..t. York Mid W., York S.V7.
Bradford Naturalists' Society — A Year's Botanical Work [.Mosses noted, 
TetrodontiiiDi brcnonianitJii, Atricliuni crispuiii,-\n(\ SplacliniiDi anipidlacenin ; 
hepatics, TricJiocolea tomenteUa and JungeJ inania capitata ; fungi, Copriniis 
couiatiis, C.
atrawentarins, C.
Iwnierobiiis, Peziza venosa, P.
leporina, Hygro- 
plioriis virgineiis, H.
pratensis, H.
ovinits, Marasuiiits oreades, Loitimts 
cochleatiis, Panus tondosns, S'shizopliylliim conuniine.
Boletus riibinus, 
CynophaUits caniniis, Ckondrioderuia iindnlicatiun , Pnccinia baryi ; lichens, 
Stigonema saxicola, CaUciiivi citrinnin , Urccolaria scriiposa, and Aniphilonia 
lamiginosiirn ; fresh-water algie, Palmodictyon siibrainosuui, Horniscia 
jnoniliforniis, Dictyosphcerinni e/irenbergii, C/irooiOiCus tiirgidus, and Cylin- 
drocystis diplospora ; all with localities noted].
Nat., F'eb.
1S86, p.
60.
RrcHARD Spruce.
York Mid W.
and N.E.
Lejeunea holtii, a new hepatic from Killarney [in which Z.
idicina in 
Upper Wharfedale and at Saltersgate is referred 10 ; and the Cleveland Esk 
A'alley stated as being rich in rare hepatics of European (or arctic) type, as.
Harpantlnis scidatus, Lioc]d(Cna lanceolata, Ccplialozia curvifolia.
C. crenidaia, 
C. connivens, C .
pliiitans, Nardia compressa, etc., but not possessing a single 
Lejeunea, except the common Z.
serpyllifoIia\ J.
of Bot.
, Mch. 1887, xxv.
74.
G. Spaisi-kk.
Westmorland.
Hedwig'idium imberbe and Grimmia hartmanni found in England [in 
Kentmere \'alley, Westmorland].
Nat., Jan. 1SS6, p 15.
[W.
Barwkli.
Turner.] York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Spurn Point [Sep. 3rd, 1884 : 
Delesseria sanguinea, D.
alata, Ceraniium riibnun, C.
eciiinatnn!.
Ulva 
latissinia^ U.
linga, Fiiciis vesieidosns, P.
serratiis, F.
ceranoides, GriffitJisux 
setacea, Chrysinienia clavellosa, PMJninaria digitata, L.
saeeJiariiia, and 
CladopJwra rupesiris noted among the algce].
Nat., Nov. 1884, pp.
92-93.
\V.
Barwei.l Turner.
York Mid W., York N.E.
Notes on Fresh-water Alg-ae [from Blubberhouses and Strensall] : with 
descriptions of new species [viz.
:— Mesotunuun degreyii, Blubberhouses, 
Onyclionevui nordstedtiana, Strensall ; list of eight algce, thirteen diatoms and 
twelve desmids from Blubberhouses ; Cosinarium regnesi from Strensall ; 
paper concludes with generalizations on the geological preferences of desmids].
Nat., Feb. 1886, pp.
33-35 and plate i.
\V.
Barwele Turner.
York N.E., Westmorland.
Notes oh Algae collected at Gormire and Thirkleby, with notice of a 
New Form [Docidiicm truncatnm y labiatuiii var.
nov.
; 15 species of algae, 
3 genera of diatoms, and 42 species of desmids, with statujns enumerated ; 
Doeidinni tnincatiini /3 erassuuL also noted as found last year in great 
abundance near Bowness, Windermere (Turner)].
Nat., Sep. 1887, pp.
275- 
276; and erratum, Oct. 1887, p.
290.
Naturalist,.
NOTES AND NEWS.
W. Harwell Turner.
York N.E.
Desmids of Gormire Lake.
— Correction of Error [in respect of varieties of 
Docidiuiii tr;i iicatuin and D.
>wdidosum\ Nat., Oct. 1887, p.
290.
George R.
Vine.
York S.W.
Luminous Wood [the phenomenon observed in firewood composed of beech 
{Fagiis sylvatua), elm {Ul/nns cai?ipestris), sycamore {Acer pseiidoplata)ius), 
and oak {Qiierciis rohitr)^ due to presence of fungus mycelium?].
Nat., Oct.
1885, pp.
340-341.
C. H.
Waddell.
Westmorland.
Cortinarius alboviolaceus Yx., and Boletus cyanescens ]3ull , near Kendal 
[in 1886].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
332.
C. H.
Waddell.
Westmorland.
Hyg-rophorus sciophanus Fr. near ICendal [in Oct. 1886, plentifully], 
Nat., March 1887, p.
66.
C. H.
Waddell.
Westmorland.
Fungus Crop of 1887 [near Kendal deficient in the species of woods and 
pastures ; Agaricus granulosus entirely absent ; Boletus cdulis and J^ax/Ilus 
invohttits very abundant].
Sci. Goss., Dec. 1887, p.
281.
W. West.
York Mid W.
Habitats of Fresh-water Algae [in West Yorkshire, etc.; Botryd/ua 
vulgaris.
Sirogoniu/ji sticticum, Cylindrospermu})i fuacrosperniuin, Rivularia 
calcarea (Gordale), Fetaloncnia aiatuiu, and Scytonenia niyoc/irous, only one 
of which, however, has a specific locality assigned].
Nat., May 1885, p 232.
W. West.
Westmorland.
Pilularia globulifera in Westmoreland ^Philonotis foiitaua, Dicrauella squar- 
rosa and SarcoscypJius ehrharti also noted].
J. of Bot..
Jan. 1886, xxiv.
24.
John Whlj ehead.
Lane.
S., Chesh., York S.W., Derbyshire.
Mosses of Ashton-under-Lyne District [list of about 250 species, localised 
within a radius of ten miles of Ashton].
Nat., March and April 1886, pp.
85-100.
NOTES AND NEWS.
We have noted with great interest the excellent series of papers on the ' History 
of the County Botany of Worcester,' from the pen of Mr, Wm. Matthews, M.A., 
appearing in successive numbers of our contemporary 'The Midland Naturalist,' 
and could wish that similar work were done for Lincolnshire or the East Riding 
of Yorkshire, botli of which are comparatively neglected tracts.
>0-)< 
Yorkshire naturalists, especially those who remember the old West Ridin'^ 
Consolidated Naturalists' Society in the years before it enlarged its borders and 
became the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, will learn with regret of the decease of 
two of the most prominent of its members — Mr. Joseph Tindall, of Hudderstield, 
and Mr. J.
M. }-)arber, of Heckmondwike.
_ >^ ►< 
Mr. Tindall, whose decease occurred in .September last, devoted himself to the 
study of geology, and was frequently called upon at the meetings to describe the 
geology of the scene of the excursions, and to determine the rock-specimens and 
fossils brouglu to the meetings.
><,o< 
Mr. Joseph Marshall Barber, a native of Barnsley, settled at Heckmond- 
wike, with the intellectual life of which he was identified throughout his residence 
there.
He was one of the founders of the Heckmondwike Naturalists' Societv, 
of the Heckmondwike Mechanics' Institute, of the Heckmondwike juvenile 
Naturalists' Society, and of the Heckmondwike Antituiarian Society, of all of 
which he was an office-bearer and indefatigable supporter.
As a member of the 
Naturalists' Society, he was concernetl in the foundation of the West Riding 
Consolidated Naturalists" Society, of which at a later })eriod he became honorary 
secretary: and when, in 1876, this body became the ^'orkshire Naturalists' I'nion', 
he was jjresented with a valuable microscope in recognition of his services.
He 
died suddenly on the 2 1st of November, at the age of 59, ami was interreil at 
the Heckmondwike Cemetery three days after.
Dec. r888.
370 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
CONTRIBUTORS.
Adamson, S.
A., F.G.s., 17, 87, 173, 214.
I 
Ashford, Charles, 89.
[240, 276, 297, 332.
I 
Atkinson, Rev. J.
C, D.c.L., F.L.S., 236.
Babington, Charles C, m.a.
, f.r.s.
, 265.
Backhouse, fas., jun , F.z.s., 79, 177, 278.
Bailey, M.,'15, 54, 114, 199, 234, 242, 263, 
Baker, J.
G , F.R.S., F.L.S., 33.
[330, 331.
Balderston, Robert R., 189, 234.
Bayford, E.
G., 329.
Brownridge, Chas., F.G.s., 49, 347.
Bunker, Thos., 212, 227, 238, 331.
Butterell, J.
Darker, .M.c.S., 45.
Butterfield, E.
P. P., 15, 236, 244, 265.
Byers, H.
S., 242.
Carter, Basil, 330.
Carter, J- W., 91, 245, 246, 268.
Chadwick, Samuel, 51, 281, 335, 
Clarke, W.
Eagle'.
F.L.S., 55, 85, 156, 160, 
169, 170, 220, 224, 233, 234, 283, 330.
Cockerell, T.
D. A., m.c.s., 226, 227, 284.
Cole, Rev. E.
Maule, m.a., 19, 81, 278, 
333.
354, 360.
Cordeaux, John, M.K.O.U., i, 24, 195, 197, 
202, 219, 224, 276, 354.
Craig-Christie, A., F.L.S., 225, 268, 331.
Crosland, G.
W. K., 331.
Crosskey, Rev. H.
W. , f.g.s., 23.
Davis, J.
W., F.S.A., F.L.S., f.g.s., 345.
Dennis, G.
C, 172.
De-Toni, Dr. G.
B., 157.
Dickinson, F.
W., 224.
Dobree, N.
F., 51, 279.
Edmondson, T.
W., 306.
Fowler, Rev. Wm., M.A., ill.
Fowler, Rev. W.
W., M.A., F.L.S., 114, 
Gain.AV.
A., M.c.s., 193.
Gardner, J., no, 119, 268, 286.
Garfit, R., 268.
George, C.
F., m.r.C.s., 107.
Gill, W.
Hodgson, 346.
Goss, Herbert, F.L.S., 199.
Greening, Linnajus, 243, 357.
Gregson, William, 19, 347.
[330.
Gurney, J.
H., jun., F.z.s., 160, 264, 276, 
Hanson, C.
C, 276.
Hardcastle, C.
D., 18.
Harding, G.
F. , 244.
Harker, Alfred, m.a., f.g.s., 349.
Harrison, J.
W., 354.
Hedworth^ T.
H., 234, 246.
Hey, Rev. W.
C, m.a., 278, 279, 331.
Hobkirk, Chas.
P., F.
L.S., 13, 14.
Hodgson, William, A.L.S.
, 44, 80.
Horsfield, H.
K., m.b.o.u., 330, 353.
Hudleston, Wilfrid PL, m.a., f.R.s., 240.
Hudson, Baker, M.c.s., 172.
Jackson, T.
A., 269.
Kevv, H.
Wallis, F.E.S., 217, 226, 329.
Kirk, J.
M., 88.
Knubley, Rev. E.
P., m.a., 222, 308.
Leach, R.
E., m.a., f.g.s., 119.
Lee, P.
Fox, 85, 200, 213.
Lees, F.
A., m.r.c.s., 160, 169, 193,  226, 
[246, 264, 267,;303.
Maclagan, P., m.d., 222.
Macpherson, Rev. H.
A., m.a., 223, 242.
Manson, R.
Taylor, m.r.c.s., 20.
Martindale, Joseph A., 25.
[284, 287.
Mason, J.
Eardley, 82, 102, 160, 244, 276, 
Massee, George, F.R.M.S., 323.
Milne, J.
G., m.c.s., 48., 
Mitchell, T.
Carter, m.r.c.s., 348.
Mortimer, Robert, 348.
Nelson, Thomas H..
m.b.o.u., 221.
Newton, Alfred, m.a., f.r.s., 156.
Parkinson, Rev. Thomas, 344.
Paver-Crow, R., j.P., 199.
Peak, E.
A., 46.
Pearson, W.
H., 214.
Percival, John, B.A., 125, 159.
Phillips, John H., 23.
Platnauer, H.
M., B.Sc., F.G.S., 343.
Porritt, Geo. T., F.L.S., 12, 82, 103, 151, 
Prodham, Herbert, 199.
[213, 298.
Riley, Edward, 46.
Roberts, George, m.c.s., 232.
Robson.
John E., 52.
[263, 284.
Roebuck, W.
Denison, f.l.-s., 48, 85, 212, 
Selys-Longchamps, Edm. de, 219.
Shepheard, Thos., f.r.m.s., 51.
Slater, M.
B., 177, 238, 278, 306, 312.
Smith.
Arthur, 275.
Soppitt, H.
T., 87, 91.
Southwell, Thos., f.z.s., 331.
Stabler, George, 313.
Stephenson, Thos., 199, 297, 330, 353.
Summerfield, Rev. R.
A., 345.
Thompson, Major B.
B., 268.
Veitch, W.
Y., m.d., 346.
Waddell, Rev. C.
H., b.a., 143, 329.
Walton, F.
Fielder, m.r.c.s., 47.
Watson, John, 161, 201.
Watts, Rev. Arthur, F.G.S., 145, 348.
West, William, f.l.s., 299, 312.
Whitlock, F.
B., 221, 246, 355, 356.
Whitwell, William, 307.
Wood, J.
S., 90, 198.
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
BOOK NOTICES 
Adamson, C.
M. — Some more Illustrations 
of Wild Birds, 108.
Baker, J.
Gilbert — Handbook of the Fern 
Allies, 193.
Bath, W.
H. — Young Collector's Hand- 
book of Ants, Bees, &c., 78, 
Bath, W.
H.— Young Collector's Hand- 
book of British Birds, 283.
Day, Francis — British and Irish Salmon- 
id?e, 55.
Fisher, Rev. R.
— Flower-land, an intro- 
duction to Botany for Children, 169.
Harvie-Brown and Buckley — Vertebrate 
Fauna of Sutherland, 152.
Newcastle Sunday Lecture Society — 
Lectures, 78.
Research, monthly journal of Science, 283.
Ridgway, R.
— Manual of North American 
Birds, 108.
Rule, P.
M.— The Cat: its Natural His- 
tory, &c., 78.
Saunders, H.— List of British Birds, 16.
Saunders, H.
— Illustrated Manual of 
British Birds, 233.
Smith, Rev. A.
C — Birds of Wiltshire, 108.
Westmorland Note-Book and Natural His 
tory Record, 235.
Williams, J.
W.— Shell-Collector's Hand- 
book for the Field, 144.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Autotype Frontispiece — Views in Heligoland.
ERRATUM.
In Mr. Christie's note, p.
331, for ' may I assure,' read ' I beg to inform.' 
NEW VARIETY OF MOLLUSK DESCRIBED IN THIS VOLUME.
Arion ater var.
nov.
cinerea, Roeb., 284.
CHESHIRE.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Cryptogamia ; Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188.
Hymenoptera : Bibliography, 1884 to 
1887, 153-155- 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1885 to 
1887, 58 ; Deilephila galii on Wallasey 
sand-hills (Porritt), 298.
Mollusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263 ; Amalia gagates at 
Bowdon (Milne), 48; Cheshire speci- 
mens in British Museum (Cockerell), 
229.
Polyzoa : Paludicella ehrenbergii (Shep- 
heard), 51.
Reptiles and Amphibia : Newts near 
Warrington (Greening), 243 ; the Natter- 
jack Toad at Wallasey (Greening), 
357-360.
CUMBERLAND 
Upper Teesdale 
Birds : Avifauna of 
(Backhouse), 79 ; remarkable flight on 
Solway (Hodgson), 80 ; the Ornithology 
of Skiddaw, Sea Fell, and Helvellyn 
(Watson), 161-169; (Macpherson), 242 ; 
Notes on P^alconidiTe in Lake District 
(Watson), 201 ; Gyr-falcons in Lake 
District (Macpherson), 223 ; Cumberland 
specimens in 13ritish Museum (Cockerell), 
227.
Coleoptera: Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210; Carabus glabratus and 
other beetles in the Lake District 
(Carter.), 246.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369 ; Lichens of Westmorland 
(Martindale), 29-32; Jubula hutchinsi^v 
at Lodore (Waddell), 143 ; Mosses and 
Hepatics in Cumberland (Stabler), 316.
Dec. 18S8.
Flowering Plants : Botany of the Cum- 
berland part of the Pennine Range 
(Baker), 33-44; Linaria minor in Cum- 
berland (Hodgson), 44.
Fishes: Solway Salmon in British Museum 
(Cockerell), 227.
Geology and Palaeontology : biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188; tlie ligneous 
Dykes of the North of England (Harker), 
349-353- 
Lepidoptera : l)ibliography for 1885 to 
1887, 62.
Mollusca: bil)lic>grai)hy for 1886 and 
1887.
247-263 ; Cumbrian specimens in 
r.rilish Museum (Cockerell), 229.
Neuroptera : ) IWblioL^raphy for 18S4 to 
Trichoptera : J 1887,285-286.
372 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
DERBYSHIRE.
Birds : Pallas' Sand-Grouse at Breaston 
(\Vhitlock),22i ; Siskins in North Derby- 
shire (Dickinson), 224; Derbyshire speci- 
mens in British Museum (Cockerell), 227.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Cryptog"amia : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188 ; The Igneous 
Dykes of the North of England 
(Barker), 349-353- 
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1885 to 
1887, 58.
MoUusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263.
Neuroptera: "\ Bibliography for 1884 to 
Trichoptera : / 1887,285-286.
DURHAM 
Birds : Notes on and Additions to the 
Avifauna of UpperTeesdale(Backhouse), 
79; Pallas' Sand -Grouse near Bishop 
Auckland (Nelson), 221.
Flowering- Plants : Thalictrum alpinum 
at Widdy Bank (Whitwell), 307.
Coleoptera: Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210 ; Quedius longicornis at 
Hartlepool (Gardner), 119.
Cryptogamia: Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369.
Geology and Palaeontology: Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188 ; Boulders near 
Darlington (Manson), 22 ; the Igneous 
Dykes of the North of England 
(Harker), 349-353- 
Hymenoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155- 
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1885, 1S86, 
and 1887, 58 ; Memoir of John Sang 
(Robson), 53 ; the Locality for certain 
Agrotidie (Gardner), no; Stigmonota 
dorsana at Axwell (Hedworth), 246; 
Deilephila galii at Hartlepool (Gardner), 
268; Larva; of D.
galii at Hartlepool 
(Gardner), 286.
Mollusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263 ; Durham specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 228.
Neuroptera : ) Bibliography for 1884 to 
Trichoptera : ) 1887, 285-286.
LANCASHIRE.
Birds: Lancashire Specimens in British 
Museum (Cockerell), 227 ; Notes on the 
Lapwing near Garstang (Tackson), 269- 
275- 
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Cryptogamia: Bibliography for 1886 and 
18S7, 361-369.
Flowering Plants and Ferns : Ferns 
neir Kirkby Lonsdale (Lees), 305.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188; the Igneous 
Dykes of the North of England 
(Harker), 349-353- 
Hymenoptera : I^.ibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155.
to 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for i 
1887, 58.
Mollusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263 ; Lancashire Shells in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 229.
; Neuroptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 285-286.
Pre-historic Archaeology : a Lake- 
dwelling at Preston (Cole), 360.
Reptiles and Amphibia : Newts near 
Warrington (Greening), 243 ; the Natter- 
jack Toad in Lancashire (Greening), 
357-360.
Trichoptera: Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 285-286.
LINCOLNSHIRE.
Arachnida : Lincolnshire Spiders (Kew), 
329- 
Birds : Pied Flycatcher near Alford 
(Mason), 160 ; Notes on the Occurrence 
of Pallas' Sand-Grouse in the Spurn 
district in the Spring of 1888 (Cordeaux), 
^95-^975 Lincolnshire specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 227; 
Osorey near Alford (Mason), 276 ; 
Pallas' Sand-Grouse at Goxhill (Har- 
rison), 354.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369 ; Fungi near Wroot (Sop- 
pitt), 86.
'   
Diptera : Lists for Alford and Louth 
districts (Kew), 217-218.
Fishes : Three-bearded Rockling in the 
North Sea (Cordeaux), 24.
Flowering Plants and Ferns : Poly- 
stichum angulare at Withern (North 
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
373 
LINCOLNSH 
Lines.
(Mason), 102; Lincolnshire Marsh 
and Water Plants (Fowler), 111-114; 
Carduus acaulis at South Ormesby 
(Mason), 284.
j 
Geolog-y and Palaeontologv : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188.
Hemiptera : List of Hemiptera-Heterop- 
tera of Lincolnshire, with Notes on 
collecting (Mason), 287-297.
Hymenoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155 ; List of Aculeata of Kir- | 
ton-in-Lindsey (George), 107 ; Sirex | 
juvencus there (George), 107.
j 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1885 to ' 
ISLE O 
Birds : Pallas' Sand-Grouse in the Isle of 
Man (Nelson), 221.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Crustacea : Manx specimens in British 
Museum (Cockerell), 231.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography for 1886 and | 
1887, 361-369, 
Diptera : Manx captures in August 1887 
(Porritt), 107.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188 ; the Igneous 
r)ykes of the North of England 
(Harker), 349-353- 
Hemiptera-Heteroptera : Manx captures 
in 1S87 (Mason), 244.
KY.— Continued.
1887, 58 ; Moths attracted by the 
illuminations of Lincoln Cathedral 
(Fowler), 114; Hermaphrodite Saturnia 
carpini (Goss), 199; Deilephila galii at 
Alford (Garfit), 268.
Mammalia : Otter in Lincolnshire (Mason), 
82 ; Bats at (iosberton (Roebuck), 263.
Mollusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263 ; Recjuest for assistance 
with Marine Species (Kew), 226 ; Occur- 
rence oi dead vShells of Crepidula forni- 
cata on Grimsby Beach (Smith), 275.
Neuroptera: 1 Bibliography for 1884 to 
Trichoptera: I 1887, 285-286.
' MAN.
Hymenoptera: Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155- 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1885 to 
1887, 60 ; an Entomological Expedition 
to North Wales and the Isle of Man 
(Porritt), 103-107.
Mammalia: Manx Cat in British Museum 
(Cockerell), 227.
Mollusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263 ; Manx specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 229.
Neuroptera : Captures in August 1887 
(Porritt), 106.
Orthoptera : Captures in August 1887 
(Porritt), 107.
Trichoptera : Captures in August 18S7 
(Porritt), 106.
NORTHUM 
Alcyonaria : Northumbrian specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerel!), 230.
Annelids : Northumbrian specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 230.
Birds : Cuckoo in Berwick town(Maclagan), 
222 ; Northumbrian specimens in British 
.Museum (Cockerell), 227 ; Nesting of 
Hawhnch near Newcastle (Hedworth), 
234 ; Crossbill at the Fame Islands \ 
(Cjurney), 276.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
i 
Crustacea : Northumbrian specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 231.
I 
Cryptogamia : l)ibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369.
Fishes : Northumbrian specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerel!), 227.
Geology and Palaeontology : 1511)110- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188 ; the Ii;neous ' 
Dec. 1888.
B E R L A N D .
Dykes of the North of England 
(Harker), 349-353- 
Hydrozoa : Northumbrian specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 230.
Hymenoptera: Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155- 
Lepidoptera : P>:b!i()graphy for 1885 to 
1887, 59.
Mammalia: Halicluerus gryphus at the 
Fames 1 Cockerell), 227.
Mollusca: Bil)lit>graphy for 1886 and 1887, 
247-263 ; Nori!uunl)rian specinien-.
in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 228, 229.
Neuroptera : Bi!)!iogra[)hy for 18S4 lo 
1887, 2S5-286.
Polyzoa : Northumbrian specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 230.
Trichoptera : Bibliography for 1SS4 tu 
1887, 285-2S6.
374 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Birds : Irruption of Pallas' Sand-Grouse 
(Whitlock), 170,221 ; Manx Shearwater 
near Nottingham (Whitlock), 356 ; Notes 
on the Reed Warbler (Whitlock).
355- 
356.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369.
Flowering; Plants : Varieties of Viola 
odorata (Whitlock), 246.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1885 to 
1887, 66.
MoUusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 1887, 
247-263 ; Arion ater var.
nov.
cinerea at 
Nottingham (Roebuck), 284.
WESTMORLAND 
Birds : Upper Teesdale (Backhouse), 79 ; 
Falconid?ein Lake district (Watson ,201 ; 
Gyr-falcons in Lake district (Macpher- 
son), 223.
Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 361-369 ; Lichens of Westmorland 
(Martindale), 25-32 ; the Hepatic?e and 
Musci of Westmorland, part I (Stabler), 
313-320; /Ecidium calthse near Kendal 
(Waddell), 329.
Flowering Plants and Ferns : Ceterach 
near Kirkby Lonsdale (Lees), 160 ; 
Thalictrum alpinum on Helvellyn (Whit- 
well), 307.
AND FURNESS.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188; the Igneous 
Dykes of the North of England (Harker), 
349-353- 
Hymenoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155- 
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1885, 1886, 
and 1887, 58 ; the supposed Nepticula 
tormentillffi (Porritt), 82.
Meteorological Tables • for various sta- 
tions, 313.
Mollusca: Bibliography for 1886 and 
1887, 247-263 ; W^estmorland specimens 
in British Museum (Cockerell), 229.
Neuroptera: "^Bibliography for 1884 to 
Trichoptera : / 1887,285-286.
YORKSHIRE.
Birds : of Heligoland compared (Cor- 
deaux), I ; Crested Tit, etc., near 
Keighley (Butterfield), 15; Flamborough 
Notes (Bailey), 15 ; Albino Kittiwake at 
Flamborough (Bailey), 54 ; additions to 
Avifauna of Upper Teesdale ( Backhouse), 
79 ; Birds at Hatfield Chace (Clarke), 84, 
85 ; the British Example of Bulwer's 
Petrel (Newton and Clarke), 156 ; Night- 
ingale near Beverley (Clarke), 160 ; 
White Stork near Scarborough (Clarke), 
169 ; Irruption of Pallas' Sand-Grouse 
(Clarke), 170; Birds at Leyburn (Back- 
house), 177 ; Pallas' Sand-Grouse in 
Spurn District, Spring of 1888 (Cor- 
deaux), 195-197 ; at Flamborough 
(Bailey), 198 ; at Whitby (Stephenson), 
199 ; at Pickering (Prodham), 199 ; in 
Nidderdale (Paver-Crow), 199 ; Notes 
from Spurn in Spring of 1888 (Cor- 
deaux), 202 ; Birds at Saddleworth 
(Bunker), 212 ; Pallas' Sand-Grouse in 
Cleveland (Nelson), 221 ; at Borough- 
bridge (Knubley) 222 ; Crossbills at 
Spurn in July (Cordeaux and Clarke), 
224 ; Yorkshire specimens in British 
Museum (Cockerell), 227; the Eared 
Chat not a British Bird (Clarke), 234 ; 
Solan Goose near Bridlington (Bailey), 
234 ; Black-throated Diver near Bingley 
(Butterfield), 236 ; Alarm Note of the 
Woodcock (Atkinson), 236 ; Birds at 
Robin Hood's Bay (Bunker), 238 ; 
Flamborough Notes (Bailey), 242 ; 
Bittern near Ripon (Byers), 242 ; unusual 
nesting site for Missel Thrush (Butter- 
field and Lees), 264; Fieldfares near 
Halifax in July (Hanson), 276 ; Food 
of Crossbills at Spurn (Cordeaux), 276 ; 
Birds at Market Weighton (Backhouse), 
278 ; Norfolk Plover on the Wolds 
(Cole), 278 ; Sand-Grouse near Whitby 
(Stephenson), 297 ; Purple Heron near 
[ Otley (Clarke), 330; Black Guillemot 
near Whitby (Stephenson), 330 ; Reed 
Warbler nesting in the Washburn Valley 
(Horsfield), 330 ; Flamborough Notes 
(Bailey), 330 ; Robin caught in a mouse- 
trap at Masham (Carter), 330 ; Whitby 
j Notes (Stephenson), 353 ; Occurrence of 
' Pectoral Sandpiper at Kilnsea (Cor- 
j deaux), 354 ; Pallas' Sand-Grouse at 
Wetwang- on - the -Wolds (Cole), 354 ; 
Rough-legged Buzzard at Meanwood, 
Leeds (Horsfield), 353.
: Coleoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 203-210 ; Carabus nitens in Swale- 
dale (Clarke), 220 ; Some Ingleborough 
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
375 
Y O R K S H I R Y.— Continued.
Coleoptera (Carter), 245-246 ; Beetles at 
Market Weighton (Hey), 279; Coleop- 
tera at Market Weighton (Bay ford), 
329- 
Crustacea : Dogger Bank and Scar- 
borough specimens in British Museum 
(Cockerell), 231.
Cryptogamia : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1:587,361-369; aCurious Habitat of some 
mosses near Dewsbury (Hobkirk), 13 ; 
Lichens in Teesdale ( Martindale), 30,32; 
Fungi at Hatfield Chace (Soppitt), 87 ; 
Desmids, Diatoms, and Alga at Hatfield 
Chace (Kirk), 89 ; Hepatics at Saddle- 
worth (Pearson), 214 ; Mosses and 
Hepatics at Robin Hood's Bay (Slater), 
240 ; Mosses and Hepatics at Market 
Weighton (Slater), 280 ; Yorkshire 
Mosses and Hepatics (Stabler), 316 ; 
Fungus Foray at Bramham and Hare- 
wood Parks and List of Fungi collected 
(Massee), 321-329- 
Diptera : Hessian Fly in East Riding 
(Riley and Bunker), 46.
Entomostraca : At Hatfield Chace (Kirk), 
88.
Fishes: Three-bearded Rockling in the 
North Sea (Cordeaux), 24 ; Congers at 
Flamborough (Bailey), 114.
Flowering Plants and Ferns : Plants at 
Welton Vale (Peak), 46 ; at North 
Ferriby (Peak), 47 ; on Hatfield Chace 
(Lee), 85 ; Some Ingleton Plants (Leach), 
119; the Flora of Wensleydale (Percival), 
125-143, and 159 ; Notes on the List of 
Ingleton Plants (Lees), 160 ; Plants near 
Leyburn (Slater), 177 ; Sparganium 
ramosum var.
microcarpum near Dews- 
bury (Lee), 200 ; Plants observed at 
Saddleworth (Lee), 213 ; Notes on the 
Flora of \\'est Yorkshire(Craig-Christie1, 
225 ; (Lees), 226 ; Plants at Robin 
Hood's Bay (Slater), 239 ; Ceterach 
officinarum in Wensleydale still (Lees), 
246 ; List of Plants noted at Fylingdales 
(Rol)in Hood's Bay) in September 1882 
( Babirigton), 265-267; a nev.' West 
Yorkshire Plant.
Pyrola rotundifolia 
(Lees), 267; Thalictrum alpinum at 
Settle (Christie), 268 ; Plants observed 
at Market Weighton (Slater), 279; 
Additional Localities for West Riding 
Plants (West), 299-302 ; Notes on the 
West Y(ukshire Flora (Lees) 303-306 ; 
Hound's Tongue at Skipton-in-Craven 
(Edmondson), 306 ; Si)ir;va fiiipendula 
in S.E. Yorkshire (Slater), 306; Notes 
on Settle Plants (Whitwell), 307: (iood- 
yera repens near Market Weighton 
(West, Slater), 312; Silene nutans still 
Dec. iS88.
at Knaresborough (Hey), 331 ; Stratiotes 
aloides at Carlton near Selby (Bunker), 
331 ; Notes on Settle Plants (Christie), 
331.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1886, 178-188 ; the Yorkshire 
Boulder Committee and its first year's 
work (Adamson), 17-24; Geology of 
Welton Vale (Walton), 47 ; interest- 
ing discovery of Boulders in the Coal 
Measures at Wortley, Leeds (Brown- 
ridge), 49 ; Ancient and Modern, or 
Scenes in the History of a Glacial Pel)ljle 
(Chad wick), 51 ; the Rudstone (Cole), 
81 ; Geology of Hatfield Chace (Adam- 
son), 87; of Leyburn (Adamson).
173; 
Evidences of Glacial Action neir Ingle- 
ton (Balderston), 189-193 and 234; 
geologists at Saddleworth (Adamson), 
214-216 ; at Robin Hood's Bay (Hudles- 
ton and Adamson), 240 ; Calverley 
Wood Quarries, Leeds (Adamson), 276; 
Geologyat Market Weighton (ChadwiCk), 
281 ; Glacier work in Airedale (Adam- 
son), 297 ; Yorkshire Boulder Committee 
and its second year's work (Adamson), 
332-348 ; the igneous Dykes of the 
North of England (Harker), 349-353.
Hemiptera : Philrenus spumarius as food 
of Crossbills at Spurn (Cordeaux), 276.
Hydra: at Hatfield Chace (Kirk), 89.
Hymenoptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 153-155; Sirex juvencus at Hull 
(Dobree), 51 ; Trichiosoma vitellina; at 
Hatfield Chace (Roebuck), 85.
Infusoria: at Hatfield Chace (Kirk), 88.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1885 to 
1887, 58 ; Huddersfield, York, etc.
(Porritt), 12 ; Sang's Captures in York- 
shire (Robson), 52 ; the supposed 
Yorkshire Nepticula tormentillre, and 
occurrence of another species new to the 
county (Porritt), 82 ; Hatfield Chace 
(Roebuck), 85 ; Nepticula serella at 
Ingleborough (Porritt), 151; Leyburn 
(Dennis), 172 ; Saddleworth (l^orritt), 
213 ; near Halifax in 1887 (Harding), 
244; Thecla rubi on Barden Moor, 
Wharfedale (Butterfield), 244; Deile- 
phila galii at Bradford (Carter), 268 ; at 
Harrogate (Thomj^son), 268 ; Lepidoj:)- 
tera at Market Weighton (Dohrce), 279; 
Deile]ihila galii in \'orkshire in 1S88 
(Porritt), 298 : Scopula ferrugalis at 
Huddersfield (Croslaml), 331; Kupciia 
fulvago and Acronycta alni near l^oii- 
caslcr (Porritt), 331.
Mammalia : at HatfieUl Chace (Clarke), 
84; Whale at Hamixirough (Bailey), 
114; Seal in the Aire at Rawclitfe 
376 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
Y O R K S H I ^Y.—Conti7med.
(Bunker), 226; Whale at Flamborough 
(Bailey), 263 ; Water Shrew and Field 
Vole near Ripon (Roebuck), 263 ; Whale 
at Flamborough(Bailey&; Southwell), 33 1.
MoUusca : Bibliography for 1886 and 
1S87, 247-263; Mollusca at Welton 
Vale (Butterell), 45; at Hatfield Chace 
(Roebuck), 85 ; another Yorkshire locality 
for Vertigo angustior (Ashford), 89 ; 
Land and Fresh-water Mollusca of 
Upper Airedale (Soppitt and Carter), 
91-102; at Leyburn (Hudson), 172 ; at 
Saddleworth (Roebuck), 212; Scar- 
borough specimens in British Museum 
(Cockerell).
228 ; York and Yorkshire 
specimens there (id.), 229-231 ; Helix 
hortensis and its variation at Lofthouse 
(Roberts), 232 ; Re-appearance of Canal 
Shells at Agbrigg near Waketield 
(Roberts), 232 ; Mollusca noted at Mar- 
ket Weighton (Hey), 278.
Neuroptera : Bibliography for 1884 to 
1S87, 285-286.
Personal Notices : Death of John Sang, 
52 ; of Thomas Lister, 123; Election of 
Yorkshire F.
G. S.
, 23 1 ; Deaths of Joseph 
Tindall and J.
M. Barber, 369.
Porifera : Scarborough specimens in 
British Museum (Cockerell), 231.
Pre - historic Archaeology : a Lake- 
dwelling at Preston compared with that 
at Ulrome (Cole), 360.
Reptiles and Amphibia : Great Warty 
Newt at Scarborough (Greening), 
243- 
Rotatoria : at Hatfield Chase (Kirk), 
Societies : \ orkshire Naturalists' Union 
at Welton Vale, 45 ; and at Hatfield 
Chice, 83 ; 26th Annual Report of 
Y.N.U., 115-119; Annual Meeting at 
Malton, 120-123 y Y.N.U. in Lower 
Wensleydale (Leyburn), 171-177; founda- 
tion of Hull Geological Society, 200 ; 
Y.N.U. at Saddleworth, 21 1-2 16 ; 
Annual Meeting of Leeds Geological 
Association, 231 ; Y.N.U. at Robin 
Hood"s Bay, 236-242 ; at Market 
Weighton, 277-282 ; British Association 
at Bath (Knubley), 308-312; Fungus 
Foray of Y.N.U. at Bramham and 
Harewood Parks, 321-329.
Trichoptera: Bibliography for 1884 to 
1887, 285-2S6.
miscel: 
Birds: of Heligoland (Cordeaux), I, etc.; 
of Heligoland (Gurney), 160; Irruption 
of Pallas' Sand-Grouse (various), 170 ; 
Pallas' Sand-Grouse at Heligoland 
(Gatke), 197 ; in Denmark (Wood), 
198 ; Crossbills at Heligoland in July 
(Cordeaux), 224 ; Eared Chat not a 
British Bird (Clarke), 234; Utility 
of the Barn Owl (Gurney), 264 ; Cross- 
bills (2 species) on the East Coast of 
England (Gurney), 330.
Botanical Nomenclature : Duplicated 
Generic Names (De-Toni), 157-158; 
(Cockerell) 226 ; (Lees) 226.
Flowering Plants : of Heligoland (Cor- 
deaux), 8 ; Leafing of Oak and Ash 
(Hobkirk), 14; Dichroism in Viola 
odorata and other plants (Cockerell), 
284.
Geolog-y and Palaeontology: Coal-dust 
and Explosions in Coal-Mines (Watts), 
145-151- 
Heligoland (illustrated by autotype views).
1-12.
Hemiptera-Heteroptera : Notes on Col- 
lecting (Mason), 295-297.
.ANEOUS.
Hepatics : Jubula hutchinsise in co.
Down 
I (Wad dell 143.
Lepidoptera : on Heligoland (Cordeaux), 
4, 8; Penmaenmawr, N.
Wales (Porritt), 
103-107 ; insect-migration at Heligoland 
j and lists of species (Selys-Longchamps), 
I 219-220.
j Measurements : Conversion Tables for 
1 naturalists (Wood), 90.
I Mollusca : Specimens in British Museum 
from various counties (Cockerell), 
230.
Neuroptera: at Penmaenmawr (Porritt), 
I Orthoptera : Grasshoppers on Pieligoland 
i (Cordeaux), 9; at Penmaenmawr (Por- 
ritt), 105, 
: Reptiles and Amphibia : Table of Specific 
Characters of British Newts (Greening), 
I 243 ; Table of the Specific Characters 
: of Frogs and Toads (Greening), 359.
i Trichoptera : at Penmaenmawr (Porritt), 
i 105- 
Zoological Nomenclature : Duplicated 
Generic Names (Cockerell), 226 ; (Lees), 
226.
^rinted by McCorquodale & Co. Limited, Leeds.
1 DEC 1888 
Jn Preparation.
onograph of the Land and Fresh-Water Mollusca 
of the British Fauna.
The work is intended to be full, detailed, and exhaustive, and adequately 
illustrative of Variation, Development, and Geographical Distribution.
Co-operation is invited from all interested, and any information or specimens 
(the common species of every district are particularly desired) will be welcomed 
and carefully acknowledged.
The Authors may be addressed — c/o Mr. John W.
Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Hunslet New Road, Leeds.
Information is at present specially required on the Slugs {Tcsfacella, Liniax, and 
Arion), of which living specimens from every district are desired.
On Monday, February 1st, 1886, was Published, No. I, Price 4d.
Monthly, 
THE SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRER.
Affords a medium through which information on everj' Scientific Subject may be obtained.
It 
contamsQueries, Answers, Short Papers and Notes, Extracts, Correspondence, Sale and Exchange 
Column.
THE JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AUD NATURAL SCIENCE, 
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, PRICE 1/6.
The recognized organ of the POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY, contains interesting 
articles in every department of Microscopy and the allied Sciences, written by experienced 
Microscopists and Specialists, and illustrated by Lithographic Plates.
It is one of the largest, 
cheapest, and most widely circulated Journals of its class.
Special features are " Half-hours at the Microscope with Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 
etc.;" "Selected Notes from the Society's Note-books." Reviews of new books relating 
to every branch of Natural Science ; Correspondence on matters of Microscopic or Scientific 
interest.
Current Notes and Memoranda, " Exchanges," &c.
Both Journals are edited and published by Mr. Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
London : BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King WiUiam St., Strand, W.C.
'NATURALIST' REPRINTS— No. I.
LIST OF 
LAND AND FRESHWATER MOLLUSCA 
LANCASHIRE.
This paper contains not only Mr. Standen's own observations, but those of Me.-srs.
R. D.
Darbishire, T.
Rogers, W.
H. Heathcote, J.
A. Plargreaves, F.
C. Long, H.
Stephenson, and 
other conchologists, and the observations published in Dyson's list of 1850, and in Hardy's 
lists of 1864 and 1865, are reproduced for comparison.
Price 9d.
(By post, 9M.) 
To be had from the Publishers of the 'Naturalist,' Park Row, Leeds.
This day, price One Shilling, %vo, with 20 Engravifigs, Parts /, //, and III of 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., 
Editor of the T^rd and ^th Volumes of YarreU's ''History of British Birds.' 
Fourth Edition.
To be completed in about 20 monthly jmrts.
GUKNEY i^' JACKSON (Successors to Mr. Van Voorst), i, Paternoster Row.
THE NATURALIST 
IPO 18 8 9 
WILL BE CONDUCTED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunnj- Bank, Leeds ; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE IN SPECIAL DEPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Royal Herbarium, Kew ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
Dewsbiiry ; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
Museum of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Huddersfield ; 
ALFRED MARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
St. John's College, Cambridge ; 
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.C.S.
, F.R.M.?., 
5.5, Reginald Terrace, Leeds.
Communications for insertion may be sent to the General Editor at Leeds, 
by whom those on special subjects will be submitted to the Associate Editor under 
whose cognizance they fall.
Towards the close of the month it will, however, save 
time to address short notes direct to the Associate Editors.
Duritig the next fezu months it is hoped to insert the folloiving articles: — 
Additions to the Algse of West Yorksh.ire.— Wm. West, F.L.S.
Bird-Notes from the Yorkshire Coast ia the Autiimn of 1888.— John 
CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U.
Bibliography: Diptera, 1884, 1885, 1888, 1887.
Notes on the Food and Habits of Slugs and Snails.— W.
A. Gain, ]\LC.S.
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union : Annual Meeting at Sheffield.
Plants of Langstrothdale, Mid-West Yorkshire.— Trevor Basil Woodd.
Bibliography: Geology and Palaeontology, 1887.
Museums of the North of England.— British Association Committee.
Bibliography: Phanerogamic Botany, 1886-1887.
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire & Cheshirf .— J.
W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., F.E.S.
NOW READY, 224 PAGES, 125 ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY 8vo.
PRICE 7s.
6d.
THE STRUCTURE AXD LIFE-HISTORY OF 
L. C.
MIALL AND ALFRED DENNY.
gin Introbuttioii ta i\t ^tubg of Insects.
BY 