! 
^' 
y 
I 
) 
^ oXw v«JL-^X-o 
I 
I 
( 
THE 
W4.
AT 
RAL 
^r 
A 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
ST: 
t 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Recorder to and Ex-President of the Coxchological Society ; Joint Hon. Secretary 
OF THE Yorkshire Naturalists* Union; Joint-Althor of a * Handbook of the 
Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire'; Hon. Member of the Bradford 
Naturalists' and Microscopical Society, Cleveland Naturalists* 
Field Club, Malton Naturalists' Society, Liverpool 
Naturalists' Field Club; etc., etc.; 
with the assistance in special departments of 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S..
^V.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S..
M.B.O.U., 
L 
ALFRED BARKER.
M.A., F.G.S., 
CHAS- P.
HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
W. HARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R.M.S.
^ 
1891.
Xb 
\ 
^ 
t: ^>' 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C 
M<=CORQUODALE & CO.
LIMITED, CaRDLVGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
and 
Leeds: BASLNtiHALL Strert.
1891.
PREFACE.
4 
A STEADILY-CONTINUED increase in the subscription-list 
may be taken as evidence that ' The Naturalist ' is 
appreciated by the class of readers for whom it is 
intended, and the large number of notes and articles 
which the present volume contains, not one of which 
but conveys an item of information or a fact of some 
value, shows that a journal of its character is required.
The Editor takes this opportunity of thanking the 
subscribers for their support, his colleagues in the 
Editorship for their assistance, and the contributors for 
the interesting character and great value of the articles 
and notes which go to make up the present volume.
He has also the pleasure of announcing that in 
future the duties and responsibility of the chief Editor- 
ship will be shared by Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S.
The Editors trust that all their present subscribers 
and contributors will continue to support them, and they 
are also desirous to have the means of giving illustra- 
tions, regularly if possible, at all events occasionally, and 
therefore propose to circulate an appeal for a large 
increase in the subscription-list, to enable this to be 
pecuniarily possible.
They trust to have the influence 
of their present supporters to the same end.
The naturalist 
For 1891.
ADDITIONS TO 
THE YORKSHIRE LIST OF LEPIDOPTERA 
FOR THE DONCASTER DISTRICT.
HERBERT H.
CORBEn\ M.R.C.S., 
Doncaster.
mre 
at or near Doncaster during 1889 and 1890, and not appearing in 
Mr. Porritf s list for that district, and in some cases not occurrinfr in 
the county list at all, may be worthy of record.
Some species are 
so common that they have probably been omitted from the local 
lists purposely.
Those that do not occur in the county list are 
marked with an asterisk.
Orgyia pudibunda.
Larva in Wheatley Wood 
Eupisteria heparata.
Wheatley 
Acidalia scutulata.
Common in Wheatley AVood.
* 
Acidalia immutata.
Abundant in damp grassy places in Wheatley 
Wood.
Cabera exanthemaria.
Wadworth Wood.
Hybernia aurantiaria.
Larvae abundant in Wheatley Wood.
Hybernia defoliaria.
Abundant in all the woods, 
Larentia pectinitaria.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Melanthia rubiginata.
Common amongAlders in Wheatley Wood.
Melanthia ocellata.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Melanippe rivata.
Common in weedy parts of Wheatley Wood.
Cidaria psittacata.
One at light in Doncaster.
Dicranura vinula- Common generally.
Pygaera bucephala.
Ditto.
Bryophila perla.
Common on a wall in Thorne Road.
Jan. tggi.
CORBETT: ADDITIONS TO YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA.
Leucania comma.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Xylophasia scolopacina.
In Wheatley Wood.
Agrotis nigricans.
Common at sugar in Wheatley Wood.
Agrotis tritici.
One at sugar in Wheatley Wood.
Noctua C-nigrum, Common at sugar.
Noctua triangulum.
Not comm.on.
A few at Wheatley.
Noctua umbrosa.
Common at sugar in Wheatley Wood.
Orthosia lota.
Common at sugar in Wheatley Wood.
Orthosia macilenta.
Ditto ditto.
Anchocelis rufina.
Abundant at sugar in Wheatley Wood.
Anchocelis pistacina.
A few at sugar In Wheatley Wood.
Hecatera serena.
One at rest on a wall at Balby.
F 
Epunda viminalis var.
obscura.
Abundant in Wheatley Wood.
Plusia iota.
Common at Lonicera flowers in Wheatley Wood.
Plusia V-aureum.
Ditto ditto.
Gonoptera libatrix.
Common at Doncaster.
Mania maura.
Abundant at sugar near the river at Hexthorpe.
r 
r 
I took one very fine light form.
Cataclysta lemnalis.
Abundant at Sandal Brick-fields.
Hydrocampa nymphealis.
Ditto.
Hydrocampa stagnalis.
Ditto.
Scoparia mercuralis.
On palings at Doncaster.
Crambus perlellus.
One very large one in Wheatley Wood.
Crambus inquinatellus.
Abundant but very local at Rossington.
Tortrix adjunctana.
Abundant in gardens in Doncaster.
Ephippiphora bimaculana/ Common in Wheatley Wood.
*Semasia ianthinana.
One on palings in the Town Field, 
Doncaster.
Carpocapsa pomonana.
One in an orchard at Doncaster.
Lemnatophila phryganella.
Abundant in Wheatley Wood- 
Ochsenheimeria birdella.
One at Wheatley.
Gelechia simllella.
In the Town Field, Doncaster.
Gelechia gemmella.
Abundant in Wheatley Wood.
Gelechia albiceps.
One at Doncaster.
Pleurota bicostella.
On the Town Moor, Doncaster.
CEcophora flavimaculella.
Abundant in Wheatley Wood.
Laverna raschkiella.
Abundant in the larva state at Wheatley 
tifolwni) 
Naturalist, 
3 
DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN YORKSHIRE, 
CHARLES P.
HOBKIRK, F.L.S., and P.
F. LEE, 
Chairman and Hon. Sec.
of the Committee appointed to inquire into the Causes o; 
Disappcarafice o/ Native Plants in Yorkshire, 
The following report of the Y.N.U. Committee — consisting of 
C. P.
Hobkirk (Chairman); R.
Barnes, Saltburn-by-the-Sea; Edward 
Birks, Sheffield; John Emmet, F.L.S., Boston Spa; Jno. H.
Phillips, 
Scarborough; Rev. W.
A. Shuffrey, M.A., Halton Gill; M.
B. 
Slater, F.L.S., Malton ; Rev. Wm.
Thompson, M.A., J.P., Sedbergh ; 
T. W.
Woodhead, Huddersfield ; and P.
F'ox Lee, Dewsbury 
(Hon. Sec), — For the purpose of colkctmg inform atioi as to the 
Disappearance of Native Plants from their various local habitats^ in 
connection with a Committee of the British Association formed 
for the same purpose, the first report of which (the latter) was 
issued in 1887 ; the second report in 1889, and the third and last 
at Leeds in 1890 — was drawn up by C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., Chairman, 
assisted by P.
F. Lee, Hon. Sec.
REPORT.
Very shortly after its formation in 1889, this Committee prepared 
and issued to Yorkshire botanists a circular, a copy of which is 
annexed to this report, asking them to furnish all information in their 
power on the question of its work.
Replies were received only 
from the following: — M.
B. Slater, Rev. W.
A. Shuffrey, R.
Barnes, 
P. F.
Lee, and C P.
Hobkirk, which, as reported by the Recorder 
of the British Association Committee, is barely 10 per cent, of the 
applications sent out; but the Committee trust for better results 
another year, and beg to impress upon their brother botanists in the 
county the desirability of their active co-operation.
Yorkshire should, 
from its extent, and the number of its botanists, stand the foremost 
county in England in this work.
As a testimony to the work already done, the following paragraph 
from the British Association's Third Report should act as an incentive 
io those who have not already sent in their contributions : 
' In the collection of the Yorkshire records the Committee has 
to express its great indebtedness to the active assistance of an 
linfluential local Committee formed by the Yorkshire Naturahsts' 
'Union, Mr. C.
P. Hobkirk being chairman.
This Committee 
apparently experienced a like difficulty to ourselves in inducing local 
botanists to take the needful trouble in order to send in reports.' 
The Y.N.U. Committee sincerely hope and trust that this reproach 
«^ay be speedily removed.
The British Association Committee further 
'Jan. iSqi.
4 ' HOBKIRK : DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN YORKSHIRE.
remark that ' the partial or complete extirpation of ferns forms a con- 
r 
siderable portion of the lists of the Committee's correspondents, the 
tourist in part, but in a greater degree the "collecting dealer," being 
held responsible.
The Committee also particularly regrets to have 
to draw attention to the rapidly approaching extermination of 
Cypripedium calceolus and hopes that strenuous efforts will be made to 
protect it in its few remaining stations/ This being a Yorkshire 
plant — or at any rate a recorded one — is well worthy of our attention.
The British Association Committee further remark that its 'various 
correspondents are practically unanimous in expressing a wish that in 
some way the law of trespass or of wilful damage should be l)rought 
to bear upon the 'collecting dealer' without the systematic ravages 
of whom they believe that any approach to extermination ^ould in 
most cases be impossible/ 
Amongst the Yorkshire plants recorded in their third report are 
the following : — 
39.
TroUius europ^us L.
Gradually becoming much rarer 
round Richmond (E, B.
Walton).
152, Crambe maritima L.
Much scarcer on the sands at 
Coatham (R.
Barnes).
r 
291.
Geranium sanguineum L.
Scarcer on coast sand-hills 
um 
(E.
B. Walton).
Now very rare round Richmond 
372.
Astragalus hypoglottis L.
Formerly plentiful in Langton 
Wold near Malton, but Is now nearly extinct, owing to the 
pasture being ploughed up.
Is still found in small quantity 
on some grassy banks near (M.
B, Slater).
416.
Rubus IdSEUS L.
Formerly plentiful in Dungeon Wood 
near Huddersfield, but destroyed by railway (C.
P. Hobkirk).
611.
Eryngium maritimum L.
Very rare, if not extinct, at 
Lazenby, Redcar (R, Barnes).
928.
Pyrola rotundifolia L.
Formerly at Birch Cave, near 
Middleton-one-Row; but now very rare, if not extinct 
(R.
Barnes).
934- Statice Limonium L.
Formerly very abundant in marshes 
between Coatham and Middlesbrough ; now scarce 
(R.
Barnes).
944.
Primula farinosa L.
Gradually becoming much rarer round 
Richmond (E, B.
Walton) ; formerly plentiful in a marshy 
field near Darlington Waterworks, now much scarcer, 
Naturalist, 
979- M 
HOBKIRK : DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN YORKSHIRE.
5 
m 
probably from botanists and others (R.
Barnes).
Formerly 
on stream-side under Gordale Scar, but now apparently 
extinct, probably from collectors (C.
P. Hobkirk).
myanthes trifoliata L.
Wet places, Littondale, 700 ft., 
extinct through drainage (W.
A. Shufifrey), 
1 09 1.
Lathrsea squamaria L.
(W 
habit this plant is said to possess of disappearing from 
a station for the time being and re -appearing in exactly the 
same spot after an interval of thirty or forty years.
'Can 
mstances of this be given ?
1344.
EpipactiS palustris Crantz.
Once not uncommon at 
Hell-kettles near Darlington, but now almost extinct, being 
'eradicated by botanists and collectors (R.
Barnes).
1 36 1.
Ophrys muscifera Huds.
Has disappeared from a wood 
in Littondale (W.
A. Shuffrey).
[Was seen about five 
years ago, but rot since.] 
1369.
Cypripedium Calceolus L.
Has disappeared from the 
woods on south side of Littondale through 'botanical 
r ^^^^ 
robbers' (W.
A. Shuffrey).
[Similar reports received as to 
Durham stations.] 
1424.
Paris quadrifolia L, Has gradually become much rarer 
round Richmond (E.
B. Walton).
Formerly in woods near 
Storthes Hall, Huddersfield ; apparently now exterminated 
by collectors (C.
P. Hobkirk).
1772.
Asplenium viride Huds.
Is much scarcer in all its Teesdale 
localities, Falcon Clints, Greenfell, etc., through tourists 
and collectors (R.
Barnes).
1773- Asplenium Trichomanes L.
Formerly in Dungeon Wood 
near Huddersfield, in clefts of rocks, but is now extinct, 
partly fron:i collectors, and finally by the making of a railway 
(C.
P. Hobkirk).
r 
1782.
Scolopendrium vulgare Symons.
Formerly grew profusely 
in the neighbourhood of Richmond, but is now becoming 
scarce, in consequence of the depredations of professional 
fern collectors (K B.
Walton).
The same is reported from 
Hazelgrove, Saltburn, and other neighbouring glens 
(R.
Barnes).
1783.
Woodsia ilvensis R.B. Formerly in several localities in 
Teesdale, but now quite extinct through the action of 
collectors (R.
Barnes).
This was its most southern English 
station.
Jan. 1801.
6 NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
1788.
Polystichum Lonchitis Roth.
Formerly in several 
Igcalities in Teesdale, but now quite extinct — 'collectors' 
again (R.
Barnes).
Rocks in Littondale in the high 
pastures ; now extinct ; botanical robbers, and possibly also 
severe weather (W.
A. ShufFrey), 
1806.
Osmunda regalis L.
Formerly (thirty years ago) in 
Marsh Wood, Huddersfield ; now gone — land built upon 
(C.
P. Hobkirk).
1807.
Ophioglossum vulgatum L.
Formerly on the banks at 
south side of Littondale, but has not been seen for the 
last five or six years (W.
A. Shuffrey).
In addition to the above, Mr. P.
F. Lee reports the following: 
Ranunculus circinatus Sibth, and 
Sparganium simplex Huds., as having been destroyed at Coxley 
Dam near Dewsbury, by the clearing-out of the ponds for 
manufacturing and pleasure-boat purposes.
Chlora perfoliata and Xanthium strumarium also referred 
to in his report are not 7iative plants of the district.
Campanula latifolia L.
Is also almost eradicated from the Hunger- 
hills district near Mtrfield.
w 
Mr. M.
B. Slater also reports on Paludella squarrosa I^., long 
since destroyed at Terrington Carr by the draining of the 
bog; also at the same place and for the same reason, 
TInddhtm hlaiidovii and Cainptothecitim nitens.
These are 
not included in British Association list, as they do not 
include mosses in their programme- 
in conclusion, this Committee requests to be re-appointed, as 
there is still much work to be done, and they hope for a larger 
measure of success during the coming year.
NO TES~ ORNITHOL OGK 
White-tailed Eagle in Northuraberland.— A female of the above species 
was shot at Esholt, on the estate of Mr. Bainbridge, on Dec. ist.
It was in the 
second year's plumage.
Length, 3 ft.
3 in.
; expanse of wings, 7 ft.
6 in.
; 
weight, 10 lbs.
6 oz.
; contents of stomach.
Rabbit.
There were two birds, but 
the other managed to escape.
The one shot I saw in the flesh at Mr. Duncan 
the naturalist's, on arrival, and it is a magnificent specimen, in beautifully bright 
plumage.
— H, T.
Archer, Newcastle-on-Tyne, December iSth, 1890.
Eared Grebe near York.— A fine specimen (sex undetermined) of the 
Eared or Black -necked Grebe {,Podiceps nigricoUis) was shot on the Ouse near 
York, October 23rd, and brought me in the flesh.
It has since been stuffed and 
set up by Mr. Helstrip.
In the Handbook of the Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire 
(18S1) this species is recorded as having occurred in Yorkshire on eight occasions 
only.
This bird is now in my possession.
Would some one please inform me 
of the dates of any other occurrences?— W, Hewitt, 6, Howard Street, Fulford 
Road, York, Dec. 13th, 1890.
NatvuaUst, 
7 
» 
DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN 
CUMBERLAND, 
WILLIAM HODGSON.
A.L.S., 
Workington^ Cumberland.
The following is a list of plants that have disappeared from old and 
well-authenticated stations within the county of Cumberland, with 
the probable causes of extinction.
The numbers and nomenclature 
are those included in the London Catalogue of British Plants, 8th ed.
Ivy-leaved Water Crowfoot.
(22.
Ranunculus hederaceus.) 
This species is mentioned as ^ Hedera aquatica — water-ivy or 
ivy-leaved duck's-meat' in Bishop Nicolson*s Hst, and stated to 
grow, along with the following, *in the cittadel pond at Carlile.' 
'Cittader and pond have alike disappeared, the site being now 
occupied by the Nisi Prius Court in almost the heart of the 
present city.
r   
(23.
Ranunculus palustris rotundifolius var.
sceleratus.
See the 
foregoing.) 
Green Hellebore.
/FelHngirs/ (40.
Helleborus viridis.) This 
plant has been annihilated at its old quarters at Threapland 
Ghyll, near Aspatria, owing to the working of limestone quarries 
for the supply of stone to the iron furnaces at Maryport.
Smooth Round-headed Poppy.
(54.
Papaver Rha^as) Not 
entirely extinct, but greatly diminished in number within living 
memory, owing to the gradual abandonment of cereal tillage 
all over the county.
P. diibiwn and P, Argemone keep their 
ground much better.
Wild Wallflower.
(75.
Cheiranthus C/ieiri\) Mentioned by Bishop 
Nicolson 200 years ago, in the following terms : — 'On the walls 
of the Castle and Abbey at Carlile— copiose/ Mr. Duckworth, 
late of that city, in his 'Wild Flowers round Carlisle' pro- 
nounces it to be extinct there now\ No reliable reason can be 
assigned for its disappearance.
On many of our old castles and 
abbey walls it is still in evidence.
Wild Sea-kale.
(152- Crambe mariUma.) Reported by the Rev.
John Harriman as plentiful on the coast between Maryport and 
Workington, at the commencement of the present century ; 
where I have seen the plant in ray early days.
It has quite 
perished, owing partly to tidal encroachments, and yet more to 
the establishment of extensive iron works and the accumula- 
tions of 'slag' on ground once covered with sea-kale.
Jan. iSqi.
8 HODGSON : DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN CUMBERLAND.
Pale Streaked Geranium.
(292.
Geranium siriatian^ In 
Mr. H.
C. Watson's supplementary list for Cumberland, vide 
'New Botanist's Guide/ p.
661, we read as follows: ' Geranium 
striahim is said to have been found between Flimsby (clearly 
a misprint for Flimby) and Workington, opposite the first gate 
after the road has turned from the valley of the Derwent to 
follow the coast towards Maryport.' The station so explicitly 
defined here is now entirely built upon, and covered by streets 
of houses occupied by the Avorkmen employed at the West 
Cumberland Iron and Steel Company's extensive works.
The 
plant is found elsewhere within the county, but its claim to rank 
as indigenous here cannot be allowed.
Narrowest Bird's-foot Trefoil.
(369.
Lotus angustissimus.) 
Another plant of the adventive type which came up about 
twenty-five years ago upon a newly-formed railway slope near 
Bullgill Station on the Derwent Branch Raihvay, but gradually 
decreased in number for eight or ten years, and is not now to 
be found.
Round-leaved Sundew.
(574.
Drosem rotundifolia.) Ros solis folio 
rotundo of the Bishop's list ; located by him in Mr. Richardson's 
Birch Close at Great Salkeld, near Penrith, of which parish 
his Lordship was rector prior to his elevation to the See of 
Carlisle.
On inquiry last year on the spot, I was informed by 
an aged farmer that within his own recollection Birch Close had 
White 
vanished.
Venus's Comb.
(643- Scandix peden-veneris.) Near St Nicholas, 
Carlile (Bishop Nicolson).
Streets and railways now occupy the 
position indicated.
Fistulous Water-Dropwort.
(651.
(Enanihe Jishdosa) Until 
about 1874, grew on the edge of Salta or Saltom Moss, near 
' AUonby.
Has not been seen for four or five seasons, and 
seems to have perished altogether j cause unknown.
Spignel or Bald-money.
(661.
Meum aihamaniicum.) Grew 
formerly at Fell-End, in Ennerdale, on the left bank of the 
river Ehen ; now, however considered as extinct.
No cause 
assigned.
Small Blue Fleabane.
(733.
Erigeron acre!) Grew very sparingly 
upon the village green at Dalston, near Carlisle; but a new 
highway formed across the green some six or seven years ago, 
entirely destroyed the station, and slight hope is entertained of 
the plant's re-appearance.
Naturalist, 
HODGSON : DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN CUMBERLAND.
9 
r 
Leopard's Bane.
(779.
Doronichum PardaUa?iches^) Grew on 
the west side of the fish-pond at Brayton Hall, Aspatria, for 
many years ; was probably at best a garden outcast, and is now 
considered as extinct altogether.
Purple Goat's-beard or Salsafy.
ifoli 
In Bishop Nicolson's MS.
list (1690) occurs the following 
entry : — * Anglicum non credit Johs.
Ray.
— About Rose^ also in 
the fields about Carlile-' Rose Castle, about six miles from 
Carlisle, is the seat of the Bishops of the diocese.
Born and 
brought up in its immediate neighbourhood, I feel satisfied that 
no such plant exists there now.
About 1856 several plants 
sprang up on a newly-dug grave in the churchyard of Aspatria, 
during my residence there.
Bird's-eye Primrose.
(944.
Primula farinosa,) At the close 
of last century was fairly plentiful in the meadows about 
Aspatria, where it is not now to be found.
Draining and 
improved systems of agriculture are responsible for the change.
In the upland valleys of the Lake District it still maintains its 
w 
ground, 
Calathian Violet.
(973- Gentiana p?ieumonanthe.') According 
to the Rev. John Harriman, wdiose records as a rule are 
exceedingly reliable, this plant formerly grew 'in a field between 
Maryport and Flimby • 200-300 yards from the latter.' A resi- 
dence of five years at Flimby enables me to say with confidence 
that no such plant exists there now.
Probably extinct through 
drainage.
I well remember a fine spring of water, overgrown 
with cresses, on the village green, which also has disappeared.
Bog" Bean.
(979- Mefiyanthes trifoUata, Trifolium palusire sive 
paludosum of the older writers, see No. 574.) 
Black Night-Shade.
( i o r 6.
Solanum nigrum) = S.
vulgare 
officinarum.
* Under the walls at Carlile.' Now quite extinct 
there, and only sparingly found in any part of Cumberland.
Now at Maryport ballast-heaps.
Deadly Night-Shade.
(iot8.
Atropa belladoyind) = Solanum 
lethale.
' On and under the walls at Carlile, over against the 
Abbey Mill.
Same as the preceding.
Moth Mullein.
(1026.
Ve^bascum hlaftaria,) Mentioned by the 
Rev. Jno.
Dodd, Vicar of Aspatria in 1800, as plentiful in the 
church-yard there.
The plant was quite unknown at that 
station in 1850 ; but in 1872, when the adjacent vicarage 
anew 
reappeared in hundreds.
Jan. i8qi.
lO HODGSON: DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN CUMBERLAND.
Tooth-wort.
(109 1.
Lathrcea sqiia7naria.) I take leave to intro- 
duce this species for the purpose of stating that I have reliable 
evidence of its tendency to abandon its stations in a temporary 
fashion, as it were; only to make its appearance afresh after 
an interval of 30 or 40 years.
This peculiarity was first 
mentioned to me by my late venerable friend, the Rev. Robert 
Wood, vicar of Westward, near Wigton, for upwards of 60 years.
The late vicar was an excellent and reliable botanist.
Catmint.
(1128.
Nepeta cataria,^ — ' Mentha cataria^ nep or cat- 
mint.
In the Abbey grounds, and under the walls at Carlile.' 
Motherwort.
(1147- Leonurus cardiaca.) ^ Inter rudera^ as in the 
Abbey at Carlile.' At Flimby.
The only place where Mother- 
wort now exists near the city is in the church-yard at Grinsdale, 
r 
Black Horehound.
(1155.
Ballota ?iigra,) 'About the walls at 
Carlile.' This, like the two preceding species, is no longer in 
evidence at or near the city of Carlisle.
At Workington Marsh.
Sand Plantain.
(i 169.
Plantago arenaria.) This alien was 
noticed growing abundantly in a flax crop at Flimby Woodside 
Farm in 1884, associated with Adonis autumnalis The seed 
used was probably from an ill-dressed sample.
Both plants 
disappeared; but the plantain has since been noted on ballast- 
heaps both at Maryport and Silloth.
Now at Barepot near 
.Workington.
Portland Sea-Spurge.
(1256.
Euphorbia portlayidica?^ In most 
old plant lists this species is marked as growing on the coast 
between Maryport and Workington, and especially on the beach 
. at Flimby.
Like Crambe ?naritima^ it has become extinct, and 
from the same cause.
A single plant was noticed in 1888, close 
to Flimby Railway Station, which disappeared after a high tide.
Pellitory of the Wall.
(1269.
Parietaria officinaUs.) 'On the 
walls of Carlile, copiose.' Now extinct.
The ancient city 
walls have been pulled down — only a very small portion 
remaining.
Torpenhow Churchyard wall.
Yellow Star of Bethlehem.
(14 19.
Gagea fascicular is) = 
' Ornithogalum luteum, sive coepe agraria.
In Willie's Wood 
plentifully/ Willie's Wood (Great Salkeld) was visited in 
1 889, and on the site was seen a young and dense plantation 
of spruce and silver firs ; no trace of Gagea, or indeed of 
any vegetation, apart from the young timber.
A very rare 
plant in the county now.
Autumnal Meadow Saffron, (1421.
C^/chicum autum?iale.) 
Until about 1864 was fairly abundant in a large meadow, 
Naturalist, 
HODGSON: DISAPPEARANCE OF PLANTS IN CUMBERLAND.
II 
near the village of Blennerhasset, on the river Ellen.
The 
property then changed hands, and the new proprietor threw 
down the old hedges, drained the meadows, and reduced 
them to arable fields: thus this comparatively rare species 
was extirpated.
F 
Flowering Rush.
(1475.
Butomus U7nbenatus)~^]\inc\x^ floridus, 
by the river Caldew, at Carlile.' Non-existent there now\ 
Kirkbride, in river Wampool.
Sea Timothy-grass.
(1652.
Fkkiun arenarhan).
This little sea- 
side grass, once associated with Crambe 7naritima^ Etiphorbia 
portlandica^ Scandix pecte?i -veneris^ etc., on the Flimby shore; 
finally disappeared after a fearful storm in 1884.
From St. Bees' 
Head northward, the sea has been gradually encroaching for 
many years past- 
FILICES.
It is with the deepest regret that I have to treat of the gradual 
decrease, and probable ultimate extinction, of many of our loveliest 
ferns.
Our mountain woods and bosky ravines are being harried of 
their treasures by rapacious dealers and reckless tourists to the 
Lakes, who uproot and carry off whatever attracts their imagination, 
regardless of the fact that a very small number of the plants so carried 
off — frequently during prolonged summer droughts — will survive trans- 
plantation from the moist and rocky dells of which they formed so 
striking an ornament.
The most eagerly sought after appear to be 
the Royal Fern {Osmunda regalis)^ the Green Spleenwort {Aspknium 
viride) with its relatives {^A.
trichomanes and A, marinvni)^ the 
Scale Fern 
offi.
Tongue {Scolopendrium vtdgare), the Brittle Bladder Fern {Cysiopieris 
fragiUs\ the Holly Fern {Polystichtifn lonckitis), and the Oak and 
Beech Ferns.
A (q\\ only of the many localities so plundered as above 
are appended.
Green Spleenwort.
(1772.
Aspknium viride^ Has entirely 
disappeared from a well-known station at Brandy-Ghyll, a deep 
gully at the S.W. base of Carrock Fell, and is now quite scarce 
in any of its remaining habitats.
Scale Fern—" Rusty-back." (1781.
Cekrach offidnarum.) 
Formerly grew on many of the southern bluffs oi Gowbarrow 
Fells, on Ullswater, where hardly a single specimen now exists.
Aira Crag, Yew Crag, and Priest Crag produced the Scale 
Fern in moderate quantity until about fifty years ago.
Bladder Fern.
(1785.
Cystopteris fragilis) Associated with the 
preceding in most of the stations indicated above ; has also 
suffered, though hardly to the same extent.
Jan. i8qx.
.12 NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
Royal Fern.
* Bog Onion/ (1806.
Osmunda regalis,) In 
Bishop Nicolson's list already referred to (1690), is the following 
entry: ^ Filix florida she Osmunda regalis ^ Thursby Lane, 
near the gate leading to Crofton/ I am of opinion that no one 
has seen the Royal Fern near Thursby since the opening of the 
nineteenth century.
Formerly the plant abounded in the 
neighbourhood of Derwentwater and Borrowdale; now only to 
be found in gardens or enclosed pleasure-grounds.
The time 
has long gone by when the farmers of Gosforth and the 
neighbourhood used the dried fronds of Osmunda as a covering 
for their potato carts, to protect the vegetables from frost, when 
attending the markets of Whitehaven or Egremont to dispose 
of their produce.
Considerable modifications in our local botany have taken place 
within my own recollection, extending over a period of upwards of 
sixty years.
Commons have been enclosed, bogs have been drained, 
and the land subjected to tillage, whereby the number of moorland 
and sub-aquatic plants was greatly reduced.
Latterly, cereal tillage 
has been very generally given up, and permanent pastures have 
multiplied.
Poppies^ corn-cockle, charlock, fumitory and similar 
annual weeds are less frequently seen.
On the other hand, the con- 
struction of floating docks at Whitehaven, Workington, Maryport, 
and Silloth, has led to the importation of numerous aliens among 
ships' ballast.
This result has been especially marked at Silloth, 
where large cargoes of foreign grain are imported by Messrs.
Carr &: 
Co., the great bread and biscuit manufacturing firm of- Carlisle, 
whose large mills are situated close to the docks.
The waste from 
these works has been singularly prolific of aliens, few of which 
probably may survive more than two or three seasons, and then 
disappear.
~-- — - " - - — 
NO TES—ORNITHOLOG K 
Shoveller near Harrogate.
— A specimen of this duck {Spatula dypeaia) 
was obtained at Ripley, on Nov. 24th, 1890.
— RiLEY Fortune, Ravensgill, 
Harrogate, Dec. 17th, 1S90.
Flamborough Notes.
— Numbers of Stonelarks {Oiocorys alpestris) have made 
their appearance again on the Headland.
Fifteen, I believe, shot by the same 
gentlemen this year on the same date as last year.
Three more fell by the same 
gun December 18th, 1890.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, Dec. 22nd, 1890.
A 
Bittern at Warrington.
— At a meeting of the Warrington Field Club, held 
on December 19th, Mr. Collins reported that on the 6th December, he had shot 
a Bittern at Longford, just on the outskirts of the town.
The bird was a male in 
remarkably good feather and was clean shot- It was thin and evidently was 
suffering from want of food, its weight being ilb.
140Z.
The Bittern is exceedingly 
rare about Warrington, the previous record being the one given in Morris' British 
Birds of a Bittern being shot on the banks of the Mersey at Thelwall, in 1S54.
— 
W. H.
Woodcock, Hon. Sec, Town Hall, Warrington, Dec. 22nd, 1890.
Natura!i!-t, 
w 
13 
EARTH-WORMS 
OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
Rev. HILDERIC FRIEND, F.L.S., 
President 0/ the Wesley Naturalists Society, and Vice-President of the Carlisle Microscopical 
Society, Author of" Fhnvers and Floiver-Lore ' and other ivorks ; IdlCy near Bradford.
So far as I can learn no list of Earth-Worms has hitherto been 
published for the North of England.
I have, therefore, put 
together the names of those which I have collected and identified 
during the past year (1890).
It includes a few which are new to 
Britain, and I have reason to think that I shall be able shortly 
to add others from Yorkshire.
I have notes of some curious 
variations, if not absolutely new species, but as nothing is gained 
by too hasty publication, I withhold everything of an uncertain 
character.
I have marked with an asterisk those which I have not found 
on record as British, and in each instance the locality is given.
I have also added a few synonyms and references for the help 
and guidance of students.
I shall be glad to receive living worms 
from collectors, with notes on the habitat, etc.
Live worms can 
be sent in sphagnum^ or other soft moss, in a tin box, and they 
may be sought for not only in gardens, pastures, and manure- 
heaps, but especially by the sides of streams, rivers, lakes, and 
ponds.
Some prefer the roots of grass, others lie under stones, 
while some burrow deep in the mud.
When ponds, canals, or 
lakes are being cleaned out careful search should be made for 
new species, which are almost sure to turn up, if only the 
collector is at hand at the right time.
Any correspondence on 
this subject will be welcomed.
I may refer the reader to a series 
of articles which are appearing week by week in the ' North 
Cumberland Reformer' on this subject.
These will, in due course^ 
be published as a ' Handbook of British Earth-Worms/ 
1. Lumbricus terrester L.
Widely distributed.
Later writers 
have altered the name given by Linnaeus to Z.
terrestris.
The synonyms are Z.
agricola, Hoffmeister; Enterior ierrestre, 
Savigny; Z.
herculens, Dug^s ; cf.
Grube, 'Familien der 
Anneliden,' BerHn, 185 1, p.
99- 
Lumbricus rubellus Hoffm.
Banks of Caldew and Eden, 
Cumberland, July 1890.
Jan. 1891.
14 FRIEND : EARTH-WORMS OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.
3. Luxnbricus purpureus Eisen.
Under droppings at Dalston, 
in tree stump near Carlisle, and at 2,000 ft or higher on 
Cross Fell- Also under droppings near Idle, Bradford.
4. Lumbricus fcetidus Duges.
In manure heaps at Kendal and 
elsewhere, widely distributed.
Sometimes found (as at Idle) 
in fields where dung is used.
Known among fishermen as 
the Brandling, and readily distinguished by its bands of 
brown and yellow.
Syn.
: Enterion fa^fidtim Qdi\.
^ Luml?n'cus 
olidus Hoffm, — Grube, p.
99.
5. Allolobophora mucosa Eisen.
From Kendal, May 20th, 1890 ; 
also from Apperley Bridge, Dec. 1890 ; with some interesting 
varieties which are under examination.
See next.
ft 
6. ^Allolobophora turgida Eisen.
From banks of the river Eden 
at Carhsle, May 1890.
The synonymy of this species and the 
last is very perplexing, as is also that of the next, which see.
7. Allolobophora trapezoides Duges.
River Eden nearDalston, 
Cumberland, May 1890, The three species just named have 
not as yet been clearly defined.
They have been described at 
different times as Luxnbricus miatomicus Duges, Z.
communis 
Hoffmeister, L.
caliginosus Sav., Z.
cyaneus Sav., and Z.
ictericns 
Sav. Cf.
Grube, p.
99; Benham in Q.J.M.Sc, 1886, p.
228.
I hope to be able shortly to throw new light on their history.
8. Allolobophora chlorotica Rosa.
Widely distributed.
Varies 
a good deal in colour — sometimes bright green, with orange 
clitellum; at other times a dirty yellow.
Frequent under stones 
by the side of ponds, especially where cattle congregate or go 
to water.
River Eden; Mondhill Loch j by small stream 
near Idle, and elsewhere.
Syn, Z.
riparius Hofifm.
; Allolobo- 
pJiora riparia Eisen; Z.
chloroticus Duges; Z.
viridis of 
authors, etc.
9. ^Allolobophora celtica Rosa.
From a Uttle stream at a con- 
siderable height above Langholm, N.B., May 1890.
I presume 
from the name that Rosa's specimens may have come from 
r 
N. Britain, but have not seen this stated in print.
TO.
Allolobophora longa D'Udekem.
From the river Eden — 
a paradise for the worm-collector.
I found only one specimen 
of this species, which has been referred to Dr. Benham, and 
confirmed by him; as have several other critical species.
ii.*Li!nibricus eiseni.
'One quite small red worm, similar in 
colour to Z.
rubelius is Z.
eiseni^ new to Britain' (Dr. Benham 
in liiLy August 2nd, 1S90).
Found by the Caldew at Cummers- 
dale, Carlisle.
Named after Eisen, the helmintholo.^ist.
Naturalist, 
REVIEW — LEPIDOPTERA OF LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE, 15 
£2.
Allurus tetraedrus Eisen.
Widely distributed.
Found on 
banks of Eden, and by Yorkshire streams whenever sought.
Immediately recognised by its square tail, and backward 
movements — w^hence termed Lumhricus a^nphisbcena by Duges, 
and Z.
agilis, Hoffm.
I found a beautiful variety near Carlisle 
which Dr. Benham thinks may merit specific rank.
I have 
named it provisionally Allurus flavns n.
var.
It is very plenti- 
ful near Dalston and Cummersdale along with the type, but 
I have not seen it elsewhere.
13.
Perichaeta indicus Horst.
I found one specimen of this 
pretty foreign worm in a greenhouse, Kendal, May 1890.
It 
has been recorded before from Scotland.
[14- Lumbricus multispinus Grube?
A peculiar form with 
setae in bundles oi three from Apperley Bridge, December 1890, 
under examination].
NO TE— MINERAL OGV.
Minerals in Cumberland and Westmorland.
— The list given by Mr. Good- 
child (Trans.
Cumb, and Westm.
Assoc.) might be considerably extended by 
including rock-forming minerals only detected by the microscope; but without 
going so far as this, one or two additions may be made.
Garnet.
— Besides the common red garnet met with in many parts of the Lake 
District, the greenish-yellow lime-garnet Grossularite occurs at Wasdale Head 
near Shap Fells.
It is imbedded in the Idocrase of the highly-metamorphosed 
limestone a little west of the farm, and forms dodecahedral crystals one-tenth of 
an inch to nearly an inch in diameter.
In the same locality occurs a browner 
variety, Essonite.
Vivianite is found as a blue incrustation on the joints of a large quartz-porphyry 
dyke south of Goodcroft, Rossgill, near Shap, and no doubt in other localities.
Sphene is a constant constituent of the .Shap granite^ and is richly present in 
the dark patches of that rock, where it may sometimes be seen with a lens.
Agate.
— Some of the best specimens are found in the amygdaloidal cavities of 
the lavas of Brown Dodd, between Lodore and Watendlath.
Andahisiie, — Small lustrous columnar crystals of true Andalusite may be 
seen on specimens of the highly-altered slates very near the Skiddaw granite in 
Sinen Gill.— A.
H. 
A COMPARISON OF THE LEPIDOPTEROUS 
FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE 
AND LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE.
The Lepidoptera of Lancashire and Cheshire.
By John W.
Ellis, 
M.B.(Vic.), F.E.S.
We very cordially welcome the appearance of this list (which is 
comprised of the series of papains published in the ' Naturalist ') in 
book form.
On comparing it with the 'last of Yorkshire Lepi- 
doptera/ one is at once struck with the closeness in the number of 
species recorded in the two lists, the total recorded lepidoi)terous 
fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire being given as 1,355; that of 
Jan. X891.
1 6 REVIEW — LEPTDOPTERA OF LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE.
Yorkshire as 1,341.
And this closeness in numbers is at the present 
time still more marked than even the two lists show, for since the 
publication of the Yorkshire list in 1883 — omitting Erastriafuscula^ 
the record of which I think needs confirmation, and regarding 
Scoparia ingratalis as a form of S.
pyralalis — the following nineteen 
species have been added to it : — Ennomos aiificninaria^ Melanippe 
unangulata^ Heliothis peltigera, Spilodes palealis, "^Scoparia atomalis^ 
Tortrix diversana^ Phoxopteryx siculana^ Phoxopteryx diminufana ^ 
Lobesia servtlicvia, EupiZcilia dubitana^ Semasia ia?ithinana^ Depres- 
saria weirella^ Gelechia tetragonella^ G, albiceps^ Dasycera oliviella^ 
Laverna phragmitella^ L, raschkiella^ LithocoUetis sorbi^ and Nepticula 
serelia.
This makes the present Yorkshire total 1,360.
But the 
extraordinary closeness of the results in lepidopterological work in 
the three counties will be best seen by a comparison of the numbers 
U3 yji.
u.v_i ^« cLo I 
vyii^i 
lY a .
^ 
1 
L. 
i\NCA.SHIRE & Cl 
IFSHIRli, 
Yorkshire.
Diurni 
P 4 ^ 
47 
48 
Nocturui 
* fl • 
66 
So 
Geometrge ...
* # * 
204 
209 
Drepanuloe ...
« 4 « 
3 
3 
Pseudo-BomWyces ...
17 
19 
Nocture 
217 
225 
Deltoides ...
6 
8 
Aventiae 
# 4 * 
I 
Pyralide-i ...
43 
- 
49 
Craiiil)ites ...
43 
39 
Tortrices ...
2{I 
L 
209 
Tincina 
478 
451 
Ftt^rophori ...
19 
18 
Alucitina ...
T 
I 
I 
p 
i>355 
1,360 
This is .wonderfully close, and shows that the numbers of species 
known to occur in the two areas are practically the same, for althoughj 
as Dr- Ellis says in his preface, he had, during the progress of the 
work through the press, received records of several species not 
included, there are several recorded as having occurred which, had 
the author paid as much attention to lepidoptera of late years as he 
has to coleoptera, would in all probability have been omitted.
The nomenclature adopted is continental, which we think is 
a mistake, for it is a nomenclature probably little used by British 
lepidopterists, and we should hope not likely to become so.
Apart 
from this, we have ever)^ praise for this very useful little work.— G.T.P.
* This is doubtless only a form of 6'.
arnbigualis, but as U is given as distinct in 
the Lancashire and Cheshire list, it is inchided here for more accurate comparison.
NaCurali.<^t, 
17 
PEAT DEPOSIT AT FILEY, 
Rev. E.
MAULE COLE, M.A., F.G.S.
Anyone who will take the trouble to walk along the sands of 
the Holderness Coast will see, in many places, on the top of the 
Boulder Clay cliffs, which line the shore, certain stratified deposits 
of pearly-grey clay, from i to 2 or 3 ft.
thick, which mark the beds 
of old dried-up lakes or meres.
On examining this clay it is found 
to consist largely of the comminuted remains of fresh-water shells.
The meres, in which they accumulated by sediment, were at one 
time far from the shore-line, but by the wearing back of the cliffs by 
denudation have been exposed- in section.
The length of these lacus- 
trine deposits varies from some thirty yards to a quarter of a mile.
In a few instances, notably at Skipsea, the clay is found covered 
with an accumulation of peat, several feet thick, the lower portion 
being compact, the upper fibrous containing roots and branches 
of trees; and in all cases remains of nuts.
Bones of the elk, 
deer, and ox have been found in the peat.
Let us now turn to Filey.
In the spring of the present year, 
a visitor, who wisely employed his time in studying Geological 
Rambles in Yorkshire, heard that the author was spending a few 
days in that interesting locality.
He called and informed me that 
he had made a discovery in the cliffs close to Filey, which claimed 
my attention.
On proceeding to the spot, within a couple of 
hundred yards of the sea-wall on the south, I found the face of 
the cliff covered with the debris of a peat bed, which had recently 
been shot down from above.
On climbing the cliff, about 70 ft.
high, a fine section of peat, in the centre, over 6 ft.
thick, was 
found exposed, resting on a bed of stiff pearly-grey clay, 2 ft.
thick.
Underneath this was another foot of peat resting on boulder clay.
" 
This is very different from the section given by Phillips, sixty 
years ago, of the same lacustrine deposit, which is as follows : — 
* It consists of light-blue clay, peaty clay, blue clay, white clay, 
and peat, altogether 4 ft.
thick, upon sand and gravel.' And 
the reason is not far to seek, for in the course of sixty years the 
cliffs must have receded sixty yards or more, and he is describing 
the outer edge of the old lake bottom, as it then appeared, which 
contained scarcely any peat, whereas, now, denudation has exposed 
the mass of peat mentioned above.
The 'sand and gravel' wliich 
he speaks of has disappeared, having played out its part in 
causing the disaster which has strewn the face of the cliff with 
large masses of peat, for doubtless the percolation of rain-water 
Jan. 1801.
^ 
1 8 cole: peat deposit at filey.
in the said bed of sand and gravel undermined the peat and 
produced the landslips which have worn back the top of the cliff.
The sea could only attack the bottom of the cliff.
On the north 
side of the deposit, where the beds thin out, there is still a little 
* w^hite clay and peat ' remaining ; the peat, 2 in.
thick, rests on 
boulder clay, and the white clay, 4 in.
thick, lies above it, and 
is succeeded by i ft.
of light-blue clay, then surface soil.
In the centre of the' lake basin, where the peat Is thickest, the 
upper portion consists of 4 ft.
of fibrous peat with large pieces of .
wood intermixed, many with the bark on, of a silvery hue, probably 
birch.
The lower portion, 2 to 3 ft.
thick, is more compact, and 
contains only twigs and small branches ; nut shells are plentiful 
throughout.
Mr. W.
Browett, of Coventry, the gentleman who first called my 
attention to this deposit, was good enough, at my request, to cut out 
four blocks of peat from different horizons, which, together wTth 
m 
other remains, were forwarded to Mr. W.
Cash, of Halifax, for deter- 
mination.
Mr. Cash, with the assistance of Mr. W.
West, kindly 
spent much time and trouble in investigating the material forwarded 
to him, and has presented the following report : 
No. I.
— Full of leaf and stem debris, which is undeterminable.
No. 2.
— Contains : 
Mosses.
Desmids.
Polytrichum commune, Calocylindrus palangtda Breb.
Sphagnum acutifoliiim.
Calocylindrus var.
de haryi Rabh.
Large spores of Sphagnum^ Pcnium truncatum Breb.
probably tetrabedrab Cosmarium ohliquum Nard.(?).
Cylindrocystis diplospora Lund.(?^ 
Conferva^ species.
No. 3.— On splitting the peat, leaves were revealed which may 
be those of Salix caprea^ judging by form, dimensions, and venation.
No. 4.- — ^Contains : 
Desmids, Diatoms.
Penium hrebissonii Ralfs.
Synedra ulna Ehrenb.
' PeniufH^ species.
Pinnularia acrospharia Ralfs.
(?) 
Cosmarium homalodermum Nard.
Other Algae.
(a punctate form).
Merismopedia glauca Ehrenb.
Cosmarium globosum Bain.?
Oscillaria, species.
Cosmarium crenatttm Ralfs.
Conferva ienerjima Kutz.
Cosmarium undulatiim Corda.
Aphanocapsa, species.
5.- — Xuts of Corylus avellana.
6. — Elytra of Coleoptera.
Aphenotheca ?
species.
7. — Wood, but not coniferous, as the large pitted vessels it con- 
tains would appear to indicate.
Coniferous trees never have vessels 
Naturalist, 
COLE : PEAT DEPOSIT AT FILEY.
I9 
in their secondary wood.
The vessels are similar to those of 
Oak or Willow, The smaller iBattened pieces of wood also contaiji 
vessels, and are also angiospermous.
From this report it would appear that the peat at Filey was 
formed at a time when glacial conditions were passing away, and the 
climate becoming humid and temperate ; for the urn mosses are the 
first to clothe new soil, and the willow and birch can best withstand 
cold J the oak and hazel are generally found to follow.
One cannot 
fail to be struck wnth the similarity of the lacustrine peat deposits on 
the Boulder Clay of East Yorkshire to those of Denmark, described 
by Dr. James Geikie ('Prehistoric Europe/ p.
485), from the obser- 
vations of Prof Steenstrup.
* They (forest bogs) are found in basins of inconsiderable size, 
which, however, are deep in proportion to their width.
Some of the 
smaller bogs are not much more than 30 yards or 40 yards across.
The pot-like depressions, which have been specially examined by 
Steenstrup, occur in the great drift or glacial deposits that cover so 
wide an area in Denmark, and appear to have existed at one time as 
pools and lakelets.
This is shown by the appearance at the bottom 
of the bogs of alluvial clay and marl, with the remains of freshwater 
organisms and land plants.' 
The lakelets on the clifT tops of Holderness have long since 
dried up.
That at Filey, now under discussion (British Association 
Meeting at Leeds, 1890), has been known to contain water within 
living memory.
It can do so no more, the side seawards having 
given way by the retrocession of the cliff.
It is not unlikely that 
these ancient pools were not entirely dependent on the rainfall on 
their immediate surface, but obtained a portion of their water- 
supply from the natural drainage from higher ground to the 
east, now denuded.
The lowest part of Holderness is that occupied 
by the river Hull, and, with the exception of Hornsea Beck, 
escaping from Hornsea Mere, all the streams flow from the coast- 
line westwards to the Hull, and not into the sea direct.
At Filey, the boulder clay cliffs at Carr Naze, over Filey Brigg, 
are higher than the lacustrine deposit under review, and doubtless 
. at one time occupied a large portion of Filey Bay itself, extend- 
ing upwards even to the top of the chalk cliffs at Bempton, where 
boulder clay is met with, containing large blocks of Teesdale 
basalt.
It was this enormous deposit, now greatly reduced by 
denudation, of boulder clay, which blocked up the exit of tlie 
Derwent eastwards, converted the Vale of Pickering into a lake, 
and caused the drainage of the moorland to cut a channel through 
the oolitic range at Kirkham into the Vale of York to join the Ouse- 
Jan. 1891.
20 
FUNGI NEW TO WEST YORKSHIRE.
CHARLES CROSSLAND, 
Halifax.
The following have been identified for me since forwarding the note 
published in ^The Naturalist^ for December 1890: 
Agaricus (Collybia) fusipes Bull, van cedematopus Schaeff.
Agaricus (Collybia) plexipes Fr. On old stump.
Lactarius camphoratus Fr.
The three plants were gathered in Rough-hey Wood, near 
Triangle, Hahfax, by the writer, on Nov. 17th, 1890.
All have 
been certified by Mr. G..:rge Massee.
Ombrophila purpurea Fckl.
This pretty Discomycetous fungus was 
gathered on a stump in Northdean Wood, Nov. 22nd, 1890, by 
Mr. G.
L. Lister, and certified by Mr. W.
Phillips, Shrewsbury.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Osmunda regalis in the Lake District.
— My attention has been called to 
a statement in 'The Naturalist' for November 1890, p.
334,' which seems to cast 
some discredit upon the work of the British Association Committee on the 
Disappearance of Native Plants, etc.
It is this : under Osmunda regalis in 
Mr. Grimshaw's * Notes on the Flora of West Cumberland,' after detailing the 
occurrence of a few plants of this fern in a dyke between Seascale and Drigg, he 
adds: * At the last meeting of the British Association the fern was reported by 
the Committee for Investigating the Disappearance of Native Plants as extinct \ 
(the italics and !
aie his).
What inference he wishes to be drawn from this is not 
clear, but it seems to indicate that the said Committee have made a blunder.
Had Mr. Grimshaw carefully read the * Report' I think he would not have 
inserted this remark.
On page 6 of that Report {1890) — under Osmunda regalis^ 
Cumberland — it is slated by W." £1.
that it was * formerly quite abundant round 
Derwentwater and Eorrowdale, but now extinct.' What connection can there be 
between this and the Seascale locality?
places quite twenty-five miles apart by the 
nearest line.
P>esides this, the boundaries of the district given by Mr. Grimshaw 
for his * notes' extends at its eastern extremity — the nearest point to Borrowdale — 
to Wastdale Head, and, if my recollection of the district serves me well, between 
these points stands the Great Gable and other hills which mark the line of the 
water-shed between Borrowdale and Wastdale.
Thus Mr. Grimshaw may be 
quite right with his locality, but that does not make the Committee's * Report* 
wrong.
— C.
P. HoRKiRK, Nov. 22nd, 1890.
[Mr. Grimshaw assures us that he had not the slightest idea of imputing any 
discredit to the British Association Committee when quoting the paragraph which 
appeared in the newspapers at the time of the meeting of the Association in Leeds, 
and as the actual report of the Committee does not appear to have been published, 
neither he nor others had the opportunity of verifying the statement made.
He 
regrets that the statement was published, and, in common with ourselves, is glad 
to know that the Royal Fern still exists in Cumberland.
Long may it continue 
to do so.
— Ed. Nat.] 
Naturalist, 
21 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM THE 
HUMBER DISTRICT 
IN THE AUTUMN OF 189a 
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes^ Ulcehy^ Lincolnshire.
Taken as a whole, the season has been much below an average in 
connection with the arrival of birds.
Although some species have 
been tolerably numerous, others — as the Short-eared Owl, Grey 
Shrike, and Golden-crested Wren — have been either scarce or absent 
altogether.
The prevailing winds from S, and S.W., anJ seldom 
blowing from northerly or easterly quarters.
The chief movement 
of migrants was from the 19th to 21st of October, and for a com- 
parison with the immense number which then came in we must go 
back to the great rush of 1885, from the 15th to 17th of October.
In preparing these notes I am indebted to ]\Ir. G.
H. Caton Haigh 
of Grainsby Hall for much information ; also to communications 
received from Mr. H.
B. Hewetson of Leeds, and Mr. Philip Lawton 
of Easington.
Wheatear 
J 
July 7th.
As early as the 
during the month.
Aug. 7th3 many; 13th and 14th, * thousands' 
at Spurn.
Oct. 4th, last.
Common Sandpiper {Totanns hypohucos (Linn.)).
July 8th.
A few returning, seen on the 'beck' and main drains- 
Shore Birds.
July 20th.
During the last week there have been 
Grey Plover, Knot, Godwil, and Dunlin on the muds near 
Spurn, and in very considerable numbers.
Redstart (/?z^//a7/^ ph<xnicurus (Linn.)).
Aug. nth.
First seen, 
a female; Sept.
3rd, a few on coast; 17th, same, but have 
altogether been very scarce.
Wood wren 
Aug. 2Gth to 23rd.
A considerable movement of small migrants between these 
dates.
Wood 
20th in one of the marsh hedgerows, and a pair also in the 
garden on the 23rd.
I never see them in this parish excepting 
on migration-^rarely in spring, but not uncommonly in the 
autumn.
Golden Plover (<r/^</ra^//«5//«z//iz//^ (Linn.)), Sept.
ist.
Mr. Haigh 
saw a few at North Cotes, and on the 2nd a flock of about fifty 
auSrainthorpe.
In last week oi November an immense arrival in 
Jan, 1891, 
22 CORDEAUX: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM HUMBER DISTRICT.
North-east Lincolnshire in advance of the snow-storm com- 
niencing on night of 24th.
These appear very soon to have 
left the district.
Greenshank {Tetanus canescejis (Gmel.)).
Sept.
2nd.
Some on 
Grainthorpe and Tetney fitties ; fairly common throughout 
September.
At this time the adults have the upper breast and 
sides of the neck only very slightly streaked.
Ruff {^Machetes ptig?iax (Linn.)).
Sept.
2nd.
Several seen during 
first week in September.
25th, one which I got 'in the flesh 
shot at Tetney has the neck and breast buff, and the darker 
parts of the feathers of the back and long scapulars with 
a faint gloss of purple.
On November 4th, Mr. Haigh saw 
three near the sea-bank at Summercotes.
Curlew Sandpiper {Tringa suharqnata (Giild.)), Sept.
6th.
Not 
very common this year, a few at Spurn, also on the Lincoln- 
shire coast.
Mr. Haigh shot three near Grainthorpe on the 17th.
Bar-tailed Godwit {Limosa lapponica (Linn.)).
Sept.
6th.
I examined a very interesting example in the flesh shot by 
Mr. Haigh near Tetney.
It was an adult female and nearly in 
winter plumage; the tail was a uniform ash colour free from bars.
Our autumn Godwits are almost invariably young of the year 
with barred tails.
Knot 
Sept.
6th.
One' shot about the same 
r 
time had the under side marked with large spots of a faded red.
Golden-crested Wren {Regulus cristatus (Koch.)).
Sept.
6th.
Mr. R.
M. Barrington, when in a boat off the Speeton cliffs picked 
up a gold-crest on the water, probably drowned in passage.
A few 
early in October, but have been throughout the autumn remark- 
ably scarce.
Corn Bunting {Emberiza miliaria Uvaw), Sept.
13th.
Mn Haigh 
saw an immense flock in a turnip-field close to the coast at 
Tetney, and evidently fresh arrivals.
Occasionally in the 
autumn I see considerable flocks on our stubbles near the sea, 
but nothing to compare with this big flock seen and described to 
me by Mr. Haigh and from which he shot one or two specimens.
At Heligoland the common Bunting is an occasional visitor, 
small flocks of ten to twenty appearing, but is never common.
Little Stint {Tringa minuta Leish).
Sept 17th.
Two caught, by 
Stubbs the younger, in plover-net on Tetney fitties, and sent to 
Mr. Haigh.
Several at Spurn during the month.
Dusky Redshank {Totanm fuscus (Linn.)).
Sept.
i8th.
I saw 
one in the flesh which was shot by Mr, Haigh at Tetney at 
Naturalise, 
CORDEAUX: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM HUMBER DISTRICT.
23 
this date; it was a young bird, and had nearly acquired the 
winter plumage.
Four were seen together on the coast early in 
the month.
Arctic Skua {Ste?'C07'arhis crepidatus (Banks)).
Sept.
i8th.
Several on coast.
On Dec. 4th one was caught on the beach at 
Mablethorpe, which I received in the flesh — an almost uniform 
dark bird.
It is a mistake to suppose Skuas are only seen on 
passage on the east coast during migration.
Many remain all 
the winter, also at sea on the fishing-banks.
Hoopoe {Upupa epops Linn.).
Sept.
i8th.
An immature female 
was shot at Ashby, near Horncastle.
Thrush (Turdus nmsiais Linn.).
Sept.
20th.
First flights of 
thrushes ; are now very plentiful in turnip-fields.
Redbreast {Erithacus mhecula (Linn.)).
Oct!
2nd.
A very con- 
siderable immigration during the last week in September and 
early in October; great numbers appeared quite suddenly in 
this village (Great Cotes), so as to attract general attention.
For some days Robins might be heard singing from every tree 
and bush.
On the 22nd also they swarmed along the coast.
Skylark {Alauda an^ensis Linn.).
Oct. 4th, first flights coming in 
from the sea, travelling east to west during the morning.
7th, 
great many, and continuous arrivals, day by day, during the 
month.
Rock-Pipit {Anthus obscurus (Lath.)).
Oct. 4th, a few on coast ; 
loth, many J 15th, same.
One shot at the latter date has the 
under-parts buff-yellow, much streaked with dark brown on 
breast, flanksj and belly.
Jack 
Mr. Haigh 
shot one in a turnip-field on the high wold \ 14th and 15th, rush, 
with Common Snipe.
Have been unusually abundant during 
the season, and I have found more in this parish than I have 
seen for many years.
Grey Crow {Corvus comix Linn.).
Oct. 8th, first; nth, several, 
Nov. 20th and 21st, immense arrivals— thousands— at Spurn, 
with a north wind.
Bittern {Boiaurus stellaris (Linn.)).
Oct. 13th, a fine male shot 
at Spurn Point by C Hopper.
A week before this, Pye and 
Hopper, when out in their boat, saw four together making for 
the land.
boat 
— ^ 
Jan. i8qi.
the slightest doubt as to the species.
They described the flight 
as very marked, the birds looking ' exactly alike fore and aft,' 
legs straight out behind, and neck and head in front.
On the 
24 CORDEAUX: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM HUMBER DISTRICT.
4th of December one, a female, was shot at Ulceby, in a field 
close to his house, by Mr. Frederick Pearson 3 and the same day, 
at Wooton, within a short distance of the same place, a Little 
Auk {Merguhis alle) was picked up.
Fieldfare {Turdus pilaris ijLAwn,)).
Oct. 15th, first seen.
Mr. Haigh 
writing in ' The Field ' says, that at this date he flushed from 
a clump of bushes near Tetney Lock about one hundred Field- 
fares, a score of Mistletoe Thrushes, as many Blackbirds, and 
4- 
a few Thrushes and Redwings.
On Oct. 20th, 2ist5 there was 
an immense arrival of old birds on the Holderness and Lincoln- 
shire coast.
On Nov. 25th, I was sheltering from a heavy cold 
rain from the eastward beneath the boughs of a low-growing fir 
on the side of the sea-cliff, near Folkestone, when a flock of 
fifteen old Fieldfares came in direct from the sea, from the S.E., 
dropping in perfect silence into the rough scrub.
How 
charmingly they looked in their clean, bright, unsullied plumage 
fresh in from the salt sea ; delicate tints of ash-grey and hazel- 
brown in contrast with golden-buff on chin and throat.
The rich dark-brown patch on the side of the breast is very 
plainly seen in flight at a considerable distance, and will alone 
serve to distinguish them on the wing from Mistletoe Thrushes.
A very light movement of my part, and, with a low chiick-a-chuck^ 
they rose together going inland over the cliff-top.
Snow-Bunting.
{Plectrophanes nivalis (Linn.)).
Oct. 19th.
I saw 
a small flight this afternoon amongst rough shingle, evidently 
newly arrived birds, and more inclined to trust to their feet than 
to take wing.
The rough banks and beds of many-coloured 
gravel on the Yorkshire coast are always favourite haunts of 
Snow-Bunting, Everywhere, since last this way, there is 
evidence of change, wreck, ruin, and waste, and an increasing 
encroachment on the cultivated land — year by year — now more, 
and now less, the seaside farms decrease in area.
I know one 
small freeholder who all his life has been tilling the few fields 
of his little farm under the very shadow of the sand-dune, where 
through the long summer day you may listen to the song of the 
bonnie 'bent' linnets and the 'lilt-lilt' of ascending larks.
The 
materials of the wooden out-buildings around his cottage are 
all of wreck wood, and worked into the structures we read 
'Perseverance of Shields,' 'Vesta of Goole,' and such like 
relics suggestive of the perils of the deep sea.
Some day with 
a northerly gale and full spring-tide the hungry sea will make 
a clean sweep of homestead and fields.
Still the old man sticks 
to his wooden one-horsed plough, hoping that matters may 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM HUMBER DLSTRICT.
25 
last his time.
Recently seeing him at his work, I remarked 
*Why, John, youVe lost your sea-plot?' [one of his fields], 
'Yes sir, I gi'en it her/ ^You mean she's ta'en it, John?' 
'Ah, sir; she's heppen fending for hersel', she is ; she gets waur 
and waur, she do; she's rerameled a site o* land sin' last l)ack 
end ' [she is skilful in providing for herself; she gets worse and 
worse ; she has moved much land since last autumn].
Just before the great snowstorm which commenced on the 
25th of November, thousands of Snow-Bunting came into the 
low-lying lands along the coast of Lincolnshire.
At Tetney, 
Mr. Haigh says under dates of November 28th, the present 
snowstorm has brought us thousands of Snow-Bunting, the fitties 
and fields near the coast swarm with them, I have never seen 
so many before.
Brambling {Fringilla fuofitifrmgilla (Linn.)).
Oct. 19th, first 
seen; an adult male shot.
Nov. 28th, Mr. Haigh saw a few 
with Chaffinches at Grainsby.
Short-eared Owl {Asia acdpitrinus i^?\\,)).
Oct. 19th.
One seen 
on Kilnsea warren by Mr. Clubley.
This is the only example 
I have heard of this autumn.
W'oodcock {Scolopax msticnla Linn.).
Oct. 20th and 21st.
A few on the 19th, and again on the 20th.
Night of 2oth-2ist, 
immense flight from Withernsea to Spurn Point, which subse- 
quent information shows extended over 200 miles of the east 
coast, from Flamborough Head to the mouth of the Thames.
Wind N., drizzling rain and mist.
There was also a second and 
very considerable arrival on the night of 2ist-2 2nd, and since 
this date a few stragglers at intervals up to the end of November.
Notwithstanding the great arrivals of Woodcock during October 
and November, very few appear to have been seen or shot in 
our chief woods.
I have this year shot a considerable extent 
of woodlands, pine and oak, which has always been considered 
first-rate Woodcock ground, but so far we have only seen and 
got a couple.
I hear the same complaint in other quarters.
Red-necked Phalarope {Phalaropus hyperborcus (Linn.)).
Oct. 28th.
One shot near Easington by Mr. G- Jolland, and 
received by Mr. P.
Lawton in the flesh.
Shore Lark {Oiocorys alpestris {iJinn.)).
Oct. 28th, first appearance.
A very considerable number throughout November ] never so 
niany before.
Immense numbers crossed Heligoland early in 
December.
Swallow {Hirund0 rustka Linn,).
Nov. 4th, one seen near Donna 
_Nook on Lincolnshire coast by Mr- Haigh.
Jan. 1891, 
26 CORDEAUX: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM HUMBER DISTRICT.
Jay {Garrulus glandarius (Linn.)).
Nov. gth.
Mr, Haigh thinks 
there was a considerable immigration about this date, and they 
have been extremely numerous ever since, 
Lapland Bunting {Plectrophanes lapponicus (Linn.)).
Nov. i8th, 
Mr. Haigh shot a male in winter plumage on the sand-hills at 
North Cotes.
At a short distance it might easily be overlooked 
for a Reed Bunting or a young Snow Bunting.
Sheldrake {Tadoma comuta (Gmeh)).
Nov. 28th.
There was 
_ b 
a great flock on North Cotes sands to-day, which Mr. Haigh 
computes at two to three hundred.
r 
"Whooper Swan {Cygnus musicus Bechst.).
Nov. 29th.
Twelve seen, 
presumably of this species, flying north, near Spurn, all white.
In the autumn also immense flocks of Greenfinches {Ligurinus 
chloris) have come in, also Chaffinches {Fringilla ccclebs)^ at irregular 
intervals; and the reedy drains near the coast in October swarmed 
with Reed Buntings {Emberiza schmniclus).
Tree Sparrows {Passer 
inontanus) also have been fairly common.
In the late severe weather 
a pair came for food along with other birds and the Common Sparrow 
(/*.
domesticus) to the window-box here.
They are, however, much 
shyer and of a more timid nature than the domestic bird, and seem 
quite unable to assert themselves before their robust cousins.
I have 
also seen some large flocks of Twites (Linotaflavirostris) near the coast.
There have been a very considerable number of Kingfishers {Alcedo 
tspidd) since September on the chief streams and drains, and I regret 
that a great many have been received by the local taxidermists.
Some 
other locally-shot birds seen and examined by me are a Rough-legged 
Buzzard {Archibiitco lagopus)^ shot at Ruckland near Louth ; immature 
Long-tailed Ducks [Harelda glacialis)^ two adult Goosanders {Mergus 
merganser)^ adult female Smew {Mergus albelltis\ and a Red-throated 
Diver {Colymbus sepientrionalis).
Under date of December loth, Mr. Haigh sends the following 
note : — * During the first week in this month a great many swans 
appeared in the Humber, both Whoopers {Cygnus musicus) and 
Bewick's Swan (C bewicki).
Stubbs killed three at one shot 
out of a herd of 30 to 40 and his son killed one from 
a herd of nine, both on the 2nd.
These were cooked or sent 
away before I heard of them, but as they only weighed 14 lbs.
each and as Stubbs said he had never seen any swans like them 
before I conclude they were Bewick^s.
Subsequently, Mr. Haigh 
received a head which proved he was quite right in his opinion.
The small swan were all old birds, but there were several grey birds 
amongst the Whoopers.
w 
Naturalist, 
27 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
FISHES, 1886, 1887, 1888.
The present instalment includes not only titles for the years stated 
above, but aisp those published in the 'Naturalist' in 1884 and 1885.
In this department of the fauna a considerable amount of what 
is written falls not within the domain of science but of sport, and it 
is not always easy to eliminate the facts which possess some scientific * 
value from among the purely angling notes.
Thus it may be useful 
here to state that for any desired additional information reference may 
be made to the columns of the ' Field ' and of ' Land and Water.' 
It will also be serviceable to note here that the previous 
ichthyological bibliographies appeared as follows : — For 1884, 
Naturalist, June 1885, pp.
253-257; and for 1885, Naturalist, Aug.
1886, pp, 242-244.
The Watsonian Vice-Counties are used throughout these 
bibliographies as more convenient and uniform in area than the 
unequal political counties ; those comprised within our purview are 
as follows : — Lincoln South, Lincoln North, Notts, Derby, Cheshire, 
Lancashire South, Lancashire West, Westmorland with Furness, 
Cumberland, Isle of Man, Cheviotland, Northumberland South, 
Durham, York N.E., York S.K, York S.W., York Mid West, and 
York N.W, 
Anon, [signed ' Ullswater '].
Cumberland, 
Destruction of the Gwjmiad [d^n^o^/us dupeoides] by Lead-mine Water 
[in Cumberland ; sent as a ' schelly/ and named by Editor as a Gwyniad 
[Coregonus pennanti) : the fish has almost disappeared : it must not he con- 
founded (in name) with the *skeIIy'of the waters of Cumberland, which is the 
Common Chub {Leuciscus cefhaius).
Field, June 13th, 1S85, p.
784.
Anon.
[' Naturalist ' reviewer], Westmorland.
[Review of] The Salmonidae of Westmoreland, Angling Reminiscences, 
and Leaves from an Angler's Note Book [with notes on Salmo saiar, S.
fario, 
S.ferox, S, wilhighhii, Coregomis ciupeoides, C, vandesius^ Osmems eperlanus\ 
Nat., July 18S5, p.
282.
Anon, [signed ' Cockspur'].
* The Trent* 
Salmon [Salmo salar] in the Trent [combatting a statement that this river 
contained but few].
Land and Water, Feb. 6th, 1886, p.
126.
Anon, [signed 'CB.'].
York N.E.
Salmon {Salmo salar] found in the Yorkshire Derwent [four miles above 
Malton; 12 lb.
weight].
Land and Water, Feb. 6th, 1886, p.
124.
Anon, [signed ' R.B.L.'].
Westmorland.
Trout [Salmo fario] in condition in February [in Windermere the large trout 
netted early in the season are in poor condition, while Irish are usually not].
Field, Feb. 20th, z886, p.
229.
Jan. iggi.
28 BIBLIOGRAPHY: FISHES, 1886, 1S87, 1888.
Anon, [not signed], .
Cheshire, Line, Cumbid,, Westmld., Lane.
The Irish PoUan [with records of Coregonns oxyrhynchus (the hautin) for 
Lincolnshire ; C.
dupeoides^ the schelley of Windermere, Pemhle Mere near 
Chester; Ullswater, all the larger lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland, 
Conningham Mere in Lancashire ; C vandesiuSj vendace, Dervventwater, and 
with some doubt in Bassenthwaite Lake].
Field, Feb. 27th, 1886, p.
246.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
The Butterfly Blenny \_{Bl€vnius ocellaris) ; * one has been taken at the Isle of 
Man*].
Land and Water, March 20th, 1886, p.
267.
Anon, [signed ' R.B.L.'].
Cumbld., Westmorland and Furness.
The Vendace {Coregomis vandcnus\ PoUan [C clupcoides], and G^wyniad 
[also C clupeoides\ [discussing at length the question as to the occurrence or 
non-occurrence of these fish in the English Lakes].
Field, Ap. 17th, 1886, p.
494.
Yorkshire, Northumberland, Durham, 
Anon, [not signed], Cumberland, Westmorland, Lines.
The Salmon Fisheries of England and Wales [article based upon a recently 
published blue-book].
Field, May 22nd, 1SS6, p.
653.
Anon, [signed 'Red Spinner'].
Notts, 
Great Haul of Fish at Clumber [on re-filling the great lake : Pike {Esox 
lucius) were nearly 15.000 in number; an immense quantity of Carp {Cyprinus 
carpid)^ perfect shoals of Tench ( Tinea vulgaris) and Perch {Ferca J(uviatilis), 
and a prodigious quantity of Eels [Anguilla vzclgaris), according to a news- 
paper cutting; weights are also quoted, the largest Pike being 40 lb..
Carp 
reaching 16 or 18 lb., Perch 10 or 12 lb.
(this doubted by writer), and Eels 
to between 7 and 8 lb,].
Field, June 5th, 1S86, p.
733.
Cumberland, 
Anon, [signed 'Flaneur'].
Great Run of Salmon [Salmo salar] in the Sol way [on the 13th, 14th, and 
15th July, 1886].
Field, July 17th, 18S6, p.
100.
Anon, [not signed].
Durham, York N,E, 
The River Tees [statistics, etc., as to the fishing for Salmon [Sabno salar) 
and Trout {S.
fario)\ Field, Aug. 7th, 1S86, p.
216.
Anon, [signed ' R.B.L/].
Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness.
The British Char \[^Salmo willughbH) ; their natural history and distribution 
in the English Lake District, with some interesting antiquarian records and 
surmises as to date of supposed introduction].
Field, Nov. 27th, 1886, p.
784.
Anon, [signed 'R.B.L.'], Cumbld,, Westmld., Furness, York N.W.
The Char {Salmo wiUitghhii\ of the Lake District [detailed notes on distri- 
bution, natural history, habits, failure of attempts at introduction, etc.].
Field, Jan. 15th, 1887, pp.
66-67.
Anon, [signed 'A.M., Grimsby'].
* North Sea.' 
Large Soles \_{Solea vulgaris) a pair weighing 7| lbs.
brought into Grimsby 
by a North Sea trawler].
Land and Water, March 12th, 1887, p.
240.
Anon, [signed ' Red Spinner '].
Derbyshire.
The Matlock Bath District [and its angling capabilities ; Trout {Salmo 
/arri>), Grayling (Thymalhis vulgaris), Pike (Esox lucius), C3.vp {Cvprinus 
iarpid)^ Chub [Leuciscus cephalus).
Roach (Z.
rutilus).
Dace (Z.
vulgaris).
Perch [Perca Jluviatilis\ Tench [Tirtca vtilgaris), and Rudd {Leuciscus 
erythrophtkalmus)\ Field, May 2lst, 18S7, p.
702-3.
Anon, [signed ' D.W.'].
Line, S.
Trout \Salmo farid] in the River Welland [near Market Deeping, one 
captured weighing close on 2^ lbs.; the fish very rare in this river].
Field, 
June nth, 1887, p.
"621.
Anon, [not signed].
Westmorland.
Large Brook Trout \{Salmo farid) ; one S lbs.
2 oz.
in Colby Beck near 
Appleby ; and one z\ lbs.
in the Eden].
Land and Water, June nth, 1887, 
P' 522.
Naturalist.
bibliography: fishes, 1886, 1887, 1888.
29 
Anon, [signed *F.S.*].
Isle of Man, 
An Old [Manx] Hallowe'en Custom [with a stolen salt herring and mystic 
rites], Manx Note Book, No. li, July 1887, iii.
146.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Notes from a MS.
Dated 1801 [that the Herring {Clupea harcngiis) fishery, 
which is the chief trade, is very considerable, upwards of Soo boats built in 
the island being employed at it].
Manx Note-Book, No. 11, July 1887, iii.
147].
Anox.
[not signed].
' Trent.
An Enormous Dace \_{Leucisats vulgaris) weighing i lb.
2\ oz., taken from 
a tributary of Trent].
Land and Water, Aug. 27th, 1887, p.
139.
Anon.- [not signed].
York S.W.
Ackworth Reports.— Natural History Society [Red Trout [Salmo fario) 
and Esox hichis in the ' Canal ' at Ackworth].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 
1S87, xi.
128.
Anon, [signed ' R.B.L.'].
Westmorland, 
Perch Disease \^'i^^Q.'C\r\g Perca fluviatilis in Killington Reservoir near Sed- 
bergh].
Field, Oct. 8th, 1887, p.
563.
Anon, [not signed].
* Yorkshire.' 
Large Pike \Esox lua'us] from Pebley Pond, Yorkshire, weighing 2o| lbs.].
Land and Water, Oct. 22nd, 1887, p.
340.
Anon, [not signed].
Northumberland S., Durham.
List of .
. Donations to the Museum .
. of the Natural History 
Society [of Newcastle-on-Tyne], from June 1877 to August, 18S7 [1884, 
a specimen of the Opah (* Zeus opah' — ILampris luna)^ taken at Newbiggin- 
by-the-Sea, June 20th, 1840, and one of Scicetia aqtdla^ taken near liiyth, 
2ist Nov., 1833, being the specimens from which Robt.
E. l^ewick drew his 
figure for the proposed work on British Fishes by Thos.
Bewick ; and the 
head of a small shark, the Common Tope {Galeiis cam's) taken at Cullercoats 
(all from John Hancock) ; a Norway Haddock [Sebastes norvegicus)^ taken 
off the Tyne, June 1SS4 (D.
Embleton) ; Three-bearded Rockling, Whistler 
or Whistle Fish {Mtistela vulgaris \i'-A\o\i^hy = Motella tricirrata)^ caught on 
the Northumbrian coast (Chas.
Henry Young) ; Angel Shark {Rhino: squat ina) 
caught off Northumberland coast by steam trawler (purchased); large Burn 
Trout (Salmo fario), killed in the Coquet by Sir W.
G. Armstrong ; Small Starry 
Ray [Rata radiata)^ juv., with abnormal mouth, Cullercoats (Thos.
Thomp- 
son) ; large Tunny {Thynnus Ihy^mus L.), 9 ft, long, caught in the salmon 
nets, off Frenchman's Bay near South Shields, 24th Aug., 18S5 (W.
Clift); 
and- three intestinal worms from Sticklebacks [Gasterosteus aatleatus) taken at 
Hebburn].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
9, Part 2 
(1 888) pp.
276-2S6.
Anon, [not signed].
Line.
N. and S., Derbyshire.
Among the Sheffield Anglers [describing the clubs, and giving notes of 
their Derbyshire and Lincolnshire haunts, with notes of large pike {Esox huius) 
Keadby Canal, Dec. 1872; Barbel [Barbus fluviaSilis), river Idle, many years 
ago ; Bream {Abramis brama)^ river Idle ; Chub {Leuciscus , cephalus).
Trout 
{Salmo fario), Abbeydale, May iSSo ; weights given].
Field, Feb. i8th, 
t888, p.
220.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.W., Derbyshire.
[Review of] The Book of the Grayiiog {{Thymallus vtdgaris)\ in the 
Derbyshire and Yorkshire rivers, the average of weight is not high, a 2^lb.
being a large fish].
Field, March 31st, 1888, p.
458.
Anon, [signed ' R.
B. L.*].
Westmorland and Furness.
A Large Char ISalmo willughhii) caught in Windermere, scaling 2lb.
2oz.
; 
another in Sept.
18S7, within an ounce of same weight].
Field, May 12th, 
}^, p.
675.
Jan. i8qi.
30 BIBLIOGRAPHY: FISHES, l886j 1887, 1888.
Axon, [signed *S.S/], Cumberland- 
A Garfish \_Belonc vtdgaris\ taken in the Eden [at Cargo ; a large female, 
29^ in, long, and a small male, both in sickly condition, at intervals of a few 
days ; dates not given].
Field, June gth, 1S88, p.
819.
Anon, [signed 'Giant'].
* Trent/ 
A fine Bleak \{AlhHrnits lucidus)', one from the Trent weighing 3 oz., was 
recorded in Field, Oct. 24th, 1874, by H.
Wild, of Nottingham], Land 
and Water, June i6th, 18S8, p.
690.
Anon, [signed ^R.B.L.'].
Durham, York N.W.
In Upper Teesdale [an account of the fishing for Trout {Sal/no far{o)\ 
Field, Aug. nth, 1S8S, p.
214.
Anon, [signed *R.B.L.'], Durham.
Tench \Tinca vtdgaris\ in the Skerne [near Haughton, captured in July 
1888; plaster cast of it is preserved at Durham], Field, Aug. l8lh, iS88, 
p. 252.
Anon, [signed ' Tweedside '].
Cheviotland.
Grayling \Thymalhis vulgaris\ in the Tweed [have increased remarkably of 
late, and are considered injurious to trout ; Ed. Field criticises this].
Field, 
Sep. 15th, 1S88, p.
404.
Anon, [signed J.
W[atson?]].
Cumberland.
Capture of an Enormous [55^ lb.] Salmon \{Salmo salar) in the Eden at 
Corby ; the nearest approach in weight was a 52 lb, fish caught at Rockcliff].
Land and Water, Nov. 17th, 1888, p.
607.
Matthew Bailey.
York S.E.
Ballan Wrasse \Lahrus maculahis\ at Flamborough [two instances, April 
1885].
Nat., June 1S85, P- 257.
M. Bailey.
York S.E, 
Doree \Zeiis faher\ at Flamborough [cast up 3rd March, 1886].
Nat., Sep.
18S6, p.
278, 
Lane.
W,, Yorkshire, and 
A. D, Berridge, Inspector of Fisheries.
*Trent Valley.' 
Our Salmon Fisheries [Besides information as to Salmo saiar, reference is 
made to Lampems {Fttromyzon fltwiatilis)^ for which only 5 Fishery Boards 
report regular fisheries — among the 5 being the Lune, Trent, and Yorkshire 
Fishery Boards].
26th Ann. Rep.
of the Inspectors of Fisheries (England 
and Wales) for 1886 ; reviewed in Field, July 2nd, 1887, pp.
20-21.
A. D.
Berrington, Inspector of Fisheries.
Line.
N. and S.
Fresh-water and Estuaiy Fisheries [Extracts from and summaries of 
Mr. Berrington's report, in which he deals with the Welland fisheries for 
Eels {Angiiilla vulgaris)^ the Lower Trent and the nets used there, and the 
Salmon fishery laws].
Field, Dec. loth, 1887, p.
883.
A. D.
Berrington, Inspector of Fisheries.
Line.
N. and S.
Fishing [for Eels] in the Witham District [being extract from Mr.
Berringtou's jeport on an inquiry held by him on the laws which hinder free 
fishing for eels {Anguilla vulgaris) in the Witham], Field, Dec. loth, 1SS7, 
p. 884.
John Brunton.
Derbyshire.
On the Introduction and Acclimatisation of Grayling {Thymallus vulgaris] 
in Trout Streams [in which the Derbyshire Derwent, and Hampshire Itchen 
are contrasted with each other at length as grayling streams].
Land and 
Water, March 20th, 1886, pp, 265-266.
Thomas Bunkkr.
York S.W. and S.E.
Angler-fish [Lophius pucatorlus\ at Whitgift [caught 27th May, 1884].
Nat., Oct. 1SS4, p.
60.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: fishes, 1886, 1887, 1888.
31 
Thomas Bunker.
York S.E. and S.W.
Goole Fish-notes [anent Salmo salar, Acipenser stttrio^ Lophius piscatoruis^ 
and Clupea aIosa\ Nat., March 1886, p, 81.
Thomas Bunker.
York S.E. and S.W.
Fishes observed near Goole {^Lophius piscatorhis in the sahnon nets ; 
Trackinus vipera^ three miles below Goole, Aug. 1S86; a Syngnathus at 
Howden Dyke; a Salmo salar scaling 35 lbs.
; and some Acipetiser stiirio 
taken].
Nat,, Oct, 1886, p.
309, 
Herbkrt C.
Chadvvick.
Lane.
S- 
On [Sticklebacks {Gasterosteus acukatus) infested by] Gyrodactylus 
elegans [in a pond at Eccles near Manchester], Ann. Rep, Manch.
Micro.
Soc. for 1883-4 (P^b.
1884), p.
7. 
Wm. Eagle Clarke.
Line.
N. 
Snake Pipe Fish [Neropkis opkidiofi\ on the Lincolnshire coast [at Skegness, 
Sept, 1886].
Nat., Oct. 1886, p.
309.
W. Eagle Clarke.
York N.E.
The * Pinky' or * Scaley* of the Yorkshire Esk [which is determined by 
Dr. Day from specimens as young Salmon Trout {Salmo tritlta) ; notes on its 
occurrence by Mr. T.
Stephenson are given].
Nat., Sep. 1S88, p.
274.
T. D.
A. Cocke rell.
Cheviotland, 
North of Eng-land Specimens in the British Collection at the British 
Museum [including Salmo salar^ Tweed ; Myliobatis aquila and Brama ratty 
Berwick ; and hybrid Salmo ; details given].
Nat., Aug. 1888, p.
227.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E., Line, N.
The Spurn [and its waters as a locality for fish ; J^aja batis^ Trackinus 
vipera^ Coitus scorpius^ Agonus caiap/iraclzis, Zoarces viviparus, Mugil 
septenirionalis^ Gadus morrhua, G.
virens, Rhombus maximus^ Pleuronectes 
piatessa, P,flesuSy Solea vtdgaris^ Salmo salar ^ S, truiia^ Syngnathns aais, 
Nerophis ophidiofiy Lampris luna^ Torpedo hebetans^ and Capros aper noted 
as having occurred].
Nat,, Aug. 1884, pp.
1-8, 
John Cordeaux.
Line.
N, and S., York S.E.
Lincolnshire [and its fishes; Esox lucius, Anguilla aailiroslrzs (off Flam- 
borough Head), both in great size, Salmo salar.
Lota vulgaris^ Barbus, and 
ZtfwmfWJ- r///'//«5 in plenty, noted], Nat., Jan. 1886, pp.
12-13.
John Cordeaux.
YorkS.E., Line, N.
Three-bearded Rockling [^/^/f//a /m/rra/a] in the North Sea [taken in a 
trawl-net between Flamborough and the Dogger ; description givenj.
Nat., 
Jan. 1888, p.
24.
R. D.
Darbishire.
Line, N.
Note on the Fishes of Grimsby about 1300 [Extract from the • Lay of 
Havelok the Dane'; references to Sturgeon {Acipenser sturio), Turbot 
{Rhombus maximus), Salmon {Salmo salar).
Cod [Gadus morrhua).
Herring 
{Clupea harengus).
Mackerel {Scomber scomber).
Halibut [Hippoglossus 
vulgaris).
Sole {Solea vulgaris).
Lamprey {Petromyzon marimus), Tlaice 
{Pleuronectes platessa), and Eels {Anguilla vulgaris)], Nat., Oct. 1884, 
p, 61 ; repeated in Angler's Note Book, Yellow Series, 1888, p.
91.
R. D.
Darbishire, ' Lane.
W. 
[Leptocephalus morrisii found at Lancaster, amongst a number of iishes 
placed on a field for manure].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Nov. 8th, 
1886, xxvi.
53..
F. Day, Cumberland.
[Vendace {Coregonus vandesius) in Derwentwater and Bassenthwaite 
Lakes; Gwiniad (C.
coregonoides) and its restriction to the Eden hasm ; 
diseased intestine of a Sea-Trout from the (which?) Esk ; details given ; a!
exhibited to Zool, Soc.] Proc.
Zool.
Soc, May 19th, 1S85, p.
483; and 
Nat, March 1SS6, p.
81.
Jan. 189U 
J 
32 bibliography: fishes, 1886, 1887, 1888.
Notts., Derbysh., Lane.
S. and W., York Mid. W,, 
Francis Day.
» Cumbld., Cheviotld.
Migration of the Saimonidse.
Part I.
Notes on * Early' and *Late' 
Rivers [discussing — among others — the Trent, Ribble, Solvvay, "Tweed, 
Eden, Esk, Caldew, Peteril, etc.].
Nat., Jan. 1S86, pp.
19-29.
Francis Day. Cheviotland, Northumberland, Durham, Cheshire.
Migration of the Saimonidse.
Part IL Periods of Migration [discussed 
at length, with the aid of evidence derived from the Tyne, Holy Island, the 
Coquet, Shields, the Dee at Chester, and other places].
Nat., April 1886, 
pp.
115-128.
Francis Day. Westmorland, Cumberland.
On the Loch-Leven Trout (Salmo Irc'enensis) [with reference (at p.
75) to 
the form from Ullswater and Windermere which Parnell called Salmo ciecifer\.
Journ.
of Linn.
Soc, Zoology, No. 117 (June 30th, 1S87), voL xx, pp.
71-90- 
Francis Day. York S.E., N,E.
and Mid W., Lane.
S. 
Fish and Fisheries Review [an Opah {Lampn's luna) 4J ft.
long, taken on 
the Yorkshire coast the last week in Aug. 1887 ; Trout [Salmo fario) intio- 
duced into Manchester reservoirs to clean off spawn of Linnusa ; breeding 
Trout to be discontinued in the Otlcy reservoirs ; Lamargns borealts (Green- 
land Shark) captured fifty miles from Whitby, Aug. 26th, .1887].
Field, 
Jan. 7th, 18SS, pp.
24-25.
Cumberland.
Francis Day.
Sea Trout \Salmo trutfa] from Cumberland Derwent [described].
Field, 
April 2ist, 1888, p.
555.
W. DtJCKWORTH.
Cumberland.
Lump Fish \_Cyclopterus Iumpus\ in the Solway [at Skinburness, March 
20th and April 3rd, 1SS6, and others at Burgh Marsh on April 23rd; par- 
ticulars given].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westm.
Assoc, No. xi.
1885-86 (pub.
1886), 
p. 149.
W. Duckworth.
Cumberland.
Sturgeon [Adpenser sfurio'] in Eden [netted April I7ih, 1SS6, at the Cargo 
fishery ; weighed between nine and ten stone].
Trans.
Cumb.
and Westnu 
Assoc, No. xi.
1885-86 (pub.
18S6;, p.
150.
ED[iior of Zoologist].
Isle of Man, 
Habits of the Holibut {[Hippoglossus vulgaris) ; one sent to Edinburgh from 
the Isle of Man weii^died 320 lbs., and measured 7 ft.
6 in.
by 3 ft.
6 in.].
ZooL, Jan. 1SS6, x.
28.
ED[itor]s., N.
H. J.
York Mid W.
and S.E.
[Sturgeon {Acipenser stwio), very large, caught in the Ouse, near Selby, 
June 26th, 1886].
N.H.J.
, Nov. 15th, 1886, x.
168.
ED[itor of Zoologist].
York N.E.
Ray's Bream \Brama rati] on Scilly [a note by T.
Cornish, to which Editor 
repeats Ray's record for Middlesburgh Marsh, Sep. 16S1].
Zool., Oct. 1887, 
xi.
393- 
Ed WD.
P^LMHiRST.
Linc.
N. 
Voracity of Pike l{Esox Indus) of 14 lb.
swallowing an 8 lb.
Carp, Riseholme 
Lake, near Lincoln, sixty years ago].
Field, Feb, iSth, 1888, p.
221.
D. Embleton.
Northumberland S.
or Durham.
Note on the Capture of [a small Shoal of] Tunnies [T/iynnus ihynnus'\ 
and of a fine specimen of the " Bergyli," or Norwej^ian Haddock \Sebastes 
nort'egicxis] off the Tyne, June, 1S84 [measurements i^iven].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumberland Durham and Newcastle, vol.
8, Part 2, 18S6, p.
221.
D. Embleton.
Durham, Westmorland, York N.W.
A Catalogue of the Place-names in Teesdale [including some derived 
from fish ; see p.
11 (Txo\:il— Salmo fario)].
Nat. Hist.
Trans, of Northum- 
berland Durham and Newcastle, vol.
ix, Part i (1887) pp.
i-xviii and 1-223.
Natiirali>t, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: FISHES, 1886, 1887, 1888.
3 
'> 
w. 
r. T- Faraday.
Notice of a Fish 
Association at Ho 
plan of the house, and referring to the breed of Trout {Salmofario) found in 
the Ril)ble].
Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and PhiL Soc, Feb. 8th, 1887, xxvi.
85-94 
and plate.
-breeding- house erected by the Manchester Anglers' 
orton-in-Ribblesdale, Yorkshire [giving full particulars and 
James Fleming.
Cheshire.
Rambles during the Year 1887.— Bramhall [2nd July; GasleTosteusacideatiis, 
male, noted in pond at Mile End].
Ann. Rep.
Manch.
Microsc.
Soc. fur 
1S87 (pub.
1888), p.
65.
Cheshire.
ox hiciiis) caught 
T. \V.
FOWLES.
W 
w 
presumably at Nantwich].
Field, July 31st, 1S86, p.
178, 
Leoxard Gaunt.
York 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Askern [20th May, 18S6; Esox 
Indus and Aiiguilla noted].
Nat., June 1886, p.
189.
Hugh S.
Gill, 
Isle of Man.
Notes from the Registers [of] the Parish of Malew [in the Isle of >ran; 
*2Sote: that att ffleshwicke on Sathurday the 13*^' of July 1667 Rich"^ Read 
cu sociis had their boat almost Loaden with herrings \Clupea ]iareugus\ and 
on Tusday after, the most were loaden^ all had sufticient, and soe continued 
with such an aboundance, that they brought thcire boais full to Duglas, 
Castletown, and Peele, and sould for 12*^ lo*^ and some for 9'^ , and 6'^ ^ Maze, 
and very fatt fish' — to which it is noted that Manxmen will not need to be 
told that z.iHease of herrings is five hundred, i.e. 5 x 124=620 fish].
Manx 
Note-Book, No. 8, Oct. 18S6, vol.
2, p.
185.
James Hardy 
Northumberland- 
Report of Meetings of Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the year 
1885.
. .
Rothbury [24th June ; mention made of Salmon-leistering on the 
Coquet as formerly practised, and that Eel -spearing still forms an exciting 
sport at the THrum].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 18S5 (pub.
1886), xi.
38-39.
H. S.
Harlaxd.
York N.E. or N.W.
Trout \SaImo /aria] in Long Captivity [in a wrought-iron tank.
North 
Riding of Yorkshire, 20 ft.
above ground : tank supplied from neighbouring 
trout-stream by small pipe and force-pump].
Land and Water, March 24th, 
1SS8, p.
323.
H. S.
II[arland].
York S.E..
Large Trout \_{Salmo fario) preserved in Scarborough Museum, captured 
about forty years ago in the DrifHeld Trout-stream; weighed I2i lbs.] Land 
and Water, Aug. 25th, 1SS8, p.
223.
G. E.
Hastings.
Northumb.
S. 
Some Summer Notes on Fish [as observed at Tynemouth and Culler- 
coats ; Salmo salar, Salmon-trout (i'./rr/t?
[sic]).
Codlings, Cod (Morr/iua 
• vulgaris).
Haddock (J/, cvglefinus).
Whiting {Meriangus vulgaris).
Sand-eels 
{Anwiodytes lancea).
Red Gurnard [Trigla pinii).
Grey Gurnard (7; 
g^irnardus).
Herring {Chipca Jiarengtis), Thornback (Raja clavata), Angler 
{Lophius piscatorius), l^wok.^ Vxo2,Q\i {Coitus bubal is), Fifteen-spined Stickle- 
back {Gasierosteus spinachio), Shanny {Blennius pholis), Butterfish (B, 
gnnnellus), etc., cited, with local names].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., ^^arch 15th, 
1888, xii.
47-48.
G. E.
Hastxn(;s.
Northumberland S.
Some Winter Notes on Fish, Starfishes, etc.
[at Tynemouth and 
Cullercoats ; Gobius auraius, G.
ruthensparri.
Coitus bubahs, Liparis 
montagui, Zoarces vivtparus.
Anarhichas lupus, CalUoitymus lyra C.
^raiu/iculus, Ra^ticeps trifurcatus, Zeusfaber, Gadus luscus, and G ^tgUfuus 
mentioned with interesting: notes].
Nat. flist.
J., May 15th, 1888, xn.
91- 
feb.
t& 
isr^i.
34 bibliography: fishes, i8S6j 1SS7, 18SS, 
G. E.
Hastings.
Northumberland S- 
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club {^Gastercsfcus aculeatiis (3-spined 
Stickleback) in a sea-pool at Tynemouth, with Lireen Crabs and Devil fishes ; 
also Gohius rtithcusparri^ Blennius pholis, zndAmmodytes Ianceolatus\ Nat.
Hist.
Journ., Oct. i5lh, iSSS, xii.
160.
G. E.
Hastings.
York S.W.
Roach \Lcuchiiis riUiIus] and Trout "ySainio fan'o] in the ' Canal/ Ackworth, 
[the- latter the first on record for the vicinity].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. ist, 
1888, xii.
1 84.
G. E.
Hastings.
York S.W, 
The Three-spined Stickleback [( Gasterosteus aculeatus)^ its habits and 
nidification as observed at Ackworth], Nat. Hist.
Journ,, Nov. 1st, 1888, 
xii.
185.
* * 
G. E.
Hastings.
'York S.W, 
Ackworth Fishes [are 8 in number, viz..
Roach [Leucisats rutihis).
Dace 
(Z.
vulgaris')^ Perch [Perca flitviatilis)^ Pike {Esox lucius')^ Trout {Salmo 
fa?-io)^ Sharp-nosed Eel [Afij^uilla acntlrostris)^ Three-spined Stickleback 
(Gasterosteus acuieatits), and Stone Loach {Cohltis barbatula) ; localities and 
relative abundance stated for each].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov, 1st, 1888, xii.
1S5.
G. E.
Hastings, York N.W., N.E. and Mid W.
York Fishes [16 enumerated, with localities and relative abundance, viz., 
Roach (Leucisais riitilus).
Dace [L.
vulgaris).
Tench ( Tinea vulgaris) y 
Gudgeon iGohio flnviatHis), Chub (Z.
cephalus)^ Minnow (Z.
phoxiuus).
Grayling {Thymallus vitlgaris).
Trout {Salmo far io)^ Salmon {S.
salar).
Pike 
(JElsox hiciiis).
Perch {Perca fliiviatilis)^ K\iK [Aeerina cernua)^ Three-spined 
^i\^<Ae\ydx\^ {Gasterosteus rza^/^^z///^), Ten-spined Stickleback {G.
pungitins).
Sharp- nosed Eel {Auguilla aadirosfris), and Stone Loach [CoNtis bar- 
batula)], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. 1st, 1888, xii.
185-186.
» 
J. Heart.
York Mid W.
Grayling ^Thymallus vulgaris] in Trout-streams [the Wharfe is becoming 
more a Grayling than a Trout stream, ' unless something be speedily done'].
Field, Oct. 13th, 1S88, p.
537.
J. A.
Heastie.
York S.W.
Growth of Trout [{Salmo fario) at Thongsbridge near Huddersficld, in a 
reservoir].
Land and Water, Dec. 1st, 18SS, p.
682.
T. C.
Heysham.
Cumberland.
[Cobitis barbatula (Bearded Loach) and Osmerus eperlanus (Sparling) {^i\ on 
near Carlisle by the Greenshank (Totanus caneseens)^ Aug. 15th and 25th, 
1832].
Macpherson and Duckworth's ' Birds of Cumberland/ 1886, p.
160.
E 
Richard Howse.
Northumberland S., Durham.
Note on the Visit of a Shoal of Tunny yPhynmis thyn?jus'] to the Northuiti- 
berland Coast la June, 18S4 [full and detailed particulars].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, Vol. 8, Part 2, 1S86, pp.
221-222.
Richard Howse.
Durham 
Note on the Capture of a very large Tunny \lliyjunis thynnns] in the 
Salmon Nets, oh Frenchman's Bay, near the mouth of the Tyne, in August, 
1885 [nieasiuements and description given], Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, Vol. 8, Part 2, 18S6, pp.
223-224.
Peter Lnchraij).
York S.E.
Fishes of Hornsea Mere [are Pike (Esox lueius), Perch {Perca fluviatilis).
Roach {LcHciseus rutilus)^ Eels (Anguilla vulgaris), and Ruff (Aeerina 
eeruua)].
Field, Nov. 19th, 1887, P* 780.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: FISHES, 1886, 1887, 1888.
35 
T. ISIMAY.
W 
Some Account of the Parish of Mirfield (by Mr. Ismay), to a Friend in 
Cumberland.
1755 [the river produces Salmon {Sabno salar), 7Vout {S.fario), 
Smelts {S.
sala}\ juv.), Graylings {Thyniallus vulgaris), Daice {Leuchcus 
vulgaris)^ Perch (Percafiiiviatiiis)^ Eels {Angiiilla vulgaris)^ Chubs {Lend sens 
cephalus), Barbies {Barbus fnviatilis)^ and Gudgeons {Gobio fuviatilis)\ 
Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, "Fart 10, Jan. 1S8S, p.
206, 
J. E.
LiTTLEBOY.
Derbyshire.
Grayling {T/iymallus vulgaris] in the Colne and Gade [introduced into the 
latter from the Derbyshire Dove].
Trans.
Herts.
Xat. Hist.
Soc, Vol. iii, 
Part 8 (Feb. 18S6), p.
li.
of Proceedings.
R. LoFTHOUSE.
Durham, York N.E.
The River Tees : its Marshes and their Fauna [Sabno salar and Acipeuser 
sturio noted].
Nat., Jan. 1SS7, pp.
I-16.
E. MiTFORD.
York S.
E. 
Stone S'wallowed by a Trout [{Sabnofario), in an East Riding stream : a 
|-i lb.
trout had swallowed a smooth stone weighing ^ oz.
and measuring 
I X I X I inches].
Field, Aug, 28th, 1SS6, p.
326.
T. H.
Nelson.
York N.E.
Occurrence of the SWng-'Ray [Trygou pasiinaca] at Redcar [Sep. 5th, 1885] 
Nat., Aug. 1 886, p.
252.
CEOR(iE L.
Paulin.
Cheviotland.
Statistics and Notes as to River Tweed Salmon Fishings [Tables given 
of estimated annual produce of River Tweed ; average weight of Sahnon 
(Salmo salar).
Grilse and Trout {Salmo fario) ; sexes of Salmon and Grilse ; 
weight of large salmon taken by nets ; and of Tweed salmon taken by rod 
and line; etc.].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 1SS6 [pub.
1S87] xi.
534-537- 
John H.
Phillips.
York N.E, 
Grey Mullet near Scarborough [one caught near Hayburn Wyke, 30th 
Aug. 1886 ; species not determined ; an.
editorial note treats of the species of 
Mugil already recorded for the Yorkshire coast].
Nat., Oct. 1886, p.
309.
T. E.
Pritt.
York Mid W- 
The Close Season for Trout [[Sai/fiofario); the character of Trout Yorkshire 
streams discussed].
Field, March 20th, 1886, p.
3S5.
Benjamin J.
Ridge.
, York N.E. and S.E., Line.
N, 
Trawling [with a notice of the rise of Grimsby as a fishing-port ; and 
of the celebrated * Silver Pits' in the North Sea, as yielding enormous quan- 
tities of Soles [Solda vulgaris)].
Journ.
of Plymouth Inst., vol.
9, part 3 
(18S6-87), pp.
375-387.
George Roberts.
York S.E.
Mollusca [and some Fish] of Wressle and Neighbourhood [the Flounders 
{Fieuronectes Jiesus)y and some other flat-fish, come up with the tide].
Nat., 
Durham.
Oct. 1S86, p.
311.
John E.
Robson.
The King Fish [Lampris guttaius] at Hartlepool [found on Black Hall 
Rocks, four miles N., Oct. 30th, 1886; details and measurements given].
Young Nat., Nov. 18S6, vii.
236.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Sturgeon iAcipenser sturio] at Hartlepool [29th Feb.; length, 7 ft.
4 in., 
and weight over 8 stone].
Young Nat., April 1888, ix.
83.
John E.
Robsox.
Durham.
The Sturgeon iAcipenser sturio] at Hartlepool [third specimen within a 
twelvemonth ; a fine example, 6 ft.
long, brought in 1st June, by a trawler].
__Yourig Nat., July 1888, ix.
143.
36 liir>MOGRA?HV : FISHES, 1886, 1887, 18S8.
P. L.
SiMMOXDs. Westmorland, Lancashire, Northumberland, 
The Animal Food Resources of Different Nations, with mention of some 
of the Special Dainties of Various People derived from the Animal Kingdom 
[Dogfish caught in Morecambe I>ay are sent — under name of ' Darwea 
Salmon' — to Preston and Blackburn for sale, where they are much liked, and 
fetch as high a price as Skate (p.
317) ; Salmon (Salmo salar) of Tweed 
referred to at p.
322, the farm-servant's veto being mentioned ; statistics of 
the lakes of Tyne Sahnon given at p.
324].
. .
. London : K.
& F.
N. Spon,.
. .
. 1SS5 [Svo, cloth, 461 pages].
Cakl Simonskn", 
Isle of Man.
Sildefisket ved Oen Man [a detailed account of the ^lanx fishery for 
Herrings {Clupea harengz{s)\.
Fiskeritidende (Kjobenhavn), Sept.
1st, 1SS5 ; 
translation by H.
Jacobson in Bull.
U.S. Fish Commission, vi.
1S86 (pub.
1887), i^p.
152-155: 
E. H.
Smart.
York S.E. and N.E,, Durham.
Occurrences of Banks' Oar-fish [Regakcus bauksii\ the Sun-fish [Ortha- 
gon'scKs mo!a\ and the Opah {Laf/tpris lujia] on the Yorkshire and Durham 
Coasts [Oar-fish at Flamborough, Feb. 1884; detailed account of the 
occurrence ; former occurrences recapitulated ; Sun-fish at Scarborough and 
Runs wick ; Opah at Hartlepool and Flamborough].
Nat., Aug. 1S87, 227-8, 
Thomas Stephenson.
York N.E.
Whitby Notes [for Oct., Nov. and Dec. 1884 : Gastei-osteus spinachia^.
Rhoffibus punciatiis^ Gadas trglefinus, and Labrax lupus noted].
JS'at., 
March 18S5, p.
180.
Thos.
StEI'HEXSON.
York N.E.
\Labrax lupus] in Whitby Harbour 
in the harbour].
Nat., July 1885, p.
269.
Thos.
Stevenson [misprint for Stephenson].
York N.E.
Muller's Topknot \_Rh0mbu5 pu)ictatus\ at Whitby [one captured, 13th May,.
1 88 1].
Nat., July 18S5, p.
269.
Thos.
Stephenson.
York N.E.
Whitby Fish-notes [Grey Mullets (Jlugil species)^ 
Thomas Stkphenson.
Whitby Fish-notes [anent a Codfish { Qr^/z/j vi07 
roe, and Salmo trufta\ Nat., Sep. 1SS6, p.
27S.
Thos.
Stephenson, 
York N.E.
York N.E.
Whitby Fish-notes [records ol Mugil capito^^ Capros ap€j\ Licniargus boreah's, 
Galeus taniSy R^j<^ circularise Page II us ceufrodontus^ and Echinorhinus^ 
spiuosus, taken from Aug. to Nov. 1886].
Nat., Feb. 18S7, p.
38.
York N.E.
Thos.
Stephenson.
Whitby Fish-notes [in respect of Pabrus ptaculatns and Orthagoriscus moJa^ 
captured respectively in Nov, 1S86 and Sep. 1SS7].
Nat., Oct. 1SS7, p.
299.
Thomas Siep::enson and Francis Day. York N.E.
Occurrence of Pagellus acarne at Whitby [on Jan. 23rd, 1S87 ; F.
Day's 
note states synonymy and distribution, T.
Stephenson notes details of occur- 
rence].
Nat., Nov. 1887, p.
352.
Thomas Stephenson 
York N.E.
Fish-notes from Whitby [on the occurrence of Trachiuus draco (five, 
Aug. 25th, 1SS7, etc.), Galeus canis, Mugil chelo [ox\t Awg. 24th), Lcemargits 
borcalis (one, Aug.), and Orthagoriscns mola (one, Sep. 22nd, 1887)].
Nat., 
Dec. 1887, p.
354.
J. A.
Erskine-Sh ART.
Cheviotland.
The Bull Trout {Salmo eriox) [in the Tweed ; its habits stated, and claim to 
specific rank upheld].
Nat., Oct. 1SS5, pp.
345-347.
ACORUS CALAMUS IN SOUTH YORKSHIRE.
37 
J. A, Krskine Stuart.
Cheviotland, Northumberland, Durham.
British Freshwater Fishes, No. II, [deals with tlie Salmon {Salmo salar) ; 
for which Tweed and Tyne are quoted as two of the chief rivers].
Nat.
World, March 1886, iii.
50-53.] 
J. A.
Erskine Stuart.
Northumberland, Cumberland.
British Freshwater Fishes, No. III.
The Sea Trout (.S>7////^ /r////'^) and 
the Bull Trout {Salmo eriox) [notes on those found in Tweed, Coquet, and 
Solway rivers].
Nat. World, April 1886, iii.
72-73.
i 
- 
J. A.
Erskine Stuakt.
Drbyshre, Northmbld, Cumbld, York, Westmldi 
British Freshwater Fishes, No. IV.
The Trout {Salmo fario) [in Derby- 
shire, Coquet, Tyne, PIden, Wharfe, and Vore, and Great Lake Trout in 
Windermere].
Nat. World, May 1S86, iii.
91-93.
J. A.
Eksklne Stuart.
Derbysh., Notts., York Mid W.
and N.W.
British Freshwater Fishes, No. V.
The Grayling [Thymalhts vulgaris) 
[the best Grayling rivers are the Derbyshire Dove, Trent, Wharfe and S'ore].
Nat. World, June 1886, iii.
106-109.
J. A.
EusKiNE Stuart.
Line, Notts.
British Freshwater Fishes, No. VI- The Pike (Esox huius) [the sluggish 
rivers of Lincolnshire aiul Notts, noted for their pike-fishing].
Nat. World, 
Sep. 1886, iii.
164-166.
Geo. Swatxson.
Isle of Man.
On the Dalby Rocks [Isle of Man ; list of captures in Aug. 1888 ; Lepado- 
gaster bimaculatus Q\\\\\\\Q:x?i\.^di\ Wesl.
Nat., Nov. 1888, ii.
268.
W. B.
Teuetmeier.
YorkS.E.
Striped Wrasse \Labrus mixius\ off Folkestone [and mentioned also as 
having occurred at Flamboroiigh], Field, Jan. 30th, 1886, p.
132.
M. G.
Watkins.
York N.E., Cheviotland, Northumberland.
Salmo eriox : the Bull-Trout [quotations and discussion, and an appeal for a 
good account of the species ; local names quoted].
Xat., Oct. 18S4, 
pp.
59-60.
M. G.
Watkixs.
Line.
N. 
Grayling {^Thynialhts z'u!garis\ and Grayling Fishing [a gossiping article; 
refers to the Claythorpe Beck being now famous fur grayling, the fish having 
been introduced some fifty years ago].
Land and Water, Feb. 27th, 1SS6, 
pp.
194-195- 
Thomas Winder.
York S.W.
Abnormal [i.e. double-headed] Trout {{ Salmo fario) in a reservoir near 
Sheffield].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1886, p.
19 ^"^^ woodcut.
J- H.
Wriglfa', Jun. Lane.
S- 
Lump-sucker [Cyclopterus lumpus] and Green Wrasse ILabrns donoiafii^ 
on the Lancashire Coast [at Formhy, taken in the nets, Ap. 27th, 1S87 ; 
weight given], field.
May 7th, 1887, p.
622.
NOTE— BOTANY, 
Acorus calamus in South Yorkshire.— This plant is abundant in the 
Dearne and Dove Canal, forming dense clumps at intervals l>etween Swinton and 
Barnsley, as well as in other parts of the canal.
It is most luxuriant on the side 
opposite to the tow-path where it escapes the fretting action of the tow-Ime.
^lany flowers of it were to be seen in July of this ) ..r.— J.
H. Pay.\e, Newhdl, 
Rotherham, 26th December, 1890.
Feb. i8gi.
PINE GROSBEAK IN NOTTS.
F. E.
WHITLOCK, 
BcestoHy Xofts.
A FINE male specimen of this bird {Pinico/a enuchator) was killed on 
30th October last, near Watnall, by Dr. Dixon of Eastwood, The 
blrdj when first observed, was drinking at a small pond.
On being 
disturbed it flew into an adjacent tree, when the doctor shot it.
This is the first Nottinghamshire occurrence of this species, and 
Mr. Whitaker, of Rainworth, informs me only the sixth authenticated 
M   
specimen for Great Britain.
As I was the first to identify the 
bird at the taxidermist's shop, I append a short description of it.
Beak, shaped very much like that of the bullfinch ; the upper 
mandible dark-brown, the lower one much lighter except at the tip.
•Crown, vermilion lake, with a few grey tips to the feathers ; lores, 
grey.
Nape, alternate longitudinal stripes of grey and lake.
The 
feathers of the upper parts grey and lake in about equal proportions.
Upper tail coverts, grey, tinged with lake.
Tail, dark grey, tinged 
with red on the outer edges of most of the feathers.
Chin, grey; 
throat, cheeks, and breast, crimson lake but paler than the crown.
Abdomen and under tail coverts, grey.
The Avhole of the wing dark- 
grey, broadly edged with white on the wing-coverts.
Legs and feet, 
dark -brown.
Irides, dark hazel.
n ^ 
NOTE— GEOLOGY.
The Basement Conglomerate of the Carboniferous in Westmorland 
and Yorkshire.— bi a note in the July number (p.
202) I pointed out that the 
pebbles in this conglomerate, as seen at Ullswater, consist mostly of a grit 
resembling the Coniston Grit, with a smaller proportion of rocks referred to the 
Ordovicinns of the Lake district.
A collection of pebbles from just west of 
Sparker Mill, Ilutton, preserved in the Keswick Museum, consists, on the other 
hand, chietly of volcanic and other igneous rocks, all probably from the Lake 
di.-tvlct,^ together with fossiliferous Coniston Limcitone.
The latter has a highly 
crystalline character, which is only locally developed in the main outcrop in West- 
morland and North Lancashire, hut is weU seen at Keisley near Appleby.
Hutton 
is only about two miles from Dunmallet, the locality noticed before.
In Ilebblethwaite Gill, near Sedbergh, where a v^ery considerable thickness of 
the conglomerate is present, there are plenty of pebbles of red-stained Coniston 
Limestone wvOaOrthis tesiudinaria^ etc., some rather crystalline in texture and 
apparently dolomitised or charged with carbonate of iron.
At this locality, 
however, most of the pebbles are of a red-and-green-spotted greyish grit, some- 
times including cubes of pyrites converted into limonite, and strongly recalling; 
the Ingleton grit.
A few other rocks occur, e.g., a felsite with felspars replaced 
by dark pseudomorphs, resembling some of those intrusive in the Ordovicians.
In some places the materials of the conglomerate seem to be strictly local, as 
in the beck immediately west of Shap Wells Hotel, where the rock is made up 
almost entirely of debris of Shap Fell granite, of which partially decomposed but 
easily recognised fragments are seen imbedded in a matrix apparently of similar 
origin.— At. KRF.n Harker, Cambridge, Octobtr 17th, 1S90.
Naturalist^ 
39 
NOTES ON THE REV.
W. FOWLER'S LIST OF 
LINCOLNSHIRE LIMESTONE PLANTS 
(See * Naturalist,' June 1890, p.
169).
J. BUKTT DAVY, 
Hon. Sec.
Alford Natnralhts^ Society, Al/ord, Lines.
As some of the plants for ^vhich stations are given in Mr. FoAvler's 
list have also been found in the Alford district of North Lincolnshire, 
a i^"^^ notes upon them may not be out of place at this time, nor 
devoid of interest to those readers of ' The Naturalist ' who may be 
engaged in investigating the Flora of the county.
To these are 
appended a few notes on some of the plants included in Mr. Fowler's 
five other Lincolnshire lists, together with on^ ox two records from 
outside the Alford district.
The records in these notes which have the mark !
affixed, have 
been verified as to specific determination by Mr. F.
Arnold Lees.
Dipsacus pilosus Linn.
Marshy holt near the stream, Aby, 
6th August, 1890 !
{J.
W. Chandler).
Erigeron acre Linn.
The first record in our Botanical Register 
is * Major Higgins' garden wall, Alford, 24th July, 1885 (J.
W. 
Chandler)/ incorrectly inserted as E.
canadensis Linn.; same 
place, 14th August, 1890!
(J.B.D.)- Mablethorpe sand-hills, 
4th August, 1890 !
(J.
W. Chandler).
Cnicus eriophorus Hoflm.
Claxby near Alford, 13th September, 
1890 !
(J.B.D.).
Cnicus acaulis Hoffm.
Well, 17th August, 1889 \ (J.B.D.).
Cnicus acaulis van caulescens.
South Ormesby, 6th August, 
18S8 !
(J.B.D.), see ' Naturalist,' October 18S8, p.
284.
Mable- 
thorpe sand-hills, 4th August, 1890 !
(F.
Altoft).
Well Vale, 
3rd September, 1S90 (J.13.D.).
Salvia Verbenaca Linn.
Dry bank, Calceby, 17th August, 1888 
(J.B.D.).
, 
Polystichum ang-ulare Presl.
Claxby near Alford, in a planta- 
tion of young Larch, 20th September, 1890 : (J.B.D.).
Between the chalk wolds and the nvirsh there is a glacial 
dej^iositof brown and purple boulder clay overlying the Chalk 
rock to a depth of from 70 to 80 feet.
Upon this boulder clay 
the following Limestone plants have been found : 
Linaria Elatine Mill.
Greenfield, 23rd August, iJ 
Feb. tSgi.
(J 
40 DAVY : LINXOLNSHIRE LIMESTONE PLAXTS.
Neottia Nidus-avis Rich.
Tothill, September 1887 (Miss Susan 
Allett, identified by Mr. J.
Eardley Mason).
Epipactis media Fries.
Aby, 4th August, 1890 I (J.
W. Chandler) ; 
this appears to be the first record of its occurrence in 
Lincolnshire 
Ophry 
J 
(J.
W. Chandler).' Specimens were brought to me from this 
June and 7th of July 
Habenaria 
J 
Allett).
Ailby, 8th June, 1890 !
(J 
Habenar 
\\ ell Vale on the 
Chalk, and at Ailby on the Boulder Clay; our first record is for 
Ailby, 3rd July, 1886 (J.
W. Chandler).
Paris quadrifolia Linn.
Aby, 9th May, 1890 (J.B.D.).
Polystichum angulare Presl.
Withern, 18S7 !
(Miss Susan 
Allett).
Recorded in *The Naturalist,' April 1888, p.
102, as 
being new to North Lincolnshire.
The following records of Limestone plants do not relate to the 
Alford district.
Spiraea Filipendula Linn, and Cnicus acaulis Hoffm.
were 
pointed out to me by an Irish botanist (Mr. Thomas Chandlee 
of Ballytore, Co. Kildare), on the Ermine Street between 
Fulbeck Heath and Ancaster (South Lincolnshire), in July 1884.
Salvia Verbenaca Linn, growing out of a wall at Bracebridge, 
Lincoln, 21st July, 1S90 (J.B.D.) 
Daphne Laureola Linn., several specimens, and 
Habenaria chlorantha Bab., plentiful, in a small wood at Gunby 
St. Peter, on the Boulder Clay, i8th June, 1890 (J.B.D.).
Asplenium Ruta-muraria Linn.
Church-yard wall, Burgh-le- 
Marsh, several tufts 19th September, 1889 (J.B.D.), 
[Clematis Vitalba Linn, and Ruscus aculeatus Linn,] are 
found in a small plantation known as Fanthorpe Lawn, about 
two miles from Louth.
The latter — of which the female 
flowers are probably abortive, as I am told that, though 
flowering annually, it never bears berries — grows in a patch 
about four feet square, under the shade of a stately yew.
An old 
labourer told me that formerly the carriage-drive to Fanthorpe 
Hall passed close beside, if not through, the plantation, and the 
Clematis and Ruscus may have been planted, together with 
Naturalist, 
daw: unxolnshire limestone plants.
41 
r 
Aconitum Napellus and Philadelphus corcnarius^ specimens of 
which still grow there.
The plantation also contains a row of 
Scotch Firs.
A small piece of Clematis Vifalba grows in a road-side hedge 
opposite Thorpe Hall, in the parish of South Elkington^ hut 
I fear it is too near to the Hall gardens to be considered truly 
wild.
Ot the plants noted in Mr. Fowler's five other lists^ I can give 
additional stations for the following : 
Papaver Argemone Linn.
Rigsby chalk-pit, 28th August, 18S9 
(J.B,rx).
Arenaria peploides Linn, and Lepigonum salinum Kindb.
Tngoldmells Point, 9th August, 1890 !
(J.B.D.).
Althaea officinalis Linn.
Freiston shore, 24th August, 1890 
(F.
Larder).
m columbinum 
form of 
Papaver Argemone Linn.
Ulceby-cum-Fordington, 3rd Sep- 
(J 
Trifol 
On the chalk at Rigsby and Miles 
Cross Hill near Alford, seven miles from the sea, in each case by 
the road-side, 6th September, 1890!
Q.B.D.) ; also on the 
Boulder Clay below the hill.
On the Tealby Clay by the road- 
side, at the foot of Dalby Hill near Spilsby, ten miles from the 
sea, 15th September, 1890 (J.B.D.).
Bupleurum tenuissimum Linn.
Mumby-Chapel Point, August 
1886 !
(J.
Eardley Mason).
Carum Petroselinum Benth.
In plenty on the sides of the 
railway-cuttings between Louth and North Willingham — perhaps 
the remains of former cultivation in the fields about (1889 and 
1890!) F.
A. Lees.
Mablethorpe sand-hills, 4th August, 1890!
Eupatorium cannabinum Linn., which is not included in 
Britten's lists in White's Lincolnshire Directory, either for 1872 
or 1882, is found in several parishes in the Alford District; our 
first record is for Alford, 24th July, 1885 (J.
W. Chandler).
Lactuca virosa Linn.
Mablethorpe sand-hills, 4th August 1890 !
Sonchus arvensis var, glabra Lond.
Cat. Mablethorpe, 
4th August, 1890 !
(Mrs. A.
G. Jarvis), not previously recorded 
for North Lincolnshire.
Aby, 13th August, 1890 (J.
W. 
Chandler).
Samolus Valerandi Linn.
Alford, 24th July, 1885 (J.
W. 
Chandler).
Mablethorpe, 4th August, 1890!
(F.
Altoft).
J'eb.
i8qi.
42 CENAXTHE LACHENALII IX CUMBERLAND.
Cynoglossum officinale Linn, Leadenham Low field (South 
Lincolnshire), July 1884 (J.B.D.).
Mablethorpe sand-hills, 
4th August, 1890 !
Solatium nigrum Linn.
^Vell Vale, 21st October, 1885 (J.
W. 
Chandler).
Lamium amplexicaule Linn.
Alford, ist Jul}', 1888!
(J.
E. 
Mason).
Skegness, 27th July, 1889 I (J.B.D.).
Not in either 
Britten's or Fowler's lists.
PlantagO Coronopus Linn.
Skellingthorpe (South Lincolnshire), 
on gravel by the roadside, 2TSt June, 1890 (J.B.D.).
Hippophae rhamnoides Linn.
Mumby-Chapel, August 1890 
(J.
E. Mason).
Ingoldmells Point, 9th August, 1890 (J.B.D.).
Hydrocharis Morsus-ranae Linn.
Mablethorpe, 4th August, 
1890!
Stratiotes Aloides Linn.
Flowering in a pond at Woodhall, 
20th June, 1890 (J.
E. Mason).
The pond is one of three 
occupying part of a hollow apparently once a gravel-pit.
Epipactis latifolia.
Welton Wood, 13th August," 1890!
(F.
AV.
Gresswell) ; Woodthorpe Wood, 23rd August, 1S90 (J.B.D.); 
both on the Boulder Clay.
Asparagus officinalis Linn, (marked with a ?
in Britten's list).
Sand-hills north of Mablethorpe, 4th August, 1890!
This in 
Mr. Lees' opinion is truly wild, though it does occur but 
sparingly now ; for one reason — among others — that Dr. Martin 
Lister mentions, in his 'Journey to Paris' (1698), having tried to 
reclaim it for the table, by cultivating plants taken from these 
very sand-hills, but in vain, it remaining tough, bitter, and 
uneatable.
It has, clearly, therefore, existed for 200 years 
on the coast, surely long enough to establish its claim to 
nativeness.
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum Linn.
Spilsby, 9th September, 
iS8g !
(Mrs. L.
B. Davy).
Burgh-le-Marsh Church, two tufts,.
4th September, 1890 (J.B.D.).
NOTE^PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY.
CEnanthe lachenalii in Cumberland: a rectification.
— I believe I made 
a mistake in identifying the CEnanthe found by the Wath Creek, near Skinburness 
(see Nat., Oct, 1S90, p.
304), as (E.
fistulosa.
I nuw recognise it as CE, iacJunalii.
I knew that (E.
fistidosa grew in the neighbourhood, having gathered it on Salta 
Moss some years ago ; and somewhat rashly concluded that I had simply discovered 
a fresh station for that plant.
Both forms are rarities with us, though clearly 
indigenous.
— \^'M.
Hodgson, Workington, Oct. Sth, 1S90.
Naturalist, 
4 
'^ 
ON THE ORIGIN OF 
THE UPPER DRIFT SANDS AND GRAVELS 
OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
G. W.
BULRIAN, M.A., E.Sc, 
C orbridge-oii- Tyue.
U 
What are known as the 'Upper Drift Sands and Gravels' of 
Northumberland are a somewhat difficult series of deposits to 
decii^lier.
They are found resting on the Boulder Clay, and fringing 
the sides of the chief valleys ; and consist of very irregularly strati- 
fied sand and gravel of various degrees of coarseness.
Their sreneral 
appearance in section is strongly suggestive of river-action; the 
stratification is extremely rude and variable; the coarsest gravel may 
give place in a few feet or inches, both horizontally and vertically, 
to fine sand.
Outwardly, they present characteristic rounded outlines, 
often hillocky and irregidar, and add an important feature to tlie 
scenery of south-eastern Xorthumberland.
Good sections are to be seen at Farnley and Thornborough Scars, 
a little io the east of Corbridge Station : on the right bank of the South 
Tyne betw^een Haydon Bridge and Bardon Mill ; on the Wansbeck 
above Morpeth; and on the Font, a tributar}^ of the latter river.
That they are aqueous and not glacial deposits is indicated by 
the existence of stratification, and the rounded state of the con- 
tained fragments ; while the nature of the bedding points to 
fluviatile rather than marine conditions.
As a broad and general outline of the manner in which these 
deposits were formed, I propose the following hypothesis: — During 
the prevalence of the ice-sheet and glaciers, the eastern and lower 
part of the county had its valleys and ravines filled up to a certain 
height with boulder-clay, so as to form a broad level area above the 
old depressions.
To this work of the ice is due one of the striking 
features in the physical geography of Northumberland at the present 
day, viz., the hilly western district, and the great plain of the eastern.
Also as a result of ice-action, moraines fringed the sides of the 
valleys, and stretched across the country in lines marking the 
nielting of the ice.
As the intense cold passed away, rains and 
rivers comn:ienced their work, and this morainic matter was carried 
down, more or less rounded, and spread out over the ]j!ain of boulder- 
clay.
At the same time, portions of the clay itself would be denuded, 
and its scratched and striated pebbles mingled with the other gravel.
As the rivers then rushed down the higher valleys, which had not 
been filled up by boulder-clay, they would have sufficient power to 
Feb. 1 89 1.
44 bulman: drift sands and gravels of Northumberland, 
carry stones of considerable size ; but, reaching the lower ground, 
their burden would be spread out over the boulderclay.
And^ as at 
the present day a sudden thaw after a long continuance of frost and 
snow brings dowTi the waters with a mighty rush, so, on a much 
larger scale, would it be at the close of the Glacial period.
The 
waters pent up for centuries, being at last released, would course 
down the valleys with enormous volume and carrying power.
In this 
way the great mass of the deposits and the large size of many of 
their contained fragments are accounted for.
The denudation in places of the underljnng clay, by the same 
fofces which accumulated the sand and gravel, would cause the latter 
to rest unconformably upon the former, as they are found to do.
It is to be observed that, w^hether the above explanation of the 
origin of these sands and gravels be accepted or not, the almost 
total disappearance of morainic matter — which at one time must 
have thickly covered the higher ground — is to be accounted for; 
since scarcely any true moraines are known in the county.
And 
there can be little doubt that, granting a Glacial epoch, the vast 
quantities of water released at the melting of the ice would carry 
this morainic debris down to the lower grounds.
Arriving at the 
plains of boulder-clay which filled in, altogether or in part, the old 
water-courses, these torrents would lose much of their carrying 
power, and consequently spread out their burden of now more or 
less rounded fragments, as already indicated.
When the livers 
became less powerful, and there w^as less glacial debris for them to 
carry, they would begin to cut out channels in the drift and boulder- 
clay down to the rock beneath, as they are still doing.
The necessity of supposing that river-action was more powerful 
at the close of the glacial period than it is at present, is thus noted by 
Preslwich : — * As the ice melted, the vast volume of water liberated 
by the accumulated ice and snow produced floods, which scored 
the plains and deepened the river-valleys.' — Geology, vol.
ii, p.
469.
The fact that the old channels -svere more or less obliterated 
would cause the sand and gravel to be spread over considerable 
areas, and this peculiarity of the river-action of the period is likewise 
noted by Prestwich : — 'At first these rivers w^ere without definite 
channels, and spread over a considerable breadth of ground.' 
Ibid, vol.
ii.
p. 470.
Wright, in his recently-published ' Ice Age in North America/ 
makes similar remarks as to the rivers of the same period in 
America: — ''When a glacier melts, the torrents of water arising may, 
in a short time, tear down and distribute as sediment to distant 
valleys the materials accumulated by the slow movement of centuries/ 
Naturalist, 
A NEW YORKSHIRE COAL-FIELD.
45 
^\'hether, then, these 'Upper Drift Sands and Gravels' of 
Northumberland are the deposits in question or not, it seems obvious 
tliatj granting a Glacial period, an extensive set of irregular river- 
deposits must have been laid down on the boulder-clay at its close.
A reference to the 'Ice Age in North America' will show that 
the above suggested explanation is practically identical with that 
proposed for similar deposits in North America.
Thus on pp.
526-7 
is found the following passage : — 'Towards the close of that [Glacial] 
period, when the land had resumed its present level and the ice liad 
nearly all disappeared south of the Catskills, the still swollen stream 
brought down the superabundant loose material from the kames and 
moraines of the glaciated area and deposited it in the valley below.
The materia!
was so abundant that doubtless the whole channel was 
silted up, so that the bed of the river was considerably above that it 
now occupies.
At Trenton it flowed over and through an extensive 
delta of coarse gravel forty feet above its present level ; and, above 
Trenton, over an accumulation of gravel from 15 ft.
to 20 ft.
above 
the prcic-nt high-water mark.' 
In conclusion, I am far from wishing to apply the above 
hypothesis to a// the sands and gravels of Northumberland.
The 
accumulation of these on the surface of the land has been a con- 
tinuous process, and they are of all ages from the Glacial epoch to 
the present day.
It may even be suggested that some of these 
deposits may be Preglacial -^ although it is probable that the first 
work of the ice would be to clear away most of the pre-existing 
superficial accumulations.
At the period, and by the means, I have indicated, however, the 
surface accumulation of sand and gravel was much more active than 
it has been since.
As the liberated water cleared away the glacial 
debris, and the gradually diminishing rivers formed fresh channels 
for themselves, their deposits of sand and gravel, lessening in amount, 
gradually merged into those of the present day ; so that it is difficult, 
or perhaps, rather, impossible, to make an exact classification of Post- 
glacial river-gravels.
NOTES AND A^EIFS.
Among recently-elected Fellows of the Geological Society we notice 
Dr. Tempest Anderson of York, Rev. E.
Jones of Embsay.
Skipton, Mr. P.
L. 
Davies of Liverpool College, and other north-country names.
We are now promised a new Yorkshire coal-fickl.
At a meeting of land- 
owners and others interested in mininir, held some time ago at Balne near Drax, 
it was contended not only that the Coal-Measures underlie the Permians of that 
<iistrict, but that coal might be met with within a workable depth.
A^committec 
has been formed with the view o( sinking a shaft on Balne Moor.
Whatever l>e 
the prospects from a commercial standpomi, geologists will watch the result.', with 
interest.
46 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM NOTTS., 
AUTUMN AND WINTER, 1890-91.
F. B.
WHITLOCK, 
Becston, Xotts.
The autumnal movements of birds began to affect us in Notts, early 
in \u£rust.
On the loth, I observed a flock of about a dozen Common 
Gulls {Lartts canus) wheeling about over the Trent; a strong S.E.
wind was blowing at the time.
On the same day I noticed along 
the margins of the river individuals of the Ringed Plover {^Egialitis 
hiaiicula\ Redshank {Totayius calidris)^ and a pair of Green Sand- 
pipers {Hdodromas ochropns).
As I was returning homewards in 
a heavy rain a small Gull flew past me, which I felt certain w^as Lams 
jninutiis.
I was subsequently informed that a bird of this species 
was killed about the same date.
On Aug. 24th a few Wheatears {Saxicoia ivnanthe) were flitting 
about our low-lying meadows ; those I observed were all birds of 
the year.
On the 29th a young male Spotted Crake {Porzana 
mariicita) was shot at Attenborough, and I met with several others 
previous to the commencement of the hard weather.
On the 30th a local specimen of the Greenshank {Totanus 
glottis) came into my possession; it was killed at Shelford.
A little 
earlier in the month another example had been shot near Ilkeston, 
Derbyshire.
ifi 
to be heard ; they Hngered with us till the 28th Sept.
The Chiffchaff 
breeds with us very sparingly.
Sept.
I St.— A flight of Whimbrel {Numeniits phcEopus) passed 
over in a south-westerly direction, about seven o'clock in the 
evening.
Sept.
14th.— I observed many freshly-moulted Pied Wagtails 
{MotaciUa luguhris) on the margins of the river.
I also noted 
numbers of Redbreasts {Erithaats rubecula) haunting our local willou' 
holts ; a great many Meadow Pipits {Anihus pratensis) appeared at 
the same time.
These three species were evidently on migration.
Linnets {Linota camialmia) were numerous, and I also met with 
a few Twites {L.
flavirostris) and Goldfinches {Carduelis ehgans).
Sept.
1 8th to 30th.
— My garden was well patronised during this 
period, by Goldcrests {Repilus cristaiiis), Coal-Tits I^Parus aier), and 
Willow Wrens {Phylloscopus trochilus).
I saw the first Grey Wagtails 
{MoladUa sulphured) on the i8th.
They have been unusually scarce 
this winter.
>fatura!isl.
WHITLOCK : AUTUMN AND WINTER NOTES FROM NOTTS.
47 
I 
On the 2ist I shot a fine immature female example of the Little 
Stint {Tringa ininutd).
It was in company with a Ringed Plover on 
a large bed of shingle on the Trent side.
Mr. AVhitaker informs me 
that this is the fourth authentic record of the Little Stint for Notts.
On Sept.
28th I observed a great commotion amongst a flock of 
Rooks {Corvus frugilegus)^ who seemed bent on reaching the clouds 
with all speed.
The cause of the alarm was the presence of a fine 
Peregrine Falcon (^Fako pertgrinus)^ which came steadily flying down 
the Trent valley.
A great many young Chaffinches {Fringi/la avlehs) 
w^ere to be observed at the end of September.
The same may be said 
of Skylarks {Alauda cD-vensis) and Meadow Pipits {Anihus pratensis).
Oct. I St.
— A few Terns a])peared on the Trent, but none were 
shot.
fl.
# 
anglorinri) was shot at Bridgford, It is curious how regularly this 
bird occurs in the autumn in an inland countv like Notts.
On Oct. TTth, a very fine example of the Common Buzzard 
{^Buteo vulgaris) was shot at Owthorpe Wood in the vale of Belvoir; 
it measured 4 ft.
2 inches across the expanded wings.
On Oct. 19th the first flocks of Fieldfores (Tz/r^/^^/Z/r^r/y) appeared, 
large numbers constantly arriving up to the 7th Nov, Though 
this is not an early date for individuals or even small flocks, we do 
not as a rule expect them in any numbers until the first week in 
November.
The Redwings {Titrdus iliaciis) arrived at the same time.
On Oct. 22nd, a fine old male Scoter {CEdemia jiigrd) was shot 
at Beeston, as w^ell as two other ducks of a smaller species.
I secured 
the Scoter but was too late to identify the smaller birds.
Oct. 26th, [ noticed a few Hooded Crows {Corvus comix).
This 
species became common a little later.
I also noticed flocks of 
Skylarks {Alauda arv€?isis) and Starlings {Slumus vulgaris) arriving at 
intervals between the flocks of Fieldfares and Redwings.
Oct. 29th brought a few Woodcocks {Scolopax rusticola) several 
of which were shot and one brought alive into Nottingham market, 
having apparently been in colHsion with some object.
Oct. 30th, a fine male Pine Grosbeak {Pinicola enuckalor) shot 
near Watnall.
I have given full details elsewhere [see p.
38 of this 
number].
Nov. ist.
— A young Goldeneye {Cla?tgula glaucion) and on 
Nov, 8th, a Wigeon {Mareca penelope), both killed near Shelford.
I saw a flock of Dunlins {Tringa variabilis), about eleven in number 
flying in a south-westerly direction on the 9th.
A Water Rail 
{Rallus aquaticus) was killed by the telegraph wires near Atten- 
borough on the nth, probably on migration.
Feb. 180T.
48 WHITLOCK : AUTUMN AND WINTER NOTES FROM NOTTS.
Nov. 22nd.
— At one of our local bird-stuffers' I noticed four 
Common Gulls i^Larus canus)^ which, I was informed, had been shot 
on the Trent.
On Nov. 23rd I saw a Spotted Crake {Porzana maruettd) splash 
across a broad dyke.
This is a very late date for this species in 
Notts.
Towards the end of November we had a good number of the 
Common Snipe {Gallinago ccekstis) with us; and on the 29th a large 
flock of Golden Plover {Charadrius pluvmlis) passed down the Soar 
valley in a southerly direction.
Dec. I St.
— A Red-throated Diver {Colyinbus septentriofialis) and a 
Scaup Duck {Fuligida viarild) were shot on Wollaton Lake.
A few 
days previously a Great Grey Shrike {Lariius excnhiior) was killed 
at Dunkirk, near Nottingham.
At the beginning of December the frost set in in earnest.
Six or 
eight Dunlins {Trhiga variabilis) were killed near Shelford, as well 
as a few Teal {Qiierquedula crecca) and Little Grebes {Podiceps ?ui)ior).
On the 13th a fine Barnacle Goose {Bernicla leiicopsis) was shot 
near Eastwood.
By the 14th all still waters were frozen except in the most 
sheltered places, and consequently when birds desired to quench 
their thirst many were compelled to visit the same spot.
By 
- waiting at one water-hole I observed large numbers of the Turdin^^ 
come down to drink, and I shot two Common Snipe {GaUinaga 
ccelestis), which were evidently in search of food.
The hard frost 
being so general, ducks were either driven to the sea or to the larger 
and more rapid streams which remained unfrozen, and, as might be 
expected under these circumstances, we have had an exceptional 
winter for ducks on the Trent.
The first specimens I secured were 
males of the Tufted Duck {Fuligida cristata) and Pochard {Fuligida 
rufina\ which were shot near Beeston, the females being also killed 
at the same time.
During the prevalence of the frost, numerous 
other examples of these species were procured, as well as Scaups 
{Fuligula marila), Mallards {Anas boschas)^ Wigeons {Mareca penelope), 
and Goldeneye {Clangula glauciony Another Common Scoter 
{(Edevua nigra) was also obtained, and a very fine old male Goosander 
{Mergus merganser^ in perfect plumage, was killed at Colwick.
One or two Geese have been shot, but I have not learned of what 
species, except in the case of a Canada Goose {Bernida Ca?iadensis\.
which no doubt belonged to one of the semi-domesticated flocks in 
the neighbourhood.
The most noteworthy event, however, has been 
the occurrence of the Smew {Mergus albeUus), three specimens of 
which have been shot.
The first, an immature bird, was killed at 
Naturalist, 
^ 1> 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
49 
Shelford about the 6th of January.
The other two — a pair, and 
both old birds — were shot on the 17th near Beeston, the male bird 
being exceptionally fine.
Amongst other birds noticed during the frost have been several 
Bitterns {Bofaurns sfellaris)^' owo.
of which was shot Dec.
.22nd, at 
Cotgrave.
Many Kingfishers {Alcedo ispidd)^ I am sorry to say, 
liave met with a similar fate.
At the end of December Jack Snipe 
{GaUinago 7n'uicr) were not uncommon ; I put up four within a very 
short distance.
A few Snow Buntings {Pkctrophanes nivalis) were 
met with on the outskirts of Nottingham at the beginning of the 
new year^a most exceptional circumstance.
About the same time 
I noticed a pair of Green Sandpipers {ffelodro?jias ochj-opus) exposed 
for sale in our market, both of which I was informed were local 
birds.
A Dipper [Cinchn aquatiais)^ one of a pair, was shot from 
a dirty dyke running up to the streets of Nottingham, about the 
same time; and a second example was killed at Cohvick a little 
later.
A Red-throated Diver {Colynibus septenirioualis) was also 
procured at Cohvick at the beginning of the new year.
It may also 
be worth mentioning that a pair of Pintails {Dafila acuta) were killed 
in the neighbourhood of Borrowash, Derbyshire, early in January.
NOTES^ORNITHOLOG K 
Is the Starling Double-brooded?
— In answer to a query of mine, a friend 
writes from Northumberland that he is of opinion the Starling is often double- 
brooded, anil in confirmation quotes the following facts: — ' Last year lie had a 
box placed on the back wall of his house, made and placed fur the purpose of 
Starlings breeding in them.
A pair of Starlings took possession, hatched, and 
brought out their young, and took off with them one fine morning ; exactly /^j/r 
days after the two okl birds returned and again occupied the box, and succeeded a 
second time in getting off a brood/ A neighbour of his also had a box hung up ; 
it was also occupied by a pair of Starlings ; these also went off with their batch 
of young ones, and strange to say, the old birds were absent the same period, _/£?//r 
days only, when they also returned and had a second brood.
This is coonclusive 
proof that they do often have two broods in a year.
But a case has come under 
my notice— communicated to me by Dr. Russell, J.R, of this town — where a pair 
of birds have brought off thtec broods of young ones.
They were hatched out 
under the eaves of^Dr. Russell's house.
The first lot were brought off at the 
beginning of March, a very early date ; the second lot about April loth ; and the 
third lot on June 1st.
Dr. Russell is confident that the same pair of birds reared 
all three broods, as one of the birds could be easily recognised— it had two or 
three feathers missing from one wing.
I am this year having nesting-boxes ^\siA 
on my house, in the hope that they will be occupied by Stailings, and thus give 
me a better opportunity of watching their habits day by day.— Riley P^oktunk, 
Ravensgill, Harrogate, Dec. iSth, 1890.
Water-Rail near Workington.— During the brief but keen frost at the 
commencement of December, a specimen of Kalhts aquatiais was picked up on 
the banks of the river Derwent, near the Cleator and Workington Railway bridge, 
in an exhausted and moribund condition.
The l>ird soon died, and though 
greatly emaciated in body, was in capital plumage.
It is now m the hands of 
Mr. Robinson, taxidermist, of this town, by whom it was shown to the writer on 
^be T5th inst.— W.M. Hodgson, AVoikington, December 22nd, 1890.
KbTTZr " 
:> 
DISCOVERY OF CAREX MONTANA, ETC 
IN DERBYSHIRE.
CHARLES WATERFALL, 
i 
T/i£ Ha^iiCy Kcnishaiu^ near Ckcstcrjicld^ Derbyshire.
About five miles from Renishaw there are what is known as 
Markland Grips, near Clowne.
Their geological formation is 
niagnesian limestonCj and they are three in number, running almost 
parallel one with the other, and resembling three immense valleys 
that have been hollowed out in the far distant past by some superior 
natural agency as by glacial action.
Some four years ago, I went to ^ the Grips' with a party and 
strolling about I found a Carex which v/as new to me.
I sent it to 
Mr. Arthur Bennett, F.L.S., of Croydon, and he named it Carex 
montana L.
I reported it to the Rev. W.
H. Painter, of Knypersley, 
near Congleton, who was then enerai^ed in brindncr out his Flora of 
»"» 
Derbyshire ; he asked for a specimen, which I sent him, and he sent 
it to Mr. Bennett, who again passed it as C.
montana.
The Rev. W.
H. 
Painter then asked for some specimens for the Exchange Club of the 
British Isles, and he sent me word that the critics of that Chib had 
passed Carex montana as being correct; so I think there can be no 
mistake tliat the plant is what it is set up to be.
For the last two or three years I have found it plentifully on the 
edge of a wood in ' the Grips,' and it seems to me likely to be 
a permanency.
So far as I know this is the only habitat of Carex 
montana in Derbyshire.
It grows along with other carices and grasses and plants generally.
It looks very much like C pihdifera while growing, but if it be dug 
up with a fork — so as to get the root intact — it wtU be found to agree 
with Babington's Manual, 8th edition, in the root being fibrous from 
a shaggy branched rhizome and also that the lowest sheaths of the 
plant are red.
The leaves are easily distinguished from the surrounding plants 
when one gets used to looking for them and they are about the same 
height as the fruit, thus differing from C pihdifera, where the fruitin 
Stem is from lo to 12 inches long and curved at the fruiting end, 
this stem being straighter than that oipilnlifera.
Among other plants in ' the Grips ' I found Anthriscus sylvestris 
Cynoglossiim officinale^ Ophrys viuscifera and on my way there I found, 
among ^\S\tx%,Blackstonia (or Chlora) perfoliata ^xi^Triglochin pahistre.
During the summer I found the following plants at or about 
Quarry Darn Paik Hall Woods : Ranrmculus circinaius, Carex remoia, 
C. vesicaria, and, in woods, Serratula tinctoria and var.
monticola.
-H 
Naturalist, 
51 
THE FLOWERING PLANTS AND FERNS 
OF LITTONDALE.
Rev. W.
a. SHUFFREY, M.A., 
Vicar of H alto n Gill and Curate of ArncUffe 
The area designated ' Littondale ' comprises the four townships of 
Hawkswickj Arndiffe, Litton and Halton Gill.
The dale runs 
south-east and north-Arestj and forms the southern branch of the 
h 
fork, which, about half a mile above Kilnsey Scar, divides the upper 
part of Wharfedale into two portions, Littondale is watered by the 
Skirfare, which receives the waters of several smaller becks in its 
course, and finally empties itself into the main stream of the 
Wharfe at Amerdale Dub, half a mile below^ the eastern end of the 
valley.
There is no arable land in the dale; the whole consists of 
pastures and meadows wnth extensive moors on the higher ground.
The lower end of the valley is about 600 ft.
above the sea, and the 
highest point — the top of Penyghent (the east side, of which is 
in Halton Gill) reaches an elevation of 2,273 f^- above the sea-level.
With such a variety of scenery and extensive range of elevation, 
there is, as might be expected, a very rich flora ; perhaps, it may be 
said, as rich as any in England when it is considered that the entire 
area is only eight miles in length, and about three miles in width.
The richness of the flora may partly be accounted for by the fact 
F 
that the geological formations of the valley are most favourable to 
the growth of plant-life.
The strata shall be briefly described.
The carboniferous mountain 
limestone forms the base of the valley; and on the south side in the 
Hawkswick and Arncliffe Clouders extends upwards to 1,700 ft., but 
on the north and west sides, w^hen the mountain limestone reaches 
an elevation of 1,300 or 1,400 feet, it gives w^ay to what is 
commonly known as the Yoredale series, a mixture of shale, limestone 
and grit.
And this in turn, when it arrives at 1,700 or 1,800 ft., 
receives a covering of Kinderscout Grit which caps the long ridges, 
and the summits of the higher hills.
It may be w.ell to add also 
another fact which would affect the growth of the Cryptogams even 
more than the Phanerogams; the average annual rainfall amounts 
to 60 inches.
Amidst such physical conditions, on crag and scar, in peat bog, 
and on the bleak hill top, in the sheltered woods and ricli meadows 
and pastures of the dale grow the following plnnts, specimens of 
which it has been the wTiter's great pleasure to collect and classify.
Feb. 1891, 
52 shuffrey: plants and ferns of littondale.
The elev^ations at which the plants grow are not given unless 
they exceed those mentioned in Mr. F.
A. Lees 'Flora of West 
Yorkshire.' 
Thalictrum minus van montanum.
Abundant on the Hniestone.
Thalictrum majus.
Arndiffe, Soo ft.
Anemone nemorosa.
Plentiful on north side of the valley.
Ranunculus Lenormandi.
Ranunculus flammula.
On the moors.
Ranunculus auricomus.
Not common.
I 
Ranunculus acris.
Ranunculus repens.
Sparingly.
Ranunculus bulbosus.
Ranunculus ficaria.
Common.
Caltha palustris.
In wet pastures and running streams- 
Trollius europaeus.
Plentiful on west side of the dale.
Actsea spicata.
In woods on west side.
Berberis vulgaris.
There are two varieties in the dale, one at 
Halton Gill (ijOoo ft.) and one at Litton, in garden; both 
probably introduced.
Meconopsis cambrica.
i,ooo ft.
Halton Gill.
Corydalis claviculata.
Amclifife Wood.
I insert this on the 
authority of Mr. Lees.
Nasturtium officinale.
Cardamine amara.
Near water-course^ infrequent.
Cardamine pratensis.
Arabis hirsuta.
Plentiful locally, road-side.
Cochlearia officinalis.
By rills and on hill-topSj and also in the 
valley; varies in size.
Barbarea vulgaris.
Infrequent.
r 
Draba verna.
In stony pastures, plentiful.
Draba muralis.
r 
Draba incana.
Not common.
Thlaspi alpestre var.
occitanum.
Near old lead-mines.
Capsella Bursa-pastoris.
Helianthemum vulgare.
On dry banks.
Viola palustris.
On the moors.
Viola sylvatica.
Viola lutea.
Arncliffe Clouders, abundant.
Naturalist, 
SHUFFREY : PLANTS AND FERNS OF LITTONDALE.
5 
Drosera rotundifolia.
Penyghent Moors.
Polyg'ala vulgaris.
Silene inflata.
Only a few plants ; some of them approach near 
to the var.
viafitinia.
I 
Lychnis vespertina.
Scarce.
Lychnis diurna.
Very common.
A 
Lychnis flos-cuculi.
Cerastium glomeratum.
Cerastium triviale.
Stellaria holostea.
Under bushes.
Stellaria graminea.
Sparingly.
Stellaria uliginosa.
Common on wet moors.
Stellaria media.
Arenaria trinervia.
700 ft., near Arncliffe.
Arenaria serpyllifolia.
Alsine verna.
Sagina procumbens.
Sagina nodosa.
Hypericum perforatum.
Not uncommon.
Hypericum quadrangulum.
Hypericum hirsutum.
Hypericum pulchrum.
Infrequent.
Malva sylvestris.
Road-side near Hawkswick.
Tilia europaea.
Foxhope, 1,100 ft.
Linum catharticum.
Common on dry banks.
Geranium sanguineum.
Abundant in one locality.
Geranium phaeum.
Only one plant found in bloom.
May 20th, 
1890.
The only record of this plant in Wharfedale.
Geranium sylvaticum.
Common in two or three meadows, 
about 1,000 ft.
Geranium pratense.
Geranium molle.
Geranium dissectum.
Infrequent.
Geranium lucidum.
Geranium Robertianum, 
Oxalis acetosella* 
Ilex aquifolium.
1,000 ft.
and above.
Rhamnus catharticus.
1,000 ft.
Feb. 1891.
54 SHUFFKEV : PLANTS AND FERXS OF LITTONDALE.
Acer pseudo-platanus.
Very common.
Ononis arvensis.
900 ft., Arncliffe.
Anthyllis vulneraria.
Trifolium pratense.
Trifolium medium.
Infrequent.
Trifolium repens.
Trifolium procumbens.
Not common.
The plants differ in 
size, etc., and sometimes resemble the var.
mi?2us, 
Lotus corniculatus.
Lotus major.
Hippocrepis comosa.
Not common.
Vicia Cracca.
Occasionally on road-side.
Vicia sepium, 
Lathyrus pratensis.
Orobus tuberosus.
Pasture near Hesleden.
Prunus spinosa.
The fruit is seldom plentiful.
Prunus insititia.
700 ft., Arncliffe Cote.
Several old trees with 
green fruit.
N.B.
— A variety with purple fruit is found at 
Hubberholme, also near to Raisgill.
Prunus Avium.
800 ft.
One tree in a pasture.
Prunus Padus.
Common in the woods.
Spirsa Ulmaria.
Agrimonia Eupatoria.
Sanguisorba officinalis.
Poterium Sanguisorba.
Alchemilla arvensis.
In ic\x places by road-side and on rocky 
ground.
Alchemilla vulgaris.
Potentilla Fragariastrum..
This is in bloom very early.
Potentilla tormentilla.
Potentilla reptans.
Uncommon.
Potentilla anserina.
Fragaria vesca.
Rubus Idasus.
Plentiful in the woods.
Rubus fruticosus.
Not common; varieties undetermined.
Rubus C3£sius.
Rare.
Rubus saxatilis.
Common in woods.
Rubus Chamsemorus.
Growing generally above 1,500 ft.
Naturalist, 
SHUFFREV : PT.AXTS AND FERNS OF LITTONDAEE.
55 
Geum urbanum.
Not so frequent ^%rivale.
Geum rivale.
Dryas octopetala.
Still plentiful, facing the north, on Hmestone 
rocks.
I have also found another station for it about 900 ft.
above sea-level.
N.B.
— These are the only stations in Yorkshire 
for this plant.
Rosa spinosissima.
Infrequent.
Rosa tomentosa.
Rosa canina.
Crataegus Oxyacantha.
Pyrus rupicola.
Pyrus Aucuparia.
Pyrus Malus.
I know of only o\\^ tree.
Epilobium angustifolium.
In a garden at Halton (all.
Epilobium parviflorum, 
Epilobium montanum.
Epilobium palustre.
Circsea lutetiana.
Ribes alpinum.
Many shrubs at Foxhope.
Ribes petrseum.
Not common.
Ribes Grossularia.
Sedum Telephium.
One station on limestone scar.
Sedum villosum.
Near Cosh Farm.
Sedum acre.
Saxifraga oppositifolia.
Saxifraga stellaris.
Mr. Lees has found this on Penyghent.
Saxifraga umbrosa.
Still wild in one locality.
Saxifraga tridactylites.
Saxifraga granulata.
Rare in this dale.
Saxifraga hypnoides.
Chrysosplenium oppositifolium.
Chrysosplenium alternifolium.
Rare.
Parnassia palustris.
Common.
Sanicula europasa.
Helosciadium nodifiorum.
In a pool, 800 ft.
^gopodium Podagraria.
Near Litton, 800 ft.
w 
Bunium flexuosum.
Common.
Pimpinella Saxifraga.
Feb iSgi.
56 SHUFFREV : PLANTS AND FERNS OF LTTTOXDAhE 
\ 
Heracleum Sphondylium.
Angelica sylvestris.
r 
Peucedanum Ostruthium.
In farm gardens up to 1,300 k.
Chserophyllum sylvestre, 
Chserophyllum temulum.
Myrrhis odorata.
Plentiful.
Hedera Helix.
Cornus sanguinea.
Sambucus nigra.
Not many trees.
Viburnum Opulus.
Galium boreale- I insert this as it is said to have been found at 
pi 
Arnchffe in 18415 but I have not seen it.
Galium cruciatum.
Galium verum.
Galium sylvestre, 
Galium saxatile.
Galium uliginosum.
Galium Aparine.
Not common.
Asperula odorata.
Sherardia arvensis* Scarce, up to 1,000 ft.
Valeriana dioica.
Valeriana officinalis.
biosa succisa.
Scabiosa Columbaria.
Scabiosa arvensis.
Sco ft., less common than the other 
varieties.
Silybum Marianum.
Only in garden, 
Carduus nutans.
• 
Carduus acanthoides.
750 ft.
Cnicus lanceolatus.
Cnicus palustris.
Cnicus heterophyllus.
Plentiful.
Cnicus arvensis.
Carlina vulgaris.
Arctium minus.
Not common.
Serratula tinctoria.
I insert this on the authority of Mv. Lees.
I have not found it in the dale, but I have seen many plants 
near Malham Tarn.
Natural i'^t.
SHUFFREY : PLANTS AND FERNS OF LITTONDALE.
57 
Centaurea nigra.
Centaurea scabiosa, 
Artemisia vulgaris.
Only one station in the dale.
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum.
Not common.
Tanacetum vulgare.
In waste at Litton, and in a garden at 
Foxbope, 1,100 ft.
Achillea Millefolium, 
Achillea Ptarmica.
Gnaphalium dioicum.
Senecio vulgare.
F 
Senecio Jacobasa.
Too common.
Senecio saracenicus.
i,ooo ft., Halton Gill.
Bellis perennis.
Solidago Virga-aurea.
Chiefly on the south side of the dale.
Tussilago Farfara.
The first flower that appears in bloom in the 
spring.
On Feb. 24th, 1S90, Feb. 2istj 1S84.
Petasites officinalis.
Eupatorium cannabinum, 700 ft., only one station.
Lapsana communis.
Hypochaeris radicata.
Leontodon hispidus.
Leontodon autumnalis* 
Tragopogon pratensis.
Only one specimen, on roadside 
Taraxacum officinale.
Lactuca muralis.
Plentiful in one locality.
Sonchus asper.
Scarce.
Crepis hieracioides.
(F.
A. Lees).
Crepis paludosa.
Hieracium pilosella.
Hieracium anglicum.
(F.
A. Lees).
Hieracium alpinum.
Hieracium murorum.
Hieracium prenanthoides.
Not common.
Campanula latifolia.
Campanula rotundifolia.
Vaccinium Vitis-idcea.
Vaccinium Myrtillus.
Erica Tetralix.
Feb. 1 891.
5S SHUFFREY : PLANTS AND FERNS OF LITTONDALE.
Calluna vulgaris.
Pyrola minor.
(F.
A. Lees).
Fraxinus excelsior.
Ligustrum vulgare.
In garden, Arncliffe, 
Erythr^a Centaurium.
800 ft., sparingly.
Gentiana Amarella, 
Gentiana campestris.
Not common.
Polemonium casruleum.
In one locality.
Verbascum Thapsus.
I found two plants in this year on road- 
side ; probably an escape from garden.
Menyanthes trifoliata.
I insert this as it Avas common in a wet 
pasture some years ago ; but it has now disappeared, probably 
on account of the draining of the field.
Scrophularia nodosa.
Digitalis purpurea.
Very rare.
Linaria Cymbalaria.
On a garden wall.
Mimulus luteuS- Abundant, near running stream.
Veronica agrestis.
Veronica arvensis.
Veronica officinalis.
Infrequent.
Veronica Chamaedrys.
Veronica montana.
Veronica Anagallis.
I 
Veronica Beccabunga* 
Euphrasia officinalis- 
Bartsia Odontites, On road-side.
Pedicularis palustrls.
Pedicularis sylvatica.
Rhinanthus Crista-galli.
Melampyrum pratense.
Scarce, on moors.
Mentha hirsuta.
Mentha arvensis.
Thymus Serpyllum.
Origanum vulgare.
Calamintha Clinopodium.
Calamlnthe Nepeta.
Infrequent.
Prunella vulgaris.
Stachys sylvatica, 
Naturali^-t, 
SHUFFKEV : PLANTS AND FERNS OF LITTONDALE.
59 
Stachys palustris.
750 ft., sparingly.
Lamium purpureum.
Lamium album.
800 ft., not common, 
Ajuga reptans.
Teucrium Scorodonia.
Myosotis csespitosa.
Myosotis sylvatica.
Myosotis repens.
Pinguicula vulgaris.
Primula vulgaris.
Plant in bloom at Arnclifte on Jan. 5th, 1890.
Primula variabilis [hybrid].
Primula veris.
Primula farinosa.
Abundant on limestone.
Lysimachia nemorum.
Plantago major.
Plantago media.
Plantago minor.
Plantago maritima.
By the road-side.
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricus.
1,000 ft., Halton Gill 
Atriplex patula var.
erecta.
In garden, Arncliffe, 
Rumex obtusifolius, and one or two additional varieties, which 
the writer omitted to identify.
Rumex Acetosa.
Rumex Acetosella.
Rumex scutatus.
In gardens.
Polygonum Bistorta.
Polygonum Persicaria.
Daphne Mezereum.
This once grew wild in a wood near Arn- 
cliffe, but it has not been seen lately.
It still grows in my garden.
Euphorbia Peplus.
Euphorbia Lathyris.
Both varieties as a garden weed.
Mercurialis perennis.
Urtica dioica.
Ulmus montana.
Quercus Robur.
Only seven or eight trees In the dale.
A very 
fine tree growing at 1,000 ft.
Fagus sylvatica.
Corylus Avellana.
Feb, 1891.
6o SHUFFREY: PLANTS AND FERNS OF MTTONDALE- 
4 
Alnus glutinosa.
Betula alba.
Populus tremula.
Salix Caprea.
Salix pentandra.
Salix purpurea.
Salix viminalis.
Salix phylicifolia.
Salix repens.
(F.
A. Lees).
Pinus sylvestris.
^Larix europsea.
A great number of these trees have died in 
recent vears.
"^ Abies excelsa.
Juniperus communis.
(Archdeacon Boyd).
Taxus baccata.
Arum maculatum.
Orchis mascula.
Orchis incarnata.
Orchis maculata.
Habenaria conopsea.
Habenaria albida.
(F.
A. Lees).
Habenaria viridis.
Habenaria chlorantha.
Plentiful in a few localities.
Ophrys muscifera.
800 ft.
I found five or six plants in an open 
* 
wood, but I have not seen theni during the last three years.
Listera ovata, 
Epipactis palustris.
(Archdeacon Boyd).
Epipactis latifolia.
The Archdeacon also found a variety some 
years ago which is sometimes designated rubra.
Cypripedium Calceolus.
This rare plant still grows in a garden 
in the dale- 
Galanthus nivalis.
1,000 ft., Halton Gill.
Paris quadrifolia.
Polygonatum officinale.
Rare.
Convallaria majalis.
Abundant in a wood up to 1,000 fr.
*[This valuable contribution would have been rendered much more so had 
Aliens and planted species been indicated by some mark, distinguishing them 
from native plants of the dale.— Ens. Xat.] 
SHUFFREV ; PLAXTS AND FERNS OF LFrXOXDALE.
6l 
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus.
About 900 ft., near Arncliffe.
Scilla nutans.
Allium scorodoprasum.
A few roots in one locality.
Allium ursinum.
Too common in some parts.
Narthecium ossifragum.
Infrequent, 
Colchicum autumnale.
Abundant in one pasture.
Scirpus palustris.
Mill-pond, ArncIifFe.
Juncus communis- Other species not determined.
Eriophorum vaginatum.
Eriophorum ang"ustifolium.
Pteris aquilina.
Blechnum boreale.
Asplenium Ruta-muraria.
Asplenium Trichomanes.
Asplenium viride.
This is getting less plentiful.
Athyrium Filix-fcemina.
Cryptogramme crispa.
Fountains Fell ; Archdeacon Boyd.
Scolopendrium vulgare.
Cystopteris fragilis.
Abundant on the limestone.
Polystichum lonchitis, I have not found this.
Archdeacon Boyd 
tells me that there were many plants on the Arnch'fTe Clouders 
about forty years ago.
Polystichum aculeatum.
Polystichum angulare.
Lastr^ea Filix-mas.
Lastrsea rigida.
(Archdeacon Boyd).
Lastrsea dilatata.
Polypodium vulgare.
areum 
ossum 
vulgatum.
i,roo ft.
About twelve plants seen 
fiv^ or six years ago on shady slope, but although I have visited 
the same spot and searched diligently two or three times in each 
year, they are not now to be seen.
Botrychium Lunaria.
In some seasons the plants are numerous, 
in others they are scarcely to be found.
Selaginella selaginoides.
Lycopodium Selago.
Equisetum sylvaticum.
Equisetum palustre.
Feb.
i^^i.
62 
SOME ANNULOSA 
FROM CUMBERLAND AND YORKSHIRE 
Rev. HILDKRIC FRIEND, F.L.S., 
I^rcsuicnt of the WcsUy Xaitiralhts Society, and Vicc-P resident of the Carlisle Microscopical 
Society, Author of^Flcnvers and Floivcr-Lore' and other 7forks\ Idle, near Bradford, 
In continuation of my list of Earthworms printed on p.
13, 1 venture 
to submit a brief notice of some other representatives of the lowly 
animal life of Cumberland and Yorkshire.
As the lists are only 
intended as contributions to the subject, I have not attempted to 
classify the species enumerated.
On the Solway we find large quantities of Lob"\YOrms {Arenicola 
piscatoriim Cuvier), which the fishermen employ as bait for marine fish.
Syn. Lnmbricus papillosus Miiller ('Fabric, Faun.
Gronl.,' p.
2S3 ; 
'Ann. des Sc. Nat./ xxx, p.
420, ph xxii, fig.
8-12 ; ' Reise in den 
Sibiriens, ii, pt.
i, p.
17).
Lumbricus marinns Belon ('Linn.
MiilK, 
Zool.
Dan./ iv, p.
39; Grube, ' Fam. der Ann./ 76).
The White-worm {NepJithys longiseiosa CErsted) of the fishermen 
is also fairly common, but is invariably rejected as unfit for bait 
CE 
Johnsto 
I found one specimen of another species during 1890, but it 
has been put aside during my removal.
Several members of the Leech family occur in the North of 
, England, of which I have collected the following : — 
Neph 
, near 
Carlisle, May 1890; a curious creature, with its eggs and embryos 
attached to the ventral surface; synonymy given in Grube, ' Fam- 
der Ann,/ p, no.
(2) Clepsine sexoailata Moq. Tand., and 
(3) Clepsine bioculata Miiller.
The synonyms are very numerous, 
and are fully given by Grube, loc.
cit., and more recently by 
Vejdovsky, * System und Morphologic der Oligochceten.' Found in 
the same locahty, where also one or two species of Lumbriailus 
abound, and some species of Enchytrmis, These I am now 
engaged upon.
I have been able to work out the doubtful Lumbricus vmltispinus 
Grube, but as the story is too long for these pages, it will be published 
elsewhere.
As I have some other Etichytmid^ to enumerate in 
a future contribution, I shall withhold the modern synonymy, and 
merely state that Grube's worm is the same as Dugbs' Tubifex 
pallidus ('Ann. des Sc. Nat., viii, ^2), and Miiller's Lumbricus ver- 
(Johnston 
Karuralist, 
review: rocks of ewcross, dufton, and shap.
6z 
* Reise in den Sibiriens,' ii, pi.
i, p.
19; *Fam, der Anneliden/ 
p. 103, etc.), or a closely-allied species.
Up till the present, Eisen's Worm {Lufiihricus eiseni Levinsen) 
has, so far as I am aware, been found in Britain only by myself, as 
recorded on page 14.
I have just found it in considerable numbers 
at Apperley Bridge, Yorks., thus making the first Yorkshire record.
It is one of the handsomest and most delicate of our British 
Lumbrici.
The following particulars are from my own observations, 
as I have not yet been able to consult Levinsen's description.
Length, i^ to 2 inches; colour, deep-red, with iridescence, chiefly 
observable dorsally when the worm has been placed in spirit.
Clitellum occupying segments 24 to 31, reddish-brown or lighter.
The first dorsal pore behind the fifth segment.
The internal structure 
is interesting.
The gizzard is j^laced just in front of the clitellum, 
whereas in the common earth-worm there are about ten segments 
betw^een.
There are only two pairs of vesicute seminales so far as 
I can find, the so-called hearts are in segments 8 to 13.
I have as 
yet seen no calciferous glands, but there are three pairs of glands 
in front of the vesiculee which are prominent and need investigation.
As worms differ in then- internal appearance at different periods of 
the year these observations must be taken as applicable to mid-winter.
I have found three or four species of earthworm parasites, 
including the old Anguillula iu?nh'ici among the Entozoa, Moiwcystis 
bimbrici in the Gregarinidi:e, and two parasitic Infusoria, together with 
an external parasite or messmate belonging to the Vorticellas or 
Rotifers which I have not been able to identify hitherto.
CAMBRIAN AND SILURIAN ROCKS OF 
EWCROSS, DUFTON, AND SHAR 
The Cambrian Rocks and Silurian Base of Ewcross, Dufton, and Shap 
Wells.
By Robert K.
Balderstox.
25 pp.
and map.
Lancaster, 1S90.
In this pamphlet (a paper read before the Lancaster Philosophical 
Society) the author begins by pointing out the necessity of being 
prepared, in the Lower Palseozoic rocks of the area in question, for 
inversions and reversed faults ; the possibihty that some breccias and 
conglomerates maybe due to crushing; and the value of a careful 
study of strikes and dips in the cleavage as well as the bedding.
Rut when we come to the working out of the subject, we are 
disappointed.
The district is, on any theory, a highly-disturbed one, 
^'ind is mostly hidden by newer rocks : to take the field against such 
odds we must avail ourselves to the full of the two chief arms of the 
eologica] attack— pak-eontology and petrology.
Our author, how- 
ever, utterly ignores fossil evidence, and does not appear to have 
64 review: rocks of ewcross, duftox, and shap.
examined the rocks themselves any more minutely than can be done 
in the field.
For instance, he tells us that the calcareous rocks seen north of 
the falls in Shap Wells Gill are metamorphosed Cambrians, 'probably 
about twice the age ' of the Coniston Limestone proper ; whereas 
this Lower Coniston Limestone is recognisable at many points in 
Westmorland, and' contains the same fauna as the Upper, from 
which it is separated only by some rhyolitic lavas, etc.
Again, he 
States that the rock quarried at Twistleton Dale House, near 
Ingleton, is 'simply a brecciated thrust fault'; but he does not 
profess to have made any careful examination of its character, and 
Mr. T.
Tate, from a microscopical study of the same rock, has 
recently shown that it is a volcanic tuff containing detritus from 
several distinct sources.
The evidence on which the author bases 
his theory of the structure of the district seems to be vitiated 
throughout by Avant of attention to such points as these^ and this is 
the more to be regretted, since he has evidently made a very close 
survey of most of the ground he describes.
^ 
The details of field-evidence are not easily followed, for, thougli 
F 
there are frequent references to a plate of sections, our copy 
contains no such plate.
The author's test-section is in Crummach 
Dale ; and here, at Austwick Beck Head, he seems to have missed 
the Silurian conglomerate underlying the 'tesselated mudstone,' 
though it is exposed in the basin of the more southerly of the two 
springs.
The rocks underlying this undoubtedly belong to the 
Coniston Limestone, as might have been found by tracing them 
eastward up Moughton Sike, Avhere they are richly fossiliferous.
In Norber Sike, so far as we can gather, the author mistakes for the 
conglomerate one of the ashy beds in the Coniston Limestone 
series ; or so it appears from the mention of a 'cap of felstone trap.' 
On this latter point, however, we fail to understand the author, for 
he elsewhere makes the statement that ' there are no contemporaneous 
traps in either series below^ the Tarrannons.' Were it not for the 
context, we should suppose lfe/o7a to be a misprint for above \ but it 
is clear that the nature of the rocks met with has always been judged 
vaguely by their appearance in the field.
The suggestion of a meta- 
morphic origin for mica-trap dykes could not have come from any 
geologist who had ever placed a slice of one of these rocks under 
the microscope.
While acknowledging the boldness of jNIr. Balderston's ideas and 
the amount of observation embodied in his paper, we cannot admit 
that he has thrown much light upon the difficult questions involved 
in the structure of this interesting tract of the older locks.
^A.H.
Naturalist, 
65 
ADDITIONS TO THE FLORA OF THE 
ALFORD DISTRICT OF NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
DURING 1890.
J. BURTT DAVY, 
Hon. Sec, A/foni j\'aiura/ists^ Society, Alford, Lines.
The Alford Naturalists' Society's Report on the work of the summer 
season of 1890, which has just been printed and circulated, shows 
that during the past season eighty-three flowering -plants and four 
ferns have been added to the Society's Botanical Register, making the 
total number of species recorded for the district = 404 Ph^nogamia 
and 12 Filices.
Three of these are believed to be new vice-county 
records, viz.: 
Sonchus arvensis var.
glabra Lond.Cat. Mablethorpe, 4th 
J 
m 
(J 
Luzula multiflora var.
congesta Koch.
Aby, 9th May (J 
Of the other additions to the district list, the most noteworthy 
are : 
Viola hirta L.
Cnicus eriophorus Hoffm.
Silene noctiflora I..
Digitalis purpurea L.
Hypericum hirsutum L.
Epipactis latifolia Lond.Cat.
Geranium columbinum I..
Bromus asper Murr.
Trifolium fragiferum T,.
Brachypodium pinnatum T^eauv.
Valerianella dentata Poll.
Aspii 
lum 
mpinella Saxifraga L.
Lastraea dilatata Presl.
impinella major Huds.
Lastraea spinulosa Presl.
Igatura 
Dipsacus pilosus 1..
Mr. F.
Arnold Lees has most kindly identified specimens of all 
of the above.
Only two excursions were made by members of the Society 
jointly during the season.
The first of these was on the 14th June, 
when the following specimens were found : — Valeriana officinalis, L.
and Orchis incamata L., on marshy ground at Aby; Viciu sepium L., 
Veronica montana L., Orchis morio L., and Luziihi pilosa Willd.,^ in 
Claythorpe parish ; and Lysimachia 
Habenaria chh- 
Presl., in Tothill Wood.
-f^ 
March iSqi.
E 
66 DAVY: ADniTlONS TO NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE FLORA.
The second excursion was made on Bank Holiday, August 4th, 
when Mr. F.
Arnold Lees, of Leeds, kindly undertook to lead the 
party — consisting of members of the Louth, Alford, Grimsby, and 
Hatton Naturalists' Societies — in an investigation of the Mablethorpe 
flora ; the party also had the acceptable company of three members of 
the Ravensthorpe (Devvsbury) Naturalists' Society.
After proceeding 
about two miles over the sandhills northward, and there being no 
apparent variation in the flora to tempt them farther in that direc- 
tion, the members bent their steps inland to search the numerous 
dykes and drains of the 'Marsh' for acjuatic plants.
During the 
day 142 Phanerogamia were noted, 120 being in flower; of these, 
40 had not been previously recorded for the district.
The most 
noteworthy were, on the sandhills : — Rosa canina var.
tomoiiella 
(Leman), not in flower; Sednm acre L., .V. 7'upestre Huds.
(a garden 
escape), Carinn Peiroseliuum Benth.
(not in flower, also an escape), 
ErigeroH acre L., Cnicus acaulis var.
caulescens^ Crepis vircns L., 
Leo7iiodo7i kirfus L.^ Z.
hispidus L., Lactuca virosa L,.
Cynoglossitm 
officinale L., Calysicgia Soldatiella R.Br., Lycium harbartmi L.
(here 
a firmly-estabUshed garden escape), Sahola Kali L., Hippophai 
Rhamnoides L.
(in fruit) ; Orchis pyramidalis L., Asparagus offici- 
nalis L., Allium vineale L.
(in seed): Amuiophila aru/idinacea Host., 
and Elymus arenarius L.
In and.
beside the drains and dykes were 
founds among others : — Rajutnculus citcinatus Sibth.; Myriophyllum 
spicatum L., Civiiuni maculatuui L., Apium graveoiens L., Sinm lati- 
folium L.
, Q^na nthe fisinlosa L .
, CE, lachenalii G m el .
, Si la us 
pratensis Bess., Galium palustre L., Achillea Pfarmica L., Samolus 
Valerandi L., Veronica Anagallis L., Utricularia vulgaris L., Poly- 
gonum amphibium L., Elodea canadensis Michx.
(introduced into 
England about the year 1841), Hxdrocharis Morsus-rame \.^,Juncus 
glaucus Ehrh., J, obiusijloi'us Ehrh., Sparganium simplex lUuls., 
Lemna gibba L., Bntomus nmbellatus L,.
Potamogeton natans L., 
P, perfoliatus L., P.
crispus L., P.
densus L., P.pusillus L., P.
pecti- 
naius L., Scirpus mariiimus L., and Glyceria aquafica Sm. The 
fields and road-sides yielded : — Papaver Somnifcruni L.
(a welb 
established Colonist), Malva rolundifolia L., Filago germanica L-, 
Pulicaria dysenkrica G^rtiL, Senecio facobcF.a x^r.Jioscu/osus (Jord), 
Sonchus arvetisis var.
glabra Lond.Cat., Carex vulpina L., and 
C. riparia Curtis.
On the permanent way occurred Erysimum 
cheiranthoides L.
and Linaria viscida Mcench ; and Plantago 
maritima L., P, Coronopus L., and Aster TripoHum L.
were found 
on the muddy banks of the catch-waters; the latter— which was not 
in flower — was only seen at Trusthorpe.
Naturaiii-t 
67 
BAGNALL'S FLORA OF WARWICKSHIRE.
The Flora of Warwickshire, By Jas. E.
Bagxall, A.L.S. London: 
Gurney and Jackson, 1891.
519 pp., with Map.
Mr. Bagnall has achieved a good and great work and we heartily 
congratulate him upon its publication.
His name as a botanist of 
no mean repute has been recognised for many years, and this, his 
crowning work up to the 25i*t^sent, will, we are sure, long stand as 
a monument ^more lasting than brass' to his genius, perseverance, 
careful work and conscientiousness.
In its arrangement, Mr. Bagnall has taken up pretty much the 
-same lines as were followed in the 'Flora of West Yorkshire' issued 
by the Y.N.U. in 1888.
The date of the first record where it is 
known is given under each species, with references to 'Topographical 
Botany; Burton's 'Midland Flora' (1817-21) and Syme's 'English 
Botany,' followed by localities under each of the separate 10 river 
basins, with authorities for the localities and in some cases dates.
The type is good, and each genus and species being printed in a 
heavier letter renders them very easy of reference, which is also 
assisted by the head-lines on each page.
The work includes, besides 
the flowering plants and ferns usually included in county floras, 
the Mosses, Hepatic^, Lichens, and Fungi (Hymenomycetes and 
Gasteromycetes) in the latter of which Mr. W.
B, Grove, M.A., has 
been Mr. Bagnall's collaborator.
In reviewing this work we are naturally led to compare it with 
a similar Flora for a neighbouring county, that of Leicestershire, 
issued by the Leicester Literary and Philosophical Society and 
edited by Mr. F.
T. Mott, F.R.G.S., and others, in 1886, but in 
doing this we find some discrepancies.
Mr. Mott in his general summary gives tlie number of Leicester- 
shire species as 1980, but he includes Algce (234 sp.), and these are 
not included by Mr. Bagnall, therefore, for comparison, they must 
be deducted, leaving Leicestershire 1744 as compared with 1023 
quoted by Mr. Mott for Warwickshire.
Leaving out all the Acrogens 
except the Vascular Acrogens, Mr. Mott's figures are— Leicestershire 
species 891; Warwickshire total species, 1017.
Comparing this 
^vith Mr. Bagnall's summary, we find his numbers for Warwickshire 
to be 1309, but of these 236 are varieties, leaving 1073, excluding 
^'^^crogens.
Mr. Bagnall's list, including varieties, is 2457.
Mr. Mott's 
estimate for Leicestershire on the same lines (excl.
Algie)-i9oi 
^'iiforiunately, Mr. Bagnall's are not consecutively numbered as are 
^Ir. Mott's, but we must leave the.c discrepancies to be accounted 
«or by the respective authors.
March t£ 
9£ 
68 
REVIEW BAGNALL's FLORA OF WARWICKSHIRE.
Among the plants recorded for Warwickshire but not for Leicester- 
shire in these two works we find, amongst others, the following : 
Eroplula [>ra:co\.
Dianthus Armcria.
Stellaria itnibrosa.
Elatine hexandra.
C/aj'fonia perfoUata.
Hypericum dubium.
Linum ani^^ustifoliuni.
Geranium columhinuni.
Vicia lalhyroides.
Lathyris Aphaca.
Poterium iniijlcafuni.
Callitriche obtusangul;!.
Canim segetuni.
Myrrhis odorata.
CT.nautlie crocata.
Wahlenbergia hederacea.
A'accinium Oxycoccos.
Vaccinium Vitis-Idiiea.
Centunculus minimus.
Cuscuta epithymum.
Utricularia minor.
.Sparganium neglectum.
Carex axillaris.
Carex elongata.
Carex curta.
Carex stricta.
Carex distans.
Among the pkmts recorded by Mr. Mott for Leicestershire, but 
not by Mr. Bagnall for Warwickshire, we note a smaller number, 
including the following : — 
Gentiana campeslris.
Symphytum tuberosum.
Orobandie IIcdera\ 
Orobanche cocrulca.
4Lamium intermetlium.
Sparganium natans.
Potamogeton heterophylkis.
Eriophorum latifoliuni.
[N.B. Rubus, Rosa, Hieracium, Salix and Gramintt.' not 
considered].
Comparing the numbers as well as they can be compared with 
VVCbl lUlKMlHC X'iUia, wc 
nave Mott's 
Estimate, 
L. 
w. 
w.v.
Dicotyledones ...
• w «**  •* \j\j i.
776 .
...
759 
Monocotyledon es 
199 
2tl 
237 
Vascular acrogens 
fr^ *•* *b4 XZ 
31 
47 
i 
891 
1018(a) 
1043 
Charace:^...
»m% t%* *frb ^L 
7 
t2 
Musci 
»79 
236 
347 
HepaticEt...
49 
44 
108 
Lichenes ...
...
177 
101 
234 
Fungi 
446 
i 
*727 
+987 
Algie ...
234 
379 
(a) Baguall's estimate, T073.
* Species and vars.
t This figure includes Hymenomycetes, Gasteromycetes, Loniomycetes,.
Ilyphomycetes, Physomycetes and Ascomycetes.
Warwickshire only the two first.
CP.H.
NO TE~^LE Pin OPTERA .
Acronycta alni Larva in North Lincolnshire.
— On August 23rd, 1S90, 
I found a larva of Jcronycia alni L.
in Stockhill Wood, Strubby, near Alford- 
When found, it was at rest on Giuun urbanum E., under the shade of a Poplar.
I brought the larva home hoping to obtain an imago, but, unfortunately, it died 
a few days afterwards.— E.
Woodthorpe, Alford, Lincolnshire, 4th Feb. 1891- 
Xatiirnlistr 
69.
FIRST REPORT OF THE 
GEOLOGICAL PHOTOGRAPHIC COMMITTEE OF 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION, 
JAMES E.
BEDFORD.
F.G.S., 
Lt'fih ; I/o/ioj-afy Stcretary to the Coimnltt^e.
This Committee was first appointed at the Hull meeting of the 
Union in 1SS9.
The late Mr. Adamson advocated the formation of 
5uch a committee by the Union to work in conjunction with, and on 
the same lines as the British Association ' Committee on Geological 
Photographs.' The suggestion was adopted and a Committee 
appointed as follows :'— James W.
Davis, F.G.S. etc., Chairman; 
Rev. E.
M, Cole, F.G.S.
; Godfrey Bingley ; F.
W. Branson, F.CS.
; 
Geo. Fowler Jones, F.R.I.B.A.
; F.
Fielder Walton, F.G.S.
(President 
Hull (;eological Society); and James E.
Bedford, F.G.S., Hon. Sec.
Two meetings of the Committee have been held, namely, 
March 12th and August 27th; particulars of these meetings will be 
found in the minute book.
Your Secretary was authoiised by the Secretaries of the Union 
to print circulars for distribution amongst geologists and photo- 
graphers and to procure albums for the reception of the photographs.
Two circulars were issued setting forth the objects of the Committee 
and asking for assistance in the work.
The circulars were sent to all 
the Yorkshire Photographic Societies (eighteen in number) but with 
little result — as only two Societies officially acknowledged receipt of 
them.
Particulars were also sent to many gentlemen resident in various 
parts of the county who were known to take interest in photography.
Your Committee has been greatly assisted by members of the 
I-eeds Geological Association and the Leeds Photographic Society, 
several gentlemen who are members of both Societies having contri- 
buted large numbers of prints to the section.
Whenever possible, 
prints have been supplied in duplicate, one of which has been 
forwarded to the British Association Committee and one retained by 
the Committee of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
Many subjects of 
great interest have been secured, some of which are valuable as they 
cannot be reproduced.
This refers to photographs of subjects smce 
removed, as, for instance, fossil trees, etc., laid bare in quarrying.
Vour Secretary has corresponded with Mr. Jeffs, the Secretary of 
^ British Association Committee, and has received great assistance 
th 
from him in this matter.
Mr. Jeffs has frequently expressed his 
satisfaction with the results from the Yorkshire Committee during its 
^!;!i_year's work.
^'arch ,891.
70 BEDFORD: REPORT OF YORKS.
GEOL.
PHOTO.
COMMITTEK.
At the meeting of the British Association held in Leeds in 
September last, a collection of geological photographs, including 
those contributed by the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, was exhibited 
in the Geological Section, and remained on view daily.
Very great 
interest was taken in the exhibit by many eminent geologists and 
otlier scientific men then present in the town, and many expressions 
of approval and suggestions for future work and further extension of 
the scheme were made to Mr. Jeffs and to your Secretary.
As an 
instance, it may be mentioned that Mr. Wilkinson, the Director of 
Mines to the New South Wales Government, exchanged lantern slides 
of geological subjects in Australia for slides taken by members of 
this Committee.
The following particulars relating to the Yorkshire Section are 
taken from the British Association Report, as issued to the members at 
the Leeds Meeting.
Total number of photographs sent in from all parts 
of the British Isles, 196; of which Yorkshire contributed over 100.
The report says: — * The only county which has so far undertaken 
such systematic work is Yorkshire.
In this county that valuable aid 
to scientific progress, the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 'has already 
aided the work of the British Association by the establishment of 
local committees charged with special objects of research.
As soon 
as possible a Geological Photographic Section was formed, of which 
Mr. James W.
Davis was appointed chairman, and Mr. James E- 
Bedford secretary.
This section has sent over a hundred copies of 
photographic prints, with descriptions, the work of its members in 
the county of York, besides other localities further afield.
This Com- 
mittee are much indebted to the officers of the Yorkshire Geological 
Photographic Section for their valuable assistance.' 
The report also states :• — ' It is with great regret that the Com- 
mittee have to record the decease of Mr. S.
A. Adamson, who wa^ 
a most active member, and to whose exertions and influence the 
progress of the work in Yorkshire is largely due.' A list of photo- 
graphs is appended.
Your Secretary received a letter from Mr. Jeffs, dated October loth, 
which contains the following paragraph: —  ' Will you kindly, officiallyr 
convey the best thanks of the Committee to all the members of the 
Photographic Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, who so 
assiduously worked for us, and enabled so fine an exhibit of photo- 
graphs to be shown at Leeds.
I personally feel much indebted to you 
for all you have done.
— Yours very faithfully, O.
W, Jeffs.' 
Your Secretary has much pleasure in thus stating how much the 
work of the Section has been appreciated by the British Association 
Committee, who, in recognition of this, have elected our Chairman 
Naturalistr 
IIEDFORD : RKPORT OF VORKS.
GEOL.
PHOTO.
COMMITTEE.
J I 
Mr. Davis) and your Secretary (Mr. J.
E. Bedford) members of the 
Committee.
It may be mentioned that the range of our labours has not been 
confined to Yorkshire, and that a large number of the subjects con- 
tributed by us to the British Association Committee were from 
Lancashire, Wales, and the Isle of Man. The British Association 
Report (section C) contains a full list of the photographs sent by the 
Yorkshire Section up to July, 1890.
I have not, therefore, added 
it to this lengthy report, but beg respectfully to refer you to that 
publication for details.
[We venture to supplement Mr. Bedford's 
hst by extracting from the British Association Committee's Report 
all that relates to the North of England.
— Eds.
* Nat.'].
FIRST LIST OF GEOLOGICAL PHOTOGRAPHS 
(to JULY 1890).
Note, — This list contains the subjects of all geological photo- 
graphs known to have been issued.
Copies of those on/y to which 
the registered No, is attached have been received by the Secretary of 
the British Association Committee.
Copies of any photographs desired can, in most cases, be 
obtained either from the photographer direct (whose address is 
usually given) or from the officers of the local society under whose 
auspices the views were taken.
The Committees have in no case assumed the copyright ot 
photographs registered, which is presumed to be held by the 
photographer.
llie price at which the photographs may be obtained depends 
upon the size of print and local circumstances, over which the Com- 
mittee has no control.
Cheshire.
Liverpool Geological Society— per W, HeweU, Secretary, Photographed by 
E, Neivall, 14, Elm Grove, Tranme'e.
Size S\ hy 6J inches.
Keg. Xo, 
'. % 4- 5- Storeton Quarry, 1887 ...
Various sections.
2. ,, ,, 1SS7 ...
' Footprint bed.' 
6. Wallasey, 1S87 Quarry in Lower Keuper.
7, 8.
,, Breck Road ...
Section showing 'current bedding/ 
9. Trenton Lane, Birkenh'd,iS87 Junction of Keuper and Hunter.
10.
Bidston Hill, 1S87 ...
.-• Fissile Keuper sandstone.
11.
Hilbre Island (m'th of R.
Dee) Bunter.
12, 13.
,, ,, (Middle Island) Conglomerate bed.
14.
Thurstaston Hill, 1887 ...
'Thor's Stone/ an outher of the Bunter.
15.
West Kirby, 1887 Fault at Calday Grange.
16.
Tunction of Keuper and Bunter.
Flaybrick Hill,"s87 ...
Ditto.
1885 ...
Fault in Keuper.^ 
...
Roche Moutonnee, 
»1 5> 
,, 19 
Poulton Quarry, Wirral, 1885 (2) Jointing in Keuper.
Marth tSgi.
72 BEDFORD: REPORT OF YORKS.
GEOL.
PHOTO.
COMMITTEE.
Cheshire— (tw///«//fcv/K 
i 
Per J.
Lornas, 23, Avondale /\oad, LivcypooL 
Reg. No.
Dawpool, Wirral, 188S (4) Boulder day clifls on bank of River Dee 
showing interbeddcd sands, etc.
Hilbre Island (2) ...
...
Coast erosion.
Wallasey (2)...
...
...
Sand-dunes, showing stratification.
,, Breck Road ...
'Contortions* in Trias.
Ince ...' ...
--.
...
Peat beds, 
,, (Ship Canal Sections) Fault in Trias.
PJwtographed by E, Timnnns^ Runcorn.
32.
Runcorn (lane to Higher Runcorn).
Frodshaai beds of Keuper.
I 
Isle of Man.
Photographed by £d.
Newall {Liverpool Gcoh^iial Society), 
31.
Scarlett Point.
30.
Port St, Mary ...
...
Glaciated limestone surface.
(And some others not designated.) 
Per Yorkshhe Naturalists' Union {GcoL Photo, Committee).
{Photographed by 
S, A, Warhiirton^ 9, Banstead Terrace^ Leeds,) Size 8 l^y 5 inches, 
75.
Douglas Head, 1885 ...
Contorted slate.
Photographed by J.
E. Bedford^ 9, Cardigan Road^ Leeds.
Size 8 by 5 inches.
76.
Scarlett Stack, 18SS ...
Basaltic boss.
77- j» 5» ji ...
,, M (with dyke).
78.
Scarlett Point ,, ...
Upheaved limestone.
70.
,9 ' »?
5j ...
Weathered volcanic ash.
Lancashire.
Photographed l^y E.
Newali ^Liverpool Geological Society), 
17, 18, Woolton^ Liverpool...
Two views of the * Calderstones' (stone circle) 
Photograplied by E.
Ward, 249, Oxford Street, Manchester, 
Series of views of the ' Oxford Road Boulder,' now in the Quadrangle 
of Owens College, Manchester.
9, 5, Manchester Ship Canal.
Photographed by Godfrey Bingtey [Leeds Geological Association), for the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union [Geol, Photo.
Committee).
Size 4 by 2^ inches, 
91, 92.
Lindale,nearGrange.i8S9 2) Old sea cliffs in Carboniferous limestone- 
93-97- Hampsfell, „ (8) Escarpment in limestone, showing 
weathering.
98-105.
}, „ (8) Weathered Carboniferous limestone.
106-108.
,, „ (3) Limestone boulders lying on Carbon- 
iferous limestone.
109-117.
,, „ (9) Erratic boulders (various) lying on Car- 
boniferous limestone.
NOTTINUHAMSUIRF..
J^Aotog/ aphed by John Ihirton Cr Sons, L.eicester, 
Nottingham, June 1882 ...
Church Cemetery; caverns in Pebble Beds.
>> ,» ., (2) Castle Hill, Bunter.
nimlack(or Hemlock Stone) Showing denudation.
Naturalist, 
BEDFORD: REPORT OF YORKS.
GKOL.
rHOTO.
COMMITTEE.
73 
Per James Shipniaji^ Mantiiui^ Grove^ Nottijigham.
Reg. No.
Nottingham Castle Pebble Beds.
Kimberley ...
...
...
Permian, resting on tilted Coal measures.
Hemlock Stone, Nottingham 
Nottingham Faulted Keuper.
' [remains).
Elidworth ...
...
...
Outliers of Keuper (supposed ' Druidical * 
Beeston ...
...
...
Interglacial sand and river gravel.
North Wales.
Leeds Geohgieal Association — per J, E, Bedford, {Photographed by Godfrey Biiigiey, 
15, Cardigan Road, Leeds, for the Yorkshire Nat uraiists Union [Geol.
Photo.
Committee\ Size various, 
118.
Llandudno, Gt. Orme's head Erratic boulder.
[stom-.
119-121.
,, j^ ^^ Weathered blocks of Carboniferous lime- 
122.
,, ,, ,^ Escarpment of Carboniferous limestone.
^23.
,, ,^ ,, Section in limestone quarry, 
124-128.
,, ^^ ,, Cliffs showing stratification.
129-131.
^^ ^^ ^^ Fissure in limestone.
^32"i37' i» ,, ,, Views of cliff sections.
Yorkshire.
Per Arthur S.
Peid, Trinity College, Glenalmond, N,B.
(Photographed 
by Dr. E, S.
Peid.
) 
39) 40- Draughton, near Skiptoa ...
Contorted limestone.
4^' Bolton Abbey ,., ...
Faulted synclinal in limestone.
t 
Yorkshire Geological and Polytechnic Society^per James IV.
Datns^ Chevinedge, 
Halifax', Size 11 by ^ inches.
19.
Raygill Quarries, with fissures, 1S75.
20.
Plumpton Rocks, 1879 
21.
Scarboro' Castle, 1SS3 
Nodular concretions in calcareous grit.
22.
Wadsley, near Sheffield, 1876 Fossil trees in Lower coal measures.
^Z, 24.
Flamboro' Head, 1SS2 ...
Erosion of chalk.
25- 9, ThornwickBay...
Chalk surmounted by drift.
26.
Clayton, near Halifax, 18S6 Roots of stigmaria.
27.
Hilderthorpe, 1887...
...
Current-bedded sands.
Draughton, 1871 ...
...
Contorted limestone.
[limestone.
Moughton Fell, 1877 ...
Junction of Silurian with Carboniferous 
Gordale Scar, 1878 
Raygill Fissure, 1880 ...
(During exploration).
Norber, i88l ...
...
Erratic blocks.
Bempton Cliffs, 1S85 ...
Contorted chalk.
^^r Yorkshire Naturalists' Union {GeoL Photo.
Committee).
(Photographs taken 
for the Leeds Geological Association, by F.
IV.
Branson, 14, Commercial Street, 
Leeds.) Size 7 by $ inches ; enlarged series, 14 by 10 inches, 
13S.
Longley's Brick Works,Leeds Coal measures above * Beeston' bed.
139- Grosvenor's Yard 'Beeston' bed (8 to 9 feet) and Coal 
measures, 
140.
Boyle\^ < Quarry General Section, 'Crow coal' and Coal 
measures above and below.
141.
^^ „ ,, (detailed)- 
142.
DoiVy Lane' Brick Yard ...
'Black bed' coal.
143- Benson Street, Brick Yard...
'Better bed' coal, etc, 
v.i^^J?'^^— 'i'^ese were photoKraphed in 1885.
and were temporary sections but extremely 
valuable as showing the succe-^sion in the Lower coal measures from above the Beeston bed to 
E^2!iiinmedlately above the ElUnd flagstone.— S.
A. Auamson.] 
March 1891.
74 
BEDFORD: REPORT OF VORKS.
GEOL.
PHOTO.
COMMITTEE.
Y O u Ks 1 1 1 R K — {conthuied\ 
w 
Photographed hy J, E, Bed/o7'd, Cardigan Road^ Leeds [for Leeds GeoL Assoe.), 
Size 6 />j' ^ inches, 
Reg. No.
144.
Armley, near Leeds, 1882.., 
J45.
Draughton, Skipton, 
146.
,, „ 
147.
Bridlington, 1886 ...
I4S.
149- 
150.
Filey, 1886 ...
1885 
1885 
Elland flagstones ; ruptured shales and 
flagstones.
[clinal).
Contorted limestone (anticlinal and syn- 
Slickenside at si(]e of an anticlinal.
5? 
»> 
?» 
Isl.
>t 
152.
The Brig, Kiley 
Cross-bedding in gravel.
Freshwater gravel on boulder clay.
Lake deposit lying on boulder clay.
...
\ Drift lying upon Oolitic limestone, shovv- 
...
) ing atmospheric denudation.
...
Oolitic beds at the Brig.
Photographed hy A.
E, Nicholls, Borough Engineers Office, Leeds {for Leeds 
Geological Association^, Sii^e 6 i>y 4 inches.
J53-5' Castleford, 1S90 
156.
lladdockstones, 1889, be- 
tween Marklngton and 
Ripon 
1 5 7" ^5^- Sections on new railway, 
1889, Ilkley to Skipton 
159-164.
Garforth and South Milford, 
18S9 
165.
Knaresborough Castle, 1S88 
166.
„ ,, iSSS 
167.
Dudley Hill, Bradford, 1890 
168, 169.
Brough, near Hull, 1889 ...
Three views of fossil-tree stem in situ in 
coal measures.
Isolated blocks of Plumpton grit.
Vertical and contorted Carboniferous 
limestone.
Six views of quarries in Magnesian lime- 
stone, showing methods of quarrying 
and varieties in bedding.
Base of Magnesian limestone, with under- 
Plumpton rocks.
[^yi"g * 3^'^^ ' .^^**' 
Lower Carboniferous sandstone.
Post-tertiary gravels, resting on Oolitic 
outlier at base of the chalk wolds.
Photographed by Godfrey Bingley {for Leeds Geological Association)^ 15, Cardigan 
Road, LLeadiugley, Lxeds.
Size various.
170-171.
Burnsal, near Skipton, 1890 
172.
Saltburn, 18SS 
4  • 
crossing valley of 
[the Wharfe.
173- 
174.
175.
11 
>9 
11 
* « 
178.
179.
187, 
Ridge of limestone 
View of drift hills.
Valley cut in drift.
Sandhills and drift.
Middle Lias and ironstone band.
Lias and Oolite.
Middle I,ias.
Hunt Cliff, 1SS8 
176.
Whitby Scar, 1S88 
177.
Staithes (Pennv Nab) i888 
(ColbornXab)iSSS 
Hayburn Wyke, near Scarborough, 1887.
Sea cliff and waterfall.
,, ,, ,, Lower shale and sandstone.
Oolite.
iSo. Thornton Force, Ingleton, Base of Carboniferous limestone, resting 
1890.
unconformably on Silurian.
T81-1S4.
Norber, near Clapham, 1889 Erratic blocks of Silurian grit resting on 
185.
EweNab.CarnelianBay,i8S7.
[Carboniferous limestone.
1S6- Scarborough Cliffs, near the Spa.
i88.
Headingley, Leeds, 1888 ...
Cliff in Lower coal measures, [(in situ).
Large weathered blocks of Millstone grit 
Yoredale shales.
Valley of the Strid through Millstone grit.
Arch in chalk cliff.
Chalk cliff.
Caves in chalk.
,, „ Showing marine erosion of chalk beneath 
and atmospheric action denuding <lrift 
above.
__ 
Naturalist, 
189-190.
Adel Moor, I,eeds, 1S90 
191.
Bolton Abbey 
Bolton Woods, iSSH 
Fiamborough, 1887...
192.
194.
195, 
196.
»5 
Thornwick Bay, 
75" 
OBSERVATIONS ON THE BURROWING HABITS 
OF CERTAIN 
I, 
LAND AND FRESHWATER MOLLUSCS.
W. v..
COT.I.TXriK, 
Leeds ; ffofiorary L/brartan to the Co7icho logical Sociciy oj 
Great Britain atul Iyel<xnd.
One, perhaps, of the most interesting among the many peculiar 
habits of our Land and Freshwater Mollusca is that of burrowing.
But few authors have troubled to inquire \vhy and when molluscs 
burrow, so there is yet a wide field for patient and painstaking 
inquiry.
In the summer of 1889 and in the January of 1890 I made a 
few notes upon the subject, which were communicated to 'Science 
Gossip ' in July 1S90.
in reply to a short j)aper upon the subject by 
Mr. Lionel E.
Adams, B.A. Since then, whenever I have found 
either land or freshwater molluscs at any distance beneath the 
surface, I have carefully measured the depth, most of which will be 
found in the following: observations.
Some authors are of opinion that, with two or three exceptions 
{Tesiacella^ Achali?ia)^ molluscs burrow only when hybernating; 
others, led by the observations of Mr. Lowe, consider that they also 
burrow when enlarging their shell.
Undoubtedly, a number of the 
smaller species burrow when hybernating, but most of the larger 
land species do not, but generally congregate in large numbers under 
the eaves of outdiouses, sheltered walls, holes in rocks, etc.
My 
observations upon the mode la which molluscs enlarge their shells 
do not at all agree with those oi Mr, Lowe.
I have bred and 
reared Clausilia rugosa and most of the commoner forms of I/eiix, 
but I never saw them burj- any part of their sliell when enlarging it, 
nor can I see that it would be of any advantage to the animal; on 
the other hand, I am inclined to think that it would seriously interfere 
with the action of the mantle during deposition if the head was 
buried in the ground as stated by Mr. Lowe, and in many cases 
damage the membranaceous film before the calcareous portion was 
deposited- It is quite possible that they may increase their shells 
when in holes, etc.
(burrows of earthworms).
The following are 
the species I have observed, together with such other remarks made 
by authors as I have thought of interest.
March 189X 
76 COLLINGE : HURROWING HAUITS OF CERTAIN MOLLUSCS.
Testacella haliotidea Drap.
This is the only species of this 
genus whose habits I am cognizant with.
The greatest depth 
I have found it at is from four to five feet.
Tate mentions that 
they burrow from one to two feet in winter.
Testacella scutulum Sow. Mr.
Quilter (Journ.
of Conch., 
p. 320, 1888) records having found this species at a depth of 
eighteen inches.
Testacella maug-ei Fer. Dr.
Jeffreys mentions that his gardener 
found a specimen of this species at a depth of about two feet, 
among celery roots.
Achatina acicula Miill.
During the summer I have found this 
species at a depth of from four to six inches.
The Rev. Henry 
Housman (Our Museum, p.
130) mentions the discovery of 
a number of human skeletons near Chichester, the bones of 
which were infested with this species, at a depth of about three 
feet below the surface.
They have also been found at con- 
siderable depths in Yorkshire in Saxon coffins.
The above four species should be distinguished from the 
follownngj as they are of decidedly subterranean habits.
Limax maximus L.
Mr. F.
Rhodes (Science Gossip, p.
190, 
August 1890) found two specimens of this species under a stone 
weighing about two hundredweight and buried from four to six 
inches in the ground.
Limax arborum B.-Ch. Occasionally found in rotten beech- 
trees, two and three inches beneath the bark.
Arion ater L.
Often niet with in winter three and four inches 
beneath the surface.
Arion bourguignati Mab. Five specimens found with Z.
inaximus.
Geomalacus maculosus Allm.
' Dr. Allman describes this slug as 
possessing a singular power of elongating itself so as at times 
to assume the appearance of a worm ; by this means it can 
insinuate itself into apertures w^hich we could scarcely conceive 
it possible for it to enter.' Rimmer states that Dr. Jeflfreys 
informed him that some specimens he (Dr. Jeffreys) had, crawled 
through some holes, one-eighth of an inch in diameter, in a tin 
box in which they had been sent.
Hyalina cellaria Miilb I have found specimens of this shell from 
six to eight inches deep in both summer and winter.
Hyalina alliarla Miill.
Habits similar to preceding species and 
found with it at al)out the same depth.
Mr. Rhodes found two 
specimens with Z.
iftaxinins.
Naturalist.
COLLINGE: BURROWING HABITS OF CERTAIN MOLLUSCS.
77 
Hyalina glabra Stud.
Mr. Rhodes records two specimens with 
preceding species.
I have met with it at a depth of about five 
inches, never deeper.
Hyalina nitidula Drap.
I have not as yet met with this species 
below the surface.
Rimmer states that 'it is a timid species, 
and often buries itself in the earth.' 
Hyalina crystallina Miill.
Under very heavy stones I have on 
many occasions in the summer met with this shell; the greatest 
depth the stones were imbedded was six inches.
Helix pomatia L.
Most authors regard this species as only 
burrowing an inch or two and only when hybernating.
Helix aspersa Miill This well-known species can hardly be 
said to burrow at all; during the time of depositing the eggs, 
they scoop out a hole two or three inches deep.
I have taken 
young specimens in winter at a depth of four inches.
The 
absurd properties attributed to molluscs reach their climax when 
+ 
such authorities as Bouchard-Chantereaux and Dr. Buckland 
tell us that this species scoops out by some mea?is or other holes 
in limestone rocks, in which they hybernate.
Some authors are 
of opinion that the rock is worn away by an acid secretion, 
others by the action of the shell and some by the rasping oi the 
mandible.
That they hybernate in such places I admit, but thtry 
are in no way responsible for the excavation.
Helix rufescens Penn.
Frequently met with at a depth of from 
four to six inches and during hybernation in the hollows of 
decaying trees.
I have on one occasion met with this species 
in the burrows of earthworms some six inches below the surface.
It is possible that they had been dragged in by the earthworms, 
but hardly likely as they seldom, I believe, take in other than 
vegetable matter.
Helix hispida L.
Found with the preceding species in burrows 
of earthworms.
Helix rotundata Miill.
Burrows from four to five inches.
Found in both summer and winter.
Very often found in earth- 
worm burrows.
Helix rupestris Drap.
Generally beneath growths of moss, etc., 
on old walls, four and five inches in thickness.
Bulimus Obscurus Miill.
Occasionally taken at depths varying 
from four to six inches.
Pupa secale Orap.
Generally with j^rec eding sj ecies.
March i8gi.
78 COLMXGE: BURROWING HABITS OK CERTAIN MOLLUSCS.
w 
.Pupa umbilicata Drap.
Often found beneath the bark of old 
trees also in the ground at a depth of five or six inches.
t 
Balea perversa L.
In dry weather this species burrows to a 
depth of from six to eight inches; it is also found under large 
stones and beneath tlie bark of trees.
Clausilia rugosa T3rap.
Frequently under large stones, but I have 
never met with it below the surface.
Cyclostoma elegans ^Eiill.
Daring the summer I have met with 
this shell three and four inches below the surface.
Sphaerium corneum L.
1 have collected this species in thick 
and sometimes hard mud at depths varying from three to 
fourteen inches at all seasons of the year.
Sphaerium rivicoia Leach.
Generally buried in five or six inclies 
of fine mud.
Have met with it once in winter in hard mud 
four inches deep.
Sphaerium lacustre Mull.
Burrows to great depths ; often found 
m 
ten and fourteen inches below the surface in dry ponds.
Have 
not met witli it during the winter months.
Dr. Jeffreys states 
that he 'found it alive in the hardened mud of a pond which had 
been drained and its bed so completely dried up by the sun as 
scarcely to show the marks of any footsteps on it.' 
Pisidium Pfr. With the exception of J^.
rostnm Scholtz, I have 
met with all the Pisidia at depths varying from four to twelve 
inches, and at various seasons of the year.
Unio Phil.
The members of this genus are often covered with 
a layer of tine mud fovu* to six inches thick.
I have not met 
with any actual cases of burrowing, nor have I found them in 
hard mud.
.Anodonta Cuvier.
According to M.
Drouet, the Anodontce usually 
hybernate before the close of autumn^ when they bury them- 
selves deep into the mud, remaining there until the middle of 
s]>ring.
Mr. Rhodes mentions that a variety oi A.
c\v^?nea at 
Pudsey (Yorks.), in a disused mill reservoir, is found buried at 
a deptli from eight to twelve inches in winter, and two to four 
inches in summer, but always imbedded.
Paludina contecta MiilL In Yorkshire I have found this species 
in the summer in thick mud quite ten inches deep; in the 
River Cherw^ell, in the north of Oxfordshire, I have brought up 
specimens in my net as deep as fourteen inches.
Paludina vivipara L.
In fine mud, a few inches deep, I have 
often met with this species.
Xaturali.'^i- 
SHACKLETON ; DISAPPEARANCE OF YORKSHIRE PLANTS.
79 
Bythinia tentaculata 1-.
Found with Palndina coniecfn in both 
of the above counties and at similar depths.
Bythinia leachii Shepp.
From six to eight inches on one or 
two occasions.
Valvata piscinalis Miill, A very inactive mollusc; althougli 
I must have dug up some hundreds, I have never found them 
deeper than six inches, and rarely that.
Valvata cristata Miill.
With the preceding species.
Planorbis vortex I- Rimmer states that this species buries 
itself, but states no depth.
Planorbis corneus L.
This is the only species of this genus 
that I have found buried at all, which I have frequently done 
at depths of from eight to ten inches.
Physa hypnorum L.
Mr. Wm.
Jeffery (Journ.
of Conch., p.
305, 
1882) states thai this si)ecies buries itself when the ponds dry up.
Limnsea truncatula Miill.
This is the only Limnaea I have any 
actual measurements for.
I have often taken it in three or four 
in(^hes of mud, and on one occasion a single live specimen 
eighteen inches below the surface of a dried-up pond.
XO TE— ORNJTIIOL OGW 
Flamboroug'h Bird-Notes.^The poor biids are having a hard time of it 
this severe weather, which has bronnht several rare visitants to our coast, I have 
had brought in a Black Guillemot {Uria grylk) which is very rare here.
Robert 
i-eng, fisherman, informs me he had observed several pairs of the ReJ-breasted 
^lerganser {Mergiis serrator)^ also Goosanders (J/, mergajtser).
Three Swans 
(Cygniis ?
) came over the Headland to-day flying southward ; a great many 
nocks of Snow Buntings {Plectrophanes nivalis) and Bramblings {Friu<^il!a monfi- 
fnngilla) are frefjuently seen un the Headland.
Several flocks of the Common 
Guillemots {Lcmvia troilc) have arrived on the Coast.
— Mattiifw Bailey, 
i'lamborough, Jan. 2isi, 1S91.
Erratum.— I hope you will correct the mistake made in ' The Naturalist' for 
January, p.
12.
Shorelark not Stonelark.— M.B.
DISAPPEARANCE OF YORKSHIRE PLANTS.
AliRAHAM SHACKLKTON, 
/.' ra ithix 'a ite, A'd'iV// /ry 
As I have in my possession a sort of manuscript Flora ol a ])ortion 
of the Parish of Keighley, compiled by a reliable botanist in the 
^^r]y years of the i)resent century, I am temj)ted to cull from it, and 
l^ffer for publication in 'The Naturalist/ tbe records of a few 
lll^£[eGting plants that are now entirely exterminated \n the localities 
8o SHACKLETON : DISAPPEARANCE OF YORKSHIRE PLANTS.
named, and some of wliich are not now to be found within a radius of 
many miles of Keigbley.
The habitats given are all on the W.
and 
N.W., and within two miles of the town, 
Habenaria bifolia.
Grows in Sharp's pasture on the road to 
Keighley.
July lo, iSii.
Gymnadenia conopsea.
Meadows.
Sometimes grows with 
O. 77iaculata.
July 12, 1810.
w 
Listera cordata.
Grows in the swamp about 200 yards N.
E. of 
the Tarn Gate.
It is past flowering.
July 6, 181 1.
In Blakey's 
Allotment, amongst the trees, pretty plentifully.
It is just 
beginning to flower.
May 18, 18 13.
Anagallis tenella- Grows in T.
Moorhouse's lowermost wood.
Flowers nearly white.
Aug. 29, 1816.
h 
Conium maculatum.
Grows on the roadside, near Blackhill- 
Aug. 4, 18 10.
Parnassia palustris.
In T.
Moorhouse's Wet Hill, Sep. 6, 1814- 
Narthecium ossifragum.
Grows plentifully in the Tarn Allot- 
ment.
July 24, 1800.
Vaccinium oxycoccus.
Common.
Sep. 7, 1816.
Primula farinosa.
Grows in Midgley's Wet Hill.
Flowers light 
pink.
May 25, 1805, (Has this species ever been recorded 
further south in Yorkshire?) 
Pyrola media?
Grows in the Long Wood, about midway down- 
August 1838, (About the year 1855 the present writer saw three 
or four plants in bloom at this station, l>ut has not seen any 
since, though repeatedly searched for).
Lythrum salicaria.
Grows in Walker's Bank Lane and Middle- 
brook's Ing. September 181 2.
Orobanche major.
Grows near the Beck, below Laycock- 
May 16, 1837.
The disappearance of the above-named plants 1 attribute to 
drainage and better cultivation of the land.
, 
The compiler of the Flora also collected various specimens of 
lichens growing in the district, many of which are no longer to be 
found there, and some survive in a depauperate condition.
One 
Pertusaria leioplaca — has never, I believe, been recorded for the 
West Riding.
I have three specimens of this plant from three 
different stations near Keighley ; but it is now, I fear, extinct.
I attribute the disappearance of lichens to the ever-increasing 
smoke-density of the Airedale atmosphere.
Naturalist, 
8i 
VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
EDGAR R.
WAITE, F.L.S., 
Sub-Curator of the Leeds Museum, and one of the 
Hon'j7-ary Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists Vnio$i 
Professor Newton writes:— 'The good effects of '* Faunal" works such as those 
named in the foregoing rapid survey none can doubt.
'* Every kingdom, every 
province, should have its own monographer," wrote Gilbert White, more than 
one hundred years ago, and experience has proved tlie truth of his assertion.' 
(Eucl.
Brit.^ gth Edition^ vol.
jr^'ifi.
/. iS.) 
'The liberty of the honour of the Ainsty of the County of the City 
of York' consists of the country lying between the Nidd and the 
Wharfe, bounded on the east by the Ouse, and on the west by 
a hne drawn from the Nidd at Cattal Lodge to a point on the 
Wharfe about a mile East of Wetherby.
A line drawn due north and south fiom^Wilstrop to Tadcaster 
cuts off a Western half, which is practically the area embraced by 
the present paper.
The district includes Ingmanthorpe, Walton, Thorp Arch, AVif;hil], 
Tadcaster, Healaugh.
Bilton, Bickerton, Tockwith, Marston Moor, 
and Wilstrop.
Observations made near Cowthorpe, North and Kirk 
Deighton, Wetherby, Boston Spa, and Newton Kyme (all of which 
he just beyond the Ainsty boundaries) are, however^ included.
Geologically sjjcaking, the district is divisible by a diagonal line 
(running from Cowthorpe through AVighill to Tadcaster) into two 
distinct areas, that lying to the north-east of this diagonal consisting 
of the Triassic rocks and overlying alluvial deposits of the X'ale of 
York, and that lying to the south-west including the Magnesian 
Limestones and Marls of the Permian series.
Physically, the district is flat and somewhat low-lying, it averages 
about 80 feet above the sea-level, and the elevations are few and 
inconsiderable.
Some idea of tlie general low-lying nature of the 
Ainsty may be gathered from the fact that the two rivers which form 
'fs eastern and southern boundaries are tidal for a portion of their 
course through the district.
The tidal influence extends as high a.s 
Naburn on the Ouse, and as far as Tadcaster on the Wharfe.
The district forms part of the drainage areas of the Nidd and the 
Wharfe, and a line drawn from the Wharfe at Wetherby will touch 
tbe Nidd at Walshford Bridge, a distance of only four miles.
Both rivers, and particularly the Wharfe, are subject to rapid 
[l22^|^The Wharfe has been known to rise three feet in an hour ; 
March i8qi.
• " 
82 ^ WAITK : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY 
this is in consequence of its large drainage area in the North- 
western fells, and at such times it overflows its banks at Thorp Arch 
and Wighill Ings, covering a considerable area.
The low-lying land 
about Wilstrop is subject to similar inundations from the Nidd.
The country is extremely welhwooded, and without a trace of 
moorland, properly so called.
The Mammalia are well represented, but the points which call for 
remark are of negative rather than of positive interest.
The mammals 
of a district are always somewhat difficult to work out, but having 
had practical acquaintance with the 'Western Ainsty' for several 
years, I believe that the following list is not f^^r from being complete.
It is quite possible, however, that other species of Eats may turn up, 
as I am able to add one — Nattercrs Bat — by the merest accident.
The Whiskered Eat {Vespertilio mystacinus) I have never seen in the 
district, although it is tolerably common in some other localities.
I 
have had small traps set in many places, and although I have 
caught most of the smaller mammals, I have never come across either 
the Red Field Vole or the Harvest Mouse.
The latter is, however, 
recorded for Wetherby.
The Badger is still found at Bramham on 
the south side of the Wharfe, but it has never, so far as I know, 
occurred wTthin the district here treated of.
There are no Deer in 
the locality now% but Fallow Deer were formerly kept at Healaugh 
Hall near Tadcaster.
Ornithologically, the district is interesting on account of the 
number of rare birds which have occurred Avithin its borders.
Among 
these may be specially mentioned the Orphean Warbler, Golden 
Oriole, Scops Owl, Golden Eagle, Lesser Kestrel, Cream-coloured 
Courser, and Wedge-tailed Gull.
One bird — the Yellowshank 
formerly included, is now removed from the Yorkshire list.
Attention may be called to the breeding of the Quail, and to the fact 
that formerly the Bittern occurred and the Ruff bred regularly in the 
district.
The entire absence of moorland renders such birds as the 
Ring Ouzel, Grouse, and Curlew of exceptional occurrence, while 
the abundance of wood and undergrowth attracts many w^arblers and 
other tree-loving birds.
During winter, when the low-lying land 
previously mentioned is flooded, many Ducks frequent the water, 
and, as will be seen, several of the rarer species have occasionally 
r 
been met with.
With regard to local names of birds, I have mentioned those 
only which are peculiar to the district, or at any rate are not in 
general use.
Many of the so-called local names are merely 
alternatives, for example, 'Throstle' for Song Thrush, 'Titlark' for 
^Meadow Pipit.
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEKRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
8 'J 
3 
Respecting the Reptiles and Amphibians, the only matter which 
calls for remark is in connection with the Viper.
I am not at all 
satisfied that it occurs in the district, although I know that it has 
certainly been taken south of the Wharfe.
The Pisci-fauna of the Nidd and the Wharfe are very similar^ and 
what differences exist may be attributed to the distinctive character 
of the two streams.
Being somewhat sluggish, the coarser fish pre- 
dominate in the Nidd.
The reverse is the case in the Wharfe, no 
doubt due to the fact that it is a much clearer and faster-flowing river.
It is worthy of remark that formerly the Wharfe, between Harewood 
and Tadcaster, was very rich in Trout, but of late years this fish has 
diminished in numbers and given place to the Grayh'ng.
So that now 
the VVharfe within the district must be regarded as a Grayling rather 
than as a Trout stream.
MAMMALS.
Plecotus auritus (Linn.).
Long'-eared Bat. Not uncommon 
in the district • it occurs at AVilstrop and Thorp Arch and is 
frequently found by the workmen when pulling down old cottages 
and farm buildings.
Examples have also been obtained at 
Wetherby, 
Vesperugo noctula (Schreb.).
Noctule.
Great Bat Fairly 
commoUj far more so than jP.
auj'iius and especially so at Thorp 
Arch where it frequents the crevices in the Magnesian limestone 
rock known as Jackdaw Crag on tlie south side of the Wharfe.
It has also been observed at Tadcaster and Boston S])a.
This 
bat usually flies very high.
I have several times kept this as well as other species of bats 
in captivity and have noticed a peculiarity which I have not 
seen described in print.
When the Noctule goes to sleep the 
ear is thrown forward, the front edge then covers the eye and at 
the same time the aural aperture becomes enlarged.
Vesperugo pipistrellus (Schreb.).
Pipistrelle.
Common Bat.
This species is extremely abundant and generally distributed 
throughout the district.
On a fine summer's evening they may 
be seen flying by scores over the Wharfe.
They frequent most 
of the church towers in the district, but the principal colonies 
are to be found at Jackdaw Crag.
I have found the Pipistrelle feeding very largely upon the 
Cliost Swift Moth {Hepalus humiili) from which it clii)s the 
wings.
I have also noticed it taking the Magpie Moth {Abraxas 
grossulariata) 2ind the Ssvallow-tailed Moth { lira J> h^ n x sambu- 
fata), all of which are common in the district.
^^arch 1891.
/ 
84 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV, 
Vespertilio nattereri Kuhl Reddish-grey Bat Natterer's 
Bat. I have met with only one example of this species in the 
y 
district.
I found it lying dead on the road near to Thorp Arch on 
the nth July, 1890 (recorded in 'The Naturalist,' 1890, page 255).
It seems improbable that this should be the only specimen of 
the district, but all the small bats which I have hitherto shot 
have been the common species i^V.
pipistrdhis), 
Erinaceus europaeus Linn.
Hedg-ehog*.
Very common and 
generally distributed throughout the district, and is usually found 
in hedgerows and thickets.
Talpa europaea Linn.
Mole.
Very common in all parts of the 
district, being generally confined to cultivated land and pastures.
The systematic trapping which is carried on does not appear to 
lessen its numbers; if, however, the trapping on an estate is 
suspended for a single season, the enormous increase in numbers 
becomes very apparent the following year.
Sorex tetragonurus Herman.
Common Shrew.
Very 
common, and generally distributed throughout the district; 
both this and the followir.g species have been frequently caught 
but are not eaten by the cat.
Sorex minutus Linn.
Lesser Shrew.
Common in several 
parts of the district, but rare in others ; nowhere so plentiful as 
SAeiragonuriis, Tt appears to spend less time outside Its burrow.
Crossopus fodiens (Pallas).
Water Shrew.
Black Shrew.
The Water Shrew is certainlv scarce in the district ; it occurs 
at "WiLstrop, and I have also seen it on the Foss (a small 
tributary of the Wharfe) near to Wighill Park.
Mr. John Emmet 
records it from Boggard House, Walton, and the Rev. J.
W. 
Chaloner, of Newton Kyme, tells me that his cat took hini a small 
animal, which he did not know.
From the description which he 
has given me I have no hesitation in saying it was a Water Shrew, 
Canis vulpes Linn.
Fox. Common throughout the district.
It is 
bred at Walton, Thorp Arch, and other places, and rigorously 
preserved for the purposes of the Bramham Moor Hunt.
During 
the season some part or other of the district is regularly hunted.
In 1862 Mr. George Lane Fox, writing to the 'Field/ stated 
that foxes were more abundant within the limits of his hunt 
(except about Selby) than in any other part of Yorkshire.
Mustela vulgaris Erxl Common WeaseL Very common 
and generally distributed throughout the district, although largely 
tnpped as vermin by the keepers.
It is generally seen about 
walls and stone-heaps.
This species is subject to much variation 
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
85 
both in size and colour; females are occasionally obtained of 
very smali size, with darker breasts, which accounts for the keepers 
maintaining that" there are two distinct kinds, the smaller of 
which they call the 'Mouse Weasel.* 
Mustela erminea Linn.
Stoat Ermine.
LocaUy called 
Foumart; also Clubster.
Common, but less ho than formerly, 
no dou])t owing to the persistent persecution by the keepers; 
it is, however, more plentiful in some places than in others.
Creamy examples are occasionally obtaine<l in winter.
It 
Irequents the bottom of hedgerows, and the keepers tell me that 
it sometimes travels for a long distance.
A white and easily 
recognisal)le example was shot three miles from the spot where 
it was first seen.
Mustela putoria Linn.
Polecat.
Foumart.
The name 
Foumart is usually used in the district in connection with 
M, erviijiea.
It lias been shot at Ingmanthorpe, and Mr. Harrison 
tells me that two or three were caught at the bottom of a haystack 
at Red House near Wilstrop in 1886.
These are the only 
records I have of it for the district.
Lutra vulgaris Erxl, Otter.
It occurs on the Nidd (Mr. Harrison 
has trapped seven at Wilstrop), but more commonly on the 
Wharfe, where it is comparatively undisturbed.
At one spot 
near Thorp Arch they may be sometimes seen during the evening.
Hie two rivers are occasionally though rarely hunted by packs 
of < )tter-hounds but not always successfully.
On two occasions, 
in 1874 and 1878, they both afforded good sport.
Like the seals, 
the Otter usually sinks when shot, but a young one killed at Thorp 
Arch by Mr. W.
Bland, Mrs. Hatfeild's keeper, remained at the 
surface.
Meles taxus (Schreb.).
Badger.
I am told that the Badger 
still occurs at Bramham south of the Wharfe.
It formerly 
iiihabited the Lime Kiln Wood at Woodhall near Wetherby, 
and the Rev. J, W.
Chaloner tells me that it was there as late 
as 1846; he saw one at Towton about that date.
These are, 
however, the only records I have of it for the neighbourhood.
Cervus dama Linn.
Fallow Deer.
A small herd was formerly 
kept at Healaugh Hall near Tadcaster, the seat of the 
lirooksbanks.
Sciurus vulgaris Linn.
Squirrel.
Very abundant in all the 
larger woods throughout the district.
I know of no place 
where it is so common as at Thorp Arch.
Some of the wood- 
men accuse it of eating the growing shoots of young trees, and 
destroy it accordingly.
March iSqt.
86 WAITE : VERTKBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Muscardinus avellanarius (Linn.).
Dormouse.
Rare, 
Mr. Harrison tells me that it occurs very sparingly at Wilstrop.
I have met with it near to Wetherby and at Bilton, and once at 
Thorp Arch.
I have never caught this species in the traps 
which I have set for the smaller mammals.
Mus minutus Pall.
Harvest Mouse.
The late W.
J. Milligan, 
of Wetherby, wrote of this species: — 'Not by any means rare 
in late summer and autumn.' I am, however, inclined to think 
that some other species is referred to, as I have never found the 
J- 
Harvest Mouse in any part of the district nor have I met any- 
one who has.
Mus sylvaticus Linn, Common Field Mouse.
Long-tailed 
Field Mouse, Abundant and generally distributed throughout 
the district.
Mus musculus Linn.
House Mouse.
Very abundant in all 
parts of the district.
It appears to frequent corn-stacks rather 
than houseSj and I often find them in hedges among the 
branches.
I once found the nest of a Hedge Accentor full of 
haws and a Mouse comfortably ensconced among them.
Mus decumanus Pall.
Brown Rat. Common throughout the 
district.
Frequents corn-stacks in company with M.
muscidns, 
occupying the lower part, while its smaller relative is generally 
found in the upper part.
When the stacks are threshed, both 
species migrate to the houses in the immediate neighbourhood- 
Arvicola amphibia (Linn.).
Water Vole.
Called here, as else- 
where, Water Rat. Plentiful at every ditch, pond, and beck in 
ihe district, and also along the banks of the Wharfe and the 
Nidd- I Lave frequently seen them swim across the river.
Arvicola agrestis DeSelys.
Common Field Vole.
Very 
common in all parts of the district ; plentiful in pastures 
and meadows, more especially those which are low-lying.
Lepus timidus Linn.
Common Hare.
Very common in 
cultivated tracts and pastures.
A few years ago this animal 
was comparatively scarce in the district, but, by strict preserva- 
tion, it has increased to a truly remarkable extent.
Lepus cuniculus Linn.
Rabbit.
Common throughout the dis- 
trict, and exceedingly numerous in some places, especially at 
Wighill Lark, where it simply swarms.
Eoth black and silver- 
grey varieties are not uncommon ; these have, however, been 
introduced.
It is to be supposed that it was in the district 
previous to 1540* as a rabbit warren at Bramham Bigging is 
mentioned in a legal document of that years date as belonging 
to the Priory at Nostell.
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
87 
BIRDS.
Turdus viscivorus Linn.
Missel Thrush.
Resident.
In 
winter this species is generally classed with T, iliacus and 
T, pila7'is, under the common term ^Felfer'; when spoken of 
separately it is known as the 'Stormcock.' It is fairly 
numerous, and a large immigration takes place in autumn ; the 
numbers are, however, again reduced in early winter.
Usually 
very wild and retiring, but bold and pugnacious during the 
breeding season.
It breeds in all parts of the district, and for 
this purpose frequents small plantations in the vicinity of houses 
rather than the deeper woods.
Turdus musicus Linn.
Song" Thrush.
Resident ; very 
abundant.
In September a large immigration takes place; the 
visitors, however, move further south at the approach of winter.
It sutlers much in severe seasons, and in the winter of 1885-6, 
when many w^ere to be found dead beneath the hedges, the 
numbers were so thinned that it was several years before they 
regained their former abundance.
This species breeds com- 
monly throughout the district, and is free from the persecution 
to which T~ merula is subject.
I have ascertained that, at any rate, some of the birds which 
breed in the district, remain there throughout the year.
Turdus iliacus Linn.
Redwing*.
Local name, Redwing- 
Felfer.
Winter visitant, very abundant, especially during severe 
weather.
Associates in large flocks with 7!///^r/y, and feeds 
principally on the ground.
I have opened a large number of these birds, and have 
generally found the food to consist of worms, slugs, and other 
animal matter; this is very probably the reason that when 
a severe continued frost prevails, the Redwings are tlie first 
^ Thrushes ' to succumb.
Turdus pilaris Linn.
Fieldfare.
Local name, IJluctail.
A regular winter visitant, arriving in October, and generally 
departing in April It sometimes appears in large flocks, but is 
never so numerous as T, iliacus, and is usually much wilder.
It feeds largely upon the berries of the hawthorn and wild 
rose, and the ground beneath the hedges is often covered with 
their droppings, which are almost the colour of the fruit that 
they have eaten.
Unlike Redwings, which roost in trees and 
bushes, Fieldfares sleep on the ground, from which they may l^e 
disturbed by hundreds during the night.
Hiey appear to 
frequent certain places to which all the birds in the immediate 
neighbourhood resort.
March i8qi.
88 WAITE: VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Turdus merula Linn.
Blackbird.
Resident and common.
It breeds regularly throughout the district, but is much perse- 
cuted by the farmers on account of its fruit-eating propensities.
Turdus torquatus Linn, Ring Ouzel, Decidedly rare; when 
seen, it is only during the spring and autumn migration.
The 
Rev. J.
W. Chaloner tells me that he has only seen this bird 
once at Newton Kyme.
Mr. John Harrison has met with it on 
two occasions at Wilstrop.
Saxicola cenanthe (Linn.).
Wheatear, A regular visitant in 
small numbers during the spring and autumn migration, when it 
is seen only for a short time, generally about walls and stone-heaps.
Pratincola rubetra (Linn.).
Whinchat.
A regular summer 
visitant.
It is common, and breeds throughout the district 
wherever whins are to be found.
Pratincola rubicola (Linn.).
Stonechat.
Rare, a few have been 
seen from time to time in different parts of the district, generally 
in spring, but ]Mr. Wm.
Eagle Clarke saw a pair at Ivinton, near 
Wetherby, on October loth, 1886.
Ruticilla phcenicurus (Linn.).
Redstart.
Locally known as 
' Wrenny Red-tail.' A summer visitant, fairly common, breeds 
regularly in the district, but is somewhat local in this respect.
Erithacus rubecula (Linn.).
Redbreast Resident ; partially 
migratory, very common in the district, throughout which it 
breeds regularly.
Daulias luscinia (Linn.), Nightingale.
The following are the 
only records which I have of this species !
— One at Stockeld 
Park, near Wetherby.
In 1846 one was seen at Wetherby 
Grange by the Rev. J.
W. Chaloner, who tells me that there 
have been two occurrences at Newton Kyme — one in 1866 and 
another in 1886.
In 1880 Mr. John Emmet wrote: — 'T am 
told that a pair built at the Vicarage, Thorp Arch, some years 
since, but the nest was taken.' Mr. John Harrison writes: 
'A pair frequented Wilstrop for two years in succession, 1S60 
and 1861, but the nest was not found.' 
Sylvia cinerea Bechst.
Whitethroat Commonly called, as 
elsewhere, Peggy Whitethroat.
Summer visitant, and very 
common, breedmg in all suitable places throughout the district, 
frequently among nettles.
Sylvia curruca (Linn.).
Lesser Whitethroat.
A regular 
summer visitant, but not nearly so common as S.
cinerea'^ 
breeds in many places in the district, usually much earlier than 
the Whitethroat.
Naturalist, 
WAITK : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Sg 
Sylvia orphea Temm.
Orphean Warbler.
The late Sir Wm. ALE.
Milner records the fact that a pair were seen in a small planta- 
tion near Wetherby on the 6th July, 1848.
The female was 
shot and stufted by Graham of York (Mihier, Zoologist, 1849, 
p. 2588).
The bird is now in the ' Milner Collection ' at the 
Leeds Museum.
Sylvia atricapilla (Linn.).
Blackcap.
Summer visitant, regular, 
but not common ; breeds at Wilstropand Healaugh.
' Blackcap' 
is the name commonly applied to Parus major, and writers of MSS.
state that the Blackcap is very common in their district.
These 
remarks are, however, distinctly applicable to the Great Tit.
Sylvia hortensis Bechst.
Garden Warbler.
A regular summer 
visitant, and fairly common ; perhaps especially so at Wetherby.
Breeds in several places in the district.
Regulus cristatus Koch.
Goldcrest.
Resident, fairly common, 
and generally distributed throughout the district.
It breeds 
regularly at Wilstrop and Wetherby, and occasionally in other 
places where there are fir jilantations.
Regulus ignicapillus (Brehm).
Firecrest One was caught 
at Whixley, just outside the district, on December 3rd, 1849.
' The markings at the side of the head as well as the feathers 
forming the crest (which in the present example are of an 
intense flame colour) sufficiently distinguish the species.' 
(Garth, Zoologist, 1S50, p.
2699}.
Phylloscopus rufus (Bechst.).
Chiffchaff.
A regular summer 
vi:5itant, but local; common where it occurs.
Breeds in several 
localities in the district.
Phylloscopus trochilus (Linn.)- Willow Warbler.
Summer 
visitant, regular, and exceedingly common.
Breeds in all parts 
of the district 
Phylloscopus sibilatrix (Bechst.).
Wood Warbler.
An 
irrei^ular summer visitant and somewhat rare.
I have seen it at 
found the nest at Wilstrop.
Joh 
Acrocephalus streperus (VieilL).
Reed Warbler 
& 
summer visitant, and rare.
I have seen it at some old tan-ponds 
Walt 
feel certain that it breeds there, but have never succeeded in 
finding the nest Mr. F.
Stevens found the nest at Wetherby, 
and possesses two eggs which he took from it 
Acrocephalus phragmitis (Bechst.).
Sedge Warbler.
Local 
name, Willow Chit A regular sunnner visitant and exceedingly 
90 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
common, perhaps more so than any other Warbler; breeds in 
all suitable localities throughout the district.
Locustella nsevia (Bodd.).
Grasshopper Warbler.
Regular 
summer visitant and not uncommon, but local.
It is fairly 
numerous at Cowthorpe and Wilsti op, where it breeds; it also 
occurs at Wetherby, but is scarcer towards the east.
I have not 
found it in the immediate neighbourhood south of the Wharfe.
Accentor modularis (Linn.).
Hedge Accentor.
Cuddy is 
the name by which it is usually designated.
Resident, and as 
common in the .-Mnsty as elsewhere.
It breeds in all parts of 
the district.
Cinclus aquaticus Bechst.
Dippen Resident ; common on 
the Wharfe; it breeds regularly at Wetherby and Thorp Arch.
The Nidd within the district is too sluggish for it, and it is seldom 
seen below Knaresborough.
Mr. Harrison has met with it only 
once on the latter river — at Skip Bridge, 
Acredula rosea (Blyih).
Long-tailed Tit. Resident and 
fairly comm.on in all the larger woods within the district.
It is 
a very gregarious species and breeds regularly at Wilstrop, 
Ingmanthorpe, and Thorp Arch- | 
Parus major Linn.
Great Tit. Local name, Blackcap (see 
Sylvia airicapilld) and Billy Jinker.
Resident and common; it 
appears to be increasing in numbers, and breeds regularly 
throughout the district, 
Parus britannicus Sharpe & Dresser.
Coal Tit- Resident ; 
fairly common, but somewhat local ; being partial to fir planta- 
tions, It breeds in most suitable parts of the district.
Parus palustris Linn.
Marsh Tit. Resident and uncommon; 
the rarest Tit of the district, throughout which, however, it 
occurs in very small numbers.
The term * Marsh ' does not 
appear to have any special reference to this bird, for it inhabits 
precisely the same localities as other Tits, and is frequently 
seen in their company.
Parus cseruleus Linn.
Blue Tit. Local names, Blue-cap and 
Billy-biter.
Resident and very abundant; the commonest Tit 
of the district, throughout winch it breeds.
Sitta C^esia Wolf.
Nuthatch.
Decidedly rare.
I have met with 
it twice at Newton Kyme.
Mr. J 
T. W, Chaloner has seen 
Joh 
(MS., 1880): — 'It breeds at AUerton Park', a short distance 
outside the district.
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEHRATKS OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
9I 
Troglodytes parvulus Koch.
Wren.
Locally known as 
Tom Tit. Resident and tolerably common ; breeds in all 
parts of the district.
Mr. J, R.
Hatfeild was bottom fishing 
in the Wharfe a short while ago, and had just drawn the worm 
out of the water when it was seized by a Wren, which held on 
to it for two or three seconds, and then flew away.
Certhia familiaris Linn.
Tree Creeper.
Local name, Little 
Woodpecker.
Resident and not very common ; breeds in 
several parts of the district, chiefly in the older woods.
Motacilla lugubris Temm.
Pied Wagtail.
Resident and 
fairly common, and breeds regularly.
In Autumn the greater 
number leave the district, but appear again in March.
. Motacilla melanope Pall.
Grey Wagtail.
Resident, but not 
very numerous.
It is, however, more common in Winter.
It 
occasionally breeds on the Wharfe, above Tadcaster, and did so 
in 1877, ^1^0 last year (1S90); breeds at Hunsingore, on the Nidd.
Motacilla rail Bonap.
Yellow Wagtail.
An irregular summer 
visitant in varying numbers.
I am told that it has bred at 
Wetherby.
I have never found it doing so in the Ainsty 
district 
Anthus trivialis (Linn.).
Tree Pipit.
Tocal name, Tree Lark.
A regular summer visitant, very common and generally distri- 
buted throughout the district, breeding in all parts.
It appears 
to be more numerous than A, praiensis, 
Anthus pratensis (Linn.).
Meadow Pipit.
Resident ; ver>' 
common in summer but much less so in winter, it breeds 
regularly in all parts of the district, but more numerously in 
moist meadows.
Oriolus galbula Linn.
Golden Oriole.
The Rev. J.
W. 
Chaloner tells me that one of these birds was seen on the 28th 
April, 1870, at Grimston Park near Tadcaster, by the keeper 
(see also ^Yorkshire Vertebrata,' page 27)- 
Lanius excubitor Linn.
Great Grey Shrike.
Mr. John 
Harrison informs me that he saw one at Wili>trop during the 
winter of 1876-7.
One has been shot near "Wetherby.
Ampelis garrulus Linn.
Waxwing.
A rare winter visitant.
It has only been seen in the district during severe seasons.
Several were seen at Farnham near Wetherby on Jan. 5th, 1870.
One was shot by Mr. Wright at Tockwith.
Muscicapa grisola Linn.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Summer 
visitant, common ; breeds regularly in many parts of the district, 
being generally found in orchards.
March i8gi.
^2 WAlTfc: : VKRIEBKATES OF THK WKSTKKX AiXSTV.
I have frequently found the young birds to leave the nest 
when they are scarcely able to fly; they sit at the roots of the trees 
and are difficult to find owing to their grey colour, which assimi- 
lates well with the bark.
Muscicapa atricapilla Linn.
Pied Flycatcher.
This bird 
has been seen in the district at Wilstrop by Mr. John Harrison 
and at Collingham by the Rev. J.
AV.
Chaloner.
Mr. F.
Stevens 
found a nest at Wetherby in 1889, 
Hirundo rustica Linn, Swallow.
A regular summer visitant, 
abundant; it breeds throughout the district wherever suitable 
nesting sites exist.
I liave described some nests built at AVilstrop 
in *Thc Naturalist/ 1890, page 258.
Chelidon urbica (T>inn.), Martin.
Summer visitant, regular 
and common, but much less so in some places than formerly; 
being driven out of its nests by the House Sparrows, which are 
increasing in numbers.
The Martin has entirely deserted some 
localities where it formerly bred, but at Wilstrop, where the 
Sparrows are kept in check, it is plentiful and I have counted as 
many as twenty-two occupied nests under the eaves of one shed.
Cotile riparia (Linn.).
Sand Martin.
A regular summer 
visitant, abundant where it occurs, breeds in colonies in many 
places in the banks of the Wharfe and Nidd and also in several 
sand-pits.
Ligurinus chloris (Linn.).
Greenfinch.
Resident and abun- 
dant, it breeds generally throughout the district.
Coccothraustes vulgaris Pall.
Hawfinch.
From all accounts 
it appears that the Hawfinch is increasing in numbers in many 
parts of the country, and the ^Vestern Ainsty is no exception ; 
it was formerly a rare bird but can hardly be considered so now.
I have seen it at several places in the district at different times 
of the year and obtained one at Wilstrop on 8th Feb., 1890.
Mr. John Emmet records it at Healaugh on May nth, 1S83 
('Naturalist,' 1S85, p.
299), and he found it nesting at Boston 
Spa in 1886 ('Naturalist,' 1886, p.
377).
Carduelis elegans Steph.
Goldfinch.
Locally called Redcai>.
Formerly common, but rare now, for which I believe the bird- 
catchers are mainly responsible.
In a MS.
dated 1S80, the 
late W.
J. Milligan, of Wetherby, wrote of this species : — ' It is 
not numerous, and is oftener seen in autumn and winter; 
a favourite locality is about Wighill and Newton Kyme, but it 
is continually shifting its quarters.' The late John Tennant wrote 
in iSSo : — * It has bred at Wilstrop, l)ut is very rar e now .' 
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
95 
It Still occurs at Wetherby, and breeds at Boston Spa. My 
father tells me that many years ago Oglethorpe Whin Covert 
used to be a favourite haunt of GoldfincheSj whence the birds 
visited a spring at Boston Spa, a mile distant.
Chrysomitris Spinus (Linn.).
Siskin.
An irregular winter 
visitant; when it occurs, it is generally during severe weather, 
usually in small, but sometimes in larger numbers, as, for 
They generally frequent the alder trees.
J 
Passer domesticus (Linn.).
House Sparrow.
Resident and 
extremely abundant.
The persistent persecution by the farmers- 
does not, on the whole, appear to lessen its numbers ; it is,, 
however, kept well wTthin bounds at Wilstrop Hall by 
Mr. Harrison.
Breeds in all parts of the district where human' 
habitations exist (see Chelidon tirbicd).
Passer montanus (Linn.).
Tree Sparrow.
Resident, but 
local ; common where it occurs, as at Walton, Thorp Arch, and 
Wilstrop.
Mr, James Backhouse has a note in 'The Naturalist,' 
1890, p.
355, on this species at Wilstrop, and I may add that it 
occasionally breeds there in low thick bushes.
I have never 
known two broods to be reared in a season, nor have I found 
/*.
montanus interpairing with P.
domesticus, 
tTingilla coelebs Linn.
Chaffinch.
Usually called Bullspink,.
or simply Spink, in the district.
Resident, and, next to- 
P. domesticus^ the most abundant Finch.
It is passionately fond 
of radish-seed, and unless prevented, will assemble in shoals 
where it is sown and soon do considerable damage.
I have 
not noticed that any separation of the sexes takes place in- 
autumn or winter, as recorded by writers in other districts.
Fringilla montifringilla Tjnn.
Brambling.
Better known in 
the district bv its second trivial name of Mountain Finch f 
a regular winter visitant, very common in severe seasons, when 
it associates Avith flocks of Chaffinches ami Greenfinches.
It 
was especially numerous last winter (1890).
Linota cannabina (Linn.).
Linnet Resident and very 
common where it occurs ; breeds regularly in those parts of the 
district where Pratincoh ruhetra is to be met witli.
It is 
usuallv seen in small flocks in the autumn.
Linota rufescens (Vieill.).
Lesser Redpoll.
Locally called 
Chevy-linnet.
Resident; not very common, but somewhat 
variable in this respect, in some places being fairly numerous, 
while in others it is seldom seen ; it breeds in the district.
94 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Linota flavirostris (Linn.).
Twite.
Mr. Harrison tells me that 
it has occurred at Wilstrop in -winter.
I have never seen it in 
the district.
Pyrrhula europaea Vieill.
Bullfinch.
Resident, and fairly 
common ; might be much more so but for the bird-catchers, 
who take both sexes indiscriminatelv in the winter.
It breeds 
pi' 
sparingly in all parts of the district, more commonly where 
young fir trees are planted, 
Loxia curvirostra Linn.
Common Crossbill.
I have only 
one occurrence to record for the district, and that a very recent 
one.
Mr. F.
Stevens, of Wetherby, wTites to me : — ' On the 
ist January last (1891), during the severe weather, I obtained 
a Crossbill here alive, but let it go again.' In a subsequent 
letter, replying to one from me, he says the Crossbill was in a 
very exhausted condition, and he gives a description of the bird 
such as to leave no doubt in my mind as to its identity.
Emberiza miliaria Linn.
Corn Bunting.
Locally known by 
the name of Chub-lark, Resident, and common on cultivated 
land ; appears to be increasing in numbers.
It breeds in all 
suitable localities throughout the district.
Emberiza citrinella Linn.
Yellow Bunting.
Local names, 
Goldie, YouUlie, and Youldring.
Resident, and very common 
in all parts of the district, breeding generally throughout.
Emberiza cirlus Linn.
Cirl Bunting.
Mr. John Harrison 
has met with a single example at Wilstrop, and the Rev. J.
W. 
Chaloner has seen the bird on one or two occasions at Newton 
Kvme.
Emberiza schceniclus Linn.
Reed Bunting.
Resident ; 
but not very common.
. It occurs on the more swam})y ground, 
but is decreasing in numbers, no doubt owing to more extensive 
drainage.
It breeds annually on the Racecourse at Wetherby, 
at Wilstrop, and occasionally near Walton and at Newton Kyme.
Plectrophanes nivalis (Linn.).
Snow Bunting* An irregular 
winter visitant ; occurs during very severe and prolonged cold 
weather.
I saw more last winter, 1890-1S91, than I have ever 
seen before in the district.
Mr. J.
R. Hatfeild shot one.
Sturnus vulgaris Linn.
Starling.
Resident and abundant; 
it has increased very much of late years, and breeds throughout 
tlie district wherever it can find suitable nesting-sites.
At Walton 
I have seen upwards of two hundred Starlings' eggs taken from 
a pigeon-house at one collection.
Mr. John Harrison (one o( 
the few farmers who recognise the worth of this bird) has built 
Naturalist, 
waitp: : vektebrates of the western ainstv.
95 
for them suitable nesting-places in the farm-buildings at Wilstrop, 
where 250 pairs breed annually.
In autumn these birds feed 
very largely on elder-berries, and at this season their dro])pings 
have quite a purple colour, resembling those of Grouse \vhen 
feeding on blueberries.
Pastor roseus (Linn.).
Rose-coloured Starling-.
In a MS.
dated 1S80, the late John Tennant wrote : ' My father saw one 
at Wetherby, which was shot there, some twenty-five years ago.' 
Garrulus glandarius (Linn,).
Jay. Resident^ but far from 
common, accounted for by the fact that it is regarded as S'ermin' 
by the keepers; its extermination in the district is but the 
question of a few years; it, however, still occurs in all the 
larger woods, and is not uncommon at Newton Kyme, where 
it breeds regularly.
Pica rustica (Scop.).
Magfpie.
Resident, and fairly common 
throughout the district, in spite of persistent persecution.
The usual practice of the gamekeepers in spring is to shoot the 
old birds and then fire through the nest, and so kill the young 
ones or destroy the eggs.
It is very gregarious, and I have 
seen twenty-eight feeding together at an offal heap.
It breeds 
regularly in most of tlie woods and planiations.
Corvus monedula Lim^.
Jackdaw.
Resident, very numerous, 
being one of the only two common members of the British 
Corvidie not usually found on the keeper's 'poles.' It nests in 
most of the old church-towers in the district, but the chief 
breeding-place is in the holes in the ALagnesian Limestone cliff 
on the south side of the Wharfe at Thorp Arch, named after 
the bird, ' The Jackdaw Crag/ They not infrequently nest in 
rabbit-holes in the bank of the river.
Scores of Jackdaws 
sometimes associate with the Rooks when these birds are per- 
forming their aerial gyrations.
Corvus corax Linn.
Raven.
Mr. Harrison has seen a few 
examples in tlie district duriug the past forty years.
He trapped 
one in the spring of 1865, and kept it alive for five or six years.
'I'he last ojie seen in the neighbourhood was at Wilstrop in 
1870.
The late John Tennant wrote; ' They formerly bred at 
Allerton Park' (MS.
iSSo).
Corvus corone Lmn. Carrion Crow.
Resident; not uncommon, 
it holds its own in spite of gun and trap, and breeds regularly 
in the more secluded woods throughout the district.
Corvus cornix Linn.
Hooded Crov^.
A regular winter visitant 
in^small numbers, usually more common during severe seasons.
96 WAITE: VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
I saw fewer during the early part of last winter t 890-9 1, although 
an exceptionally severe one, than I ever remember having 
seen before; this I attribute to the very mild weather which 
prevailed in the North of Europe.
Corvus frugilegus Linn, Rook.
Resident and common, the 
second species about which the gamekeeper does not trouble; 
it occasionally suffers a little at the hands of the farmers.
Breeds 
in colonies in many parts of the district.
Alauda arvensis Linn.
Skylark, Resident, abundant and 
generally distributed; it is largely snared by the bird-catchers,, 
and breeds in all parts of the district.
Cypselus apus Linn.
Swift.
Locally known as Devil-screamer^ 
a common summer visitant, breeds regularly in large numbers 
in all the railway .sheds on the Wetherby line within the district,, 
also in Wetherby Bridge and Walshford Bridge and in most of 
the church towers.
Caprimulgus europaeus Linn.
Nightjar.
Goatsucker.
A summer visitant but not very common, and quite local ; 
Mr. Llarrison has only twice found it breeding at Wilstrop 
(which is perhaps the most suitable locality in the district) during 
the last forty years.
It has also occurred at Newton Kyme.
lynx torquilla Linn.
Wryneck.
.The only record 1 have of 
this species In the district is that Mr. Chaloner saw one at 
Newton Kyme in 1889 (MS.).
Dendrocopus major (Linn.).
Great Spotted Woodpecker.
Resident and fairly numerouSj the commonest Woodpecker of 
the (Hstrict.
It breeds regularly in all the deeply-wooded parts, 
e.g., Walton, Wilstrop, Ingmanthorpe, Newton Kyme, Thorp 
Arch, etc.
Dendrocopus minor (Linn.).
Lesser Spotted Woodpecker.
(See Certhia familians).
According to the Rev. J.
W. Chaloner 
this species has occurred at Newton Kyme (MS.), and Mr. F.
Stevens tells me that he has seen it on one occasion at Wetherby.
Gecinus viridis (Linn.).
Green Woodpecker.
The keepers 
and woodmen call this bird the Golden Woodpecker.
Resident, 
but far from common ; it occurs sparingly in all the larger woods, 
but the only place in the district where it breeds regularly is at 
Healaugh.
A pair bred at Wetherby in 1887.
This bird is 
a much better flyer than it usually gets credit for ; I once startled 
one out of a small coppice and it flew in an almost straight line 
until it appeared a mere speck, and finally I could see ir no 
longer.
NaturalUtr 
waite: vertebrates of the western ainsty.
97 
Alcedo ispida Linn.
Kingfisher.
Resident, and by no means 
uncommon in suitable places in the district; lam glad to be 
able to say that it is certainly increasing in numbers and breeds 
regularly, not only in the banks of the Wharfe and Nidd but also 
on several ponds especially those which are protected by over- 
hanging brushwood.
y 
r 
Upupa epops Linn, Hoopoe.
A male was shot by Mr. Ripley 
in Cowthorpe Woods, near Tockwith, in June, 1877.
He fired 
at a rabbit, and on going to pick it up, found that he had shot 
the Hoopoe also (Wesley, Zool., July 1877, p.
298).
Cuculus canorus Linn.
Cuckoo.
A regular summer visitant ; 
common throughout all parts of the district.
I once saw a 
Cuckoo fly from a hedge with a large caterpillar in its beak, and 
suspecting it to be a larva of the Oak-Eggar Moth {Lasiocampa 
quercus) which I knew to be plentiful in the locality, I went to 
the place and gathered over twenty larv^ during the afternoon.
The egg of the Cuckoo has been taken in the district, from 
the nests of — Pratincola rubetra, Sylvia cinerea, S.
hortensiSy 
Mi 
M. rail, A nth 
E. schcenidus.
Strix flammea Linn.
Barn Owl. Locally called Yellow Owl 
Resident ; not very common.
It occurs in most parts of the 
district, and has bred at Thorp Arch, Walton, and Newton 
Kyme, and does so regularly at Ingmanthorpe and Wilstrop.
I have more than once seen an example in the pigeon-house 
mentioned in connection with the Starhng, but it has never bred 
in it- At Wilstrop a nesting-hole has been regularly occupied 
by Barn Owls for the last thirty-five years.
Two broods were 
reared last year (1890).
There were six in the first and five in 
the second brood.
I saw the latter in 'down' on November ist, 
and Mn Harrison tells me they were not on the wing until 
a month later.
This nest chamber is about four feet square, and 
is paved to the depth of four inches with pellets, which form tlie 
only repository for the eggs or young birds.
A note on the Earn 
Owl at Wilstrop (by Mr. Harrison) will be found in the Nat.
Hist.
Journal, Feb. T5th, 1879.
Asio otus (Linn.).
Long-eared Owl. Resident, but uncommon; 
it occurs in many of the thicker woods, notably at Wetherby, 
and breeds at Newton Kyme, but this is the only place in the 
district where I know of it doing so.
April 1891.
G 
98 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Asio accipitrinus (Pall).
Short-eared Owl, Rare, and when 
seen it is generally in the winter.
It has, however, occurred at 
other seasons of the year; one at Wilstrop 21st June, 1878 
(Clarke, Zooh, 1880, p.
353).
Mr. J.
G. Blanshard has one in 
his possession, which he shot at Walton in the spring of 18S1, 
and Mr. John Harrison saw one in June, 1889, flying in the 
sunshine.
Syrnium aluco (Linn.).
Tawny Owl. Brown Owl, Resident, 
and fairly common, more so than any other Owl in the district, 
in most of the woods of which it breeds.
Scops g"iu (Scop.).
Scops Owl. One, now in the possession of 
Mr. Charles Fothergill, of York, was shot at Wetherby in the 
spring of 1805.
(Mont.
Ornith.
Diet.
Supp.).
Circus cineraceus (Mont).
Montagu's Harrier.
Mr. John 
Harrison tells me that he saw a male at Wilstrop on June 3rd, 
1886.
Circus cyaneus (Linn.).
Hen Harrier.
The late Henry Denny, 
in his Leeds Catalogue (Ann. and Mag. Nat Hist., 1840), 
mentions it as being rare, and gives Thorp Arch as one of the 
localities where it had occurred.
An example has been obtained 
near Wetherby, and another was picked up dead in a rookery at 
Thorparch about 1874.
Buteo vulgaris Leach.
Common Buzzard.
In the Leeds 
Catalogue above mentioned Denny cites it as rare, and gives 
North Deighton as one of the locahties in which it had occurred, 
Mr. J.
Redfern, the keeper at Wighill Park, has a very fine 
example, which he trapped there in November 1887.
Mr. Francis G.
Binnie, of the Edinburgh University, sends me 
an account of the Common Buzzard, from which it seems 
probable that it has bred in the district.
He writes : — 'I find 
in my diary under date 27th February, 1S68, the following note : 
'* Mr, Simpson (bird-stuffer, A^ork) told me that some years since 
he had bought from some boys at Tadcaster a pair of yoimg 
Hawks, which, on rearing, turned out to be this species.
The 
old birds had been seen several times afterwards.'*' 
Archibuteo lagopus (Gmel.).
Rough-legged Buzzard.
Mr. Harrison informs me that one was shot at near Wilstrop by 
a keeper, who, however, failed to secure the bird.
Aquila chrysaetus (Linn.).
Golden Eagle.
'But one instance 
of this bird has occurred, which was a specimen shot in Stockeld 
Park, near Wetherby, November 29th, 1804' (Henry Denny, 
Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., 1840).
Nat\\r;*Hst, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
99 
Astur palumbarius (Linn.).
Gos Hawk.
Mr. John Harrison 
saw one on the ground at Wilstrop in 1880 ; he was so near to 
the bird that he had no difificulty in recognising it.
He went 
into his house for a gun, but when he returned the bird had 
disappeared, and was not seen again.
Accipiter nisus (Linn.).
Sparrow Hawk.
Resident and fairly 
numerous, but much harassed by the keepers and farmers, who, 
in addition to shooting and trapping the old birds, destroy the 
eggs and the young ones by firing through the nest, as is done 
with the Magpie and other species which they consider hurtful 
to game birds.
The Sparrow Hawk, however, survives this 
continued persecution, and breeds regularly in most of the 
woods throughout the district- 
Milvus ictinus Sav, Kite.
In a MS.
dated iSBo the late John 
Tennant wrote: — 'Shot from the nest at Morton by the late 
Charles Harrison, who obtained both birds.
A pair were shot 
m Redhouse Wood by A.
Christie, in spring, 20 to 30 years ago.
Pair passed over Wilstrop some years ago.' Mr. J.
Harrison, 
who saw the last-named birds, tells me that the year was 
probably 1874.
His attention was directed to the birds (which 
he easily recognised by their long forked tails) by their being 
mobbed by a large party of Rooks.
Pernis apivorus (Linn,).
Honey Buzzard.
An old female 
in the possession of Mr. Harrison was shot by a gamekeeper 
near Wetherby, on June 7th, 1873; and a second example, also 
and stuffed by Ripley, of York.
J 
I^alco islandus Gmel.
Iceland Falcon.
*In the collection of 
Mr. C, C.
Oxley, of Ripon, is a fine specimen of the Iceland 
Falcon, which is said to have been shot on Marston Moor, in 
1 -December 1826 or 1836.
This bird was purchased by Mr. Oxiey 
at the sale of the collection of the late Dr. Hobson, of Leeds' 
(Clarke, ' Birds of Yorkshire,' p.
10).
Falco peregrinus Tunstall.
Peregrine Falcon.
An immature 
female, now in the possession of Mr. John Harrison, was shot 
by his brother, the late Wm. Harrison, at Wilstrop, about i860, 
This species is quoted as rare in the Leeds district by Denny, 
who mentions it as having occurred at 1 adcaster (Ann. and ^^ag.
Nat. Hist, 1840).
Falco subbuteo Linn.
Hobby.
I ^mi told that the Hobby has 
occasionally been seen in the district, but the only specific record 
loo WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
I have of such a fact is that one was shot near AVetherby Grange 
* about twenty years ago' (\V.
J. MiUigarij 1880).
Falco aesalon Tunstall.
Merlin.
An occasional visitant to the 
district in winter.
One was shot near Wetherby on the 16th 
December, 1877.
A second is recorded also near Wetherby^ 
Dec. 1877 (Backhouse, Zooh, March 1878, p.
106).
Falco tinnunculus Linn.
Kestrel.
Local name, Brown Hawk.
Resident.
The commonest of the Falconidce , breeds regularly 
in many of the woods throughout the district.
Falco cenchris Naum.
Lesser Kestrel.
A mature male, novr 
in the York Museum, was shot at Wilstrop by Mr. John Har- 
rison, in the middle of November, 1867 (for detailed account 
see Clarke's ' Birds of Yorkshire,' p.
21).
Phalacrocorax carbo (Linn.).
Cormorant.
The Rev. J.
W. 
Chaloner has in his collection an example which he shot at 
Newton Kyme in 1852, and Mr. John Emmet tells me that the 
late Coote Alexr, Carroll saw three flying over Toulson Lodge 
in 186S.
Sula bassana (Linn.).
Gannet.
I am told that an example in 
immature plumage was picked up in 1SS8 at Hessay, about two 
miles from Wilstrop, having injured itself by flying against the 
telegraph wires.
Ardea cinerea Linn, Heron.
Resident, and fairly common 
both on the Nidd and Wharfe.
I have also several times 
flushed it from a reedy pond near Walton.
It formerly bred in 
Wilstrop Wood, and has done so in recent years in a wood near 
Goldsborough, and also at Ribstone.
The nearest heronry is at 
Harewood Park.
There was formerly one at Wetherby (Harting, 
* Field,' Feb. 7th, 1872, p.
146).
In 1S89 a pair nested at 
Ingmanthorpe, and successfully reared five young ones.
Botaurus stellaris (Linn.).
Bittern.
Formerly this now rare 
bird was not uncommon in the district, and has occasionally 
been seen during more recent years.
' It has been shot at 
Skewkirk' (Tennant MS., 1880).
'Shot near Smaws Wood, 
Tadcaster in 1843' (Emmet MS.)- Mr. Wm.
Cass has in his 
possession a very fine example which he shot on the Nidd, near 
Wilstrop, in i860.
A few years later one was shot at Spofibrth.
The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner tells me that specimens have been 
obtained at Newton Kyme and Tadcaster.
One recorded from 
Grimston Park, Tadcaster, was killed in December, 1884.
(Backhouse, 'Naturalist,' 18S4-5, p.
149).
The last record of 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
lOI 
this bird for the district is, ' A male was shot at North Deighton 
by Col. Wilkinson's keeper about three years ago, during the 
third week in May.' (Milligan, MS., 1880).
Anser cinereus Meyer.
Grey Lag Goose.
Small flocks of 
^ ' Wild Geese ' frequently pass over the district in winter, and 
occasionally settle on the Wharfe and Nidd.
This species has 
been obtained, but not nearly so commonly as A.brachyrhynchus.
Anser seg-etum (Gmel.).
Bean Goose.
It is just possible that 
this species may frequently occur among the 'Wild Geese,' and 
pass unnoticed.
I have, however, the opportunity of recording 
one undoubted occurrence, having seen the bird, which is now 
in the possession of Mrs, Hatfeild, of Thorp Arch.
It was shot 
out of a flock of six on the Wharfe, at Newton Kyme, on the 
14th January last (1891) by Mr. Charles Chaloner.
Anser brachyrhynchus Baill.
Pink-footed Goose.
This is, 
I believe, the commonest ' Wild Goose ' which visits the district, 
and has been shot on both the Wharfe and the Nidcl.
Mr. Tom 
Cass obtained three on the latter river near to Wilstrop, on 
February 8th, 1S88.
Anser albifrons (Scop.).
White-fronted Goose.
Has 
occasionally occurred in winter.
Mr. Wm.
Cass shot several 
on the Nidd, at Wilstrop, during the winter 18S5-6.
Bernicla brenta (Pall).
Brent Goose.
I am told that this 
species has been obtained on the Wharfe, within the district 
I have, however, no specific record of the fact.
Bernicla leucopsis (Bechst.).
Barnacle Goose.
This species 
is not an uncommon, although irregular winter visitant.
An 
example was shot on the Nidd by Mr. Charles Whincup in 
November, i860.
It has several times occurred on the Wharfe, 
and the Rev. J.
\\\ Chaloner shot two at Newton Kyme in the 
winter of 18S9-90, one of which is in the possession of ^frs.
Hatfeild, of Thorp Arch.
Bernicla canadensis (Linn.)- Canada Goose.
An introduced 
species.
I have occasionally seen this bird on the Wharfe, near 
Thorp Arch.
It has also occurred on several occasions on the 
Nidd.
Mr. Wm.
Cass shot one on that river near to Wilstrop, 
and Mr. Harrison thinks that this is one of the two examples in 
the ' Milner Collection ' at the Leeds Museum.
All the occur- 
rences of this bird within the district are very probably stragglers 
from Harewood Parle, where they are kept in a semi-domesticated 
state.
April i8gi.
f 
1 02 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Cygnus olor (Gmel.).
Mute Swan.
A domesticated species 
which occasionally straggles into the district, 
Cygnus immutabilis Yarr.
Polish Swan.
An example of this 
bird (perhaps to be regarded merely as a variety of C.
o/or, cf.
Proc.
Zool.
Soc, T876, p.
466) was shot by Mr. John Harrison 
out of a flock of two or three at Wilstrop during late autumn 
! 
i860.
musicus 
Bechst.
Whooper Swan.
An occasional 
winter visitant.
Small flocks of Swans sometimes pass over the 
district in winter, but usually at such an elevation that it is im- 
possible to distinguish the species.
Nine Whoopers were 
seen on the Nidd at Wilstrop for nearly a week, al)0ut Christmas 
in 1859, during a very severe snow-storm, and of these five were 
shot.
They were, I am told, all served up for * Christmas 
dinner.' 
Tadorna cornuta (Gmel.).
Sheldrake.
An occasional straggler, 
generally during the floods.
A male was shot at Wilstrop out of 
a flock of five, by Mr. J.
Harrison, in Oct. 1881.
This bird 
passed into the possession of Mr. J.
Backhouse, of Harrogate.
Anas boschas Linn.
Mallard.
Common Wild Duck.
Resident and fairly common, much more so in winter ; 
occasionally breeds in the district ; has done so at Wetherby.
Dafila acuta (Linn.).
Pintail.
Very rarely seen, and only 
winter.
Mr. John Harrison shot two on the Nidd at Wilstrop, 
in the winter of 1881-2.
The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner has seen 
several of these birds at Newton Kyme, one of which fell to his 
gun in 1856.
Querquedula crecca (Linn.).
Teal.
Common on the Wharfe, 
but less so on the Nidd ; generally seen in winter, and 
occasionally in summer, but I have no record of it having bred 
m 
in the district.
M 
Wigeon, A regular 
and fairly common on both the Wharfe and the Nidd ; some 
seasons it is much more numerous than others.
r 
Fuligula ferina (Linn.).
Pochard.
Locally known as Re^l 
Head.
Not uncommon in winter; appears in larger numbers 
when the land is flooded.
Fuligula cristata (Leach).
Tufted Duck, A winter visitant; 
somewhat irregular and never common ; has occurred on both 
the Nidd and the Wharfe, and several examples have been shot 
J 
N.-jturalist 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
lOJ 
Fulig'ula marila (Linn.).
Scaup.
Winter visitant.
Mr. Harrison 
tells me that he has shot several examples on the Nidd, at 
Wilstrop- I have no record of it for the Wharfe, although it no 
doubt has occurred.
Clangula glaucion (Linn.).
Golden-eye.
Specimens have 
been obtained both on the Nidd, at Wilstrop, and on the 
Wharfe, at Newton Kyme.
Although not common^ this species 
cannot be considered rare- 
Harelda glacialis (Linn.).
Long--tailed Duck.
An example 
has been shot at Wilstrop (Tennant, MS.).
There is no 
reason why this bird should not have occurred in the district.
A female in the ' Milner Collection' at the Leeds Museum was 
obtained at Nun Appleton in 1S69, and Mr. Riley Fortune saw 
a pair at Killinghall in December 1883 (' Birds of Harrogate/ 
p. 12).
J 
looking over the proofs, tells me that he shot the bird recorded 
from Wilstrop.
CEdemia nigra (Linn.).
Common Scoter.
Black Duck.
The Rev, J.
W, Chaloner informs me that this species has 
occurred several times at Newton Kyme; he has an example 
in his possession which he shot there.
Mr. John Harrison 
has one which he shot at Wilstrop in 1875, ^^^ he has seen 
others in the locality.
r 
Mergus merganser Linn.
Goosanden Local name of the 
female, Dun Diver.
Regular winter visitant in small numbers.
Nine were seen on the Wharfe at Newton Kyme on March 6th, 
1884 (Naturalist, 1883-4, p.
151).
Mr. Wilson of Wetherby 
has two specimens which he shot there in March 1886; one of 
them was only slightly damaged, and on being seized, it dis- 
gorged a trout 10 inches in length.
Mr. Charles Chaloner 
shot two out of a flock of five at Newton Kyme on 6th January 
last (1891).
Mr. Wm, Cass has shot several on the Nidd at 
Wilstrop, 
irgus albellus Linn.
Smew.
The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner shot 
a male on the Wharfe at Newton Kyme; this bird passed into 
the possession of Mr. George Lane Fox, I have had the 
opportunity of examining a copy of ' Bewick ' which belonged 
to the late Wm. Hatfeild of Newton Kyme, and under this 
species Mr. Hatfeild has made the following note : — * I assisted 
John Chaloner, Jun., of Newton Kyme, to bag a bird of this 
species in the winter of 1829-30, and compared it with this 
print, which is a very good representation.
He has had it 
M 
April i8gi 
104 waite: vertebrates of the western ainsty.
stuffed.' An example -vvas obtained on the Nidd by Mr. Proude 
about 1850; and a female was shot at Grimston near Tad- 
caster, Nov. loth, 1879.
Columba palumbus Linn.
Ring- Dove.
Wood Pigeon.
Generally spoken of as Stock Dove, Resident, and very 
abundant ; it is rapidly increasing in numbers, and breeds in all 
suitable places within the district- 
An example which I obtained at Thorp Arch on Dec. 2nd, 
1890, was feeding on a whitethorn hedge along with many 
others, its crop contained: — 30 acorns, 151 haws, and 16 grains 
of barley- -   
Columba cenas Linn.
Stock Dove.
Local names, Rock 
Pigeon or Blue Rock.
Resident and very common, but local; 
breeds regularly in the district wherever suitable nesting-places 
exist, as in the farm-buildings at Bilton, Wilstrop, etc.
; but 
more abundantly at 'Jackdaw^ Crag' and the limestone cliff on 
the opposite side of the Wharfe.
Turtur communis Selby.
Turtle Dove.
Summer visitant.
Has occasionally occurred.
One year a pair frequented Wilstrop 
Wood throughout the summer, and Mr. John Harrison thinks 
they bred, but the nest w^as not found.
' An example w^as shot 
at Wetherby on loth July, 1879' (Milligan, MS.).
They have 
been seen on several occasions at Scarthingwell, a few miles 
south of Tadcaster.
Syrrhaptes paradoxus (Pall.).
Pallas's Sand-Grouse- 
Mr. John Harrison tells me to include this bird in my list, as he 
saw five together in one of his fields at Wilstrop during the 
recent irruption (1888).
Lag'opus scoticus (Lath.), Red Grouse.
This moorland bird 
is never seen in the district except during particularly severe 
and prolonged hard weather.
One was seen at Newton 
Kyme in wnnter 1856, and during the severe snow-storms which 
prevailed in the early part of 1886, when grouse perished in all 
parts of the county, single examples were obtained at Marston 
Moor, Walton, Cowthorpe, and Wetherby (Chaloner, ' Naturalist/ 
1886, p.
68).
The long-continued frost of the present w^inter 
has driven the grouse again into the lowlands, but not into the 
Ainsty district.
Phasianus colchicus (Linn.).
Pheasant.
Resident, common, 
might be more so but for the fox, which is regarded as of more 
importance in this hunting district.
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
I05 
r 
Perdix cinerea Lath.
Partridg:e.
Resident and abundant 
throughout the district.
If a sitting Pheasant should be taken 
by the fox, the keepers sometimes place the eggs under a 
Partridge, which usually rears the young successfully.
Coturnix communis Bonnat.
Quail.
Summer visitant.
The 
district is particularly interesting, as being annually favoured by 
visits of the Quail.
It has occurred at Wetherby, Boston Spa, 
CoUingham, Newton Kyme, and once at Wilstrop.
Was par- 
ticularly numerous in the district in August 1848.
They bred 
at CoUingham in that year, and the Rev. J.
AV.
Chaloner (' Field/ 
Aug. 7th, 1880) states that the Quail bred regularly at Newton 
Kyme up to 1830; and Mr. John Emmet informs me that it did 
so at Boston Spa up to 1881 — mentioned as breeding there 
third week in July 1878 (Clarke, ZooL, p.
353); a nest with 
eight eggs was found in a field at Boston Spa by the mowers 
during the first week of August, 1879 — since which time I 
have not heard of it having done so, although I saw it there in 
1885.
Crex pratensis Eechst.
Land Rail Corn Crake.
Locally, 
Daker Hen. A very common summer visitant, but some years 
not so numerous as others* It breeds regularly throughout the 
district.
One was killed at Healaugh by Mr. E.
C Brooksbank 
at a very unusual date, 24th December, 1884 (Chaloner, 
'Naturalist/ 1884-5, P- ^49)- ^I^- F.
G, Binnie (who formerly 
resided in the Ainsty) tells me that this bird was remarkably 
scarce in 1868, and writes : — 'The summer was very hot and 
tropical in its character ; pastures were burnt up and ponds 
became dry ; water had to be carted into the fields, and cattle 
fed upon " cake " as in winter.
At Tadcaster my father heard 
the Corn Crake only two or three times, and I did not hear it 
once, although in other years it was common enough in the 
meadows around our house/ 
The grass-cutting machines prove very destructive to the 
Landrail.
Not only are the eggs broken, but both the young 
and old birds are frequently caught by the knives.
Rallus aquaticus Linn.
Water Rail.
Resident, but uncommon, 
although perhaps, owing to its skulking habits, much overlooked, 
as it is seldom seen except when flushed by the dog.
It has 
occasionally been killed by flying against the telegraph wires.
Mr. J.
R. Hatfeild shot one on the 15th of January last (1S91).
Mr. John Emmet writes :— ' The Water-rail bred near to Boston 
Spa this year and last year also ' (Naturalist, 1884-5, p.
299).
Io6 WAITE ; VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
Gallinula chloropus (Linn.).
Waterhen.
Moorhen.
Resident, 
very abundant ; it breeds in all suitable places throughout the 
district.
Fulica atra Linn.
Coot.
Resident, but not common.
I have 
seen it at Wilstrop, where it breeds among the sedges on the 
banks of the Nidd.
It is more numerous on the Wharfe, but not 
nearly so plentiful as the Waterhen.
Otis tarda Linn, Great Bustard.
A female in the York 
Museum was shot on Rufforth Moor, near York, by Mr. Richard 
Rogers, on the 22nd February, 1861.
('AUis Zoologist,' 1861, 
p. 7507).
My friend, Mr. John Harrison, tells me that he saw 
a female — no doubt the same bird — at Wilstrop a day or two 
previous to the date mentioned.
CEdicnemus scolopax (Gmel.).
Stone Curlew.
Thick-knee.
I am told that one was caught in a flax field at Bilton by the 
Rev. Christopher Wilkinson, of Bilton Hall, 'about 25 years 
ago.' 
Cursoriusgallicus(Gmel.).
Cream-coloured Courser.
Denny, 
in his Leeds catalogue (Ann. and Mag. Nat, Hist., 1840) writes: 
* A specimen was shot in April, 1816, in a fallow field, near 
Wetherby, by Mr. Rhodes, of that place, which afterwards came 
' into the possession of George Walker, Esq., of Killingbeck 
Lodge, near Leeds.
There cannot remain the least doubt as to 
the authenticity of the species.' (See also Atkinson's Comp.
Ornith., 1820, p.
165).
Eudromias morinellus (Linn.).
Dotterel.
The late John 
Tennant shot one at Wilstrop, and Mr. John Emmet tells me 
that it has occurred at Boston Spa.
iCgialltis hiaticula (Linn.).
Ringed Plover.
A casual visitant- 
Seen on several occasions in the district in winter and spring.
JEgialitis curonica (Gmel.).
Little Ringed Plover.
One was 
shot in a ploughed field at Whixley (north of the Nidd) by 
Mr. James Styan, on July 30th, 1850.
('Garth.
Zool./ 1850, 
P- 2953).
Charadrius pluvialis Linn.
Golden Plover.
Occurs in small 
flocks in winter.
It is rather more numerous after snow-storms, 
and especially so in severe seasons.
Vanellus vulgaris Bechst.
Lapwing.
Resident ; frequenting 
low-lying and poor land, and very abundant.
In autumn its 
numbers are greatly increased by immigration.
It breeds in all 
suitable localities throu2:hout the district.
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEl^RATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
lOj 
H^ematopus ostralegus Linn.
Oyster catcher.
Has several 
times occurred in the district.
Mr, John Harrison saw th 
together at Wilstrop in the spring of 1882.
Phalaropus fulicarius (Linn.).
Grey Phalarope.
The Rev.
J. W.
Chaloner has a specimen in his collection which he shot 
near Tadcaster — he shot two, but owing to one being badly 
damaged, it was thrown away.
He cannot give me the date.
Scolopax rusticola Linn, Woodcock, Occurs anmially in 
autumn and winter in varying numbers, never very numerous, 
and in some winters is scarce.
Gallinago major (GmeL).
Great Snipe, This bird is no doubt 
much overlooked.
Mr. John Harrison had obtained examples 
at Wilstrop on two separate occasions.
The late John Tennant 
wrote : — ' My uncle, H.
Tennant, shot two, one of which I saw.^ 
(MS., 1880).
Gallinago coelestis (Frenzel).
Common Snipe.
Resident 
and very common, more especially in winter, frequenting low- 
lying lands, preferably those which are submerged during the 
floods.
It breeds in all such localities throughout the district- 
Gallinago gallinula Linn.
Jack Snipe.
Winter visitant; 
occurs annually, but never in very large numbers.
It is much 
less common than G.
ccekstis.
Machetes pugnax (Linn.).
Ruff.
The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner 
informs me that the Ruff w^as formerly common at Wighill Ings 
and bred at Newton Kyme.
The latest record for the district is 
that a female (Reeve) was shot at Eilton in the winter of 1880-1 
by Mr. Richard Skilbeck.
Totanus hypoleucus (Linn.).
Common Sandpiper.
Local 
name, *Sand Snipe/ A summer visitant, but not numerous; 
it breeds on the banks of the Wharfe and the Nidd ; more 
commonly at Collingham than elsewhere in the district.
Totanus ochropus (Linn.).
Green Sandpiper.
A rare visitant; 
it haSj however, occasionally been seen in several parts of the 
district during the spring and autumn migration.
The Rev. J.
W. 
Chaloner has shot several examples at Newton Kyme, one of 
which he has in his possession ; he records having seen four 
p. 21).
J 
[Totanus flavipes (Gmel).
Yellowshank* In the ' Handbook 
of Yorkshire Vertebrata/ p.
77, the following appears concerning 
tln_s bird :—' Tadcaster, one, Oct. 1858 (Milner, Zool., 1S58, 
April i8ot.
lo8 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
p. 5958 ; Graham, Nat, 1858, p.
291).' Having examined these 
references, I find that Sir Wm. Milner states the bird was 
obtained at Misson in Yorkshire.
This place, although on 
the border of the two counties, is in reality in Nottinghamshire, 
so that the bird must not only not be included in the present 
list, but must be removed from the Yorkshire list also.
With 
regard to Graham's note, Mr. Howard Saunders, in the 4th 
edition of Yarrell's 'British Birds,' p.
481, writes: — '.
. .
another 
example was stated by Graham of York (Nat., 1858, p.
291) 
without a particle of substantiating evidencCj to have been 
obtained near Tadcaster.' The figure and description given in 
Yarrell's * British Birds ' were taken from this specimen^ which is 
now in the Leeds ^Museum.] 
Totanus calidris (Linn.).
Redshank.
A casual visitant.
'A pair 
bred at Wilstrop some years ago, but the female was taken by 
a Sparrow Hawk' (Tennant, IMS.
18S0).
Another pair bred in 
the same spot in 1884; they were possibly stragglers from 
Strensall Common near York, at which place this species 
breeds annually.
Tetanus canescens (GmeL), Greenshank.
Has occasionally 
been seen in the district.
The Rev. J 
Wm. J 
of Wetherby wrote:— 'A Greenshank was brought to me on 
August 22nd (1879), shortly after it had been shot near here.
It is a rare bird w;ith us' (Field, vol.
liv, 1S79, P- 374)- 
t 
Numenius arquata (Linn.).
Curlew.
This bird has occasionally 
occurred in the district, more frequently in winter, generally 
passing over.
Sterna fluviatilis Naum.
Common Tern.
Not unfrequently 
seen during the floods in autumn.
Rhodostethia rosea MacgilL Wedge-tailed Gull, Cuneate- 
taiied Gull.
Ross's Gull.
The only English example 
of this very rare Gull was shot near Tadcaster by Mr. Thomas 
Robinson, of Saxton, near Aberford, on the 22nd December, 
1846 (\V.
M. E.
Milner, ^Zoologist/ 1847, P- 1694).
It is also 
described as being killed by Horner^ Lord Howden's head 
keeper, in February, 1847, in a ploughed field near Milford- 
cum-Kirby [near Tadcaster].
(Charlesworth — quoting Henry 
Milner, Proc.
Yorks.
Pin).
Soc, vol.
i., 1847, p.
36).
This 
specimen is now in the Leeds ^Museum, and is described by 
Mr. Howard Saunders as being in winter plumage (* Field/ 
February, 1875, p.
^9^)- 
Naturalist, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY, I09- 
Larus ridibundus Linn.
Black-headed Gull.
Small flocks 
of Gulls often pass over in winter, but usually at a great 
height.
This is the commonest Cull which visits the district, 
and examples have been shot at several places.
I obtained a 
young bird in its first year's plumage at Walton, on the 25th 
June, 1890.
(Naturalist, July, 1890, p.
2ro).
Larus canus Linn.
Common Gull.
Occurs, but not nearly 
so commonly as Z.
ridibundus.
Stragglers are occasionally 
obtained during boisterous weather in late autunm and winter.
They are usually birds of the year, and when not on the wing^ 
they generally confine themselves to recently ploughed fields.
Larus arg-entatus Gmel.
Herring- Gull.
This species has 
occurred in the district, though very rarely.
It has been shot at 
Wilstrop by Mr. John Harrison.
Rissa tridactyla (Linn.).
Kittiwake.
Has occurred during 
winter, and examples have been shot at several places in the 
district.
Stercorarius pomatorhinus (Temm.).
Pomatorhine Skua* 
An example was obtained at Towton in October, 1879, and a 
second, now in the possession of the Rev. J.
W. Chaloner, was 
shot by him at Newton Kyme about the same time.
This was 
during the great irruption, when scores of specimens were 
obtained on the East coast of England, and individuals were 
shot very far inland.
Mergulus alle (Linn.).
Little Auk. The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner 
records the fact that an example was picked up dead by the 
mowers in a meadow at Newton Kyme, on the i6th July, 1885.
C Naturalist,' 1885, p.
299).
He tells me that the bird had been 
dead so long as to be of no use for a specimen, and it was thrown 
away.
Fratercula arctica (Linn.).
Puffin, One was shot on the 
Wharfe at Wetherby in November, 1870 (Wesley, ^ Field, ' 
November 19th, 1870).
Colymbus glacialis Linn.
Great Northern Diver.
In a MS., 
dated 14th May, 1S80, Mr. John Emmet, of Boston Spa, 
writes :— ' Mr. Chaloner considers this bird the scarcest ever 
taken at Newton Kyme.
He took three birds about the year 
T826 or 1827/ In looking over my proofs, Mr. Chaloner tells 
me that he saw the birds but did not obtain them, and adds 
that the date was 1818 or 1819.
Colymbus septentrionalis Linn.
Red-throated Diver.
Tiie 
April 1891.
J 
no WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY, 
but not knowing the bird, he had it mounted, and it is now in 
his possession.
The taxidermist told him that it was a ' Satin- 
breasted Grebe.' On seeing the specimen I found it to be a 
Red-throated Diver in winter plumage.
Podiceps cristatus (Linn.).
Great Crested Grebe.
I am 
told that it has been obtained on two or three occasions in the 
district in winter, and the Rev. J.
W. Chaloner has one which 
he shot at Newton Kyme.
Tachybaptes fluviatilis (Tunstall).
Little Grebe.
Dabchick.
Resident, though not very common.
It generally occurs on 
reedy ponds, but also on both the Wharfe and the Nidd.
It 
breeds at Wilstrop, and has done so at Ingmanthorpe, 
Procellaria pelagica Linn.
Storm Petrel.
Mr. John 
Emmet tells me that a specimen was found dead in the garden of 
Toulson Lodge, and in a MS., dated 1880, the late AV.
J. MiUigan, 
of Wetherby, wrote :- — 'A single example passed into my hands 
about three years ago.
It was shot at Compton, near Col- 
" * lingham, but so heavily damaged that I could not set it up.
I 
made it into a skin.* 
Procellaria leucorrhoa Vieill.
Leaches Petrel Fork- 
tailed Petrel.
An example was obtained at Kirk Hammerton 
during the winter of 1 850-1 ('Yorkshire Vertebrata,' p.
85), 
and the Rev. J.
W. Chaloner has an example which was picked 
up dead at Newton Kyme, under a gooseberry bush.
REPTILES.
I 
Tropidonotus natrix (Linn.).
Common Snake.
Ringed 
Snake.
Locally known as Dung-hill Snake.
It occurs at 
several places in the district.
I have seen it at Marston, Walton, 
and near to Wetherby; I am told that it also occurs at Newton 
Kyme and CoUingham, so it is pretty generally distributed, 
but is nowhere common.
At Bickerton, some men who were 
leading manure in the winter came across seven or eight coiled 
together in the middle of the manure-heap.
Vipera berus Linn.
Vipen Adder.
I have made assiduous 
search for the Viper in all suitable places that I know of in the 
district, but have never yet found it.
I am told that it has been 
seen at Collingham and also at Thorp Arch, but I am not 
satisfied on this point.
The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner killed one in 
1846 at Deepdale, opposite Thorp Arch Hall, but on the south 
side of the river.
It occurs sparsely at Bramham.
N'aturaiii't, 
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
I I I 
Lacerta vivipara Jacq.
Common Lizard.
Viviparous 
Lizard.
Having found this reptile in many places within the 
district, I believe it is generally distributed throughout; but it 
is certainly not common.
Anguis fragilis Linn.
Slow-worm.
Blindworm.
The only 
place in the district where I have met with the Slow-worm is in 
an old sand-quarry near to Thorp Arch, where it is not 
uncommon.
I am told, however, that it also occurs at 
Collingham.
AMPHIBIANS.
Triton cristatus Laur.
Great Crested Newt Mr. John 
Harrison tells me that it occurs at Wilstrop, and I am informed 
by the Rev, J.
W. Chaloner that he has seen it at Newton Kyme, 
and by Mr. F.
G. Binnie that it was to be found in 
some ponds around Tadcaster in 1872.
The only place 
in the district where I have met with it is in an old 
tan-pond near Walton, but it is far from common.
I have kept 
several in the aquarium which I got there, and noticed that 
they cast their skins every time the water was changed.
In 
'British Reptiles/ p.
127, Professor Bell writes: — 'The Newts 
shed their skin in the same way as other aquatic amphibia; 
// comes off in shreds^ and is washed away as it becomes loose.' 
This has not been my experience; all my Newts {T.
cristatus) 
have cast their skins whole^ and I have mounted one or two 
skins which are perfect, even to the toes.
Triton tasniatus (Schneid.).
Smooth Newt.
Locally called 
Askern.
Common in every suitable pond and cattle-trough 
throughout the district.
Bufo vulgaris Laur.
Common Toad.
Common and generally 
distributed throudiout the district.
Rana temporaria Linn.
Common Frog.
Extremely abundant 
in all parts of the district.
FISHES.
Acipenser sturio Linn.
Sturgeon.
^Ihis, our only British 
ganoid, has occurred in the Wharfe as high as Arthington, but 
not since the weirs have been constructed.
Mr. John Emmet tells 
me that he remembers one being obtained at Boston Spa, which 
^veighed fifteen stones.
Another example was landed at Stutton 
Mill, near Tadcaster.
-'^Pril 1891.
112 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
Perca fluviatilis Linn.
Perch.
Occurs in both the Nidd and 
the Wharfe, but not plentifully.
Those from the Wharfe are 
much finer than the Nidd specimens, but are not to be compared 
to those from Malham Tarn.
Acerina cernua (Linn.).
Ruffe.
Pope.
This little fish is very 
common in the Wharfe, but I regard it as scarcer in the Nidd.
It is a practice with the lads when they catch a ^ Tommy Bar/ as 
it is locally called, to stick a cork on the dorsal fin and let the 
fish go, whichj of course, compels the littlp creature to swim 
at the surface.
Cottus gobio Linn.
River Bullhead.
Miller's Thumb.
It occurs in the Nidd, but is not common.
It is very plentiful 
in the Wharfe, 
Gasterosteus aculeatus Linn.
Three-splned Stickleback- 
Common in both the Nidd and the Wharfe.
It also occurs in 
several ponds and ditches in the district, more especially those 
in -which the water is freely moving.
Gasterosteus pungitius (Linn.).
Ten-spined Stickleback.
I am indebted to Mr. Francis G.
Binnie, of the Edinburgh 
University (formerly of Tadcaster) for the following.
note on this 
species :  — He writes : ' I owe my acquaintance with this small 
species to my being occupied with the study of aquatic in- 
vertebrata.
I found it in a small pond near Healaugh Hall, 
and in another near Tadcaster.
In the latter I only became 
aware of its existence on the pond drying up during the hot 
summer of iS68, when, of course, the little fishes were nil killed.' 
:\Ir. Binnie adds : — ' It thus differs from its ally G.
aculeatus 
in a greater tolerance of stagnant water, for I never found the 
latter in small ponds, but almost invariably in running water of 
ditches, becks, &c.' 
Lota vulgaris Cuv. Burbot.
Eelpout.
This is a rare fish in 
the district.
It has, however, occurred in both the Nidd and 
the Wharfe, and Mr. J.
W. Grassham tells me that it is not so 
uncommon in the latter river below Tadcaster.
He frequently 
meets with it at UUeskelf.
Pleuronectes flesus Linn.
Flounder.
A few very small 
examples may generally be found in the Nidd.
They attain a 
larger size in the Wharfe, which is tidal as high as Tadcaster.
They are occasionally caught there by means of rod and line.
One was caught at Thorp Arch a short while ago, but it is not 
easy to understand how it got over the dam at Tadcaster.
WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTV.
II3 
Cyprinus carpio Linn, Common Carp.
This introduced 
species is very rarely taken, although it has been obtained from 
both the Wharfe and the Nidd, and was formerly plentiful in a 
pond at Newton Kyme- 
Barbus vulg:aris Flem.
Barbel.
Plentiful in the Wharfe, 
especially so in Boston Spa * Deeps.' It also occurs in the Nidd, 
but in smaller numbers.
Gobio fluviatilis Flem.
Gudgeon.
Common in both the Nidd 
and the Wharfe, generally used as bait for Pike.
Leuciscus rutilus (Linn.).
Roach.
Abundant in both the 
Nidd and the Wharfe, more especially so in the latter river.
Leuciscus cephalus (Linn.).
Chub.
Plentiful, equally so in 
both the Nidd and Wharfe.
Leuciscus vulgaris Flem.
Dace.
This species like most of 
the Leuciscina of the district is common in the Nidd and also 
in the Wharfe.
M 
too small to be of use on its own account, is largely caught and 
used as bait for Trout ; the females are preferred on account of 
their brighter colour.
It is very common in both the Nidd 
and Wharfe.
Tinea vulgaris Cuv. Tench.
I am told by Mr. John Harrison 
that this species occurs in very small numbers in the Nidd, 
but is very rarely found in the Wharfe.
It has been taken at 
Thorp Arch.
Abramis brama (Linn.).
Bream.
It is fairly common in the 
Wharfe below Tadcaster, but is not found above the Weir.
Alburnus lucidus Heck.
& Kner.
Bleak.
In Denny's Catalogue 
(Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., 1840) this species is recorded under 
the name of Letisdscus alburnus, as occurring at Tadcaster.
The Rev. J.
W. Chaloner tells me that it was formerly common 
there but it does not occur now.
Nernachilus barbatulus (Linn.).
Loach.
Abundant in both 
the Nidd and the "Wharfe.
Esox lucius Linn.
Pike.
Common in the Wharfe especially 
at Boston Spa 'Deeps.' It also occurs in the Nidd, but not 
so plentifully.
Salmo salar Linn.
Salmon.
Common in the Wharfe, but 
rarely met with in the Nidd.
Salmo fario Linn.
Trout.
Fairly common in the Wharfe, but 
^ so than formerly.
It Is said by the natives that the decrease 
April 1891.
" 
114 WAITE : VERTEBRATES OF THE WESTERN AINSTY.
in numbers is mainly attributable to the pollution poured into 
the river from the Otley paper mills.
The Wharfe within the 
district is becoming more a Grayling than a Trout stream 
(J.
Heart, 'Field/ Oct. 13th, 1888, p.
537.).
But Mn J.
N. 
VValbran, of Leeds, tells me that the Trout is the commoner fish 
in the higher reaches of the river, cg.^ about Burnsall, This fish 
is far from common in the Nidd.
Thymallus vulgaris NUss. Grayling.
Very common in the 
Wharfe, where it appears to be increasing in numbers.
It is 
always "caught more plentifully during winter.
The Grayling 
is also found in the Nidd, but is not nearly so common.
Clupea alosa Linn, AUis Shad.
In Denny's catalogue before 
referred to, the author writes: — *I purchased a specimen of 
this fish in the (Leeds) Market for our Museum, which was 
said to have been taken at Tadcaster.' 
Anguilla vulgaris Flem.
Sharp-nosed Eel. Locally called 
Silver Eel and Snig.
Abundant in the Wharfe, but more so in 
the Nidd, which is a slower-moving stream.
A common method of catching Eels is to thread a few score 
of dew worms on to a piece of worsted ; the whole is twisted 
into a mass and sunk in the river, at a spot where Eels are 
numerous.
After a while a landing-net is placed carefully 
beneath the mass, and the fish, having swallowed the worms, are 
sometimes caught in very large numbers.
Anguilla latirostris Risso.
Broad-nosed Eel. Local name, 
Black Eel. Common in both the Nidd and the Wharfe, but 
not nearly so abundant as A, vulgaris.
Petromyzon fluviatilis Linn.
Lampern.
The River- Lamprey 
is plentiful in both the Nidd and the Wharfe.
In preparing the foregoing Lists, and especially that relating to 
the Birds, I have to acknowledge much kind assistance rendered by 
the Rev. J.
W. Chaloner, of Newton Kyme, and Mr. John Harrison, 
of Wilstrop Hall, whose acquaintance with their own districts has 
been seventy years and forty years respectively.
I am indebted 
to my friends Messrs, Wm. Eagle Clarke and Wm. Denison Roebuck 
for access to a large amount of published records and to manuscripts 
by the late John Tennant and Wm. J.
Milllgan, which have enabled 
me to complete the bibliography of the district.
I take this 
opportunity of thanking Mrs. Hatfeild, of Thorp Arch Hall, for 
granting me every facility for the investigation of her estate; and 
also to Mr. J.
Lloyd Wharton, M.P., of Bramham, for permitting 
research on his game preserves in the Walton district.
Naturalist, 
II 
WHITE GROUSE AND WHITE PARTRIDGES 
IN YORKSHIRE, 
Rev. h/a.
MACPHERSON, M.A., M.B.O.U., Etc., 
A Hthor of ike * Visitation of Pallas s Saiui-Groitse to Scotland^ etc.
Tx the course of exploring old records in search of notes bearing on 
the Lake District, I happened to come across the accompanying 
notes, which may, perhaps, possess some local interest for Yorkshire 
naturalists.
(i) Lagopus SCOticus.
The 'Carlisle Patriot' of October 25th, 
1828, supplies the following short paragraph : 
* A curious specimen of the grouse or heath fowl was last 
week shot by Richard Metcalf, gamekeeper to L.
Topham, Esq., 
at Middleham.
Its belly was entirely white, its eyes and legs 
a beautiful pink, and the rest of its body of a delicate fawn 
colour.' 
^2) Perdix cinerea, A note on this species appears in the 
^Gentleman's Magazine' of 1797, p.
342 : — 
* Natural Curiosity.
— There are now at Henry B.
Barnard's, 
Esq., at South Cave, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, seven 
partridges, four of which are of the most delicate milk-white, 
without a single coloured feather.
The remaining three are 
pied.
The covey consisted of eight.
The above seven were 
taken by a net in September last, the eighth escaped.
They 
are kept in a place built for the purpose of keeping pheasants 
and birds of that kind, and do not appear to suffer at all from 
their confinement.' 
NOTES AND NEWS.
We regret to have to record the death, after a long period of ill-health, of 
'^^r- Henry B.
Brady, a native of Gateshead and for many years a v.ell-known 
resident of Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Though both a chemist and a botanist, Mr. Brady 
^'as best known for his numerous and valuable memoirs on the foraminifera, both 
recent and fossil, and especially for his two quarto volumes describing the 
i^'^aminifera collected by the * Challenger ' Expedition.
He was a Fellow oi the 
^oyal, the Geological, the Chemical, and other Societies, and a contributor to 
"i^ny scientific publications.
He died on January loth, in his fifty-sixth year.
Two north-country geologists have received honourable recognition from the 
Geological Society of London.
At the anniversary meeting on February 20th 
^^e Lycll Medal was presented to Prof.
T. McK.
Hughes, F.R.S., and a portion 
Z^ Lyell Donation Fund to Mr. G.
W. Lamplugh of Bridlington Quay.
-^Pril i8q,; 
ii6 
n "^Jlcmcriam.
ROBERT CALVERT.
By the death, on the 21st February, of Mr. Robert Calvert, Bishop 
Auckland has lost one of its oldest, best known, and most 
picturesquely historical residents.
He was born at Jock's Row, 
by the Wear Side, at Bishop Auckland, on 25th October, 1815; 
educated at the Barrington School; and apprenticed to Peter Fair, 
then the only printer in the town.
After his apprenticeship, he 
started business in Sunderland; and had episodical dealings with the 
famous artist, John Wilson Ewbank, R.S.A., whose life was one of 
strange and pathetic vicissitudes.
Mr. Calvert knew Ewbank and 
his daughter when in the deeps of misfortune.
The daughter in 
those days helped her father in painting, and in going round to- 
dispose of the work.
Mr. Calvert frequently bought of Ewbank 
paintings on sheets of tin, thrown off quickly to get food, and as- 
often to get drink.
Mr. Calvert next w^ent into business at Cockfield,, 
and subsequently returned to Bishop Auckland, where he began the- 
business of auctioneer, valuer, etc.
He retired a few years ago on 
ample means, the result of industry, good habits, intelligence, and 
sterling character.
He had a considerable knowledge of the fauna 
of the county of Durham before it became disturbed by the opening 
out of collieries and the consequent increase of population.
I have 
a pair of Crossbills shot by him some time in the 'fifties,' up the 
Wear Valley near Wolsingham, at a place where they had nested.
My latest dealings with him were in connection with an article by 
Mr, J.
H. Gurney, ' On the occasional appearance in England of the 
Crested Tit,' in the * Zoologist' for June 1890, wherein Mr. Gurney 
writes: — 'In the county of Durham it has been shot once, on 
Sunderland Moor, in January 1850, and the specimen is said (Zool.,.
p. 2766) to be in the possession of a Mr. Calvert, whom I have- 
tried to trace, but in vain.* Knowing that he had lived in Sunder- 
land, I inquired of Mr. Calvert if he had the bird in question ; he 
replied in the affirmative, saying that two had been shot, and he 
kindly presented one to me.
But it was as an entomologist that he had most experience, and 
he has left insect collections of no ordinary value.
I remember 
his surprise and delight when told of the swarms of Fritillaries I had 
noticed in the open glade of a wood, within a few miles of Bishop 
Auckland, and of whose presence he was not aware j he promptly 
visited the place and secured some very good examples.
He was 
Naturalist.
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY AND MOLLUSCA.
II7 
also an accomplished botanist and geologist, and some ten years 
ago published a work on the latter subject, with special reference to 
the strata of the county.
He often worked in company with the 
late Mr. Joseph Duff, another well-known Bishop Auckland naturalist, 
who died some four or five years ago, and whose magnificent 
collection of fossils is now in Newcastle Museum.
An old friend of 
Mr. Calvert's, writing on March 2nd, says: — 'I had a walk with 
Calvert on the 8th of February; he was in very good health then, 
and told me that the 24th of February w^ould be the sixty-fourth 
anniversary of his apprenticeship to Peter Fair.
He little thought 
then that, on that anniversary, his own funeral would take place.' 
T. H, Nelson.
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGK 
Water Rail at North Stainley near Ripon.— A Water Rail (A\2l/2^s 
aquatiius) was shot here on January 8th.
— R.
A. Summkrfikld, North Stainley 
Vicarage, Ripon, Feb. 5th, 1891.
Great Northern Diver near Wakefield.
— I have to record for the 30th of 
October a fine male Great Northern Diver {Colymlms glacialis) in partial summer 
<Iress, a great many of the spotted feathers on the back and wing coverts yet 
remaining ; weight, 9 lbs.
It was shot near Wakefield, and is the second speci- 
men within three years, as I have in my collection a fine winter-dress bird got in 
March 188S.— Geo. Parkin, York Street, Wakefield, Nov. 7th, 1890.
Great Northern Divers and Long--tailed Duck near Morecambe.
— My 
friend, Mr, W.
Woodhouse of Morecambe, informs me that a Great Northern 
Diver {Colymhus glacialis)^ female, was shot from the Old Pier on the 15th 
December last, and, on the gth January, he writes that another had been seen for 
some days previously near the same place.
Early in January, Mr. Woodhouse 
shot a Long-tailed Duck {Harelda ^lacialis) opposite Morecambe, between the two 
Piers.— T.
H. Nelson, Oxley Villa, Redcar, iSth February, 1891.
Bittern in North Lincolnshire, ^A fine specimen of this now rare British 
hird {Botmtrits stellaris) was shot in this parish on December lith, 1890, by 
Mr, Geo. Trimmingham.
It was in an old disused sand-pit, overgrown with 
tall reeds, rushes, and other water-plants, a place well known to our local 
gunners as a sure 'find' for a snipe or duck.
Unfortunately, Trimmingham not 
knowing its value sold it to a Hull game dealer.
The Bittern was once common 
^n the Fen district of Lincolnshire, and known to the old Fen folks as * Mire- 
drum' or * Butter-bump,' from the peculiar noise it made during the nesting 
season.— J, W.
Harrison, Goxhill, Lincolnshire.
January 23rd, 1891.
NOTE--MOLL USCA.
Burrowing Mollusca.— I am interested in ^Ir. Coinage's paper on burrowing.
I have had considerable experience with Testacella maiigei at Bristol, and always 
found it from six to twelve inches below the surface.
Its retreat can be detected 
l>y the very clean-cut hole it leaves — very different from a worm's hole—nnder 
some sheltering plant (the garden pink, viola, pansy, etc.) I have often found 
^yalina nitidiila below ground.
As regards H.
pomatia^ I found it frequently in the 
N. of Italy (especially on the shores of Lake Como), buried a few inches below the 
surface (in hedgerows, etc.), in August and beginning of September, 1SS6— when 
the weather was quite tropical— with the usual solid epiphragm.
Specmrens 
showing this are in my collection.— B.
ToMi.iN, The Green, LlandaO", March 
7th, 1891.
^ 
April 1891.
ii8 
MISCODERA ARCTICA AND 
PTEROSTICHUS iETHIOPS IN LANCASHIRE 
C. REDMAN, 
Sf. Beymos College, St* Asaph^ Xoi-fh Wales.
I AM informed by Dr. J.
W. Ellis that Miscodera arctica and 
Pterostichtts cethiops have not been hitherto recorded for Lancashire.
I found a single specimen of the former in June 1884, on Long- 
ridge Fell, which is situated about half-way between Whitewell and 
Ribchester.
The insect was verified at the Natural History Museum^ 
South Kensington.
In 1889 three other specimens were found by 
me near the same spot.
As regards the mountainous species Pterosfichus cethiops^ I found 
three specimens in 1890 in the vicinity of Stonyhurst College, which 
is about two miles distant from Longridge Fell (1,149 ft.) and ten 
miles fromPendle Hill (1,831 ft.).
Dr.J.W. Ellis, who kindly examined 
one of the insects in question, said there could be no doubt as to its 
being P, cethiops.
NOTES— ENTOMOLOG K 
Dasycera oliviella at Kildale-in-Cleveland : a correction.— T find that 
the insect I recorded at the Yorkshire Naturalisls' Union excursion to Kildale, 
I2th July, 1S90, as Dasycera oliviella is not that species, hut a female specimen 
of Adeia degeerella, Tlie much shorter antenn:^ of the female (of which I did not 
possess a specimen) in compnrison with that of the male Adela led me into the 
error, which please correct in next month's 'Naturalist*.
— J.
Gardner, 6, Friar 
Terrace, Hartlepool, i6th March, 1891.
Collix sparsata and other Lepidoptera, Neuroptera, Trichoptera, and 
Orthoptera, near Thome Waste*— On July i6th last, Mr. John Harrison, of 
Barnsley, took a specimen of this local species in a fir wood near Thorne Wnste.
The species was previously only known to occur, in Yorkshire, at Askham 
Bogs, and there are only one or two other British localities for it — Wicken 
Fen being, perhaps next to Askham Bogs, the best known.
The 
date of Mr. Harrison's capture was late for the insect, or probably 
more specimens would have been secured.
As the food-plant {LysimacJna 
vulgaris) is plentiful, and the locality evidently a very suitable one, there is no 
reason why the species should not prove to be common there ; still, Mr. Harrison 
and I, when passing over the ground, on September 13th, spent a short time in a 
vain search for the larvce.
Other larvae we found abundant at Thorne on that 
day, a day which I may add was about the most perfect for weather we had had 
during the whole season.
By beating birches those of Notodonta dictivoides^ 
N, dromedarius.
N, camdinay and Platypteryx falada^ were all taken in fair 
numbers ; whilst those o^ Notodonta dictcra^ both brown and green varieties, were 
common on aspen, on which tree those of Acrorzycta 7negacephala also occurred.
Among Neuroptera, the Dragon-fly Sympetriim scoticum was in great abundance, 
about the broad ditches, &c., near the Waste ; and the Trichoptera taken included 
Limnophihis marjuoratus^ Z.
iiinatns^ Z.
auricula, L.favicornis^^wA Asynarchus 
arnosus.
The Orthoptera were represented by the Grasshopper Stenohothris 
paralieilitSj w^hich was plentiful on the ground near the plantations bordering the 
•Waste/ but did not seem to occur on the ' Waste.*— Geo. T.
PorriTT, 
Huddersfield, March 5th, 1891 _^ 
Naturalist, 
119 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM REDCAR 
for 1890-91.
THOMAS H.
NELSON, M.E.O.U., Etc., 
Kedcar.
Following up my notes for 1889-90, I now send my report for 
1890-91, The past season has been noticeable for two, what I may 
term, peculiar ornithological features, viz., in August and Sep- 
tember an unusually large flight of Pigmy Curlews, and, in the early 
part of the present year, most extraordinary quantities of Red-necked 
Grebes.
With regard to the latter, I may state that since the 
memorable irruption of Skuas in 1879, there has not been any visit 
of sea-birds to equal it.
One of the old fishermen, who is seventy- 
five years of age, and who used to be a shooter in his earlier days, 
told me that he did not remember ever having seen more than one 
or two Grebes in one day ; and, although I have shot most of the 
different kinds of sea-fowl to be found on this coast, I have never 
had a chance of shooting a Grebe before.
They are usually too 
wary to allow one to approach within range, but, as will be seen from 
my notes, they appeared in hundreds off Redcar in January and 
February, and I shot four in one afternoon.
The most probable 
theory to account for this visitation is that, owing to the intense 
frost, all the lakes and streams on the Continent were frozen, and the 
Grebes were driven to the open sea and thence to our shores.
Have 
any other readers of 'The Naturalist' remarked a similar increase of 
these birds in their localities?
The occurrence of seven Wood Larks 
in January is also a noteworthy incident.
1890.
March.
The first Wheatears {Saxicola cenanthe) were 
seen on Coatham sand-hills on the 23rd.
I noticed several small 
parties on the Redcar sand-hills on the 29th.
April.
Ring Dotterels {^gialiiis hiaticidd) commenced laying 
early ; single eggs were found on the 4th.
I saw seven new nests on 
the 6th ; a clutch of four eggs was taken on the 19th.
Great numbers 
of Gulls, chiefly Great and Lesser Black-backed {Larus marinus and 
L.fusais)^ flew past during a strong N.
wind on the loth.
I very much 
fear that the colony of Cormorants {Phalacrocorax carbd) at Kettle- 
^ess is being broken up by the propinquity of the railway, which now 
passes within a few yards of the cliffs.
Two or tliree years ago 
there were about thirty pairs breeding, but last season I only saw one 
pair in several visits, and understand that they did not nest there.
It is 
probable they may have changed their quarters to some of the other 
April i8qi.
120 NELSON: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM REDCAR.
cliffs near Staithes.
The Herring Gulls (Z.
argentaius) are as numerous 
as ever between Staithes and Kettleness- Several Stock Doves 
{Columba cenas) were nesting at the latter place.
July.
A few flocks of Whimbrels [Nuvienius phceopus) appeared; 
these birds are always the first of the autumn immigrants to visit us.
August.
Two Grey Plovers {Sc/uatarola helvetica)^ two Pigmy 
Curlews {Tringa subarqiiata)^ and a Knot {T, canutus), all in perfect 
summer plumage, were obtained at the Tees mouth early in this 
month.
8th, — The first Richardson's Skua {Stercorarius crepidatits)^ 
an immature specimen, was shot in Tees Bay, 12th.
— I observed 
a Sandwich Tern {Sterna cantiaca)^ and a Lesser Tern {S.
fnhiiita) 
at the Tees.
Shore Birds, viz.
: — Bar-tailed Godwits {Limosa 
lapponica\ Redshanks {Totanus calidris), Turnstones [Sirepsilas 
ifiierpres)^ Oysfer-catcbers {HcBmatopus ostrale^^us)^ Sanderlings 
{Calidris arenaria), and Dunlins {Tringa alpina)^ were all represented, 
but only in small flocks.
An immense flight of Pigmy Curlews, 
most unusual for this district, occurred this month.
Small parties 
appear at irregular intervals, and three or four examples may be taken 
in a season, but, on this occasion, their numbers far exceeded any- 
thing in my experience.
On the 26th, twenty-one were killed, eleven 
at one shot \ and, from that date to the 25th September, I saw no 
less than one hundred and ten which were shot at or near the Tees.
On their first arrival they were in flocks by themselves, and generally 
kept to the salt-^marshes, but, after a Itw days, they associated wich 
Dunlins and other small waders ; those which were procured during 
the latter half of September were all shot by firing into mixed flocks 
of shore birds.
The last I noticed were on the sands on the 25th 
September, nor did I afterwards hear of any others being observed.
29th.
— I saw five Lesser Terns at the Tees mouth, and one, an 
immature example, was shot.
September.
5th.
— The first of the ordinary autumn contingent 
of Grey Plovers, a flock of six, passed to the N.W. while I was off 
in a boat about two miles N.E. of Redcar.
8th.
— About a dozen 
young Gannets {Sula bassana) were in the bay, and remained for a 
week or two, fishing industriously amongst the herrings and sprats, 
loth.
— A flight of Grey Plovers, Dunlins, Sanderlings, and a few 
Godwits arrived at the Tees.
nth.
— Great flocks of Godwits and 
Knots w^ere on the Tees sands, evidently newly arrived.
I made 
good bags of both species.
16th, — Moderate wind from E.
A great 
many Ducks passed to the N.W. A Woodcock {Scolopax rusticola) 
flew up the sands near the fishing cobles, early in the morning.
20th.— A great passage of Ducks took place.
23rd.
— At sea 
I observed eight Red-throated Divers {Coiymbus sepienirionalis).
NaturaH>t, 
NELSON: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM REDCAR.
12 t 
26th,— There was a large arrival of Dunlins at the Tees mouth.
Several immense flocks were on the sands at high tide.
A few Larks 
{Alauda arveusis) and Chaffinches {Frhigilla ccekbs) were crossing, 
on the usual -autumnal migration.
29th.
— Larks crossing con- 
tinually.
A Honey Buzzard {Fernts apivorus) was shot near Whitby 
and sent to Mussell, the Middlesbrough taxidermist.
October.
2nd.
— N.
Avind, moderate.
Several flocks of Ducks, 
a Heron {Ardea a'nerea), and three Skuas (6*.
crepidatus)^ passed 
East Scar.
Larks continued to cross daily up to the 8th.
6th.
The first Short-eared Owl {Asia accipitri?ius) was reported.
7th.
E. wind and rain.
An immature Grey Phalarope {Phalaropus 
jultcarius) was shot while swimming among the breakers near Redcar 
Pier.
8th.
— N.E. wind, moderate.
A great many Ducks passed, 
and a Woodcock was seen on Redcar sand-hills.
9th.
— S.W. wTud, 
light.
A great rush of Larks and Green Plover ( Vanellus vulgaris).
They were crossing from daylight up to noon.
I noticed a white 
bird among a flock of Larks, which passed me on Coatham sands.
loth.
— An adult BufTon's Skua I^S.
parasiticus) was picked up east of 
Redcar, having been killed by coming in contact w^ith the telephone 
'Wires.
The first Hooded Crows (Corvus comix) of the season were 
seen to-day.
This is about a week later than the average date of 
their appearance.
loth to 14th.
— Larks were crossing daily, and 
Ducks were reported on migration by the fishermen.
13th.
— 
Guillemots {Lomvia iroile) and Razor-bills {Alca tarda) were passing 
to the E.
in flocks during the early morning.
A few Terns, Gannets, 
and Skuas were still in the Bay. 15th, — I saw six Shore Larks 
{Otocorys alpestris) on East Scar, and a friend who was with me shot 
two, both f^ne adult birds.
17th.— Strong N.W. gale.
Two Snipe 
{Gal/inago ccelestis) came from seaward over East Scar.
18th.
N. gale, with rain.
Many flocks of Ducks passed.
I shot an 
immature Long-tailed Duck {Harelda glacialis) near East Scar, and 
another similar example was shot by a fisherman.
A Goosander 
{Mergtis 77urga7iser) and three small flocks of Pomatorhine Skuas 
{S.pomatorhiniis), flew past to the N.W. 19th.
— N.E. gale, and rain.
L)ucks still passing.
I saw five Shore Larks.
20th.
— S.W., light; 
rain.
A great many Dunlins and several flocks of Ducks passed.
2ist.— S.W., light.
A few Larks and Hooded Crows came over.
22nd.— Calm, hazy, A rush of Hooded Crows, Larks, and Green 
Plover.
Three Shore Larks were shot.
I was off in a boat to the 
east of Redcar, and shot an adult Red-throated Diver, with traces of 
the red plumage on the throat, and an adult Long-tailed Drake.
23rd.— S.W., light.
A few Larks and Hooded Crows crossed daily 
'i^^^Uhis date to the end of the month.
I walked within a few yards of 
April 1891.
122 NELSON: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM REDCAR.
a Shore Lark and an immature Arctic Tern {S.
ma crura) by the edge 
of the water.
24th.— S.W. wind, moderate.
Many Hooded Crows 
and Larks miaratiner.
Two immature Velvet Scoters 
W,.V*VW,J- 
iCEdemia ft 
were shot east of Redcar.
25th.
— A large Hawk, probably a 
Peregrine Falcon, carrying a bird in its talons, came from seaward 
at 10.30 a.m., flying S.W. It dropped the bird on the water near 
Redcar Pier, and passed on up the sands about two hundred yards 
away, A Kestrel {Falco tinmmcuhis) crossed, from over the sea, at 
noon.
26th.
— N.E. gale.
A large number of Skuas flew past to the 
N.W. 28th.
— N.W. gale.
Two immature Long-tailed Ducks were 
shot.
29th.— Gale continuing.
fi' 
was picked up alive on Coatham sands, and a Woodcock was shot 
on the sand-hills- 30th.
— While looking through the telescope at 
the Lifeboat look-out, I distinctly saw a Great Northern Diver 
(C- glacialis)^ swimming and diving near West Scar.
After some 
delay we launched a boat, but could not then see anything of the 
bird.
On the 8th of November a very fine adult male example of 
this species was shot inside the rocks, and this, probably, was the 
same individual which I had observed.
November, ist to 15th.
— S.W. light winds.
A few Hooded 
Crows and Larks crossed daily.
18th.
— S.W. light, hazy.
A large 
flight of Green Plover came over.
24th.
— N.
wind, strong, rain.
Two Shore Larks were shot on the sands E.
of Redcar.
Several 
flocks of Ducks passed.
25th.
— N.E. gale, snow and hail showers.
A great rush of Ducks ; also a good many Snow Buntings {Pkctro- 
phanes tiivalis).
27th to 29th.
— E.
gales, and snow.
A great many 
Ducks, Dunlins, Larks, and Snow Buntings passed.
December, ist.
— An adult male Black-throated Diver 
{C, arcticits)^ in almost perfect summer plumage, was shot within 
twenty yards of the beach, opposite Redcar.
This is the first 
specimen, in full plumage, which I have known here.
2nd.
— While 
off in a boat I saw two Great Northern Divers and a larcre Grebe, 
but could not get within shot of them.
i6th.
— E.
gale ; and 19th 
S. moderate wind.
A few flocks of Ducks passed.
20th — An intense 
frost.
Three Swans flew past to the N.W. Thousands of Wood- 
pigeons {C, pahtvibns) congregated in the fields E.
of Redcar, feeding 
on the bean-stubbles.
All the pools and water-courses "on the 
marshes were frozen hard.
22nd.
— A Spotted Crake {Porzana 
77iaru€ttd) was captured alive, in a ditch, near Redcar.
27th.
— -Two 
Swans were on West Scar early in the morning ; five others were 
seen at the Tees mouth.
Many hundreds of Black-headed Gulls 
(Z.
ridibundiis) assembled on the shore during the severe weather in 
this month.
31st.— A Little Auk {Mergulus alle) was picked up on 
Naturalist, 
NELSON: ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM REDCAR.
T23 
the shore.
Unusual quantities of Scaups {Fitligula marihi) were 
obtained during December and January ; many of them being drakes 
in perfect plumage.
The old wildfowlers say that, 40 or 50 years ago, 
these birds were numerous every winter, and they hardly considered 
them worth shooting, but they are by no means common now* 
3^591.
January.
7th.
— A Whooper {Cygnus musiais) was shot 
near Stockton-on-Tees.
Several Swans were killed by a puntsman, 
on the Tees, in December and January.
8th.
— Hard frost A great 
rush of Larks {A, aivensis) took place, all flying to the N.W.
9th.
— Fine, S.W, light wind.
Three Swans passed, about half-a-mile 
off at sea, flying N.W. I do not think we had such severe frosts as 
were experienced in places further South, nor was there much snow.
The little which did fall quickly melted on the coast-line, and throngs 
of Fieldfares {T, pilaris).
Redwings (71 iliacus), Larks, Thrushes 
{T, miisiats), and other small birds came down to the sands and 
fields near the shore, but the ground was frozen so hard that they 
could find but little sustenance, and many perished from starvation.
16th.
— My attention was attracted by the notes of some birds of the 
Lark tribe, at high-water mark, near the sand-hills ; on shooting one 
I saw xi was a 'stratiger,- and forwarded it to Mr. W^ Eagle 
Clarke ; however, I afterwards procured two more, and then, by the 
aid of Mr. Saunders' ' Manual ' discovered they were Wood Larks 
{Alaiida arborea).
Probably they comprised a family party, for there 
were only seven altogether.
These are the first I have met with, 
and it is, surely, an extraordinary time and place for birds of th^^ir 
nature.
A local taxidermist, who has been in the habit of snaring 
song-birds ever since he was a boy, informs me that although he has 
often looked for the Wood Lark he never saw one until this winter; 
and Mussell has had only one specimen through his hands in the 
course of the past 35 years.
19th.
— A Scaup Drake swimming near 
the shore induced me to take a boat and go in pursuit ; I winged the 
r)rake, but it escaped, by diving, at the time, although I secured it 
afterwards.
I then shot a strange-looking bird, which was flying 
past, and which proved to be a Great Crested Grebe (/*.
cristatus), 
and shortly aVter obtained three Red-necked Grebes {P.
griseigena), 
t^esides seeing eight or ten others, and a Great Northern Diver, which 
I could not follow% owin^r to the cold snow showers and darkness 
coming on.
Two fishermen, who had heard me shooting, put off m 
their boat, and shot a Mute Swan (C olor) and three Red-necked 
Grebes.
They told me they had seen at least twenty.
The weather 
became too rough for boating for some days after the 19th ; between 
that date and the 27th the fishermen reported most surprising 
quantities of Grebes at sea ; there must have been some hundreds 
April 1891.
124 NOTES — FISHES AND HYMENOPTERA.
between the Tees Mouth and Huntcliffe ; two were picked up alive 
on the beach, having been driven ashore by the rough seas.
27th.
— 
Two Red-necked Grebes and an immature Black-throated Diver 
were shot early in the morning.
I went off about ten o'clock, and 
obtained another specimen of P, griseigena ; we saw several more, 
but the wind rose and obliged us to come ashore.
A few Green 
Plover and Larks came over.
Wind strong from S.AV.
February.
7th.
— Another Red-necked Grebe was shot, and 
other four and a Great Northern Diver observed, early in the morn- 
ing.
i2th.
— N.
gale; rough sea.
Three Grebes were swimming 
near the shore at low tide, under the shelter of West Scar.
14th.
I went up into the look-out at the Life-boat Station, to see if there 
were any birds on the water, and discovered two splendid adult 
Long-tailed Drakes, swimming and diving near Salt Scar, and 
a Grebe near West Scar.
i6th.
— Two Grebes were inside the rocks.
17th.
— An immature Black-throated Diver and a Glaucous Gull 
(Z.
glaucus) were shot from a boat between Redcar and Marske.
25th.
— A wounded Grey-Lag Goose {Afiser cinereus) was brought in 
by one of the fishing cobles.
A Lark came over the sea at i p.m.
The weather during the last week of this month was calm and fogg}'; 
the sea perfectly smooth.
On the 27th I observed a Red-throated 
Diver {Colymhis septenirionalis) within two yards of the shore, near 
East Scar; at one time when it dived there must have been barely 
water enough to cover its back.
NO TE— FISHES.
Abundance of Haddocks off the coast of Redcar.
— It may be desirable 
to place upon record the fact that an immense shoal of Haddocks suddenly appeared 
on the N.
E. coast in the month of January last ; for the space of three weeks the 
cobles had splendid catches, varjdng from 10 to 30 score, all fine well-fed fish, 
ranging from 3 lbs.
to 8 lbs.
in weight.
From all parts of the coast of Yorkshire, 
and northward into Scotland, came reports of these fish being taken in unusual 
numbers, but they disappeared just as mysteriously as they came.
The old fisher- 
men say they never remember such a quantity of Haddocks (Gadus irglefinus) 
at that time of the year.
— T.
H, Nelson, Redcar, 26th February, 1891.
NO TE—H YMENOPTERA .
Preponderance of the Female in Sirex.
— On several occasions I have 
had Sirex gigas brought to me living and dead, and once I caught it flying in our 
market-place.
I have also had Sirex jnvencus given to me alive, but all these 
creatures were females.
I also find that in most Natural History books where 
there is a figure of this creature, it is the female.
I come, therefore, to the 
conclusion that the male is rarely seen.
I was, therefore, greatly pleased last 
August when my sister sent me a male which was caught flying in her drawing- 
room.
I find there is a good figure in Newman's History of Insects.
— F.
George, 
Kirton-in-Lindsey, January 17th, 189T.
- 
Naturalist, 
125 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1887.
The present instalment comprises the record of botanical activity ia 
the North of England for a single year, so far as concerns the plants 
included in the London Catalogue of British Plants.
Previous 
instalments of the botanical bibliography have been published in 
'The Naturalist' as follows: — For 1884, Nat, Sep. 1885, pp.
331-336; 
for 1885, Nat., June 18S6, pp.
174-179; and for 1886, Nat, Dec.
1890, pp.
359-374.
The counties included are the Watsonian vice-counties of 
Cheviotland, Northumberland S., Durham, York N.W., N.E.^ 
Mid W., S.W., and S.E., Line.
N. and S., Notts., Derby, Cheshire, 
Lane.
S. and W., Westmorland with Furness, Cumberland, and 
Isle of Man.
Anon, [signed *J.C.S., Penrith'].
Derbyshire, Cumberland.
Tussilago Petasites [at Buxton -with fiower stems quite 2-3 ft.
high, 
whilst never more than a foot in Cumberland; Mif7iiilus iuteus noi^d ^s on 
the banks of many mountain streams, and growing by the roadside on Hart- 
side Fell (Pennine Range), nearly 2,000 ft.
alt.], ^ci.
Goss., Jan. 1887, p.
20.
Anon, [not signed].
York S,W.
Calder-Vale Words [as used from Wakefield upwards; Caise= kecks, 
umbelliferous plants (CV/^^;-^//i;'////w sylvestre, etc.) ; Cal nut, hairy nut^earth 
nut {Buniuinflexuosiari) ; Cleats = Foal- or CoU*s fool {Tusdlago farfara)— 
from which is made wine to purify the blood ; Colons stalks of furze {UUx 
europ(Cits); Cresh^ water cress (Nasturtium officinale); Daffy dahn di]Iy = 
daffodil (Nasa'ssuspse7ti^o-narcissus) ; Dee-nettles=stinglessnettIes(Z^;y/;WO^ 
Dockens-- docks (Kumex sp.), see remarks; Dog-daisy-^ the large-flowered 
wild (XQ.\%y [ChrysanthemufH leucanthcmum), see remarks ; Esh {Saxon, Esche) 
= Ash tree {Fraxinus) -, Espin = Aspin leaf (Fopulus tremula)\ Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ., Parts 7 and 8, Jan. and Ap. 1887, pp.
109-115.
Anon, [not signed].
' York S.W.
Excursion [of Wesley Scientific Society] to Roche Abbey [May i2th^ 
1887; Gagea littea, Belleborns viridis, Potentilla vcrua noted].
Wesl.
Nat.^ 
June 1SS7, i.
127.
Anox.
[signed ' E.C.'].
Derbyshire.
Helianthus annuus [established itself in 1886 on the ancient arch of Repton 
School].
Sci. Goss., Aug. 1SS7, p.
190* 
Anon, [not signed].
York S.W.
Ackworth Reports.
-Natural History Society [noting that three Cambridge- 
shire roots oi A uemo7re Pulsatilla have been planted on the Danish Camp, 
Went Vale; large bed q{ Epilobium tetragonum found at ^orwood near 
Ilemsworth; and doubt expressed as to the Brierley Common record ot 
Eriophonwi gracile], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. iS^h, 1887, xi, I2».
Anok.
[not signed].
North of England generally.
' Floral Calendar, 1878-1887 [a table of mean dates for 31 selected plants for 
_each^year, and for the whole decade].
N. H.
Jm Nov. 15th, 18S7, xi.
191.
April 1891.
126 bibliography; phanerogamic botany, 1887.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.E., S.E., and Mid W.
A * Rosette' Geum {G, rtva/e, Water Avens) [at Rievaulx, 7th June, 1887; 
also at Kirkham and Settle ; full description of the sport given], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Dec. 15th, 1887, xL 211.
R. Adkin.
Westmorland or Furness.
[Impatiens noli-me-tang-e^ near Windermere ; very local].
Trans, Ent.
Soc, Dec. ist, 1886, p.
Ivi; Zool., Jan. 1887, xi.
34; Ent. Mo.
Mag.^ 
Jan. 18S7, xxiii.
192; Ent., Jan, 1887, xx.
20; Young Nat., Jan. 1887, 
viii.
13; and Nat,, March 18S7, p.
69.
Olu'er V.
Aplin.
Notts.
A Visit to Rainworth Lodge [in April, 1886; Drosera 7'oUindifolia and 
Erica tetralix noted].
Nat., July 1887, p.
197.
F. H.
Arnold.
Derbyshire.
Notes on the Mistletoe [( Viscurn album) ; on oak at Staveley, Derbyshire, 
latter half of the 17th century; said to be * the only oake in England that 
bears Mistletoe'].
Nat. Monthly, Dec. 18S7, p.
65, 
Charles C.
Babington.
York S.W.
Supplement to Notes on Rubi.
— No. I.
[Rubtis newhouldii described as 
new from plant found by Mr. Newbould at Loxley, near Sheffield, in 1846].
Journ.
of Bot., Jan. 1887, xxv.
20-23.
" 
Charles C.
Babington.
Cumberland, York N.E., Northumberland S.
Supplement to Notes on Rubi.
— No. 2, [Critical notes on the Genus in 
Britain and on theContinentj with reference to * Ft. I, Comparative Examin- 
ation of the Rubi in the Scandinavian Peninsula,* by F.
W. C.
Areschoug, 
Ph.D., Professor in the University of Lund, 1885-86, and stating that Rubin 
Miinteri Marss., gathered at Keswick by Dr. Hort, and R, Maassii Focke 
are probably the British representatives of ^.
polyanthemos Lindb., said to be 
the 'most vigorous of all the Scandinavian brambles,' although Areschoug 
considers it to be the English R.
itmbrosiis (the R.
carpinifolim of Bloxam) ; 
a specimen in Genevier's herbarium, with the name of R.
nemoralis Miill., is 
cited, gathered by J.
G. Baker at Thirsk, Aug. 1865, and at Hartley Links, 
Northumberland, Aug. 1862, the latter specimen being in the possession of 
Prof.
Babington himself], Journ.
of Bot., Nov. 1887, xxv.
327-333.
Charles Bailey.
Lane.
S. 
On the Structure, the Occurrence in Lancashire, and the probable 
Source, of Naias graminea, Delile, var.
Delilei, Magnus [for abstract of 
this paper, which also appeared in Journ.
of Bot., Oct. 1884, see Bibliography 
in The Naturalist, Sep. 1885, p.
331].
Memoirs of Manch.
Lit.
& Phil.
Soc, 
Third Series, Tenth Vol., 1887, pp.
29-75, with 4 platesand numerous woodcuts.
Cheshire, Lane.
S., Westmorland, Cumberland, 
Charles Bailev.
Yorkshire.
Forms and Allies of Ranunculus Flammula Linn, [discussed in detail, 
with frequent references to the forms and distribution about Manchester of 
R. flammtda^ R.
Hjigua^ and the Ullswater locality for R, reptans stated with 
some detail].
Journ.
of Bot., May 1887, xxv.
135-13S.
Lanes.
S. and W,, Furness, Westmld., Cheshire, 
Charles Bailev.
Derbyshire, York Mid W.
and S.W.
The Botany of the [Manchester] District [dealing firstly with the influence 
of town-growth on plant-life, the introduction of plants with cotton, and 
then fully enumerating the plants of the district in brief and readable form ; 
the 'district' is wide, reaching far into Furness, Derbyshire, and Yorkshire].
Handbook of Manchester.— Prepared by the Local Committee for the 
Members of the British Assoc, at the Manchester Meeting, 18S7, pp.
27-42.
The Excursion Programme, No. 4, G, Delamere for Oakmere, by Charles 
Bailey, also contains notes on the plants of Oakmere; and No. II, T, con- 
tains notes on the plants of Craven.
Natur;tUst, 
bibliography: phanerogamic botany, 1887.
127 
Arthur Benneit.
Lane.
S. 
Two new forms of Grasses for Britain [one hemg J^ros^ts alba var.
sub- 
jungens Hackel, Southport, on sandy ground, July 1884, F, C King].
Journ.
of Bot., March 1SS7, xxv.
84.
A. Bennett.
York N.E.
Calamagrostis stricta Nutt.
in Yorkshire [at Castle Howard Woods, July 
1844, collected by H.
Ibbotson ; now in F.
J. Hanbury's herbarium], Nat., 
'July 1887, p.
2or.
Arthur Bennett.
Yorkshire.
Rhynchospora fusca R.
et S.
in Scotland [sent by J.
McAndrew, gathered 
in 1882, and till now unnamed; formerly reported from Yorkshire, although 
its most northern English station is believed to be Cardigan].
Journ.
of Bot., 
Dec. 1887, '"^xv.
373.
William D.
Braithwaite, Secretary.
York S.W.
Ackworth School Natural History Society [two specimens of Anemone 
pithafilla found at the Danish Camp, March 1887 ; Daphne mezereon, Brocken- 
dale, and D.
laureola^ near Hampole, several places, noted].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May i6th, 1887, xi.
80.
W. D.
Braithwaite, Secretary.
York S.W.
Ackworth Natural History Society [Erantkis hyemalis in Owstun Park, 
in fruit, follicles open, 26th May, 1887].
N. H.
J.j June 15th, 1887, xi.
106.
W. D.
Braithwaite, Secy.
York S.W.
Ackivorth School Natural History Society [Scutellaria nit'nor, Brierley 
Common, added to district records].
N. H.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 18S7, xi.
130.
Robert Brown.
Cheshire, Lane.
S., Isle of Man.
Botanical Resume [of observations made at Excursions of the Liverpool 
N.F.C. in 1886, at Backford, Cheshire, ist May, Kivinuton, Lancashire, 
24th June, Heswall and Thurstaston, Cheshire, loth July, and Wallasey 
sand-hills, 2nd October ; with notes on Brassica tnonensis in the Isle of Man 
and the appearance at Leasowe of Cotula coronopifolia\ Proc.
Liverp.
Nat.
Field Club for 1886-S7 (puhl.
1887), pp.
55-62.
Robert Brown.
Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
Names of Some of the most Interesting- Plants noticed during- the 
[Liverpool Field Club] Excursions in 1886 [enumerating 10 species for 
Backford, Cheshire, 1st May, 12 for Heapy and Rivington, 24th June, 20 for 
Heswall and Thurstaston, Cheshire.
10th July, and 17 for Wallasey sand-hills, 
2nd October].
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. F.
Club for 1SS6-87 (publ.
1SS7), pp.
65-68.
Robert Brown.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Third Appendix to the Flora of Liverpool [stations given for about 170 
species, of which several are additional to the district, viz., Elatine hexandra^ 
Campanula rapiincnloides, Cusaita epiliuum^ Jensens aculeatus^ Chara 
syncarpa, and Cotula coronopifoUa^ an escape from cultivation].
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. F.
Club for 1886-87 (publ.
iS^?)* PP- 17-44 (and pp.
1-30 of rep.).
James Cash.
Lane.
S., York S.W., Cumbld., Chesh., Derbysh.
The Early Botanical Work of the late William Wilson [in York S.
W., 
where, at Greenfield, he found Hymenophyllum tunbridgense and H, wilsoni^ 
Myosotis repens, GnaphaUum dioicum^ Salix lanata, Rubus chamiFmorus, 
Lycopodiuni alpinum, and Arbutus uva-ur si \ the latter also at Kinderscout 
and Staley Brushes, Lathr^a in Longdendale and at Eccles, Draha vema and 
Polemonium at Buxton, Mentha ritbra^ M.
viridts and M.
piperita^ Verbascum 
nigrum^ Polemonium, Galeopsis ladanum, and a new Carduus in Dovedale].
Nat., June 1887, pp.
181-190.
James Clark.
Cumberland.
Monstrosities .
. .
White Valerian IValeriana officinalis, at Allonby, 
Cumberland].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Dec. 15th, 1887, xi.
212.
April 1891.
128 bibliography: phanerogamic botany, 1887.
J. E, Clark.
Cumberland, York N.E.
Abnormal Plantains [monstrosities oi Plant ago major at Whitehaven, and of 
P. lanceolata at Ayton and York, described].
Nat. Hist.
Journ,, Dec. 15th, 
iSSy, xi.
212.
J. E.
C[lakk].
Cumberland.
White [variety of] Sea Pink {Annerla marithna) [in considerable abundance 
between AUonby and Maryport ; white Geranium pratense also noted], 
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Dec. 15th, 1S87, xi.
212.
C. De ViT.
York N.E.
Rose-coloured [variety of] * Blue-Bells ' {Scilla mitans), — Near Ayton^ 
June, 1SS7.
Nat. Hist, Journ., Dec. 15th, 18S7, xi.
212.
Ed[itor]s.
[of Nat. Hist.
Journal].
York Mid W.
and S.W- 
[Foot-note to] Some Botanical Outlaws [that fields of Teasel {Dipsacus 
fiilloniun) are still grown around Church Fenton in Yorkshire ; also that they 
remember a field of it near Ackworth].
N. H, J., June 15th, 1SS7, xi.
96.
T. W.
Edmondson.
York S.W. and Mid W.
Pee Orchis \Ophrys apifora] in Craven \pnQ, July 24th, 18S6, between 
Stirton and Gargrave ; fairly common round Skipton some twenty years agOy 
but of late years lost sight of].
Nat., Jan. 1887, p.
22.
John \V, Elijs.
Cheshire.
[Rosa spinosissima on Wallasey sand-hills], Sci. Goss,, April 1887, p.
93.
D. Embleton.
Northumb.
S., Durham, Westmld., York N.W. and N.E.
A Catalogue of the Place-names in Teesdale [including some derived 
from the Oak, Birch, Willow, Holly, Mulberry, Wheat, Here, Burdock, 
Raspberry, Daisy, Lily, Primrose, Ling, and Bracken ; see p.
xiii, 7 and 14 
{Rubus chamiemorus)^ g (Facdnh^m myrtillus)^ 10 (Alder, Oak), li {Pyrus 
miciiparia)^ 12 (Pterts)j 12 (Dock), 12 (Cherry), 14 (Barley), 14 (AW>«^), 
14 (Pru7iHS paihfs), 15 [Cratcegus or Prunus spiiiosa)^ 15 {Betida)^ 25 (Corn- 
cockle or Darnel), 51 (Barley), 53 (Birch), 61 (Ash), 75 (Hazel), 76 (Ash), 
77 (Willow), 87 (Birch), 88 (Wdlow), 96 (Lily, Daisy, Primrose), 96 (Rasp), 
96 (Seavy or Rush), 97 (Holly), 99 (Bracken), 103 (Birch), I06 {Myrica gale .
and Angelica archang/liia), 124 ' Ling= Calluna, etc., and Scirpus avspitosiis^ 
Elymus arenaritts^ Erica tetralix^ and E, '' cineraria')^ 138 (Barley), 15* 
(Nettles), 153 (Raspberry), 157 (Apple, Hazel), 160 (Willow and Convallaria 
polygonatum)^ 160 (Seavy — rush or sedge, y/rz/^z/i- effusus, J.
conglomeraius^ 
Scirpus iacusiris mentioned), 167 (Holly), 169 (Seavy or Rush), 169 (Hazel), 
177 (Oak), 185 (Bracken), 203 (Bere or Barley), 2ii (Apple)].
Nat.
Hist.
Trans, of Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
ix.
part i.
(1SS7), 
pp.
i-xviii.
and 1-223.
William Fowlek, 
Line, N.
and S- 
Lincolnshire Bog and Moorland Plants [enumerated to the number of 
72, with occasional annotations, and preceded by remarks on the extinction 
and decrease of bog plants].
Nat., Nov. 1887, pp.
349-351.
HiLDERIC FrIEXD.
NottS- 
[Senecio lividus Smith ; a patch between OUerton and Rufford Abbey, 
infested profusely by] Coleosporium Senecionis^ Fr.
[in mid-Aug. 1S87].
Nat. Monthly, Oct. 1887, p.
39.
HiLDERIC Friend, Cumberland- 
Spergula pentandra L.
[at Carlisle, by the Eden, in fruit, Sep. 2nd, 1S87]- 
Sci. Goss., Oct. 1887, p.
235.
F. J.
Geor(;e.
Lane.
S- 
Floral Malformation [in Digitalis purpurea at Rivington].
Sci. Goss., 
Sep. 1SS7, p.
214.
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man- 
Notes on Isle of Man Captures in June [an entomological paper, with 
incidental notices oi Silene maritima ^x\A Cochharia danica\.
Young Nat., 
July 1887, viii.
138.
Naturalist^ 
bibliography: phanerogamic BOTANVj 1887.
129 
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man.
A Day's ''Scientific" Insect-Hunting on the Isle of Man in June 
[with casual references to Rosa sJ>i?iostssima, Thyfnus serpylhoji^ Lotus corni- 
culatusy Statics armerta, Silene maritima^ Plantago niariiima^ Poa aespitosa^ 
P. carulea^ Aira Cicspitosa^ Holms mollis^ Dactylis glomerata, Coninm 
maatlatum, A it Jura officinalis^ and Malva sylvestris\.
Young Nat., Aug.
1887.
viii.
153-155.
C. S.
Grkgson and G.
Rose.
York S.W» 
[Impatiens noli-me-tangere in Wharncliffe Wood, just coming into 
flower, August 1S87].
Young Nat., Oct. 1887, viii.
194.
^ 
York N.E.
Barbarea striata and Alopecurus bulbosus, two rather rare plants, froui 
Clifton Ings, Yorkshire.
Midi.
Nat., Aug. 1887, x.
215.
W. B.
Grove.
H. and J.
Groves.
York N.E.
Notes on British Characeae for 1886 [the only North of England record is 
Chara vulgaris var.
longihracteata^ York N.E., W.
W. Reeves; locality not 
further indicated], Journ.
Bot., May 1S87, xxv.
146.
James Groves [Editor].
Furness, Cumbld., Chevld., Chesh., Lanes.
S. 
Extracts from Report of Botanical Exchange Club for 1885 \Ramtnaihis 
Jlammida var.
pseitdo-reptans E.B., Furness and Cumberland; Euphrasia 
officinalis^ praiensis Fr.
, Cheviotland ; Zanntc hell iapedicellataY tits., Che^hlvQ ; 
and Naias graminea Del. var.
delilei Magnus, S.
Lancashire].
Journ.
of Bot., 
March 1887, XXV.
86-89.
J. T.
Gumersall.
Cumberland^ 
[Plants at] Seascale, (Cumb.) [Padiola livoides', Saxifraga nmh-osa {h^did 
of Stanley Ghyll) ; Scutellaria minor \ and Ceterach\ Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
Dec. 15th, 1887, xJ- 211- 
J. Hagc.er.
Derbyshire* 
The Leafing of the Oak \Querctis rodur] and Ash [Fraxinus excelsior;, 
discussion based on Burton-on-Trent experience].
Nat., Dec. 1887, 365-366.
AiXAN B.
Hall.
York N.E.
Unusual Flowering- [of Primula vulgaris below Whitstonecllff, Thirsk, 
Dec. 18th, 1886], Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 15th, 1887, xi.
37.
Allan B.
Hall.
York N.E.
[Plants at] Thirsk [Arah's per/oliata, Stellaria glauca, Cnicus eriophorus^ 
C\ pratensis, C.
acaulis (near Rievaulx, new to N.E. York), [ysimachia thyrsi- 
Jlora^ Cusciita trifolii^ Ltmosella aijualicdy Hydrocharis morsus-rana^ AcoruS' 
calamus^ Scirpus caricis, and Carex stricta ; no details given but census- 
numbers], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Dec. 15th, 1887, xi.
211, 
James Hardy.
Northumberland.
Report of Meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the 
year 1886 [Fedia olitoria.
Ranunculus Jicaria, Doronicum pardalianches^ 
Chenopodium donzts-henricus^ and ^"Egopodinm podagraria noted at Woodhorn^ 
26th May].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 1886 (pub.
1887), xi.
336 and ^Zl- 
J[AMEii].
H[ARrA'].
Cheviotland.
Localities for Neottia Nidus-avis [Twizell Dean, and Cawledge Woods 
near Alnwick].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 1886 fpub.
1887), xi.
533.
'^^.
Hv. Heathcote.
Lane.
S. 
Lancashire Notes \Nuphar lutea at Tarleton near Treston].
Nat. World, 
March 1887, iv.
58.
^V.
C. Hev. York N.E.
The River Foss [and its water-plants ; Bulrush (Scirpus lacustris), ^'ellow 
Water-lily {Nuphar luted).
White Water-Lily {Nymphaa alba).
Arrowhead 
{Sagittaria sagittifolia), Butomus umbellatus, Sium latifolium, and (Ettanthf 
P^fllandriuml Nat, World, Feb, 1887, iv.
22-23.
130 BIBLIOGRAPHY: PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 18S7.
J. F.
Hills, Secretary.
York Mid W.
York, Bootham, Natural History Club [Water Avens (C^//;// rivale) noted 
at Fountains Abbey, April 9th, by W.
H. Satterthwaite].
Nat. Hist-Journ., 
May i6th, 1SS7, xi.
82.
J. F.
Hills [, Secretary], 
York N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [Bog Bean {Menyanthes trifoUata) 
at Gormire near Thirsk].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June iSth, 1887, xi.
108.
J. F.
Hills [, Secretary].
York N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Society \_Ophrys fmtscifera (one only), 
Primula farlnosay Pingtiictda^ and Laihnea, Rievaulx Abbey, June 7th, 1887 
(H.
S. Thompson); Menyanthes trifoliata and Hottonia paliistris abundant 
at or near Gormire, 13th June; Eqtdseitim telmaieia, Carex pendida^ C.
syl- 
vatica^ Tussilago, Salvia verhenaca^ ^.ndi Polys tichum angtdare at Whitby; 
Trollius near Levisham], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 1887, xi.
132.
Bernard Hobson, Cheshire* 
Seedlings of Heracleum [sphondylium at Northenden near Manchester, 
April 29th, 1887, in which the fruit (cremocarp) still adhered to one of the 
cotyledons; described and figured].
Sci. Goss., July 1887, p.
165 and 
woodcut (fig, 84).
W. Hodgson.
" Cumberland.
Carex pendula in Cumberland [on the river Lyne near Shanks Castle, July 
1887; localities given also for Cardtiits heterophyllus and Eqtiisetum 
fnaximiint\.
Nat., Dec. 1887, p.
364.
J. Jackson, .
York Mid W» 
The Fly Orchis \_Ophrys muscifird] near Wetherby [in West Woods, June 
1887, with Aquilegia^ BerberzSy Rhamnus cathartzcus, EuonytnuSy Thalictrum 
Jiexiiosum^ Melica 7itdans^ white Scilla ntdans^ and Polygala vulgaris].
Nat., 
July 1SS7, p.
208.
John Jackson.
York Mid W.
Twiggy Mullein ( Verbascum virgatum) at Wetherby [growing in a gravel- 
pit ; queries as to origin].
Nat,, Nov. 1887, p.
351.
J. A.
Jackson.
Lane.
W. 
Notes on the Black-headed Gull near Garstang [and on the vegetation 
of the * Gull Moss/ viz.
Calhuia^ Erica^ Vaccinitim oxycoccus, Drosera 
rotundifolia^ D.
intermedia^ Andromeda^ and ATyrica\ Nat., May 1SS7, 
p. 130- 
A. J.
Jukes-Browne.
Line.
N, 
The Geology of Part of East Lincolnshire, including the country near the 
towns oi Louth, Alford, and Spilsby [at p.
r 1 1 referring to the service rendered 
by Arundo arenaria^ ffordeum maritimum^ Triticum junceum^ Hippophai 
rhamnoides 3ind Pubus aesius, in holding together the sand-hills on the coast].
Memoirs of the Geol.
Sur\'ey of England and Wales, 1887, pp.
iri-ii2.
P. Q.
Keegan, Cumberland, Westmorland, Fumess.
The Minerals and Flowers of the English Lake District [numerous 
plants enumerated].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1887, pp.
1-4.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Natural History Rambles.
No. i.— In the Woods [near Louth ; notes on 
Chelidonium majus^ Malva pioschata^ Lonicera^ Agrimonia enpatoria.
Ranunculus flammula^ Mentha aquatica, and Lysimachia nummularia\ 
Sci. Goss., Feb. 1887, p.
31.
J. Larder.
Line, N.
A Strip of Lincolnshire Coast [Mablethorpe ; Ammophila arctiaria, IHp' 
pophae rkamnoidcs^ Calystegia soldanellay Trifolinm arvense^ Senecio jacob^iO-% 
Draba verna, Cynoglossutn officinale^ Rubus ectsius, Malva, Cakile maritima^ 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: phanerogamic botanv, 1887.
T31 
Sednm^ Erodiufit ciaifartum^ Firdia olitoria^ Armorai'ia rustlcana, Eryng^ium 
niaritiunim^ Arcnaria peploides^ Planiago coronopus^ Cardamine mnaray 
Glaucium hiteani^ Armeria jfiaritima^ and Saliconiia herbacea; remains of 
old forest also noted].
WesL Nat., Nov. 1887, i.
283.
F. T.
Law^ 
Lane.
S* 
Our British Wild Flowers ['on the Lancashire coast grows the tall, 
golden-flowered Common Evening Primrose' {CEnoihej'a biennis)\ WesK 
Nat., Dec. 1887, i.
313.
Westmld., Chesh,, Lancash,, Cumbld., Derby, 
P. Fox Lee. Durham, York S.W., N.E., Mid W.
The Watson Botanical Exchange Club [numerous records of critical plants 
for the counyes enumerated above].
Third Annual Report {1886-7), pp.
1-16, 
P. Fox Lee.
York S.W.
Rubus podophyllus in England [near Dewsbury ; along with R.
lejeunei 
var.
aff.
festivus ; determined by C.
C, Babington ; description given].
Nat., Sep. 1887, p.
277, 
t, Arnold Lees.
York N.E.
Yorkshire Naturalists at Gormire Lake and Thirkleby Park [with notes 
on PotentiUa ai'geniea (new to N.E. Yorksh.), Veronica panmdaria^ V, 
scutellata, Rubus bakeri (new name), R.
nitidns^ R.
lindhianns^ Chara fatida 
V. at7'ovirens^ Typha an<^iistifolia^ Carex vesicaria^ Pyriis commum's, Hyperi- 
cum huniifusum^ ErythnEa centaurium^ Scolopoidium vulgare^ Diplotaxis 
muralis, Z>.
babingtonii^ and D.
tenuifolia\ Nat., Aug. 1887, 2ip.
238-239.
F. Arnold Lees.
Chesh., York N.E., S-W., and Mid W.
Botanical Notes from North-East Yorkshire [mentioning Caf-duus acaulis 
from the moor near Rievaulx Abbey, a new record for vice-county 62, and 
doubting the reputed discovery at Castle Howard of Calamagrostis stricta^ 
all recently gathered specimens in that district being proved to be only 
C lanc€oIatd\.
Nat., Sep. 1887, pp.
273-274.
F. Arnold Lees.
York N.W.^ Westmorland.
Yorkshire and Westmorland Naturalists at Sedbergh [Aug. ist, 1887 ; 
detailed notes of interest on the observations made, on Aleum athajnanticum^ 
Hypericum dubium^ Hieracium crocattuji^ H.
drsium^ Rosa spinosissima^ 
Galium horeale^ Sedum anglicum, Circuia alpina, Hzeracium lunbdlaium^ H, 
pallidum^ Polygoniun viviparum^ Equisetitm voriegaium, Prumis padusy 
Rosa mollis.
Geranium sylvaticum^ Liuaria juiitor (viscida), Epilobium 
alsinifoUum and its var.
anceps^ Hieracium iridmtatum, Alchemiila alpina^ 
Saxifraga steilaris, S.
aizoides, Circcea alpina, Ceierach officinarnm (in West- 
morland, on the boundary) and Hymcnophyllum itnilaUrale\ Nat., Sep.
1887, pp.
277-281.
R. LoFTHousE.
Durham, York N.E.
The River Tees : Its Marshes and their Faima [with a reference to 
a gigantic tree (oak?) dredged from the river, now in the Middlesbrough 
Park ; and to Stalice limonium on south side of Tees].
Nat., Jan. 1887, 1-16.
^- W.
Mac LAGAN.
Cheviotland.
Linaria minor in Northumberland [at Beal Station, on railway tracks ; 
inquiry as to the connection of this plant with such stations].
Nat., Oct.
1S87, p.
294.
P. W.
Maclagan.
Cheviotland, 
Threatened Extinction of Sisymbrium Irio at Berwick-on-Tweed [in 
^ay's 1671 station; caused by 'pointing' the walls on which it growsj.
Nat., Oct. 18S7, p.
294.
J' Cosmo Melvill.
Lane, S.
[Deschampsia fiexuosa grows abundantly on Kersal Moor, Manchester].
£^- Manch.
Lit.
& Phil.
Soc, Feb. 14, ^^^7, xxvi.
116.
132 bibliography: phanerogamic botany, 1887.
Robert Middlemas.
Northumberland S^ 
Address delivered to the Berwickshire Naturalists* Club, at Alnwick, 
October 14th, 1886 \_Raniinciilus aqitatilis and Scilla nutans noted at 
Cresswell, Doronkttvi pardaliaiiches zx Newbiggin], Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club- 
for i886 [pub.
1887], xi, 324 and 325, 
F. T.
MoTT.
York Mid W.
[Asplenium viride from the Craven Hills, Yorks., exhibited to Leicester 
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Sep. 21st, 1887].
Midi.
Nat., Oct. 1887, p.
268.
John J.
Ogle.
Notts.
Monstrous Flowers of Elm [remarks on abnormal flowers of elm trees on the- 
Mansfield Road, Notts.].
Journ.
of Bot., Aug. 1887, xxv.
247-S.
H. Pearce.
Westmorland.
[Lake District Plants exhibited to Dudley Field Club : Asphnmm viride,.
Alchemiila aipina^ from Mardale, and Afitejtnai-ia dioica^ from Long Street 
Mountain].
Midi.
Nat., July 1887, x.
192.
Horace Pearce.
Cumberland, Westmorland, Derbyshire.
[Garden-grown specimens of Viola hitea var.
amana from St. John's Vale,.
Keswick ; Geranium sylvaficiim from Thirlspot, Keswick ; G*.
prafcnse front 
Castleton, Derbyshire ; Aspleniufu viride from mountain near Mardale,^ 
Cumberland, and Polypodnim rohei-tianinn from Miller's Dale, Derbyshire, 
exhibited to Birm.
Nat. Hist, and Micr.
Soc.].
Midi.
Nat., Aug. 1887, x.
215.
R. A.
Pryor, 
? Durham or Yorkshire.
Notes on some Hertfordshire Carices [with casual reference to Carex- 
Jiava from Teesdale at p.
124].
Trans.
Herts.
Nat. Hist.
Soc, vol.
iv.- 
part 4 (Jan. 1887), pp.
121-128.
W. H.
PuRCHAs. Derbyshire 
A List of Plants observed in S.
Derbyshire [more particularly around 
Calke and Tickenhall ; references to previous work are first given, and then 
the plants in number, enumerated in systematic order, with specified 
stations for the more uncommon ones].
Journ.
of BoL, Feb., April, May^ 
1887, xxv.
40-44, 101-107, 138-145.
Hugh Richardson.
York S.W.
Anacharis Canadensis, Planch, [in Went Vale, its stations, and approximate 
date of first appearance stated at about 1857 (not later)].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
Dec. iSth, 1887, xi.
201.
Cumberland, Durham, York N.E., N.W., Mid W., and S.W.
Lawrence Richardson [compiler].
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Floral Calendar, 1887 [of observations made on 31 specified plants at 26- 
stations, including Silloth, Wilton, Cotherstone, Ayton, Thirsk, York, Settler 
Rawdon, Ackworth, and Penketh ; with general notes thereon, and special 
mention of some species].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Oct. 15th, 1887, xi.
165-167.
B. S.
Rowntree.
Lake District..
Sport of Scented Orchis {Gymnadenia Conapsea) [flower-spike bifid, Lake 
District, July 1886].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March I5lh, 1887, xi.
37.
B. S.
Row.vtree.
York N.E., S.E., and Mid W.
York, Bootham [Pihtlan'a still plentiful at Strensall, Caliha (still in flower),.
Ophioglossum ziilgatum, Calarnagrostis larzceolata^ and Habenaria Moraiitha 
near Pocklington, Sep. 19th, 1887; Achra spicata and A fnpa belladonna 
(both in fruit), and Inula conyza at Thorparch, Oct. 1st, 1887].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Oct. loth, 1887, xi.
163.
M. B, Slater.
York N.E., S.E., and N.W- 
Botany [Report on the Investig-ations of Malton members in 1886 in 
various parts of N.E. and S.E. Yorkshire; numerous species mentioned].
Fourth Rep. Malton F.
Nat. and Sci. Soc, 1886-7 (pub.
1887), pp.
17-19- 
Matthew B.
Sr.ATER.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Saltburn [May 30th, 1887; the 
plants noted were Hellehorns viridis, Cardarnine aviara^ Myrrh is odora lOj^ 
Naturalist 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1887.
133 
Petasties vulgaris^ Glaux maritluia^ Cochlearia officinalis^ Myosotls sylvalua^ 
Atropa belladonna^ Mentha viridis^ Lafniuni furpiireum^ (Z.
album not seen), 
Orchis masctda^ Iris feet idiss una ^ Asperitla odoratay Priinits padus^ Allium 
ursinitm^ Scilla nuians, Melica unijiora, Broffius mollis, AntJioxanthum 
odoraium^ Alopecitrus pratensis^ Poa annua, Lolium perenne, and of ferns 
Scolopendriiim\ Nat., July 1887, pp.
219-220.
C. C.
Smith, Hon. Sec.
York Mid W.
Craven Naturalists' Society [with dates for Sesleria avrnlea at Malham, 
Cochlearia officinalis at Airton, Lamiufn piirpureum, Genni rivale^ Adoxa 
nioschatellina, and Chrysosplenium alternifolium at AppIetreewick,^/'/i7/'^(?;v//;^ 
vaginatnm at Thorpe, and Oxalis acetosella at Thorlehy].
Nat.
\Yorld., 
May 18S7, iv.
96.
C. C.
Smith, Hon. Sec, 
York Mid W.
Craven Naturalists* Association [with dates for Galium vtrujn^ Lychnis 
dioicaj Alyosotis palusirls, and Fraxinus, at Thorleby, Saxifraga tridactylites 
at Embsay, Lamium album at Skipton, and Hyacintkns nonscriptus at 
Skibeden].
Nat. World, June 1887, iv.
113.
A. H.
SwiNTON.
Westmorland- 
Poterium Sanguisorba [in the meado'ws at Grassmere, 18S6].
Sci. Goss., 
April 1887, p.
95.
JNO.
\V.
Taylor.
York Mid W.
Occurrence of Vertigo alpestris Alder in Yorkshire [the vegetation on 
the wall on which it occurs — at Cottingley near Bingley — includes Arenaria 
irinervis, Saxifraga tridactylites and Polypodium vulgare\ Journ.
of Conch., 
Oct. 1887, V.
238.
Thomas Henry Thomas.
York Mid W.
[The Cowthorpe Oak (Quercus robur var.
peduncnlata) described in an 
article entitled] Notes upon some fine specimens of Oak, Yew, Elm, and 
Beech, chiefly in the counties of Monmouth and Glamorgan.
Cardiff Nat.
Soc, Report and Trans.
1880, xii.
19.
John Vicaks.
Cheshire, Lane.
W, 
Botanical Resume [of plants noted at excursions in 1886 of Liverpool N.
F. 
Club, to Petty Pool, Cheshire, 5th June, and to Scorton, Lane, 2nd Sept.
; 
three species noted only, viz., Caltha, Cratitgus^ and Sparganium natans\ 
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. F.
Club for 1886-87 (pub.'iS87), pp.
63-64.
John Vicars.
Cheshire, Lane.
W, 
Names of some of the Most Interesting^ Plants noticed during the 
[Liverpool Field Club] Excursions in 1SS6 [enumerating five species found 
at Broxton, Cheshire, 14th Aug., and 12 at Scorton, Lanes., 2nd Sept.].
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. F.
Club for 1886-S7 (pub.
1S87), pp.
65-68.
H. J.
Wharton, York N.E., Lancashire.
[Maianthemum bifolium, its only recognised habitat as a truly indigenous 
British plant is on the west sid^ of Forge Valley, near Hackness, where it is 
abundant ; has also been reported from Lancashire on insufficient evidence].
Journ.
of Micr.
and Nat. Sc, Part 22, April 18S7, vi.
97.
C. S.
Wilson.
York Mid W.
[Daphne] Mezereon [in] blossom, Ling Gill, near Ribblehead, April 8th 
[1S87].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May i6th, 1887, xi.
85.
Thos.
Winder.
York S.W.
Willow Roots [a curious mass of which filled up a three-inch earthenware 
drain-pipe at Hazle Head, for a length of 40 feet].
Nat. World, Jan. 1SS7, 
iv.
20.
R. S, Wis hart.
Yorkshire, Cumberland.
The Chickweed Winter Green {Triantalis etiropaa) [very rarely found 
south of Tweed, and appears to be confined to the hills about Cumberland 
and Y ork, where it exists but sparingly*].
Sci, Goss., April 1887, p.
76.
^ay 1891.
134 
HIERACIUM ORARIUM 
IN DURHAM AND WEST YORKSHIRE.
G. E.
MARTINDALE, 
L iverpool College.
f 
A SHORT time since I sent to Mr. F.
J. Hanbury some Hieracia 
collected last autumn (August 1890), and among them were speci- 
mens of a plant I gathered first in Teesdale.
on the banks of 
Langdon Beck, Durham, and afterwards near Clapham in Yorkshire.
These Mr. Hanbury has named H.
orarunn Lind.
It is probable 
that in both localities, as well as elsewhere, the plant has been taken 
by botanists to be a montane form oi H, vulgahim, 
Ilierachim Gihsoni Backh.
is still marked in the last revision of 
the 8th Edition of the London Catalogue as occurring only in one 
county — Mid -West Yorkshire.
To this, however, must be added 
Westmorland, where it is most likely pretty generally distributed on 
the limestone.
It occurs in fair abundance on Scout Scar, Here 
my father gathered it in 1861 or 1862, though for many years he 
looked upon it as a maculate form of II.
inurorunu Other persons 
who met with it there are the late Mr. Barnes, my friend Mr. George 
Stabler, and the Rev. E.
F. I.inton, who informs me that he gathered 
it in 1874.
In the year 1883 it was collected near Kirkby Stephen 
by the Rev. E.
S. Marshall (Journ.
of Botany, xxvi.
27).
NOTES— OKNITHOLOG K 
Ornitholog-ical Notes from the Humber district.— Referring to Mr. Cor- 
deaux's note on the Curlew Sandpiper {Tri?2ga snhanjuaia) in 'The Naturalist' 
for January, p.
22, I beg to say that on August 30th, 1890, I saw a large flock, 
numbering fully fifty birds, on the Humber ' muds' in this parish.
I fired into 
them and killed eight and also a Dunlin {Trlnga alptna) at the same shot.
The 
greater part of them were young birds ; one which now stands before me has 
down still adhering to the upper tail coverts.
A pair of Turnstones [Strepsilas 
interpres) was also in company with them, the latter by no means a common bird 
thus far, within the Humber, the extensive mud-flats being unsuited to their 
habits, — J.
W. Harrison, Goxhill, Lincolnshire, January 20th, 1891.
Goldcrests and Redstarts at Easixigton in Holderness.— A few Golden- 
crested Wrens {Regnhis cristaijis) and Redstarts {Rut i cilia ph(£7iii it rus) about here 
on Saturday and Monday last, the 4th and 7th April.— PuiLir \V.
LoteN, 
Easlngton, Holderness, April 9th, 1891.
Spring Migrants In Cleveland.— Two Wheatears {Saxicola ananthe), two 
\Vhinchats {Pratincola ritbetra), and several Pied Wagtails {Motacilla higttbris) 
arrived on the 20th inst.— T.
H. Nelson, Redcar, March 23rd, 1891.
Great Spotted Woodpecker and Hawfinch in Notts, and Yorkshire.
— 
For the last fortnight the Great Spotted Woodpecker {DenJrocopus major) has 
been about the garden here (Aldercar Hall, Nottingham), and in last April (1890) 
I shot two Hawfinches {Coccothratistes vulgaris) in our own garden at Whitkirk.
— 
T. E- Plait, Whitkirk, Leeds, November 12th, 1890.
Natur.iHst, 
^35 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF 
LANGSTROTHDALE, MID-WEST YORKSHIRE 
C. H.
B. WOODD, B.A., 
Oughtershmu Hall.
The following is a contribution towards a knowledge of the fauna 
of the uppermost parts of Wharfedale — a district hitherto little 
visited by naturalists.
Langstrothdale supplies a great variety of 
habitat, from the sheltered woods of Buckden to the bleak fells of 
Cam (about 1,900 feet) ; and hence it is that the fauna, considering 
the limited area, is a rich one.
As regards the birds, I have relied 
largely on the observations of several friends (particularly Mr. Basil 
T. Woodd, of Knaresborough, and Mr. Basil R- Woodd, of 
Hampstead); several are marked doubtful, about which there is 
some uncertainty ; while one or two are recorded as seen at 
Semraerwater, which, though not in our valley, is only a few miles 
distant.
The list lays no claim to completeness, but may possibly 
serve as a basis for future observers to w^ork upon.
It may be noted that Oughtershaw is more than 1,200 feet above 
the sea-level, and its avifauna would be much reduced but for the 
fir plantations which have grown up within recent years.
MAMMALIA.
Bats.
The species have not been determined.
Erinaceus europaeus.
Hedgehog- Abundant, ascending to 
about 1,400 ft.
in the fir plantations.
Talpa europasa.
Mole.
Abundant to 1,800 ft 
Sorex tetragonurus.
Shrew.
Abundant.
Ascends to some 
1,500 ft.
? Crossopus fodiens.
Water Shrew.
I cannot name this 
species with certainty.
Canis vulpes.
Fox. Infrequent.
Martes sylvestris.
Marten.
Winter of 1880, at Buckden 
(Bishop, MS.).
Mustela vulgaris.
Weasel.
Abundant to 1,300 ft.
or so.
Mustela erminea.
Stoat!
Mustela putoria.
Polecat Now probably extinct in Lang- 
strothdale, but occurred sparingly within the memory of the 
older inhabitants.
Lutra vulgaris.
Otter.
Infrequent; has been hunted up to 
_ Beckermonds.
^lay 1891, 
136 WOODD : VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF LANGSTROTHDALE.
Cervus dama.
Fallow Deer.
Domesticated in Buckden Woods.
Sciurus vulgaris.
Squirrel.
Rare as high up as Oughtershaw, 
but occurs at Buckden.
Mus musculus.
House Mouse.
Mus decumanus.
Brown Rat.
Arvicola amphibia.
Water Vole.
Abundant near the source 
of the Wharfe.
Arvicola agrestis.
Field Vole.
Abundant to 1,300 ft.
or more.
Lepus europseus.
Hare.
To 1,800 ft.
Never abundant, and 
less so than formerly.
White specimens have been seen in 
winter.
Lepus cuniculus.
Rabbit.
Abundant to 1,500 or 1,600 ft.
AYES.
Turdus viscivorus.
Missel Thrush.
Plentiful.
Turdus musicus.
Song Thrush.
Plentiful.
? Turdus pilaris.
Fieldfare.
Turdus merula.
Blackbird.
Plentiful 
Turdus torquatus.
Ring Ouzel.
Fairly numerous.
Cinclus aquaticus.
Dipper.
Very plentiful.
I have found 
a nest for several consecutive years in a cleft of the rocks, behind 
what is, in time of rain, a considerable waterfall.
Saxicola oenanthe.
Wheatear.
Very plentiful, 
? Pratincola rubicola.
Stonechat 
Erithacus rubectila.
Redbreast.
Sylvia rufa.
Whitethroat.
Regulus cristatus.
Goldcrest.
Accentor modularis.
Hedge Sparrow.
Parus cseruleus.
Blue Titmouse.
Plentiful 
Parus major.
Great Titmouse.
Troglodsrtes parvulus.
Wren, Plentiful 
* 
Motacilla lugubris.
Pied Wagtail.
Motacilla melanope.
Grey Wagtail.
Plentiful 
Anthus pratensis.
Meadow Pipit.
Muscicapa grisola.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Hirundo rustica.
Swallow.
' 
Chelidon urbica.
Martin.
Plentiful 
? Carduelis elegans.
Goldfinch.
Passer domesticus.
Sparrow.
Naturalist, 
WOODD : VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF LANGSTROTHDALE.
I37 
Fringilla ccelebs.
Chaffinch, Very plentiful- 
Linota cannabina.
Linnet, 
Linota flavirostris.
Twite.
Pyrrhula europsea.
Bullfinch.
Infrequent.
Emberiza citrinella.
Yellowhammer.
Fairly abundant.
Alauda arvensis.
Skylark.
Sturnus vulgaris.
Starling.
Immense flocks are sometimes 
seen in autumn.
A white specimen was observed some years 
ago.
Pica rustica.
Magpie.
Fairly numerous.
Corvus monedula.
Jackdaw.
Corvus corone.
Carrion Crow.
Corvus frugilegus.
Rook.
Rookery at Beckermonds.
? Garrulus glandarius.
Jay.
Cypselus apus.
Swift.
Buckden, 
Alcedo ispida.
Kingfisher.
Only occasionally seen so far up 
as Oughtershavv.
Cuculus canorus.
Cuckoo.
Common.
A young bird was 
shot above Oughtershaw, some years ago, late in Aiigust.
Asio accipitrinus.
Short-eared Owl. Oughtershaw Moss.
Asio otus.
Long-eared Owl. Buckden.
Circus cyaneus.
Hen-Harrier.
Not seen within recent years 
(B.T.W.).
Accipiter nisus.
Sparrow Hawk.
This year a brood was 
reared in the plantation below our house.
Falco tinnunculus.
Kestrel.
Plentiful.
Ardea cinerea.
Common Heron.
Not so frequently seen at 
Oughtershaw as lower down.
Botaurus stellaris.
Bittern.
There is a stuffed specimen in 
the valley which was shot at Semraerwater during a severe winter.
Querquedula crecca.
Common Teal.
Frequently found at 
Oughtershaw Tarn (i,8oo feet), and near the source of the 
Wharfe.
Anas boschas.
Mallard.
Oughtershaw Tarn and source of 
Wharfe.
Columba palumbus.
Ring Dove.
Phasianus colchicus.
Pheasant.
A few have been intro- 
duced into the Buckden Woods, and occasionally wander as far 
up as Oughtershaw.
May ,891.
138 WOODD : VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF LAKGSTROTHDALE.
Perdix cinerea.
Partridge, A few are generally to be found 
at Oughtershaw, but until recently were hardly known in the 
upper parts of the valley- 
Lagopus SCoticus.
Red Grouse.
Abundant on Oughtershaw 
Moss and elsewhere.
Tetrao tetrix.
Black Grouse.
Observed this year at Buckden.
Rallus aquaticus.
Water Rail.
Crex pratensis.
Land Rail.
Charadrius pluvialis.
Golden Plover.
Generally to be 
Fi 
found on Cam Fells, Fleet Moss, etc.
Vanellus vulgaris.
Lapwing.
Very abundant.
Scolopax rusticola.
Woodcock.
Buckden.
Rarely seen.
Gallinago gallinula.
Jack Snipe.
Occurs sparingly.
A speci- 
men was shot at Oughtershaw some years ago (1879) at an 
exceptionally early date — about the middle of August — and is 
probably the instance referred to on p.
74 of 'Yorkshire 
Yertebrata.^ 
Gallinago coelestis.
Common Snipe.
Common.
Tringa alpina.
Dunlin.
Semmerwater (B.R,W,), 
Tetanus hypoleucos.
Common Sandpiper.
Numenius arquata.
Common Curlew.
Plentiful.
Larus argentatus.
Herring Gull.
The sea at Morecambe 
Bay is not very far distant.
Larus marinus.
Great Black-backed Gull.
Sterna fluviatilis.
Common Tern.
Semmerwater.
Colyrabus septentrionalis.
Red-throated Diver.
Stuffed 
specimen from Semmerwater ; shot during winter-time.
REPTILIA, 
Lacerta vivipara.
Common Lizard- Infrequent.
Oughter- 
shaw Moss, 1,300 — 1,400 ft.
? Lacerta agilis.
Sand Lizard.
I regret that I have only 
memory to trust to concerning this species.
I recollect keeping 
in confinement some years ago a Lizard, which, from its dark 
colouring, variegated with glossy blue markings, could not, 
I think, be other than Z.
agi/is.
It was a small specimen, and 
was taken on Cocklee Fell (Oughtershaw Moss) during a hot 
dry August.
This capture ^Y0uld be interesting, both from the 
habitat being an unusual one for Z.
agiHs, as well as for the fact 
that Z.
vivipara is the only Lizard definitely recorded for 
Yorkshire (Handbook of Yorks.
Vert., p.
xli).
Nat Lira] istf 
NOTES ORNITHOLOGY AND PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY.
139- 
Vipera berus.
Viper.
Oughtershaw Moss.
Rare (B.
T, Woodd).
Anguis fragilis.
Slow-worm.
Oughtershaw Moss.
Infrequent.
AMPHIBIA.
Triton taeniatus.
Smooth Newt.
In a small tarn near 
Beckermonds, 1,300 ft.
Rana temporaria.
Common Frog.
PISCES.
Salmo fario.
Common Trout.
Abundant up to the very source 
of the Wharfe.
Cottus gobio.
River Bullhead.
Fairly abundant.
Leuciscus phoxinus.
Minnow.
In the quieter reaches of the 
Wharfe about Buckden, 
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGV.
Bittern near St. Helens, Lancashire.
— A Bittern {Botaurns stellaris) was 
shot by Mr. James Hayes, on the 31st December, 1890, at Ramfold Farm, 
Eccleston, near St. Helens.
— R.
G. Brook, Wolverhampton House, St. Helens, 
Lancashire, April 2ist, 1891.
Flamboroug-h Bird-Notes.— The weather here has been very severe for a 
considerably long time, but in a very favourable quarter for sending us our spring 
and summer visitants.
In February and March there were great arrivals of Pied 
Wagtails (Motacilla htgiihris) ; also on April 6lh several Blackstarts {Eitticiila 
tithys) and Redstarts {R.
phceiticzirtis).
I think it must be nearly ten years ago since 
I have seen that magnificent bird, the Blackstart, at Flamborough.
He pops 
about in such splendid style, first on the ground, then on to the posts or on the 
twigs or branches, then again on to a wall or the ground before you can scarcely 
see him.
I believe altogether the wind and weather have been quite opposite for 
the birds leaving our shores.
For days and weeks Hooded Crows {Corvus comix) 
have been hanging about the Headland ; also several Woodcocks {Scolofax 
rusfuo/a),~MATTnE\v Bailey, Flamborough, April i6th, 1891.
NOTE—PHANEROGAMJC BOTANY.
Sedum Rhodiola DC— I was glad to see Mr. Whitwell's remarks on the 
* Flowering Plants and Ferns of Upper Swaledale,' as one of my sons had 
previously called my attention to the chief points calling for remark, though he 
declined to write a note about them.
However, as no one else has yet called 
attention to an error made by Mr. Whitwell, I venture to point out that the 
above-mentioned Sedntn is not confined to slate rock.
I have seen it on the 
Voredale Limestone of two at least of our West Riding hills, and though I have 
also seen it in the greatest profusion in Scotland and the Like District, yet I can 
state that it is quite as luxurious and abundant too on the Yoredale Limestone ot 
one West Riding hill.
I have previously pointed out in this journal that 
Leontodon hirtits L.
occurs profusely in West Yorkshire up to seven or eight 
hundred feet, I am not able to refer to a copy of ' North Yorkshire.
^lr.
)^ hitwell says that Arctostaphylos Uva-ursi Spreng.
is not m this work for 
the western hills.' I have seen it in abundance while clambering down the 
^^^^ern^rts of Cronkley Scars.— Wm. West, Bradford, March 24th, 1891.
May 1891.
I40 
LANGSTROTHDALE FUNGI 
C. H.
B. WOODD, B.A., 
O tighter sJiai.v Hall.
In the latter part of the summer of 1888, a particularly wet year, 
our attention was attracted by the abundance of Fungi (chiefly the 
more conspicuous Hymenomycetes) to be found in the immediate 
neighbourhood of Oughtershaw.
We accordingly made a number of 
figures— representing about one hundred varieties — to which a few 
have since been added.
These have recently been submitted to 
Mr. George Massee, of Kew, who has kindly examined them, and 
has been able to identify some seventy species, included in about 
thirty-six genera and sub-genera.
The area from which by far the 
majority of the species were collected is very limited — namely, the 
immediate neighbourhood of Oughtershaw, which is situated at 
about I J 200 feet above the seadeveL The rest were collected in 
other parts of Langstrothdale, especially the Buckden Woods.
They were all gathered in the months of August and September.
Mr. Massee calls attention to the fact that an important majority of 
the species are white-spared^ included in the sub-genera Amanitopsis^ 
Lepiota^ Armillaria^ Tricholoina^ Collybia^ Mycena^ Clitocybe and 
Laccaria of the genus Agaricus; and the genera Lactarius^ Ricssula, 
and HygropJwrus.
He further remarks that the species of the last- 
named genus are said to be characteristic of high latitudes and 
elevated regions, and are assisted in their development by a little 
frost ; and that this seems to be borne out by the occurrence of nine 
species in this neighbourhood which he is able to identify, besides 
several others at present undetermined.
In the subjoined list I have distinguished by an asterisk eleven 
species which appear to be unrecorded in Mr. Lees' ' Flora of West 
Yorkshire.' This number would be increased to thirteen were 
there not some little doubt regarding Leptonia lampropus and 
Coriinarius albo-violacetts, 
Agaricus (Amanitopsis) vaginatus Fr. Fir plantation, 
Oughtershaw.
Agaricus (Lepiota) cristatus Fr.
Agaricus (Lepiota) granulosus Batsch.
Amongst grass, 
Oughtershaw.
Agaricus (Armillaria) melleus Fl. Dan.
Oughtershaw.
Decaying stumps.
Naturalist, 
\ 
WOODD : LANGSTROTHDALE FUNGI.
14I 
t 
1 
Agaricus (Tricholoma) imbricatus Fr. Oughtershaw Wood.
Agaricus (Tricholoma) bufonius Fr. Fir-wood.
Agaricus (Tricholoma) terreus Schgef.
Oughtershaw Woods.
Very common.
Agaricus (Collybia) radicatus Relh.
Tree-stumps.
Agaricus (Collybia) dryophilus Bull.
Moor-top.
Agaricus (Collybia) maculatus A.
& S.
Under fir-trees, 
Oughtershaw Wood.
Agaricus (Collybia) clavipes Per. Mossy grass.
Agaricus (Mycena) vulgaris P.
Tree-stumps, etc., Oughter- 
shaw.
Agaricus (Omphalia) sp.
Buckden Woods.
Agaricus (Leptonia) lampropus ?
Meadow.
Agaricus (Nolanea) sp.
Cam Road.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) laccatus Scop.
Under fir-trees, Oughter- 
shaw.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) cyathiformis Fr. Mossy wall, Oughter- 
shaw.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) geotropus Bull.
In a fir-wood.
Agaricus (Entoloma) sericeus Bull.
Meadow.
Agaricus (Clitopilus) orcella Badh.
Oughtershaw Wood.
Agaricus (Galera) tener Sch.-efr.
Meadow.
Agaricus (Naucoria) pediades Fr. Wet meadow.
Agaricus (Naucoria) cerodes Fr. Meadow.
Agaricus (Psalliota) campestris L.
Meadows.
Common.
Agaricus (Hebeloma) mesophaeus Berk.
Oughtershaw 
Wood.
Agaricus (Stropharia) semiglobatus Batsch.
Meadows.
Very 
common.
Agaricus (Stropharia) aeruginosus Curt.
Under fir-trees, 
Oughtershaw.
Agaricus (Hypholoma) fascicularis Huds.
Decaying 
trunk.
Agaricus (Panaeolus) papilionaceus Bull.
Oughtershaw.
Common.
Agaricus (Panaeolus) campanulatus L.?
Meadows.
Coprinus aratus Berk.
Oughtershaw.
Cortinarius albo-violaceus?
Oughtershaw Woods.
Cortinarius (Dermocybe) caninus Fn 
May 1S91.
142 WOODD : LANGSTROTHDALE FUNGI.
*Cortinarius (Telamonia) gentilis Fr.
Cortinarius (Hydrocybe) acutus Pers.
Gomphidius viscidus L.
Fir-wood.
Hygrophorus pratensis P.
Pasture.
Common.
Hygrophorus virgineus Wulf.
? Hill pasture.
Hygrophorus ceraceus Wulf.
Meadows, etc.
Common.
Hygrophorus miniatus Fr. Moorland.
Hygrophorus puniceus Fr. Meadows, etc., Oughtershaw.
Hygrophorus conicus Scop.
Pastures, etc.
Very common.
'^Hygrophorus chlorophanus Fr. Moorland pasture.
Hygrophorus psittacinus SchaefF.
Meadows.
Common.
Hygrophorus coccineus Fr.
Lactarius chrysorrhaeus Fr. Common.
Oughtershaw Wood* 
Lactarius quietus Fr.
. 
Lactarius subdulcis Bull.
Oughtershaw Wood.
Lactarius rufus Fr. Oughtershaw Wood.
*Russula rosacea Fr. Common.
*Russula virescens Fr. Oughtershaw Wood.
Marasmius insititius Fr. Under fir-trees, Oughtershaw.
Boletus granulatus L.
Oughtershaw.
Boletus piperatus Bull, Oughtershaw Wood.
Boletus scaber Fr. Common.
Poiyporus sulphureus Fr. Raisghyll, on trunk of Ash-tree.
Polyporus versicolor Fr. Hurdle-rail, Yokenthwaite.
Poiyporus adustus Fr. Ling-ghyll, rather beyond our area.
Stereum hirsutum Fr. Water-butt in greenhouse, Oughter- 
shaw.
Clavaria rugosa Bull.
Oughtershaw Wood.
Clavaria vermiculata Scop.
Meadow, Oughtershaw.
Clavaria rosea Fr. Meadow.
Tremella mesenterica Retz.
Buckden Woods.
Lycoperdon giganteum Batsch.
Common.
Oughtershaw, etc.
Lycoperdon caelatum Fr. Yokenthwaite.
Lycoperdon pusiUum Fr. Meadows.
Lycoperdon gemmatum Fr. Buckden Woods.
Lycoperdon pyriforme Schceff.
Hill pasture.
Peziza scutellata L Oughtershaw Wood, 
Xylaria hypoxyion Fr. Oughtershaw, 
/ 
^ 
M3 
ARE STARLINGS DOUBLE-BROODED?
Rev. HEXRY H.
SLATER, M.A., F 2.S., M.B.O.U., 
Vicar of Irchester, Northamptonskire, 
I THINK that it is about a couple of years since Mr. Mitchell asked 
this question in 'The Naturalist.* He asked me the same question 
privately, but I had not given the matter sufficient attention to 
express a decided opinion either way.
I have, however^ been paying 
some attention to it this spring ( 1 890), and have come to the conclusion 
that, at all events in a large number of cases, the question at the 
head of this must be answered in the affirmative.
The following 
circumstance, amongst others, seemed to me tolerably conclusive.
It was one day in the first week of June 1890, towards evening, 
that I and my two elder boys disturbed a flock of some hundred 
Starlings from a small wooded island in the lake which lies in the 
middle of the Park near here.
They w^ere preparing to roost, and 
w-e were close to them.
There was not one old bird amongst them.
They w^ere all brow^n young birds of the year, but strong on the 
wing and well feathered.
There were plenty of old birds flying 
about the park, but singly, and evidently still feeding young oneSj for 
their bills were often full of food, and they were often dropping 
'things' which fell heavily on the surface of the lake.
There are 
^any old elms in the park, with woodpecker holes, which Starlings 
inherit, and are very partial to.
But I never knew with certainty of Starlings laying two con- 
secutive clutches of eggs in the same hole ; or only in the case of so 
desirable a spot as a pigeon-cote of the old-fashioned kind on a pole.
There w^ere many birds— too many to observe closely — and many 
holes, but certainly these latter seemed to be appropriated without 
exception from March to June.
But there is a reason why Starlings might easily prefer not to rear 
two broods in the same year in the same nest.
Starlings, as most 
people are aware, are 'thickly inhabited' birds, and by the time that 
a brood of young birds are ready to fly, the hole, as most people also 
know, is, to say the least, 'populous' to an extent sufficient to make 
|t very desirable that it should not be used again that year.
Hence 
It becomes difficult to settle the question of second broods with 
sufficient accuracy.
That can only be done where they are strictly 
protected, and where there are individual birds who, from some 
peculiarity, can be recognised.
It seems appropriate to add, that a Hedge Sparrow this morning 
(J^%_xs^ 1890) laid her fourth egg in her third nest this season in the 
144 notes: mammalia.
+ 
same ivied court in front of the study window where I am now writing 
r 
this.
The other two nests were within five yards of her present one, 
and both broods got safely away— an unusual thing in this cat- 
beridden place.
I am quite certain that one individual, at least, of 
the pair has had a share in all three nests^I presume, the female; 
at all events, the one which has taken the largest share of the work 
in incubation.
She has a peculiar bare patch on her neck, by which 
she is recognisable at a glance.
And both she and her mate are 
quite tame, and feed their young without concern, when some 
person may be gardening within a few yards of the nest.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Churchwardens' Accounts, Cockerington S.
Mary's, North Lincoln- 
shire.
— Mr. R.
W. Goulding, of Louth, has extracted the following Natural 
History notes from the parish accounts of Cockerington S.
Mary's (or North 
Cockerington) near Louth.
Corviis jnonedula, — In 1734, is.
4d.
was paid 'for two men stoping jackdaws 
out.' 
Talpa enropiva.
— In 1732, John Tomson received 15s.
'for mouling.' 
Viilpes vulgaris, — In 1735, John Shipton and Henry Hutton were paid is.
'for killing a fox.* 
Lutra httra, — In 1744, is, was given to Wm. Souden *for catching an otter.' 
J. BuRTT Davy, Alford, Lines., January 17th, 189I.
Red Field Voles near Lotherton, Yorkshire.
— Bird-lime is usually made 
by boiling linseed-oil until it attains the requisite tenacity, and recently I had a 
somewhat curious experience in the way of natural bird-lime.
Whilst walking 
in company with Mr. Roebuck from Micklefield to Tadcaster on the 1st inst., I 
noticed a broken stone jar lying by the road-side, not far from Lotherton.
It had 
contained linseed-oil, and had evidently fallen from the cart on which it had 
been carried.
A little oil still lay in one of the broken pieces, but it was quite- 
thick and yellow, as though it had been exposed some time.
It was very 
tenacious, and had done its work only too well.
Two Red Field Voles (Ai"Vicola 
glareolus) were lying dead in the oil, having no doubt been attracted by the 
substance, and unwillingly detained.
^Edgar R.
Waite, The Museum, Leeds, 
2ist March, 1S91.
Common Field Voles at Eccup.
—Anyone who is in the habit of visiting 
Eccup Reservoir will probably have noticed the fringe of long grass which grows 
between high and low water-marks.
WTien covered by water this grass stands 
up, but is laid when the water recedes.
The Reservoir has been almost empty 
since the middle of December, 1890, for the purpose of alterations.
I frequently 
visit the Reservoir, and have done so several times during the work of recon- 
struction.
On the 28th February last I noticed that the sandy soil {in which 
£rows the grass before-mentioned) was drilled all over with small holes.
I had 
scarcely made the discovery when some of the perpetrators put in an appearance- 
The Common Field Voles {Arvlcola agrestis) had taken possession, and these 
little creatures were scurrying about in all directions through the grass, which was 
lying dow^n like the swathes in a meadow.
The Voles were very numerous, and 
four or five were frequently in sight at once, so that, although ihey were ver}- quick, 
I managed to catch one or two of them.
I looked carefully at the j^round both 
above and below the area occupied by the grass, but could not find a single 
burrow, although, as I have said before, this particular tract was perforated in all 
directions.— Edgar R.
Waite, The Museum, Leeds, 3rd April, 1S91.
Naturalist, 
M5 
THE ANCIENT 
LAVAS OF THE ENGLISH LAKE DISTRICT 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A..
F.G.S.
The existence of a great series of volcanic rocks in the English 
Lake District has long been recognised, although very little precise 
information about them has been forthcoming.
The rocks were 
first described by Sedgwick, who, in the terminology of his day, 
named them the ' Green-Slates and Porphyries/ Messrs.
Harkness 
and Nicholson have termed them the 'Borrowdale Series/ from the 
fine development of a portion of the succession in that valley.
The 
series forms part of the Ordovician system (Lower Silurian of the 
Geological Survey), and must be of the same general age as 
the volcanic rocks of Caernarvonshire, The volcanic accumulations 
occupy all the central part of the Lake District, being bounded 
northward by the Skiddaw Slates, while to the south they terminate 
with the Coniston Limestone, and are succeeded by the Silurian 
strata (Upper Silurian of the Survey).
Further, a belt of volcanic 
rocks belonging to the same series runs along tlie northern edge of 
the Skiddaw Slate area.
Fragmental rocks (breccias, coarse and fine ashes, etc.) form a 
large part of the volcanic series, often in beds alternating with the lavas, 
but it is to the latter alone that we shall refer here.
With regard to 
chemical composition, the lavas divide into three distinct sets — basic, 
intermediate, and acid; and these will be briefly noticed in order.
The dasic lavas, with certain associated ashes, etc., occupy the 
northerly belt already mentioned, and are especially well exhibited 
at the eastern end of their course, in Eycott Hill, near Troutbeck 
Station.
They contain 51 to 53 per cent, of silica, and have 
a specific gravity of about 275.
Unlike most lavas of simikr 
chemical composition, they contain no olivine, but instead we find 
other basic minerals abundant, and particularly hypersthene; so 
that the rocks may be termed hypersthene-basalts.
The most 
striking type is seen in a thick flow rather low down in the Eycott 
section, where it stands out conspicuously, forming a row of small 
prominences.
It is distinguished by its enclosing porphyritic crystals 
of triclinic felspar up to an inch or even two inches in length in 
a compact ground.
The crystals often have a rather tabular shape, 
with rounded outline.
When fresh, they are quite glassy in aspect, 
and show distinctly the Carlsbad twinning, as well as the usual 
^^'in-striation.
They belong to the variety bytownite.
The other 
??^sjeen in Eycott Hill are compact throughout, or enclose only 
^^ay 1891, K 
1-46 HARKER : ANCIENT LAVAS OF THE LAKE DISTRICT.
small porphyritic crystals.
All the upper sheets are of this type, 
and these show a very marked ' flow-structure.' The hypersthene 
is indicated only by minute black spots.
In thin sections, however, 
it is easily recognised, though quite altered into bastite- With it 
occur some augite, magnetite, etc.
These compact basalts have 
normally a dark colour, but sometimes, as in Charlton Gill, they 
become pale and reddish, owing to oxidation of the iron compounds, 
and they might almost be mistaken for some of the acid lavas.
It 
should be noticed that a vesicular or amygdaloidal character is found 
in some of the flows, or, rather, near their upper and lower surfaces.
By far the greater number of the Lake District lavas belong to 
the intermediate division^ giving 59 to 61 per cent, of silica on 
analysis, and having a specific gravity 2*65 to 2*7.
They are 
pyroxene-andesites, the pyroxene being sometimes a rhombic one 
(hypersthene), sometimes a monoclinic (augite), or the two often 
occurring together.
These minerals are not in large enough crystals 
to be easily detected by eye, though the dark patches due to their 
decomposition-products may often be observ^ed.
Porphyritic felspars 
are usually present, sometimes rather crowded and up to a quarter of 
an inch long, but more usually scattered, and often minute.
The 
ground-mass has a very compact look, with usually either a pale 
greenish or a dark grey tint.
Many of the flows are vesicular, or 
have their uppermost and lowest layers vesicular; and the vesicles 
niay reach considerable dimensions, as, for instance, on some parts 
of Grange Fells.
They are commonly filled with chalcedony, agate, 
calcite, chloritoid substances, etc., in concentric layers.
Some of the andesites have a special character in the occurrence 
of little red garnets.
The occasional presence of garnets in the 
Lake District rocks is very striking.
They occur in basic, inter- 
mediate, and acid lavas alike, and in the ashes and breccias 
associated with them.
The mineral even occurs in some of the 
intrusive rocks, such as the Armboth dykes and others.
Most of the less resisting rocks in the Lake District have been 
more or less affected by profound mechanical disturbances, which 
operated after the Silurian period, and they have thus received 
a cleavage-structure.
In some places the stresses produced have 
been very intense, and even hard lavas have become crushed and 
cleaved.
This is very evident in the case of amygdaloidal lavas like 
the andesites near the Gates of Borrowdale, the vesicles being in 
places flattened into mere films; but compact non-vesicular lavas 
have also become cleaved, and some have even been worked as slates.
r 
w 
The acid lavas occur at more than one horizon among the 
andesites, but they are most developed at the summit of the whole 
Naturalist, 
• HARKER : ANCIENT LAVAS OF THE LAKE DISTRICT.
I47 
volcanic series, and in the middle of the Coniston Limestone group 
ahove.
The rocks are rhyolites, with a silica-percentage up to 76 or 
77 and a specific gravity of about 2'6.
They are hardly ever 
conspicuously porphyritic, presenting most frequently a uniformly 
compact aspect.
Often they are grey, with a rather flinty 
appearance; or, again, they acquire by oxidation and other 
changes a pink or cream-colour, and become duller in aspect, 
Ihe flow-structure is sometimes strongly marked to the eye, and 
some of the rhyolites have quite a laminated look.
Thin sections 
under the microscope suggest that the rocks have in many cases 
been largely glassy in texture, but have suffered various processes of 
alteration.
One type of structure met with is the micro-spherulitic.
Among other secondary modifications, the rhyolites appear to be 
hable to impregnation with silica, and this may even go so far as to 
convert masses of the rock into a jaspery substance.
More 
remarkable are the effects observed in certain globular bodies in the 
tock, having a diameter of one or two inches or more.
These seem 
to be originally giant spherulitic structures, not fundamentally 
different from the minute ones seen under the microscope, but they 
become apparent only after certain chemical alterations.
To such 
alterations, consisting especially in a kind of silicification, these 
spheroidal bodies are more susceptible than the rest of the rock.
Some of the altered spheroids show concentric alternating shells of 
chalcedony or quartz, of a black chloritoid substance, and sometimes 
of comparatively unaltered rhyolite.
In certain cases actual hollows 
2re formed by the destruction of portions of the interior.
The final 
stage is the conversion of the whole into a nodule of quartz, and 
sometimes the surrounding matrix of rhyolite also becomes silicified.
Excellent examples of these phenomena are seen on the face of 
Great Yarlside and at other places in the neighbourhood.
The above are only the leading characters of the main types of 
Lake District lavas.
The sources which «rave vent to such extensive 
outpourings are still to be localised The thickness of the whole 
volcanic series was estimated by Mr. Clifton Ward at 12,000 feet, 
but is probably much greater.
In any case it betokens the long- 
continued prevalence of intense volcanic activity.
I'his was heralded 
"y a few minor outbursts during the deposition of the Skiddaw 
Slates, and, on the other hand, igneous activity appears to have 
lingered feebly into the beginning, at least, of the Silurian period ; 
out the important display of vulcanicity in this area is comprised 
between the limits of the great Volcanic Series as defined above, 
2-nd this part of England may dobtless furnnish important lessons 
^2!!S^ng the essential features of a period of igneous manifestations 
148 
§11 'J^^lcmonam.
NICHOLAS WEARMOUTH, 
Since writing upon the Birds inhabiting Upper Teesdale 
(Naturalist, October 1885, p.
353), one from whom a great 
deal of my information was acquired, has passed away — Mr, 
Nicholas Wearmouth.
He was a bona-fide naturalist, who made 
many of his observations and shot numbers of specimens on the 
Yorkshire side of the Tees.
He was born on July i6th, 1826, and 
lived for many years at Newbiggin, a small village two miles or 
more west of Middleton-in-Teesdale.
Here the writer and every 
bird-student who knevv him loved to call and learn Avhat he had to 
teach respecting the wild birds which (especially some ten years ago) 
were so very numerous in the dale.
Mr. Wearmouth, though very 
constantly at work as a village grocer and provision dealer, 
frequently found time to * ornithologise,' and some of the happiest 
hours which the mind can recall were spent in his company by the 
Tees side, or in 'Park End' Wood.
Mr. Wearmouth at an early 
period of his life showed a great interest in birds and animals, but 
was more especially fond of the former.
For some years, however, 
circumstances prevented him from giving much attention to his 
hobby, but about i860 he began to study in earnest, and continued 
to do so with increasing vigour until the time of his demise.
By 
nature gentle and courteous, Mr. Wearmouth won the respect of 
those who knew him, and even to a comparative stranger his kindness 
and friendship will not easily be forgotten.
Nor were his hospitality 
or intelligent conversation the only attractions to his house at 
Newbiggin.
For years, with untiring energy, Mr. Wearmouth 
(a self taught taxidermist) collected and stuffed a vast number of 
birds, both British and Foreign, but chiefly the former, amongst 
which were many rare specimens from his beloved valley.
The 
Rough-legged Buzzard {Archibuieo lagopus) and Sanderling \Calidris 
ar€naria\ both shot close to the village, are among the number.
A fine cabinet, chiefly containing local birds' eggs, materially 
enhances the value of the collection, which is added to yearly by 
Mr. Wearmouth's son Joseph, who, like his father, is a true lover of 
nature.
A clutch of eggs of the Red-backed Shrike {Lanius coUnrio) 
from nearer Middleton, grace this extensive cabinet.
Mr. Wearmouth 
visited week by week the market at Barnard Castle, some seventeen 
miles away, and it was on one of these journeys that, through a slight 
mishap, an illness was brought on which terminated his useful life- 
Harrogate, ^h Ap'il, 1S91.
J. BACKHOUSE- 
Naturalist, 
/ 
149 
FOSSIL CLIMATES.
A. C.
SEWARD, M.A., F.G.S., 
Without attempting to crowd into a short paper an undue number 
of facts or theories, we may begin by noting what some of the 
earlier geologists and pal;^obotanists have to say with regard to 
climates of past ages.
Fossil plants, rather than animals, will be 
taken as guides in these weather retrospects ; our attention will be 
centred round them, not concerning ourselves to any great extent 
with either physical evidence or evidence afforded by fossil animals.
For many reasons, theories as to climate in past time were first pro- 
pounded with reference to the Carboniferous period, or rather the 
uppermost division of that system — the Coal Measures.
Perhaps 
even to-day the climate of that age has the greatest fascination for 
^s, as more wrapped in obscurity and affording less valuable evidence 
than the plant-bearing beds of more recent systems, whose fossils, 
much more closely allied to living forms, tell us in more certain 
terms of changes of climate well nigh incredible.
The botanist 
Antoine de JussieUj in the early part of last century, was one of the 
first to draw any conclusions as to Carboniferous climate from the 
fossil plants so abundant and widely distributed in the Coal seams and 
associated strata.
He pointed to tropical genera as the nearest 
relatives of coal plants, this relationship suggesting tropical con- 
ditions at the time when these plants formed the Carboniferous 
forests.
Passing to the present century, we find Adolphe Brongniart, 
whom we may regard as the Father of palseobotany, referring to 
certain algae in pre-cretaceous strata as indicative of a high tempera- 
ture ; the occurrence of a fossil Sargassum (the Gulf-weed) in Sweden 
being quoted in support of his conclusions.
One may note, in 
passing, the impracticability of forming any theories on such extremely 
doubtful forms as the so-called 'fossil algae.' 
Taking his stand on surer ground, Brongniart lays stress on the 
high percentage of vascular cryptogams in the Coal Measures 
flora — five-sixths of the whole— as compared with the very sub- 
ordinate position which the group holds to-day.
It is pointed out 
that these Carboniferous vascular cryptogams are larger than 
niodern genera, and differ further in the greater development of 
their stems, botli facts regarded as suggestive of warmer climate.
The same botanist recognises the uniform character of this flora, 
!££2U?^^'^^J^nd and the shores of Baffin's Bay to localities in 
150 SEWARD: FOSSIL CLIMATES.
r 
Widely separated latitudes, all yielding identical species.
His 
conclusions are briefly as follows :- — the predominance in Carboni- 
ferous times of vascular cryptogams, and the consideration of the 
conditions most favourable for the growth of such plants to-day, 
point to the Coal Period as one enjoying a moist and warm climate, 
the land more insular than in subsequent periods, the atmosphere 
more highly charged with carbonic acid gas.
We should find, did 
time allow, that this is in the main the view held by most of the older 
botanists or geologists, and, indeed, one which finds a place in some 
of our modern text books.
In 1833, Witham published his work on 'The Internal Structure 
of Fossil Vegetables/ Here is followed a new line of inquiry; the 
absence or very slight development of annual rings of growth in the 
wood of Carboniferous trees, their existence in Jurassic Conifers, 
indicating in the former period a uniform temperature without 
sharply defined alternations of seasons, in the latter a succession of 
periods of rest and of active growth, which have left their mark in 
autumn and spring wood.
This annual ring test is further taken up 
by Lindley and Hulton in their ' Fossil Flora,' and is well worthy of 
careful investigation to-day by those interested in palseoclimatic 
questions- 
Prof, Renault, of Paris, notes the superiority of plants over 
animals as tests of climate, the former, without the means of loco- 
motion possessed by the latter, being more susceptible to temperature 
changes.
Dr. Archibald Geikie and other writers lend their support to 
this view, that in plants rather than animals we ^ have the best 
thermometers of the past.
Sir Charles Lyell emphasises the serious diflficulty attending 
deductions as to temperature from fossil plants.
On those older 
types — which in species, and even in genus and family, differ from 
present day forms — we can rely but little.
We must be careful in 
any case- — i.e., in all geologic periods — to take into account the 
absence of competitive forms of a higher grade, whose presence in 
more recent times has doubtless played a most important part as 
a factor in geographical distribution.
In speaking of the earlier calculations as to the Coal Period 
climate, Lyell notes a modification in the opinions of botanists, 
formerly in favour of a tropical temperature.
Quoting such cases as 
the Mammoth, whose thick and warm coat Cuvier regarded as 
a protection against Arctic cold, he suggests that this power of 
adaptation may have been possessed by those Carboniferous plants 
whose remains are preserved within the Arctic circle.
We are 
Naturalist.
SEWARD: FOSSIL CLIMATES.
151 
referred to a New Zealand forest as the nearest approach to the 
evergreen forests of the Palaeozoic period.
Even here we may 
remember how tree ferns almost overhang the terminal moraines of 
glaciers; a striking caution, which should temper our rashness in 
settling climatal questions.
In dealing with these older plants— and, indeed, with all fossils 
one cannot be too mindful of the many instances in the vegetable 
and animal kingdoms which prove how closely-related species may 
live under very different conditions of climate.
It is well known how 
Palms, generally characteristic of warm countries, are represented by 
species growing in northern latitudes in Europe ; in the Himalayas, 
too, palnas, bamboos, and Conifers grow in close association.
Many 
land plants of the north temperate zone have been found to extend 
themselves rapidly when afforded an opportunity of spreading in 
warmer latitudes- 
In the case of animals^ many similar examples might be taken 
warning us against the danger of regarding a close specific relation- 
ship as a necessary mark of similar habitats.
To take one instance : 
the chamois — a kind of antelope— delights in the severe cold of 
Alpine heights, the antelopes generally being inhabitants of warmer 
regions ('Nature,' 1890, pp.
148-151, pp.
175-180; 'The Climates 
of Past Ages,' Neumayr).
This power of adaptation in plants is a subject as interesting as 
it is significant and suggestive, but we cannot now stay to describe 
the peculiar leaf-structures in certain Greenland plants, or in such as 
flourish further south in the Steppes, by which the periods of drought 
are tided over.
Let us rapidly sketch the general conditions of climate in the past, 
noticing here and there such facts as may tend to modify some of 
the generally received ideas with regard to past temperatures.
Leaving out of consideration the oldest periods, we plunge at once 
into the shades of a Carboniferous forest.
A vast expanse of forest- 
covered swamp, or low-lying ground, thickly set with archaic types 
of vascular cryptogams, with whose protean genera one is familiar 
in the various 'Carboniferous landscapes,' the same genus being made 
to appear in such a garb as may best suit the theories of the 
botanical reconstructor or the artist's conception of sylvan beauty- 
The higher ground, standing out from these level plains, studded 
doubdess with more hardy Conifers, whose remains occur so 
abundantly in the Carboniferous sands alternating with the Coal 
seams.
It has already been pointed out what is the general verdict 
as to the Coal Period climate :—warm, if not tropical ; an atmosphere 
'i^5nj\'ith aqueous vapour, rich in carbonic acid gas; a uniform 
^*ay 1891.
152 SEWARD: FOSSIL CLIMATES, 
temperature, proved by the world-wide distribution of typical coal- 
measure fossils; violent rains — as to-day in the tropics — pitted the 
sands of the Carboniferous flats; whether, indeed, these showers 
were of tropical intensity is beyond us to decide ; that rain there 
was, is proved by the sandstone rain-prints.
At the British Association Meeting at Montreal, Dr. Blanford 
threw out the suggestion that evidence is not wanting in favour of 
distinct floras in the Carboniferous period.
Not only have we 
highland flora and a plain flora^as previously recognised by 
Godwin-Austen and others — but in the southern hemisphere the 
characteristic Carboniferous flora is replaced by another set of 
plants, destined in later periods to extend over a wide area, and 
gradually drive out the Coal Measure forms which held on for 
a longer period in the northern hemisphere.
To examine the evidence against the generally received opinion 
of a uniform Carboniferous flora.
We shall find it more convenient 
u 
to include in one system the Carboniferous and Permian rocks; the 
plants of the two differ rather in degree than in kind, and some 
of the plant-bearing beds of the southern hemisphere cannot be 
regarded in the present state of our knowledge as undoubtedly 
Carboniferous, but may at present be included in a Permo- 
Carboniferous bracket.
In India, Australia, South Africa, and 
Afghanistan there occur abundant plant-remains of the same type 
in beds referred to the Carboniferous and Permian systems, 
which differ essentially from the typical Permo-Carboniferous flora 
of the northern hemisphere, having a distinctly Mesozoic facies.
These southern abnormal forms are regarded as the ancestors of 
the Mesozoic flora of the northern hemisphere.
This southern 
Permo-Carboniferous flora is generally spoken of as the Glossoptens 
flora, from the widespread occurrence of the reticulately-veined 
tongue-shaped leaves, presumably those of a fern.
In the Salt Range of Northern India, in more southerly districts 
in the Indian Peninsula, in South Africa and Australia, there 
are interbedded with Glossopteris-bearing strata thick deposits of 
a stiff clay, full of rounded and scratched stones — deposits referred 
by the majority of geologists most competent to express an opinion 
on the subject to the action of ice.
We have, then, in these several 
countries a certain flora — and, indeed, foreshadowed in beds of the 
same age in China — very diff*erent from the European Carboniferous 
flora, and much more closely allied to our Triassic vegetation.
With this flora are associated in certain districts ice-scratched blocks.
The late Prof.
Neumayr, of Vienna, regarded this southern flora as 
a continental one ; in Permo-Carboniferous times, Africa, So uth an d 
Naturalist, 
t 
SEWARD: FOSSIL CLIMATES.
153 
F 
Middle India, and Australia being in direct communication.
Over 
this continent — for or against whose existence we have no time to 
discuss the arguments — there obtained a cold or even Arctic climate, 
which drove north the older types of Carboniferous plants— traces 
of which have been found in Australia and South Africa underlying 
the Glossopteris beds— and gave birth to a mountain flora or Permo- 
Carboniferous Alpine vegetation- Allowing that this is a theory not 
unassailed by arguments whose weight calls for careful consideration, 
we will further consider what are the main reasons which compel us 
to depart from the orthodox views as to the Coal Period vegetation 
and climate.
Allowing the occurrence in the southern hemisphere 
of this Glossopteris flora, and the fact that even in North America 
certain species of Carboniferous plants are found unknown in 
Europe, that differences are noticed in Arctic Carboniferous plants, 
and again in the China flora of the same age, we must still admit a 
widely-spread typical Carboniferous vegetation.
But does this neces- 
sarily imply a uniform tropical climate?
As was pointed out years 
ago and recently insisted upon by Neumayr, we must take intoaccoun 
the fact that the Carboniferous plants — well adapted in their very 
nature to easy and wide distribution by spores — had not the 
formidable rivalry of the higher plants, the Monocotyledons and 
Dicotyledons, to contend against, and could spread over wide 
areas without having to yield to superior force in the struggle for 
existence.
In a lecture delivered in Vienna in 1S89, Prof.
Neumayr, 
speaking on this subject, remarks :—' It is not in the towering 
primaeval forests of India and Brazil^ nor the mangrove swamps of 
tropical coasts, but in the moors of the sub-Arctic zone that plant- 
remains are now being stored up in a form that, in the course of 
geological ages, may become converted into beds of coal' ('Nature,' 
loc.
cit.).
He points out how the greatest deposits of coal are 
restricted to a zone outside the tropics; within the tropics the 
typical Carboniferous plants are conspicuous by their absence, 
Whether we take our stand on facts of plant geography in Carbon- 
iferous times, or on the physical conditions favourable for the 
accumulation and conversion into coal of the Palaeozoic forests, 
^'e are compelled to depart from the old opinions, and without 
dogmatising in definite terms, must allow a difference in temperature 
in different latitudes and the existence, even in the remote Carbon- 
iferous age, of sharply-contrasted floras.
Without stopping to particularise as to Triassic climates, one may 
remark, even in this more recent period, a striking uniformity in the 
g^neralj;haracter of the flora.
In the same period we notice an 
May 1891.
154 SEWARD: FOSSIL CLIMATES.
important change in the type of vegetation : in the northern hemi- 
sphere are introduced those new elements already recognised in the 
abnormal southern flora of Permo-Carboniferous times.
We have 
here the last survivors of the Carboniferous types in competition 
with the newer forms; as the Marquis of Saporta puts it : 'Old age 
and infancy together.' 
As to the Jurassic climate, the Cycads so abundant in our own 
island suggest a temperature considerably higher than the present.
To turn for a moment from plants to animals.
Prof.
Neumayr, after 
careful and detailed examination of the Jurassic fossils, recognises in 
the differences of the Ammonites and other genera from different 
latitudes evidence for the existence of climatic zones.
Next, to pass in review the plant evidence of Cretaceous and 
Tertiary times.
The most interesting facts in connection with 
these systems are those furnished by the various finds of fossil 
plants in Arctic regions.
From Kome, Atave, and other Green- 
land districts, Dicotyledons, Ferns, Cycads, and Conifers have 
been collected of Cretaceous age, indicating a climate warm and 
possibly moist.
In the lowest beds of Cretaceous age we have suddenly 
appearing the deciduous-leaved Dicotyledons, described as the 
greatest revolution ever seen in the botanical world* As to the 
significance of this with reference to climatology, the sharper 
seasonal contrasts, and other matters of greater or less interest, 
we cannot stay to discuss.
In conclusion, to pass to surer ground, and note the evidence 
afforded by Tertiary plants; evidence of greater value in proportion 
to the closer relationship between Tertiary forms and their living 
descendants.
In Eocene times — the first chapter in Tertiary 
history — Europe — then an archipelago of islands — enjoyed a climate 
sub-tropical or even tropical.
Palms, Dracfsnas^ Eticalyptus, 
Magnolias^ Lycopodmms,Aspl€niu?ns,vfi\h the more familiar Chestnuts, 
Willows, Figs, Maples, and other genera, flourished in these latitudes.
The predominance of the order Proteaceoe gave to this Eocene 
flora an Australian aspect.
In the Arctic genera of the same age 
we have evidence of the effect of difference in latitude, already 
evident in the preceding Cretaceous and Jurassic flora.
This 
English Eocene flora, according to Mr. Starkie Gardner, could now 
exist in Madeira, the Iceland flora in the Isle of Wight, that of 
Spitzbergen in Sweden, that of Grinnell Land in North Norway.
In the succeeding and younger Tertiary beds we have a rich and 
varied evergreen flora, linked by many ties with the flora of America 
and the tropical floras of India and Australia.
_ 
Naturalist, 
HVBERNIA LEUCOPHEARIA V.
NIGRICARIA AT DONCASTER.
155 
Heer, par excellence the botanist of the Tertiary period, claims 
for the northern Alps in Switzerland, in middle Tertiary times, 
a mean temperature of 68°-72'' F., such as now obtains at Cairo.
No doubt one might give mean temperatures for all the past periods 
in the earth's history, but they would be of little value even for these 
more recent and better known Tertiary beds; there are so many 
other considerations to take into account beyond the mere 
comparison of fossil and present-day species, however closely the 
two may be related.
Starting with a subtropical or tropical climate in the Eocene 
period, we pass up the series, noting as we ascend a steady but 
gradual decrease in temperature until we find ourselves in more 
recent English strata in company with the dw^irf birch and Arctic 
willow, plants which prepare us for the sw^ing of the pendulum to 
the other extreme, where from the Arctic regions to Central Europe 
extend slowly-spreading tongues of ice, uniting at the maximum of 
cold to form an ice-sheet almost continuous.
Here and there stood 
out the higher peaks of land, oases in the ice desert, held as their 
last stronghold by a few hardy plants, as now' on those peaks pene- 
trating the Greenland ice-mantle are found some few stragglers of 
the Greenland flora.
Tempting as it is to regard plants as thermometers of past ages 
and to amuse ourselves by drawing up temperatures read by glimpses 
through the 'corridors of time/ interesting enough as it is to 
contrast these extinct types with their supposed living relatives, or 
to go more minutely into the subject and search with the microscope 
in transverse sections of Carboniferous trees for evidence of buried 
seasons, yet we cannot be too careful to remember w^e have in fossil 
plants only one hnk — and that, too often, an imperfect one — in the 
chain of evidence which leads us to conclusions as to climates of 
^ges past.
NO TE~^LEFID OPTERA.
Hybernia Icucophearia var.
nigricaria at Doncaster, — I have taken 
^ form ol //yberm'a iencophearia here that appears to me to be peculiar.
It is 
of the following description — Upper surface : Fore-wing, almost entirely sooty 
black, slightly paler and ochreous about the disc ; the costa, inner margin, dx%- 
coidal spot and two transverse lines, rather darker — not a trace of hind-marginal 
pale spots; hind-wing, without markings, dark gray.
Under surface: Entirely 
without markings, slightly nacreous, dark gray ; the nervures rather darker.
I have 
only seen one oi this form, or anything approaching to it* — H.
H. Corbktt, 
I9» Hallgate, Doncaster, March 31st, 1891, 
This is the variety nigricaria, and so far as I know has not previously hccn 
reported from Yorkshire.
It is one of the very few melanic forms which seem to 
occur more commonly in the South of England than in the north.
A well-known 
London locality is Richmond Park, where in some seasons it is not at all uncom- 
nyn, and from where I have specimens in my own cabinet.
™G.
T. Porritt, 
May i8q(.
^56 
NOTES AND NEWS.
The Italian journal * La Notarisia,' in its No. 23, 28 Febbraio 1891, contains 
a paper by Mr. Wm, West, F.L.S., of Bradford, on the * Conjugazlone delle 
Zignemee,* illustrated by a couple of plates by himself and his son.
An appreciative obituary notice of the late Dr. IT.
B. Brady, F.R-S., giving 
a succinct and interesting sketch of his life and scientific career, appears in the 
March number of the Annals and Magazine of Natural History, to which he has 
so often contributed.
At the last anniversary meeting of the Geological Society of London, 
Mr. Wilfred H.
Hudleston, M.A., F.R.S., was elected a Vice-President, and 
Messrs.
Alfred Marker, M.A., and James W.
Davis.
F.S.A.
(Mayor of Halifax), 
•were chosen as Members of the Council.
In the Transactions of the Rochdale Literary and Scientific Society, vols, i 
{1878-1888) and 2 {18S9-1890), we are pleased to observe some interesting papers 
of local value.
Mr. R.
Law, F.G.S., has a note on bones of extinct pleistocene 
animals in a Cave at Matlock, Mr. W.
Watts, F.G.S., discourses on Swallows as 
observed at upwards of 700 ft.
alt.
in the Pennine range, Dr. T.
Hunt treats upon 
the 'Roses of Ashworth,' Mr. S.
S. Piatt describes the paving-stones used at 
Rochdale, Mr. C.
R. Beaumont narrates *A Ramble round Daisy Nook/ and 
Mr. J.
R. Ashworth gives useful tables of thermometrical observations of air and 
water at Cowm and Spring Mill Reservoirs.
>oo<~- 
Among the elections to the Fellowship of the Entomological Society of 
London during the past few months we have been pleased to note the following 
North-country names :— John Gardner (Hartlepool), S.
J. Capper, F.L.S.
(Liverpool), J.
E. Robson (Hartlepool), A.
E. Hall (Sheffield), Sir Vauncey 
Harpur-Crewe, Bart.
(Calke Abbey), and Mr. G.
A. Booth (Grange-over-Sands).
The 58th annual meeting of the Entomological Society of London was held on 
Wednesday, 21st January, Lord Walsingham, M.A., F.R.S., President, in the 
chair.
The following gentlemen were elected as Officers and Council for 1891 — 
President, Mr. Frederick DuCane Godman, M.A., F.R.S.
; Treasurer, Mr. R.
M'Lachlan, F.R.S.
; Secretaries, Mr. Herbert Goss, F.L.S., and the Rev. Canon 
Fowler, M.A., F.L.S.
; Librarian, Mr. Ferdinand Grut, F.L.S.
; and as other 
members of the Council, Prof.
R. Meldola, F.R.S., Mr. Edward Saunders, F.L.S., 
Dr. David Sharp, F.R.S., Mr. Richard South, TNIr. H.
T. Stainton, F.R.S., 
Col. C, Swinhoe, F.L.S., Mr. G.
H. Verrall, and the Rt. Hon.
Lord Walsingham, 
M.A., F.R.S. It was also announced that the new President had appointed 
Lord Walsingham, Prof.
Meldola, and Dr. Sharp, Vice-Presidents for the session 
1891-92.
Lord Walsingham, the retiring President, then delivered an address.
->oo< 
An examination of the current list of Fellows of the Entomological Society 
with reference to their geographical distribution shows that of our eleven northern 
counties ?i\q are quite without, viz.
— Nottinghamshire, Westmorland, Cumberland, 
Northumberland, and the Isle of Man. Lincolnshire has one, at Lincoln ; 
Durham has three, two resident at Hartlepool and one near Darlington ; Cheshire 
also has three, one at Chester, one at Sale, and one near Stockport ; Derbyshire 
has four, one at Calke Abbey and three at Burton-on-Trent ; Lancashire possesses 
seven, being two each at Liverpool and Manchester, and one each at Warrington, 
Preston, and Accrington ; while Yorkshire can boast of as many as eleven, two 
each at Leeds, Sheffield, and Huddersfield.
and one each at Barnsley, Beverley, 
Knoltingley, Hornsea, and near Ripon.
The smallness of all these figures tends 
to show that the premier entomological society of the kingdom, one which can 
confer a title (F\E.S. to wit), is not adequately supported in our di-trict, unless 
we admit that scientific entomology is but a feeble force in the North.
Against 
this last supposition we may, however, place the evidence which our bibliography 
(see opposite page) gives as to the activity of entomological investigators within 
our field of study.
Naturalift, 
157 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
LEPIDOPTERA, 1889.
The present instalment includes some titles of previous years whicb 
have hitherto escaped record, and contains a few contributed by 
Mr. T.
D. A.
Cockerell, to whose vigilance the Editors have often 
been indebted for assistance of this kind.
Previous instalments of 
the Bibliography of Lepidoptera have appeared as follows : — For 
1884, Nat., July 1885, p.
285; for 1885, 1886, and 1887, Nat, 
Feb. 1888, p- 58; for 1888, Nat, Sep. 1890, p.
279.
The counties for which the bibliographic record is made 
Cheviotland (:= Northumberland North), Northumberland South, 
Durham, York (N.W., N.E., S.E., S.W., and Mid W.), Lincolnshire 
W 
Westmorland with Furness, Cumberland, and the Isle of Man, 
Anon, [not signed].
and 
Liverpool Science Students* Association [re-appearance in Liverpool 
district (after i8 years' absence} oi Deilephila ^a!n\ noted by J.
Mackarell].
Research, Feb. 1889, p.
138.
Anon, [signed 'HJ.C/] 
Clouded Yeliov7 Butterfly [Colias edusa] in Durham 
1889], Field, Sep. 28, 1889, p.
476.
Anon, [signed ' W.B.B.'J.
Durham 
W 
Ackworth School Natural History [Notes : Smerintkus poptdi noted as 
found at Potteric Car].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. i5th, 1889, p.
148.
R. Adkin, 
W. and 
[Exhibition of Noctua g^Iareosa Esp. from Barnsley, York, ^ic^ to South 
Lond.
Ent. Soc, Jan. loth, 1889].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Feb. 1889, xxv.
216;.
Ent., Feb. 1889, xxii.
51 ; Young Nat., Feb. 1889, p.
37.
R. Ad KIN, 
West 
[Lobophora halterata (hexapterata) bred from larvx taken in West York- 
shire, where it appears to be abundant].
South Lond.
Ent- Soc, June 27th, 
1889; Ent., Aug, 18S9, xxii.
216; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep. 1889, xxv.
386;.
Young Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
173.
R. Adkin.
an 
^olia xanthomista v.
nigrocincta, Isle of Man; Cidaria reticulata and 
Emmelesia tu:niata.
Lake District, exhibited].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 
Nov. 6th, 1889, p.
xlvi.: Ent., D^c, 1889.
xxii.
309; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec...
1889, xxv.
460; Young Nat., Dec. 18S9, p, 249 ; Zool, Dec. 1889, p.
459- .
J- Arkle, 
Early 
Cheshire.
Appearance of Phigalia pedaria [(=/*.
///(^^iir/a) male, at Chester, 
Jan. 19th, 1889, after a warm winter], Ent., April 1889, xxii.
1 13.
J- Akkle.
Cheshire* 
Deilephila galii in Cheshire [two taken near Chester in 1889].
Ent., Aug.
1889, xxii.
211.
May 1^91.
158 BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1889.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Luperina testacea, van ?
gueneei [amongst the scores taken on Chester 
gas-lamps was only one of vslt.
^neHeei], P^nt., Sep, 1889, xxii.
235.
J. Akklr.
Cheshire, 
Natural Pairing of Amphidasys betularia and van doubledayaria 
[in Delamere Forest ; 85 per cent, of insects bred from this union were black], 
Ent., Sep. 1 889, xxii, 236.
J Akkle.
Cheshire.
Parasites on Lepidoptera [red mites on a Caradrina cubicttlarls^ taken 
23rd July, 1889, off a Chester gas-lamp].
Ent., Oct. 1889, xxii.
262.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire, Lane.
W., Westmorland.
Notes from the North- West Counties [being detailed accounts ol 1889 
observations at Delamere Forest, at Chester, at Wallasey, at Heysham Moss 
near Morecambe, at Witherslack, and at Morecambe ; numerous species 
mentioned], Ent., Dec. 1889, xxii.
291-299.
C G.
Barrett.
Cumberland.
Notes on some very Old Specimens of Lepidoptera [in coll.
Rev. H.
Burney ; one is a genuine Heliothis sctitosa^ one of the two taken fifty years 
ago near Carhsle by Heysham], Ent, Mo. Mag., March 1889, xxv.
225, 
T, Baxter.
Lane.
W. 
Deilephila galii in Lancashire [three caught July 27th and 28th, at 
St. Anne's-on-Sea, a larva there Sep. 27th, and seven larvce at Lytham].
Ent,, Feb. 1889, xxii, 47.
R. C.
Bindley.
Derbyshire.
Deilephila galii in Derbyshire [a male and female taken in Mickleover 
Vicarage garden, 21st July, 18S8; record also of Sphinx convolvtili taken 
near there in 1884].
Ent., Jan. 1889, xxii.
14.
R. C.
Bindley.
Derbyshire.
Sphinx Convolvuli [in] Derbyshire [one found asleep at Mickleover near 
Derby, Aug. 1SS9].
Ent., Nov. 1889, xxii.
280.
J. W.
BouLT.
York, S.E.
Lycasna icarus, hermaphrodite [at Keyingham, 22nd June, 1889; 
described].
Ent., Aug. 1889, xxii.
211.
W. D.
Braithwaite.
York S.W.
Ackworth School Excursions [larva of Scalloped Oak {Crocallis elhigtiaria) 
at New Park Spring, May 22nd, 1889].
N. H.
J., Oct. 15, 1SS9, xiii.
125.
Samuel James Capper.
Cheshire.
Deilephila galii in Cheshire [on Wallasey sand-hills ; account of rearing 
twenty larvae].
Ent., Jan. 1889, xxii.
14.
S. J.
Capper [President].
Cheshire.
Liverpool Entomological Society [presidential address : abundance of 
DciUphila galii at Wallasey in 18S8 referred to], l^esearch, Mar. 1S89, p.
I5^- 
H- J.
Carpenter.
Durham.
Colias Edusa [near Durham, one seen 2nd Sep. 18S9].
Ent., Oct. 1889, 
xxii.
256.
J. T, Carringtox.
* Yorkshire.' 
[Txniocampa populeti, Rannoch specimens being shown, Mr. Carrington 
remarked that the same form was taken in Yorkshire].
South Lond.
Ent.
Soc, April 25th, 1889; Young Nat., June 1S89, p.
130; E.
M. M., June 
1889, xxv.
311.
J. W, Carter, York, Mid W.
The Mildness of the Season [near Bradford, has not as yet produced 
Phigalia pHosaria, Hibania leucopktearla and //.
frogemmaria^ which m 
1SS4 appeared on i6th, 20lh, and 20th Jan.].
Young Nat., Feb. 1S 89, p- 44- 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1889.
159 
r 
Abel Chapman.
Northumberland S.
Bird-Life of the Borders [with note at p.
50 as to Colias edusa June 15, 
1877, ou Redewater, and as to occurrence of Satttrnia caypini on the moors].
Joseph CHArPELL.
Lane.
W. 
Lycaena argiades at Blackpool [found by Joseph Clegg about 25 years ago, 
and after figuring as Z.
bcetica in ChappelFs collection, determined by 
J. Cosmo Melvill to be Z.
argiades].
Young Nat., Feb. 1889, p.
43.
Joseph Chapplll.
Cheshire or Lane.
S. 
Abnormal Hybernia progemmaria [found near Stalybridg^e ; male wings 
and female antennae on one side, female wings and male antennae on the 
other].
Young Nat., March 1889, p.
6l 
Joseph Chappell.
Lane.
S, 
Amphidasys betularia, buff var.
[in the Middleton district near Man- 
Chester; black var.
common, buff one rare].
Ent., April 1S89, xxii.
113.
J. E.
Clark.
York N.E.
r 
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club \_Grapta C-alhum used to occur at 
Langwith].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. iSth, 1889, p.
151.
H, Shortridge Clarke, Isle of 
Man 
Man 
gives a list of 33 species (with a few localities) additional to the Manx list, 
which now includes 23 butterflies and 293 moths], Yn Lioar Manninagh, 
Lane.
S. 
No. 2, April 1889, i.
62.
Joseph Collins.
r 
C[olias].
Edusa near Liverpool 
Young Nat., Oct. 1889, p.
213.
Walter Copley, 
Deilephila galii in Yorkshire [fine male at Sowerby Bridge, 12th Aug., 
1889].
Ent., Sep. 1889, xxii.
234, 
W, 
W. Crouch, 
Cheshire.
exhibition of Saturma carpini found at about 2,000 ft.
Shutlingslowe, Cheshire].
Essex Nat., Dec. 1888, ii.
267.
Cumberland, Line.
N. or S., Isle of Man, 
C W.
Dale, York S.E., Northumberland, Durham.
The History of our British Butterflies [issued as a separately paged 
appendix in successive numbers of the * Young Naturalist,' and entering in 
a detailed manner into the life-history, variation, and range of each species ; 
Alelzima aurinia{ = artemzs)^viniQV has a small specimen from Carlisle similar 
to the Irish form (p.
203) ; in Cumberland it is abundant at the Brick House, 
Saburgham, the larvai from this bleak place producing very small dark 
specimens, and also some beautiful varieties with large canary-coloured spots 
on the fore wings (p.
207) ; Cydopides paniscits occurs rarely in 
Lincolnshire: W.
Fowler's record of it (Ent. 1882, xv.) for a wood about 
seven or eight miles from Lincoln repeated (p.
209) ; Hesperia comma is 
absent from Isle of Man, and rare in Yorkshire (p.
212) ; Hull neighbour- 
hood recorded by Dale, in Morris's Brit.
Butterflies, 1853 (p.
213); Hesperia 
syivanus is apparently unknown in Northumberland (p.
214); H linea is 
absent from Durham and Northumberland, and Isle oi Man (p.
216); 
^yricthus alveolus XK^zx Newcastle, common (Stephens' III., 1828) (p.
225)].
Young Nat., Jan. 1889, pp.
203, 207; Feb. 18S9, pp.
209, 212, 213, 214, 
216 ; and April 1889, p.
225.
John W.
Ellis.
Lane.
S. and W., Cheshire, Furness.
Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire [treats of Tortricina, 
of which 209 species are included].
Nat., Jan. and Feb. 1S89, pp.
25-43.
l6o BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1889.
T- W.
Ellis.
W. and S., Cumberland 
erbvshire.
York Mid W 
Observations on the Unusual Abundance in 1888 of the Madder Hawk 
Moth {Deilephila galit) [especially dealing with its occurrence on the 
Wallasey sand-hills, and giving a list of occurrences and dates throughout the 
kingdom, including some records unpublished elsewhere ; reference also made 
to Ti?niocavipa opima on the Wallasey sand-hills].
Research, June 1889, 
pp.
221-222.
H. Friend.
Cumberland.
w 
Local Butterflies [in Cumberland ; larva oi Erebia cassiope taken on Great 
Gable, May 27th, 1889, by George Dawson, and Cccnony^npha davus at 
TodhiJl Moss near Carhsle, June 13th].
Wesh Nat., July 1S89, p.
158.
John Gardner.
Durham.
Sphinx convolvuli at Hartlepool [one * to-day/ date not otherwise stated].
Young Nat., Sep, 18S9, p.
180.
C. S.
Gregson.
[E[ubolia].
Cervinata [and its food-plants, hollyhock and n 
Man].
Young Nat., Feb. 1889, P- 44- 
C. S.
Gregson.
Isle of Man* 
Lane.
S. 
Plusia Ni [taken some 18 years ago off St. George's Church wall, Liver- 
pool].
Young Nat., Feb. 1889, p.
44.
C. S.
Grec.son.
Lane 
Spring Notes [record of blank days at Bidston, Formby ; larvce of 
Epiinda lichenea at Formby ; Taniocampa opima at Wallasey sand-hills ; 
dates given].
Young Nat., June 1SS9, p.
133-134.
C. S.
Gregson.
Cheshire.
eilephila Galii at Wallasey [a larva found ' yesterday,' but date not given]- 
Young Nat., Oct. 1889, p.
213.
J. T.
Gummersall.
Convolvulus Ha\ 
Lane.
S. 
August [1889, at Penketh].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 1SS9, xiii.
iH.
A. E.
Hall.
W 
Calocampa solidaginis [description of its locality near Sheffield].
Ent., 
Jan, 1889, xxii.
15.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W, 
Caradrina quadripuncta [common at Sheffield in winter].
Ent,, Aug.
1889, xxii.
212.
\Vm. Hewett.
'York.' 
Acidalia inornata [and A, aversata near York ; former commoner than is 
supposed].
Young Nat., Nov. 1889, p.
231.
J. F.
Hills, Sec. York N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [first Anthocharis cardamines seen 
at Overton, 14th May, 1889].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1S85.
xiii.
86.
J. B.
HoDGKiNsoN.
Lane.
S. or W« 
Nepticula minusculella [notes on breeding- it in 18S7 to 1889 ; locality 
not stated, probably near Preston].
Ent., June 1889, xxii.
164.
J. B.
HODGKINSON.
Lane.
W. 
Trifurcula pallidella [a male taken ten years ago ; a female at Dutton 
'yesterday,' but no date given].
Ent., Aug. 1SS9, xxii.
212.
Mr. Jager, Isle of Man.
[Manx examples of Polyommatus phlceas, and a small dark form of 
Pieris napi^ which latter J.
T. Carrington said was unusually dark in that 
localhy].
South Lend.
Ent. Soc, Sep. 26th, 1889; Ent,, Nov. 18S9, xxii.
286 ; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov, 1889, xxv.
436 ; Young Nat., Nov. i889^x^^?; 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1889.
161 
P. M.
C. K[ermode].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [giving Manx dates for Pieris rapcr^ Lyarna 
aUxis, and Vanessa cardut], Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, Ap, 1889, i.
64-65.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Field Notes.
No. i.
In the Woods [near Louth] in Spring [of 1885 ; 
Lyccena phliEas and Argynnis euphi'osyne noted in Eur well and Haugham 
Woods].
Nat. World, Jan. 1886, iii, 1-2.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N, 
Field Notes.
No. 5.
Old Chalk-pits [near Louth ; Epinephile hyperanthus, 
Famphila sylvantis^ Melatzargia galaihea^ Ckortobhis pamphilus, LyciEna 
phlcEas^ Vanessa atalanta noted].
Nat. Worlds Sep. 1886, iii.
81-82.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
Lincolnshire Marsh Drains [at Saltfleetby ; Vanessa tirticm and V.
atalanta 
noted July i6th, 18S6J.
Nat. World, Oct. 18S6, p.
183.
W, F.
KiRBY.
York S.E.
[Gynandromorphous Lycaena icarus (alexis) caught at Keyingham, East 
Yorkshire, 22nd June, 18S9, by T.
Brown ; described].
Proc.
Ent.
*^oc, 
Lond,, Nov. 6th, 1889, Part 3, p.
xlvi.
; Ent., Dec. 1889, xxii.
309; Ent.
Mo. Mag., Dec. 1889, xxv.
459; Young Nat., Dec. 1889, p.
248; Zool., 
T>Qc, 1SS9, p.
458.
W. Kempster Mann, 
Cumberland.
A Few Notes on Heliothis scutosa [one taken in 1833 near Dalston, 
Carlisle, and another on the coast near Shinburness in Aug. 1834 ; particulars 
given and authenticity -discussed].
Proc, Bristol Nat. Soc, New Series, 
vol, 6, part I, 18S8-9 (pub.
1889), pp.
34-35.
A. H.
Martineau.
York Mid W.
Birmingham Natural History and Microscopical Society [Exhibition oi 
^Aniens pavonia major (the Great Emperor Moth)' from likley ; doubtless 
SaUirnia carpini is meant].
Midi.
Nat., Oct. 1889, p.
244.
T. G, Mason.
Lane.
S- 
Sphinx convolvuli [seen at Didsbury, Manchester, 24th io 26th Aug., 1889]* 
Ent., Oct. 1889, xxii.
259.
J. Cosmo Melvill.
Lane.
S., Cheshire 
Insecta [of Manchester district], .
. 11.
Lepidoptera [enumerated, with 
remarks, in systematic order, omitting ubiquitous species only].
Handbook 
of Manchester.
— Prepared by the Local Committee for the members of the 
British Association at the Manchester Meeting, 1887, pp.
50-51 and 62-75.
H, Murray.
Westmorland, Furness, or Lane.
W. {?
which).
Cidaria reticulata [near Carnforth or Windermere ; experience of its 
capture, and prognostications of its early extinction], Ent., Jan. 1889, xxii* 
16, and erratum, Feb., p.
50; Young Nat., Jan. 1S89, x.
14.
H. Murray.
Westmorland, Furness, Lane.
W. (?
which).
Penthina postremana [series bred from Impatieyis noH-me-tangere during 
1S8S, near Carnforth].
Ent., Jan. 1SS9, xxii.
16.
H. Murray.
Isle of Man.
Polia ne[jf/V]grocincta, Dpanthscia].
C^sla, &c.
[EpiaiJa nigra, Sdaphila 
cotqiihounana.m^ Sciaphita penziana in the Isle of Man, June].
YoungNat., 
Oct. 1SS9, p.
213.
W 
H. Murray.
Stilbia anomala in Lancashire [near Carnforth, a female taken, Aug. 1SS9].
Ent,, Oct. 1S89, xxii.
260, 
H. Murray.
I-anc.
W., Isle of Man, 
— ^ ^ ^ 
Cidaria reticulata, long in pupa [proved by observations made at Carnforth ; 
Eupithecia vcnosata noted as bred this year from Manx larvie taken June 
Ent,, Oct, 1889, xxiL 261.
June X891.
l62 BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1889.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire, 
CoHas edusa in 1889 [near Chester, Aug., and several at Shotwick, Cheshire].
Ent., Nov. 1889^ xxii.
279.
F, N.
Pierce.
Cheshire.
Deilephila galii at Wallasey [larvse reported, hut on investigation turned 
out to be only Macroglossa stellatarum, which was abundant]- Young Nat., 
Nov. 1S89, p.
231.
F. N.
Pierce.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Colias edusa [near Liverpool in fair numbers in 1S89].
Youtig Nat., Nov.
1S89, p.
232.
F. N.
Pierce.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Splnx convolvuli [a few occurred about Liverpool in 1SS9].
Voung 
Nat., Nov. 1SS9, p.
233.
George T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
Scoparia ingratalis in Yorkshire [near Huddersfield, along ^'{ihS.pyralalis ; 
never before known anywhere than in the extreme South of England].
Nat., 
Jan. 1889, p.
5. 
G. T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
[Melanic Boarmia repandata from Huddersfield, compared with Hebridean 
specimens ; R.
M'Lachlan remarking that melanism is more prevalent in 
Yoikshire and North Midlands than further North in Britain.] Proc.
Ent.
Soc. Lond., Feb. 6th, 1889, p.
ii ; Young Nat., March 1S89, p.
57; ZooL, 
Mar. 1SS9, p.
114; E.M.M.,Mar. 1S89, xxv.
240 ; Ent., Mar. 1889, xxii.
79.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Isle of Man.
Description of the Larva of Homoeosoma nlmbella [found Aug. 16, 
1887, feeding commonly in wild chamomile flowers on the rocks near Douglas, 
Isle of Man].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., April 1889^ xxv, 245.
G. T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
[Remarkable variation in a brood of Arctia mendica bred from eggs 
found at Grimescar, Huddersfield].
Proc.
Ent, Soc. Lond., July 3rd, 1889, 
p. xxviii.
; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Aug. 1889, xxv.
364 ; Ent., Aug. 1889, xxii- 215 ; 
Young Nat., Aug. 1SS9, p.
171 ; Zool., Aug. 1889, p.
317.
George T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
Notes on an Extraordinary Race of Arctia mendica, Linn, [bred from 
batches of larvse found at Grimescar, near Huddersfield   the coloured plate 
gives figures of three males and fifteen females, all different in markings].
Trans.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 1S89, part 3 (Oct.), pp.
441-442, and plate xiv.
E. G.
Potter.
York Mid W.
Acronycta aini near York [netted at Askham Bog, June 13, 18S9].
Ent., 
July 1889, xxii.
187.
S. R[ayner].
Yorkshire.
Cures for Warts [long'-haired caterpillars found in hedges and called 
' Tommy Taiiyers,' when found, thrown over heads for luck : probably larvse 
of some of the AraideJ, Yorksh.
Folk Lore Journ., Part 2, Jan. 1886, p.
21.
John E.
Robson.
Lane.
S., Durham- 
Notable Lepidoptera in 1888 [scarcity of F/er/s brassica^ P, rapm^ -P.
napi, 
Vanessa cardui^ Antkocharis cardafnines after the abundance of 1SS7 in 
CO.
Durham ; numerous larvae of Deilephila galii at Risley Moss near 
Warrington].
Young Nat., Jan. 1889, pp.
I -4.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Note on Eubolia cervinata [formerly common near Hartlepool, now scarce, 
from diminution of its food-plant, Malva sylvestris\ Young Nat.
, Jan. i SS9, 1 5- 
E. Robson.
York S.W.
Varieties of Arctia mendica [taken in 1SS8 and 18S9 near Huddersfield; 
described].
Young Nat., Oct. 1889, p.
214.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTKRA, 1889.
163 
J. E.
ROBSOX.
Durham.
Acidalia inornata [a few miles from Hartlepool, only twice met with, in 
1888 and 18S9].
Voung Nat., Nov. 1SS9, p.
231, 
J. T.
RODGERS.
Lane.
S. 
Amphidasys betularia, var.
[remarks on the relative prevalence of the type 
and black variety, and on the results of breeding from a cross between them, 
all in South Lancashire].
Ent., Feb. 1889, xxii.
49.
Rupert E.
Sanderson.
" Cumberlatid.
The ** Bustard " [local, or perhaps anglers', name for a large moth, good 
bait for Trout at Wigton, Cumberland, on rivers Calder, Waver, and Wam- 
pool ; it is a large moth, which rises in immense numbers about 9 o'clock 
every evening].
Land and Water, Nov. 12th, 1887, p.
435.
W. E.
Sharp.
Cheshire.
Some further remarks on D[eilephila].
Galii [partly based on Cheshire 
information].
Young Nat., Oct. 1SS9, pp.
203-206.
Bernard Smith.
York S.W.
Notes on the Notodontidaa, .
, No. 5.
— Lophoptayx carmelita and Noto- 
donta dictteoides [the latter, supposed to feed exckisively on birch, near 
Doncaster is found on aspens].
Ent., April 1SS9, xxii.
102.
Richard South.
Lane.
W, 
Luperina testacea var, nickerlii, Freyer [taken at St. Anne's-on-Sea, close 
to water's cd^o.^ Aug. 1st, no specimen of type appearing till loth ; full 
description given].
Ent., Nov. 1889, xxii.
271-272 ; abstracts also in Proc, 
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Ocf. 2, 1889, part 3, p.
xl.
; Ent. Mo.
Mag., l^ov, 1889, 
XXV.
438; Ent., Nov. 1889, xxii.
286; Young Nat., Nov. 1889, p.
228; 
Proc, South Lond.
Ent. Soc, Oct. 10, 18S9 ; Ent., l<^ov.
1889, xxii.
2S7.
H. T.
Stainton.
Westmorland or Furness, 'York.' 
Chrysoclista bimaculella ; its variability in markings and size [the 
remarks based in part on specimens from Windermere and York]* Ent. Mo.
^^g-> J*^n.
1S89, xxv.
169-170.
^. E.
Stott.
Lane.
S. 
Dicranura vinula [records of dates of breeding from eggs laid by a female 
taken in copula on Blackpool sand-hills].
Ent., l^oy, 1889, xxii.
281.
John Thorpe.
? Lane* S.
Amphidasys betularia, buff var, [a history of the breeding of it from a buff 
female taken in 1S74; the buff form has not been bred since iSSo].
Ent., 
June 1889, xxii.
162.
W. H.] TuGWELL.
Isle of Man.
[Dark variety of Dianthaecia caesia, Isle of Man, exhibited to South Lond.
Ent. Soc, I2th Jan., iSSS].
Young Nat., Feb. 18SS, p.
1% ; Ent. Mo.
>Lag., 
Feb. iSSS, xxiv.
216; Ent., Feb. 1888, xxi.
70.
W. H.
TuGWELL.
York S.W.
[Exhibition of forms of Hypsipetes sordidata Fb.
(i.e. H.
eluiaia) bred 
from Huddersfield larvx, to South Lond.
Ent. Soc, Dec 13th, iS88].
Ent.
Mo. Mag., Jan. 18S9, xxv.
1S7 ; Ent,, Jan. 1889, xxii.
24; Young Nat., 
Jan. 18S9, x.
13.
W, H.
TuGWELL 
Cheshire.
Notes on the probable origin [* blown over*] of last year's Deilephila 
6'a//;;w.V.
[measurements of Liverpool and other specimens cited in evidence].
Young Nat,, May 1S89, pp.
I13-115; Ent. Mo.
Mag., May 1SS9, xxv.
284.
W. H.
TuGWELL.
Cheshire.
Notes on the uncertain abundance of many Lepidoptera [with passing 
references to the Cheshire occurrences in 1S88 of Deilephila galii larva;].
Young Nat., July 1889, p.
145.
June i8gi.
164 BIBLIOGRAPHV : LEPIDOPTERA, 1889.
W. H.
TuGWELL.
Yorkshire, Durham, Cheshire, Lancashire- 
Note on Deilephila GaUi [in reply to \V.
E. Sharp ; occurrences discussed; 
Wallasey sand-hills in particular].
Young Xat., Nov. 1889, pp.
225-227.
J. HoRSFALL Turner.
York N.E, 
Runswick [Folk-Lore ; cure for hooping-cough, catch a live hairy worm 
(woolly boy) and hang it in a bag from the child's neck, and the cough will 
waste with the worm (no doubt larva of a species of Arctia)].
Yorkshire 
Folk-Lore Journ., part 12, July 1888, p.
232.
W., S.E..
Mid W..
Lane, W 
W 
TuTT.
Derbyshire, Notts., Northumb.
S. 
Contributions towards a List of the Varieties of Noctuae occurring in 
the British Islands IXyiophasia mouoglypha \i\\{\i.~polyodon L., vars.
obscitra mihi (Barnsley), bnuinea niihi (do.), infiiscata AVhite (Barnsley, 
Fleetwood, Hartlepool), and tzthiops Staud.
(Lancashire coast)].
Ent., Feb.
1889, xxii.
41-43.
\_Xylophasia rnrea F., type (Isle of Man), var.
§ inter- 
media mihi (Barnsley, Hull, Derby), y2X.y Jiavorufa mihi (Barnsley, Ripon), 
var.
h ptUris (Huddersfield = v.
borealis of Porritt's Yorkshire list)].
Ent., 
March i S89, xxii.
58-61.
\^Xylophasia hepatica var.
characterea II lib.
, 
Barnsley ; X.
scolopacina, a specimen captured by Harrison near Barnsley, 
slightly glaucous, but otherwise like type].
Ent., April 1889, xxii.
94-95- 
[Cha7'(vas graininis var.
grafuineiis Haw., Yorkshire (p.
154); o^ the 
species, red and grey forms in both sexes occur in the Huddersfield 
district (p.
153); var.
rtifa mihi, Yorkshire (p.
154); var.
tricuspis Esp., 
Morpeth (p.
154); var.
hibernicMS Curt., Mr. Gregson (Ent., iv.
51) records 
it from Staleybridge Brushes (p.
155); \^x, ohsokta mihi, from Mr. Finlay 
of Morpeth, and obtained by Mr. Harrison of Barnsley (p.
155); ^ ^^  
pallida mihi, Yorkshire (p.
155)].
Ent., June 1889, xxii.
pp.
i53-i55- 
{Luperina cespitis Fab., smallness of Lancashire specimens ; Z.
testacea 
Hb., nielanic tendency in Lancashire, Hartlepool, and Barnsley, variation 
to very brown ; var.
obsoleta mihi, Hartlepool, J.
E. Robson ; a pale 
yellowish form near Huddersfield, Porritt ; var.
cinerea mihi, Lancashire, 
Hartlepool; S2X, nigrescens vcaVx^ Fleetwood, Hartlepool; Mamestra abjeda 
Vih.^\2X, variegata Stdgr., near Hartlepool, Robson; y2S, fribohis Bdv., 
Fleetwood].
Ent., Aug. 1889, xxii.
204-210.
[Mamestra albicolon Sepp, 
the dark type at Fleetwood ; the specimens taken on the sand-hills at the 
mouth of the Humber through a series of years by N.
F. Dobree have 
the dark form predominant].
Ent., Sep. 1889, xxii.
p. 232.
\^Ma7nestra 
hrassiaz L.
var.
7 tinicolor mihi, Nottingham; var.
5 albidilinea Haw,, 
bred from pupae sent by Mottershavv of Nottingham (p.
251); Apamea 
basilinea Fab., Hluddersfield and Hartlepool specimens differ in groundcolour 
from Southern English; \zx , tmicolor mihi, Huddersfield, Porritt's remarks 
quoted (p.
254); var.
cinerascens mihi, Hartlepool (p.
255) ; \z.x. finitirfia Gm., 
Yorkshire and Newcastle (255)].
Ent., Oct, 1889, xxii.
251-255.
lApa 
connexa Bork., Harrison and Young's Yorkshire specimens described].
Ent., 
Nov. 1889, xxii.
276.
[Apamea gefnina Hb., specimens taken by Mr. Newman 
of Dailmgton referred to as very dark; variations from Morpeth (Finlay), 
Huddersfield (Porritt), Liverpool (Gregson) treated of].
Ent,, Dec. 1889, 
xxii, 302-305.
mea 
J. W.
TUTT 
The Ptei 
W 
that Pterophorus serotinus occurs continuously from May to October near 
Huddersfield].
Young Nat., July 1889, p.
150.
\_Chrysocorys festalieU(^ at 
Scarborough and Lake District].
Young Nat., Sep. 1889, p.
U^- 
{Agdistes bennetii at Hartlepool noted].
Young Nat., Oct. 1889, pp.
198-^99- 
[Non-appearance at Saltburn of Pterophortis bertrami and /*.
dickrodadylus 
dealt with].
Young Nat., Nov. 18S9, p.
224.
C. J.
Wainwrigt.
Notts.
[Euperia fulvago, Sherwood Forest, exhibited], Birm.
Ent. Soc, Oct. 21 
1889; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Dec. 1889, xxv.
45S.
Naturalistj 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
16^ 
ft 
Lord Walsingham.
Westmorland and Furness.
[Preserved larvae and imago of Cidaria retkidata, Lake District, Hodg- 
kinson], Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Oct. 2nd, 1889, part 3, p.
xliii.
; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. 18S9, XXV.
438; Ent., Nov. 1889, xxii.
286; Young Nat., Nov.
1889, p.
22S; Zool., Nov, 1889, p.
440.
N. E.
Warne.
Cumberland- 
[CcEnonympha typhon from Cumberland; on underside it differed (like most 
English specimens) from the unicolorous Scotch forms].
South Lond.
Ent.
Soc, July nth, 1889; Ent., Aug. 1889^ jcxii, 216; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep.
1889, XXV, 387 ; Young Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
174.
\V.
Warren.
? Durham.
[Exhibition of Eupithecia jasioneata and Geiechia cofifinis bred by Mr.
Gardner of Hartlepool].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., June 5th, 1889, Part 3,xxiv.
J. R.
Wellmann.
Isle of Man.
[Sesia musciformis bred from Manx pupae].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc., July 
25th, 1889; Ent., Sep. 1SS9, xxii.
239; Ent. Mo.
Mag., Sep. 1889, xxv.
387 ; Young Nat., Sep. 1S89, p.
1S3.
A. Woods.
Durham.
Chaerocampa celerio at Hartlepool [on Oct. ist, 1889].
Ent., Nov. 1889, 
xxii, 281.
A, Woods.
Durham- 
C[haerocampa].
celerio at West Hartlepool [found Oct. ist, 1889].
Young 
Nat., Nov. 18S9, p.
231, 
NO TES—ORNITHOL OG K 
Brambling" and Goosander near Ripon.— A male and female Brambling 
\Fringilla montifringilla) were shot here yesterday, amongst a flock of sparrows.
Also a male and female Goosander {Mergtts merganser) were shot by the 
nver at Norton Conyers, in this neighbourhood, in the last week of December, 
R. A.
SUMMERFIELD, North Stainley Vicarage, Ripon, January 2nd, 1891.
Yellow Wagtails at Ghaistrills, Wharfedale.
— I was at Grassington on 
the i6th inst., with Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, and witnessed a large immigration 
of Motacilla rail ; they were making their way up the Wharfe, and a dozen or 
more were frequently in sight at once ; their numl)ers appeared to be undiminished 
during the whole time I watched them— probably about an hour.
— Edgar R.
Waite, The Museum, Leeds, May 25th, 1891.
Birds and Snow in May (Harrogate).
— It may be interesting to record 
an experience I had on the 17th inst, I was in the neighbourhood of Harrogate, 
and the day opened with the thermometer standing at 14°, or in other words, it 
registered iS^ degrees of frost.
About noon a heavy fall of hail and snow took 
place, which covered the ground to a depth of two inches in some places.
The 
ground was very hard, and although the sun afterwards shone, it had not much 
effect on the snow, and traces of it were to be found on the north side of the 
fences next day.
The behaviour of the birds during the storm was noteworthy 
Starlings left their nesting-places and flew about in large flocks, while Chaffinches, 
Greenfinches, Sparrows, and Buntings flew hither and thither, evidently quite 
bewildered by the blinding snow.
But the procedure of the Lapwings was even 
niore remarkable.
Shortly after the snow had commenced falling they left the 
ground, and flocking together, began to rise in the air, ascending in circles until 
they attained a great height, and no doubt overtopped the snow-cloud.
Their cries 
were heard long after they had disappeared from sight.
When the snow ceased 
falling they returned to the snow-covered ground, but were in great distress, being 
evidently unable to find their eggs or young ones, and there can be no doubt that 
many eggs would become cold and perish, and possibly some young birds also.
A friend tells me that he observed the same thing on the Beamsley Moors, where 
the storm appears to have been even more severe ; he watched the Lai>wings for 
some lime, and noticed that they, endeavouring to find their eggs, scratched away 
the snow, but evidently without success.— Edgar R.
Wah k, The Museum, I^eds, 
^I^)125th, 1891.
June i8gi.
X66 
AZOTES AND NEWS.
The Collection of Ancient Marbles in the Museum at Leeds forms the subject 
of an interesting paper by Mr. E.
L. Hicks in the nth vohuiie of the Journal of 
Hellenic Studies, 1S90, pp.
255-270, illustrated by a fine photogravure plate.
The progress made in the re-labelling and re-arrangement of the Leeds Museum 
is dealt with in the 71st annual report of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary 
Society, which was presented to the Society at the beginning of May.
The tube-building habits of Terehella littoralis are described, and illustrated 
with a plate, in a paper by ]Mr. Arnold T.
Watson, of Sheffield, in the Journal 
of the Royal Microscopical Society for 1S90, of which a reprint from the author 
lies before us.
In the Journal of the Linnean Society (Botany — Nos. 187-188, Ap. 25, 1S91) 
we notice a paper by our old friend, Mr. George Massee, F.R.M.S., giving the 
'Life-History of a Stipitate Fresh-Water Alga' {Diciyosp/uei'itun ehi'ejtbergianum 
Nag.), illustrated by a fine plate.
The Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society are losing the services of 
Mr. Richard Reynolds, F.LC., F.C.S., as their senior honorary secretary, after 
a lengthened period of office.
It is satisfactory to note, however, that the Society 
will still retain (and we hope for long) the benefit of his lengthened experience in 
his new capacity as a member of the council.
A list of land and fresh-water mollusca of the Liverpool district, prefaced by 
introductory remarks of a more general character, forms the subject of the 
Presidential Address which the Rev. H.
H. Higgins, M.A., read to the Liverpool 
Naturalists' Field Club on the 30th January last, and w^hich is printed in full with 
the 31st Annual Report.
Biographies of living naturalists are not often ^iven.
It is therefore interesting 
to read in the * Yorkshire County Magazine ' for iVIay and June, an account of the 
life and career of Mr. George Roberts, of Lofthouse, accompanied by a portrait.
His ability as a naturalist, and his attainments in more than one department of 
natural science, are hardly, we think, adequately brought out in the article, which 
is evidently written from a more purely archaeological point of view.
We note in the 3Tst annual report of the Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club an 
instance of the attainment of municipal honours by a field naturalist.
Mr. John 
Vicars, to whom, in conjunction with Mr. Robert Brown, the Club has been 
indebted for notes on the plants collected at its excursions, is described as Mayor 
of Bootle — an interesting parallel to the Yorkshire case in which so well-known 
a geological investigator as Mr. James W.
Davis at the present time worthily fills 
the Mayoral chair of so important a borough as Halifax.
*A Simple Method of taking Phenological Observations' is the subject of 
a paper by Mr. Edward Mawdey, F.R.Met.S., who is phenological recorder to 
the Royal Meteorological Society, and who is desirous of establishing a network 
of phenological observers throughout the kingdom, to whom he wall gladly 
supply forms and full directions.
He may be addressed at Rosebank, Berk- 
hamsted, Herts., by all who may be disposed to take the necessary pains to 
observe the ver}^ few plants and animals mentioned in the schedule.
We have received from the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge copies 
of some of their large Natural History Prints, published at a shilling each.
They 
are w^ell adapted for schools, and will serve to convey a sufficiently graphic idea 
of the animals shown.
Those before us include prints of the Camel, Codfish, 
Herring and Eel, Tortoises, the Colorado Beetle and the Bark Beetle, the Locust 
and Mole Cricket, the Silkworm and Pieris brasskte.
The labelling is not as 
accurate as we could like to see, and argues the need of more care.
__ 
Naturalist, 
lb J 
VOLVOX IN YORKSHIRE.
THOMAS HICK, B.A., B.Sc, 
Demonstrator and Assistant Lecturer in Boia^iy, Oivens College, Manchester, 
In March of last: year I drew the attention of the readers of * The 
Naturalist' to an important paper on the genus Volvox by Klein, in 
the hope of inducing Yorkshire botanists and microscopists to assist 
in extending our knowledge of the Yorkshire species, their distribu- 
tion, and the physical and other conditions under which they are 
met with.
As the time has come round when the subject may again 
be profitably worked at, it seems desirable to say a few more words 
on the subject, with special reference to the results of last year's 
observations and the desirability of continuing them.
Distribution.
— As regards the distribution of Volvox in York- 
shire, little was added last year to our previous knowledge.
Mr. Lees, in his ' Flora of West Yorkshire/ gives as its localities 
Ripon, Bramham Park, and Askern, as well as Bramhope and 
Hunslet in the Leeds district, and, as was mentioned in my previous 
paper, I myself collected it several years ago at Rawcliffe and 
Askham Bog, and in ponds near Wetherby.
The new localities 
r   
which, so far as I have learned, have to be added to this list, are the 
following: (i) Midgely Moor, near Halifax, where specimens were 
obtained by Mr. A.
Thompson, of Luddenden ; (2) a hill slope near 
Salterhebble, Halifax, where Volvox was discovered by Mr. T.
Carnell; and (3) Thornhill Lees, whence specimens were obtained 
for me by Mr. P.
Fox Lee, of Dewsbury.
It is obvious that, even with these additions, the recorded 
locaHties for the occurrence of Volvox are extremely i^"^ for ^o large 
a county as Yorkshire, and one cannot but think that if the ponds in 
tlie various districts were thoroughly searched, they might easily be 
considerably extended.
Vertical Range.
— In Klein's paper attention was drawn to the 
fact that in Germany Volvox inhabited low-lying districts, and had 
not been found in regions ranging from 900 to 1,300 metres above 
sea-level.
Up to the present time the statement is equally true for 
Yorkshire, though it is difficult to see why Volvox should not occur 
on some of our more elevated moorlands.
Two of the new localities 
are interesting from this point of view.
The one on the hill above 
Salterhebble is estimated to be over 600 ft., while that on Midgely 
Moor is said to be 800 ft.
above sea-level.
They are the highest 
points at which Volvox has been found in Yorkshire, so far as I know, 
and seem of themselves sufficient to warrant the expectation that it 
June 1891.
ltd 
1 68 hick: volvox in Yorkshire 
may yet be found at higher elevations.
From the numerous facts 
which have come under my notice indeed, I am inclined to think 
that elevation has far less to do with the distribution of Volvox than 
the nature of the pond and its immediate surroundings.
Local Conditions.
— The immediate surroundings or the local 
conditions under which Volvox flourishes are very imperfectly 
known, and until careful observations have been multiplied and 
extended, it will be impossible to make any general statements on 
the subject.
Some attention was given to these matters last year, 
but the observations that were made were very limited.
As an 
example of the details to which they were directed I cannot do 
better than quote the following extracts from letters sent me by 
Messrs.
Crossland and Carnell, of Halifax, respecting the pond at 
Salterhebble.
Mr. Crossland writes : — * The altitude of the pond ...
is about 
650 ft.
above sea-level.
It appears to have at some time been 
excavated on the side of the hill.
It is situated a little above the 
outcrop of the hard- bed coal belonging to the lower coal measures.
The hillside faces W.S.W. The pond is fed by a spring.
There are 
three large old thorn trees on the margin — two on the south and one 
on the east — also Glyceria fluitans^ Lotus uliginosus^ and a few other 
water-loving plants.
There is plenty of Callitriche^ from the 
washings of which we get Bulbochcete and Coleoch^eie^ and of 
Desmids, Docidium^ S/aurastru?n, Cosmariwn^ and Closteritim, 
I don't remember having seen any Lemna, Fish were put in a few 
years ago by the farmer.' 
Mr. Carnell writes: — 'The pond is not a very large one — say 
about 30 yds.
by 15 yds.— and will be six or eight feet deep.
The 
edges and greater part of the bottom are covered with Starwort, etc., 
and it contains some small Chub and Perch.
There is no 
perceptible inlet or outlet of water — probably it is supplied by some 
top spring.' 
In addition to the points included in these accounts, a few 
particulars have been obtained in one or two isolated cases as 
regards the temperature of the ponds and the depth at which 
Volvox is found in bright and cloudy weather respectively.
The 
temperature observations I am disposed to regard as of great 
importance, and as the evidence of its influence on the well-being of 
Volvox is somewhat conflicting, it is to be hoped that special 
attention will be paid to it in the future.
The accounts of the effect 
of wind are also wanting in uniformity, the plants being driven, 
according to some, to the far side of the pond, while according to ' 
others they remain on the windward side.
These discrepancies may 
- _| ^ *-" 
Naturalist, 
HICK: VOLVOX IN YORKSHIRE.
169 
be due to differences in the amount of shelter afforded by the 
marginal vegetation on different sides of the pond, and to other 
influences which co-operate.
Species.
— Thanks to Klein's admirable account of the specific 
distinctions of the forms of Volvox, a brief summary of which was 
given m my previous paper, it has been found easy to set up a few 
diagnostic characters by which the species collected may be readily 
determined, whether the colonies be sexual or asexual- The result 
is that of the two British species, V.
aureus appears to be the 
commoner form in Yorkshire, as I have shown elsewhere to be the 
case in the district round Manchester.
Of my old gatherings in 
Yorkshire I can only speak with certainty of that made at Rawcliffe 
in 1878, specimens of which I still have mounted as microscopic 
slides.
This, I can state positively, is F- aureus.
Most, if not all 
the rest, I suspect were V.
aureus also, as I have a distinct recollec- 
tion of always thinking that the published figures of Volvox — which 
usually represented V.
globator (see, for example, the figures in 
Carpenter's Microscope, 5th Ed., PL ix.) — gave a wrong shape to the 
protoplasts.
This, however, does not count for much, and it would 
be well to determine the forms at Askham and elsewhere — assuming 
they are still to be found — by direct observation.
Of the three new localities brought to light last year, two 
undoubtedly yielded V.
aureus^ chiefly, if not entirely, viz., Midgely 
Moor and Thornhill Lees.
But experience has shown that too 
general a conclusion should not be drawn from a few gatherings, and 
that it is unsafe to transfer the character of the gathering to the pond 
whence it was obtained until experience has proved it to be constant.
The case of Salterhebble may be cited in illustration of this.
The 
first specimens sent me by Mr. Carnell I received in June, and 
were found to be the asexual colonies of V.
globator.
Subsequently, 
in July, specimens were collected by myself, and a much larger 
supply obtained than could be sent through the post.
These, on 
examination, proved to be F.
aureus^ and no example of V.
globator 
was noticed.
At first I was inchned to think that a mistake had 
been made in the determination of the eariier sample, which, though 
possible was scarcely probable, or that the two species were not 
J"eally distinct, but capable of passing the oviQ into the other.
On 
comparison with the results obtained elsewhere, however, I came to 
the conclusion that the explanation is to be found in the fact that 
sometimes both species co-exist in the same pond, but in widely 
different proportions, which are liable to vary under circumstances 
which cannot as yet be defined, Iti several instances, for example, 
I have had large gatherings of V.
aureus in which isolated individuals 
June 1891.
170 hick: volvox in Yorkshire.
of K globaior were found, and and vice versa, it is obvious that if 
under any circumstances local predominance is given to one species 
at certain points of the pond, the whole must be carefully examined 
before the character of the pond can be determined.
Hence, in 
practice it has been found necessary to fish round the entire pond in 
order to obtain sufficient samples for determining the character of 
the whole.
But when all due allowance has been made for this, the 
general result still appears to be as stated, that V.
atiretis is the 
commoner form in the localities for which Volvox has hitherto been 
recorded.
Not much was done last year to determine the seasonal duration 
of the sexual and asexual colonies, and there are several anomalies 
which still await elucidation.
Thus, in the large supply of V.
aureus 
obtained from Salterhebble in July, I found several female colonies 
with a number of oospores varying up to a maximum of eight, but 
no males.
One can scarcely believe that these were altogether 
absent, but it is strange that in overhauling some hundreds of 
individuals, not a single male was met with.
In contrast with this, 
the gatherings at Rawcliffe, in April, 1878, contained large numbers 
of male colonies, with a smaller but not inconsiderable number of 
females.
It is evident, therefore, from these two illustrations, that 
on this part of the subject there is still much to be done.
It has 
too often been assumed that the succession of asexual and sexual 
colonies is simple, definite, and constant, but the researches of Klein 
have shown that this is not the case, and last year's work has satisfied 
me that the relation between the various colonies is a comphcated 
one.
The facts on which this view is based are chiefly drawn from 
observations on Lancashire material which cannot be dealt with here, 
but it is mentioned in the hope that those who are favourably situated 
for the purpose will assist in throwing more light on the subject.
If 
the succession of forms met with in one and the same pond, with the 
dates of their occurrence, could be once determined, an important 
step would be taken towards unravelling the complicated relations 
under consideration, and would afford a standard of reference for 
other localities.
For this purpose it would be necessary to take 
samples regularly and periodically, and to examine them with 
sufficient thoroughness to ensure an accurate estimate of the 
character of the whole.
In other respects, the work would not be 
difficult, seeing that the species are easily distinguishable, and the 
sexual structures so well difterentiated that they may be recognised 
under the microscope at a glance.
It is hardly necessary to say that 
in cases of doubt, or exceptional difficulty, it would be a pleasure to 
me to give any assistance in my power.
171 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT 
MALHAM AND GORDALE.
It is a well-known custom connected with the meetings of the 
British Association that excursions should be undertaken during two 
days of the meeting.
These are arranged with a view to giving the 
visitors an opportunity of acquainting themselves with whatever 
there may be of interest in the neighbourhood of the place of 
meeting.
In a county like Yorkshire, noted as it is for the 
diversified character of its natural features, for its mountains and 
moorlands, abbeys and castles^ its agriculture and commerce, the 
difficulty is not so much to find places which are likely to attract 
visitors, as to select, from the many which suggest themselves, those 
which can be easily compassed in a day's excursion.
Among the numerous excursions that were carried out on 
Thursday, the nth of September (1890), was one which was 
entrusted to the guidance and direction of the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union.
The area allotted to this expedition was the plateau 
of Malham, and the escarpment which it forms along the South 
Craven fault.
This district includes the only lake in the West 
Riding, and the remarkably picturesque scenes of Malham Cove 
and Gordale Scan Besides these natural beauties there is not 
a branch of natural history which cannot be successfully pursued in 
this district, owing chiefly to the diversified character of the 
geological formations, which include Silurian, Mountain Limestone, 
Yoredale Shales, and Millstone Grit.
These characteristics are 
especially valuable when it is remembered that this was an essentially 
working excursion, carried out (so far as the restrictions of the 
British Association Committee would allow) on the lines of the 
ordinary excursions of the Union; and the fact that it was a working 
excursion attracted many members of Field Naturalists' Clubs, who 
were anxious to avail themselves of the opportunity of studying the 
methods adopted by the Union.
A special train left Leeds at 8.25 a.m. with a party of about 
seventy, and arrived at Bell Busk at 9.15 a.m. Here wagonettes 
were in waiting to convey the party to Malham.
A break in the 
journey was made at Kirkby Malham to give the excursionists an 
opportunity of examining the interesting old church, and of inspecting 
the register, which contains the signature of Oliver Cromwell.
The 
Rev. T.
C. Henley most kindly explained the objects of interest.
On arriving at Malham village, lunch was served at 10.30, at the 
Buck Hotel, after which three parties were formed for Investigating 
the natural history of the district.
June 1891.
172 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALHAM.
The geologists, who attracted the largest number of followers, 
were under the leadership of Mr. R, H.
Tiddeman, M.A., F.G.S., 
and Mr. James W.
Davis, F.S.A., F.G.S. The party made for 
Gordale Scar, with its lofty overhanging cliffs and picturesque 
waterfalls ; this precipitous scar was safely ascended by the party, 
who next crossed the moors to the limestone pavement at Malham 
Cove, and descended the mountain side to the foot of the rocky 
escarpment whence the water emerges.
Another party, chiefly botanists, led by Mr. C.
P. Hobkirk, 
F-L.S., proceeded by the river bank to Malham Cove, and ascended 
by easy stages to the limestone pavement.
The party then struck 
over the moors until the highway was reached, and a pleasant walk 
brought them to Janet's Cave, with its pretty waterfalls, and thence 
to Gordale Scar.
The third party, which had for its leaders Mr. Wm.
Denison 
Roebuck, F.L.S., and Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., had a more 
ambitious programme before it, and was composed of members of 
the vertebrate section and conchologists, but had the advantage 
of skilled botanical assistance, in the presence of Mr. George 
Massee, F.R.M.S. These members proceeded with the geologists 
as far as Gordale Scar, and there struck out for themselves over 
the moors to Malham Tarn.
Some of the members availed 
themselves of the boats on the Tarn, which had been kindly 
placed at their disposal by Mr- Walter Morrison.
The ' Sinks ' 
was next visited, and the return journey was made by way of 
Malham Cove.
The re-united party sat down to tea at 4 p.m., at the Buck 
Hotel, Malham, and as time was exceedingly limited, it was 
deemed advisable not to hold the usual sectional and general 
meetings.
After tea, the party assembled in front of the hotel, 
under the presidency of Mr. C- P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., for the 
purpose of passing a series of votes of thanks to those who had 
contributed to the success of the excursion.
Mr. James W.
Davis, 
F-L.S.
, F.G.S., was entrusted with the duty of moving that the 
thanks of the assembly be conveyed to Mr. Walter Morrison, M.P., 
of Malham, for allowing them the privilege of travelling over his 
estates and for kindly placing his boats at their disposal; also to the 
Rev. T.
C. Henley, vicar of Kirkby Malham, for conducting them 
over the church and pointing out the various objects of interest in 
that ancient edifice.
Mr. Davis remarked that Mr. Morrison was 
always ready and willing to assist scientists in the investigation of 
the district, and at his own cost had had experiments made with the 
object of ascertaining the course of the stream which entered the 
KaCuralist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALHAM.
I 73 
ground at ^ The Sinks/ and was found to make its appearance at Aire 
Head, In seconding the resolution, the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.
A., one 
of the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturahsts' Union, said that 
they had the good fortune of having in the county landowners 
who had always shown themselves willing to assist the Union in its 
investigations.
The motion was carried, and responded to on behalf 
of Mr. Morrison and himself by the Rev. T.
C Henley.
On the 
proposition of Dr. Valentine Ball, F.R.S., of Dublin, seconded by 
Mr. Jas.
Thompson of Glasgow, a vote of thanks was accorded to the 
various members of the Union who had acted as leaders of parties.
Dr. Ball took occasion to remark that he had been very much 
struck with the admirable way in which the members of the British 
Association had been received, and remarked that its Leeds meeting 
had not only been a most successful, but a most agreeable one.
' Shortly after six o'clock the excursionists proceeded by con- 
veyances to Bell Busk, where they arrived in time for the special 
train which was to convey them to Leeds.
The following reports have been prepared by the several officers 
in charge of their respective sections : 
For the Vertebrate section, Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., writes: — 
The excursion being restricted to members and associates of the 
British Association, the number of Y.
N.U. members attending 
the section was consequently small, but all the officers were 
on the field, viz., the President, Mr. Thos.
Bunker, Goole, and the 
Hon. Secretaries, Messrs.
James Backhouse, F.Z.S., Harrogate, and 
Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., Leeds- One or two representatives of the 
section rode with the general party from Bell Busk to Malham, but 
the majority elected to traverse the six miles afoot, leaving the dusty 
high road for the fields where practicable.
A Goldfinch was seen on 
the road between Bell Busk and Airton, and flocks of Chaffinches, 
Greenfinches, Sparrows, and Yellow Buntings rose from the corn- 
fields as the party passed by.
The end of summer is a season not 
conducive to obtaining a long list of birds, for most of the warblers 
and many other migrants have left the uplands and are going down 
the valleys preparatory to their annual migration ; the only summer 
visitors seen on the excursion were the Ring Ouzel, Swallow, Martin,, 
and Sand Martin.
It is also too early for the winter visitors, so tliat 
the bulk of the birds recorded are residents.
On arriving at Malham 
several nests of the House Martin were seen under the eaves of the 
'Buck/ containing young birds, which were being fed by their 
parents heedless o[ the presence of the bystanders.
From here the 
party proceeded up Gordale Beck, where several Dippers and one or 
two Water Voles were met with.
Arrived at Gordale Scar a Keiitrel 
June 1891, 
174 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALHAM.
was noticed, and on the moor-top the Weasel and Stoat were added 
to the list.
The way was then taken for Malhani Tarn, and in 
passing through the wood flocks of Goldcrests, in company with 
Coal and Blue Tits, were observed.
Mr. Morrison having kindly 
placed his boats at the disposal of the Unionj the party, in company 
wTth the Conchological section, were soon afloat.
A flock of about 
thirty Mallard rose from the water, and after circling about for some 
little time settled on the further side of the Tarn.
Here the only winter 
visitor was noted — a female Wigeon, which paddled quietly away.
This is a somewhat early occurrence, as the bird does not usually 
arrive on our shores until the end of September.
On reaching the 
lower end of the Tarn the Mallard were again disturbed, and shortly 
afterwards a couple of Little Grebes, which were seen swimming, 
dived on the approach of, the boat.
After disembarking, the party 
followed the stream to the 'Sinks' and made their way to Malham 
Cove, where other Weasels were observed, and after descending, the 
stream was again followed to Malham, several Kingfishers being seen 
en route.
It would appear that Vie waters from the Tarn become 
cooled in their passage through the earth, for Mr. Knubley took the 
temperature of the waters with the following result: — Gordale 
Beck 57**, Aire 46*5**, the temperature of the atmosphere in both 
cases being about 68°.
The following is a complete list of the 
Vertebrates observed on the excursion 
Mammals 
Weasel.
Stoat.
Rabbit.
Water Vole.
Birds- 
Missel Thrush, 
Song Thrush, 
Blackbird, 
Ring Ouzel.
Redbreast.
Goldcrest.
Hedge Accentor 
Dipper.
Coal Tit.
Blue Tit.
Wren.
Pied Wagtail- 
Grey Wagtail.
Meadow Pipit.
Swallow.
Martin.
Sand Martin.
Goldfinch.
Greenfinch.
Sparrow.
Chaffinch.
Yellow Bunting, 
Starling.
Jackdaw, 
Carrion Crow- 
Rook.
Kingfisher.
Kestrel.
Mallard.
Wigeon.
Ring Dove.
Red Grouse.
Lapwing.
Snipe.
Little Grebe.
Trout.
Fish 
Bullhead ( Coitus gobio\ 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALHAM.
I 75 
In the absence of its officers, the Conchological section was 
represented by Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., Mr. A.
H. 
Newstead, B.A., of Epping, and Messrs.
C Rowson and F.
W. 
Fierke of Hull, by the last-named of whom the following report was 
drawn up.
Although the weather was fine there was too much wind to 
attract the Helices from their retirement, such species as Helix 
ericetoriwi and j^ lapicida being either rarely, or not at all, observed.
A careful search was therefore required of the members of this 
section to enable them to obtain anything like a Hst, which, as the 
time w^as rather short, and the ground to be covered somewhat 
extensive, proved no easy task.
For a day excursion at Malham the meagre attendance was not 
at all satisfactory, but had it been possible to divide the workers 
into parties, some to undertake the Tarn, others the grand limestone 
rocks of the moors, better results might reasonably have been 
anticipated from the labours of this section.
The following is the list of Mollusca collected during the day : 
Arion bourguignati.
One taken at Malham.
Succinea putris.
Under a tree trunk on the border of Malham 
Tarn at 1,200 ft.
alt.
Vitrina pellucida.
Rather common, both at Bell Busk on the 
roadside, and near Malham Tarn House, 1,300 ft.
alt.
Zonites cellarius.
Malham.
Zonites alliarius.
Common at Bell Busk.
Zonites nitidulus.
On the road to Malham from Bell Busk.
Zonites crystallinus.
Above Malham Cove, and close to 
Malham Tarn House.
Helix nemoralis.
Dead specimen was found of libellula 00000 
at Bell Busk.
Helix rufescens.
A somew^hat common species at Malham.
Helix hispida was found at Bell Busk.
Helix sericea.
On the road from Malham to the plateau, on 
a heap of limestone rocks some 100 yards past the village, 
which were covered over with nettle.
Helix ericetorum.
On the same road, but a little higher up.
Helix rotundata.
Bell Busk and Malham.
Helix rupestris.
Common on walls near Bell Busk ; also on the 
same heap of limestone rocks as H, sericea, behind Malha.a, 
but occupying much drier situations than that species and 
a\vay from the herbage.
June 1891.
176 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT MALHAM.
Helix pulchella.
Malham.
Pupa umbilicata.
Close to Malham Tarn House, and also at 
Malham and the valleys above Malham Cove.
Clausilia rugosa.
Very common at Bell Busk.
Clausilia dubia var.
suttoni.
Limestone rocks on Malham 
Plateau.
Zua lubrica.
Bell Busk.
Sphaerium corneum.
Dead specimens in the Tarn, common.
Pisidium pusillum.
Common in Malham Tarn.
Bythinia tentaculata.
Only dead specimens taken in the Tarn.
Valvata piscinalis.
A very prolific species in the Tarn, 
Planorbis nautileus.
Several specimens were taken in the Tarn.
Planorbis albus, Malham Tarn.
Planorbis contortus.
Malham Tarn.
' Physa fontinalis.
One specimen in the Tarn (W.D.R.).
Limnaea peregra.
The majority found in the Tarn were dead 
specimens.
Limnaea stagnalis.
Only dead specimens were found in the 
Tarn, but were to be picked up abundantly on the bottom, and 
were as large and fine as in many lowland stations, although 
Malham Tarn is on an exposed open plateau with an elevation 
of 1,250 feet.
Ancylus fluviatilis.
Malham Cove, 
On comparing the terrestrial species noticed at this excursion 
with the published list of mollusca for Malham, there appear to be 
two additions, viz., Z nitiduhis and H, pulchella^vAAt the distribution 
of H.
sericea has been extended.
As regards the aquatic species, two boats were placed at the 
disposal of the party on the Tarn, but although four scoops were 
set to work, the results did not appear very encouraging.
On 
previous occasions Potamogeton lucens had produced numerous 
Limncea stagnalis, but this time the collectors met with no such good 
luck.
Only odd live specimens of SpJuzrium^ Limnma peregra^ and 
Physa fontinalis were secured, whilst Valvata piscinalis was very 
plentiful.
The other species obtained consisted altogether of dead 
specimens scooped from a sandy bottom, largely made up of the 
fragments of shells and other debris.
It is satisfactory, however, 
to note that Physa ftmtinalis and Planorbis albiis which appear on 
the list had not been previously recorded.
For the Entomological section, Mr. G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., of 
Huddersfield, reported that the only Lepidoptera which had been 
Naturalist, 
r 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS^ UNION AT MALHAM.
177 
reported were Cidaria immanata (common) and Sciaphila pasaiana^ 
and that the Neuroptera and Trichoptera included the following : — - 
fusciventris, Neinoura vieyeri (abundant), St^ 
, Halesus auricollis (common), and Agapetus fi 
Necroph 
rus.
jafor^ a common * Burying-beetle.' In other orders no observa- 
tions seem to have been reported, except that Gai)imarus pulex 
occurred in Mr. Knubley's gatherings of water at Malham Cove and 
Gordale Scar.
In Micro-Zoology and Micro-Botany, the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, 
M,A., collected a few gatherings, which were submitted to and 
reported on by Mr, J.
M. Kirk, F.R.M.S,, of Doncaster.
All were 
at an altitude above sea-level of 700 feet.
The first gathering, from 
clear water at Malham Cov^^ at a temperature of 46I'', contained 
of Diatoms, Amphora ovalis^ Meridian circulare-^ Cocconema lanceo- 
latuMy Odontidium iiirgidulum^ Synedra capitata^ and Finnularia 
oblonga ; of DesmidSj Euastrnm didelta^ Penium 7nargaritaceiim^ 
and Docidium triincatinn.
Mr. Kirk remarked that the list of diatoms 
in this gathering was interesting, and that there was another species 
about w^hich he could not be certain.
The second gathering, also at 
Malham Cove, at the same temperature, contained crowds oi Meridian 
circular e, also Pin mil aria 
a Rotifer, Fnrcnlaria reinhardtii.
oblonga 
an d Nitzsch ia sigmoidea^ and 
The third gathering, from Gordale 
Scar, at a temperature of 57"*, included — of Diatoms, Fragilaiia 
capucina^ Synedra radians, and Dentiada obtusa.
Mr. Kirk noted 
that there was an almost total absence of animal life, owing to the 
length oi time which would elapse before the tubes could reach him 
for examination.
For the Botanical Section, Mr. W.
Norwood Cheesman, of Selby, 
reported that the more noteworthy plants seen were the following: 
Thalictrum montanum.
Aetata spicata.
Mecoaopsis cambrica.
Viola lutea, 
Hypericum montanum.
Coch^earia ani^Jica.
Geranium sanguineum.
Geranium sylvaticum.
Geranium pratense.
Geranium luciclum.
Geum intermedium.
Rosa tomentosa.
Poterium sanguisorba.
Rubus saxatilis.
Saxifraga hypnoides.
June i8qi.
Sedum Telephium.
Saxifraga tridactylites, 
Chrysospleniuni alternifolium, 
Parnassia palustris.
Myrrhis odorata, 
Lactuca murab's.
Carduus acaulis, 
Carduus heteropbyllus.
Campanula latifolia.
Antennaria dioica.
Cuscuta europxa.
On nettles, 
road to Malbam.
Lathraea squamaria.
Near Janet s 
Cave.
Salvia Verbenaca.
M 
178 
NOTES : MAMMALIA.
Stachys Betonica.
Pingiiicula vulgaris.
Potamogeton densus.
Potamogeton lucens.
Polypodium vulgare.
Polypodium calcareum.
Cystopteris fragilis.
Polystlchum aculeatum 
Lastrasa Oreopteris.
Aspleniutn viride.
Asplenium Trichomane.
Asplenium ruta-rauraria.
Scolopendrium vulgare, 
Lycopodium selago.
Selaginella selaginoides.
For the Geological Section no report has been furnished, but it 
may be explained that the work of this section was confined to 
explaining, for the benefit of visitors, the already well-known 
geological features of the district.
— E.P,K., E.R.W, 
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Parish Accounts, Rigsby with Ailby, North Lincolnshire.
— The parish 
accounts of Rigsby with xAilby contain many entries of sums paid for killing foxes 
^ Vtiipes vulgaris) between 1686 and 1739.
[We should have been glad to have 
the full details with dates.
— Eds. Nat.] Besides these, there are the following 
items extracted by me : — 
Meles taxiis Schreb.
Lutra vulgaris Erxl.
1686.
1718.
1732.
^733- 
1735- 
-1 7 10.
1725.
1733- 
* • «^ 
* It- giuen for a badger taking 
*gaue for a bager killing 
' payd for fox Bagear 
*for a Baggar killing 
' Giue for Bager caching ...
* paid for a noter killing ...
* Giuen to Samwell Dusnap 
killing a oter ...
' Giue to Richard Norton for a noter 
s. 
I 
d. 
o' 
6' 
o' 
6' 
for 
• • > 
killing 
» %.
^ » 
» * T 
3' 
6.' 
J. Eardley Mason, Alford, Lines., May 4th, 1891, 
Carnivorous propensities in the Water Rat.
— A sudden rustling in the 
grass, a splash, and then a brown apparition gliding through the water close to 
the bank-side is what we generally see of one of our commonest British 
mammals : it is comparatively seldom that several are seen together as in the case 
about to be described.
These little animals are usually understood to feed upon 
the roots of aquatic plants, but the following incident seems to point to an 
occasional carnivorous propensity, and as it has been given to me by one of the 
spectators, who is intimately acquainted with the Water Rat and his ways, I give 
it simply as a curious yet significant fact.
One Sunday afternoon in July last, 
Mr. Poulter of Church Fenton, and his brother, whilst walking across some low 
land south of the village, heard some piteous screams proceeding from a small 
bridge of railw^ay sleepers spanning a little drain grip.
Through a rent in one of 
the sleepers, Mr. Poulter saw a young rabbit struggling violently, and suspecting 
a stoat or weasel to be in close attendance behind, he raised the sleeper to release 
the rabbit.
Immediately this was done, out came, one by one, five Water Rats !
which speedily vanished into a drain end, under the adjoining field.
When lifted 
out, the rabbit had just succumbed — obviously killed by the Water Rats.
Whether a meal would have been made of it, had not an interruption come, is of 
course an open question, hut the reason for tlie murder must certainly have been a 
pretty strong one, for the rabbit, though young, was a large one — quite large enough 
at least for Mr. Poulter to take home for domestic purposes.
— ^J.
Backhouse.
[Mr. Backhouse assures us that Mr. Poulter is so well acquainted with the 
distinction between At-vicola amphibia and Mas decumanus ^ which also is a 
common species in drains and on the banks of streams, that we may safely 
accept the above note as an instance of a remarkable deviation from the normal 
habits of the Water Vole.— Eds.].
Naturalist, 
*79 
STALAGMITES OF SAND^ 
T. MELLARD READE, C.E., F.G.S., 
Park Corner., Blnndellsands, near Lwerfool.
The mode in which stalagmites in limestone caves are built up by 
accretion of carbonate of lime from water constantly dropping on 
the same spots is familiar to most people.
It was rather an 
interesting surprise to me to find that stalagmites of sand under 
certain conditions are a possibility.
This phenomenon I observed 
some years ago on the shore at Hightown, and noted it for 
future use.
A bed of peat situated on the upper part of the shore beyond the 
reach of all but spring tides had a projecting edge overhanging the 
sand of the shore below, which was then in a dry state.
Over the 
surface of the peat on which a small quantity of sand was scattered 
a little water trickled, and fell over the edge at several points in 
distinct drops.
The vertical fall was not more than six or eight 
inches.
Under each drop a little pillar of sand was being built up, 
and there were others standing where the water had ceased to drop.
Some of them were several inches high.
On examination I found 
that each drop of water took with it a few grains of sand, the 
accumulation of w^hich gradually built up a pillar.
The first drop of 
water produced a cup-like depression in the surface of the shore, but 
gradually a pillar became erected which still preserved the cup-like 
depression on the top.
The phenomenon was contrary to ordinary 
experience, which would have suggested that a pillar of sand 
cemented only with water was an impossibility.
The ^stalagmites' assumed different forms, some having a circular 
stem, smallest at the base, with a spreading cup or corolla at the top.
Others simulated a stem of coral, while those that had been built up 
beyond the strength of their foundations became pyramids of ropy 
flatter.
It was singular to see with every drop a glistening pulsation 
travel through the sand pillar.
My son, M.
Treleaven Reade^ has succeeded in manufacturing 
^ sand-stalagmites ' in the following way.
He took a circular tin 
vessel and drilled a hole nearly through, finishing it by puncturing 
with a needle- Then, filling it with finely sifted sand, he placed it 
over a larger vessel filled with dry sand.
On adding water sufficient 
to liquefy the sand and make a drip through the hole, each drop took 
with it a grain or two of sand, gradually building up a sand-pillar 
before the eye.
The phenomenon is evidently due to capillarity.
The dry foundation of sand sucks the superfluous water from the 
sa nd-col umn as each drop falls, leaving only the capillary water 
June x8qi.
l8o READE : STALAGMITES OF SAND 
which binds the grains of the * stalagmite ' together for the time 
being.
It is this quick drainage that produces the appearance of 
r 
pulsation.
With each drop the water suffuses the substance of the 
column and disappears in the interval before the next drop falls.
So soon as the sand in the vessel below becomes saturated, that 
is when its capillarity is satisfied, the stalagmite gets supersaturated 
and falls to pieces.
I fancy it is not known to many that diverse geological 
phenomena can be imitated with sand and water, and in fact are so 
imitated in Nature, but pass unobserved or unheeded.
The 
cementing power of pure water by reason of its surface tension is 
very considerable, so much so that moist sand will stand when 
excavated with a considerable vertical face.
I have before pointed 
out several geological phenomena that may be studied in pure 
siliceous sand, and now make this little addition to the information 
on the subject* 
to 
It may be appropriate here to record a kindred phenomenon I 
have lately observed on the shore at Blundellsands.
The cavalry 
from the Seaforth Barracks often come out for exercise and gallop 
along the shore on or about the margin of spring-tides, leaving 
innumerable footprints of horses' lioofs on the sand, if damp.
The 
sand, blowing across these depressions, builds out the sand over the 
hollows, so that they appear as crescentic cracks in the shore, in 
some cases nearly closed up.
On examination I find that the sand 
does not fill up the depression, but simply ' corbels ' over the 
hollows, the greatest ' corbeling ' taking place on the windward side.
I consider this very remarkable, and would have deemed it 
impossible had there not been such irrefragable proofs.
The 
explanation appears to be that some of the sand-grains are arrested 
while blowing horizontally over the ' hoof depressions, and by slow 
accretion build out from the side the ' overhang ' or ' corbelling,^ 
the moisture from the surrounding sand providing the binding by 
capillarity.
The greater part of the sand is doubtless blown across 
the depression without falling in.
Observations such as these may seem trivial to some minds.
On 
the contrar)-, they are interesting from a physical point of view, and 
valuable as often affording explanations of geological phenomena of 
a very puzzling nature.
' Geological Lessons among the Sand-hills,' Science Gossip, 1881, p.
198.
* Miniature Domes in Sand,' Geol.
Mag., Jan. 18S4.
* Eolites,' Ibid, 1875, p.
587.
* A Mechanical Cause of the Lamination of Sandstone not hitherto noticed/ 
Nature, vol.
x.xxvii, pp.
222, 223.
Naturalist^ 
i8i 
OCCURRENCES OF UNCOMMON BIRDS 
IN DERBYSHIRE AND SOUTH YORKSHIRE.
ELIJAH HOWARTH, F.R.A.S., 
Curator of the Public Museutn, IVeston Parky SJiefficld\ and late President of the 
Sheffield Xaturalists Club.
Lomvia troile.
Common Guillemot.
A specimen was captured 
alive in Sheffield on Nov. 26th, 1890, and taken to the Public 
Museum, where it lived for four days.
The bird was plump 
and in good winter plumage, but had received some injury to 
its legs.
It was found in the neighbourhood of the dams near 
to the Museum, but not on the water.
The appearance of this 
bird so far inland at the winter season, when its usual haunts 
are far out at sea, is very remarkable, and I know of no previous 
record of its occurrence in this neighbourhood.
Westerly gales 
had prevailed a few days before, and the weather was just 
changing to the severe cold which commenced here on 
Nov. 26th.
Fulica atra.
Coot.
One was caught alive on the River Don at 
Sheffield, on Nov. 29th, and lived in confinement for rather 
more than a week.
This is not a common bird here, and it is 
quite unusual for it to be found in the midst of the manufac- 
turing part of the town as this bird was.
Syrnium aluco.
Tawny Owl. We also have in the Museum 
a living Tawny Owl, which was caught near Grantham, Lincoln- 
shire, in April last.
Mr. A.
S. Hutchinson of Derby, the official taxidermist to this 
Museum, has sent me the following notes of rare birds and unusual 
varieties, which have been sent to him in the flesh during the latter 
part of 1890: — 
Tringa striata.
Purple Sandpiper.
Adult female from 
near Derby.
Saxicola cenanthe.
Wheatean Pale buff-coloured variety 
shot at Castle Donington, September 1890.
Perdix cinerea.
Partridge.
Immature, pied and mottled with 
white all over, shot near Burton-on-Trent.
(This bird is the 
property of Sir Francis Burdett of Foremak Hall, on whose 
estate it was shot.) 
Passer domesticus.
Sparrow.
Albino, shot at Arleyston near 
Derby, August 1890.
Turdus merula.
Blackbird Pied variety, almost white, shot 
at Arleyston, Nov. 1S90.
June 1891.
l82 NOTES — GEOLOGY AND ORNITHOLOGY.
Turdus muslcus.
Thrush.
White variety, with dark eyes, shot 
at Sudbury, near Derby, June 1890.
Phasianus colchicus.
Pheasant.
White variety, with pale blue 
eyeSj shot near Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Dec. 1890.
This record looks 
as if coming events had cast their shadows before, and the birds 
had prepared themselves for the severe winter with its long- 
continued white mantle.
Dafila acuta.
Pintail Duck.
Shot on the lake in Kedleston 
Park, near Derby, Dec. 23rd, 1890.
The property of the 
Hon. A.
N. Curzon, 
m 
FuHgula cristata.
Tufted Duck.
Male shot on the Trent 
at Weston, Dec. 1890.
Fuligula marila.
Scaup.
Female shot on the Trent at Weston, 
Dec. 1890.
Mareca penelope.
Wigeon.
Male shot near Doncaster,Dec.i8go.
Fuligula ferina.
Pochard.
Do. do.
These two are the property of Mr. A.
Gamble, Sheffield.
Tadorna cornuta.
Sheldrake.
Shot on the Trent near 
Burton, December 1890.
NOTE—GEOLOG K 
Boulders at Guisborough, — I have just obsen^ed on pnge 347 oi 'The 
Naturalist' for Nov, 188S, a mention by Mr. Gregson of boulders in the Priory 
grounds at Guisborough.
This reminds me of rather a curious circumstance.
In 1878 Admiral Chaloner excavated the floor of the church, and the workmen 
uncovered a large boulder actually resting upon the stone pavement.
How in the 
world did it get there ?
It is also perhaps worth record that when a deep excavation was made under 
Guisborough Beck, for laying a pipe, a peat-like deposit was found immediately 
under the stream, containing bones of the horse in numbers.
— W.
C. Hey, York, 
March 9th, 1891.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG K 
Spotted Crake at North Stainley, near Ripen.
^During the last week 
a Spotted Crake {Porzana niarnettd) has frequented a stream which runs by my 
garden, and has often shown itself among the shrubs and on the lawn.
The 
stream is not more than ten yards from the house.
— R.
A. Su^[^rERFIELD, North 
Stainley Vicarage, April 30th, 1S91.
Flamborough Bird Notes.
— Since I last wrote you, we have had an 
immense quantity of migratory birds.
April i6th, some three or four Swallows 
{Hirtmdo ftisiica) seen.
April l8th, a pair of Turtle Doves (Tttrtur communis).
April 19th, Cuckoo (Ctictiius canortis) heard for the first time this season.
April 20th, several \Miitethroats, Great and Lesser (Sylvia cinerea and •S*.
curriica).
May 4th, a pair of Hooded Crows [Corvus comix) and one Woodcock (Scolopax 
rttsticola) seen on the Headland.
May loth and nth, a great rush of Redstnrts 
{Ruticilla phirniairus), Blackstarts {R, tiihys)^ Wheatears (Saxicola a-nanthe)y 
Pied Flycatchers {Miiscicapa atricapilla\ a few Gold-crested Wrens {Regidus 
cristatus), and Stonechats {Pratincola rtibicola).
The hundreds of Redstarts and 
Blackstarts which have arrived on the Headland are something astonishing ; 
I have not seen so many for years.— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, May 14th- 
Naturalist, 
THE PIED AND WHITE WAGTAILS IN NOTTS.
F. B.
WHITLOCK, 
Beestoftj Notts.
Readers of 'The Naturalist' who also see the 'The Zoologist/ 
will remember a recent paper by Mr. O.
V. Aplin on the Grey and 
White Wagtails in Oxfordshire.
In his interesting paper, Mr. Aplin records the interbreeding of the 
Pied and White Wagtails {Motacilla yarrelli and M.
alba) as observed 
by him in Oxfordshire in June last.
As I had reasons to suspect 
a similar case having occurred in this neighbourhood, I resolved to 
keep a sharp look-out for the White Wagtail in the coming season 
of 1891.
Certain remarks of Mr. Aplin's, relating to the amount of 
grey and black to be found in the breeding plumage of the female 
Pied Wagtail, determined me also to examine all individuals of that 
species which should happen to come under my notice.
In previous years I have paid most attention to the various small 
waders which visit the Trent valley on their migrations, rather to the 
neglect of the Wagtails, which are so numerously represented ; and 
though I have long suspected the White Wagtail to be a regular 
visitor in small numbers, it was not until April last year that I fully 
identified it.
In the present year but few migrants had arrived by the middle 
of April, the weather being unfavourable.
The i8th April, however, 
was warm, with light S.
to S.W. winds, and in the evening I saw the 
first Swallow {Hirundo rustica).
Knowing there would be an arrival 
of Yellow and Pied Wagtails, I was early abroad the following 
morning.
Arriving at the river, I found my surmises were correct, 
a many J/", rayii and M, yarrellii appearing on the margins of the 
stream.
Taking my boat, I rowed up the stream, examining such 
birds as attracted my attention, with the aid of my glass.
It was not 
until I had rowed about three miles that my patience was rewarded.
I w^as watching a Common Sandpiper {Tringoides hypokucos) feeding 
on a sand-bank on the opposite side of the Trent, when several very 
light-coloured Wagtails caught my eye, and though they were sixty 
yards off, I had little doubt that I had met with a little flock of 
White Wagtails.
After watching them through my glass for some 
time, I rowed my boat over to the other side of the river to get 
a better view, and though I found them rather wary, T was able to 
identify them with certainty.
Their notes were different from those 
of the Pied Wagtail, and I fully agree with the authors of the * Birds 
of Cumberland/ who write :— * It has always seemed to us that the 
call-note of the White Wagtail was softer and less incisive than that 
June 1891.
184 WHITLOCK : PIED AND WHITE WAGTAILS IN NOTTS.
of the Pied Wagtail.* I also think, if anything, they are more lively 
in their movements and rather shyer.
A Pied Wagtail takes but 
little notice of a small boat passing within a few feet ; the White 
Wagtail will not permit this.
I found my flock to consist of five, 
apparently of both sexes.
A little later in the month, I was led by 
the difference in their notes to identify two more.
It maybe interesting to those who are not familiar with the White 
Wagtail to enter into some of the differences of plumage between it 
and the Pied Wagtail.
There can be no difficulty in distinguishing 
the males in breeding plumage, the glossy black head and mantle of 
the Pied Wagtail being in strong contrast to the dull black head and 
clear pearl-grey mantle of the White Wagtail.
Females in breeding plumage of both species seem to be subject 
to some variation, but there is one constant difference, and this 
applies also to birds of the year and adults In winter plumage, as 
pointed out by Mr. Aplin.
In M, yarrellii the upper tail coverts 
are black ; in M.
alba they are dull lead grey, no black being met 
with until the tail is reached.
The female oi M.
yarrellii in breeding plumage has the general 
colour of the upper parts dark grey, boldly mottled with black, the 
head having more black than grey, and the grey being of a rather 
muddy tinge.
In the White Wagtail the mantle is clear pearl grey, 
the head having a darker appearance, owing to a few streaks of black 
on either side of the crown, of greater or lesser intensity in different 
individuals."*^ 
M. 
not alluded to by Mr. Aplin, and which I have met with several 
times, the mantle in this case being pure grey, though darker than in 
the case of M.
alba^ and, curiously enough, the head and nape are dull 
black, with hardly any grey mottling at all.
It was the knowledge 
of this variety that made me hesitate in recording the supposed inter- 
breeding of the two species in Notts.
An interesting fact in con- 
nection with this case is that the eggs produced were of very small 
size, and much resembled the variety of eggs of M, alba figured by 
Mr. Seebohm.
In the Oxfordshire case the evidence is much 
strengthened by the female having a grey head, a characteristic 
I never observed in M, yarrellii, 
I feel sure that I have read somewhere that old females of 
M, yarrellii become very grey.
I think, on the contrary, that 
young females are grey, and also of a smaller size, the difference in 
the length of the wings and tail of these grey specimens compared 
with dark ones being very apparent.
* Females of J/, allfa often have a few white feathers on the chin and throat.
ave a female M, yarrellii marked in a similar manner.
__^__ 
Naturalist, 
IN MEMORIAM — JOHN HARRISON.
185 
I think that Pied Wagtails which spend the winter with us are 
darker in plumage than immigrants arriving in spring.
A female 
I have, which haunted a bend in our river throughout the recent 
severe weather, has the ear coverts nearly black; the flank feathers 
are also much darker.
In the foregoing notes I do not pretend to have entered into the 
smaller and, to my thinking, not very constant differences between 
the two species as pointed out by various authors.
Anyone who has 
had much experience in skinning birds will know how readily the 
relative extent of markings may be altered by careless making up.
Such differences, to be of any value, must be noted on the spot from 
freshly-killed birds.
It is yet too early to say whether the White Wagtails will breed 
here, but if such be the case, I hope to send some further notes on 
the subject.
n "^^emoriam.
JOHN HARRISON.
By the lamented death of Mr. John Harrison, Yorkshire natural 
history has suffered a severe loss, and many of her naturalists an 
old, much esteemed, and greatly respected friend.
Mr. Harrison was born at Nunnington Hall, near Malton, on 
the ist of June, 1823, and spent his boyhood there, afterwards 
residing at Murton, near Hawnby, until 1852, when he removed 
to Wilstrop Hall, near York, where he passed away on the 30th of 
April last, falling a victim to bronchitis, following an attack of the 
prevalent influenza.
From his youth until his death he was a true lover of nature, and 
a close and careful observer of her children and their ways.
His 
profession — a gentleman farmer — aff'orded him unlimited oppor- 
tunities of pursuing his favourite study, and the result was that he 
possessed a surprising amount of knowledge in many departments of 
natural history.
This knowledge, though seldom contributed by 
him to scientific literature, owing to Mr. Harrison's modest nature, 
was always freely at tlie disposal o( those who sought it The 
authors of the * Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire' well remember how 
generously he afforded them much valued aid during the progress 
of their work.
Mr. Harrison's special study was ornithology.
In this branch of 
science he was not only familiar with the British aspect of the 
subject, but his special trips to Scandinavia, Holland, the Lower 
5il^e, and North America, undertaken for the purpose of making 
J«ne 1891, 
1 86 IN MEMORIAM JOHN HARRISON, 
himself familiar with some of the rarer species, contributed a 
practical aspect to his general knowledge of the European and 
Nearctic avifaunas.
The writer will ever remember with unalloyed 
pleasure the advantages of Mr. Harrison's genial companionship 
on many occasions, and especially on their expeditions to North 
Brabant and to Hungary^ and Sclavonia.
In 1867 Mr. Harrison shot the first British specimen of the 
Kestrel {Tinminculus cenchris\ and, although himself a 
collector of birds, he, with his natural generosity, presented the 
specimen to the York Museum, in order that all who desired 
might have the benefit of examining it.
He also formed a very 
valuable collection of birds' eggs.
Mr. Harrison filled the office 
of President of the York Naturalists' Field Club, and contributed 
materially for many years to the value and interest of the meetings 
of that Society.
Wilstrop Hall and its surroundings were a paradise for birds, and 
many naturahsts have visited Mr, Harrison's home on the site of the 
battlefield of Marston Moor.
Here there was much of interest to be 
seen, since all birds found in Mr. Harrison a staunch protector.
When carrying out the extensive alterations which Mr. Harrison 
effected on the farm premises, he caused holes to be left in the 
walls and gables for nesting-sites for Starlings, Titmice, and other 
birds, while boxes, specially constructed, were erected in the 
barns for Owls, Hawks were permitted to dwell in peace in the 
woods and plantations, and yet, in spite of the presence of these 
supposed deadly foes, Mr. Harrison was able to afford his friends an 
excellent day's pheasant shooting.
Mr. Harrison was at one time an enthusiastic collector of 
butterflies, and he used to relate how on one occasion he was driving 
to Wetherby Market in a neighbour's conveyance, when he espied 
a butterfly on the wing.
* Stop !
pull up,' he cried, and was out of 
the conveyance almost before his friend was aware of it, and to his 
utter astonishment, in full pursuit.
At this time other conveyances 
were seen approaching, and the non -naturalist called upon Mr.
Harrison to give up the chase and get into the trap at once, before 
these people overtook them; * For,* said he, *they will think we have 
lost our senses.' In reply, Mr. Harrison remarked, ' Why, it was 
a Clouded Yellow !
' 
Of Mr. Harrison*s kindly nature, genial disposition, and sterling 
worth, it is quite impossible to speak in terms too high.
He had, 
and most deservedly, a host of friends by whom his loss will be most 
keenly felt, but his memory will be treasured always by them, and by 
all those who had the advantage of his acquaintance.
— W.E.C 
Naturalist, 
i87 
THE FISH-FAUNA OF 
NORTHUMBERLAND AND DURHAM.
Mr, Richard Howse, the well-known and able Curator of the 
Museum at Newcastle-on-Tyne, has published in the Natural 
History Transactions of Northumberland and Durham, a ' Catalogue 
of the Fishes of the Rivers and Coast of Northumberland and 
Durham and the adjacent Sea/ of which a reprint lies before us.
There can be no hesitation in declaring this to be one of the best 
pieces of natural history work that has been produced of late years, 
and the author, who has spared no pains to render it as (Complete, 
as useful, and as interesting as possible, is to be congratulated upon 
the result of his labour with no stinted praise.
The authorities in charge of the Newcastle Museum are also to 
be heartily congratulated upon their exceptional appreciation of what 
is, perhaps, the most important function of a provincial museum, and 
the considerable number of species of fish that the present Catalogue 
evidences to be represented' in the Museum by local specimens bears 
witness to the enlightened policy which characterizes their adminis- 
tration of it.
So also does the list of desiderata in this respect, 
which Mr. Howse appends to his paper, further show how fully 
alive they are to their responsibiUties, and we hope that the time 
which is to elapse before each species in desideratum is added to the 
collection may be of the briefest.
The introduction to Mr. Howse's Catalogue first deals with the 
bibliography of the subject, enumerating not merely the lists, but also 
the additions to them which have been from time to time published, 
and in the list itself the records are faithfully repeated for each 
species.
Cognizance is also taken of the Firth of Forth and York- 
shire lists, and useful comparisons are instituted.
The introduction 
next deals with the systematic classification adopted, which is that of 
Dr. Giinther's British Museum Catalogue of Fishes; a synoptical 
table of the various families, showing the number of species of each 
which are included in the Northumbrian fauna, follows; and after- 
wards comes a reference to the increment to our knowledge which the 
comparatively recent introduction of the use of the*trawl-n^t on the 
north-eastern coast has brought about.
The list itself is most full and detailed, and remarkably interesting 
in character.
A certain limited amount of synonymy is given, and 
a detailed account of what is known as to the distribution.
Frequent 
reference is made to Yorkshire and to Berwickshire records, and local 
vernacular names are given wherever possible.
Due notice is taken 
of species which have been reported either for Berwickshire or the 
June 1891.
1 88 .
NOTES AND NEWS.
Forth area in the one direction, or for Yorkshire in the other, and 
not for Northumberland and Durham.
The species which are repre- 
sented by actual local specimens in the Museum collection are 
designated by an asterisk, and — a most important point — their faunal 
status is always indicated by a letter — R, M, S, or C — the signification 
being as follows : — 
R. Resident ; truly native, and indigenous to the Coast or the 
adjacent Sea, or to the Burns and Rivers.
M. Migrant; approaching the Coast or ascending Rivers 
periodically from deep water to spawn.
S. Straggler; occurring occasionally on the Coast, a wanderer 
from the North or South, but not resident.
C. Colonist; introduced artificially, that is, by human agency, 
at an earlier or later period, into rivers, lakes, and ponds, and now 
fully acclimatized.
The total number of species which Mr. Howse includes in the 
list is 142, as against 155 which are included by Messrs.
Clarke and 
Roebuck in their Handbook of the Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire 
in 1 88 1, and 125 included by Dr. Parnell, in his Natural History of 
the Fishes of the Firth of Forth, published in 1838.
It would be 
interesting, but time forbids, to pursue the comparison further, so as 
to ascertain the relative numbers of resident, migrant, straggler, and 
colonist fish in each of the three areas in question.
An ample index is furnished, after which is given the list of 
desiderata already referred to.
Altogether, it is but seldom that we meet with sixty-four pages of 
matter as useful and interesting as that which Mr. Howse has 
furnished, and it may be regarded as a model which cannot be too 
soon adopted by the ichthyologists of other counties within our 
northern area.
^ .
NOTES AND NEWS.
A well-known north-country geologist, Mr. J.
E. Marr, M.A., Sec.G.S., is 
among those selected for the honour of F.R.S. Mr. Marr is the author of 
numerous papers on the geology of the Lake District, Yorkshire, etc.
A fine portrait in photogravure of the late John Hancock accompanies a Memoir 
of him by his friend Dr. Embleton, from whom we have received a reprint from 
the Natural History Transactions of Northumberland and Durham.
We have received from Mr. R.
Bullen Newton, F.G.S., of the British 
Museum, a reprint of a paper 'On the Genus LcvcilUay^ which he published in 
the Geological Magazine for May. The name only is new, and it is proposed 
because the former name of the genus— /Vr^//m— is too like the earlier name 
Porceilio borne by a genus of well-known Isopod Crustaceans (wood-lice).
Three of 
the species— Z.///C£?
C. L^v., Z.
verneuili D'Orb., and Z, woodwardi W.
Martin- 
are represented in the British Museum by examples in the Gilbertson collection 
fromBolland ; the last-named also being found at Winster, in Derbyshire.
Naturalist, 
i89 
BLIOGRAPHY 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
+ 
Physical Features of the North of England.
PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888.
The present instalment comprises the record of botanical activity in 
the North of England for a single year, so far as concerns the plants 
included in the London Catalogue of British Plants.
Previous 
instalments of the botanical bibliography have been published in 
'The Naturalist' as follows: — For 1884, Nat., Sep. 1885, pp.
331-336 ; 
for 1885, Nat, June 1886, pp.
174-179; for 1886, Nat., Dec. 1890, 
PP' 359-37.4; ^nd for 1887, Nat, April and May 1891, pp.
i2$-[^^.
The counties included are the Watsonian vice-counties of 
Cheviotland, Northumberland S., Durham, York N.W., N.E., 
Mid W., S.W., and S.E., Line, N.
and S., Notts., Derby, Cheshire, 
Lane.
S. and W., Westmorland with Furness, Cumberland, and 
Isle of Man.
Anon, [signed 'H.B.'].
Westmorland.
Twelfth Night Custom at Brough [in Westmorland ; carrying the Plolly 
Tree (//ex a(2itifolhim)\ Westm.
Note Book, Part i, March 1888, p.
23.
Anon, [not signed].
Derbyshire.
[Excursion to Dovedale, by Birmingham Nat. Hist, and Microsc.
Society ; 
notes on Saxifraga granidaia^ S.
kypnoides^ S, tridadylites^ Ambis hirsuta, 
Myosotis collina^ and Veronica arv€nsis\ Midi.
Nat., June 188S, p.
163.
Cumberland, York N.W., N.E., 
Anon.
[Various Observers and Ed. Nat.
Hist.
Jonrn.].
Mid W., and S.W.
Floral Calendar, 1878- 1887 [giving- Average Dates for certain specified 
flowers at each station where observations have been made ; the North of 
England stations are Silloth, Wiglon, Cotherstone, Ayton, York, Birstwith, 
Settle, and Ackworth ; the plants were Cory/us avellana^ Primula vulgaris^ 
Raniincuhts Jicaria^ Mercitrialis perennis^ Tussilago farfara, Viola odorata^ 
Anemone nemorosa^ Caltka pautstris^ Nepeta glechoma^ Prinnda veris^ 
Stellaria holostea^ Cardamine pratensis, i'r units communis^ Veronica chamm- 
drys.
Lychnis diurna^Salla nutans.
Ranunculus buibosas, R, acris, R.
repens^ 
Piantago lanceolata^ Orchis mascula^ Fyrus malits^ Polygala vulgaris or 
/*.
serpyilacea^ Cylisus scoparius, Trifoliuin pralense^ Crataegus oxyacanlha, 
Lotus corniculatus, Trifolium repcns, Myosotis palustris.
Orchis maculaia, 
and Rosa canina].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1888, xii.
I15-116.
Anon, [not signed].
York S.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union [at Saddleworth, 16th June, 1888; 
several plants noted by English names only].
Research, July 1S88, p- 14- 
Anon, [not signed].
York Mid W, 
Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club [at Ingleton, 13th June, 1SS8; Con- 
vallaria majalis, Paris, Prollius, Afeconopsis, Primula farinosa, and Geranium 
niolle noted].
Research, July 1SS8, p.
15.
Anon, [not signed].
Cheshire.
Liverpool Science Students* Association [at West Kirby and Hilbre 
Island ; Thalictntm minus, Sediim anglicum, Ornithopus pcrpusillus, and 
Armaria maritima noted].
Research, July 18S8, p.
15.
June iBgi.
190 BIBLIOGRAPHY : PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888.
Anon, [not signed].
York Mid W.
Leeds Naturalists' Club [at Bishop Wood, July 1888; Valerianella 
olitoriay Silaiis fratensis^ (Enanthe Jistulosa^ Iris psez^dacoriiSy Hipptiris 
vulgaris y Potamogdon crispiis^ P, dens us, Nastnriium amphihiuni, Artemisia 
absinihium, Ranunczdus arvensis noted].
Research, Aug, 1888, p, 30.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.E, 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union [at Robin Hood's Bay, i6th July, 1888 : 
Ophrys apifera^ Carex viilpifia^ Agrimonia enpatoriuin.
Daphne laiireola^ 
Afyrrkis odorafa, the larger Equisetum^ Scolopendriitm vidgai-e^ ihtAspidiani 
aculeatttm^ and La strata Jilix -mas noted].
Research, Aug. 1888, p.
29.
Anon, [not signed].
Lane.
S. 
Liverpool Science Students' Association [at Ince Blundell, 14th July, 
1888 ; Blysvms compressus^ ciliated var.
of Saponaria officinalis^ Orchis 
incarnata^ Iris pseudacorus^ Myosotis palustris^ Lychnis git kago^ and Hottonia 
noted].
Research, Aug. 1888, p.
31.
Anon, [not signed].
Derbyshire, 
Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club [at Miller's Dale, July 12, i888; 
Ribes nigi'ttni, Geranium sanguineiiMy Aspleninm irichomanes^ and Gettm 
rzVaZ?
noted].
Research, Aug. 1888, p.
30.
Anon, [signed ' R.B.L.'], Durham, York N.W* 
In Upper Teesdale [an angling paper with incidental notice oi Potentilla 
fruticosa^ Pingtdctda vulgaris^ and Drosera rotund if olia\ P'ield, Aug llth, 
1888, p.
2x4.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.W- 
York.
The Mount.
— Annual Excursion ...
to Wensleydale, June 12th.
[Primula farinosuy Trollius, Menyanthes^ and Aquilegia noted], Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. isth, 1888, xii.
136.
h^o-s, [not signed].
York S.W. and N.E.
Ackworth (Boys') Reports \Lycopus, Chelidonium majus^ Echium vtdgare, 
Vinca //my^r (Hampole Stubbs), and Papaver somniferum^ registered for the 
Ackworth flora for the first time ; Drosera rottindifolia^ Osmunda^ Andromeda^ 
Hottonia^ Myrica^ Empetrum nigrum, Vaccinium Oxycoccos^ and Claytonia 
perfoliata, all at Thorne Waste ; Trollius, Meconopsis canihrica^ Atropa 
belladonna.
Daphne laureola, and Paris, all at Rievaulx, or between there 
and Coxwold], Nat. Hist Journ., Oct. 15th, 1888, xii.
157.
Line.
S. 
F. H.
Arnold.
Lathyrus tuberosus in Sussex [with a mention (quoted from Gibson's 
Flora of Essex) that the Rev. W.
W. Newbould found specimens in the 
British Museum, in the Buddie and Petiver collections, Buddie stating ' I had 
it from the Rev. Mr.
John Sedgwick, who gathered it not far from Lincoln, 
in the north field of Blankney, near the road to Lincoln*].
Sci. Goss., Oct.
1888, p, 224, 
C. C.
Babixgtox.
York N.E.
List of [163] plants noticed at Fylingdales (Robin Hood's Bay) in 
September 1882 [distinguishing those additional Xo M.
B, Slater's list], 
Nat., Sep, 1SS8, pp.
265-267, 
J. E.
Bagnall.
Lane.
S. 
[Ceratophyllum demersum in fruit from Liverpool, exhibited to Birm.
Nat, 
Hist, and Micro.
Soc, Feb. 14th, 18S8].
Midi.
Nat., March iSSS, p.
79- 
J. E.
Bagnall, Derbyshire.
[Equisetum sylvaticum var.
capillare, from Shirley, Derbyshire, exhibited 
toBirm, N.
H, and M.Soc.,Mar. 13th, 1888].
xMidl.
Nat., April 1888, 108, 
J, E.
Ba<;naix.
Westmorland.
[Plants from Foxfield, Westmorland; Ardostaphylos uva~ursi\ xMidl.
Nat., Oct. 1888, p, 266.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888.
191 
Edmund J.
Raillie.
Cheshire.
Obituary Notice, Mr. John Price, M.A.
[died at Chester, 14th Oct., 1887, 
aged 84, was school-fellow of Charles Darwin at Shrewsbury School, and 
ultimately became a tutor at St. John's College, Cambs.
Cultivated in his 
garden ' beds filled with huge plants of the giant Herackiim^^ and he ' carried 
with him, frequently for weeks at a time, leaves of Cardaniine [C.
pratensis ?] 
in a small phial of water, to watch the process of development of leaf propa- 
gation '].
Journ.
of Eot., Jan, 1888, p.
32.
J. G.
Baker.
Cumberland.
On the Botany of the Cumberland part of the Pennine Range [about 
Alston, as observed in the autumn of 1887 ; the paper, after describing the 
physical geography and geology, and noting the cultural characteristics of the 
Super-agrarian Zone, enumerates the whole of the plants, with stations, about 
304 in number.
The plants of the Infer-arctic zone are then stated by alti- 
tudes, after which the best plaat-staiions are mentioned, and a comparative 
and statistical summary concludes].
Nat., Feb. 1888, pp.
33-44.
J. Batalha-Reis.
Cheviotland.
Note on the Plants and Insects observed at the Wooler Meeting, 
Sep. l6th and 17th, 1887; list of 35 flowering plants, ^\q.
ferns, and three 
lycopods noted].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, 
part I (1888), pp.
195-197- 
W. H.
Beeby.
Furness.
On Potentilla reptans and its Allies [mentioning P, sttberecta Zimm., Lake 
Lancashire, F, A.
Lees in Hb. Bennett].
Journ.
of Bot., No. 303, March 
1888, xxvi.
78.
Arthur Bennett.
Yorkshire, Lane.
S. 
Notes on the Eighth Edition of the London Catalogue of British Plants 
[with Yorkshire notes on Epipadis atro-ruhens and Potamogeton perfoUaUis 
(p.
no); notes include Naias graminea (Manchester), Carex leesii from 
Yorkshire, and Carex lepidocarpa from Yorkshire].
Sci. Cess., May and 
June 1888, pp.
110 and 130-131.
James Britten and G.
S. Boulger, Durham, York Mid W.
and S.W.
Biographical Index of British and Irish Botanists [James Backhouse of 
York, who died in 1869 ; referring to his discovery of Trichomanes radicans 
in S.W. Yorks.
and of Viola arenaria in Teesdale (pp.
85-89); Mr, Brad- 
shaugh, with reference to his finding Riihus Chamitmorus on Ingleborough 
about 1640 (pp.
145-149), Journ.
of Bot., March and May 1888, pp.
85-89 
and 145-149.
Robert Brown.
Lane, S., Cheshire.
Additional Localities to the Flora of Liverpool.
Recorded in 1887 
since the publication of the Third Appendix ; all noticed within the fifteen 
miles radius [giving stations for 58 species, and a list of 12 Birkenhead 
ballast-plants], Proc.
Liverpool Nat. F.
Club for 1SS7 (pub.
1888), pp.
22-27.
Robert Brown.
Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
Botanical Resume [of plants noted at the Liverpool Field Club 
Excursions of 1887, at Capenhurst and Shotwick, Cheshire, 7th May ; 
Orrell and Upholland, Lane., nth June; Little Sutton, Overpool, and 
Hooton Park, Cheshire, T6th July; Lydiate, Lane, 6th Aug.; Willaston 
and Neston, Cheshire, lOlh Sept.; and Formby and Freshfieid, Lane, ist 
Oct.].
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. Field Club for 1887 (publ.
iSSS), pp.
37-46.
Robert Brown.
Lane.
S,, Cheshire, 
Names of Some of the Most Interesting Plants noticed [by the 
Liverpool Nat. Club] during the excursions in 18S7 [enumerating 9 species 
for Capenhurst and Shotwick, Cheshire, 7ih May ; 13 for Orrell and 
Upholland, S.
Lane, nth June; 17 for Little Sutton and Overpool, Cheshire, 
X6th July; 19 for Lydiate, Lane, 6th Aug.; 18 for Willaston and Ncftton, 
Cheshire, loth Sept., and 25 for Formby, Lane, ist Oct.].
Proe Liverp.
Nat. F.
Club for 1SS7 (publ.
1888), pp.
47-5 r- 
June i8,_,i.
192 BIBLIOGRAPHY: PHAXEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888.
Thomas Bunker.
York Mid W, 
Stratiotes aloides at Carlton near Selby [Oct. nth, 188S, with Hydro- 
charts vtorstis-rana^ Siiim latifoliitrn^ Iris^ and Rurnex hydrolapathum\ 
Nat,, Nov, i888j p.
331.
J. W.
Carter.
York Mid W.
[Appearance of flo-wers of Hazel {Corylus avelland) at Shipley Glen, both 
staminate and pistillate, 22ad Jan., 1888 ; under heading ^ FJiigalia pilosaria 
in January'], ^'oung Nat., March 1888, ix.
63 
Cheshire.
Joseph Chappeli,.
Captures [at Dunham] near Manchester [of insects on Galiiun mxatile 
and Festiica diiriuscula\.
Young Nat., Dec. 1888, ix.
238.
A. Craig Christie.
York Mid W.
Notes on the * Flora of West Yorkshire ' [of F.
A. Lees : Thalktrum 
alpinum, Sagina eii-apetala^ S, ciliata^ S\ nodosa^ Melilotiis alba^ Primus 
padttSy Alchefnilla arvensis^ Linana inhior^ Asplenhtfu septentriouale^ 
A, adiantum-nigritfu^ Aspidiiim loncJiitis^ Nephrodiuni (Tmulu7ny Polypodiiim 
phegopteris^ Ophioglossnm vulgatum, and Lycopodiiitn iunndatitm noted for 
Craven localities, or Mr. Lees' records criticised ; criticisms by F.
A. Lees 
on this paper are appended to it].
Nat., Aug. 1888, pp.
225-226.
A, Craig Christie.
York Mid W.
Thalictrum alpinum L.
at Settle [criticising F.
A. Lees' notes on this and 
Nephrodium i€?nuhun\ Nat., Sep. 1S88, p.
268.
A. Craig Christie.
York Mid W, 
Notes on Settle Plants [in reply to W.
WTiitwell in respect of Aspidium 
lonckitis\ Nat., Nov. i8S8, p.
331.
Esther B.
Clark.
York Mid W.
A Double Celandine \_{RanuncitlHS Ficaria) found at Bishopthorpe near 
York, April 28th, iSSS].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May isth, 1888, xii.
88.
J. E.
Ci-ark.
York N.E.
[Lathraea squamaria, Ckrysosplenium altef-nifolmm, and Sctlla mttans near 
Byland, Skelton, and Overton].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1888, xii.
ni- 
Wm. Cross.
Furness and Westmorland.
Boat-Botanising on Lake Windermere [with note of Cirara hiteliana^ 
Lysimachia nemorum, Veronica officinalis^ Viburniun optilns^ Lobelia dort- 
manna, Ca?'ex ampttUacea^ Corydalis claviculata, Chrysanthemum lettcanthe- 
muni^ Melampyruni pratense.
Geranium robertiajium^ G.
sylvaticum^ Trotlius, 
Iris pseitdacorus, Melica unijlora^ AquHegia vulgaris, Lintim nsttatissifniifn, 
Thalictrnm^ Solanum dulcamara^ Hypericitmy and Scabiosa, some from Stock 
Ghyll Force].
Wesl.
Nat., Sep. iSSS, ii.
220-222.
William Cross, Lane.
W* 
Roadside gatherings at Arnside [20th Sep., 1888 ; Silejie injlata, Malva 
sylvestrisy Geranium luaditm, Scabiosa columbaria^ Tussilago^ Gahiun 
cntciatum, Poterium sangtiisorba, Geum urhanumy Pimpinella saxifraga, 
ToHlis anthriscits, Lactuca viiiralisj Daiuiis carota, Leontodon hispldtis, 
Mcrcurialis perennis, Viola odorata, V.
canina.
Inula dysenterica, Nepeta 
glecko7na, Calamintha clinopodinm^ Origannm vztlgare^ Tencrinm scorodoma^ 
Pot cut ilia rep tans, PriDieUa vulgaris^ Hypericum motitanum, Riibus fmtt- 
cosus, Alchemilla alpina, A.
vti/garis.
A, arvensis.
Geranium molle, G htci- 
dtim, G.
columbinum, 6*.
robertianum, G.
dissecfum^ Veronica montana, 
Sonchns art'ensis.
Aster tripolium, Claux viaritima, Scirpus marilimus, 
Flantago mariiima, Silene maritima^ A triplex littoratis, Centanrea nigra, 
Malva moschata, Tamus^ Carduus heterophyllus, Ginanthe Jistulosa, Erigeron 
acris, Apinm graveolens, Verbasaim t haps us ^ McUlotus albus, Gentiana 
tumpestris, Calluna^Medicago lupulinus, Ettphorbia amygdaloides, Agrimo^n'a, 
and Epilohium lauceolatum noted, with habitats].
Wesl.
Nat., Nov. iSSS, 
ii.
281-283.
Naturalist* 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888, 193 
^V.
Crouch.
Cheshire.
[Calluna vulgaris var.
alba at about 2,000 feet, nearly at the top of 
Shutliiigslowe, Cheshire, one of the highest peaks of the Pennine chain].
Essex Nat., Dec. 18S8, ii.
267.
T. \Y.
Edmondson.
York Mid W.
The Hound's-Tongue \Cynoglossum officinale} at Skipton-in-C raven [at 
Piawbank Quarry, with 6"^?^//^;;^ aniarella o.x\d Aichemilla a?'Vens2s].
Nat., 
Oct. 1888, p.
306.
William Fowler 
Line.
N. and S.
Lincolnshire Marsh and Water Plants [a list, with stations, of 144 species].
Nat., April 1S88, pp.
111-TI4.
H. E.
Fox. Cheviotland, Durham, York N.W.
List of .
. .
Donations to the Museum .
, • of the Natural History- 
Society [of Newcast!e-on-Tyne], June, 1877, to August, 1887 [1S86, 
Fyrola rotiindifoUa and Corallorhiza innaiay Newnham Bog ; Cenhtncuhis 
?ninimus and Viola ctirtisiiy Ross Links, Northumberland ; Zostera iiana^ 
Fenham Flats; Polygala tdiginosa ( — /*.
amara L.) and Helianthemnm 
vineale (^ZT.
camtm E.B.), Cronkley Fell].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumh.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
9, part 2 (1SS9), p.
289.
Hii.DERic Friend.
Notts.
Notes on the Flora of North Notts.
[Be7'l?eris vulgaris, Pimpinella saxi- 
fraga at \Yalesby, Senecio sylvaticum^ Claytonia perfoliata, and Carduus 
marianits at Ollerton, Geranimn 7Zodos7tm at Eakring, and Echium vtdgare 
at Apley Head, noted, some as hosts for micro-fungi].
Trans, and 35th Rep.
Nottingham Nat. Soc, 1887 (pub.
1888), p.
33.
Lane.
S. or W.
? 
HiLDERic Friend.
A Rare 
Lancash 
British Fungus [found on Omithogahim njuhellatiufi growing in 
shire, by Wm. Cross of Lytham].
Wesl.
Nat., June 1888, ii.
107-109.
HiLDERic Friend.
Cumberland.
A Cumberland Moss [describing a visit to one, on or near which grew Bird- 
cherry {Pniuus padus)^ Meadow Geranium {G.
pratense)^ Water Avens 
(GeuiJi 7'ivale), Myrica gale.
Marsh Valerian {Valeriana dioica)^ Globeflower 
(Trollitis etiropcrus), Ramincnlus lingtia.
Primula farina sa^ Crepis palndosa, 
Menyauthes, and Utricularia\ Wesl.
Nat., July 188S, ii.
142-T44.
HiLDERic Friend.
Cumberland.
The Eden and Solway [noting* plants observed in walking from Carlisle 
to the Solway along the Eden ; Arabis JiirsiUa (alien), Sanguisorha officinalis 
(do.), Melilotus officinalis, Medicago sativa.
Allium carinatum.
Origanum vul- 
gare, Calamintha acinos, Leonurtts cardiaca, Ballota nigra, Tanacettimvulgare, 
Conium maculatum, CEnanthe fisiidosa, Myrica gale, Meny ant hes trifolmta, 
Comai'ufH palustre, Andromeda, Apiuni graveolens^ Armeria vulgaris, 
Putomus umbellalus, Ranuntulus scelcratus, THglochin, Senecic viscosus, 
Parietaria, Echium vulgare, Brassica Monensis^ Geranium sanguineum^ 
Rosa spinosissima, Erynginm maritimum, Cakile marilima, Carcx arenana^ 
Brassica oleracea, Carduus tenuijloriis^ Plantago maritima, Medicago falcata.
Polygonum macnlatum, Echinospermiim iappula.
Sisymbrium so/^ita^ 
Centaurea vtelitensis, C.
calocephala, Lathyrus sylvestris (Everlastmg Pea), 
Trifolium arvense, Melilotus albus, Raphanus maritimus, Spergidaria rubra, 
Critkmum maritimum, Hieracium umbellatum, H.
boreale, H.
pdosella, 
Pyrola minor.
Utictdaria, Primula farinosa, Botrychium lunaria, and Carex 
extensa noted].
Wesl.
Nat., Sep. 1SS8, ii.
207-209.
W. A.
Gain.
Notts.
[Colour-] Varieties of Viola odorata [near Tux ford, Newark, Notts.].
Nat., July 1888, p, 193.
J. GAkDNER.
Durham.
Larva of Deilephila galii at Hartlepool [on the sand-hills, found on Galium 
_££^/;/, 23rd Sep..
1 668].
Nat., Oct. 1888, p.
2S6.
July 1891, ^ 
194 bibliography: phanerogamic botany, 1888.
F. Gayner and B.
S. Rowntree.
Lane.
S. 
A Day on the Southport Sand-hills [June 9th, iSSS; Pyrola rotundifoiia 
var.
jnaritima^ A7nmophila antndinacea, etc., noted].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
Sep. 15, iSSS, xii.
122.
M. E.
Gill.
Westmorland and Furness.
[Plant] Rarities [Lobelia dortmamia from Windermere].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
May 15th, 1888, xii.
89.
Allan B.
Hall.
York N.E.
Rosette Variety of Geum ( G.
rivale) [more plentiful than type in Flazendale, 
ofTRyedale, covering many acres].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Feb. 15, 1SS8, p.
23.
A. B.
Hall.
York N.E. and Mid W.
Double Water-Crowfoot [Ranunculus aquaticus) [at Gormire near Thirsk, 
and at Swillington near Leeds].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. 1st, 1888, xii.
I77* 
Allan B.
Hall.
York Mid W.
and N.E.
Rarities [near Leeds^ AcUea spkata and Ulex nanus ; and near Thirsk, 
Atropa belladonna\ Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. ist, 1888, xii.
178.
Frederick J.
Hanbury.
York Mid W., Durham or York N.W.
Notes on Some Hieracia new to Britain \^H.
hifiduni Kit., Teesdale ; 
H. friesii Htm., Ingleborough (F, A.
Lees) ; H.
angustttm Lindeb.
= ^.
^v'^" 
catum V- aiigustatttm Fr., Teesdale].
Journ.
of Bot., No. 307, July 1888, 
xxvi.
204-206.
W. C.
Hey, York Mid W.
Silene nutans still at Knaresborough [particulars and dates given], Nat., 
Nov. 1888, p.
331.
J. M.
Hick.
Northumberland S.
Address to the Members of the Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club - - 
May i6th, 1887 [notes on field excursions: Lamiian maculatuni at Shotley 
Bridge, 31st May ; Vaccininm Oxycoccos at Whinnetly Moss ; Menyanthes at 
Broomlee Lough ; Clematis vitalha at CresswellJ.
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part i (1888), pp.
3, 4, and 14.
J. B.
HoDGKiNso-V.
Westmorland and Furness.
Northern Lepidoptera in 1887 [with a reference to the vitality of Impatiens 
noli'Vie-tangere at Windermere].
Ent., April iSSS, xxi.
108, 
^VM.
HoDGSox. Cumberland, 
Linaria minor in Cumberland [two or three stations noted].
Nat., Feb.
1888, p.
44.
Abraham Holroyd.
York Mid W.
and S.W.
ppins 
Folk-Lore Journ., part li, April 18S8, pp.
217-224.
H. Hyde.
Cheshire.
[Exhibition of Camelina satrva, Nesh'a panzailata, Saponaria vaccaria^ Sliene 
dichotoma^ and Salvia verticillata, found on a refuse heap, canal bank at 
BoUington, Cheshire, 18S6].
Mem. and Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, 
Jan. 1 6th, iSSS, Series 4, vol.
I, 1888, p.
W>.
J. IsMAY.
York S.W.
Extracts from the Diary of the Rev. J.
Ismay [of Mirfield : 1736— Apple 
bloshom (Pyrus mains) nine times and ripe fruit tive times; in blossom on 
Christmas Day, and a red Rose {Rosa canina ?) full blown in the hedge by it j 
I75^» J^b' 5^h> Apple and Plum (Pninus communis) trees in blossom a second 
time this year in my garden ; 1768, the Yew tree ( Taxus haccata) now growing 
near the S.E. corner of the churchyard was planted by Thos.
Sherrd, clerk, 
Sth Nov., 1673, as appears by an entry in the parish register; the other two 
Yews are so very ancient that no man Jiving can remember them in a youthful 
state].
Yorksh.
Notes and Oueries, part lO, Jan. iSSS, pp.
196-201.
bibliography: phanerogamic botany, 1888.
195 
J. Ism AY.
W 
Some Account of the Parish of Mirfield (by Mn Ismay), to a Friend in 
Cumberland, 1755 [speaks of there being 250 sorts of wild plants growing 
spontaneously in the wood, fieldj pastures, and waste grounds, the poisonous 
plants being the cictita or the Lesser Hemlock ( ?
), the Common 
Night-shade [Sola^inni nigrum)^ Black Henbane ( ?
), Cynocrambe 
( ?
), Yew tree (Taxus haccata) ; particulars given as to last-named ; the 
crops also are mentioned].
Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, pt.
10, Jan. i888, 205-6.
P. Q.
Keegan.
Isle of Man.
Man 
plants personally observed].
Science Gossip, April 1SS8, p.
75.
R. E.
Leach.
York Mid W., Westmorland- 
Some Ingleton Plants [stating- localities for ConvaUaria majalis, Polygon- 
atum mitliijloi'uni^ Daphne mezereiim^ Asplemufji germanuiun^ Epilohittm 
hirstitum^ Aspidiion lonckitis, Fingiiicida vulgaris^ Primitla fai'inosa^ 
Trolims, Polypodium dryopteris, F, phegopteriSy Ophrys inuscifera^ and 
Ceterath officinariim\ Nat., April iSSS, p.
119.
P. Fox Lee.
W 
The Yorkshire Naturalists* Union at Hatfield Chace [21st Sept.
1887: 
plants noted were Rosa lutetiana^ Androvieda^ Drosera lotzindifoliaj CaUzina^ 
Erica tetraliXy Myi'ica^ Osinitnda (not found), Epilobhtm angttstifolitim^ 
RJiyjtchospora alba^ Eriopkorinn vagtnatuni^ Stellan'a aquatica^ S, glama, 
Hydrocotyh vulgaris^ Hippuris vulgaris^ Pota>nogeton pttsilliis var.
ieniiissiuia^ 
^lyriophylhifn^ Carex pseiidaiype^us^ P*apaver dzd>uim^ Spergularia r?fbra, 
Erodiiim ciaitarhtnu Ridms siiberedus var.
fisst/s?, Dipsactts syh'esfris^ 
Sderanihus aiinitus^ Hordeitm mtirinnm^ and Senecio syh'aiiius'].
Nai., Mar, 
1888, pp.
85-S7.
P. Fox Lee.
W 
parg^amum ramosum var.
microcarpum m Yorkshire [near Brett(jn ; the 
var.
is new as British, and was determined by Arthur Bennett].
Nat., July 
1888, p.
200.
P. F.
Lee.
York S.E.
Yorkshire and Lancashire Naturalists at Saddleworth [i6th June, 
1888 ; Rulnis ihainctnionis^ Cardamine amara^ Viola palustris^ Epiioidnm 
angustifoliiimy Vacciniiifn vitis-idma^ Euipetrum nigrum, Scirpus cu^spitosus, 
Nartheciitm ossifragtwi^ Eriopkornm angustifolittm var.
elatiits Koch, Drosera 
rofttndifoUa^ Liizida canipestris var.
ereda Desv., Carex pilulifera, CJlava 
Var. w/;/t?r Towns., Polypodium dryopleris, Cysioplcris fragilis^ Nephrodiitm 
oreopteris^ N, filix-inas var.
borreri Netvfu,^ and Hymenophyllum itndaleiale 
noted, and Malaxis searched for without success].
Nat. July 188S, p.
213.
Frederic Arnold Lees.
York N.W,, Mid W., and S.W.
The Flora of West Yorkshire, with a sketch of the climatology ^nA 
litholo^y in connection therewith .
. London .
. 1888 [a portly volume 
of 844 pages, of which the climatology occupies 62, the Hthol<^y 22, the 
bibliography 16, the phanerogamic flora 303, the cryptogamia I'H, appendi 
and indexes loi ; the lithological chapter is accompanied by a coloured map; 
the flora, which includes 1042 numbered and numerous unnumbered 'as 
erroneous, extinct, or alien) fioweriug plants and vascular cryptograms, 
concernimgeach of which is stated its local names, ante-Linnean designations, 
vice-comital distribution, localities arranged under river basins, lithological 
restrictions, floristic status, habitat, relative abundance, and^ months of 
appearance ; detailed reviews are foun<l in Journal of Botany, Xo. 307, July 
1888, xxvi.
219-222; Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., Aug. 1888, 6th S.
ii, 186- 
(88, by A.
Bennett; Wesley Nat., May 1888, ii.
7376, by Hilderic Friend, 
who gives additional records for Sedljergh and Ansion districts ; Field, 21st 
April, xSS8, p.
583; etc.], 
J"ly 1891.
ces 
196 BIBLIOGRAPHY: PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1S88.
F. A.
Lees.
W 
Notes on the [R.
E. Leaches] List of Ingleton Plants [anent Asplenmm 
gernianicujH^ A, riita-muraria^ Aspidinni lonchitts, A.
aadeatiim^ Epilobhirn 
hzrsutu??i, E.
angttstifolittm^ Polygonatuni jjiultijlorum^ P.
officinale ^ Daphne 
mezereum^ Op/uys muscifera^ and CeteTac}i\.
Nat., June 1888, p.
160.
F. A, Lees.
York Mid W.
Notes on the 'Flora of West Yorkshire' [anent Tkalicti-zim a!pim(??i^ 
Nephrodiinn iVfunlifm^ and Asplenium septentrionale ; a criticism on a note 
by A.
Craig-Christie], Nat., Aug. 188S, p.
226.
F. A.
Lees.
York N,W.
Ceterach officinarum in Wensleydale still [station not precisely indicated; 
previous records discussed].
Nat., Aug. 1888, p.
246.
F. Arnold Lees.
York Mid W.
A New West Yorkshire Plant {Pyrola rotiindifolid) [found at Outershaw 
in Langstrothdale, 1,200 ft.
alt., by Trevor Basil Woodd].
Nat., Sep. 18SS, 267.
F. Arnold Lees.
Lane.
W., York Mid W., N.W., and S.W.
Notes on the West Yorkshire Flora [22 species mentioned, with critical 
remarks and details of localities], Nat., Oct. 1888, pp.
303-306.
B. B.
LeTall.
York N.E.
[Plants seen at Ampleforth, May 24th, 188S; Cardamine amara^ Acer 
campestre^ Inula heleninm^ Vuica rnijior, Myosotis sylvatica^ and Paris\ 
Nat. Plist.
journ., June 15th, 1888, xii.
ill.
B. B.
LeTall.' York N.E.,' Mid W.
Orchis Morio and O.
mascuia near York [their relative abundance; 
numerous stations cited, anent \V.
Whitweirs remarks quoted in Lees' Flora 
of West Yorkshire].
Nat. Hist.
Journ,, Nov. ist, 1S88, xii.
177.
B. B.
LeTall.
York Mid W., N.E, 
Late Flowers \Pyriis japonica at Dringhouses, i8th Aug.
; Hotlonia^ Askham 
Bog, 25th Aug.; Caltka^ Tilimire, 13th Sept.; Ve^'onka c/iamcEdrys, Castle 
Howard, 2Gth Sept.; Salix repejts, Strensall Common, 19th Sept., and 
Fragar-ia vesca, Buttercrambe Moor Wood, 26th Sept., 1888; also Samolus 
valerandi and Lithospermtwi officinale near Allertpn].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
Nov. 15th, 1888, xii.
202.
W. R.
Linton.
Derbyshire.
South Derbyshire Plants [notes on plants about Shirley ; Ranunciihts 
penicillatus Hiern, Viola reichenbachiana Bor., Stellai'ia neglecta Weih., 
S,nmhrosa Op., Medicago maculata Sibth., Primus cerasusY,.^ P insititia'L-i 
three species of A'/z/wj, six o^ Posa, four of Epilobium^ Ribes uva-crispi L., 
Taraxacum officinale var.
ejythrospemiujn Andrz.
, Sonchus ai"i>ensis var.^ 
glabra Lond.
Cat.; Pri/nula vulgaris and P, veris vars., Cuscuta trifoln 
Bab., Mentha viridis L., M, rubra Sm., HL piperita Huds., Betula glutinosa^ 
Fr., three of Salix, Juncus diffusus Hoppe, J, supiuus Mcench.
var.
kochii 
Syme, Potamogeton serratus Huds., five of Cai-ex^ Arrhenatherum nodosum 
Rchb.,^;'t'/««i arvensis \j.,Agropyron repensViQ^nw, var.
harhata Duv.-Jouve- 
Boreal character of district shown by absence of four species and presence of 
four others, all named, while 19 species and varieties are enumerated as new 
county records].
Journ.
of ^ot..
No. 311, Nov. 18SS, xxvi.
329-331.
F. C.
Long.
Lane 
Queer Place for Shells [and for AnachaHs alsinastrum \ the engine 
cistern (60 ft.
above canal) at Gannow W'eaving-shed, Burnley].
Sci. GoaS.r 
Dec. 1888, p.
281.
Edward S.
Marshall.
Westmorland 
ieracium Gibsoni Backh.
and Carex irrigiia Hoppe in Westmoreland 
[gathered in July 1883 : the first on mountain limestone near Kirkby Stephen, 
and the second in a bog above the Mazebeck, between Caldron Snout and 
Highcup Scar, both plants stated to be 'additions to the county flora'].
Journ.
of Hot., No. 301, Jan. 1888, xxvi.
27.
Naturalist^ 
BlliLlOGRAPHV : PHANEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888.
197 
E. S.
Marshall.
York N.W. and ?
Durham.
Notes on Highland Plants [with a casual reference to Viola sylvatica on 
Cronkley Fell, and Plantago viaritima in Upper Teesdale].
Journ.
of Bot., 
^o- 305j May 1888, xxvi.
150-153.
J. J, Marshall.
York S,E.
Goodyera repens in Yorkshire [at Houghton Wood near Market Weighton, 
6th Aug., 188S ; habitat described].
J. of Bot., No. 312, Dec. i888,xxvi.
379.
J. A.
Martindale.
Westmorland and Furness.
Our District [Westmorland and Furness, defined, described, divided into 
six river basins, and illustrated by an excellent map; each of these is 
described and its Botany characterised, and lists of the rarer plants given ; 
the vice-county flora stated to amount to 897 plants].
Westm.
Note Book 
and Nat. Hist.
Record, Part i, March 1888, pp.
1-19, and folding map.
G. E.
Martindale.
Westmorland and Furness.
List of [39] Sedges [recorded for Westmorland and Furness, showing the 
river basins in which gathered].
Westm.
Note Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, 
Parts I and 2, March and June 1SS8, pp.
26-27.
G. E.
Martindale [not signed].
Westmorland.
Orchis pyramidalis in Westmorland [found on the banks of Leith, between 
CliLurn and Melkinthorpe].
Westm.
Note Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, 
Vol. I, part 3, Sept.
1888, p.
66.
J 
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Polystichum annulare In North Lincolnshire [in Withern parish, found by 
Mi5,s Susan Allett ; identified by F.
A. Lees].
Nat., April 1888, p.
102.
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Carduus acaulis in North Lincolnshire [found on the Chalk Wolds at 
South Ormesby, by J.
B. Davy, on the 6th August, 1888; name confirmed 
by F.
A. Lees].
Nat., Sept.
rSS8, p.
284.
W, Narramore.
Lane.
S, 
A Phenomenon [with incidental mention of Ramuhiilus aquatilis near 
Huyton, S.
Lanes.].
Research, July 1888, p.
11.
J. I.
Newion.
Lane, S 
Rambles during the year 1887, — Ashton-under-Lyne [30th July ; IJottonia 
pahtstris^ Ranuncidus aqitatiUs^ Lemna minor^ Z.
irisulca, Potamogeto^t 
natajis, Hydrocharis 7norsus-rana^ Alisuia plantagOy Epilobhun angitsfi/olium^ 
Hippuris vulgaris^ and Stratiotes aloides noted in or near ponds, Ashton 
Moss].
Ann. Rep.
Manch.
Microsc.
Soc. for 1887 (pub.
1888), pp.
66-7.
E, A.
Peak.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Welton Vale [27th Aug., 1887; 
III flowering plants and ferns enumerated as found, and stations cited for 
several of them].
Nat., Feb. 1SS8, pp.
46-47- 
JOHN Percival.
York N.W- 
The Flora of Wensleydale, North- West Yorkshire [enumerating about 
600 species, with stations].
Nat., May 1888, pp.
125-143.
John Percival.
York N.W.
The Flora of Wensleydale : Additions [16] and Corrections [one].
Nat., 
June 1888, p.
159.
Jxo. Philipsun.
Durham, York Mid W.
Address to the , .
. Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club .
. .
May 9th, 
18SS [notes of tield excursions: Myosotis, Orchis mascula.
Primula vulgaris 
at Whitfield on Allen, May 30th, 1887 ; rotenilUa fruiicosa, Polygonmn 
viviparumjiabmaria hifolia.^Xi^ Gymnadenia cotwpsea at High Force, 27th 
June; Hdianthemum canitm.Arenaria va-na, Tofieldia.Gentiana vernaJ.ycO' 
podium alpinum, Rtdms chamtemorus, on Cronkley Fell same day ; Siohpen^ 
July i8qi.
198 BIBLIOGRAPHY : PHAXEROGAMIC BOTANY, 1888.
driiitn at How Stean Beck, Myrrhis odorata at Lofthouse, CIrara hitetiana, 
Hypericum^ Erica or CalliDia, Vaccinium juyrtillus on the Nidd slope of 
Bewerley ^Ioor, Ang, 2nd ; Ophrys apifera at Roker Dene, formerly].
Nat.
Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part i (1888), pp.
183-202, 
George T.
Porritt.
Isle of Man.
[Plants noted during] an Entomological Expedition to .
. * and the 
Isle of Man [in Aug. 1S87 ; Statice armeria^ Fraximis^ Silene znjiata, and 
Eupatoriiim cannabinnm\ Nat., April 1888, pp.
104-106.
E. P.
QuiNN.
Cheshire.
Rambles during the year 1887.
— Ashley [June it; the pond produces 
Eladderwort (677'/r///a;7a, species unstated)].
Ann, Rep. Manch.
Microsc.
Soc. for 18S7 (pub.
1888), pp.
63-64.
E. P, QuiNN.
Cheshire.
On a Vegetable Trap [the Bladderwort (6?r/V«/arza, species not mentioned) 
which is often found in the ponds abounding on the Cheshire side of 
Manchester; description, etc., given].
Research, Dec, 1S88, p.
89.
Cumberland, York N.W., N.E., 
Lawrence Richardson.
Mid W., S.W.
Floral Calendar, 1888 [as observed at Silloth, Wigton, Cotherstone, 
Thirsk, York, Settle, Ravvdon, Leeds, and Ackworth; the species same as in 
the 1S7S-1887 averages; averages given, and names of observers].
N.H.J., 
Oct. 15, 1SS8, xii.
165-166.
A. S.
RowNTREE.
York N.E.
York, Bootham, May 3rd [at Skelton, the Blue-belis [Sciila mitam) in their 
beauty].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1888, xii.
113.
A, S.
RowNTREE.
York N.E.
York, Bootham [Excursion to Scarborough, June 14, 1888; Helleborus 
viridiSy AquUegia^ Pyrola^ Trieiztalls.
Habenaria vh-idis^ Malafithemtimi and 
Polypodinm phegopteris noted], Nat. Hist.
Jgurn,, Sept.
15th, 18SS, xii.
136.
A. S.
ROWNTREE.
York N.E.
[Castle Howard Excursion, Sep. i8th, 1888; Parnassia in Crambeck 
Valley and Vicia sylvafica near the station].
N.H.J., Oct. 15th, 1888, xii.
163.
W. H.
Satterthwaite.
York N.E.
[York Plants : Lilies-of-the-Valley ( Co7ivaUaria viajalis) in Nova Scotia Wood 
:ind Barbarea strkta on Clifton Ings].
N.H,J.,June 15th, 1888, xii.
IH- 
M. B.
Slater.
York N.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Lower Wensleydale [at Leyburn, 
2ist May, 1888; Cardamuie amara^ Cochlearia officinalis^ Viola liitea, 
Gera7tium htcidnm^ Saxifraga gra77ulafa, Pritmts padiis, 3fyr?'his odorata, 
Adoxa 7noschatellina^ Parietaria diffusa.
Orchis masczda.
Sax, hypnouies, 
and Lathnva^ noted], Nat., June 1888, p.
177.
M. B.
Slater.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Robin Hood's Bay [i6th July, 
1888 ; list of 78 flowering plants and six ferns noted].
Nat., Aug. 1888, 238-40.
M. B.
Slater.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Market Weighton [6th Aug., 1888; 
28 plants and seven ferns noted as seen].
Nat., Sep. 1888, pp.
279-2S0.
Matthew B.
Slater, York S.E.
Spiraea filipendula in South-East Yorkshire [notes of three stations].
Nat., Oct. iSSS, p.
306.
M. B.
Slater.
York S.E., Cumberland- 
Goodyera repens near Market Weighton [Aug. 1888 ; correction of mis- 
record ^?> Spirant hes aiitumnalis% first record for Yorkshire], Nat., Oct.
1888, p.
312.
Naturalist.
NOTES AND NEWS, 1 99 
C. E.
Stansfiei.b. York Mid W.
Ra'wdon [Sep. 5th, Lycopus eiiropirus^ Cichoriuni iittybus^ and Bidens tri- 
partita reported for the first time].
N.HJ., Oct. I5lh, 1888, xii.
159.
C. E.
Stansfield.
York Mid W.
Notes from our Stations • .
• Rawdon (nr.
Leeds) [eight plants new to 
the district, Viola odo7-ata^ Geuin rivale^ Latknxa squainan'a, Aquilegia^ 
Cardamiyie anmra^ Valej'iana dioica^ Carex pnecox^ and Raauncuhts lingua ; 
and new locality for Primula vulgaris], N.H.J., Oct. 15th, 18S8, xii.
167.
G. Su'AIXSOxV.
Isle of Man.
On the Dalby Rocks [Isle of Man, grow Glanciujn luteum (abundant), 
AspleniujH 7uarinu?n, and Osmimda regalis ; also Samoltis vaierandi^ Ai'teniisia 
maritima^ Ci'ithnuim mayitimnm^ Sagina 7naritii)ia^ Sedum telephium, 
Hypericum androsczmwn^ Plantago maritima^ P.
coronopus, Asplenium 
germanictim^ and Adiantttin capillus-veneris enumerated].
Wesl.
Nat., 
Nov. 1888, ii.
263 and 268.
Tatton Sykes.
York S.E.
Large Silver Fir [in the park at Sledmere ; dimensions given, also of 
a large Larch {Larix europica); the Silver Fir (Pinus sylvesh'is) grows very 
rapidly when planted on the Yorkshire Wolds].
Field, May 5th, 1888, 660.
E. H.
rUKNER.
Cheshire.
[Anacharis alsinastrum at Bramhall, 2nd July, 1887].
Ann. Rep.
Manch.
Microsc.
Soc. for 1887 (pub.
1S88), p.
34, 
C. H.
Waddell.
Westmorland and Furness.
List of Fung-i .
. .
growing in the District round Kendal [mentioning 
Caltha palustris^ Ranujicuhis Jicaria, Viola canina, Allium ursiuum.
Polygonum historta^ AlcheDiilla vulgaris^ Campanula rottindifolia^ Salix 
eapmaj Poten'um sanguisorha^ Anemone 7ieniorosa, Myrica gale, Heracle^im 
sphonaylium and Angelica sylvestrls as hosts, with localities, etc.].
Westui.
Note Book and Nat, Hist.
Record, Vol. i, part 3, Sept.
1888, pp.
61-63.
William West.
York Mid W., S.W., and N.W.
Additional Localities for the Vascular Plants of the West Riding Flora 
[notes on 67 species ; also on one Chara\ Nat., Oct. 18SS, pp.
299-302, 
Wm. Wkst.
York S.E, 
Goodyera repens near Market Weighton, S.E. Yorks.
[gathered in 
Houghton Hall Woods, Aug. 18S8; at first reported as Spirauthes 
atitumnalis\ Nat., Oct. 1888, p.
312.
F. B.
Whitlock.
Notts, 
Varieties of Viola odorata [in South Notts.].
Nat., Aug. r888, p.
246.
William Whitwell.
Westm., Durh., York Mid W.
and N.W.
Notes on Settle Plants [in criticism of A.
Craig-ChHstie's notes; with 
information as to the Settle and Craven occmx^7\<:e9> oi Aspidium ioftchiiis, 
N'ephrodiiim ce/nulum, and Thalidruni alpinum\ Nat., Oct. 1888, p.
307.
J- Russell Wildman.
Lane.
S. 
[Potamagun (sic) crispus and Anacrhais (sic) alsinastrum recorded as the 
chief weeds in a pond at Burnley in which Planorlns dilatatus occurs].
Sci. Goss., Sep. 18SS, p.
209.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The question as to the validity of Cydostoma as a generic name in conchology 
-raised by Mr. R.
Bullen Newton -is discussed by Rev. Canon Norman, F.R.S., 
in an article in the May number of the Annals and Magazine of Natural History, 
wherein he arrives at a conclusion quite the reverse of Mr. Newton's.
The latter 
gentleman, however, stands to his guns in the June number, and throws his facts 
into the form of a chronological table.
July 1S91.
200 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
[Apology is due to readers — and hereby offered — for the tardy 
appearance of this report, but indulgence will readily be conceded 
by all who learn that it was caused by a complication of most 
serious illnesses from which Mr. Goodchild, whose geological 
account was indispensable, has suffered for several months, and 
from which he has only lately recovered].
The August bank-holiday excursion of last year was fixed for 
Upper Swaledale, particularly the part lying around the villages of 
Keld and Muker, and the remarkable hillock of Kisdon; and was 
arranged as a three-days' or week-end excursion, the district being 
far too inaccessible for a single day's investigation.
Arrangements 
had been previously carefully made by the Secretaries for the 
accommodation of members, this being rendered more than usually 
necessary from the fact that inns are both few in number and far 
apart in such a remote district.
The greater number of the 
members stayed at 'The Cat-hole' at Keld, and others were lodged 
at the Joiners' Arms at Thwaite, and at the Farmers' Arms and the 
Queen's Head at Muker.
The Union were particularly fortunate in 
having as their leader Mr. J.
G. Goodchild, F.G.S., of H.M.
Geological Survey, by whom the district was geologically surveyed 
some sixteen years ago, and who may therefore be considered (in 
a much more literal and accurate sense than that in which the 
phrase is often used) to know every inch of the ground- This, and 
his genial companionship, made the excursion a success in every 
way, both as regards the scientific results achieved and the enjoyment 
of it by the members present.
The actual proceedings commenced on Saturday, the 2nd August, 
when Mr, Goodchild led a party of members, who started about 
mid-day from Askrigg Station, although a few were on the ground 
early on Friday morning.
A second party, arriving at Askrigg late in the afternoon of 
Saturday, were conducted over the moor to Keld by Mr. W.
Dcnison 
Roebuck, FX.S., and another party (from Skipton) walked over from 
Hawes to Keld about the same time.
The distance from Askrigg 
to Keld being about eight miles, and much of it being performed by 
the second party in the dark, all were glad to reach their inns.
Mr. Goodchild's party, travelling by daylight, were more fortunate, 
and learnt much from him en route, as they traversed the outcrops 
of the various .strata, first up the Wensleydale and then down the 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
20I 
Swaledale slope of the hill-range — here attaining an elevation of 
i,8oo ft.
in the passes and over 2,000 ft.
on the hill-summits— which 
divides the two dales.
Sunday was a quiet day, and the weather being fine and pleasant, 
a most enjoyable one.
Some of the members went to hear a sermon 
which was preached with special reference to the visit of the 
naturalists by the Rev. W.
Crombie, who is himself a botanist, and, 
along with Mr. George Fawcett of Thwaite, pays attention to the 
flora of the district.
The Swinnergill Kirk was also visited, a quaint 
cave, round which are some extraordinary dislocations in the strata, 
while others visited the slopes and summit of Kisdon, the picturesque 
waterfalls of Kisdon and Cat Rake Forces, etc.
On Monday the 
vicinity of Kisdon and Keld were still further investigated during 
the forenoon, and at noon the usual business meeting was held in 
the Literary Institute at Muker.
There was but scant time available, 
so that the proceedings were cut short, and sectional reports not being 
given, so that tlie meeting was very unlike those which are usually 
held after Union excursions.
There was a good attendance of the 
members who had taken part in the excursion, and a k\v visitors.
The Rev. R.
V. Taylor, B.A., vicar of Melbecks, who'has long been 
a member of the Union, was voted to the chair, and was supported 
by the vicar of Muker.
The minutes having been postponed, 
Mr. W, Lower Carter, ALA., F.G.S., of Leeds, was elected a member 
of the Union.
It was then resolved, on the motion of Mr. Roebuck, 
seconded by Mr. William Home, F.G.S., of Leyburn, that the 
vacancy in the secretaryship of the Geological Section caused by 
the death of Mr. Adamson should be filled up by the appointment 
of Mr. Carter.
It was next resolved that Mr. Chas.
P. Hobkirk, 
F.L.S., of Dewsbury, be the delegate to represent the Union at the 
forthcoming meeting of the British Association at Leeds, and that 
the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A., and Mr. W.
Cash, F.L.S., Halifax, 
be his two colleagues on the General Committee of the Association.
A hearty vote of thanks was then passed — on the motion of Mr. M.
B. 
Slater, F.L.S., Malton, seconded by Mr. Herbert Prodham, of 
Allerston— to Mr. Goodchild for his able and genial leadership of tlie 
excursion.
Thanks were also voted — on the motion of Mr. R.
B. 
Cook, of York— to Captain Lyell and Mr. Alderson of Keld, for the 
permission so freely granted for members to visit their estates in the 
valley, to the Committee of the Muker Literary Institute for the use 
of their room, and to the various leaders of parties- It was 
announced that the Sectional reports were to be sent to the Secretary 
for publication, and a vote of thanks to the Rev. R.
V. Taylor for 
presiding concluded the proceedings- It may be added that 
July iSqi.
202 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
at the excursion eleven societies were represented, viz., Cleveland, 
HarrogatCj Leyburn, Scarborough (two), Craven, Leeds (three), 
Malton, and York.
The main body of the members then started under the leadership 
of Mr, Goodchild for Hawes,via theButtertubs Pass and Hardra Fors.
The Sectional Reports, for which there was not time at the 
meeting, were sent in afterwards as follows : — 
The Vertebrate Section does not appear to have been represented 
at all, and consequently no report was submitted — an almost un- 
precedented event in the history of this usually most active body of 
members.
For the Conchological Section, Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., 
who was the sole representative, and who had in previous years paid 
attention to the mollusca of the district, reported that but little had 
been done, from the dryness of the season.
The following species 
were taken in the immediate vicinity of Kisdon Force and round 
Keld :— 
Arion ater.
Helix hispicla.
Arioii hortensis.
Helix sericea.
Arion bourguignati.
Helix rotundata.
Limax agrestis.
Helix rupestris.
Vitrina pellucida.
Balea perversa.
Zonites cellarius.
Clausilia rugosa.
Zonites alliarius.
Clausilia dubia.
Zonites glaben Clausilia laminata.
Zonite?
nitidulus.
Azeca tridens.
Zonites purus.
Zua lubrica.
Zonites crystallinus.
Limnaea truncatula.
Helix arbustorum.
Limnsea truncatula var.
minor.
Helix rufescens.
Altogether 24 species only, of which there is but one, Clausilia^ 
laminata^ which is an addition to the published list for the district, 
(see 'Naturalist/ August 1890, pp.
229-233).
This is not a very 
satisfactory record for so productive a district.
The Botanical Section was represented by its Cryptogamic 
Secretary, Mr. M.
B. Slater, F.L.S., of Malton, and there were also 
present^ among others, Mr. Richard Barnes, of Saltburn, and 
Mr. Thomas F.
Ward, of Middlesbrough, the latter of whom has 
furnished a list of 133 plants observed, of which the following are 
the rarer and most interesting species : 
Thalictrum minus.
Peucedanum ostruthiuni.
Draba incana.
Carduus heterophyllus.
Cochlearia officinalis.
Campanula latifolia.
Geranium sylvaticum.
Ferns.
Geranium luciclum.
Polypodium calcareum.
Epilobium anirustifolium.
Asplenium '/iride.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
203 
The Geological Section was represented by Mr.S.Chadwick,F.G.S., 
one of its Secretaries, and other geologists, and had the great advantage 
of the presence and guidance of Mr, J.
G. Goodchild, F.G.S., who 
furnishes the following account of the investigations of this section :— 
On arrival on the Saturday' at Askrigg Station, and starting from 
the horizon of the two uppermost subdivisions of the Mountain 
Limestone as defined by Phillips— the Muker Limestone (Smiddy 
Limestone of Alston Moor) and the overlying Askrigg Limestone 
(Little Limestone of the same district)— the party crossed the 
various subdivisions of the Yoredale Rocks as the hillside north of 
tlie town (Askrigg) was ascended.
The actual rocks themselves 
are not clearly laid bare along the whole of the route ; but (as 
Prof.
Phillips has shown in his 'Geology of Yorkshire') beck- 
sections and other exposures east and west of the road show the 
following succession, th^ lowest rock being named first : — top of the 
Askrigg or Aysgarth Limestone, thick black shale (Hardra Shale), 
Sandstone of Hardra Fors, Hardra Limestone (the Jew Limestone 
of the Alston district), thin bed of shale, repeated alternations of 
sandstone, shale, and thin limestone, Simonstone Limestone (the 
Tyne-Bottom Limestone) shale, alternations of sandstone and shale, 
with thin but very persistent beds of limestone (two are respectively 
known as the Cockle Shell and the Post Limestones in the country to 
the north-west), Middle Limestone, Fifth Sett (or Scar Limestone) 
shales and sandstones, Fourth Sett (Five Yards Limestone) shales 
and sandstones, Third Sett (Three Yards Limestone) shales and 
sandstones (Nattrass Gill Hazle), Lower Undersett Limestone (Four 
Fadom) shale, passing northward into the Quarry Hazle, Upper 
Undersett, or Undersett Chert (Limestone Post), shales, sandstones, 
Main, Twelve Fadom, or Great Limestone, Main Chert, Black Beds, 
Shales and Coal Sills, Red Beds Limestone and Chert, shales, Ten 
Fadom Grit, Crow Limestone and Chert, shales and Fell-Top 
Limestone, shales, ganister.
Tan Hill Coal, shales, Ingleborough 
Grit.
This last is taken as the basement bed of the Millstone Grit.
(The foregoing was given in Woodward's Geology of England and 
Wales, 2nd Ed., p.
164, 1887).
The outcrops of these various subdivisions can be traced along both 
sides of the dales, in some cases for distances of three miles, without 
interruption.
The terrace-like outcrop of the limestones— each 
ending outwards in a cliff-like scar, and bounded on its inner edge by 
lines of swallow-holes— could be distinctly seen by the party as they 
climbed the hill.
On the way several of the party obtained some of the commoner 
fossils of the Yoredale limestones, which were chiefly brachiopods.
July 1801.
2 04 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
At Oxnop (or Ousnop) Beck Head the party spent some time in 
examining the road-side sections of the Main Chert and Black Beds.
These were seen to be siUcious (not arenaceous) limestones, in which 
silica in a colloid form had been an original constituent of the rock.
It is chiefly of organic origin, consisting largely of sponge specules.
Locally it passes into beds of nearly pure chert, and graduates 
horizontally, in other directions, into limestones of the ordinary type, 
thickening considerably as it does so.
' One is tempted to regard 
these siliceous beds as representing a palaeozoic series of deposits of 
siliceous mud, derived, it may be.
from the exuviae of the diatoms, 
radiolarians, and sponges inhabiting the deep sea at that remote 
period.
Prof Huxley (Contemp.
Review) has shown how deposits 
of this nature may, by the partial^ — or the total— dissolution, and the 
subsequent redeposition of their siliceous particles, be converted into 
amorphous opaline silica.
Such deposits as jiave lately been brought 
under the notice of the scientific world as one of the results of the 
Challenger Expedition, would give rise to a set of rocks essentially 
like those above referred to, if there were frequent oscillations of 
level bringing about alternate deposits of siliceous mud and 
n 
calcareous ooze' (see J.
G. Goodchild, Trans.
Cumb.
and Westra.
Assoc, Part vii, p.
125, May 1882).
This view has since been con- 
firmed by Dr. Hinde (Q.J.G.S.).
A remarkable plexus of faults occurs in Ousnop Beck, and the 
geological structure of that part is further complicated by other dis- 
turbances of the strata.
The broader features of these were briefly 
described en route.
The outcrop of the Main Limestone attracted 
much attention, as it forms a fine bold precipice on the east bank of 
the' stream.
In this scar Ravens {Corvus corax) bred up to within 
the last few years, and, doubtless, would do so still if they were left 
unmolested.
Several of the party were much interested in some curious speci- 
men of (Main) Limestone which had been irregularly corroded by 
the action of surface waters, and subsequently glazed by a thin film 
of transparent calcite, redeposited from solution, during the drier 
part of the summer months.
At Spout Gill attention was directed to such of the broader 
features of Swaledale geology visible from that point.
The general 
course of the 'Stockdale Vein,' a great fault ranging past the 
north side of Thwaite, Muker, Gunnerside, etc., was pointed 
out.
The Askrigg and Muker Limestone lay at the bottom of 
the dale before the party, but the northern downthrow of the 
Stockdale Vein has let down much higher strata against the rocks 
named.
Xatunilist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
' 205 
From Spout Gill onward to Muker the attention of the party was 
chiefly devoted to botanical pursuits, several additions to the 
published lists being made on the way.
On the second day a contingent of the party gathered at Muker, 
and left for Keld by way of the east side of Kisdon.
Soon after 
crossing the Stockdale Vein the outcrop of the rocks on the east 
bank of the Swale could be easily made out, and the general 
succession was briefly described.
The rocks best exhibited were the 
Undersett and the Main Limestones.
Attention was directed to the 
smooth and rounded-off contour of the hill especially to the 
north-east of Muker.
This is due to the fact that the prevailing 
direction of movement of the ice during the Glacial Period had been 
oblique to the outcrop of the strata ; where it long coincided with the 
outcrop, terraces of the more resistant strata resulted.
Several small 
faults and mineral veins could easily be made out in the scars below 
Ivelet Moor, and the study of these gave rise to considerable dis- 
cussion as to the origin of metalliferous veins in general Mr. Good- 
child reg^irded these as having received their present contents by 
deposition from thermal water rising through pre-existing fissures 
(faults, etc.) at a time when the rocks were undergoing their last 
principal upheaval, in Miocene times (J.
G. Goodchild, 'Cumberland 
and Westmorland Minerals,' Trans.
Cumb.
and VVestmld.
Assoc, vii^ 
pp.
107-110 (1882), and 'Genesis of Metalliferous Deposits/ Proc, 
Geol Assoc, xi, No. 2, p.
49 et seq.).
Above Hartlakes the party obtained a good general view of the 
lead-mines of Swinner Gill, as well as those of Beldi Hill These 
are situated upon the westerly continuation of the E.
and N.E. veins 
so long worked in the Old Gang Mines, They are here much 
disrupted and deranged by faults, whose general direction is north- 
westeriy.
These are the older set, and have 'trailed' the later-formed 
easterly faults ('Notes on Faults/ J.
G. Goodchild, Trans.
Edin.
Geol Soc, 1 889, pp.
71-74).
Their broader features were described 
as far as was necessar}' for general purposes.
On the south side of Kisdon Lower Foss (in Wensleydale 
a waterfall is called a *Fors/in Swaledale 'Foss': it is interesting to 
find both Scandinavian names), which is caused by the superposition 
of the (harder) Undersett Limestone upon the (softer) shale and 
sandstone at its base, the contingent from Keld and Thwaite was 
met Then, after a pleasant ramble together amongst the beautifuUy- 
w'ooded crags below Birkhill, a move was made in the direction of 
Kisdon.
Arrived at the north end of that hill the party had an 
opportunity of studying all the broader geological features of that 
supremely beautiful part of Swaledale.
The effect of the numerous 
July i8gi.
206 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
faults and other disturbances in contributing to the varied nature of 
the scenery was described in some detail, and was further illustrated 
by many diagrams.
Mr. Goodchild indicated the point where 
Kisdon Foss had started at the close of the Glacial Period^ and 
showed that it had since cut back from that starting point a distance 
of more than half-a-mile.
The starting point of the Upper Kisdon 
Foss (Undersell Cherl on shale above Undersell Limestone) could 
easily be made out also.
The conjoined gorges left by the recession 
of the two fosses constitute an important element in the scenery 
here.
Some remarks were made upon the recession of the fosses 
higher up the Swale— Catrake Foss, Hoggart's Loup, Currack Foss, 
Rainby FosS; &c.
— ^and it was shown that the scars left on both 
banks of the river, by the recession of each of the fosses in 
question, could be distinctly traced back to their post-glacial starting- 
point.
Some observations upon the same features will be found in 
the *Geol.
Mag./ 1875, PP- 3^5-6, where an attempt has been made 
to estimate the extent of post-glacial erosion by means of these 
fosses, dealing more especially with the waterfalls of Wensleydale.
From Birkhill the party descended to a point opposite the foot of 
White Wallit Scar, where Mr. Abraham Lambert, of Harrogate, took 
a photograph of the group of naturalists.
Then a move was made 
towards Keld, where the various objects of interest in the scenery 
were inspected and much admired.
These were the gorge formed 
by the Undersell Limestone and its underlying sandstone, extending 
eastward from Catrake Foss and Morell Hole ; Clap Stye Well, 
w^here a perennial spring of the brightest of water flows from the base 
of the Undersell Limestone ; the Sandbed, above ; the Sandstone 
Foss of Hoggart's Loup; Rainby Foss, &c.
All the riverside 
scenery here was bright with the blossoms oi Epilobium angustifolhini, 
Geranium pratense and G.
sylvatitum, Campanula latifoUa^ Spircca^ 
etc., and the ferns were at their best.
Then past Cotterby Scar 
(Main Limestone) with the Undersell Chert at its foot, to Keldside 
IMines, where the Main Chert and Black Beds are let down into the 
Swale by faults.
Here some time was spent in examining these 
remarkable siliceous beds.
Then a return move Avas made to Keld, 
where the whole party gathered to a very pleasant dinner at the 
Cat-hole Inn.
On the day following, at the conclusion of the meeting held at 
Muker, most of the naturalists started for Hawes by way of the 
Buttertubs.
On the way Mr. Goodchild pointed out the chief 
features of the geology, indicating the outcrop of each of the chief 
Yoredale limestones, which were, of course, seen in the same order 
as on the first day's excursion.
On the way up Mr. Goodchild made 
Natural is', 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION IN UPPER SWALEDALE.
207 
f 
some observations upon the plain of the fell tops, as seen from the 
high ground, and gave his reasons for regarding it as the modified 
descendant of the old surface on which the New Red Rocks 
( - Magnesian Limestone and Trias) formerly reposed.
Its present 
upheaval and part of its present inclination date from Oligocene or 
Miocene times, and are coeval with the close of the volcanic period 
of the /Antrim and Western Island Basalts, and with the filling of 
the metalliferous veins.
Arrived at the Buttertubs the naturalists made a long halt for the 
purpose of examining these singularly beautiful natural features.
Several persons made the descent to near the bottom of one or two 
of the shafts.
The Buttertubs commence at the very top of the 
Main Limestone, where the insoluble Main Chert comes on, and are 
continued downward to the very base, where the insoluble sandstone 
below the soluble limestone comes on.
Water sinks in from the 
surface, dissolving the limestone right and left of each joint as it 
proceeds, works its M'ay down through the newly-formed channel, 
until it reaches an impervious stratum beneath, where it issues as 
copious springs, heavily charged with calcareous matter in solution.
As the rock wastes, the places where the water enters the limestone 
recede radially from the starting-point, so that the limestone is eaten , 
away to every point of the compass, provided the water enters on all 
sides.
Of course, the limestone ceases to be fretted away along any 
direction where the water ceases to flow.
Some good examples of 
rotten-stone, resulting from the removal of the calcareous constituents 
of the Main Chert, were examined.
Specimens of the more interesting 
of these are placed in the Edinburgh Museum of Science and Art.
On leaving the Buttertubs, the general features of the beds 
forming the fell-tops were described.
Liunasit (misspelt Lovely Seat 
by Phillips and others since) consists of the three lower subdivisions 
of the Kinder Scout Grit, which retain their several characteristics 
over a very large area in this part.
Nearer Wensleydale the chief fell-tops visible on the way ^vere 
named and their geological composition briefly referred to.
When 
the party were sufficiently near to Wensleydale to see the broader 
features of the dale itself, Mr. Goodchild gave some account of the 
origin of the remarkable scars and terraces of limestone seen there.
He showed that their present form does not admit of explanation by 
ordinary subaerial denudation, while it is exactly of the nature that 
would result from prolonged glacial action.
The subject is more 
fully dealt with in the Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc. for Fel).
1S75 (read 
in June 1874), pp.
71 et seq.; Geol Mag., Dec. ii, vol.
i and 2 ; and 
Trans.
C umb.
and West.
Assoc, No, xi (1887X pp.
J 55 et seq.
July iSqx.
208 NOTES CLIMATOLOGY.
At Simonstone most of the naturalists deviated from the Hawes 
road to examine Hardra Fors; and thus terminated the very pleasant 
excursion to Swaledale.
— W.D.R.
NOTES— CLIMATOLOGY.
Ferns in the Frost,^ — I have been a grower of ferns for 30 years, and never 
knew our out-of-door native species suffer as much as they did in the frost at the 
end of May this year.
One plant, Lastrea rigida^ was completely demoralised, 
hung its fronds, and its unrolled croziers drooped to the ground.
Even Lastrea 
dilatata suffered much.
Both these ferns were in northern aspects, and both are 
hardy ferns found in sub-alpine districts, the last a most common fern, Lastrea 
rigida, whose home is Ingleborough, one would think had got acclimatised, and 
heedless of cold weather.
— John Emmet, Boston Spa, June ist, 1891.
[It is, fortunately, not often that this country experiences such severe frosts as 
the one named, in the latter end of May ; hence it is equally seldom that our out- 
of-door native ferns are called upon to submit to such unusual terms.
The usual 
periods for frost occur before the ferns have either grown their fronds or even 
thrown up their 'croziers,' It is quite certain that with a temperature several 
degrees below freezing point at the end of May, ail young vegetation must, and 
did suffer.
— Eds. Nat,] 
Unseasonable Weather in Mid-May (Staveley near Boroug-hbridge).-— 
Whit-Sunday, May 17th, 189 1, will be long remembered in Central Yorkshire for 
its unreasonable weather.
On the two preceding days there had been hailstones, 
a few flakes of snow had also fallen ; but these hardly prepared one for what was 
to follow.
Whilst experiencing the heat of the previous Monday, Tuesday, and 
Wednesday, when the thermometer ranj;ed between jo"" and 80° in the shade, it 
would have been difficult to believe that in four short days the face of the country 
would be wrapped in a veil of snow.
Yet so it came to pass.
Early on Whit- 
Sunday afternoon snow began to fall, and in a couple of hours it covered the 
ground to the depth of three inches.
* Winter lingering chills the lap of May,* 
sang the poet long ago of another land, but here in our own land in the ' merry 
month of May * was the same untoward visitor lingering.
During the progress of the storm one was struck with many anomalies caused 
by the unseasonable weather.
Pastures, which but now delighted the eye with 
the brightness of their vernal hues, became draped in purest white.
One heard.
the W^iilow Wren singing in the snow-clad larch, and noted the Swallows flying 
among the falling flakes, while Starlings and Blackbirds, as they passed to and 
fro feeding their young, appeared bewildered.
One saw, too, the bright green of 
the mountain-ash heavily coated with snow, the delicate young foliage of the birch 
becoming gradually white, the thorn trees, which in some seasons would have 
been laden with a cataract of blossom, now bending under the snows of winter; 
bright-hued pansies, yellow-bloomed allisum and rock white, being gradually 
buried beneath the all-spreading shroud, whilst from out the mantle of snow which 
concealed its foliage, peeped the pink blossom of the apple.
Truly these were 
incongruous sights, but more sad scenes were destined to meet the eye on the 
morrow.
The twelve degrees of fiost which followed in the night filled up * the 
measure of our grief,' and completed * the winter of our discontent.' 
Writing a month after the event, the damage caused by the storm has become 
apparent.
It is sad to mark the havoc which has been wrought among the fruit 
and garden crops, and to see the blighted foliage — brown as in autumn— of the 
beech.
A portion of the foliage of the horse-chesnut and the larch appears as if 
scorched by a sudden blast.
The oak is but now timidly putting forth its leaves.
Here and there an ash shows signs of life, the lateral buds breaking forth to replace 
the destroyed terminals.
The walnut trees, standing up among the summer foliage 
of the sycamore and hornbeam, still as bare and gaunt as whcjn held in the grip of 
winter, lend a weird look to the landscape.
In the hedgerow the privet and 
bramble have suffeied, and the flower-buds of the roan-tree, laburnum, and 
sycamore have fallen unopened.
— E.
P. Knukley, Staveley Rectory, Leeds, 
17th June, 1891.
Natural!?
t 
209 
BIRD-NOTES FROM NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
MARCH, APRIL, MAY, 1891.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes ^ Ulceby^ Lincolnshire.
Plectrophanes nivalis.
Snow Bunting.
March 12th.
Last 
seen, a considerabe Iflock, amongst them being many very 
white-plumaged birds.
Querquedula crecca.
Teal.
I was shown a cock Teal, shot in 
February, and since set up, in which the black on the throat 
was much more pronounced and extended than is usual, as is 
the case also with some Wicreon.
Fuligula ferina.
Pochard.
March 19th.
On Croxby Lake on 
the North Wolds to-day were ten common Pochard, and of these 
six were adult males, and four immature males and one female 
Scaup swimming amongst them.
Motacilla alba.
White Wagtail.
April ist.
Saw owq early 
this morning on the lawn, also a pair of Pied Wagtails.
Charadrius pluvialis.
Golden Plover.
April nth.
Large 
flocks in summer plumage up to this date in the marshes; one 
flock numbered between three and four hundred; none seen 
after this.
Corvus cornix.
Grey Crow.
April nth to 13th.
Up to this 
time seen daily in very considerable numbers; they left the 
district to a bird between these dates.
Wind northerly, light.
Regulus cristatus.
Golden-crested Wren.
April nth.
Several seen near the coast on the spring migration.
Hirundo rustica.
Swallow.
April 12th, first seen, many on 
April 17th, and again on May 4th, 
Cuculus canorus.
Cuckoo.
April 28th.
Wind south, many 
heard calling at early morning.
Tringa canutus.
Knot.
April 28th.
Flock of one to two 
hundred, chiefly grey birds ; some slightly suffused with red 
underneath, and one in full summer plumage with bright 
chestnut under parts.
Other flocks, in a more advanced stage 
of change to summer plumage, were seen by me during the 
month on the Humber muds, and some very handsome birds on 
the 30th ; last seen on May 5th.
Saxicola oenanthe.
Wheatear.
May 4th.
There was a very 
large arrival of small migrants on this date, the hedges and fields 
July 1891.
O 
2IO CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE.
swarming with them.
Those chiefly observed were Wheatears, 
. WhinchatSj Whitethroats, Willow Wrens, and Yellow Wagtails ; 
also Swallows and Martins.
^ 
Numenius phaeopus.
WhimbreL May 5th, first seen — much 
below the average number during the month.
* 
Eudromias morinellus.
Dotterel.
May roth.
Atrip of about 
two hundred of these handsome spring visitors on the ' fitties ' in 
Stallinbrough parish, on the evening of the loth, wind north, and 
heavy rain for twenty-four hours : on the following morning 
they had collected in a marsh pasture adjoining the Humber 
embankment, a place where Dotterel appear every year in May.
My informant, a shepherd, who is very well acquainted wuth 
these birdSj and has often in other years given me information 
as to their whereabouts, says they were very tame, and that he 
rode his horse amongst them.
He had never seen so many 
before at once, and that there were fully two hundred, if not 
more.
He had seen from twenty-five to thirty, but more 
frequently small ' trips' from ten to twenty.
Scolopax rusticola.
Woodcock.
The young were hatched 
off early in May in a locality in North Lincolnshire, where 
many breed each year.
About thirty couples nested in 1890 
in a comparatively circumscribed area, where they are most 
strictly preserved and looked after.
These, both old and young, 
are supposed to have left the district early in October.
1 
Cypselus apus.
Swift.
May 15th, first seen; also the Lesser 
Whitethroat {Sylvia cumud).
Sylvia salicaria.
Garden Warblen May 20th, first heard 
singing.
Squatarola helvetica.
Grey Plover.
May 23rd, Some in 
complete summer plumage on the coast ; have been fairly 
numerous throughout the month- 
Limosa lapponica.
Bar-tailed Godwit May 23rd, last 
seen — nine very fine birds in red plumage on the coast.
These 
were eagerly boring in the ooze and extracting sandworms.
Totanus calidris- Redshank.
May 23rd.
Several pairs seen 
in a wild natural spot which they appear to have quite recently 
adopted as nesting quarters.
I watched them for sorne time 
wheeling and drifting to and fro with drooping wings, all the 
time uttering a call quite distinct from their ordinary alarm 
note.
Frequently they flew up quite close, their complaining, 
monotonous plaint never ceasing for a moment.
Naturalist, 
211 
SOME NOTES ON THE WHITE WAGTAIL.
Rev. H.
a. MACPHERSON, M.A., M.B.O.U., Etc., 
Author of the ' Visitation of Pallas s Sand-Gronsc to Scotland,'' etc.
My friend Mr. F.
B. Whitlock has asked me to supplement his 
notes on the White Wagtail {Motadlla alba), and I gladly accede 
to his request.
My experience, however, of the species in England 
relates solely to observations upon migratory birds in April and 
September; except, indeed that I have seen the species apparently 
interbreeding with the common Pied WagtaiL As Mr. Seebohm 
pointed out some years ago, this species can at all times be dis- 
tinguished by its grey upper tail coverts ; but I did not shoot the 
bird that was apparently paired to a Pied Wagtail.
We, in the 
North-West of England, consider the White Wagtail a scarce spring 
visitant, observed on migration almost every year, generally alone or 
in company with other individuals of its own species.
The stay of 
such birds is generally limited to a few days.
My predecessor, the 
late Mr. T.
C Heysham, was perhaps the first man to detect the 
species in Cumberland, in the month of April 1842 ; and he met 
with a second specimen in April 1848.
I am not aware that he met 
with the species in autumn, and though large numbers of Pied 
Wagtails appear at that season on the Solway, I have only once 
observed the White Wagtail at that season in Cumberland, though 
I possess the skin of a second autumn-killed bird, shot by the late 
Blackett Greenwell.
Mr. Whitlock quotes a remark of mine that it has always appeared 
to me that the call-note of the White Wagtail 'is softer and less 
incisive than that of the Pied Wagtail.' To this I still adhere ; and 
though my ear may be less correct than that of some of my friends, 
I have really no misgiving as to the difference between the call-notes 
of the two species.
The White Wagtail has occurred to me in Xorway, and in 
different parts of France, in Holland, in Spain and Germany.
Its 
nesting habits are very similar to, if not indeed identical with, those 
of the Pied Wagtail.
One pair that I noticed daily a few weeks 
3go, had a[)parently a nest in the wall of a village church.
The male 
bird was pugnacious in driving away other small birds from the 
immediate vicinity.
In Germany I found nests in holes in walls, 
in roots of trees, and one on a shelf in a tool-house.
I never 
happened to find a nest in Switzeriand, but we observed young 
birds being fed by their parents as late as the month of September, 
^nd these no doubt were a second brood.
July 1891.
212 NOTES AND NEWS 
I should say that White AVagtails as a rule associate very little 
with other species, but I once saw a family party in company with 
a Wryneck.
Perhaps the latter was an uninvited guest ; at any rate, 
he was very busily engaged in catching ants, and the group of old 
and young Wagtails gracefully posed around him made up a very 
pretty Httle picture.
That occurred early in July, in the neighbour- 
hood of the Upper Rhine.
There, as elsewhere in Central Europe, 
the White Wagtail was a common bird, and often enlivened the 
country roads with its cheery presence.
It may be fancy, but it has 
sometimes struck me, that the White Wagtail subsists upon flies to 
a much greater extent than the Pied Wagtail; and perhaps it is also 
more partial to perching on buildings than our common bird.
I do not 
remember, either, having seen the Pied Wagtail feeding on the refuse 
of farm-yards, which often attracts the White Wagtail to search for 
insects.
The continental bird always seems to me to be the daintier 
species, less robust perhaps than our home bird, a trifle slighter in 
make, and more graceful in carriage.
But the two species are so 
closely related that it is really unsafe to discriminate too nicely 
between their relative characteristics.
Nor should it be forgotten 
that the habits of most birds are modified by circumstances.
I have 
never yet met with the Pied Wagtail upon the Continent.
Had 
I done so, it would have been easier to compare the habits of the 
two species with absolute certainty.
But the Pied Wagtail has, of 
course, a much less extensive range on the Continent than the 
White Wagtail, which one meets with almost everywhere in the 
plains and valleys, and up to at least 5,000 ft.
in the mountains,- 
though the Grey Wagtail to a considerable extent replaces the White 
species on the rivers of elevated districts, as in the Puy de Dome- 
country.
NOTES AND NOTES, 
The paper on * Some Physical Properties of Coal,' which our friend Mr. Benj.- 
Holgate, F.G.S., of Leeds, read in abstract at the Leeds meeting of the British 
Association, has now been printed in the Proceedings of the Yorkshire Geological' 
and Polytechnic Society for 1890, from which a reprint lies before us.
The British Post Office has at last given way on a matter which affects the 
dispatch of small parcels of scientific specimens abroad.
At the May meeting of 
the P^ntomological Society of London was read a letter which Lord Walsingham 
had received from^ Sir Arthur Blackwood, the Secretary of the Post Office, in 
answer to a memorial which had been submitted to ihe Postmaster-General, asking, 
that small- parcels of the kind mentioned might be sent to places abroad at the 
reduced rates of postage applicable to packets of bona-fide trade patterns and 
samples.
The letter intimated that, so far as the English Post Office was con- 
cerned, scientific specimens sent by sample post to places abroad would not be 
stopped in future.
Naturalist,.
213 
NOTES AND NEWS, 
In the Mineralogical Magazine, No. 43, is a brief note, with hgure, on 'Twins 
of Marcasite in regular disposition upon Cubes of Pyrites,' by Dr. C.
O. 
Trechmann, F.G.S., of Hartlepool.
England and Sweden still retain the pre-eminence as to priority of institution 
Egon Ihne of Friedberg 
logischen Beobachtungen in Deutschland ' (28 Eericht d.
Oberhess.
Ges. f.
Nat.- 
und Keil.
zu Giessen), in which he establishes the right of Gottfried Reyger to be 
regarded as the pioneer of phonological observers in Germany, his observations 
made at Danzig dating back to 1767, the next earliest being those of von Schmoger 
in 1774 at Regensburg, and of Eisenlohr in 1779 at Carlsruhe.
Mr. Tuffen West, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., who was so well known as a natural 
history and microscopical draughtsman, died on the 19th of March, at his residence, 
Furnell House, Frensham, in the 68th year of his age.
He was a nativeof 
Leeds, where he was born in 1823.
lie early evinced a taste for science, which 
tirst manifested itself in an osteological direction, and by the time he was fifteen 
years old he had set up at least a hundred complete skeletons of various creatures.
He was brought up to the medical profession, but in later life devoted himself to 
microscopy and natural history.
He was of the Society of Friends, and appre- 
ciative notices of him are to be found in the Natural History Journal (York) and 
in the International Journal of Microscopy (Bath) for May.
The first printed report of the Manchester Museum has just been issued.
It includes, by way of introduction, a brief history of the Museum, and an account 
of the various collections which go to form its nucleus in addition to what remains 
of the collections formerly in the hands of the Manchester Natural History 
Society.
This is followed by the Report of the Keeper of the :Museum (Mr. W.
E. 
Hoyle, M.A., F.R.S.E.), for the Session 1889-90, showing a large amount of work 
accomplished by himself and his various assistants, viz., Messrs.
J. Ray Hardy, 
F. G.
Pearcey, and Herbert Bolton, Assistant Keepers, and Messrs.
Thos.
Hick, 
B.A., B.Sc., R.
Assheton, B.A., and Bernard Hobson, M.Sc, the Lecturers m 
Botany, Zoology, and Geoloiry respectively at the Owens College, under the con- 
trol of which institution the ^luseum is.
Manchester is to be congratulated upon 
having so efficient a staff of active workers in connection with its Museum.
The Rev. E.
Maule Cole sends us an interesting note on Bird-talk.
He 
remarks that the power of imitation is very great in some birds.
No respectatjie 
Parrot would think of holding its tongue after attaining its majority, say, at the 
age of two.
Therefore, much depends on the atmosphere of its surroundmgs.
Parrots have been known to scold, and to use very bad language, having only too 
faithfully represented the sounds which reached their observant ears.
But 2S 
a rule they are taught to speak more or less politely, and it is a marvel how, wiUi 
perhaps a dozen phrases at command, they often use the right one at the right 
moment, as if endowed with some degree of intelligence.
Certainly they possess 
an association of ideas, for the other day Mr. Cole was imitating the miew o( a cat, 
when the Parrot called out ' Puss, Puss.' Many will remember the amusing story ot 
how a young man was making love to a housemaid, when a parrot, unseen, callecl 
out in a shrill voice, 'Who kissed the cook.' The indignant maiden discharged 
her lover on the spot.
Starlings, too, have been trained to speak One in tin 
West Riding used to say *a pint/ 'I shan't pay/ 'twenty pound for Tommy.
Bullfinches, Robins, and Linnets have been known to whistle popular airs witli 
perfection.
But a Sparrow !
Who ever heard a Sparrow talk ?
Well, Air.
^oie 
has.
He was visiting at a house near York this year when he was astonished by 
hearing a Sparrow call out, with dear and ringing tones.
Tommy, -l^^iyj^y' 
kiss me, kiss me.' 'Tommy, kiss me, kiss me, kiss me, kiss me.
The efforts ot 
th|s clever little bird seem not unworthy of notice in the * ^aturahst.
July iSgt.
214 
NO TES—ORNITHOLOG K 
Two Cuckoo's Egg's in one nest.
— A case of the above has occurred near 
Louth this year.
The nest, that of a Pied Wagtail {JMotacilla higithris)^ was in 
a chalk-pit, and was found by me to contain, on June i8th, two Cuckoo [Ctiatlus 
canorus) s eggs only, of which I took one.
On June 22nd I again visited the nest, 
and found it deserted, containing only the egg I had left, — E.
Larder, 33, 
Mercer Row, Louth, June 23rd, 189 1.
Hooded Crow on Board Ship, — On June 2nd, when the Orlando s.s.
(Gothenburg to Hull) was off the coast of Denmark, a Hooded Crow [Corvus 
cor7iix) came on board.
Finding it was too far for him to make to land again, he 
remained quite contentedly on the ship till our arrival off the Humber on June 4th.
Occasionally, when either passenger or sailor approached him too curiously, he 
would take a short flight round the vessel, otherwise he did not appear to be at all 
embarrassed at his somewhat pecuh'ar position.
— E.
T. I^ALrnviN, London, S.W., 
June 22nd, 1 89 1.
Turtle Dove near Robin Hood's Bay.— Although the Turtle Dove {Ttirtur 
co7nnmnis) cannot be considered a rare visitor to East Yorkshire, it is sufficiently 
uncommon to make it advisable that all occurrences should be recorded.
Walking 
from Cloughton to Robin Hood's Bay on the 13th inst., I called on 
Mr. William Lickley, the station-master at Peak, who is an amateur taxi- 
dermist.
He told me that he had a strange bird which had been shot at 
Peak a few days previously.
I went with him to his house, and found the 
bird to be a Turtle Dove.
It was obtained under the following circum- 
stances:— On the and inst.
Mr. William Hodgson, a farmer at Peak, went 
out with his gim to shoot a pigeon.
Passing by a small fir plantation he saw 
what he took to be two young pigeons, one of which he shot ; the other 
flew away.
Seeing that he had obtained a strange bird he took it to Mr. Lickley, 
who mounted it, and it was still in the wrappings when I saw it.
It seems a pity 
that the bird was shot, as there were apparently a pair of them, and they might 
have bred, or perhaps were breeding, in the neighbourhood.
Since writing the foregoing I have received a letter from Mr. Lickley, who 
writes : — ' I have been informed by another farmer in this locality that he has seen 
the Turtle Dove up here three times during the last few years, at rare intervals, but 
has never obtained one.'— Edgar R.
Watte, The Museum, Leeds, June 18th, 1891.
Birds and Snow in May {Goathland).— Whilst on the moors near 
Goathland on the 17th ult., in company with Mr. E.
G. Potter of this city, we 
noticed the strange evolutions of the Lapwings ( Vancllus vitlgai'is) referred to by 
Mr.^ E.
R. Waite as having been noticed by him on the same day near Harrogate 
during the memorable snowstorm, viz., flying restlessly about, and at last ascending 
to such a height that they became lost to the view, but long after their wnld 
and plaintive cries were plainly audible apparently from a great height.
The 
Grouse ( Lagopiis scoticus) too, seemed very uneasy, and were constantly getting on 
the wing, and then, after a short flight, settling down again.
I noticed they 
always uttered their peculiarly harsh cry on rising, and frequently, but not always, 
on settling down.
I may just add that our point of vantage was the shelter 
afforded by the thick foliage of a fine Holly tree, situate in a small wood rising up 
from the stream side, and which commanded a splendid view of the moor stretching 
away for miles ; and that the other birds of interest seen during the day were the 
Curlew {Nuvienins arqtiata).
Lapwing {Vanelhts vulgaris).
Golden Plover 
{Charadrhts plnvialis).
Snipe {Gallimigo calestis).
Sandpiper (Tringo'ides hypo- 
ieticos), and Ring Ouzel (Tierdzts torquatus), and all these were breeding.
At the 
commencement of the snowstorm, and just after, we repeatedly heard the 
melodious call of the Cuckoo (Cztailus camvits), truly out of place at'such a time, 
and saw numerous birds ; one which I examined had two of the wing feathers 
of each wing marked just like those of the Kestrel.
The bird was a male, and 
had been shot owing to its destroyer having mistaken it for a Hawk.
An autopsy 
which I afterwards held upon the defunct revealed the fact that the bird had been 
eating the larvae of some hairy species, probably Arctia fidiginosa or Chelonia 
plantaginis.
The eggs of the Merlin [Fako ivsalon) are taken annually, and my 
informant told me that he obtained a high price for them.— WiLi lAM HeuetT, 
12, Howard Street.
Fulford Road, York, June r4th, i8or.
NAUirali-t 
215 
SOME 
WORD-PICTURES TAKEN FROM NATURE 
Rev. W.
C. HEV, M.A., 
P'lCar of Si. OlaveSy York ; President of the Cone ho log- tea I Section of the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union ; ajui Vice-President of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, 
Descriptions of natural scenery, whether in prose or poetry, have 
nearly always disappointed me.
They are not, as a rule, perfectly 
accurate, and are consequently unsatisfactory to a close observer.
The explanation of this is simple — they have been written from 
memory.
They are the records of impressions^ not observations.
These short word-pictures have just this one merit — they were taken 
out of doors and on the spot ; they are verbal photographs.
April 26tHj 1890.
In Saltburn Glen.
Above, the north-west wind sweeps fiercely over the fields, but 
down here in the deep glen, it scarcely waves the slender wood- 
anemones, nor stirs the ivy that clings to the alders.
All the steep 
bank before me is a pale green mist — young leaves of hawthorn and 
willow and honeysuckle.
Near at hand the ground is covered with 
dog-mercury, with here and there a tuft of the great drooping wood- 
sedge or a pale pink spike of water colt's-foot.
Behind me, a low 
swamp is all on fire with the broad golden blossoms of Caltha — suns 
that almost shame the soft moonshine of the coy primroses which 
nestle among the dead leaves and dry stalks of last year.
Here and 
there a blue eye of the wood forget-me-not peeps forth, only 
beginning to open ; but up above, through the branches of the 
flowering ashes and the still sleeping oaks, the whin is in all its full 
glory, and its peculiar scent comes sifting now and again along the 
air.
That graceful grass, Melica tmiflora^ has shot up its green 
spears through the fingered anemone leaves, but the panicle scarcely 
appears.
Adoxa, shiest of all shy flowers, reveals its inconspicuous 
crown of flowers where the shelter is closest, and on a damp and 
shady bank, spreads a reach of golden Saxifrage.
The alder tree 
on which I sit and write has fallen across the noisy stream ; its trunk 
is held in a perfect network of ivy branches, and on this the silver- 
grey lichens have laid their intricate lacework.
Near the root a few 
fronds of Polypody have found a precarious home.
Sep. 20th, 1890.
Danes' Dvke (North End).
I am lying by a stile under shelter of the great grassy end of 
Danes' Dyke, a fresh south-east breeze blowing, a warm and sunny 
wind, p utting a thousand little snowy crests upon the ripples of 
July tSqt.
2i6 hey: some word-pictures taken from nature.
a brilliant satiny green-blue sea, with great purple patches on its 
surface.
The horizon ends vaporously.
A few white clouds of very 
irregular shapes float in a pale blue sky.
Now and again I hear the 
sea-gulls cry, and a few birds appear above the clifiF; with snowy 
breasts and dark wings.
By me the thistles shake silvery plumes 
against the sea; dried stems of Holcus tremble in the wind; flies 
settle upon them with great brown eyes ; hundreds of little gnats flit 
in the sunshine; now and again the buzz of larger insects goes by.
Behind me is a sheep pasture, a faded field with dark masses of gorse.
The sheep are feeding so busily that they are silent, but the waves 
below are clamorous, a seething, and a perpetual roaring beneath 
the seething, both continuous and unvarying at this height.
May 24TH, 1890.
In Sheriff Hutton Park.
I am sitting on a swinging oak branch — one of those great old 
trees which are considered to be relics of the Forest of Galtres.
It 
is a day of pale blue sky, and hot sunshine, with a strong north-east 
wind fresh and cool, rushing through the young leaves.
The oaks 
are in their tenderest foliage, which, in to-day's strong light, is more 
gold than green.
The shadows of the leaves still twinkle individually 
on the grass.
At hand are some horse-chestnuts in bloom.
They 
have quite a glaucous effect against the oaks.
The castle jackdaws 
are chattering.
Piles and piles of may crowd the hedges ; I never 
saw it so profuse, and its idle scent fills the air.
The view over the 
great vale of York is full of refreshment — unbroken, save by the 
dimly-seen towers of the ]Minster.
Once these quiet fields saw other 
scenes, for the great pasture through which I have just walked is full 
of entrenchments from end to end.
To-day I saw no living thing in 
it but a swarm ^f turquoise-bodied dragon-flies {Agrions) darting 
about a marshy spot where Rannncuhts sceleratus was spreading its 
glossy leaves.
Nov. 4TH, 1890.
At Redcar.
I have walked from Redcar by sand-hills and sands, and climbed 
up a steep sandy bank, crowned with the glaucous tufts of 
Ammophila.
All along the red boulder clay beneath the sand-hills 
has been washed clean by a stormy tide,' and here and there great 
boulders appear, inscribed with their history, just as experiences 
leave a mark on human character.
A soft west wind blows very, 
very feebly ; the sea is low, but the tides are neap.
Near me the 
colour is a very pale pearly blue.
Long regular waves are breaking, 
the foam very white in the low sunshine ; for though it is but two 
o'clock, the faint shadow of the cliff" reaches far out on the level 
sands.
Where a stream has broken through the cliff, the sunligh t 
Naturalist, 
HEY: SOME WORD PICTURES TAKEN FROM NATURE- 217 
falls in a long shaft on the shore.
Not far off" rises the little gray 
church, in whose yard is the unmarked grave of Cook's father.
The 
sands are lonely— only a distant figure on either hand — very uniform 
too ; a thin broken line of sea-coal and a few blackened stalks of 
Laminaria mark high-water line.
I have gathered a handful of late 
poppies in a field near.
Their full bright scarlet looks strange 
amid these pallid November tints, as sometimes the sun sets crimson 
when the earth is wrapt in winter snows.
For all the bright tiny 
flowers that deck these sandy hollows in such numbers — purple 
astragalus, pink thyme, and yellow lotus — are over.
Only a few 
blooms of the white variety of the storksbill linger on in nooks that 
catch the sun's full warmth.
May 4TH, 1S91.
Avton.
My feelings in leaving the plain for this breezy hill may be com- 
pared to those of a fly which has just crawled up the side of a milk 
jug mto which it had fallen, and now stands drying its wings on the 
rim.
On my way up, I passed a quantity of green hellebore, 
flourishing under the shelter of an old stone wall.
The bright green 
flowers contrast beautifully with the young leaves, which are at 
present of a deep vinous purple tint, reminding one of Sophocles' 
oivujTra KiQ-a-ov.
The view from this hill, inconsiderable as it is, is 
quite surprising.
Immediately at my left opens the mouth of Forge 
Valley.
Close to the river are groups of alder, wearing a very red 
tinge just before the opening of the leaf.
Higher up, a few larches 
shine out^ dressed in their spring emerald.
Beyond extend the 
brown reaches of Seamer Moor, crowned with its round beacon 
tower.
Before me stretches the long vale of Pickering, where the 
^vhite srnoke of many trains rising above plantations of dark pines 
niarks the route of the railway line.
For some little distance the 
course of the Derwent may be distinguished by the tail stiff alders 
that line its banks — that curious devious river which seems to have 
shrunk from the embrace of Neptune just when he was prepared to 
receive her.
I suppose the real explanation of the Derwent's inland 
flight is the massing of a great ice-barrier near Filey, damming up the 
water and so forcing the river to break itself a way through the 
Howardian Hills.
Above the vale rises the long swelling range of 
the wolds, ribbed here and there, like a giant carcase, with many 
^hite roads.
At their base many villages are visible, venerable from 
their antiquity.
I can never look at these chalk hills without a vision 
of those ancient peoples that lived and laboured, hunted and fought, 
and at last died and were buried upon them — whose arrows and axes 
^hejarmer's plough and the drainer's spade turn up in such numbers, 
i^iy 1891.
2t8 swaledale plants.
whose quiet grassy graves unscrupulous science rummages to fill an 
antiquary's cabinet or stock a provincial museum.
There is no more 
pathetic picture in the universe than man's early struggle with 
nature — the slow-developing triumph of brain-force over brute-force 
That it is no very long time since wild animals constituted a danger 
to human life, I am reminded by the sight of Fhxton Wold just 
opposite me, where once stood a refuge for the escape of travellers 
pursued by wolves.
Beyond the last soft swell of the hill, the giant cliffs of Speeton 
rise, a ghostly Une of precipices.
The sun will fall upon them in the 
evening, and then they will shine forth bright and clear; now in 
shade, they appear strangely dim and mysterious, almost unsubstantial, 
and as if they might melt away like a cloud; not Hke the barrier 
that even resisted the onward march of the great glacier of the North 
Sea, and turned its course aside till it met with the lower ground of 
Flamborough Head, The hard stern reahties of life sometimes 
conceal their true character as effectually as these massive cliffs, and 
then surprise us by all at once revealing their inflexible rigidity.
Almost at my feet rises a crumbling ruin, as eloquent of human 
perishableness as yonder cliffs of Nature's endurance.
A fragment, 
I understand, this old building is of the Ever's family mansion; its 
former extent is proved by masses of ruin and the foundations of 
walls, now mantled by the thick turf.
An elder-tree has rooted 
deeply in the stone-work of a narrow window.
And while its fibres 
are loosening the mortar and preparing the stones for their fall, its 
spreading branches seem to proclaim and predict Nature's triumph 
over this old relic of human greatness.
JVOTJS— BOTANY.
Swaledale Plants.
— For reasons [serious illness] given in my report of the 
Swaledale excursion, I have been unable to reply sooner to the very courteous 
criticisms on my plant-list by Mr. Whitweli, which appeared in * TheNaturalist ' for 
Oct. 1890, p.
305, An equally courteous letter to almost exactly the same effect was 
sent me by Mr. J.
Gilbert Baker a short time before the appearance of Mr. Whit- 
weli's letter referred to.
All I can say in reply is that nearly the whole of my 
energies for several years were devoted to the working-out of the many very difficult 
geological problems with which it was my official duty to deal in the Swaledale 
and adjoining areas.
Plant collecting was a mere recreation, and I have never 
taken it up seriously, either then or since.
For this reason it is more than likely 
that my critics are right and I am wrong as regards some of the species called^ in 
question.
But with all deference to the opinion of such competent authorities, 
1 still cherish the belief that I correctly identified and recorded the remainder.
Mr.
^Vhit well's letter will do good by showing others what to look for, and also 
how to criticise when occasion for criticism arises.
— ^J.
G.GooDCHlLD, Edinburgh, 
June 6th, 1891.
Naturalist, 
219 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
29th ANNUAL REPORT, for 1890, 
The Executive, in presenting the 29th Annual Report and Statement 
of Accounts, have to congratulate the members upon a year of 
steady and continued progress and of satisfectory work, whether as 
regards the value of the Union's publicationSj the interest maintained 
m its excursions, or the amount of work done by the various 
Committees appointed for special research.
The Meetings which have been held during the year have 
been five in number, one for each division of the county, the places 
and dates having been as follows: — 
May 26th, Whit-Monday, Driffield for Lowthorpe.
June 14th, Saturday, Dewsbury for Bretton Park.
July 8th, Tuesday, Kildale-in-Cleveland.
Aug. 2nd to 4th, Saturday to Bank Holiday Monday, Upper Swaledale 
(Gunnerside, Kisdon, and Keld).
Sept, nth, Thursday, Malham and Gordale (in connection with the 
meeting of the British Association in Leeds).
For each of these meetings the usual descriptive circular^ which 
is so conducive to the convenience of members and associates under- 
taking the day's explorations, was issued, and at all the meetings 
good results were achieved.
The opening meeting, fixed for the investigation of the picturesque 
little valley down which flows the famous trout stream, with Driffield 
as the actual place of meeting, was the means of introducing members 
to a district of the East Riding which the Union has never before 
visited.
On this occasion the Union met with the utmost kindness 
on the part of one of its members, Mr. W.
H. St. Quintin, over whose 
l^roperty the route lay.
At the meeting the chair was occupied by 
Mr. N, F.
Dobree, F.RS., President of the Entomological Section, 
and before leaving Driffield a visit was paid to Mr. Mortimer's well- 
arranged and most interesting museum.
The second excursion was held in June, at Dewsburj^, and the 
districts visited were Bretton Park, Coxley Valley, and BuHcliffe 
Wood.
The arrangements were admirably made by Messrs.
P. F.
Lee 
and Chas.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., the latter of whom, in his capacity of 
President of the Botanical Section, presided at the meeting.
Some 
interesting observations were made during the day, and the only 
regret is that, in a place so conveniently accessible to the great body 
of members and associates, the attendance was not more than an 
average one.
H'x 
July iBqx 
2 20 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL REPORT.
• 
The third meeting was arranged for July, for the investigation of 
Kildale, a picturesque and sequestered little valley in the Cleveland 
Hills.
Thanks to the local knowledge and excellent arrangements 
made by the Middlesbrough members, the excursion was more than 
usually productive of good results, especially to the conchologists, 
entomologists, and botanists, the investigations of the two latter 
sections being instrumental in discovering a lepidopterous insect new 
to the county list and a plant additional to the North Riding flora.
The meeting was for convenience held at }^Iiddlesbrough, the chair 
being occupied by Dn W.
Y. Veitch, the President of the Cleveland 
Naturalists' Field Club.
The August Bank Holiday excursion was devoted to Upper 
Swaledale, and the district being much too inaccessible for a single 
day's excursion, the observations were extended over three days, as 
was done in Teesdale in the preceding year.
There was a fair 
attendance of members, and the Union was particularly fortunate in 
having the presence of Mr. J.
G. Goodchild, F.G.S., by whom the 
whole of the district had been geologically surveyed.
His able 
guidance and genial company made the excursion one that will be 
recalled with pleasure by all who joined in it The chair of the 
meeting, which was held at Muker, was occupied by the Rev. R.
V. 
Taylor, B.A., the Vicar of Melbecks.
The closing meeting of the year was one arranged in connection 
with the Leeds meedng of the British Association, and by the 
kindness of an old member of the Union, Mr. Walter Morrison, M.P., 
was held at Malham.
The meeting was a successful one, and was 
well attended, both by members of the British Association and of 
the Union.
Mr. C.
P. Hobkirk presided at the meeting, which was 
very short, the usual sectional reports being omitted.
On all these occasions the Union has been indebted to the 
unvarying kindness with which Yorkshire landowners facilitate 
scientific research on their estates, and the opportunities granted by 
the various railway companies whose lines run through Yorkshire 
contribute their share to promoting the success of the Union's 
investigations.
The Societies which constitute the Union are now thirty-nine 
in number, as against forty last year.
Two small societies, numbering 
eighteen members between them, have ceased to exist, viz., the 
^Middlesbrough Junior Naturalists' Club, whose members now join 
in the work of the Cleveland Club, and the Practical Naturalists' 
Society, whilst another Society of thirty members, the Leeds 
Y.M.C.A. Naturalists' Club, withdrew from the Union at the begin- 
ning of the year.
On the other hand, two new Societies have been 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL REPORT.
221 
admitted — the Scarborough Naturalists' Society with thirty-seven 
members, and the Ravensthorpe Naturahsts' Society with 124.
The statistics which the Secretaries of the various Societies 
have again been kind enough to furnish, show a slight increase in 
the number of Associates, the aggregate membership of the thirty- 
nine Societies now amounting to 2,580, an increase of sixty-three.
Adding to this the number of direct members, the total numerical 
strength of the Union is 3,010.
The Membership now stands at 430, an increase of twenty 
on the previous year.
During the year, 43 new members have been 
elected.
The Union has been unfortunate in losing by death several good 
supporters in Messrs.
Jas. Backhouse, F.L.S., Wm. Aldam, D.L., J.P., 
Edward Hailstone, F.S.A., John Grassham, Walter W.
Booth, 
Francis H.
Potter, and E.
B. Wrigglesworth, the latter of whom was 
at one time a Secretary of the Entomological Section.
The most 
serious loss has been that of a member of the Executive Committee 
in Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S., who had for several years been the 
life and soul of the Geological Section and a most energetic member 
of the committees concerned with geological research.
The Financial Position of the Union has been a subject of 
some anxiety to the Executive during the year, as the very heavy loss 
which the Union sustained in the matter of the publication of the 
West Yorkshire Flora and difficulty in recovering some of the 
arrears of subscriptions, have much embarrassed the l^easurer in 
paying off the Union's liabilities.
The number of copies of the 
Flora which are left in stock is quite sufficient to clear off the liability 
incurred for its publication, and members could do the Union good 
service by providing themselves with the work; but so long as the 
unsold copies remain in hand, the Union's work in publishing 
Transactions will be somewhat restricted.
Much credit is due to the various members who act as local 
Treasurers for the service which they render to the Union, many 
of them keeping the subscriptions in their district regularly and 
systematically collected, and thereby avoiding the accumulation of 
the arrears which in certain instances form so serious an incon- 
venience.
It is satisfactory to note the increasing number of members who 
^vail themselves of the convenient method of instructing their 
bankers to pay the subscription on its falling due.
The Publications of the Union have been as in former years.
The Transactions.— Part 14 was issued in September of this 
year^jmd was devoted to a Report by Mr. Robert Kidston, F.R.S.E.
JiiW 1891.
222 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ANNUAL REPORT.
on the Carboniferous Flora of Yorkshire, being the first of the 
reports prepared for the Union's Fossil Flora Committee.
The 
second of these reports is in course of preparation by Mr. Wm.
Cash, 
and will deal with the Flora of the Halifax Hard Bed.
Part i5j which is devoted to the continuation of Mr. J.
Gilbert 
+ 
Baker's ' North Yorkshire,' is now ready for issue to the members, 
and will very shortly be sent out.
All the sheets intended for inclusion in Part i6 are printed or in 
the printer's hands, and it is proposed to issue it about the middle 
or end of January next.
When this has been issued, the arrears in the publication of the 
Transactions, which have for some years been a source of anxious 
consideration to the Executive, will have been overcome, and it will 
afterwards be practicable to issue each part during the course of the 
year for which it is due.
The Library continues to increase by means of donations 
and exchanges, and is suitably accommodated in book-cases at the 
Leeds Mechanics' Institute.
The Sections of the Union have carefully carried on their 
work during the year, and it is to their efficient management that 
much of the success which attends the excursions has been 
attributable.
Committees of Research.
^ — This important feature of the 
Union's work has been further developed during the year by the 
appointment at the last annual meeting of three additional Com- 
mittees, all working in conjunction with similar ones of the British 
Association.
Of these new Committees, the one for collecting and recording 
Geological Photographs has worked with remarkable success, as was 
evidenced by their having contributed the larger portion of the 
excellent show of geological photographs which was exhibited at 
this year's meeting of the British Association, 
The Committee for collecting information as to the Disappearance 
of Plants from their old habitat, has also carried on its work with 
success, and contributed a larger number of facts to the report which 
Prof.
Hillhouse gave to the British Association this year.
The 
detailed Yorkshire report, compiled by Messrs.
C P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., 
and P.
F. Lee, has been published in 'The Xaturalist.' 
The Committee appointed for the investigation of the Crypto- 
gamic Flora and Invertebrate Fauna of the Freshwaters of 
Yorkshire has accumulated a number of intefesting facts, but has been 
unable to frame a report, from inabiHty to obtain from the British 
Association Committee copies of the necessary schedules- This 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ANNUAL REPORT.
223 
being mentioned at the British Association Meeting, the Yorkshire 
Committee was encouraged to frame a schedule of its own, and 
it is therefore to be hoped that in another year it will be in a 
favourable position for reporting good work in a most fascinating 
field of study.
Of the Committees of older standing, the Yorksl)ire Boulder 
Committee, which has during the past three years worked so 
energetically and successfully, has suffered most seriously by the 
decease of its secretary, Mr. S.
A. Adamson, but has nevertheless 
been able to report a considerable number of erratics, and to again 
occupy a prominent part of the report on Erratics given to the British 
Association.
The Yorkshire Fossil Flora Committee has also continued its 
investigations, the first portion of which is already in print, and the 
second instalment, which Mr. AV.
Cash, F.L.S., has in preparation, 
will include some observations of considerable interest bearing upon 
the flora of the Halifax Hard Bed.
The Yorkshire Marine Zoology Committee has no report to make, 
not having been able to prosecute active operations, probably owing 
in part to the Union not having had a coast excursion.
The Yorkshire Coast Erosion Committee has done something in 
the direction of recording facts bearing upon its subject, but is not 
prepared as yet to make any detailed report.
British Association.
— The Union has again been appointed 
one of the Corresponding Societies of the Association, and was 
represented at the meeting held in Leeds this year by the 
Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A., and Messrs.
C. P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., and 
Wm. Cash, F.L.s/ 
Life Membership.
— Your Executive having considered that 
it would materially benefit the Union to enrol a number of Life 
Members, the qualification being a donation not less in amount than 
Five Guineas, ventured to address themselves to a number of noble- 
men and gentlemen of the county or connected with it, and are 
pleased that the response has been gratifying.
Several Life Members 
have now been enrolled, and the Executive hope still further to 
increase the number.
The Presidency for next year (1S91) has been offered to and 
accepted by an old and distinguished member of the Union 
Prof.
A. H.
Green, M.A., F.R.S., of the University of Oxford.
In conclusion, your Executive have to place on record their 
sense of gratitude to the Lord Bishop of Wakefield for the honour 
which he has conferred upon the Union by his tenure of the 
presidency for the year which has now come to a close.
July 1892, 
/ 
224 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
ANNUAL MEETING AT HALIFAX.
The 29th Annual Meeting of the Union was held at Halifax on the 
iSth November, 1890.
Through the kindness of the Halifax 
Literary and Philosophical Society, the Lecture Theatre at the 
Museum, Harrison Road, was placed at the disposal of the Union 
for the purpose of holding its various meetings.
The Ackroyd 
Museum and Art Gallery, the Public Library at Belle Vue, and the 
Museum of the Literary and Philosophical Society were verj- 
generously thrown open throughout the day to members and associates 
of the Union.
J 
Halifax, and other local members of the Union, that tlie success of 
the meeting was due.
At three o'clock the various sections met in the rooms of the 
Museum for the purpose of electing their officers for the ensuing 
h 
year, and for the consideration of their annual reports.
An hour later the General Committee met in the Lecture Theatre 
of the same institution.
Fifteen societies were officially represented 
by delegates, and other six were unofficially represented by permanent 
members of the General Committee.
The attendance also included 
one ex-President (Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A.), all the Honorary Secretaries 
(Mr. Wm.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., Rev, E.
P. Knubley, M.A., and 
Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S.), six members of the Executive, one 
President and four Secretaries of Sections, three of the local 
Treasurers, and nine other permanent members of the General 
Committee, the total attendance being forty-seven.
The chair was occupied by the Chairman of the Executive 
(Mr. C- P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S.).
The minutes of the previous annual 
meeting were taken as read.
The 29th Annual Report (as printed 
on p.
219) was read by the Rev, E.
P. Knubley, M.A., one of the 
Hon. Secretaries, and on the motion of the Chairman^ seconded by 
Mr. J.
W. Davis, F.G.S., F.L.S., was unanimously adopted.
The Secretary then read the recommendation of the Executive 
that the excursions for 1891 be fixed for the following places, the 
selection of dates to be left for decision by the new Executive : 
South-East Yorkshire ...
Sledmere.
North-East „ .„ Ilayburn Wyke.
North- West „ ...
Leckby Carr.
Mid-West „ ...
Gisburn.
South- West ,, ...
Conisborough and Edlington Wood.
Some discussion took place with regard to the Mid-West Yorkshire 
excursion, and ultimately Grassington was substituted for Gisbur n^ 
Naturalist, 
n 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
225 
on the motion of Mr. J.
W. Davis, F.G.S., F.L.S., seconded by 
Jklr.
J. H.
Plowarth.
The amended programme was then adopted, 
on the motion of the Chairman, seconded by Mr. G.
T, Porritt, 
F.L.S., F.E.S.
The annual meeting for 1891 was the next subject for 
consideration, and a letter was read from the Scarborough 
Field Naturalists' Society cordially inviting the Union to hold 
the Meeting at Scarborough, The invitation was unanimously 
accepted, on the motion of the Chairman, seconded by Mr. J.
J. 
Stead.
Proceeding to the election of officers, the Chairman announced, 
as stated in the concluding paragraph of the Annual Report, that 
the Presidency for the ensuing year had been offered to and 
accepted by one who had formerly been a familiar figure on the 
Union's excursions — Professor A.
H. Green, M.A,, F.R.S-, holding 
the Geological Chair at the University of Oxford, and late of the 
Yorkshire College, Leeds.
On the motion of the Chairman, Mr. Wm.
Denison Roebuck, 
F.L.S., and the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A,, were re-elected Honorary 
Secretaries of the Union.
It was stated that a letter had been 
received from Mr. Percy H.
Grimshaw, in which he mentioned that 
owing to increased pressure of private work, he was compelled to 
retire from the office of Hon. Assistant Secretary, whereupon the 
Chairman announced that the Executive recommended that a third 
General Secretary of the Union should be appointed in the person 
of Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S.
; this was unanimously carried on the 
motion of Messrs.
J. W.
Davis, F.G.S., F.L.S., and G.
T. Porritt, 
F.L.S., F.E.S. A letter was read from Mr. Charles Brownridge, 
stating that his health compelled him to ask to be allowed to retire 
from the post of Hon. Librarian.
The matter was referred to the 
Executive for consideration.
On the motion of Mr. Washington Teasdale, seconded by 
Mn J.
A. E.
Stuart, the following nine retiring members of the 
Executive were re-elected: — Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A., Liversedge; 
Messrs.
J. W, Davis, F.G.S., F.L.S., Halifax; William Cash, F.L.S., 
Halifax; C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., Dewsbury; John Emmet, F.L.S., 
Boston Spa ; Benj.
Holgate, RG.S., Leeds ; H.
T. Soppitt, Bradford ; 
J- J.
Stead, Heckmondwike; and M.
B. Slater, F.L.S., Malton.
Mr Charles Brownridge, F.G.S., was elected in place of the late 
SamI, A.
Adamson.
Mr. C.
D. Hardcastle was re-elected one of the Auditors, and the 
election of a second Auditor was left to the Executive, Mr. J.
^l^^ford, F.G.S., having resigned- 
August 1S91.
226 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
AH the retiring Hon. Local Treasurers were re-elected, as 
follows : 
J 
H. Speight, Bradford; J 
Geo. Winter, 
Doncaster ; L.
B. Ross, F.C.S., Driffield ; T.
Bunker, Goole; W.
Cash, 
F.L.S., Halifax; Riley Fortune, F.Z.S., Harrogate; John Stears, 
Hull; Edgar R.
Waite,' F.L.S., Leeds; M.
B. Slater, F.L.S., xMalton ; 
T, F.
AVard, Middlesbrough; Wm. Fletcher, Pickering; Thos.
H, 
Nelson, M.B.O.U., Redcar; Rev. R.
A. Summerfield, B.A., Ripon ; 
Richard Barnes, Saltburn ; J.
H. Rowntree, Scarborough; Hugh 
Richardson, B.
A., Sedbergh ; W.
N. Cheesman, Selby ; A.
T. Watson, 
Sheffield; J.
J. Stead, Spen Valley; Geo. Parkin, Wakefield; 
Thos.
Newbitt, Whitby ; G.
C. Dennis, York ; and Mr. J.
J. Howarth 
was elected to the vacancy at Skipton.
On the proposition of Mr. Lionel E.
Adams, seconded by Mr.
G. T.
Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S., all the Committees of Research were 
^ 
re-appointed, as follows : 
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee.— Prof.
L. C.
Miall, 
F.L.S., F.G.S.
(chairman) ; Messrs.
C. D.
Hardcastle, Leeds (vice- 
chairman) ; Samuel Chadwick, F.G.S., Malton (hon.
secretary); 
J ....
_ J 
F.G.S., F.L.S., Halifax; Prof.
A. H.
Green, M.A., F.R.S., Oxford; 
Wm. Gregson.
Baldersby ; B.
Holgate, F.G.S., Leeds; Wm. Horne, 
J 
J 
J. R.
Mortimer, Driffi 
Rev. H.
W. Crosskey, M.A., as an honorary member.
The Yorkshire Marine Zoology Committee.— Dr. H.
C 
Sorby, LL.D., F.R.S., Sheffield (chairman) ; Messrs.
J. Percy A.
Davis, Halifax (hon.
secretary); G.
Brook, F.L.S., Edinburgh; 
J- D.
Butterell, Beverley; W.
Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., Edinburgh; 
John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U., Great Cotes ; W.
Cash, F.L.S., Halifax; 
Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.
A., York; Baker Hudson, Redcar; T.
H. Nelson, 
Redcar; O.
T. Olsen, F.L.S., Grimsby; Rev. H.
Smith, xM.A-, 
Redcar ; J.
W. Woodall, M.A., F.G.S., Scarborough ; with George 
]\Iassee, F.R.M.S., Kew, as Botanical Referee.
The Yorkshire Fossil Flora Committee.— Prof.
W. C- 
Williamson, LL.D., F.R.S., Manchester (chairman) ; James W.
Davis, F.L.S., F.G.S., F.S.A., Haliflix (vice-chairman); William 
Cash, F.G.S., F.L.S., F.R.M.S., 38, Elmfield Terrace, Halifax (hon.
secretary); Messrs.
Thos.
Hick, B.A., B.Sc, Manchester; Benj.
Holgate, F.G.S., Leeds ; Robert Kidston, F.G.S., F.R.S.E., Stirling; 
Robert Lasv, F.G.S., Halifax; Prof.
L. C Miall, F.L.S., F\GS^, 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ANNUAL MEETING.
. 227 
Leeds; James Spencer, Halifax; John Stubbins, F.G.S., F.R.M.S., 
Leeds; and William AVest, F.L.S., Bradford.
Yorkshire Coast Erosion Committee.
— Mr. J, W.
Woodall, F.G.S., Scarborough (chairman); Rev. E.
Maule Cole, 
M.A., F.G.S., Wetwang (hon.
secretary) ; Rev. H.
E. Maddock, 
M.A., Patrington; Mr. J.
C. FAnson, F.S.A., F.G.S., Saltburn-by-the- 
Sea ; and Dr. F.
Fielder Walton, F.G.S., Hull.
Yorkshire Micro-Zoology and Micro-Botany Com- 
mittee.— Dr. H.
C. Sorby, LL.D., F.R.S., Sheffield (chairman) ; 
IMessrs.
J. M.
Kirk, F.R.M.S., Doncaster (hon.
sec); C.
B. Crawshaw, 
Dewsbury; Charles Crossland^ Halifax; Prof.
Alfred Denny, F.L.S., 
Sheffield ; Rev. W.
E, Handcock, M.A., Knaresborough ; Chas.
P. 
Hobkirk, F.L.S., Dewsbury; M.
H. Stiles, Doncaster; and William 
West, F.L.S., Bradford.
Disappearance of Native Plants Committee.
— Messrs, 
Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., Dewsbury (chairman); P.
Fox Lee, 
Dewsbury (hon.
secretary); R.
Barnes, Saltburn-by-the-Sea; Edward 
Birks, Sheffield; John Emmet, F.L.S., Boston Spa; John H, 
Phillips, Scarborough; Rev. W.
A. Shuffrey, M.A., Arncliffe; 
Matthew B.
Slater, F.L.S., Malton ; Rev. Wm.
Thompson, M.A., 
Sedbergh; and T.
W. Woodhead, Huddersfield.
Geological Photographs Committee.
— Messrs.
James W.
Davis, F.L.S., F.G.S., F.S.A., Halifax (chairman) ; James E.
Bedford, F.G.S., Cardigan Villas, Headingley (hon.
secretary); 
Godfrey Bingley, Leeds; Frederick W.
Branson, F.LC, F.C.S., 
Leeds; Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., F.G.S., Wetwang; George 
Fowler Jones, Malton ; A.
E. Nichols, A.M.Inst.CE., Leeds; and 
F. Fielder Walton, F.G.S., Hull.
Voting papers for the election of lo new Permanent Members 
of the General Committee had been sent to all members of the 
Union, and 32 of them had been returned, with the result that the 
following 10 members had been elected; viz.
: — Rev. F.
Addison, 
M.A., Thirsk; Messrs.
Charles Crossland, Halifax; Elijah Howarth, 
F.R.A.S., Sheffield; Robt.
Law, F.G.S., HaUfax ; Thos.
Newbitt, 
Whitby; George Parkin, Wakefield; Rev. H.
A. Powys, M.A., 
John 
George Winter, Doncaster.
The following gentlemen were elected Life Members of the 
Union:— Rt. Hon.
Lord Lilford, Oundle, Northants; Messrs.
E. B.
Wheatley Balme, Mirfield ; Joshua Buckton, Leeds; Rt. Hon.
Earl of 
Carlisle; Messrs.
John B.
CharJesworth, J.P.
; Cecil G.
S. 
Foljambe, J.R ; Ben. Hirst, J.P.
; R- Heywood Jones, J.P.; 
Sir Jauies Kitson, Bart., J.P., Leeds; Edward B.
Lees, J.P.; 
August 1891.
2 28 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UKIOX — AXXUAL MEETING.
Arthur Marshall; Rev. Canon H.
Newton; Henry Oxley, Leeds; 
J.P.
; Jas. S.
Cooke, F.R.A.S.; LP.
; Col. Joh 
J 
The Ordinary Members elected were :— J.
Edmondson, Halifax ; 
George Fawcett, Keld ; Edward Gledhill, Halifax j G.
F. Harding, 
Halifax; Charles H.
Hutchinson, Barnsley ; W.
B. Hutchinson, 
Liversedge ; Tom Jubb, Halifax ; Charles Middleton, Halifax ; 
W. H.
Newhouse, Erighouse ; Owen Piatt, Oldham ; A.
W. 
Reith, M-A., HaUfax ; Albert Seed, Halifax; John Shillito, Halifax; 
John W.
Stather, Hull; Charles H.
Thackrah, Halifax; James A.
Toothill, Halifax; H, Whitley, B.A., Halifax; Henry J.
Wilson, 
M.P., Sheffield; David Woodhead, Halifax; C.
H. Worsnop, 
Halifax- 
The sectional officers were next called upon to announce the 
r 
names of the officers elected for 1891, as follows: 
B. Vertebrate Zoology.— Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., 
reported that all the officers of the past year had retired, and the 
following had been elected in their stead : — President, James 
Backhouse, F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., Harrogate; Secretaries, Riley Fortune, 
F.Z.S., Harrogate; Thos, H.
Nelson, M.B.O.TJ., Redcar.
C. Conchology.^Mr. John Emmet, F.L.S., stated that all the 
old officers had been re-elected, viz.
: — President, Rev. W, C Hey, 
M.A., York; Secretaries, John Emmet, F.L.S., Boston Spa; Lewis B.
Ross, F.C.S., Driffield.
D. Entomology.— Mr, G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., reported that 
the following appointments had been made : — President, G.
T. 
Porritt, F.L.S.
; Secretaries, Jas. H.
Rowntree, York (re-elected); 
A. E.
Hall, F.E.S., Sheffield.
E. Botany.—Mr. Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., presented the 
report of the section, announcing that the officers had been elected 
as follows: — President, Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., Dewsbury 
(re-elected); Secretaries, M.
B. Slater, F.L.S., :Malton (re-elected); 
J. A.
Erskine Stuart, Heckmondwike.
F. Geology,— Mr. Samuel Chadwick, F.G.S., reported that the 
following officers had been elected : — President, C D.
Hardcastle, 
Leeds; Secretaries, W.
Lower Carter, M.A., F.G.S., Leeds (re- 
elected); Samuel Chadwick, F.G.S., Malton (re-elected).
This concluded the business of the General Committee, where- 
upon Members adjourned to the White Swan Hotel where tea was 
provided.
The Annual Public Meeting was held at seven o'clock in 
the Lecture Theatre of the Museum of the Halifax Literary and 
Philosophical Society.
J 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
229 
F.G.S., F.
L.S.J F.S.A., Mayor of Halifax, and an old and prominent 
member of the Union.
The minutes of the previous annual meeting having been printed 
and circulated were taken as read, as was also the Annual Report 
which appears on pages 219-223 of *The Naturalist' 
The excursion-programme for 1S91 having been announced to 
the meeting, the Chairman called upon the Right Rev. W.
W. How, 
D.D,, Lord Bishop of Wakefield, to deliver the Annual Presidential 
Address, entitled ' The Study of Natural Science/ 
The Bishop, Avho had a cordial reception, said he had not for 
years been able to do anything in scientific studies, except of a 
most casual and superficial character.
But his interest in scientific 
matters could never, he thought, decline.
He thought they had 
learnt in these latter days that a patient collection of facts was a 
key which opened the gate of all new avenues of discovery, and 
of all enlargements o[ their area of knowledge.
Of course very 
few single minds could combine powers of minute observation, of 
delicate comparison, of intuitive recognition of the true bearing of 
phenomena, with a large grasp of general principles, and a profound 
skill in fitting all details into the great theories which characterised 
a Darwin.
Darwin seemed to combine all the powers which could 
contribute to the advancement of science.
He was a thinker, 
and a collector of facts— he was, indeed, he supposed, one of the 
most splendidly-equipped minds for the prosecution of natural 
science which one could conceive of But though few could 
combine all those various powers, a very great number could 
contribute something to the advancement of natural science.
As 
an illustration of this point, the Bishop mentioned the splendid 
astronomical discoveries at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century.
Tycho in £)enmark, Kepler in Germany, and Galileo in 
Italy, w^orking each in his own way to accomplish results which 
were to shake the world.
No one of these could have won the 
splendid triumphs w^hich were achieved without the other two.
He urged the members of this Union to learn the habit of 
accurate observation, and to record carefully what they observed.
Take, for example, botany — say a plant new to the region where it 
was found, such as the Arenaria gothica, discovered at Rib1)lehead 
last year.
This meant not only an interesting find, but a contribu- 
tion to far larger fields of inquiry, such as the distribution of the 
flora throughout the world, the modes and causes of that distribution, 
the changes in the surface of the earth, and the like.
So, whatever 
branch of science they undertook, let them gather facts, be accurate, 
and record carefully.
But as a Bishop, with a charge of the 
August i8gr.
2.'?0 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
highest interest laid upon him, he could not be content to deal 
only with the purely scientific aspect of this question.
He knew 
that some said that science and faith occupied two distinct spheres 
which never touched.
He never could hold that.
They did touch.
They overlapped, and they intersected.
Of course, each had a 
region of its own untouched by the other.
But it was foolish to 
say there was no point of contact.
Take such things as the 
antiquity of man, the history of the Creation, the universality of 
the Deluge, the history of the sun and moon standing still — these 
were instances of how the two areas intersected.
Well, he had no 
fears whatever from a patient, honest, candid, reverent study of 
Nature.
God's library did not consist of one volume alone.
There 
was the book of nature and the book of conscience, no less than 
the book of the Revealed Word; and if God was the author of 
these books, he did not think they could really contradict one 
another.
If they did seem to do, w^e might be reading wrongly 
the one volume or the other.
It had been so before, it might be so 
now.
And if there was anything in the past history of the Church 
more humiliating than another — he supposed moral corruption was, 
but next to that — it was the fulminations of the Church against 
physical science.
What a sad picture is that of Galileo, with his 
lucid insight and his firm grasp of the Copernican system !
Who 
could help almost weeping as one reads of the aged philosopher 
made by the Inquisition to go down on his knees, and, with his 
hand on the Bible, to swear that all he tauirht was a tissue of lies ?
Which really was the more likely to lead to infidelity — the light of 
the sage or the darkness of the Church?
Well, they had seen 
something like it in later times ; in reference to Geology, for 
instance, and the story of the days of Creation in Genesis.
Again, 
they had Evolution, and the same scare had to some extent been 
created in these later days.
Yet he thought that the higher 
Christian philosophy, now more and more recognising the doctrine 
of the immanence of the Creator in all creation, could accept the 
doctrine of Evolution without fear.
He did not want to assume 
that everything had been definitely and conclusively proved, but he 
thought they need not be in the least afraid if it should be con- 
clusively proved ; and he supposed they were advancing every day 
towards the acceptance of that truth as a great fact in scientific 
discovery.
But, if proved, what then ?
Why, then what he would 
say was that they had been taught what w^as God's method of 
eating.
Surely the creating by successive stages of advance was 
not less wonderful, and gave one no less idea of the power and 
wisdom of the Creator than the creating by an enormous number 
Naturalist?
NOTE — GEOLOGICAL PHOTOGRAPHY.
23 1 
of separate and disconnected acts.
If they traced a few links 
flirther back of cause and effect, they must at last come to the 
point where the last link was held by an invisible Hand.
Following the delivery of the address, a hearty vote of thanks 
was accorded to the President for his services during the past year, 
on the motion of Mr. Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., seconded by 
Mr. Wm.
Cash, F.L.S., and supported by the Ven. Archdeacon Brooke.
On the motion of the President, seconded by the Rev. E.
P. 
Knubley, M.A., a similar vote was passed to the Mayor, for his 
services in the chair.
A vote of thanks to the Council of the 
Halifax Literary and Philosophical Society for kindly allowing the 
Union the use of their Museum for the various meetings terminated 
the proceeding's.— E.R.W.
Geological Photographic Committee of the Y.N.U.
— At the last 
meeting of the British Association an Exhibition of Geological Photographs 
was held in Leeds, under Section C (Geology), a full report of which was 
published in the * Naturalist,' 1891, pp.
69—74, by Mr. J.
E. Bedford, F.G.S., 
the local Secretary for Yorkshire.
It is gratifying to learn that in the first year's 
work Yorkshire contributed more than one-half of the total number of photo- 
graphs received by the Committee, and great satisfaction was expressed by the 
meeting at the way in which the work had been taken up in Yorkshire.
We 
have been informed by Mr, Bedford that our county still maintains its position, 
as^ shown by the following extract from a letter just received from Mr. Osmund 
W, Jeffs, the Secretary of the Geological Photo^rraphs Committee of the British 
Association : — ' Your contribution is again the first in point of numbers, and I 
think is not excelled by any in interest and variety.
The valuable assistance 
rendered by your Committee is a great encouragement to us , .
. .' There have, 
no doubt, been many photographs of geological interest taken since last meeting, 
in addition to those already received, and Mr. Bedford will be glad if all such be 
sent to him at 9, Cardigan Koad, Leeds, as early as possible, to enable him to 
include liiem in the list about to be published.
THROUGH AIREDALE.
Through Airedale from Goole to Malham.
By Johnnie Gray.
. .
. With 
likistrations and Map .
. .
1891.
8vo, pp.
Ixiv + 302, 
We have pleasure in commending this little book to Yorkshire 
naturalists and topographers, and to the general tourist.
It is got 
up in a handy form for the pocket, and is really a great book in 
small compass.
It cannot fail to be useful, both to the naturah'st 
and the topographer, and will serve as a book of reference at home, 
and as a guide and a friend when abroad.
Small though it may 
look, there is an immense amount of labour in it.
None but those 
who have attempted similar work can estimate the labour and care 
required in such an undertaking.
Nearly everything that is worth 
August i8gi.
232 REVIEW THROUGH AIREDALE, 
seeing in the valley is pointed out, and advice is given as to the best 
way of seeing it.
The pith of the history of each old church, 
castle, or manor-house is given; and the natural scenery is described 
in a concise, clear, and easy style.
The names of places are printed 
in a heavy type to catch the eye ; this is an ingenious and useful 
adjunct to the index, and will save much thne.
There is a good 
map of Airedale, including miles of country on both sides, and 
many illustrations of interesting objects, together with a plan of 
Kirkstall Abbey.
A glance at the map, taking in the whole of 
Airedale from the Humber to Settle, will show that the valley is 
studded over with old parish churches, castles, historic manor- 
houses, ancient seats of Yorkshire gentry, fortifications, ruins, and 
numberless other attractive objects, so that we may easily conceive 
that the author has had ample scope for his pen.
The hum of 
business fills a portion of the valley— from Castleford to Bingley 
and many places in this part of Airedale have lost their former 
beauty ; and many birds and other creatures have been banished by 
an ever-increasing population ; but, above the latter place, the 
author takes us among murmuring streams, quiet ferny dells, 
meadows of wild flowers, breezy heights, and glorious river-pictures 
— spots at which one may spend a day or a week pleasantly, at 
little cost.
There is a list of the birds of Airedale, compiled by Mr. E.
P- 
Butterfield, of Wilsden ; a list of the flowering plants and ferns, com- 
piled by Mr. H.
T. Soppitt ; a chapter on Geology, and an interesting 
gossip on Folk-lore.
This portion, which is paged separately, 
and placed at the beginning of the book, would, in our opinion, 
have been better at the end, and indexed along with the other 
matter.
It might also have been an improvement if some of the 
common plants which are found everywhere had been omitted, and 
more stations given for the rarer species.
As the list stands, a non- 
botanical reader might be liable to fall into the error of concluding 
that a plant is known only in the one or two stations indicated, 
whereas that particular plant might occur in twenty or thirty difl'crent 
places.
This might, however, be easily remedied in a second 
edition.
It is pleasing to observe that misprints and cases of 
incorrect spelling, which often creep into the technical parts of the 
very best scientific books, are in this very rare indeed.
The book is 
not got up in a gaudy form to lie on a drawing-room table as an 
ornament, but is designed for real everyday use.
On the whole, we 
think the author has succeeded well in his work, and we hope that 
the result may encourage him to bring out similar guides fur some 
of the other Yorkshire valleys.— G.
R, 
Naturalist, 
^33 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT LECKBY CARR.
Considering the Avinter-like weather which prevailed during the 
middle of May, the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union had reason for 
congratulation that Whit-Monday, the i8th, the date fixed for the 
first excursion of the season, was so beautifully fine.
There was 
almost uninterrupted sunshine from morn until night, but yet the 
weather was of a nature to maintain the extraordinary character of 
the season, the peculiarity of which will no doubt long remain 
unequalled.
The day opened with 12° of frost, and although the 
sun was quite powerful, a cold cutting wind from the north almost 
froze one when in the shade.
This excursion was the ninety-first in the annals of the Union, 
and was arranged for the investigation of Leckby Carr, Baldersby 
Park and Woods, Cundall, Dishforth, and that part of the country 
lymg on the south-w^est side of the river Swale, forming a portion of 
the Vale of Mowbray.
Nearly the whole of the district is the 
property of Mr. Basil T.
Woodd, J.
P., D.L., who not only kindly 
F 
granted the Union permission to roam over his estate, but also 
appeared in person to welcome the members to the district.
Permission was also handsomely granted by the Dowager Viscountess 
.Dowme for the investigation of Baldersby Park and Woods, 
The party, numbering about seventy, left Brafferton Station on the 
arrival of the 10.31 train from Pilmoor and made their way to 
I>eckby Carr, passing through the village of Cundall, Arrived at the 
Carr the party was met by Mr. Basil T.
Woodd and Mr. T.
Carter 
Mitchell, and, after some little consultation, moved off in various 
directions under special leadership or not as the inclination or 
pursuit of the individual required.
The geologists, under the direction of Mr. Mitchell, proceeded to 
the river in order to examine some exposures along its course; they 
worked up the stream and eventually arrived at Asenby, whence 
they returned to Brafferton.
Another party, chiefly ornithologists, commenced work at Leckby, 
and some considerable time was spent in the woods; then following 
the route set forth in the excursion-programme they rambled down 
the right bank of the Swale, and struck the high road to Brafferton 
at Thornton Bridge.
A number of botanists, wnth Mr. Wm.
Foggitt as their guide, first 
investigated Leckby Carr, and then divided, some going north-west 
to Asenby, while others paid attention to the district lying between 
^ Carr and Brafferton.
August iSqi.
234 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UKION AT LECKBY CARR 
Explanation.
— The Map is divided into square miles by horizontal and 
perpendicular lines, Brafferton Station will be found in the lower right-hand 
corner, and the general line of route is indicated by arrows.
The shaded areas are 
woods and plantations.
The lines of fault shown are referred to in the geological 
paragraph.
Another party, whose chief end was conchological, under the 
direction and leadership of Mr. Wm.
Nelson and Mr. Wm.
Denison 
Roebuck, F.L.S., searched the hedge-banks of the lane as they pro- 
ceeded towards Cundall, where young examples of Helix aindana., 
H. hispida^ and H, hortensh were obtained.
A great sameness pre- 
vailed amongst the specimens of the last-named, by for the greatest 
proportion of them being yellow, coloured with, five narrow bands.
Arriving at Leckby Carr the party was strengthened by the accession 
of two or three more recruits, and now took the road to the left past 
Throsde Nest towards Dishforth.
In a small coppice near Throstle 
Nest they stayed and searched amongst the fallen leaves for a short 
time, soon finding examples of Zonites cellarins^ Z.
alliarius and its 
var.
viridtda, Z niiidulus, Z purus, Vitrlna, Helix hispidci^^jir^on 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT LECKBY CAKK.
235 
piinimus, A.
bourgidgnati, etc.
Leaving this coppice the party turned 
to the right and made for the Mow-lying piece of country with slow- 
running ditches' mentioned in the circular.
Alas for their anticipa- 
tions, the slow ditches were without water, as a rule, but after careful 
searching some water was found, and the 'gravy- strainers' being set to 
work, there were obtained Limncea peregra, Planorbis spirorhis, and 
Fisidium pusilhnn.
The party following this what may fairly be 
termed a 'dry ditch,' came to a drain, and here obtained, in the 
vicinity of a slight wooden bridge, Bythmia ientaculatn^ Planorbis 
m 
nmbi/icafuSj and Li7n?icea peregra of quite another form from those 
first met with a few yards away- Here the junior member of the 
party secured a specimen of the 'tinker,' or ten-spined stickleback, 
a rather uncommon species.
The commoner three-spined stickleback 
was also found.
The drains were then left, and the party crossed 
some fields and struck into a road which led through x\senby.
Just 
as they were leaving the village search was made at the foot of a w^all, 
the result being the finding specimens of Limax viaxiimis^ Zonites 
cellarms, Vitrina^ Helix aspersa^ H.
hispida, and //.
7'oiundata.
Leaving the road, and taking to the banks of the Swale, a number of 
botanists were encountered, and their leader, Mr. W, Foggitt, kindly 
show^ed the nearest way to Leckby Carr.
Here not a single shell of 
any kind was to be found, and though there was some water, it 
was of a coffee colour and of a pungent odour, and was quite devoid 
of molluscan life.
The woods here showed evidences of the severe 
frost of the night preceding, the beautiful foHage of the beech trees 
being completely shrivelled up- Leaving this unprofitable ground 
the party took to the main road again, leaving it at Cundall, where 
they were strengthened by another member.
After leaving the pretty 
village some fields were crossed and a shallow grass-grown pond found, 
where Limnma peregra was obtained.
Crossing more fields another 
similar pond was reached close to the margin of the Swale, w^hich 
yielded Physa hypnorum rather commonly, also Planorbis umbilicatus^ 
one specimen of PL conioriies^ and several of Pisidium fontinak.
Crossing more fields the road was reached again near Red House, but 
just before this was reached the latest recruit went to turn over 
a stone lying on the ground near a clothes-post and evidently 
used by the women of the farm to stand on when tying up the 
clothes-cord.
Turning it over he found it to be a quern, one of the 
primitive hand-mills formerly used for grinding corn.
The antiquarian 
instinct was too strong to permit the quern to fulfil its present 
rather ignoble purpose, so after some considerable trouble in finding 
the owner it was purchased at small cost and carried off in triumph, 
to be placed in more fitting surroundings by its new possessor.
This 
August 1891.
236 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT LECKBY CARR- 
was the ending of a pleasant round, and soon afterwards the whole 
parly reached Helperby.
In addition to these set parties several members indulged in 
individual research, and investigated Baldersby Park and other 
places within the restricted district.
At the close of the day it was found that the whole of the 
district appointed for investigation had received attention from one 
or more members.
By 5.30 most of the naturalists had returned to Brafferton, and 
fifteen minutes later sat down to tea at the Golden Lion Inn, 
Helperby.
It may be noted here that Helperby and Brafferton are 
practically one and the same village, the road only dividing the two 
places.
The spacious rooms of the Helperby Mechanics' Institute — the 
use of which was, by the kindness of the Rev. C.
B. Hunter, 
obtained for a nominal sum — were next visited, and at 6.30 the 
Sectional Meetings were held ; these were followed at seven o'clock 
by the General Meeting.
The General Meeting was held under the chairmanship of the 
President of the Leeds Geoloizical Association, Mr. Charles Brown- 
ridge, F.G.S. After passing the minutes of the previous meeting, 
w 
the following persons were elected members of the Union : 
F. R.
CoUins, Huddersfield: C.
E. Grahl, Headingley; E.
Hawkes- 
worth, Leeds; J.
H. Howarth, Skipton; Rev. W.
H. Norman, M.A., 
Huddersfield; Geo. H.
Niven, Cleckheaton ; Geo. G.
lanson, 
Wakefield; K.
McLean, T.
Laycock, jun., and J.
Lund, Harrogate; 
Rev. Hy.
E. Maddock, M.A., F.G.S., Patrington; A.
S. Marriott, 
Dewsbury; Thomas E.
Miln, Darlington; and Chas.
Waterfall, 
Renishaw, Chesterfield.
Mr. Wm.
C. Stobart, Spellow Hill, was 
elected a life-member.
The following ten Societies were represented on the Excursion : — 
Wakefield Naturalists' Society, York and District Naturalists' 
Society, Leeds Geological Association, Harrogate Naturalists' Society, 
Scarborough Field Naturalists' Society, Leeds Naturalists' Club, 
Conchological Society, Dewsbury Naturalists' Society, Thirsk Natural 
History Society, and Scarborough Philosophical Society- 
On the motion of the Rev, George Gill, seconded by Mr. A.
H- 
Pawson, a vote of thanks was passed to Mr. Basil T.
Woodd for 
granting the Union permission to investigate his estates in the 
Leckby Carr district; to Lady Downe for similar permission for 
Baldersby Park and Woods; and to Messrs.
T. C.
Mitchell, F.S.A., 
and William Foggitt for contributing to the excursion-programme or 
leading parties during the day.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION AT LECKBY CARR.
2^7 
The Sectional Reports were next presented, and the following 
accounts have since been supplied : 
The Vertebrate Zoology Section was officially represented on the 
field by one of its Hon. Secretaries, Mr. Riley Fortune, 
F.Z.S.
(by whom the following report is furnished); arid among 
others who attended were Messrs, 
Edgar 
R. Waite 
JC * X V • Of « 
J. Braim, W.
Hemingway, J.
Whitaker, J.
Lund, and others.
Several lady visitors also attended.
The members were well spread 
over the district under investigation, and, as the records for the day 
show, they were not idle.
Some of the members went over the whole 
area, while others, chiefly Messrs.
Waite, Braim, and Fortune, 
confined their labours to Leckby Carr, and with excellent results.
During the day seven species of mammals were met with.
The 
country visited was very prolific in bird-life, and no less than 60 
species were recorded; of these 41 'were residents and 19 summer 
visitants.
The nests of 13 species were found containing eggs; the 
egg which probably excited most interest was a Cuckoo's, found in 
the nest of a Hedge Accentor.
Nests of the Barn Owl and Lesser 
Redpole were also found, but they did not contain eggs.
Seven 
species of young birds were also seen ; all these are marked on the 
list appended.
One particularly noticeable feature observed during 
the ramble was the scarcity of Kingfishers (only one seen), and the 
total absence of Dippers and Sandpipers.
One each of Reptiles and 
Amphibians was noticed, and ten species of Fish, including a very 
fine Chub, weighing at least 3^ lbs., and, curious to relate, having 
only one eye; from the appearance of the fish it had never possessed 
another.
This specimen was caught by an angler in the Swale, just 
below Cundall Church.
The ten-spined stickleback, which is a new 
record for the district, was taken in a stream between Asenby and 
Dishforth.
The following is the complete list of Vertebrates recorded- 
The asterisks (*) denote that eggs, and the daggers (t) that young 
birds were observed.
Hedgehog.
Squirrel.
Wheatear.
\Yhinchat.
Redstart, 
Whitethroat, 
Lesser Whitethroat 
Blackcap.
_Chiffchaff.
August i8gi.
Mammals.
Brown Rat.
Water Vole.
Migrants.
AViUow Warbler.
Wood Warbler.
Sedge Warbler.
Yellow Wagtail.
Tree Pipit.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Swallow.
Common Field Vole, 
Hare and Rabbit.
Martin.
*Sand ^fartin 
Swift.
*Cuckoo, 
Landrail.
2 38 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT LECKBY CARR.
Residents.
+Missel Thrush.
*Greenfinch.
Lark, 
Song 'I'hrush.
* House Sparrow.
Green Woodpecker.
tBlackbird.
Tree Sparrow.
Kingfisher.
Redbreast.
*Chaffinch.
*Sparrow Hawk.
Goldcrest.
Linnet.
Heron.
*t Hedge Accentor.
Lesser RedpoII.
* Mallard.
Great Tit.
Bulltinch.
*King Dove.
Blue Tit.
Yellow Bunting.
*Stock Dove.
Coal Tit, 
*tStarling.
*Pheasant.
Marsh Tit.
Jay.
Partridge.
Wren.
fMagpie.
Moorhen.
Pied Wagtail.
*tjackdaw.
Lapwing.
Meadow Tipit.
Crow.
Common Snipe.
Tree Creeper.
tRook.
^^^ 
Reptile.
Amphibian- 
Comnlon Lizarc 
I. 
Fish.
Great Crested Newt.
Perch.
Gudgeon, 
Minnow.
Ruffe.
Roach.
Pike.
Three-spined and 
Chub.
Grayling.
Ten-spined Sticklebacks.
For the Entomological Section its senior Secretary, Mr. J.
H, 
Rowntree, reported that owing to the exceptional lateness of the 
season, due to the protracted winter — a very severe frost having 
prevailed in the district during the previous night — coupled with 
a keen north wind, which made itself unpleasantly felt in the open, 
but few insects were on the wing, and only the following species of 
Lepidoptera were recorded : — Pierla raj^ce^ Anihocaris cardamines 
(female), Vanessa tiriiccB^ Arctia 7nenthastri^ and Diiirnea fagella.
Mr. M.
L. Thompson and Mr. William Hewett have supplied the 
accompanying list of Coleoptera: 
Carabus nemoralis MlilL 
Notiophilus biguttatus F.
Elaphrus cupreus Duft.
Loricera pilicornis F.
Harpalus ruficornis F.
Pterostichus madidus F.
P. diligens Sturm.
Calathus cisteloides Panz.
Anchomenus dorsalis MiilL 
Hydroporus lituratus F.
In ditches.
Agabus bipustulatus L.
In ditches.
Anacasna variabilis Sharp, A.
limbata Sharp.
In ditches.
Choleva fumata Spence.
In a carcase.
Philonthus decorus Grav.
Acidota crenata F.
Under fir-chips (a rare insect).
_ 
Naturalist 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT LECKBY CARR.
239 
Anatis ocellata L.
Oa firs.
Coccinella lo-punctata L.
On firs.
Halyzia 14-guttata L.
On firs.
Elater balteatus L.
Under bark of fir?.
Melanotus rufipes Herbst.
In decaying fir-stumps.
Rhagium bifasciatum F.
In decaying fir-stumps.
Lochmaea capre^e L.
On birches.
Lochmsea suturalis Thoms, On heather.
Deporaus betulse L.
On birches.
Apion haematodes Kirby.
On nettles.
Polydrusus cervinus L.
Ceuthorrhynchus pollinarius Forst.
On nettles.
For the Geological Section, Mr. W.
Lower Carter, M.A., F.G.S., 
Secretary,' the only ofiicer of the Section who was present, 
reported that the sections had been visited under the leadership of 
Mr. T.
C. Mitchell, F.S.A., and that a (tw common Lower Lias 
fossils had been found.
Their first visit was paid to the large gravel 
mounds which flank the Swale for some distance, and shut off the 
swampy hollow^ of Leckby Carr from the river.
These mounds are 
composed of rounded gravel embedded in a sandy matrix.
This 
gravel appears to be of glacial origin, and is full of pebbles of grit 
and limestone from the Carboniferous beds, as well as others from 
beds ranging from the Silurians to the Lias, A large boulder of shap 
granite w^as seen in the river-bed not far from Leckby Carr, which 
indicates with great accuracy the direction in which the flow of ice 
must have taken place.
Thence the party proceeded to view the two 
sections of the Lias beds which are exposed by the stream.
The 
first is near Leckby Carr, and consists of a mass of Lias clay 
apparently resting on a deep red sandy clay, and overlaid by two feet 
of river sand.
The question as to whether this Lias is in situ was 
warmly discussed, but there did not seem sufficient evidence to 
warrant an alteration of the line of fault marked on the Ordnance 
niap.
Near Asenby the Swale makes a sharp bend, and has eaten 
into the cliff, exposing a good section of the lower Lias beds.
They 
consist of tenacious, blackish clay, with bands of concretionary lime- 
stone at intervals.
After photographing this section, a start was made 
for Baldersby Park, where a fine erratic, of millstone grit, weighing 
probably three tons, was examined, measured and photographed.
The Botanical Section was under the guidance of Mr, William 
Foggitt of Thirsk, and, considering the early date and the very 
backward spring, showed tolerably satisfactory results.
Between 
Brafferton and Leckby Carr the following species were noticed : — 
August 1891.
Of 
240 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT LECKBY CARR.
Siktie ifijlata^ Hypericin diibttim^ Rosa villosa, Pimpinella saxifraga^ 
Cefitaurea scabiosa^ Plantago media^ and Hittnuhis lupidus.
It was 
noticed that the foliage of the fine Beech trees near Cundall and 
Leckby, which a few days ago appeared beautifully green, was all 
browned and blackened by the recent intense frost.
The Carr, 
which was unprecedentedly dry, yielded those two S'egetable spiders' 
Drosera rotundifoUa and D.
anglica, Vacciniunt oxycoccos (the 
cranberry), the rare Lysimachia thyrsifiora^ Betida gliitinosay Erio- 
phoriim vagiiiatum^ E.
angustifolium^ Calamagrostis lanceolata^ and 
abundance oi Lastrcea spinulosa^ the young fronds of which had all 
been cut down by the late frost.
This locality is so greatly altered 
by drainage, and also by the planting of a large number of Conifers, 
that the sphagnous peat ditches which afforded so congenial a 
home to that floral treasure Scheiichzeria palustris have well-nigh 
disappeared.
Leaving the Carr a very pleasant walk upon the west 
bank of the river Swale produced Thalictrum flavnm^ Rammculus 
atirico?nus^ Viola alba, V.
hirta^ K riviniana, Sapcviaria officinalis^ 
Cerasiiiim arvense^ G^ra?tinm pra tense, Rubus plicatns^ Poterium 
sa7iguisorba^ Ribes rubnun, Sanicula eiiropiBa^ Campanula latifoUa^ 
Myosolis palustris.
Primula caukscens (popularly known as the 
Oxlip), Rumex aquaiicus^ Populus alba, with its copious, far-extendin 
and very conspicuous white suckers, Salix fragilis, S.
alba, S.
helix, 
S. vif?iinalis, S.
cinerea, Orchis 7norio^ Allium scorodopraston, and 
Gagea lutea.
In the river were dense masses oi Ranunculus fluitajn, 
with its long floating grass-like leaves, which in one place had 
accumulated a sand-bank sufficiently large to divert the course of the 
stream.
Liliuin martagon was seen in the w^ood below Asenby, 
a locality in which it has been naturalised for upwards of forty years.
At the Sectional Meeting one of the members exhibited Polygonatum 
officinale (Solomon's Seal) from Baldersby Park, most probably an 
escape from cultivation ; and another showed that pretty and 
interesting species Paris quadri/olia.
The Conchological Section, in the absence of all its officers, was 
represented by Mr. Wm.
Nelson, Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., 
Mr, W.
Hewett, etc., and the report was given by Mr. Nelson as 
follows : — Twenty-eight species had been taken during the day, of 
which eight were water shells, six slugs, and fourteen land shells.
Of 
these the most interesting wti^ Pisidium pusillum,Planorbis spirorbis, 
PL contoriiis, and Arion 7fiinimus^ all of which were additions to the 
fauna of North-West York vice-county.
A vote of thanks passed to the Chairman on, the motion of 
Messrs.
Thrippleton and Hemingway concluded the meeting.
Naturalist, 
241 
ICTERINE WARBLER AT EASINGTON IN 
HOLDERNESS: 
AN ADDITION TO THE YORKSHIRE AVIFAUNA 
/ 
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Cotes^ Uiceby, Lincolnshire, 
I RECENTLY obtained from Mr. Philip Loten, of Easington, the skins 
of six small birds brought in by the village boys, at various times 
during the spring, either such as had been found dead or killed with 
stones or catapults ; amongst them is a fine adult male of Hypolais 
tcterina, obtained on May 28th, which Mr. Loten skinned at the 
time, thinking it might be a Wood Wren, but with grave doubts on 
the subject.
This is the first Yorkshire example recorded of this 
continental species ; three (two in England and one in Ireland) 
are mentioned as occurring between 1848 and 1889, by Mr. Howard 
Saunders in his * Manual of British Birds,' and in the appendix to 
that work, mention is made of another, an adult male, obtained at 
Newcasde-on-Tyne on June 2othj 1889.
The Icterine Warbler is also 
supposed to have been heard and seen in county Wicklow and in 
Pembrokeshire in May, 18S6 (Zool., 1886, pp.
333-4).
The song of this charming warbler is so rich, loud and varied, 
that it is scarcely probable it would long escape notice should an 
example at any time wander to this country, and take up its abode in 
garden or park.
The Easington bird was sent to my friend, Mr. Wm.
Eagle Clarke, 
of the Science and Art Museum, Edinburgh, and has subsequently 
been purchased for that Museum.
Vhjidy, 1891.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Malham Plants.
— I notice that in the report of the Y.N.U. excursion to 
Malham and Gordale last September (Nat., June, 1891, pp.
177), Corhlearia 
anglica and Cardiacs acaidis are mentioned, as having been seen during the 
excursion.
The former is entirely a littoral plant, occurring on muddy seashores, 
(N.
to Moray on the W.
coast), and the Malham plant was probably C alpina^ 
which is there abundant.
If C.
anglica occurs in W.
Yorks.
at all,^it would most 
probably be on the muddy river banks, under tidal influence, near Goole.
If the 
record for Carduits acaidis is correct, it is a great extension of the plant's range in 
W, Yorks., it previously having been reported from the extreme S.
of the Riding, 
in that limited area judged by Mr. Lees to belong to Watson's Zone i.
As^ttie 
species is now known to occur in N.E. Yorks., however, it viay occur as far N.
as 
Malham.
Was not Carlina the plant intended?
This is most abundant there, 
and was not mentioned in the list.
The occurrence of Ciisatta eiiropiva at Malham is very interesting, confirming 
the occurrence of the plant in Mid-West Yorkshire.
This species generally 
occurs in much warmer localities and at much lower altitudes.
— \V.
West, Junr , 
5£adford, iSth July, 1S91, 
August i8gi.
Q 
242 
EARLY NOTICE OF THE PINK-FOOTED GOOSE 
IN YORKSHIRE, 
Rev. H, A- MACPHERSOX, M.A., M.B.O.U., Etc., 
Author of ^ An Introduction to the Study of British Birds,' etc.
Readers of 'The Naturalist' will remember that the Pink-footed 
Goose {Anser brachyrhynchus) was first recorded as a British species 
by Mr. Bartlett in 1S39.
It may interest them, therefore, to learn 
that this bird was reported to Ray as the common wild goose of 
Yorkshire in the seventeenth century, though there is apparently 
a confusion in the text between two species- It will be seen that 
Ray himself draws attention to the discrepancy in the colour of the 
bill and feet, showing that he was fully alive to it.
Ray describes the Grey-lagg Goose :—' Rostrum ^ capite ad 
mediam fere partem nigrum, demde subpurpureum, ipso etiam apice 
nigro.
Pedes subpurpurei sive carnei coloris.' 
He continues : — ' In paludibus agri Eboracensis nidificant: ipsi 
& eorum Pulli Mense Maio pinguescunt & in dehciis habentur.
Hactenus D.
Lister^ qui tamen banc speciem ab Ansere fero vulgari 
nobis descripto diversam esse non sidentur afifirmat, quoniam 
descriptiones in omnibus fere, excepto Rostri & pedum colore, 
conveniunt.' '  
I extract this from my note-book, not having novy the original to 
consult, but the reference given is Syn. Meth.
Av., p.
138, and 
I think the work was published after Ray's death, in 1713.
It 
seems quite clear that Dr. Lister had described to Ray a true 
Pink-footed Goose, obtained in Yorkshire.
But the species which 
bred in Yorkshire was, of course, the Grey-lag Goose.
NOTES AND NEWS, 
We regret to announce the death of a noted North of England geologist 
Mr. Daniel Mackintosh, F.G.S., which occurred at Chester on the 19th ultimo.
The Lecturer on Botany at the Liverpool University College (Mr. R.J. Harvey 
Gibson, M.A., F.L.S., F.R.S.E.), has a paper in the Journal of Botany for May 
189 1 (p.
12a), illustrated by a plate, on the histology of Polysiphonia fastigiata.
Mr. Harvey Gibson also has a paper in the Journal of the Linnean Society 
(Botany, No. 193, May 1S91) on the development of the sporangia in Khodochorton 
rothii and R, floridulum^ and describes a new species belonging to that genus.
One of the ceremonies in the Senate House at Cambridge on June i6th was 
the installation of the Rt. Hon.
Lord Walsingham as High Steward of the 
University.
Subsequently, the degree of Doctor in Law was conferred upon the 
newly-elected officer honoris caiisd.
Lord Walsingham is an ex-President of 
the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, and is well known, not only as a popular land- 
lord and a 'crack shot,' but as a distinguished enlomologipt and Fellow of the 
Royal Society* 
Naturalist, 
243 
ADDITIONS TO THE FRESHWATER ALG^ 
OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
WM.
WEST, F.L.S., 
Lecturer on Botany and Jfaifria MetUca at the Bradford Technical CcUege* 
The following list has been gradually accumulating since the publi- 
cation of the last list of additions and is the result of the examination 
of a very large number of gatherings.
I have been most ably assisted 
in the work by the keen judgment and knowledge of my son, 
G. S, West, who has also helped in tlie collection of the material, 
several lots of which, such as that from Whernside and Moughton 
Fell, have been collected by him alone.
The Penyghent gatherings 
were in the Ribble drainage area.
Many new locaUiies are given for 
species previously recorded, and there are seventy additional species 
and varieties (before each of which is placed an asterisk) to those 
hitherto enumerated for the Riding.
The total number ol Algas 
now on record for West Yorkshire is 540 species and 37 varieties 
and forms.
Class— FLORIDE.^^.
Order— SQUAMARIACKE.
Hildenbrandtia rivularis (Liebm.) J.
Ag. On stones in rill, 
near Rawdon ; H.
T. Soppitt.
Small dark red patches on the 
surface of dripping rocks, Shipley Glen ; Gordale.
Order—HELMINTHOCLADIE.E.
Batrachospermum vag-um (Roth.) Ag.
*Var. keratophytum 
Bory.
On stones in running stream, Horton-in-Ribblesdale.
Chantransia pygmaea Kiitz.
In a similar locality to the last, 
but not with it.
Class— CONFERVOIDEyE HETEROGAME.E.
Order— CEDOGOXIACE^.
r 
CEdogonium itzig-sohnii DeBary.
Ingleborough.
CEdogonium delicatulum Kiitz.
Askern.
Class-CONFERVOIDE.-E ISOGAME.E.
Order-cox FERVACE.*:.
Cladophora glomerata (Linn.) Kiitz.
Moughton Fell ; Holden 
Gill, near Keighley.
August iBqx.
244 WEST : ADDITIONS TO FRESHWATER ALG.^.
Cladophora flavescens Ag. Rawcliffe Common.
Stigeoclonium fastig'iatum Kutz.
Still waters of a spring, 
Moucrhton Fell.
Draparnaldia plumosa Ag.
*Var. pulchella Kiitz.
Peny- 
ghent.
Chaetophora pisiformis (Roth.) Ag. Rawcliffe; Askern.
Order— CHROOLEPIDE-^!:.
Trentepohlia aurea (Linn.) Mart.
\Chrookpus aurats (Linn.) 
Kiitz.] Moughton Fell.
M 
Greetland near Halifax- 
Class — CONJUGATE.^^:.
Order— MESOCARPE.T*.
Many examples have been observed from various localities, but 
could not be determined as they were not in conjugation.
Order—ZVGNEMACE.E.
''Zygnema insigne (Hass.) Kiitz.
Long.
cell, veget.
37—95/^^ 
lat.
cell, veget.
23-5— 25 /x; diam.
zygosp.
28 — ZZ\^' Abun- 
dantly in fruit from Malham.
Sirogonium sticticum (Eng. Bot.) Kiitz.
Ingleton.
Order— DESMIDIACE/E, 
Gonatozygon brebissonii DcBary.
Malham Tarn.
Gonatozygon kinahani Arch.
Lat. 11 — 12 /x; 14 — 20 longius 
quam latum.
Malham Tarn ; Penyghent.
Sphaerozosma vertebratum Ralfs.
^ Forma minor.
Long.
9 — lo/x; lat.
13-5 — t4/a; lat.
isthm.
7*5 /x.
Malham Tarn.
Sphaerozosma excavatum Ralfs.
Penyghent; Ribblehead.
Hyalotheca dissiliens (Sm.) Breb.
Greetland near Halifax.
Pieurotaenium truncatum (Breb.) Nag. Rawchffe Common.
Closterium obtusum Breb.
Greetland, near Halifax.
Closterium acerosum (Schrank) Ehrnb.
Rawchffe Common- 
Closterium lanceolatum Kiitz.
Moughton Fell; Penyghent.
Closterium prselongum Breb.
Forma brevior Nord.
('Freshw.
Alg. of New Zeal, and Austr.,' p.
68, ph 3^ 
fig- 22-24).
Rawcliffe Common.
Closterium ehrenbergii Meneg.
Moughton Fell; Askern.
Closterium moniliferum Ehrnb.
Mouditon Fell; Askern; 
Ribblehead; Malham Tarn.
o 
>'aturaiist, 
WEST : ADDITIONS TO FRESHWATER ALGtE.
245 
Closterium leibleinii Kiitz.
Moughton Fell; Askern; Rawcliffe 
Common.
Closterium dianse Ehrnb.
Moughton Fell; Malham Tarn; 
Rawcliffe Common; Askern.
Closterium venus Kiitz.
Rawcliffe Common- 
Closterium striolatum Greetland near Halifax.
Closterium rostratum Ehrnb.
Greetland near Halifax.
Closterium setaceum Ehrnb, Rawcliffe Common, 
Closterium COrnu Ehrnb.
Moughton Fell ; Greetland near 
Halifax.
^Closterium pronum Breb.
Rawcliffe Common, 
Penium oblongum DeBary.
Whernside; Greetland near 
Halifax.
Penium truncatum Breb.
"Forma punctata.
Forma membrana 
distincte punctata.
Leeming ; Greetland near Halifax.
Cylindrocystis diplospora Lund.
Whernside.
Cylindrocystis crassa DeBary.
Moughton Fell.
Tetmemorus brebissonii Ralfs.
*Var. 7 (DeBary) Archer.
Penvi^rhent.
tnemorus g 
near Halifax.
Rawcliffe Common; Greetland 
Euastrum verrucosum Ehrnb.
Rawcliffe Common.
Euastrum oblonerum Grev.
Rawcliffe Common.
rum 
rum 
b. Malham Tarn.
Malham Tarn.
Euastrum binale (Turp.) Ralfs.
Ribblehead.
Cosmarium hammeri Reinsch.
•Forma rotundata (Wille) 
Boldt.
(Desm.
Groni., p.
14)- [Syn. C.
homalodennum Nord.
var.
rotundatum Wille.
(Nov. Semi.
Alg., p.
z^, tab.
xii, 
fig.
18).] Malham Tarn.
Cosmarium anceps Lund.
Baildon.
Cosmarium granatum Breb.
Malham Tarn; Baildon.
r 
v'ar.
subgranatum Nord.
Baildon.
osmarium cucumis Corda.
Moughton Fell.
um 
smarium 
Moughton Fell ; SaUaire.
Lund.
Malham Tarn.
Cosmarium g-aleritum Nord, Malham Tarn* 
Cosmarium phaseolus Breb.
Malham Tarn.
Long.
20 /x; 
lat.
19/^; lat.
isthm.
4/i.
August i8gi.
246 west: additions to freshwater alg^.
*Cosinarium scenedesmus Delp.
Malham Tarn; Long.
34 /x; 
lat.
41 ju-; lat.
isthm.
14 /x; crass.
16 /a.
Cosmarium bioculatum Breb.
MalhamTarn; Halifax.
Cosmarium tinctum Ralfs.
Ribblehead.
^Cosmarium aspherosporum Nord.
Penyghent.
Cosmarium meneghinii Breb.
Malham Tarn; Doncaster.
*Cosmarium substriatum Nord.
in Nord.
and Wittr., Alg.
Exsic, No. 977.
Rawcliffe Common.
Cosmarium crenatum Ralfs.
Malham Tarn.
Cosmarium undulatum Corda.
Rawclifife Common; Malham 
Tarn.
Cosmarium tetraophthalmum (Kiitz.) Breb.
Malham Tarn.
Cosmarium conspersum Ralfs.
Malham Tarn.
Cosmarium margaritiferum (Turp.) Meneg.
Malham Tarn.
Cosmarium punctulatum Breb.
Rawchffe Common; Malham 
Tarn ; Halifax.
Cosmarium botrytis Meneg.
Common ; seen from numerous 
additional localities.
Cosmarium pr^emorsum Breb.
Eldwick.
^Cosmarium turpinii Breb.
Var. lundellii Gutw.
[Syn.
C htrpinii Breb.
forma Lund.
(Desm.
Suec, p.
29, tab.
lu., 
fig' 9)]* Malham Tarn.
Long.
60 — 63 /x ; lat.
50 — 55/^^ 
lat.
isthm.
15 — 16 /x; crass.
28 /x.
Cosmarium broomeii Thw. Moughton Fell.
Cosmarium eboracense West.
Baildon.
Cosmarium ochthodes Nord.
Moui^hton Fell ; Rawcliffe 
Common ; Malham Tarn.
*-\r 
Var. subcirculare Wille (Bidrag til kundsk.
om Norges 
Ferskv.
Alg., p.
26, tab.
i., fig.
8).
Baildon.
r 
Cosmarium boeckii Wille.
Malham Tarn.
*Cosmarium commissurale Ereb.
Rawcliffe Common.
•Cosmarium speciosum Lund.
Var. simplex Nord.
forma 
intermedia Wille.
Woolley.
Cosmarium moniliforme Ralfs.
Penyghent.
Cosmarium cucurbita Breb.
Whernside (c.
zygosp.) 
Zygosporse globosae, glabra?.
Cosmarium thwaitesii Ralfs.
W'hernside.
Cosmarium curtum Breb.
Penyghent.
Arthrodesmus incus *Forma divergens Arch.
Penyghent; 
Greetland near Halifax (cum.
zygosp.).
Katuralis-> 
WEST: ADDITIONS TO FRESHWATER ALG/E.
247 
Staurastrum dejectum Ralfs.
Malham Tarn; Ribblehead.
*FoRMA punctata.
Membrana distincte punctata, Adel Bog.
^Staurastrum brevispinum Breb.
Long.
35 — 40 fM ; lat.
30 — 34 /x; lat.
isthm.
15 — 18/^, Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum cuspidatum Breb.
*Var. maximum nov.
var.
Var. maltum major quam forma typica, spinis robustioribus 
et isthmo latiore.
Long.
39 — 43/^; lat.
sine spin.
25 — 30 yu; 
lat.
cum spin.
56— 62/x; lat.
isthm.
9 — lo/x.
Malham Tarn.
*Staurastrum lunatum Ralfs.
Long.
21 /a; lat.
21/x; lat.
isthm.
7/x.
Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum avicula Breb.
Long.
34 — 36/i.; lat.
sine spin.
35 — 40 fx I lat.
cum spin.
42 — 47/^; lat.
isthm.
17 — 19/^.
Penyghent ; Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum aciculiferum (West) Anders.
(Sver.
Chloroph.
I., 
p. II, fig.
4).
[Syn. S, innada Breb.
var.
aciculiferum West.
('Freshw.
Alg. of N.
Yorks.', p.
293, tab.
291, fig.
12).] 
Penyghent ; Whernside.
Staurastrum pygmasum Breb.
Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum punctulatum Breb.
Rawcliffe Common; Malham 
Tarn ; Halifax.
Staurastrum tricorne (Breb.) Menegh.
Ribblehead; Malham 
Tarn.
Staurastrum inflexum Breb.
Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum polymorphum Breb.
Rawcliffe Common ; 
Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum gracile Ralfs.
Malham Tarn.
Staurastrum paradoxum Meyen.
Ribblehead.
Staurastrum margaritaceum Menegh.
Rawcliffe Common; 
Ribblehead.
Class— MULTL\UCLEATE.^5.
Order— SIFHONE.^.
Vaucheria sessilis (Vauch.) D.C. Whernside.
Class— COEXOBIE.'E.
Order— VOLVOCINE.^.
Eudorina elegans Ehrnb.
Goole.
Order— PAXDORINE.^.
Pandonna morum (MuUer?) Bor}-.
Goole; Askern 
August iSqi.
248 west: additions to freshwater alg^.
Order— PEDIASTRE.E.
Pediastrum angulosum Ehrnb.
Ribblehead ; Malham Tarn 
Pediastrum boryanum (Turp.) Menegh, Doncaster.
Pediastrum 
Ribblehead.
Order— SORASTRE.'E.
Ccelastrum microporum Nag. Malham Tarn.
Class— PROTOCOCCOIDE^.
Order— EREMOBIE/E, 
Hydrianum heteromorphum Reinsch.
Malham Tarn ; 
Greetland near Halifax.
Order— PROTOCOCCACE7E.
Chlorococcum gigas (Kiitz.) Grun.
Malham Tarn.
"^Tetraspora lubrica (Roth.) Ag. Greetland near Halifax.
Scenedesmus acutus Meyen.
Malham Tarn.
Var. obliquus Rabh.
Moughton Fell.
Scenedesmus quadricauda Breb, Ribblehead ; Malham 
Tarn ; Doncaster.
Class— CYAN OPHYCE.E.
Sub-Class— NOSTOCHINEyE.
Order— NOSTOCACE.^.
*Nostoc macrosporum Menegh.
Heseltine Gill.
Nostoc muscorum Ag. Heseltine Gill.
Order— OSCILLARIACE.E.
Oscillaria limosa Ag. Moughton Fell ; Peel Park, Bradford.
*Oscillaria antliaria Jurg.
Baildon.
*Symploca ralfsiana Kutz.
Diam.
trichom.
3-5 — 5 ft.
Frizing- 
halL 
Sub-Class— CITROOCOCCACE.^>.
Order— CHROOCOCCACE.E.
* 
1 
Chroococcus turgidus NSg. Whemside.
Merismopedia glauca Nag. Mirfield; Greetland near Halifax.
Class— DIATOMACE.E.
Order— DIATOME.E.
Cyclotella ktitzlngiana Thw. Moughton Fell; Horton near 
Bradford.
Cyclotella meneghinlana Kiitz.
Baildon.
_ 
Naturalist, 
west: additions to freshwater ALGyE.
249 
Melosira varians Greg.
Holden Gill, near Keighley ; Peel 
Park, Bradford; Manningham Park..
Surirella linearis Sm. Greetland near Halifax.
Surirella panduriformis Sm. AUerton- 
^Surirella ovalis Breb.
Saltaire ; Goole, 
Surirella ovata Turp.
Bingley.
Surirella minuta Breb.
Baildon   Bingley; Goole.
Surirella pinnata Sm. Bingley ; Adel Bog.
Cymatopleura solea Sm. Moughton Fell ; Penyghent ; 
Whernside.
*Epithemia sorex Kiitz.
Malham Tarn.
Epithemia gibba (Ehrnb.) Kiitz.
Baiklon; Adel Bog; Malham 
Tarn.
Epithemia ventricosa Kiitz.
Moughton Fell.
ip 
Himantidium arcus Sm. Penyghent.
Himantidium undulatum Sm. Whernside.
Himantidium gracile Ehrnb.
Kildwick ; Greetland near 
Halifax.
Ceratoneis arcus (Ehrnb.) Kiitz.
Whernside; Holden Gill 
near Keigliley.
Ceratoneis amphioxys Rabh.
Calfbeck, Howgill Fells.
Cymbella cuspidata Kiitz, Adel Bog ; Rombalds Moor ; 
Greetland near Halifax.
Cocconema lanceolatum Ehrnb, Moughton Fell; Baildon; 
Holden Gill near Keighley.
Cocconema cymbiforme (Kiitz.) Ehrnb.
Moughton Fell ; 
Baildon ; WooUey.
Cocconema cistula Hempr.
Moughton Fell ; Peel Park, 
Bradford ; Manningham Park.
Cocconema parvum Sm. Baildon ; Peel Park, Bradford; 
Bingley.
Encyonema prostratum (Berk.) Ralfs, Moughton Fell; 
Peel Park, Bradford ; Horton near Bradford- 
Encyonema caespitosum Kiitz.
Allerton ; Malham Tarn ; 
Rombalds' Moor ; Manningham Park ; Bingley ; Mirfield ; 
Horton near Bradford.
*Encyonema gracile Rabh.
Cullingworth.
Amphora ovalis Kutz.
Doncaster; Moughton Fell.
Cocconeis pediculus Ehrnb.
Abundant on Cladophora 
glomeraia.
Holden Gill near Keighley.
August i8qi.
250 west: additions to freshwater alg.^.
Cocconeis placentula Ehrnb.
Moughton Fell ; Baildon ; 
]\Ialham Tarn.
Forma perpusilla Rabh.
Baildon.
Cocconeis thwaitesii Sm. Bingley.
Achnanthidium microcephalum Kiitz.
Baildon.
♦Achnanthidium lanceolatum Breb, Baildon; Cullingworth ; 
Whernside ; WooUey ; Elslack, 
^Achnanthidium coarctatum Breb.
Bingley.
Achnanthes exilis Kiitz.
Malhara Tarn ; Baildon ; Mirfield ; 
Cullingworth.
*Denticu!a obtusa Sm. Bingley; Holden Gill near Keigliley.
*Denticula sinuata Sm. Baildon.
Odontidium hiemale (Lyngb.) Kiitz.
Greetland near Halifax, 
Odontidium mesodon Kiitz.
Whernside ; Holden Gill near 
Keighley; Calfbeckj Howgill Fells.
Odontidium mutabile Sm. Baildon ;   Holden Gill near 
Keighley.
Fragilaria capucina Sm, Holden Gill near Keighley ; Man- 
ningham Park.
Diatoma elongatum Ag, Holden Gill near Keighley.
Synedra lunaris Ehrnb.
Mirfield; Elslack.
Synedra longissima Sm. Rombalds' Moor, 
*Synedra pulchella Kiitz.
Baildon: Bingley; Whernside.
Synedra acicularis Sm. Mirfield.
^Synedra vaucherias Kiitz.
Mirfield ; Allerton.
Synedra ulna Ehrnb.
Holden Gill near Keighley ; Mirfield ; 
Morley ; Peel Park, Bradford* 
Synedra splendens Kiitz.
Peel Park, Bradford ; Manningham 
Park ; Elslack ; Wooley.
Synedra acus Kiitz.
Greetland near Halifax.
Asterionella formosa Hass.
Penyghent ; Holden Gill near 
Keighley ; Greetland near Halifax.
Nitzschia amphioxys (Ehrnb.) Sm. Shipley ; Peel Park, 
Bradford ; Baildon.
Nitzschia constricta (Kiitz.) Pritch.
[Syn, N.
dubia Sm.]- 
Forma minor Rabh.
Baildon.
-'Nitzschia parvula Sm. Doncaster.
Nitzschia sig-raoidea (Nitzsch) Sm. Doncaster; Whernside.
Nitzschia curvula (Ehrnb.) Sm. Allerton ; Cullingworth ; Adel 
* 
Bog.
Naturalist, 
wkst: additions to freshwater alg^.
251 
Nitzschia linearis (Ag.) Sm, Holden Gill near Keighley; 
Baildon ; Doncaster ; "Woolley.
Nitzschia tenuis Sm. Moughton Fell ; Doncaster.
Nitzschia minutissima Sm. Baildon ; Malham Tarn.
^Nitzschia communis Rabh, Allerton.
^Nitzschia palea (Kiitz.) Sm. Allerton.
Nitzschia acicularis Sm. Mirfield ; Adel Bog.
Navicula cuspidata Kutz.
Moughton Fell.
Navicula rhomboides Ehrnb, Moughton Fell ; Peel Park, 
Bradford; Morley ; Greetland near Halifax.
Navicula inflata Kiitz.
Allerton.
Navicula elliptica Klitz, [Syn. N.
ovalis Sm.].
Baildon.
*Navicula sphserophora Kutz.
Doncaster.
*Navicula dirhynchus Ehrnb.
Adel Bog; Malham Tarn; 
Morley.
Navicula rhynchocephala Kiitz.
Greetland near Halifax, 
Navicula affinis Ehrnb.
Moughton Fell ; Horton near 
Bradford ; Peel Park, Bradford ; Rombalds' Moor.
Navicula amphirhynchus Ehrnb.
Adel Bog; Cullingworth.
Navicula exilis (Kiitz.) Grun.
Cullingworth; Doncaster; 
Baildon ; Woolley.
Navicula angustata Sm. Moughton Fell ; Bingley ; Don- 
caster ; Greetland near Halifax 
Navicula cryptocephala Kiitz.
Moughton Fell.
Navicula dicephala Ehrnb.
Allerton ; Whernside ; Halifax.
^Navicula binodis Ehrnb.
Baildon ; Rombalds' Moor.
Pinnularia nobilis Ehrnb.
Eldwick; Moughton Fell.
Pinnularia major Rabh.
Malham Tarn.
Pinnularia viridis (Ehrnb.) Rabh.
Manningham Park ; 
Malham Tarn ; Greetland near Halifax.
Pinnularia oblonga (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Baildon ; Peel Park.
'"Pinnularia peregrina Ehrnb.
Allerton; Goole.
Pinnularia radiosa (KUtz.) Rabh.
Moughton Fell; Baildon; 
Mirfield ; Morlev : Elslack ; Malham Tarn ; Greetland near 
Halifax.
Pinnularia dactylus Ehrnb.
Wigton Moor.
Pinnularia acuminata Sm. Adel Bog.
Pinnularia brebissonii (Kutz.) Rabh.
[Syn. P.
stauronei^ 
J'ormis Sm.].
Cullingworth ; Manningham Park ; Adel Hog.
Pleurosigma attenuatum (Kiitz.) Sm. Manningham Park.
August i8qt.
2^2 MISCELLANEOUS SHORT NOTES.
Pleurosigma acuminatum (Kiitz.) Grun.
Var. lacustre 
(Sm.) Rabh.
[Syn. P.
lacustre Sm.].
Manningham Park ; 
Malham Tarn.
Pleurosigma spencerii Sm. Doncaster.
Stauroneis phoenicenteron (Kitzsch.) Ehrnb.
Malham Tarn.
Pleurostaurum legumen (Ehrnb.) Rabh.
[Syn. Stauroneis 
linearis Sm.].
Baildon.
Gomphonema capitatum Ehrnb.
Bingley ; Malham Tarn.
Gomphonema constrictum Ehrnb.
Holden Gill near Keighley.
Gomphonema geminatum Ag. Moughton Fell.
Gomphonema olivaceum (Lyngb.) Kiitz.
Malham Tarn.
Gomphonema intricatum Kiitz.
Baildon ; Whernside ; 
Morley ; Goole ; Elslack.
Gomphonema fractum Schum.
Kildwick ^ Adel Bog ; 
CuUingworth.
um 
Peel Park, Bradford.
Tabellaria fenestrata (Lyngb.) Kiitz.
Greetland near Halifax.
NOTE—ORNITHOLOG K 
r 
The Chough in Yorkshire.— Mr. R- Lydekker says :—* The former 
existence of the Chough {Pyrrhocorax graculus) in Yorkshire is proved by an 
ulna from Kirkdale Cave, preserved in the British Museum,' (Ibis, July 189I, 
P- 385).
This is an interesting instance of the Chough having formerly bred 
inland in England, as it still does in Navarre, and, no doubt, elsewhere in North 
Spain.— H.
A. Macpherson.
NOTES— BOTANY.
Chara vulgaris fL.) var.
longibracteata (Kuetz.).
— I found this in a small 
pond in the lane behind Middleton Church, Pickering, Yorkshire, in August 1S86.
Walter W.
Reeves, London, June 5th, 1891.
Saxifraga oppositifolia at Moughton.
— On July 8th last, while rambling 
over Moughton, near Settle, in company with Mr. F.
J. Hanbury, we came acroi-s 
a small patch ol Saxifragra oppositifolia Linn, still in full flower, at an elevation of 
about 1150 ft.
So far as we know this locality has not been previously recorded, 
and the elevation is 450 ft.
lower than the * lowest descent,' as given in Lees' ' Flora 
of West Yorkshire,' p.
246.— R.
F, & F.
P. Thompson, Settle, July 1S9K 
NO TE~ COL E OPTERA.
Pyropteras affinis near Doncaster.
—While in Wheatley Wood on the 
23rd October last year, I collected several coleopterous larvae from rotten wood.
At the time they w^ere quite unknown to me, but having Leen successful in rearing 
a few of them, which emerged May i6th to iSth, I am glad to be able to record 
them as Pyropta'us affinis Payk., a beetle so 'extremely local ' as to be considered 
somewhat of a rarity.
I should say that they will be tolerably abundant at 
Wheatley during; their season, but have not, unfortunately, owing to lack of time, 
been able to verify the opinion.— E.
G. Bayford, Doncaster, 7th July, i891N_ 
Naturalist, 
^sz 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
MAMMALIA, 1888.
The intent of these bibliographical citations is to give a complete 
series of references to books, papers, and records which have been 
printed or published with regard to the ten northern English counties 
and the Isle of Man, and to indicate the gist of the contents of each 
m as concise a form as may be consistent with making these papers 
of interest and of value to persons engaged in geographical natural 
history work.
In the case of long lists or papers, the very briefest 
mdications only are given, reference to the original work or 
paper being necessary.
In the case of short records, however, the 
convenience of the user of the bibliography necessitates the giving 
of fuller detail and the name of every species included, or even by 
giving the whole substance (destitute of verbiage) to obviate the 
necessity of further reference.
No apology need be given for giving 
matter of this kind in 'The Naturalist'; it may not be of interest to 
casual readers, but to actual workers it will be of decided use.
The counties and vice-counties of which cognizance is taken in 
these references are the following, as named and numbered in the 
Watsonian scheme : — 
53j Lincoln S.
; 54, Lincoln N.
; 56, Notts.; 57, Derby; 58, 
Cheshire; 59, Lancashire S, ; 60, Lancashire W.
; 6r, York S.E.
; 
62, York N.E.; 6^, York S.W.; 64, York Mid W.; 65, York N.W.; 
66, Durham; 67, Northumberland S.
; 6^, Cheviotland; 69, West- 
morland with Furness ; 70, Cumberland; and 71, Isle of Man.
The present instalment of Bibliography has been compiled and 
edited by W.
Denison Roebuck.
Previous instalments of the 
Bibliography of this group of animals have appeared as follows : — 
For 1884, in 'Naturalist,' February, 1885, pp.
152-156.
3> ^885, „ August, 1886, pp.
239-241.
„ T886-7, „ April, 1889, pp.
115-127.
As is our custom, the purely sporting and hunting notes which 
occupy so much space in *The Field' and similar journals, nnd no 
place here, save in those exceptional instances which involve some 
natural history fact of value or interest.
Anox.
[not signed].
York S.W.
Yorkshire Dialects [words used in Calder Vale from Wakefield upwards: 
Brocks = badger (iI/^/^5/a.v//i-)].
Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ.,Pt. I, Oct. 1SS5, 16.
Anon, [not signed], York N.E.
Otters [Luira vuigans]\n the North [are a pest in the Codbeck, threatening 
___ihe_en tire destruction of the Trout].
Land and Water, March 19th, 1887,275.
August 1891.
254 EIBLTOGRAPHV: MAMMALIA, iSSo.
M 
Anon- [not signed].
Cheshire (Dee Estuary).
A fine Specimen of the Mottled Seal [( ?
) caught in the Dee, 
neai Flint Castle, probably attracted by the great number of Sahnon 
now in the Dee].
Land and Water, June 4th, 1SS7, p.
513.
Anon, [not signed].
Cumberland.
A Rabbit ^Lepus ainiLttIus\ caught with a Rod and Line [in the Eden, 
a Httle below Eden Bridge, Wetheral].
Land and Water, July 30th, 1887,47.
Anon-, [not signed].
Northb.
S., Chevtld., York Mid W., S.E., Durh.
List of .
. .
Donations to the Museum ...
of the Natural History 
Society [of Newcastle-on-Tyne], from June, 1877, to August, i887[; 
in iSSo, Water Vole (Aj-vkola amphibia) cauj^ht at Eshutt near Felton (J.
G. 
P'enwick) ; portion of skull of a horse {Equns caballus) found on the moors 
near Rothhury (Sir W.
G. Armstrong); portion of skull of a Whale found on 
the rocks at Alnmouth, near Locke's Leap (G.
H.* Smart); 1SS4, Water 
Shrew {Sorex fodieiis) caught in the Ouseburn Dene (R.
Y. Green); 18S5, 
Whiskered Bat {Vespertilio niystacinus) from Pateley Bridge (W.
Storey) 
and from Pocklington (W.
D. Roebuck) ; 1SS6, white Mole (Taipa europn^a) 
caught at Victoria, Garesfield Colliery, en.
Durham (John Tucker) ; Antler of 
Red Deer {Ccrvus elaphus) from foundations of High Level Bridge, Newcastle 
(Mrs. J.
Naylor) ; 1S87, Weasel {Mnstela vulgaris), Gosforth Park (-^ Jackson) ; 
Stoat (J/, erjnmea)^ Limestone Bank, Chesters (John Clayton) ; skeleton of 
a Chillingham Cow {Bos taurus), (Earl of Tankerville) ; and a full-grown 
male Grey Seal {Halicharus gryphus) picked up at sea off the coast near 
Seaham, 17th March, 1887 (purchased)].
Nat. Hist.
Trans, of Northumbld., 
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
9, part 2 (1S88), pp.
274-276.
Axon, [not signed].
Line.
N. 
Weasels [Musfela vulgaj-is and M, ermlma] for New Zealand [a fourth 
consignment, 300 in number, collected by Mr, Allbones in North Lincolnshire, 
at average cost of 3s.
4d.
each].
Field, Dec. 24th, 1887 ; ZooL, Jan. 1S88, 
3rd Series, xii, 21.
Axon, [signed ' Ed. Field '].
Northumberland S.
Hare [{Lepus enropirus) killed near Morpeth, weighed 13 J lbs.].
Field, Oct. 2Sth, 1876; rep.
Field, Jan. 2Sth, iSSS, p.
107.
Anon, [signed ' A.M.*] 
Line.
S. 
sandy and White] Variety of the Water Vole [(Amcola amphibia) at 
Essendine, S, Lines., seen by writer about twelve years ago].
Field, Feb.
4th, 1888, p.
159.
Anon, [signed ' Lincoln Green'].
Line.
N. 
Martens \\^Martes sylvestris) have been frequently seen in Lincolnshire 
since 1825, and reference to Cordeaux's papers given ; affirmation and par- 
ticulats o^ occurrence of true Wild Cat {Felts catits) near BuIIington Wood, 
Wragby, in 1 883 ; both notes in correction of M.
G. Watkins' note].
Field, 
Feb. 1 8th, iSSS, p.
220.
Anon, [signed * L.'].
Westmorland 
Early Leverets [{Lepus europteus); two, a fortnight old, found near Kendal 
abtmt the end of January 1888J.
Field, Feb. 25th, 18SS, p.
248.
' 
Anon, [not signed].
York S-W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists* Union at Hatfield Chace [Sep. 21st, 1887 ; 
Musteia putorius exhibited at the meeting, a local capture].
Nat., March 
1888, p.
84.
Anon, [not signed].
Yorksh 
Anon, [signed 'R.B.L.'l 
Derbyshire.
' Hares {Lepus etiropceus) 
hsrd, 188S, p.
2S7.
Westmorland 
Run by a Single Hound [after a Fox {Vulpes vulgaris) on the fells near 
Kendal, Feb, 18SS; details given].
Field, March 3rd, 1888, p.
290 
Katuraliitf 
BnaiOGRAPHV: MAMMALIA, 1888.
255 
Anox.
[not signed].
York S.E.
Capture of a Whale on the Flamborough Rocks [on March 13th ; 
measurements given, species not stated].
Land and Water, March 17th, 
1888, p.
279.
Anon, [signed *Snaid*].
York S.W.
Penistone Harriers [an old pack, dates as far back as 1260; historical par- 
ticulars given].
Field, April 7th, 18S8, p.
473, 
Anov.
[not signed].
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Liverpool Science Students' Association [at Ince Blundell, July 14th, 
1888; peat-beds at mouth of Alt and at Leasowe have yielded bones ot d'fvus 
elaphiis^ Bos taunts, BJongifrojis^Equus and Urus\ Research, Aug. 1888,31.
Anon, [not signed].
Westmorland.
Field-Meeting- oi the Kendal Natural History Society [at Longsleddale, 
one of the few existing haunts of Martes sylvestris^ but none were seen], 
Westm.
Note Book and Nat. ITist.
Record, vol.
I, part 3, Sep. iSSS, p, 65.
Anox.
[not signed].
Northumberland S.
Whales and ...
in British Waters [on Aug. 30th a Whale, about 20 ft.
in 
length, seen off Newcastle, but not caught].
Field, Sep. 15th, 18S8, p.
402.
Anon, [not signed].
Cheviotland.
Chilling'ham Wild Cattle [account of their being crossed with shorthorns].
Field, Dec. Sth, 1SS8, p.
S44.
J. Backhouse, Jun. Durham.
The Carnivorous Propensities of the Squirrel {{Sciurus vulgaris)^ as 
noticed by J.
E. Backhouse of Croft and Chas.
Backhouse of Wolsingham], 
Nat. Hist.
Journ., May 15th, 188S, xii.
89.
Mattupiw Bailf.y.
York S.E.
Whale [Bottle-nose] at Flamborough [species not stated].
Nat., April 18S8, 
p. 114, 
Matthew Bailey.
York S.E.
Whale at Flamborough [described, but not named].
Nat., Sep. 1SS8, 263.
Matthew Bailey, York S.E.
Whales off Flamborough [particulars given ; probably some species of 
Bahenoplera^ in T.
Southwell's opinion].
Nat., Nov. 1S88, p.
331.
Thomas Blount.
York S.W., N.E., N.W., and Mid W.
Blount's Yorkshire Tenures [at Aislaby, hare-dog ; at Carlton-juxta- 
Rothwell, deer-hunting; at Elmsall, fox skin lined gloves; at Hutton 
Conyers, coney-warren; at Langwath, buck and doe; at Sheffield, grey- 
hounds or hares].
Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, part 11, April 1SS8, 
pp.
211-223.
Thomas Blount.
York N,E.
Blount's Yorkshire Tenures [at Whitby, the well-known legend respecting 
the Wild Boar (iW scrofa fcrus)\ Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, part J 2, 
July 18S8, pp.
228, etc.
^V.
D, BRArniWAiTE.
York S.W.
[Supposed Badger {Meks taxus) in Brockendale, Aug. 21st, 1886], Nat.
Hiit.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 1S86, p.
123.
Montagu Browne.
Line.
S- 
Notes on the Vertebrate Animals of Leicestershire [including the 
following species recorded for Belvoir, which may possibly be South 
Lincolnshire x^zoxils:- Miis tela fn tori us {p, 163) ; Mcles t^rxus {167) ; albino 
7alpa curopira (214), Mus miuutns (2lS) ; and Muscardmus avellanarlus 
(219); the two latter negative records].
ZooK, May and June 1SS5, 
pp.
163, 167, 214, 218, and 219.
August 1891.
256 BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 188S.
T. EUNKER.
York S.W., Line.
N. 
Capture of a Seal \^P/ioca vittiliuay presumably] in the Aire at Rawcliffe 
[early in 1S88; particulars of capture given].
Nat., Aug. 1888, p.
226, 
DiPTON Burn.
Cumberland.
Stoats \MiisteIa erminea] and Weasels [J/, vulgaris'] for Australia [have 
been collected near Brampton to about four hundred in number, for 
exportation].
Sci. Goss, Aug. 18SS, p.
191.
York N.W.
Basil Carter, 
Robin caught in a mouse-trap [set at Burton House.
Masham, for Red 
Field Voles {Afvicola ^lareohts)\ Nat., Nov. iSSS, p, 330, 
James Carter.
York N.W.
Food of the Qtt^x \{,LiUra vulgaris) in the Yore near Masham: fond uf 
coarse fish and of crayfish ; they do not {^^^ on water rats, pheasants' eggs, 
nor mussels].
Field, April 21st, 1888, p.
547.
IL Charbonnier.
* Yorkshire-' 
[A * Cross* bet-ween a Rabbit and a Hare [Lepus cunicnliis and L.
timidia), 
which had been lately shot in Yorkshire, exhibited March ist, 1888].
Proc.
Bristol Nat. Soc, New Series, Vol. 5, part 3, 1S87-8, p.
373.
T. D.
A. Cockerell.
Cheviotland, Isle of Man.
North of England Specimens In the British Collection at the British 
Museum [Manx Cat (Felis ratiis, van), and IJaiichteriis gryphus from the 
Fames, P.
J. Selby].
Nat., Aug. 18S8, p.
227.
E. Maule Cole.
York S.E- 
The Badger ^Mehs taxns\ on the Yorkshire Wolds [at Fimber Nab ; 
humorously worded account of captures from 1830 to 1880].
Nat., April 
1SS8, p.
112.
T. A.
Coward.
Cheshire.
The Whiskered Bat \_VespertiUo mystacinus'] in Cheshire [details of cap- 
tures of five, and of one Plecotus atiritus at Fernilee and Alderley Edge].
Zool., June 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
222.
Walter Crouch.
York S.E. and S.W., Line.
N. 
Notes on the Whale, Rudolphi's Rorqual (Balicnoptera horealis.
Lesson), 
and record of .
. a Female Stranded in the Humber [near Goole, Sep. 1S84 ; 
measurements given].
Essex Nat., April 1SS8, ii.
41-46, 
N. F.
Dorrke.
York S.E.
Mammalian Remains [Rhinoceros and Elephant] at Kelsey Hill, Holderness, 
Nat., Nov. 1885, p.
3 78.
C. WoLLEY Don. Cheshire.
Squirrels {Sciitrus vulgaris] and Yew Berries [at Edge Hall, Malpas ; 
squirrels are numerous, but Editor of Field thinks Hawfinches did the mis- 
chief to the Yews].
Field, Sep. 15th, 1S88, p.
413.
\V.
Finch, jun.
Notts- 
Bank Vole [Arvicola glareolns] in Nottinghamshire, [not common ; two 
instances given, with notes on habits], Zool., Jan, 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
23.
F, R.
Fitzgerald.
York Mid W.
Bank Vole [Arvicola glareolus] in Surrey and Yorkshire [several times in 
the woods at Ripley and elsewhere near Harrogate].
ZooL, Aug. iSSS, 3rd 
Series, xii.
298.
F- Gayner and B.
S. Rowntree.
Lane.
S* 
A Day on the Southport sand-hills [June 9th, 1S8S ; Leptis atniculus 
extremely abundant].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. 15th, 1888, xii.
122.
A. Graveson.
York N.E.
Two Otters {LiUra vulgaris] .
. caught in the Cod Beck, near Thirsk, 
just before Chri.stmas [habits of one in confinement].
Nat. Hist.
Journ-, 
Feb. 15th, 1S88, p.
23.
Naturalist 
bibliography: mammalia, 1888.
257 
C. Hardwick.
W 
pectre Huntsman and Hounds [and White Doe Legends, at Cliviger 
Gorge, Rothwell Haigh Common, etc.], Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ., Part 11, 
April 1888, pp.
200-207.
R. P.
Harper.
York N.E.
Bank Vole [Ay-vicola ^^!areoh(s\ in Yorkshire [one found dead on the Cliffs 
near Scarborough].
Zool., Jan. 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
23.
Durham, Northumb., Lane, York S.W., 
J. E.
Harting.
Cumberland, Line.
N., Derby.
The Badger, Meles taxus [a resume of what is known of its distribution and 
natural history ; Brockholes, Lanes, and Yorksh., Brock -le-Bank, Cumberland, 
Brocklesby, Lines.
; distribution in Cumberland, Lines., Yorksh., Derbyshire, 
Durham, Lanes., and Northumberland referred to].
ZooL, Jan. r 888, 3rd 
Series, xii.
3 and 4.
Cheshire, Line.
N., York Mid W., N.W., 
J* E.
Harting.
and S.E., Cumberland, Durham.
The Whiskered Bat, Vespertilio mystacinus [a resume of records as to 
natural history, distribution ; Cheshire (Roebuck), Lincolnshire (Caton 
Haigh), Yorkshire (Roebuck), Durham (Bond), Cumberland (Macpherson), 
and Shotley Bridge (Mennell and Perkins), are mentioned with full details], 
ZooL, May 1S88, 3rd series, xii.
161-166, and plate.
J. E.
Harting.
Cumberland.
[Pine Marten [Mmies sylvesiris) trapped in Cumberland; exhibited to 
Linnean Society, April 5th, 1888].
Zool., May 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
194.
J. E.
Harting.
Line.
N. 
Change of Habit under altered Conditions of Life [exemplified by 
Rabbits (Lepus atnicuhts) breedin<; above ground in the Humber marshes, 
fide Cordeaux], Field, Ju!y 7th, 18SS, p.
5. 
G, E, Hastings.
Northumberland S, 
Some Summer Notes on Fish [and on a shoal of Porpoises {Phocicna 
communis) off Tynemouth ; their habits, etc.].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., March 
X5th, 1888, xii.
47, 
G. E.
Hastings.
York S.W.
The Badgers \MtIes iaJC2is\ of Brockendale [extracts from diary ; habits of 
a specimen in confinement].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. ist, 1888, xii.
175-177.
G. E.
Hastln'GS.
York S.W, 
A Hedgehog [{Erifiacats europietis) caught at Ackworth ; its habits], 
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Nov. ist, 1888, xii.
iSo.
C. D, Head.
York N.E.
Nest of Short-tailed Field Vole [(Arvteola agrestis) in a hole in a tree, 
about twelve inches from the ground ; locality not stated, but note dated 
from Scarborough].
Sci, Goss., Aug. 1888, p, 191.
J- M.
Hick.
Durham, 
Address to the Members of the Tyneside Naturalists* Field Club .
. 
May i6th, 1887 [notes on field meetings; Census ehphus in Raby Park], 
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part I (1888), p.
6. 
Abraham Holroyd.
York S.W. and Mid W.
Yorkshire Proverbs an* Speyks ['Better have a Mouse {Mus musculus) in 
the pot as nae flesh*].
Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ., Part ii, April 1S88, p.
218.
W. R.
Hughes.
Secretar}\ Cheviotland, Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
[British Wild Cattle, being the] Report of the Committee, consisting of 
. .
[ten names] .
. and Mr. W.
R. Hughes (Secretary), appointed for the 
purpose of preparing a Report on the Herds of Wild Cattle in Chartley Park, 
S«pt.- 189!.
258 BIELIOGRAPHV: MAMMALIA, iSSS.
and other Parks in Great Britain [giving detailed information upon the Chil- 
lingham and Lyme Park herds, with notices of those at Somerford Park near 
Congleton (Cheshire), and Middleton Park (Lanes.)].
Brit.
Assoc, 57th 
Rep.
(Manchester, 18S7), 1SS8, pp.
135-145.
J. ISMAY.
York S.W.
Some Account of the Parish of Mirfield (by Mr. Ismay), to a Friend in 
Cumberland.
1755 [Hares {Lepiis europtens) mentioned in respect of sport ; 
men and boys in Hoplon employ themselves in the Christmas hohdays in 
hunting the Squirrel {Schims zntlgaris)^ which gives them violent exercise in 
the woods, and affords them excellent diversion].
Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, 
Parts 10 and II, Jan. and April 1888, pp.
207 and 211.
Derbyshire, Notts.
J. E.
Kelsali..
[Rhinolophus hipposideros in Derbyshire and Notts ; details of localities ; 
copied from Zool., March 1887].
Midi.
Nat., April 1887, x.
105.
Gerald Lascelles.
Cumberland.
Chapter XH.
Vermin [(p.
277) the true Wild Cat {Fells cahts) 'still exists 
...
in Cumberland'].
Shooting, by .
. .
Walsingham and .
. .
Galhvey 
. .
. 18S6 [8vo, vol.
i. p.
277].
W. J.
LeTall.
York S.W.
Rats \Mus iUcumantis\ and Weasels {{^Mitstela vulgaris) in combat, in a 
brook near Whiston which flows into the Rother].
Nat. Hist.
Journ.j Nov.
15th, 18SS, xii.
206.
JAS.
Eakdley Mason.
Line, S.
Otter [Lutra vulgaris'] in Lincolnshire [found in Dunston Fen, Jan. 23rd, 
1888].
Nat., March 1888, p.
82.
James Munro.
Notts.
The Roe Deer [a g^eneral article, in which incidental mention is made of 
an unsuccessful attempt made in 1S73 ^^^ 1^7^ to establish Cei-vus capreolus on 
an estate in Notts], Nat. Monthly, Oct. 1887, p.
35.
C. Parkinson.
Cumberland.
In the Valley of the Teme, Worcestershire.
. • ..
No. 2.— The Lair 
of the Otter [with references to the eccentric distribution of this animal 
{Lutra vulgaris) in the Cumberland rivers ; never found in Caldew, which is 
a tributary of Eden, famous for them], Nat. Monthly, Jan. 18SS, p.
89.
T N.
Postlethwaite.
Cumb., Westm., Furness, York Mid W.
Remains of Red-deer {Cervus elaphus\ in the Duddon [estuary; horns 
dredged up ; Editor refers to the deer of Bowland Forest and Martindale 
Fells].
Zool., April 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
138.
W. Denison Roebuck.
Line, S.
Lincolnshire Bats [PUcotus auritiis and Vesperugo pipistrellus^ both young, 
taken in Gosberton Church, near Spalding, by J.
W. Chandler].
Nat., 
Sept.
1888, p.
263.
\V.
Demsox Roebuck.
York Mid W.
Water Shrew iCrossopus fodiens] and Field Vole ^Arzicola agresfis] near 
Ripon [at North Stainley, in a hay-field ; sent by Rev. R.
A. Sunimerfiekl].
Nai., Sep. 1888, p.
263.
W. H.
St. QUINTIN.
York N.E.
The Preservation of Indigenous Animals [as instanced by readiness of 
Fulpes vulgaris, Meles taxus and Ltitra vulgaris to avail themselves of the 
shelter afforded them on the Scampston Estate].
Field, Sep. ist, 1S8S, 316.
Derbyshire.
Benjamin Scoit, 
The Weasel and his Family [speaks of Maries foina and M, abietum 
' being seldom seen in South Britain, except in the more mountainous parts of 
Wales and Derbyshire'].
English lUust.
Mag., Feb. iSSS, p.
334- 
Naturaiis , 
]^ii^liography: mammalia, 1888.
259 
T. SiNGTON.
Lane.
W. 
[Exhibition of antler of Cervus elaphus and horn of Bos ionipfrons^ from 
excavations for Preston Docks, to Manch, Lit. and Phil.
Soc, Nov. 7th, 1887].
Mem. and Proc.
Mancb.
Lit. and PhiL Soc, 4th Series, Vol. i, 1S8S, p.
17.
Thomas Southwkll.
Lane.
W,, York Mid W.
On the Winter Breeding of the Otter [{Lutra vulgaris) ; quoting occur- 
rences of young ones on the river Cocker on July 26th, and on hanks of 
Dunsup (Yorkshire), Nov. 17th].
Zool., July 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
250, 
Abraham Stansfield, York S.W., Lane.
S. 
A Difficult Lancashire Place Name [Todmorden; the Tod = fox theory 
abandoned], 16-page reprint from the 'Manchester Quarterly,' 1SS4.
Not 
seen.
Abstract in Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, Part 13, Oct. i8S8,Vol. 2, p.
53.
Jamks Suttox.
Durham.
Varieties of the Mole \Talpa eiiropica\ in Durham [a cream-coloured one 
nearly every year in one particular spot, in black peaty soil] ZooL, Jan.
1S8S, 3rd Series, xii.
22.
James Sutton.
Durham.
The Bank Vole ^Arvuola gJareoIus] in co.
Durham [near Durham city; 
instances of capture by trap given].
ZooL, Jan. 1888, 3rd Series, xii, 23.
J. Sutton.
Durham- 
Seasonal Change of Colour in the Stoat {j^Mustela erminca) as observed 
near Durham], Zool., May 1888, 3rd Series, xii.
183.
J. HoRSFALL Turner.
York N.E.
RunsTvick [Folk-Lore ; Roasted Mouse (Mus musculus) infallible in 
hooping-cough].
Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ., Part 12, July 188S, p.
233.
J. HoRSFALL Turner.
York Mid W.
Slight Sketch of the History of the Ancient Family of Routh 
[mcluding references to the Forests of Knaresburgh, Wensleydale, and the 
delivery on 2 1st June, 47th Ed. 3rd, of a fat Buck {Cervits dama) from 
Knaresburgh Forest], Yorkshire Genealogist, Part 12, July iSSS, p.
235.
M. G.
Watkins, 
Cumberland, Line.
S. 
Martens [discussing the decrease of Musiela martes in the Lake District 
(Wastwaler and Eorrowdale) and its probable occurrence in the Lincolnshire 
woodlands, where one was killed by hounds in 1S25].
*FieId, Feb. nth, 
1888, p.
193.
JotLN ^VATsoN.
Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness.
The Extinct Animals of the Lake District [respecting the remains of 
mammals found in Bone-caves at Arnside, Whitbarrow Scaur, Helsfell, Long 
Sleddale, Silloth, and Ressondale, and also giving historical evidence; Homo 
sapiens^ Ursus (two species), Sus scrofa ferns^ Canis lupus, Cervus elaphus, 
C damn, C.
caprcolns.
Castor fiber.
Fells catus, Mustelce, Bos taurus^ 
B. primigenius, B.
longifrons, Megaceros hibernuus, Eqiius, and Meles % 
existence of Castor fiber and of Ursus arctos and U.
fossills gone into at 
length, the Lake District being one of the districts in which Bears were taken 
in Roman times; details of occntrence oi Bos primigenius given at length; 
extracts from ancient documents of 1629 and 1675 as to wild cattle, red and 
fallow deer at Naworth ; the Beaver, the Wild Boar, the Wolf, etc., treated 
of in similar manner].
Westm.
Note Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, 
Vol. I, part 3, Sept.
iSSS, pp.
55*60.
S. Henry Wright.
Notts.
Sherwood Forest [with details as to the Red Deer (Cervus elaphus).
Fallow Deer {Dauia vulgaris).
Squirrel {"^dnrus vulgaris), and Fox {Vulpes 
vulgaris].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Sep. iS^K 1SS6, pp.
1 13- 1 17, 
26o 
NOTES AND NEWS.
In the May number of the Annals and Magazine of Natural History, p.
418, 
Mr. Alfred O.
"Walker, formerly of Chester, has a note on Pheriisa fncicola (Leach), 
a crustacean about which much confusion has arisen.
Several new exotic genera and species of Pyralida; contained in the British 
Museum Collection are described by Mr.
\V.
Warren, M.A., F.E.S., in the 
Annals and Magazine of Natural History for May.
In the ' Philosophical Magazine' for March 1889, Mr. Mellard Reade attempts 
to explain why granitic intrusions show so little evidence of contraction durin 
consolidation and cooling.
Such an intrusion being more or less of the nature of 
a laccolite in communication with some larger molten reservoir, the contraction on 
passing into the solid state is balanced by a further inflow of molten matter.
When the granite is contracting by cooling after solidification, the weight of the 
overlying rocks is sufficient to prevent the mass from breaking up.
We have received from Mr. R.
Howse, Curator of the Museum of the Natural 
History Society at Newcastle-on-Tyne, a copy of his Guide to the Collections of 
Local Fossils in the Museum, printed for the Society (62 pp.
8vo, Newcastle 18S9).
It consists essentially of very full fossil lists from the strata of Northumberland 
and Durham, the Carboniferous and Permian of course filling most of the work.
The smaller fossils such as the entomostraca and foraminifera are not neglected ; 
synonymy and references are given when necessary ; and a few stratigraphical notes 
are inserted in their proper places.
The catalogue seems to contain very few 
misprints for such a work, though in the section on p.
50 we note a curiously 
cabalistic word, apparently a type-setter's anagram on * limestone-post.
Mr. J.
J. Burton, of Nunthorpe, writes us that some time ago hfs boys were 
spending their summer holidays in the country near York, and found a rabbit's nest 
in which were several young.
Two of these they took out and placed with some 
young kittens of about the same size in the box of a threshing machine which the 
cat had selected as the birth-place of her family.
Strange to say, the old cat 
suckled the young rabbits for many weeks, when one of them died.
The other 
rabbit lived until it was half grown, and was regularly nourished by its foster- 
mother, until one day late in autumn, when by some mischance a door at the 
bottom of the box, used for cleaning out the straw and refuse which gathers there 
when the machine is used, was left oi:ten, and the rabbit fell or jumped out, and 
was subsequently killed by one of the other cats kept at the farm.
. 
4 
The Severn Valley Naturalists' Field Club, under the direction of their 
Secretary, the Rev. R.
C. Wanstall, made a three days* visit to Yorkshire, from 
the 9th to the 12th of June, and to the number of between twenty and thirty, made 
the Queen Hotel, Harrogate, their headquarters.
On Tuesday, the 9th, they 
visited Plumpton Rocks and Knaresborough under the guidance of Mr. Rdey 
Fortune and Mr. Fred.
Powell.
The following day carriages conveyed the party 
to Ripley, Ripon, Studley, and Fountains, under the guidance of the Rev. W.
T- 
Travis, Rev. J.
S. Tute, and Mr. J.
Emmet, and after dinner Dr. Olliver read 
a paper on the geology of Harrogate, with special reference to the mineral watery 
Thursday, the nth, was spent in AYharfedale, at Bolton Abbey, Ilkley, and 
Otley.
On that day the Rev. E.
P. Knubley and Mr. M.
B. Slater conducted 
the party during the day; and in the evening the former gave a i^^f^ notes on the 
general geological and physical features of the county, at the same _ time 
mentioning a few interesting facts in regard to the migration and distribution of 
one or two species of birds.
Hearty votes of thanks were passed to Prof.
Miail, 
and all who had guided the several expeditions, or assisted with the arrangements.
On Friday, the 12th, the party returned to Shrewsbury.
Naturalist 
26l 
D 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT GRASSINGTON.
In ' The Buxton of Yorkshire ' the Rev. Bailey J.
Harker, F.R.Hist.S,, 
writes : — 'Supposing that your purpose, even if you can afford it, is 
not in your spring or summer hoUdays, to go to the Highlands, the 
Lakes of Killarney, the '' English Switzerland '' in the North-west, 
**bonnie Wales," the Continent, "the Land of the Midnight Sun," 
America, or Palestine, but to find your way to some English spot .
. .
I recommend you to go to Grassington- in -Upper Wharfedale.' 
If, then, Grassington is such an attractive spot — and so it certainly 
is — we cannot understand why Mr. Harker is not content to allow^ it 
to be known as Grassington, a far prettier name, to our mind, than 
'The Buxton of Yorkshire.' But a rose w^ould smell as swxet by 
my other name, and we trust that Grassington and its surroundings 
will long retain their wild and primitive beauty, 
Grassington, then, was the place selected for the ninety -first 
meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, which took place on 
Saturday, the 20th of June- The neighbourhood, with its fine 
woods, wild surroundings, and beautiful river, is always attractive to 
naturalists, and it is not surprising that the excursion was largely 
attended by members and their friends, many ladies also being 
present.
No doubt the magnificently fine and sunny weather, not 
only of the day itself, but also of the preceding week, had no little 
to do with this.
A small number of members, wishing to spend as 
much time in the district as possible, arrived on the ground the 
previous day, and had been some time at work when the main body 
appeared upon the scene.
The members who availed themselves 
of the arrangements prepared for their conveyance, arrived at Skipton 
about half-past nine on Saturday morning, and were driven to 
Cracoe, and thence to Grassington.
At the former place the 
geologists left the conveyances, and, under the guidance of Mr. R.
H. 
Tiddeman, M.A., F.G.S., than whom, attached as he is to the 
Geological Survey of the district, no more efficient leader could be 
desired, investigated the country, and especially the reef-knolls 
about Cracoe and Thorpe.
The interest of the members accom- 
panying this party was amply evidenced by their attention to the 
explanations given, and by keeping well together and not being 
troubled by stragglers.
Far different was the case with the members 
who devoted themselves to other branches of research.
A party of 
naturalists bent upon active investigation cannot disperse too much 
over the district, and the members attending this excursion did their 
26 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT GRASSINGTON.
duty well.
Hardly a part of Grass Wood or the adjoining river-bank 
was left unexplored, and the result was that a considerable amount 
of excellent worlc was achieved.
A few members availed themselves 
of the invitation of the Craven Naturalists' Association to visit 
Elbolton Cave and inspected the admirable work effected by the 
J 
To the Craven 
Naturalists' Association much credit is due for assisting the honorary 
secretaries in the preparation of the arrangements for the excursion, 
and the Union was favoured as usual by the landowners of the 
district granting the members every facility for the investigation of 
their estates.
Naturai'^tT 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT GRASSINGTON.
263 
The members who confined their attention to the woods had 
certainly, so far as mere comfort goes, the most enjoyable time of it, 
for the excursion was conducted under continuous broiling sunshine; 
and this, on the day preceding the longest day of the year, was 
about noon almost unbearable.
About four o'clock the inhabitants 
of the quiet little village of Grassington began to flock to their 
windows and doors to see the visitors invade their domain.
Bearing 
unmistakeable traces of the limestone nature of the district, they at 
length assembled in Grassington House to the number of between 
70 and 80, and after a most acceptable wash sat down in the 
spacious rooms to the good fare provided.
After tea the party, 
mfluenced by the beautiful weather, moved into the gardens attached 
to Grassington House, and there conducted the business of the 
meetings under the shade of the trees, in true naturalists' fashion.
The Sectional Meetings were first held, at which notes were compared 
and the reports prepared for presentation to theGeneral Meeting, which 
opened at 5.30 under the chairmanship of Mr. G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., 
President of the Entomological Section.
Amid beautiful surroundings 
It IS scarcely advisable to submit members to too much formality in 
the way of meetings, and the proposition that 'the minutes of the 
previous meeting be taken as read' was unanimously acceded to.
The following ladies and gentlemen whose names had been duly 
proposed and seconded were elected, viz.
: the Misses Rachel Ford 
Thompson and Frances Phillips Thompson, Settle; Mrs. A.
H. 
Pawson, Farnleyj and Messrs.
J. J.
Burton, Nunthorpe; E.
D. 
Doncaster, Sheffield; Wm.Mansbridge, Horsforth; Adam Millward, 
Harrogate; and Rudolph Rosenstock, B.A., Huddersfield, It is 
usually and naturally expected that several new members, from the 
district in which an excursion is held, will be admitted into the 
Union, but it is to be regretted that such was not the case with 
regard to the Grassington excursion, not a single new member 
from the immediate district being proposed.
The Societies represented on tlie excursion included Liversedge, 
Leeds (2), York, Dewsbury, Malton, Halifax, Harrogate, Thirsk, 
Craven, Teyburn, Scarborough, Huddersfield, Cleveland, and the 
Conchological Society, 
A vote of thanks was accorded to the Duke of Devonshir 
Messrs.
James Lambert, N.
H. Kelsall, R.
Procter, and ^V.
A. 
Procter for permission granted to visit their respective estates, and to 
Messrs.
R. H.
Tiddeman, M.A., F.G.S, L.
Rotheray, and H.
T. 
Soppitt for leading parties, or contributing to the excursion- 
programme, on the proposition of the Mayor of Halifax, seconded 
byMr^B.
Holgate, RG-S.
Sept, 1891.
£1 
264 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT GRASSINGTON, 
i 
The Reports of the several Sections were presented, and the 
following accounts have been supplied for publication.
For the Vertebrate Section Mr. Riley Fortune, F.Z.S., supplies 
the following report ; — The Section was well attended, and included 
its President, Mr. James Backhouse, F.Z.S.; one of its Hon. Secre- 
taries, Mr- Riley Fortune, F.Z.S.
; Messrs.
Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., 
H. Whitaker, J.
Braim, and others.
The excursion, so far as the 
Vertebrate Section was concerned, was very successful, the only 
drawback being the weather, which was excessively hot.
Birds were 
very plentiful.
Wood Warblers and Garden Warblers especially being 
abundant in Grass Wood and neighbourhood.
Sandpipers were also 
common along the banks of the Wharfe, and a nest containing eggs 
was found.
Yellow Wagtails were also very common ; two or three 
nests of young Dippers were met with, and many others, containing 
either eggs or young birds, marked in the following list.
At Kilnsey Crag House Martins were breeding in very large 
numbers, the nests attached to the face of the cliffs making a very 
pretty and interesting sight; both the Kestrel and the Redstart were 
noted as breeding there, and a great number of Swifts were also 
observed, many of them, no doubt, leaving nests in the crevices of 
the rocks.
Fifty-four species of birds were observed in all ; of this 
number 34 are residents and 20 summer visitors.
The waters of the Wharfe were very low and exceedingly clear, 
so that large numbers of Grayling — some of them very fine speci- 
mens — were seen to the best advantage.
The day's work resulted in two species new to the district beii^g 
added to the list, viz., the Dormouse, seen by Mr. Fortune in Grass 
AV^ood, and the Whiskered Bat, an example of which most oppor- 
tunely and considerately dropped out of the trees right into the 
midst of several officers of the Union during the progress of the 
general meeting, which, on account of the delightful weather, was 
held in the large garden attached to Grassington House- 
The following is a complete list of the Vertebrates observed 
during the excursion.
The asterisks (*) denote that eggs, and the 
daggers (+) that young birds were observed :^ 
Mammals.
Birds.
Great Tit.
Whiskered Bat. Residents.
Blue Tit.
Weasel.
tMissel Thrush.
fWren.
Squirrel.
tSong Thrush.
+Pied Wagtail.
Dormouse.
Blackbird.
tGrey Wagtail.
Water Vole.
Redbreast.
*Meado\v Pipit.
Field Vole.
Goldcrest.
^Greenfinch.
Hare.
Hedge Accentor.
*House Sparrow.
Rabbif.
tDipper.
♦Chaffinch.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT GRASSINGTON- 
265 
Lesser Redpoll.
Bullfinch.
Corn Bunting.
tStarllng.
Magpie.
Jackdaw, 
Crow.
Rook.
*SkyIark.
Kestrel.
Ring Dove.
Stock Dove.
*tPheasant, 
Partridge.
Goldea Plover.
Snipe.
Curlew.
Migrants.
Ring Ouzel.
tWheatear.
Whinchat.
tRedstart.
Whitethroat.
Blackcap.
*Garden Warbler, 
Willow Warbler.
Wood Warbler.
Sedge Warbler.
Yellow Wagtail.
fTree Pipit.
Spotted Flycatcher.
*SwaIlow.
*i\lartin.
*Sand Martin.
Swift.
Cuckoo.
Landrail.
*Sandpiper.
Reptiles and 
Amphibians.
Common Lizard, 
Smooth Newt.
Toad.
Frog.
Fishes.
Bullhead, 
Minnow.
Trout.
Grayling.
For the Entomological Section, Mr. J.
H. Rowntree (Scarborough), 
reported that the members had had a good day.
Mr. Porritt had 
worked along the river side for Neuroptera and Trichoptera; whilst 
Messrs.
Henry Lupton (Leeds), Wm. Mansbridge (Horsforth), and 
himself, had chiefly confined their investigations to the lepidoptera 
of the Grass Wood 
The lepidoptera noticed included the local 
Eitpithecia pygnu^ata (by the river-side between Linton and the 
Grass Wood); Procris s tat ices ^coxa\x\ov\y \ Venusia canihricaria com- 
monly; Demas coryli^ not uncommon; Niimeria pidveraria^]\[elanthia 
<^^bicillata^Pyrausta pimicealis ; whilst others of less note, in greater or 
lesser numbers, were AntJwcharis cardatnines^ Ntidaria muHda?ia 
(larvas)j Venilia maculata^ Fidonia piniaria^ Abraxas ulmata^ Lojuas- 
pilis marginala^ Enpithecia hzridata, Coremia proptigriaia^ C.fermgata, 
Scotosia dubita/a, Lare?itia pedinitaria^ Asthena Candida ta^ Emmelesia 
aibulata^ Tortrix icferana^ Fardia tripunctana, Chrysoclista Jlavi- 
capifdla^ and many others.
Of Neuroptera and Trichoptera, C/iloro- 
peria grammatica was abundant ; Isopteryx burmeisteri^ 7.
tripunctata^ 
Nemotira meyeriy N, cinerea^ Sialis fidiginosa^ Hemerobius orotypus^ 
Sfenophylax stellatiis^ Polycentropus flaiwnaciilatus^ Rhyacophila 
dorsalis^ and Tinodes dives ; the last mentioned, which was new to 
the county, seemed fairly common.
In addition a large species 
belonging to the Perlidse, taken at the 'Tin Brigg' at Linton Falls, 
is as yet undetermined.
Mr. J.
A. Erskine Stuart, Secretary of the Botanical Section, 
writes : — The botanists at Grassington had an excellent day's work, 
although owing to the lateness of the season many of the plants were 
not in flower.
Grass Wood and the river banks were thoroughly 
^v estiga ted by a considerable band, who spread out in all directions, 
Sept.
I So I.
266 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION AT GRASSIXGTON 
and found the greater number of the rarities mentioned in the 
circular, besides one or two additional.
The principal plants were 
Thalicirum mwus v .
Jlexuosiini^ Trollins europceus^ Viola hirta^ 
GeraniujJi sa7iguineum^ Rhamnus frangula^ Spircea filipendida^ Ruhus 
saxatilis^ Dryas odopeiala (at Arncliffe by Mr. J^mes Backhouse)?
Rosa fnolliSj Saxifraga hypnoides, Hieracium a7igHcnin (by Mr. Back- 
house at Kilnsey Q.X2.^^Pyrola minor^ Barfsia odoniiies^ Melampyrinn 
prafense^ Salix phylici/olm, Polygonaium officinale^ Cotivallaria majalis^ 
and Melica nutans \ and of ferns AspUniicm viride^ A, iric/wmanes, 
A. rufa-muraria^ and Scolopendritan tndgare.
No cryptogamist 
reported, so we are without information as to lichens and mosses.
Mr. B.
Holgate, F.G.S., supplies the following report of the 
Geological Section : — ^ To Rilston and Cracoe ' was the order of the 
day for the geologists who took part in the outing.
All w^ere 
in high spirits as, in bright sunshine, they left Skipton about 9.30 
a.m., and went along the pass between Airedale and Wharfedale, 
under the guidance of that most genial and learned member of the 
Geological Survey, Mr. Tiddeman.
The craggy edge of Embsay 
Moor made a high sky-line to the right, and the old eyrie of the 
Norrons frowned forbiddingly from the summit.
One feature of the 
landscape in the valley was most apparent.
The latter was studded 
here and there with dome-like knolls, most prominent near the base 
of the crags, which were capped with gritstone.
This peculiarity 
struck one at once, covered as the knolls were with the lovely green 
which always marks the presence of limestone.
They contrasted 
with the swarthy heather on the grit moors above, and the ex- 
clamation was often repeated, 'What peculiar mounds !' followed by 
the question, ' How have they been formed ?
' It was to examine 
into this problem that the party had come to the spot, and to learn 
from Mr. Tiddeman what he thought on the subject, it being one to 
which he has devoted a great deal of attention.
Most people who know anything about Yorkshire have heard of 
the great Craven faults, faults so immense that the strata on one side 
of them are something like a mile lower down in the earth than the 
corresponding ones on the other side.
Faults are of common 
occurrence, and no one can pass along the main working of a coal 
mine of any size without coming across several of them.
Generally 
the strata have been cut off, appearing again it may be at a few feet 
or yards higher up in the same mine ; but as a rule we are right in 
supposing that though the same strata are at different levels, they 
follow one another in the same order and thickness.
From the 
investigations made by Mr. Tiddeman, however, it would seem that 
that immense fracture in the crust' of the earth, known as the^raXE!^ 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION AT GRASSINGTON.
267 
fault, was made very slowly, and took an immense period of time.
The scene of it was at one time the bottom of a sea.
Corals were 
then hard at work, each little animal doing his little share in the 
immense work of building up the crust of the earth.
The encrinite 
rooted himself among the corals, and reared his head slowly, waving 
his arms through the water in search of food.
The numerous kinds 
of brachiopods attached themselves by means of their self-made 
strings to different objects.
Fishes swam in the waters, and water- 
snails and trilobites crept about, acting as scavengers.
The shells 
and hard skeletons of all these animals went to build up the reef, 
much in the same manner as the reefs in the South Seas are being 
built up at the present day.
But there was a line of weakness in the 
earth, and on one side this line it lowered more rapidly than on the 
other.
The sea, however, did not become much deeper for all this 
lowering, and as the animals became more prolific on the lower side 
than on the upper, the coral had to build up his habitation more 
rapidly, for he would die if he got too far beneath the surface of the 
water, and similarly with the other animals.
But with all this, as age 
after age went on, the depression gradually began to go on at a greater 
rate than the reproductive power of the animals whose shells went to 
build up the thick mass of what is now limestone, and instead of 
forming a long reef of equal height, the work became broken up into 
rows of detached portions of reef, and as the bottom went on 
lowering the water became too deep to sustain the life of even these 
animals, which had outlived their fellows, and struggled on to build 
up these islets.
Not only had the water been too deep, but fine 
black mud was being washed very slowly into the deeper part, killing 
outright the animals which, of all others, required clear water for 
their existence, and this mud brought with it fronds and parts of ferns 
and other plants, so that even these islets began to be interred in 
mud.
The soft open parts of the corals crumbled away, and the 
upper hard layers of shells began to bend over and sometimes to 
break off and slide down into the muddy bottom ; but in any case 
it went to form a dome-like cap over the main body of the islet.
The deposit of mud became more rapid, and in time interred the 
entire reef.
All this time the beds on the other or upper side of the 
fault, although they had been lowering, had done so so slowly that 
the animals whose dead shells went to make up the strata had a hard 
struggle for existence, and at length died out, partly because the 
water was too shallow^ and partly because the animals were choked 
with mud.
These latter deposits, extending from this fault into 
Northumberland, are known as the Yoredale Rocks, and are well 
developed in the valley of the Yore.
— % 
Sept.
1891, 
268 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION AT GRASSINGTON.
The deposits first spoken of are known as the Chtheroe Hme- 
stonesj the mud being the Bowland shales; and they form a base 
for the carboniferous strata of Yorkshire and Derbyshire.
Since that 
time ages have passed away ; these reefs and their islets have been 
surrounded by other strata, and buried deep in the earth; but, as 
change after change has taken place, they have been again raised, 
and the mud which surrounded them has been gradually washed 
from them by weather and water, and carried down the rivers Wharfe 
and Aire.
But the dome-like covering has protected the knolls, and 
they still stand out, immense monuments of one of the many curious 
ways in which the earth has been built up, the mysteries of which 
a geologist makes it his work to unravel.
Three of these knolls 
were visited by the party — namely, those of Stebden, Garden, and 
Elbolton ; and in these the dip of the rocks and the different animal 
and plant remains were found in illustration of what has been said 
as to the manner in which they were formed.
As the party stood on 
the sides of these immense mounds, the occurrences of much later 
periods were passed in review before them.
Evidence lay there of 
the last great geological period previous to the present one, the 
evidence of which is almost universal in our Yorkshire valleys.
In the hollows between the knolls were the mixture of clay, sand, 
and the different kinds of rocks found in the valley lying together in 
total disorder, their surface forming a hummocky, irregular outline 
the whole being the residue brought down the valley by a glacier.
At Elbolton the party had a view of a still later episode.
They 
there descended the now famous well-like cave in which has been 
found the remains of some twelve human beings; as also those of 
bears, wild boars, wolves, and other animals now long extinct in 
Britain— the latter of which had probably fallen in by accident.
The geological business over, the party went through the once- 
thriving but now almost deserted village of Thorpe to Grassington, 
all well pleased with the interesting and instructive day, and with 
thanks to the leader, who had so clearly explained on the spot this 
very curious formation.
For the Conchological Section Mr. William Nelson, who was 
during the course of its proceedings elected one of its Secretaries 
in place of Mr. John Emmet, F.L.S,, whose res 
was very sorry to receive, prepared the report, as follows : 
Messrs.
Nelson and Roebuck began operations at Cracoe on the 
wagonette stopping for rest for the horses, by searching at the foot of 
the walls, where a beautifully coloured Umax agrestis was found, 
which Mr. Roebuck identified as van Hlacina, while they also took 
Zonites nitidulus.
Helix rufescens (commonly), H rotundata, and 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT GUASSINGTON.
269 
Clausilia 7'ugosa^ before again mounting the conveyance.
Then being 
rapidly driven towards their destination they could not but admire 
the beautiful flowers of Geranium sylvaticiim by the road-sides.
Directly the Wharfe was reached and crossed the conveyance was 
left for good, and the party followed the footpath along the north 
bank to Ghaistrills.
Here, in a water-trough were obtained examples 
of Limncea peregra^ and a single specimen of Helix lapicida en- 
sconced in a corner of the trough a few^ inches above the water.
Passing through Grass Low Wood and crossing the Kilnsey road, 
Grass High Wood was reached.
Diligent search here produced but 
little result.
The search was, however, steadily continued as the way 
was made to the foot of Dewbottom Scar.
Here there -was a pretty stiff 
and awkward climb up the steep slope and the nearly perpendicular 
rocks of the summit, but this being reached the sight of the abundant 
blossoms of Rosa mollis was a rich reward.
On the summit some 
time was spent in searching amongst the only damp leaves to be 
found.
Here were obtained dead examples of Vitrina pelhuida (each 
excursion this year has confirmed as a fact that winter and early 
spring is the time to collect this mollusc in a living state), Zonites- 
cellariiis^ Z.
nitidtihis^ Z.
purus, Z.
fiilvus, Z crystallinus^ Z glaber^ 
Z alliarius, Z.
radiatuluSy BuHdius obscurics^ Pupa umbilicata^ 
one Vertigo edentula^ Clausilia mgosa^ CL laminata^ several Azeca 
iride/is, a few Zua lubrica^ and a dead Carychium minimum.
On 
this spot being left the wood was traversed by w^ay of its bare and 
sterile summit, enlivened however by the chaste flowers of the 
Mealy Primrose, and passing alongside Gregory Scar, the great 
profusion of the Globe-flower was noticed in certain parts of the 
woods.
Grassington was reached soon after this, when Mr. A.
H. 
Pawson laid before the Section examples of Helix nemoralis^ 
H arbustorum^ Succinea putris and Limneea peregra^ which he had 
collected the previous evening, and Mr. Riley Fortune, F.Z.S.y 
showed specimens of Ancylics jftiviatilis.
At the sectional meeting, 
Mr, William Cash, F.L.S., of Halifax, was voted to the chair, and 
afterwards reported the results to the general meeting.
After the 
meetings were over, Messrs, Pawson, Roebuck, and R.
Rosenstock, 
B.A., who were remaining behind for the week end, took the 
opportunity to go down the Burnsall footpath to look for and confirm 
the reported occurrence of Cydostoma elegans.
This was soon done, 
numerous dead examples being found on banks close to the footpath 
and river in Lythe woods, about a mile and a half from Grassington, 
and with them numbers of other dead shells, including plenty of 
Helix ericciomm.
This walk was continued to Hebden, where a 
mill-dam yielded numerous Limncea peregra and Pisidiian fontinah.
Sept.
1891.
27c NOTES AND NEWS.
Next day the same collectors found various other shells, including 
Helix coiicinna and H.
rupestris on the topmost summits (975 feet) 
of Grass Wood.
The total number of species observed was 2>h ^^ 
which 3 were slugs, 3 fresh-water shells, and the rest land shells, a 
very satisfactory result considering the dryness and warmth of the 
weather.
Vertigo edentula and Zonites piirus were of interest as 
additions to the published lists for Grassington.
This concluded the scientific portion of the business, and 
the Hon. Secretaries then brought forward the question of 
representation at the forthcoming meeting of the British Association 
-at Cardiff, their colleague, the Rev. E.
P. Knubley, M.A., being 
tinanimously chosen to that office.
A vote of thanks passed to the 
Chairman, on the motion of Messrs.
Wm. Home, F.G.S,, and J.
E. 
Bedford, F.G.S., terminated the meeting.
It may be added that several photographers present added to 
the interest of the Geological Section by taking some of the 
exposures along the line of route.
The Hon. Secretaries invite all 
persons taking photographs on the Union's excursions to supply 
a copy of each photograph for the Y.N.U. albums.
— E.R.W.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Our colleague, Mr. Alfred Harker, M.A., F.G.S., has published in the 
Geological Magazine for June some 'Notes on a Collection of Rocks from the 
Tonga Islands,' a group which has hitherto received no attention from geologists.
The early publication of a new Yorkshire book by Mr. Frederick Ross, entitled 
* Contributions towards a History of Driffield,' is announced, of which the natural 
historj' chapters will be by Mr. Lewis Buttle Ross, F.C.S., a prominent member 
-of the Yorkshire Naturalists* Union.
Tlie latest addition to our Exchange list is 'The New Zealand Journal of 
Science,' a monthly magazine devoted to the furtherance of pure and applied 
science throughout the colony.
It is published at Dunedin, ably edited, well 
pilnted, and the papers appear to be of great interest as well as of scientific value.
The Buzzard which our late lamented friend Mr. John Harrison of ^ViIstrop 
lias had in captivity for some years past has laid a couple of eggs this year, on 
April 30th and May 3rd, and when Mr, Harrison's niece removed them she put 
a hen's egi^ instead.
The Buzzard hatched a fine chicken, of which she was 
immensely proud, but unfortunately at the end of a week she was found carrying 
it about dead.
We hear from the Antipodes of the decease of a distinguished native of 
Westmorland, in the person of William John Stephens, who was born at Levens, 
16th July, 1829, and died at Sydney on 22nd November, 1890.
A man of varied 
attainments, he was Professor of Geology and Palaeontology in the University of 
Sydney, and prominently identified with first the Entomological Society of New 
South Wales, and afterwards of the Linncan Society of N.S.W., of which latter 
V>ody he was at times Hon. Secretary, Vice-President, and twice President, 
holding the latter office down to the close of his life.
_ 
Nauiralisty 
271 
n ^{lemoriam.
DANIEL MACKINTOSH, F.G.S.
4 
Many of our geological readers will have read with regret the 
announcement of the death of Mr. Daniel Mackintosh, who was 
widely known as an able and enthusiastic teacher of natural 
science, and was no less celebrated as an ardent worker in the 
glacial geology of the British Islands.
The deceased gentleman, 
who passed away at the age of 76, had been in failing health for 
some time past.
He had held, among other scholastic posts, the 
.appointment of lecturer on geology and physiography to the 
Liverpool College, besides which, he had a high reputation among 
many of the leading institutions and educational centres of the 
country as a lecturer on these subjects and on astronomy.
P21ected 
a Fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1861, he became.
a prolific writer, and at a time when his strength permitted his 
best energies to be put forth there was no one whose name was 
niore often met with in the geological literature of the day.
His 
extensive field-work brought him in contact with some of the 
most noted savants of the age, among those whose friendship 
he enjoyed being the late Charles Darwin, Canon Kingsley, Sir 
Roderick Murchison, Professor Sedgwick, and Sir Charles Lyeli.
Mr. Mackintosh was, we believe, by birth a Scotchman, but 
resided for some years in the south of England.
He afterwards 
removed to Chester, where he materially assisted Canon Kingsley 
in establishing the Chester Society of Natural Science, frequently 
leading their early excursions.
In 1875 ^^e members of this 
Society subscribed a purse of ;^4o as a testimonial of their 
appreciation of his services, the gift being presented to him by the 
late Dean Howson.
More recently he was awarded the Kingsley 
Memorial Medal, 2[iven in commemoration of their revered founder 
to those who have specially distinguished themselves in original 
scientific research, this being the highest distinction it is in the 
power of the Society to bestow.
The Geological Society of 
London also recognised his work in presenting him wath a grant 
from the ' Lyell Fund' in 1886, 
On receiving his appointment at Liverpool, Mr.
?>Lackintosh left 
Chester to reside at Birkenhead.
He was elected President of the 
I'iverpool Geological Society during the sessions 1881-83, when he 
delivered two addresses at the Royal Institution, in Colquitt Street, 
having for their subjects :—' The time which has elapsed since the 
Sl^se^of the glacial period,' and 'Post-tertiary changes of level/ 
Sept.
iifQi.
272 IN MEMORIAM — DANIEL MACKINTOSH, F.G.S.
He also sat on the British Association Committee on erratic 
blocks, and rendered much valuable assistance to that body.
As a geologist he belonged to the pre-Lyellian school, but in 
later years he considerably modified many of his opinions, 
especially in regard to the effects of marine denudation in giving rise 
to certain prominent features of the landscape, such as valleys, 
cwms, and mountain passes, which are now generally held to be 
due to subaerial influences.
But, in addition to his valuable general 
knowledge of the diversified rocks of the country, his most 
important contribution to science wasj perhaps, that careful and 
systematic survey of the boulder clay and erratic blocks of the 
north-west of England and the east of Wales, which formed the 
subject of an elaborate memoir published in 1878 by the Geological 
Society of London, Although some of his views, especially those 
relating to the tripartite division of the Boulder Clay and the 
supposed inter-glacial age of certain deposits in the Cheshire area, 
do not seem likely to be accepted in their entirety by the modern 
school of glacial geologists, it is not too much to say that 
Mr. Mackintosh's observations have laid the foundation of a great 
part of the work of later explorers, and that his papers are standard 
authorities for students of our local glacial records on the rocks.
He published a work (now, unhappily, out of print) entitled 
*The Scenery of England and Wales in relation to its Geology/ 
which comprised an account of his own observations covering a 
large part of Great Britain ; scarcely a hill or dale possessing any 
feature of interest, existing in the country, with which he was not 
familiar.
Among other works worthy of note may be mentioned his 
papers on the * Inter-glacial Age of the Cave Mammalia,' and on 
* Eskers and Lake Basins of Cheshire and Flint/ 
During the last few years his life has been passed almost m 
seclusion, the state of his health having compelled him to relinquish 
most of his scholastic and other work.
His wants were simple, and, 
as to his frugality, the following extract from a memorial notice in 
the Chester Chronicle will speak ; — * Money was no object beyond its 
power of providing him with wholesome and humble fare.
It was 
luxury beyond dreams, wealth beyond measure to him, to decipher 
some of nature's hieroglyphics in her grand history of the past, as 
recorded upon the face of the heavens and in the depth of the 
earth/ Such a character is, indeed, rare.
Apart from his scientific 
eminence Mr. Mackintosh will be remembered with much affection 
by a large circle of friends and pupils, for his gentle disposition and 
kind and genial qualities were impressed upon all who knew him.
O^AVJ.
Naturalist 
273 
EXTRACTS 
FROM A CONCHOLOGIST'S NOTE-BOOK 
WILLIAM NELSON, 
Cro$sgates, Leeds; Hon. Curator to t/ie Cotichological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
1. To Batley for Limnsea glabra.
— On a bitter cold morning 
in the early part of February twenty-seven years ago, I started out 
accompanied by my friend J.
Beevers — at that time an enthusiastic 
conchologist — in search for Lwuma glabra at a locality near Batley, 
particulars of which had been communicated to us bv a mutual 
friend (and here I may say the locality was near to the present 
railway station, and has been built on many years ago).
The 
weather for some time had been very mild, causing the vegetation to 
begin growing in the bottom of the hedges, but a severe frost having 
set in some days before our journey made it useless for us to search 
for shells on the road-side, so that we arrived at Woodchurch before 
making any attempt.
Here we obtained specimens of Ancylus 
flnviatlUs from a small rapidly-running stream, and then pushing 
along to our destination, which was a small pond in a bye-lane, 
we found the pond frozen over, but, procuring a stone, we broke a 
hole through the ice; then taking off our coats and turning up our 
shirt-sleeves we lay flat down on the ice, when we groped with our 
hands beneath it, and so obtained handfuls of Callitriche^ amongst 
which we found a few specimens oi Pisidia^ and numerous examples 
of Lhnnaa glabra^ some oi which are now in my collection, 
and serve to remind me of my first acquaintance with this local 
species in one of its native habitats.
2. To Havercroft Green for Limnaea glabra.— On a fine 
morning in the latter part of February 1882, 1 called on J.
Hebden, 
who for many years was one of our very best out-door naturalists 
(can nothing be done to re-enlist his interest in our common studies?), 
and who had promised to take me to this locality ioxL.
glabra (which 
I had not hitherto visited).
Passing through Sandal we examined an 
old garden wall, and noticed the Rue Fern {Asplenitan rttta-miiraria)^ 
but found no shells.
In a lane at Walton we obtained Zonites nitidiilus^ 
and going along the side of Haw Park searched the foot of the wall, and 
obtained examples of Zonites alliarius^ Z.
excavatiis^ Helix aculeaia^ 
H. hispida and H, rotundata^ and, under a piece of rotting wood, 
Zonites radiatulus.
Arriving at Cold Hiendley reservoir we skirted the 
large sheet of water, and searched one or two small ponds without 
success.
Crossing some fields, we went in anything but a direct course; 
^X^^^tually we turned along a lane, where we noticed the first flowers 
Sept.
1891.
S 
2 74 NOTES AND NEWS.
of the Lesser Celandine.
We at length came to Havercroft Green, 
which was our destination.
Here there are a number of small ponds, 
in one of which we collected a fair quantity of Limm^a glabra^ which 
I think may be referred to the variety subulaia (Kick.), as figured 
by Clessin (Deutsche Exc. Moll Fauna, Fig. 256, 1884).
The only 
other shell we obtained here was Pisidium pusillum.
Before leaving 
here it began to rain, and went on at a steadily increasing rate until 
we got to Ryhill, where we stopped to shelter; but at length we were 
obliged to turn out and trudge along in the pouring rain to 
Wintersett, Leaving the village our troubles commenced, for Hebden, 
who usually displays a want of knowledge of localities, out-Herods 
himself by taking us a considerable distance across ploughed fields, 
only to discover that he is hopelessly lost.
At length we reached the 
wall of Haw Park ; this we skirted till we got in sight of Walton, and 
so from there to Sandal and Wakefield, where we arrived thoroughly 
drenched.
NOTES AND NEWS, 
The Geologists' Association announce for publication a * Record of Excursions 
made between i860 and 1890.' The Association has visited, during the past 
thirty years, most places of geological interest in England and Wales.
The 
record of excursions is a collection of the reports made by the directors of the 
several excursions, illustrated by maps or sections of the places visited, and 
giving at the same time information as to the Ordnance Survey Maps, the 
Geological Maps, and the recent literature on the subject.
Thus the work is seen 
to be one of considerable value to the working geologist, the student, and the 
amateur, and it will no doubt prove to be of especial value to the secretaries of 
Field Clubs and local Natural History Societies, 
"We have to welcome a new magazine, whose object is to further the investi- 
gation of the physical features and the natural history of a definitely restricted 
area.
*The Mediterranean Naturalist,' of which the first number (June, 1891) 
lies before us, is to appear monthly, price 5s.
per annum, and is conducted by 
Mr. John H.
Cooke, B.Sc, F.G.S., of Highland House, St. Julians, Malta, who 
promises, in his introductory remarks, that the magazine shall be devoted to the 
natural history of the Mediterranean Sea, its islands and its shores.
We note that 
our own old friend and supporter, Mr. T.
Mellard Reade, F.G.S., of Liverpool, 
promises to contribute to future numbers, and that the list of contributors also 
includes such other distinguished names as those of Prof.
G. Capellini of Bologna, 
Cav. G.
Jervis of Turin, Dr. Johnstone-Lavis of Naples, etc., and the opening 
number is a varied and attractive one- 
Some of the most charming of Yorkshire Dale-scenery is to form the subject 
of an important new Yorkshire book announced as in preparation by the Rev. V^ • 
Thompson, M.A., of Sedbergh, who will treat of ' Sedbergh, Garsdale, and 
Dent.' The geology and botany of the district will not be overlooked; M»^; 
Thompson is himself a botanist, and published a * Florula Sedberghensis 
privately some years ago.
The district is moreover classic ground to geologists, 
being the birth-place of Adam Sedgwick, A portrait of hira is to be given, abo 
of Dr. Dawson, the self-taught mathematician, and of Dr. Inman, whose ^Nautical 
Tables' are still the text-book used in the Royal Navy.
The heronry near 
Sedbergh is to be noticed, and the work will be illustrated by Mr. J.
A- 
Symington's drawings.
Mr, Thompson has our every good wish for the success 
of his work* 
Naturalist, 
275 
DAU BENTON'S BAT 
ADDED TO THE YORKSHIRE FAUNA 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., 
Natural History Dcpartinent, Mnseum of Science and Art, Edinburgh; etc 
At last this local but widely-distributed Bat {Vespertilio daubeniofiii) 
has been detected in Yorkshire, That it would sooner or later be 
recorded for the county has been regarded as a matter almost of 
certainty by those interested in the distribution of the British 
Mammalia, to whom the absence of this species from an area of such 
magnitude and diversity of aspect has always seemed to be little less 
than an impossibility.
These opinions are now happily confirmed, 
and the species appears to be not uncommon in at least one district 
of North-West Yorkshire.
The example which I had the pleasure 
of identifying was forwarded to me for that purpose by my friend 
Mr. Basil Carter, to whom belongs the credit of obtaining the first 
Yorkshire example.
The specimen, a male, was shot as it was 
flitting over the river Yore at Masham, on the 19th of August last, 
at 8,30 p.m. It appeared to be accompanied by several others of 
the same species, and these, attracted by the squeaks of the captive, 
flew quite closely around as he took it from the water into which it 
had fallen.
Mr. James Carter writes me that he has often watched 
similar Bats flying over the surface oi the Yore, but always failed \n 
his efforts to secure a specimen of what he felt sure was V.
danhentonii.
Is Dr. Dobson's description of the tragus as given in his excellent 
Catalogue of the Cheiroptera, p.
297, wherein it is said to terminate 
* in an acute point,' correct ?
I have examined a number of perfectly 
fresh examples this year, and I find that this organ, though it tapers 
considerably, is decidedly rounded at its distal extremity; and that 
such is the case is well-shown in the enlarged figure of the ear of this 
species given by Blasius in his 'Fauna der Wirbelthiere Deutschlands,' 
Saugethiere, p, 99.
^__ 
NOTE— FUNGI.
Geaster hygrometricus Fr. in Wharf edale.— As this fungus does not 
seem to have been recorded for West Yorkshire since the \\mQ of Bolton (1791), 
it may interest the readers of 'The Naturalist' to know that I came across three 
specimens on Rombalds Moor on the evening of the 12th of August.
The plants 
were very old and dry, but I sent them to Dr, Cooke, who kindly identified them 
for me.
These • earth-stars/ as they are popularly called, are interesting, not 
JTierely on account of their extreme rarity, but also for their curious structure and 
^ygrometric properties.— PerCV H.
GrimshaW, Burley-in-Wharfedale.
Sept.
iS^t.
\ 
276 
NEW YORKSHIRE EARTHWORMS 
Rev. HILDERIC FRIEND, F.L.S., 
President 0/ the IVesley Scientific Society ; Author of ^Flowers and Flower-Lore^ etc, ; 
Idle^ Bradford, 
A year's work among the earthworms of Yorkshire has enabled me 
to correct and enlarge the list which I published some months ago.
As it seems likely that the list wall be still further enlarged by 
continuous research, I do not propose at present to revise it, but 
simply place on record new facts.
I have recently been able to 
identify a new worm found in the Haigh Beck, Idle, which has 
I believe, been regarded formerly as the young of another species.
In 1836 there appeared a catalogue of species of Annulose 
Animals in Loudon's Magazine of Natural History (vol.
ix,, 235), 
by Templeton, in which we find reference to an unknown worm.
This is named Liimhricus omihirus (— Omiliirus rubescens Temp.).
Recent writers have all pushed it aside, and relegated it to the limbo 
of the unknown.
I have been able to recover what I believe to be 
Templeton's species, and as it is a genuine Lumbricus, and at present 
is without synonyms, I purpose retaining the name Lumbricus 
rubescens (Temp.), and calling it the Ruddy Worm, as distinguished 
from the Red Worm {Ltonbricus nibellus Hoffm.), with which 
I believe it has been confounded.
The following is a description of my Yorkshire specimens, w^hich 
corresponds very nearly with that given by Templeton.
Colour exactly like the Red Worm, except the tail, which is 
usually a more transparent flesh-colour; beautifully iridescent, pale 
underneath.
About three or four inches long, fore part of the body 
round, tail flattened.
No apparent girdle (clitellum), but a well- 
defined region (segments 34 to 39), modified especially on the 
underside to serve the purposes of a clitellum.
A band connects 
segments 35 to 38 on the under surface — this is known as tuber cula 
pubertatis^ and is farther back than in any other known British 
species of Lumbricus.
In the Red Worm (Z.
rubellus), the well- 
marked clitellum extends from segments 27 to 32, the tuberciila from 
28 to 31.
Total number of segments about 120.
Setse of three kinds, 
arranged as in typical Lumbricus, with specially modified (penial) setae 
on segments 11, 13, 34 to 40 (under the clitellum)- The first dorsal 
pore varies in position between the sth and the 7th segments.
The 
male pore is on a papilla in segment 15, and prominent papillse are 
found in the 28th and 29th quite ventrally.
The worm like the 
other true Lumbrici, and unlike the majority of the Allolobophor^, 
yields no coloured fluid, but secretes a slimy mucus when irritated.
Naturalist, 
REVIEW — VARIATION IN BRITISH NOCTU^.
277 
Internally, so far as I have at present observed, there are the 
normal pairs of spermathecse, four pairs of seminal vesicles, and two 
pairs of calciferous glands.
As these structures vary, however, with 
the season and sexual maturity of the worm, further examination 
will be necessary, 
I have found a new Yorkshire worm near the Strid, in Wharfe- 
dale, which I believe will also prove new to Britain.
It belongs to 
Eisen's Dendrob^na division, but as the nomenclature is bewildering 
I forbear adding to the confusion.
The following brief description 
may, however, be useful.
Worm about i^ inches in length.
Very similar at first sight to the 
Purple Worm (L, purpiircits)^ but unlike it has the male pores on 
prominent papilla extending over the adjoining posterior segment, 
while the setse are in eight distinct rows, making the worm 
octohedraL The clitellum extends from segments 29 to 33.
NOTE—LEFIDOPTEKA.
Larentia ruficinctata near Scarborough.
— I beg to record the finding of the 
imago of Lareiitia rufichicfata on Hutton Buscel Moor on July i6th.
I was in the 
company of Mr. H.
W. Head, who at once identified the insect, which tallies 
exactly with the description in Newman, It differs materially from L.
msiata^ 
which is, I believe, not uncommon here.
The Moor at that point is about 450 Jeet 
above sea -level.
The White INIeadow Saxifrage (S.
gramdata) does not 
grow in the neighbourhood; and therefore, though this is the only food -plant 
named by Newman, the larva probably has alternative food plants not yet 
recorded.— Reginald H.
Barker, Hull, August 7th, 1S91.
VARIATION IN BRITISH NOCTURE.
r 
The British Noctu^ and their Varieties.
By J.
W. Tutt, F.E.S. Swan, 
Sonnenschein and Co. Voh I, 5s.
6d.
We have received the first volume of this book, which has for some 
time been awaited with considerable interest by lepidopterists.
With 
the first paragraph in the ^Preface/ and consequently in the book — 
*The study of the causes of the variation of lepidoptera has now 
become such an acknowledged part of our work, that there appears 
j:o be but little need to explain the necessity for bringing out a 
systematic and descriptive volume of the varieties of a part of one 
of our most interesting groups of lepidoptera '--we cordially agree.
The 'Introduction/ too, explaining what the author conceives to be 
the causes which produce variation in lepidoptera is a very valuable 
contribution to entomological literature.
The author's theory as to 
nielanic varieties, of which we have probably more in the West 
Riding of Yorkshire than in any other part of the country, to the 
effect that they are caused by an excess of moisture and cold, 
Sept.
i8gi.
p 
278 REVIEW — VARIATION IN BRITISH NOCTU^.
together with an exclusion of the sun's rays — as propounded by 
Lord Walsingham in his presidential address to the members of our 
Union in 1885 — combined with natural selection, is fully borne out 
in our West Riding districts, and is the theory w^hich has for some 
time, as the result of a careful study of these melamc forms and their 
habitats, tnost commended itself to ourselves.
The primary object 
of the book^ the describing and differentiating of all the known forms 
of the British Noctuae, is well and exhaustively done (in this volume.
to the end of the genus Caradrina\ and the labour involved in it 
must have been enormous.
But that the author has seen fit to 
bestow separate names on nearly all the forms he has described, we 
think is a mistake, the mistake of the book.
We should not ourselves 
have used the new {as it is called, though in reality it professes to be 
the oldest!) nomenclature, but that is simply a matter of opinion.
The absurdity of it, however, reaches its climax when our old friend 
Apamea oculea has no less than thirty names given to its various 
forms, and one has to study the nomenclature for some time before 
discovering that cadea is really the species treated of at all !
We had 
always considered the conchologists the greatest sinners as variety 
namers, but Mr. Tutt has outdone the conchologists completely, and 
to make so many vars, tufiXy rosea^ intermedia^ stiffusa, grisea, and 
many others named simply from a difference in colour of the 
stigmata, or a spot, and especially from a single specimen, is 
altogether unwarrantable.
For example, Xylophasia rurea has nine 
named forms given to it, whereas two variety names in addition to 
the type name would, we think, be amply sufficient.
The author 
describes Mian a strigilis and M.
fasciuncida as separate species, but 
yet goes on to say that "- M.fasciuncula is so exactly like J/, strigilis 
in shape and markings, that besides colour there appears to be no 
distinguishing mark in the imago state by which it can be separated.' 
This statement we entirely deny, as there are no two more 
satisfactorily separated species in the list of British Lepidopteral 
Dr. Chapman's recently proposed division of the genus Acronyda is 
adopted, and if the genus is to be divided at all we hope it will 
stand, as it is the result of a very painstaking and careful study of 
the group on Dr. Chapman's part, and as it seems to us superior to 
any division which had previously been suggested.
To all lepidop- 
terists who take interest in the study of varieties (and w^here now is 
one who does not ?), the book, when complete, will be invaluable as 
a successful attempt at a description of the known forms; but that 
they wnll use all the names in the labelling of their cabinets, or in 
conversation or correspondence, is probably more than the author 
expects.
— G.T.P, 
Naturalist 
279 
ADDITIONS TO WEST YORKSHIRE FUNGI 
(HYMENOMYCETES).
i. 
H. T.
SOPPITT.
It has been deemed advisable, in view of the forthcoming fungus 
foray at Doncaster, to enumerate the more interesting of the 
Hymenomycetes which have been found in West Yorkshire since 
the Bramham and Harewood fungus forays of September 1888.
Owing in great measure to the lack of mycological workers, the 
greater portion of West Yorkshire has not been investigated, and 
doubtless there yet remains a large number of species to be 
recorded.
The majority of species in the following list are new to the 
West Riding; and those marked with an asterisk have been 
previously recorded, but the localities are additional- The total 
number of Hymenomycetes on record, including those in Lees' 
'Flora of West Yorkshire/ and in the 'Naturalist,' is 553, which is 
small compared with other areas of smaller extent.
AGARICINI.
Agaricus (Amanita) spissus Fr. Nab Wood, Saltaire, 
Oct. 1889!
Agaricus (Amanita) adnatus Sm. Heaton Woods!
Nab 
Wood, Sept 1889, R.
Dewhirst.
Bingley, Aug. 1891, J.
A. 
Butterfield.
Agaricus (Arminaria) melleus van laricinus Fn On wood 
at Liversedge station, Rev. W.
Fowler.
Agaricus (Tricholoma) cuneifoHus Fr. Pasture at Seven 
Arches, Bingley, Sept.
1889 !
Agaricus (Tricholoma) albus Schseff.
Beckfoot Lane, 
Cottingley, Oct. 1890.
aricus (Tricholoma) brevipes Bull.
Frequent in pastures 
at Otiey Chevin !
Agaricus ' (Clitocybe) opacus With.
Beneath the wooden 
floor of an old building, White Abbey, Bradford, Nov. 1890; 
B. Illingworth- 
Agaricus (Mycena) adonis Bull.
Pasture on Baildon Moor, 
Oct 1889!
Agaricus )Mycena) lutea-albus Bolt.
Pastures at Cottingley 
and Goitstock, Sept.
1888 !
Sept.
1891.
28o SOPPITT : ADDITIONS TO WEST YORKSHIRE FUNGI.
Agancus (Mycena) ammoniacus Fn Field at Gomersal; 
Rev. W.
Fowler.
Near Shipley Glen, Oct. 1889 !
Agaricus (Mycena) plicosus Fr. On lawn at Peel Park, 
Bradford, Oct. 1889!
Agaricus (Mycena) sacchariferus B.
& Br. Shipley Glen 
Bog, July 1889 !
Agaricus (Omphalia) sphagnicola B.
& Br. Swamp in Nab 
Wood, Oct. 1890 !
Agaricus (Omphalia) grlseo-pallidus Desm.
Bingley Woods, 
Oct. 1890 !
Agaricus (Omphalia) stellatus Fr. On twigs, Calverley, 
Nov. 1889!
Agaricus (Pleurotus) corticatus Fr. On a fallen tree, 
Goitstock, August 1891 !
Agaricus (Pleurotusy euosmus Berk.
Plentiful on decaying 
poplars, Liversedge, 1890; Rev. W- Fowler.
Agaricus (Entoloma) bloxami Berk.
Pasture near Bingley 
Woods, Sept.
1889 !
Agaricus (Entoloma) majalis Fr. Shipley Glen, May, 1889 r 
Agaricus (Clitopilus) orcella Bull.
Pastures, Bingley and 
Baildon, 1890 !
Agaricus (Leptonia) serrulatus Pers.
Thornton Moor, 
Sept.
1888; W.
West.
'Agaricus (Leptonia) chalybaeus Pers.
Austwick, Aug. 1891 !
Agaricus (Nolanea) mammosus Linn.
Field near Bingley 
Woods, Sept.
1 888!
Agaricus (Pholiota) erebius Fr. Bingley Woods, Sept.
1889 i 
Agaricus (Pholiota) pumila Fr. Mossy ground, Idle quarries, 
Oct. 1S90.
Agaricus (Flammula) inopus Fr. Fir plantation, Cottingley, 
Sept.
1S89!
Agaricus (Stropharia) squamosus Fr. Wood in Coxley 
Valley; Rev. W.
Fowler.
Agaricus (Psilocybe) physaloides Bull.
Nab Wood, Saltaire, 
Sept.
1889 : 
Agaricus (Psathyra) spadiceo-griseus Schseff.
Wood floor 
of a summer-house at Dewsbury ; Rev. W.
Fowler.
Agaricus (Panseotus) retirugis Fr. Fagley, Nov. 1S89 !
Agaricus (Psathyrella) hiascens Fr. Bingley Woods, Oct.
1890!
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT : ADDITIONS TO WEST YORKSHIRE FUNGI.
28 1 
Coprinus hendersoni Berk.
On a mushroom bed, Bradford, 
Aug, 1S91 !
Cortinarius (Dermocybe) uHginosus Berk.
Sphagnum 
swamp, Nab Wood, Oct. 1890 !
Cortinarius (Hygrocybe) duracinus Fr, Bolton Woods, 
Sept.
1890 !
Cortinarius (Hygrocybe) fasciatus Fr. Shipley Glen, Oct.
1890!
Hygrophorus chlorophanus Fr. Pastures, Calverley, Nov.
1888!
Hygrophorus COSSUS Fr. Nab Wood, Saltaire ; R.
iJewhirst, 
Sept.
1888.
Hygrophorus laetus Fr. Common amongst brackens in 
Shipley Glen, Sept.
1889!
Lactarius involutus Soppitt.
Bolton Woods, Aug. 1890!
Lactarius glyciosmus Fr. Wood in Coxley Valley; Rev. W.
Fowler.
Russula depallens Fr. Field at Dean Hill, Barnsley ; Rev. W.
Fowler.
^Russula rubra Fr. Esholt Woods, Aug. 1891 !
^Russula lutea Fr. Bolton Woods, Aug. 1890!
*Cantharellus cinereus Fr. Esholt Woods, Oct. 18S9 !
Panus Stypticus Fr. Shelf Woods !
rOLYPOREL 
^ 
"Boletus striaepes Seer.
Near Halifax, 1890; C.
Crossland- 
Boletus olivaceus Sch^fif.
Bolton Woods, Aug. 1890 !
*Boletus laricinus Berk.
Abundant in plantation on Giggleswick 
Scar, also in Clapham Woods, Aug. 1891 1 
*Boletus versipellis Fr. Nab Wood, Saltaire; R.
Dewhirst.
*Fistulina hepatica Fr. On oaks, Bingley!
Near Harden, 
T. Hebden.
Polyporus brumalis Fn Bolton Woods, April 1889!
Polyporus terrestris Fr. Chellow Dean, July 1890!
*PoIyporus destructor Fn Liversedge station; Rev. W.
Fowler.
HYDNEI.
num niveum 
J 
Sept.
t8qi.
282 NOTES — MAMMALIA AND ORNITHOLOGY.
THELEPHOREL 
Craterellus cornucopioides Pers.
Not uncommon near the 
'Strid; Bolton Woods, Aug. 1889-90 !
Corticium corrugatum Fn Calverley Woods, Aug. 1889 !
Corticium puteanum Fr, Esholt, Nov. 1888!
Cyphella muscicola Fr. On Mnium Jiomum^ Bolton Woods, 
Aug. 1890 !
CLAVARIEL 
Typhula gyrans Fr. Shipley Glen Bog, 1889; F.
Rhodes !
TREMELLINEI.
Tremella lutescens Pers.
On dead hawthorn, Calverley 
Woods, Jan. 1889 !
NOTE—MAMMALIA.
Badger In South Yorkshire.
— la addition to fhe numerous records of the 
occurrence of the Badger in Yorkshire published in 'The Naturalist,' a fine 
specimen was found on the line between Hampole and Adwick-Ie-Street near 
Doncaster about six years ago.
It was much mutilated on one side, but was taken 
to a taxidermist in Doncaster, who did his work very creditably, so much so that, 
as far as appearances go, it is a perfect specimen.
It is now in the possession of 
the finder at Hampole, where I saw it not very long ago- — E.
G. Bayford, 
Doncaster, 24th July, 189L 
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG K 
JT 
Blue Tits.
— On Sunday, June 28th, I was in my garden watching a Blue Tit 
{Partis carnleus) feed its young which were in a walk Wanting to see what it was 
the old birds were taking, I stood rather near the nest ; in fact, so near as to 
prevent them going in.
After standing a short time, I noticed three old birds on 
the wall a short distance away, evidently waiting.
I called a friend's attention to 
this, and then stood a greater distance away.
All three old birds then went in and 
left the small green caterpillars they were bringing.— A.
C. Holtby, Heaton 
House, Boroughbridge.
^ Pheasant Nest by Roadside.— The roads on the Yorkshire Wolds were 
laid out at the beginning of the century by Act of Parliament, and are of 
a uniform width of forty feet.
The central portion only, about four yards wide, 
is macadamized, the sides are in grass, charming for horse exercise, and utilised for 
cottagers* cows, which from May to October are daily turned out to graze under 
the care of a boy or old man.
On May 6th my children were returning from a 
primrose expedition, walking on the grass by the roadside, when they suddenly 
came upon a pheasant, which did not offer to move till, like children, they stooped 
down to touch it.
Then the bird decamped, and on examining a tuft of grass they 
found its nest, with seven or eight eggs in it- The nest was within four ket of the 
actual road, and about four yards from the hedge.
It seems extraordinary that a 
bird should select such a spot for its nest in close proximity to daily traffic, 
especially on an estate where there are very few pheasants.
Driving with the 
owner of the estate on June 26th, I thought it sufficiently interesting to mention 
the fact to him.
On reaching the place we got down to see what had happened.
vanous 
dangers to which they had been exposed for nearly two months, from the chance 
feet of wayfarers, horses, and cows.
The parent bird must have been of a very 
confiding disposition, but its sagacity is proved by the fact of the preservation of 
the eggs during so long an interval.— E.
Maule Cole, Wetwang-on-the- Wolds, 
July 8th, i8gi.
Naturalisf, 
283 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT 
HAYBURN WYKE.
The third excursion of the year was organised for the investigation 
of that part of the Yorkshire coast lying between Peak (the south 
cheek of Robin Hood's Bay) on the north, and Cloughton Wyke on 
the south, and including Hayburn Beck, Staintondale, Cloughton 
Moor and Wyke, and the undercliffs from Hayburn Wyke to Peak.
The meeting was held on Saturday, July nth, 1891, and was well 
attended, between seventy and eighty members and their friends 
participatmg in the excursion ; this is the more gratifying when the 
distance from the centre of the county is taken into consideration.
On the other hand, the district investigated is very near the attractive 
watering-place of Scarborough, and the various railway companies 
ever ready to facilitate the wishes of the Union — had granted per- 
4 y 
mission for the tickets to be available until Tuesday, and many 
members took advantage of this, either to spend the time at Scar- 
borough, or what was more commendable, in the immediate vicinity 
of Hayburn Wyke.
The weather was most propitious, and the 
excursion was very successful, and members would have reached 
their homes in perfect happiness had not an unforeseen accident 
happened, which most unfortunately was not calculated to maintain 
the equanimity of the members.
We will, however, not throw a gloom 
over the proceedings at this early stage, but reserve the dismal news 
for a few pages later.
Several of the members had been on the 
scene since the previous day, but the main body journeyed from 
Scarborough by the train leaving at 10.40 a.m.
Three routes had been arranged for the better investigation of 
the district.
A considerable contingent, composed for the main part of mem- 
bers interested in geology, left the train at Cloughton Station, and 
passing through the village of Cloughton, proceeded to the coast, 
whence they worked northward to Hayburn Wyke.
Under the leadership of Mr. Edward R.
Cross of Scarborough, 
those members botanically inclined also commenced work at 
Cloughton Station, and made their way to Ringing Keld Bog; 
crossing the moors, they eventually landed at the common rendez- 
vous— Hayburn Wyke.
According to the excursion-programme, the third party were to 
work from Hayburn Wyke Station up Staintondale, and crossing 
to the coast, were to return by the undercliff.
it was found, 
however , 'that the distance would be too great to be accom- 
Sept.
1801.
284 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE.
plished in the allotted time, and it was decided to modify the route 
by confining the investigation to 
the undercliff in going, and to 
return to Hayburn Wyke by the cliiff-top.
It had been stated 
that members accompanying this party were to be prepared to do 
some stiif climbing, this was fully borne out by experience.
This 
contingent was under the guidance of Mr. W.
J. Clarke, also of 
Scarborough.
Permission for the investigation of the district had been kindly 
granted by Messrs, J.
W. Woodall, M.A., J.P., S.
Day, and Peter 
Tissiman, all of Scarborough.
In order to reach their homes the same night several members 
left by an early train, and it was fortunate they did so.
At 5.30 the 
remainder gathered round the tea tables in the Hotel, and afterwards 
moved into the field between the hotel and the station, for the 
purpose of holding the usual meetings.
The Sectional Meeting s 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE, 285 
were first held, and at 7.0 o'clock were followed by the General 
Meeting, Mr. Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., presiding.
The minutes 
of the previous meeting being taken as read, the following four new 
members were elected, viz.: — Messrs.
Thomas Carnell, Halifax; 
R. F.
Dawson, Bradford ; H.
S. Holmes, B.Sc, Skipton ; and 
A. C.
Holtby, Boroughbridge.
On calling the roll of Affiliated 
Societies, it was found that the following were represented : 
Liversedge, Bradford, Leeds, Sheffield, Dewsbury, Malton, Hull, 
Hahfax, Cleveland, and Scarborough Naturalists* Societies; Leeds 
and Hull Geological Societies; Scarborough Philosophical Society; 
and the Conchological Society.
Walton 
J 
Woodall, M.A,, J.R, Peter Tissiman, and S.
Day for granting 
permission to visit their respective holdings; and to Messrs.
Edward 
R. Cross, W.
J. Clarke, C.
Fox Strangvvayes, F.G.S., M, B.
Slater, 
F.L.S., George E.
Massee, RR.M,S., Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., 
Jas. H.
Rowntree, Charles D.
Head, and J.
A. Hargreaves for 
leading parties or contributing to the excursion-programme.
The Sectional Reports were then presented, and the following 
accounts have since been supplied.
For the Vertebrate Section, Mr, Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., one of 
the ex-Secretaries, furnishes the following report : — It is a very rare 
occurrence that the Vertebrate Section is not represented by one or 
niore of its officers, but such was the case on the present excursion.
In 
accordance with the arrangements stated on the excursion-programme, 
the party, nine in number, was conducted by Mn VV- J.
Clarke, of 
Scarborough, and included, in addition to its leader and the writer, 
Messrs.
W. Gyngell, H.
Simmonds, and younger followers attached 
to the Scarborough Societies.
After leaving the hotel the party 
crossed the Hayburn Beck, and proceeded along tlie cliff top to the 
north of the Wyke- Many Common and Herring Gulls were either 
flying a short distance from the land, or following the plough in the 
neighbouring fields.
Mr. Clarke, who was some distance ahead, saw 
a single Great Black-backed Gull.
Occasionally a Cormorant would 
sail past beneath the cliff, looking scarcely larger than the Jackdaws 
nesting freely beneath the summit, in company with a Kestrel, which 
flew out on the approach of the party.
It was expected that the 
Stock Dove would be seen, but such was not the case ; and although 
House Martins were very numerous, it was not certain that they 
were breeding in the cliffs.
After proceeding for abour two miles, 
the word was given to descend, and then began a somewhat 
haz ardou s undertaking, the party moving slowly in Indian file, 
Sept.
1891.
286 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAVBURN WYKE 
sometimes finding the ghost of a trace of a path, but more frequently 
nothing whatever to indicate the course to be pursued ; however 
trusting to their leader, they were at length safely piloted to the 
portion of the cliff known as the undercliff.
When on the cliff top 
one noticed what seemed to be a dense scrub, but it appeared to 
become larger, as the descent was made, until it was found to 
consist of trees of by no means small size.
The foot of the trees 
was clothed with a mass of briars, which made progress exceedingly 
difficult, and even painful.
Redstarts were very common, and 
probably nested among the rocks, as many young ones were flying 
about.
The Linnet was also to be observed here, and a Bullfinch's 
nest was found, although the bird was not seen.
Magpies, Crows, 
and Starlings were by no means absent, and nests of the Ring-Dove 
and Snipe were found.
The ponds were in due time reached, but 
the only vertebrates they appeared to contain were some myriads of 
tadpoles.
The cliff was ascended by a very easy path, and the party 
gently proceeded in the direction of Hayburn Wyke.
In the woods 
the Whitethroat, Garden, Willow, Wood and ChifTchaff Warblers 
were more or less common, and eggs of the Redstart, Chaffinch, and 
Greenfinch were found.
A Creeper was observed, and a nest of 
the Grey Wagtail seen, close to the beach.
At the meeting a non- 
ornithological member stated that he had seen a woman carrying 
a young Owl, but did not know the species.
Mr. Clarke has since 
written: ' After leaving the meeting I crossed Cloughton Moor in 
company with Mr. Simmonds, and here saw a Nightjar, and heard 
the Landrail.
Coming down to Cloughton we met a woman carryin 
a young Long-Eared Owl, probably the one seen earlier in the day.' 
45 birds in all were recorded, of which 32 are residents and 13 
summer visitors.
Eggs of fivie and young of six species were 
observed, and are marked on the following list.
The only mammal 
recorded during the day was the Common Rabbit, and of Reptiles 
the Viper and Common Lizard were obtained.
A Frog and the 
Tadpoles before mentioned represented, no doubt, only one species 
of Amphibia, and the Common Trout was the only representative 
of Freshwater Fish.
The Marine Fishes recorded were the Bkack 
Goby, One-spotted Goby, and the Shanny.
The asterisks (*) denote that eggs, and the daggers (t) that young 
birds were observed.
O" 
Mammal.
Redbreast.
*Grey Wagtail.
Rabbit.
Hedge Accentor, 
Meadow Pipit.
Birds.
r 
Dipper.
Tree Creeper.
Residents.
tBIue Tit.
Greenfinch- 
*Song 'Ihrush.
Wren.
House Sparrow- 
Blackbird.
Pied Wagtail.
Chaffinch.
^     ' 
aturalist.
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION AT HAYBURN WVKE.
287 
Linnet.
Corn Buntincr.
Yellow Bunting.
Starling, 
t Magpie.
Jackdaw- 
Crow.
Rook.
Skylark.
tLong-eared Owl.
Kestrel, 
Cormorant.
*Ring Dove.
Lapwing.
*Snipe, 
Common Gull.
Herring Gull.
Great Black-backed 
Nightjar.
Landrail.
GuIL 
Summer Visitors.
t Redstart.
fWhitethroat.
Reptiles.
Viper.
Common Lizards 
Garden Warbler.
Chiffchaff.
tWillow Warbler.
Amphibian.
Common Frog.
Wood Warbler.
Sedge Warbler.
Tree Pipit.
Swallow.
Fishes.
Trout.
Black Goby, 
Martin.
One-spotted Goby.
Swift.
Shanny.
the Cleg {H^matopota phivialis) was 
For the Entomological Section, Mr. A.
E. Hall, F.E.S., Sheffield, 
Secretary, reported that it was but poorly represented, only the 
following members being present : Messrs.
W. Gyngell, Scarborough ;.
A. E.
Hall, Sheffield; H.
W. Head, Scarborough; T.
A. Lofthouse, 
Middlesbrough ; and M.
L. Thompson, Saltburn-by-the-Sea. So far 
as general appearance is concerned, the locality should be a pro- 
ductive one, though one cannot judge by a single day's collecting, 
as it takes a season's hard work to form any idea of what a locality 
niay contain.
A very fair number of species of both Coleoptera.
and Lepidoptera were taken during the day, the other orders not 
being worked for, although 
noted.
Mr. Thompson has furnished the list of Coleoptera, and 
Messrs.
Lofthouse and Head the list of Lepidoptera which were 
taken or observed during the excursion.
Coleoptera : — Cicindela campestris^ Notiophilus biguiiaius^ 
A^.
aquaticus, Bradycelliis stmilis (all Cloughton Moor), Harpalus 
proteiis (Hayburn Wyke), H.
nificornis (Cloughton and Beast ClifF)^ 
H. riifibarbis (Beast Cliff), Ptcrostichus viadidiis and P.
vulgaris 
(Cloughton), P.
7iiger (Beast Cliff), P.
diiigens (Ringing Keld Bog),.
Calathtis cisteloides (Cloughton), C^vielanocephahts (Cloughton Moor) 
Trechus mifiuttis (Ringing Keld Bog), Cercyon flavipes (Cloughton),.
Cholera fumata (under a carcase, Cloughton Moor), Tachyporus 
<:hryso7n€linHs^ Tachinus ntfipes^ and Adalia ohliteraia (Cloughton), 
Cocc'mella \o~punctata (on herbage, Cloughton Moor), Brachyptertis 
nrticce (on nettles, Cloughton), Antherophagus pallens (on Cloughton 
M<^or), Athons niger 
(on herbage, 
Cloughton 
and Beast Cliff), 
A. hamorrhoidalis (on herbage, Cloughton), Agriotes palliduhts (on 
herbage, 
Cloughton and Hayburn AVyke), Dolopius marginatus 
(Hayburn \Xyk€), Heiodes niinutus {on sallows, Ringing Keld Bog), 
Ca7npy/us linearis (one on sallow, Cloughton Moor), Cyphon niti- 
Sept.
X891.
288 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE 
dulus (on oak, Cloughton Moor), C, variabilis (on sallow, Cloughton 
Moor), Telephorus bicolor^ T.
Jlavilahris^ Rhagonycha pallida^ R.
lint- 
lata, Alalthodes viarginatus^ and M.
minimus (Cloughton and 
Hayburn Wyke), Sira?igalia armafa (one on herbage, Hayburn 
Wyke), Adimoftia stitiiralis (on heath, Cloughton Moor), Crepidodera 
Jerruginea (on herbage, Cloughton), Phyllotreta tmdata (on herbage, 
Cloughton), Spharoderma cardiii (on thistles, Cloughton), Pyrochroa 
serraticornis (Beast CHff), Apion apricans^ A, pisi^ A.
vioiaceton, 
A. humili^ and Otiorrhynclms picipes (on herbage, Cloughton and 
Hayburn Wyke), <9.
ovatus (Beast Cliff), Strophosomns coryli (on 
bracken, Cloughton Moor), Polydriisus cervinus (on herbage, 
Cloughton Moor), Phyllobius urtic^ (on nettles)^ P^ pyri (on 
nettles), P* argentatus (on firs), P, viridicollis (on herbage), and 
C€itfhorhy7tchus poUinarius (on nettles, Cloughton), and C erica 
{on heath, Cloughton Moor).
All the above are common, and 
more or less widely distributed, except Aniherophagiis pallens^ 
Campyhis linearis^ and Strangalia armata.
These are more local, 
but none rare.
The last is common in the Midlands, but rarer 
r 
further north.
Lepidoptera: — Pieris 7iapi (Beastcliff), P.
rapce (common), 
Argynfiis aglaia (a specimen taken near Cloughton), Epitiephele 
Janira and Ciiortobius pamphilus (common), Polyommaius phlizas 
(near Cloughton), Lyae/ia alexis (common), Smerinthus populi (ova 
and larvae common in Stainton Dale), Sesia bembecifonnis (near 
H. 
H, 
\ Hayburn 
Dicrantira 
Notodonta camelina, N.
JV, 
rnrea (near Cloughton), Nodua C-nigrum (Beast Cliff), Tieniocampa 
instabilis and T, stabilis (larvje, Stainton Dale), Polia chi (larvae near 
Cloughton), Plusia ga?nma (common), Anarta myrtilli (Cloughton 
Moor), Riimia crat(2gata (common), Selenia illustraria (larvae near 
Cloughton), Phigalia pilosaria (larvae near Cloughton), Boarmia 
rhoviboidaria and Venus ia cambricaria (Hayburn Wyke), Strenia 
dathrata (Beast Cliff, common, and Hayburn Wyke), Aspilaies 
strigilaria (Cloughton Moor), Lomaspilis marginaia (Stainton Dale 
and Hayburn Wyke), Larentia didymata (common), Z.
pectinilaria 
{Cloughton Moor), Hyp 
xMnitati 
M, 
ianata, Camptogramma bilineata and Eubolia mensuraria (Hayburn 
forjicalis (Cloughton Moor) 
NaturaJi-^t, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE.
2S9 
The Conchological Section was represented by two of its officers, 
Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A., of York, President, and Mr. Lewis B.
Ross, 
I.C.S., of Driffield, one of the Secretaries.
Other members taking 
part in the work of the section were Mr. J.
A. Hargreaves, of 
Scarborough, Mr. T.
A. T.ofthouse, of ^Middlesbrough, Mr, A.
H. 
Pawson, of Farnley, Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., of Leeds, etc.
The President and Secretary not being able to remain to the 
meeting, the report was drawn up by Messrs.
Lofthouse and Roebuck 
as follows.
Messrs.
Ross and Lofthouse began their work at 
Cloughton Station.
They immediately found Helix aspersa in the 
village, clinging to the old walls which in this part of the county do 
duty for the hedges of Holderness.
Thence passing along in the 
direction of the moor, towards Hayburn Wyke, Helix /lemoralis was 
met with, and further along, in displacing the stones in the walls 
skirting the high road, H caperaia and H rotundata were found ; 
and under stones and wood, and on the grass, were seen Zonites 
nitidiihcs.
Helix virgafa^ and H.
sericca.
The only water-shell was 
the ubiquitous Limnma peregra^ found in a small stream on the 
roadside, which completes the list so far as Mr. Ross's party was 
concerned.
Mr. Lofthouse continued his investigations after partuig 
company with Mr. Ross, finding Vitrina pellucida and Sitccinea putris 
near Cloughton, Zojiiies cellarius^ Z, alliarius^ Z.
niiidiilus^ Z.
punts y 
Z. cry stall imis^ if.
fulviis^ Fupa umbilicata^ Vertigo edentula, and 
abundance of Carychium viininmm^ in the woods at Hayburn Wyke- 
Ihe Rev. W.
C. Hey noticed living specimens of Z.
alliariiis and 
dead ones of Helix caperaia at the Wyke.
Mr. W.
Denison 
Roebuck, who accompanied the ornithological party which worked 
t'^e undercliffs north of the Wyke, as far as the ponds at the 
Heast Cliff, noted several examples of Lmiax arlwrum var.
nemorosa^ 
tlausilia rugosa^ Bidimus ohsairus^ Helix kispida, Limax agresiis^ 
Arwn minimus^ A.
bourguignaii^ A.
ater, and Limfuea truncatula^ in 
addition to several species oi Zonites.
Mr. A.
H. Pawson found 
Helix arbustorum near Hayburn Wyke, and Mr. J.
A. Hargreaves 
collected Pupa ririgens in the same vicinity, while examples of 
Ancylus laaislris were found by Mr. Hargreaves on leaves of water- 
nlies brought by one of the botanists from one of the ponds under the 
^>east Cliff.
The total number of species amounted lo 28, composed 
^f 2 water shells, 5 slugs, and 21 land shells — about an average 
number for a day's work.
The Phanerogamic report of the Botanical Section was presented 
by Mr. J, A.
Erskine Stuart, of Heckmondwike, one of the Secretaries 
of the section :— Under the direction of Mr. Edward R.
Cross, the 
w 
^gtanical party explored Ringing Keld Bog, near Cloughton, where 
Oct, i8qi.
r 
290 YORKSHIRE naturalists' UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE.
they observed Ranunculus hnor77iaiidi^ Habenaria viridisy Listei'a 
^ordata^ Drosera rotimdifolia^ Pinguicula vulgaris^ Senecio sylvaticus^ 
Parfiassia palustris^ Anagallis tenella^ Nartheciiim ossifragum^ Epi- 
J>actis latifolia^ and Habenaria chlorantha.
On the way to tlie Wyke, 
near to the Druidical circle, Gymnade?na co7iopsea was seen in great 
luxuriance, and on the Wyke Orchis pyramidalis, Vicia sylvatica^ and 
Inula helenium were noted.
Altogether 226 species were observed.
Mr. M.
B. Slater, F.L.S., Secretary for Cryptogamia, reported 
that the bryologists first searched a portion of moorland and boggy 
ground, on the west side of the Scarborough high-road, a short distance 
from Hayburn Wyke railway-station.
Sphagnum subsecunduni Nees 
and 5.
cymbifolium Ehrh,, both widely distributed species, were met 
wath in the bog, the latter one having fruiting capsules.
The follow- 
ing mosses were also gathered : — Brytnn capillare L.
(fruiting), 
Dicranclla heteromalla Hedw., Tetraphis pellucida L.
(with gemmae), 
Flagiotheciiim ujidulatum L., P, dentkulatuvi L.
(fruiting), and Hypnum 
^ommutatitm Hedw.
The Hepatic^ gathered were Lepidozia reptans 
L. (in fine fruit), Cephalozia laniniersiana Hiib, {Ao.), Junger mania 
a^enulafa Sm., Diplophyllum albicans L.
(with abundance of fine 
perianths), and /ungermania capitata Hook., a large form of which 
was met with in fine fruit, growing on stones on the moor, and was the 
most interesting plant gathered in this section.
The wood near the 
Wyke, the rocky ground by the stream-side, and near the mouth of 
the Beck, were next explored.
Of the mosses met with here, the 
almost ubiquitous Toriula muralis L.
was abundant in fine fruit on 
the rocks and stones; Limnobium palustre L.
was fruiting abundantly 
on stones by the stream; Eucladijvn veriicillaium L., on dripping 
Tocks, without fruit ; Dichodontiuni pelhicidum L,, on stones ; 
Brachythecium plumosum Swartz., abundant on stones by the stream; 
Trichostomum tophaceum Brid.
was also found with abundance of 
old fruit capsules, growing in fine patches near the mouth of the 
stream.
November is the season when the fruit capsules of this moss 
are in the most perfect condition, and when no doubt fine specimens 
of this plant might be got in this locality.
The Hepatics gathered 
yi^x^ Jungermania riparia Taylor, plentiful on wet stones near the 
stream-side, and Frullania dilataia L., with perianths, abundant on 
the trees.
No Orthotrichums were seen on the trees.
This genus 
of mosses is much less abundant in the low country than it was some 
years ago.
All the plants seen in this section were of species that 
of general distribution.
No very rare forms were found.
During 
the summer months the localities at higher elevations, at the upper 
sources of our mountain streams, are the places where the rarer 
mosses and hepatics are to be gathered.
Naturalis^i 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAVBURN WYKE.
29 1 
With regard to Fungi, Mr. H.
T. Soppitt reported that Cloughton 
Moor, with Ringing Keld Bog, the adjacent woodland, and the 
nicely-wooded glen of Hayburn AVyke, were found to be a splendid 
mycological hunting-groundj although it was too early in the season 
for most fungi.
No doubt at a later date the district would well 
repay a visit.
About 20 species of fungi were collected, the most 
uiterestmg of which were the Uredinei.
Amongst the most 
1 
important of these were Puccinia dioicce Magnus, the aecidiospores 
being not uncommon on Cardims pahisiris \ Melampsora repentis 
Plowr.
{Cczoma orcMdis Alb.
& Schw.) on Orchis laiifolia and Salix 
repens\ and Coleosporiiim stnecionis Pers., which was abundant on 
Senedo sylvatica^ and the young trees of Pinus sylvestris in proximity 
bore traces of having been invaded by the earlier stage of the 
parasite {Peridermium pini Chev.).
It may also be added that 
Galium vertint was found near Scarborough, distorted to a great 
degree by the presence within its tissues oi Melanotceniu7n endogemcm 
DeBary, a remarkable species of Ustilaginese.
For the Geological Section Mr. Charles Brownridge, F.G.S., 
* 
writes ; — The meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union devoted 
to the investigation of a portion of the Yorkshire coast is always 
a popular one with geologists of our broad-acred shire, and therefore 
It was not a matter of great surprise that a good contingent travelled 
from our sooty and smoky towns of the West Riding to investigate 
the interesting sections to be seen in the cliffs between Cloughton 
and Hayburn Wykes.
The knights of the hammer had to be astir 
With the early cock-crow to get on the ground in good time, and, 
being joined at Scarborough by the East Riding and local con- 
tingents, when Cloughton was reached and the party organised, it 
*vas found to be a numerous and typical one from all parts of the 
county.
It was here found, unfortunately, that there was no leader 
or guide to take charge of the party, as is usual on these excursions, 
the section having had at various times the assistance of gentlemen 
^vhose names are intimately connected with the geology of the district 
visited ; but not dismayed by this, the President of the Section, 
-Mr. C.
D. Hardcastle, getting the party together, a start was made 
across the fields for Cloughton Wyke, permission not being allowed 
the members to go along the railway.
Walls and fences were soon 
surmounted, and the party quickly arrived at the starting-point of 
the day's investigation.
A descent was speedily made to the foot 
^f the cliffs to Hundale Point, where the place was found already 
^n possession of a Scarborough geologist, who had early got on 
t'^e ground, and was fast bagging fine fossils to enrich his collec- 
tion.
^cc.
1891.
J^ 
292 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAYBURN '\\^KE.
The whole of the district comprised in the day's investigations 
lies on the Lower Oolites, which are at this part of the coast very 
finely developed.
Starting at the south end of the district and 
working up north, the various beds were clearly seen in descending 
order.
At Hundale the basement beds of the Upper Estuarine 
series are met, and below comes the Scarborough or Grey Limestone 
series, which is the most important marine series of the Lower Oolites, 
consisting of a series of siliceous and calcareous bands with shaly 
partings, and having a considerable thickness of shale in the upper 
part, and whose massive sandstone base forms the fine reefs of 
Hundale Scar.
Typical fossils having been got, the party proceeded 
around the Wyke and examined the fine sections in the Middle 
Estuarine series which are there exposed.
Tliis is the principal coal- 
bearing horizon of the Lower Oolites, consisting generally of shales 
with bands of sandstone, containing abundance of plant-remains.
An old drift or day-hole was noted in the cliff, where evidently the 
soft or Oolite jet had been worked from the outcrop.
This series 
attains at this point a total thickness of over 103 ft, and is topped 
by an evenly-bedded, slightly calcareous massive sandstone, which, 
from the fossils found at its base, would seem to be a passage bed 
marking a gradual change from the marine to a freshwater condition.
Continuing along the shore, noting in passing many enormous slips 
that had taken place in the cliffs, the party were soon busy clamber- 
ing up and slipping over enormous boulders that bestrewed the 
foreshore; no nice sandy path could the fast-tiring geologist get to 
ease his aching limbs, while the high cliffs effectively shut out any 
chance of gaining the green carpeted summit.
Slowly and heavily 
plodding along with thoughts of pity for any poor mariner who 
should by stress of weather be driven on such a rock -bound coast, 
where in times of storm the undercliff is washed with a seething 
mass of foam, the party reached the very fine section of the Mille- 
pore bed, when a refreshing halt was made to examine this interesting 
marine bed and regain breath.
The rock here forms an important 
and extensive reef of massive and ferruginous sandstone, running 
out at low water into the sea, finely weathered, and formed into 
a floor resembling huge flags with open joints, and in many instances 
recalling the deep-weathered joints of the carboniferous limestones 
about Ingleborough.
Rising up in the cliff towards the north, this 
bed can be traced as far as Hayburn Wyke.
Passing along further 
north, and still over the sharp and relentless boulders, to Iron Scar, 
the Eller Beck bed was next examined.
This band of manne 
formation, capping the estuarine and freshwater beds of the Lower 
Estuarine Series, consists of over 17 ft.
of sandstones, ironstones, 
Naturalist^ 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE.
293 
and shales, and is in parts very rich in fossils, which soon resulted 
in the sharp ring of the hammer and chisel being heard, and the 
already tired and jaded scientist being further weighted down with 
many fine specimens.
Pushing along until Hayburn Wyke was safely reached, and the 
welcome ripple and splash of its pretty waterfall greeted the ear, 
a cursory glance w^as taken of what seems to be a detached or 
disturbed portion of the cliff.
Whether this is caused by a fault or 
not the geological surveyors have not yet determined, but that some 
considerable action has caused this condition of affairs seems evident.
The pretty Wyke of Hayburn is typical of the scenery to be found 
amongst the OoHtic rocks ; rain, rivers, and atmospheric agencies 
having carved out many charming dales over the area occupied 
by these rocks, which occupy a large part of East Yorkshire, 
extending from Filey through the Vale of Pickering over the 
Hambleton and the Cleveland Hills.
This formation derives its 
name from the characteristic grains constituting many of its beds, 
Avhich resemble the roe or egg of a fish, consisting of little rounded 
balls, which, when broken, show under the magnifying glass 
concentric layer upon layer built up around a small nucleus or 
I 
centre.
What have been the conditions during the formation and 
growth of these rocks .^ It would seem that a similar series of 
events, on a smaller scale, to those that took place during the 
formation of the Coal Measures were occurring — sediment brought 
down by a large river from the carboniferous area west and north- 
west of the Vale of York, the level of the land varying considerably ; 
at times a shallow sea rich in marine life, and again a low-lying tract 
subject to periodical inundations.
The fauna contained in these 
beds indicate generally a brackish condition of the waters during 
the deposition of the beds, with an occasional bursting in of the sea, 
giving to certain of the beds a distinct marine character.
The examination of the exposed sections being complete, the 
party at once proceeded to the Hayburn Wyke Hotel, where they 
showed up in marked contrast by their travel-stained and weary 
look against the freshness of the recent arrivals, who had come on by 
later trains to join the party.
After a refreshing tea, the Sectional 
fleeting was held in the open air, Mr. C D.
Hardcastle 
in the chain Bags being emptied, it was at once seen that 
^ very rich and representative cailection had been got together, 
most of the characteristic fossils of the various beds seen during 
the day being among the spoils.
These having been arranged 
and named, Mr. S.
Chadwick, F.G.S., one of the Sectional 
Secretaries, reported on the day's work to the General Meeting, and 
Oct. rSgi.
294 YORKSHIRE KATLTRALISTS' UNION AT HAYBURN WYKE.
Stated that the Section had had a Ycry good and prolific day, among 
some of the finest sections to be seen of tlie series.
The members 
r 
then slowly wended their way to the station, where a long wait was 
experienced before the welcome sight of the iron horse came into 
viewj which carried most of the members back to the Queen of 
^ 
Watering-places, arriving there too late for the West Riding members 
to catch their train home.
Those who were not compelled by 
circumstances — as, unfortunately, the clerical members of the party 
were — too tired to experience further vicissitudes, sought out friendly 
rest and shelter for the night.
All felt that a good hard day's work 
had been done, with favouring weather to assist in making the 
excursion a success; and although early in the morning members 
were heard expressing wonder at the short distance to be covered 
during the day's proceedings, all finished with profound respect for 
that short distance, and will for a long time vividly remember the 
climb and tumble over the rough and rocky shore to the music of 
the rolling surf, at times commingled with the startled cry of the 
birds disturbed from their homes high up in the cliffs.
On behalf of the Marine-Zoology Committee, its Secretary, 
Mr. J.
Percy A.
Davis, of Halifax, reported that the coast in the 
neighbourhood of Hayburn Wyke being extremely rough, causes 
any large waves to break with great force on the shore, and conse- 
quently destroy all but the most hardy marine objects.
Under these 
circumstances a very long list was impossible.
Generally, it was 
found that the sedentary shells— i.e., Chiton^ Patella^ etc.
— were the 
most common, although the more delicate sea-anemones of common 
ty[)e were very abundant.
Chiton fasciadaris^ C.
ruber^ <7.
cmereus, 
C aselhts.
Patella vidgata, and P.
pellucida were obtained in large 
quantities, and Trochus cinerens was also very abundant, although 
the only species found.
Littorina rudis, L, littorea, Z.
tmebrosa, 
L,patida^ Z.
litf oralis, and Purpura lapillus were common.
The only 
fishes taken were Bknnius pholis (Shanny), Gobius //;^^r (Black Goby), 
and G.
unipunctatus (One-Spotted Goby).
Three sea-anemones 
were found, one {Actinia mesembryanthemuni) being common, 
while the others were the only two of their species obtained, and 
have not yet been determined.
The common Starfish {(/raster 
riibens) was taken, and Solaster pap>posa (Sun Star) was reported from 
Cloughton Wyke.
The Zoophytes taken were Sertularia fiUcula 
and Fhistra foliacea, and the only sponge was the common Tethya- 
Eggs of the Whelk and Puri)ura were obtained, but only very few 
specimens.
The Crustacea included Main sqitinado (Spider Crab), the 
Sandhopper {Talitrus locusta), Shrimp {Crajigon communis), Hermit 
Crab {Pagurus bernhardus)^ and the common Green or Dog ^ab.
REVIEW — DEVELOPMENT OF THE PECTORAL FINS IX FISHES.
295 
A vote of thanks passed to the chairman, on the motion of 
Alessrs.
John H.
Phillips and W.
W. Reeves, terminated the 
proceedings so far as the meeting was concerned, but !
aye, but !
1 
shortly afterwards the members proceeded to the railway platform, and 
waited !
waited !
! waited !
! !— 5 minutes !
10 minutes !
! 15 minutes !
! I 
still no train — grave apprehensions were expressed about making the 
various connections at Scarborough ; 20 minutes !
40 minutes !
! all 
hope had now fled.
Five minutes later the train came puffing into 
the station, and speculation was rife as to whether the station- 
master's telegraphic request would be the means of detaining the 
I^eeds train, but it was a vain hope.
On arriving at Scarborough it was 
found that the train had gone !
and about thirty persons were stranded 
for the night.
The station-master was besieged en masse, and the 
poor fellow sent telegrams here and telegrams there, until, having 
exhausted their benedictions on the railway company, the enraged 
party departed, hke a swarm of bees, to seek accommodation for 
the night.
Let us hope that on Sunday morning they rose from 
their couches with thoughts better suited to the day.
— E.R.W.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Here is a ' fine specimen ' of newspaper botany, for which we are indebted to 
Mr. Wm.
Whitwellj who copied it verbatim from the 'Glasgow Evening News/ — 
'Alpine Plants on thk Campsie Hills.— A fine specimen of the Alpine 
plant Gitssie Parnassmm was recently found growing on the top of Tomtain, one 
of the spurs of the Campsie Range.
The flower is of a waxy appearance, and 
pure white.
The appearance of this plant on the hills of the West of Scotland is 
very rare.' Mr, Whitwell adds that: ^ Gussie Farnassium' decidedly 'caps' 
the 'grass upon nasus' quoted by Mr, F.
Arnold Lees as a name for Pamassia 
talustris, on p.
251 of the ' Flora of West Yorkshire.' 
RECENT VIEWS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
THE PECTORAL FINS IN 
The Development and Morphology of the Pectoral Fins in Teleostean 
Fishes ; A Contribution to the Theory of the Paired Limbs in 
Vertebrates.
An Inaugural Dissertation by Edward E.
Prince^ Professor 
of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy in St. Mungo's College, Glasgow, 1890.
Prof- Prince's name will be familiar to many readers of this 
journaL At one time a zealous Yorkshire zoologist, and for some 
years engaged in investigations connected with the Scottish Fisheries, 
he was appointed to a scientific chair in Glasgow about a year ago.
The address which he gave on his induction has been published la 
4to form, 24 pp.
with two plates.
bony 
^ct.
i8qi.
296 REVIEW — DEVELOPMENT OF THE PECTORAL FINS IN FISHES.
fishes, arid embraces some interesting researches, carried on, as 
a prefatory note informs us, under the auspices of the Elizabeth 
Thompson (U.S.A.) Science Fund.
Prof- Prince was wise in his 
choice of a subject.
His own researches appeared to him to give 
some needed light upon the meaning of those bony elements which 
compose the pectoral fin of the cod and other fishes.
Instead of 
indulging, at his inauguration as an academic teacher, in vague 
generalities upon scientific pursuits, or urging the claims of his own 
subject, natural history, he presented a summary of certain results of 
his work; connecting them with the researches of continental and 
American workers in the same field.
Prof.
Prince succeeds, we 
think, in exposing the error of which many eminent anatomists are 
guilty, and shows that these paired fins in, say, the cod, are of real 
importance in elucidating the true nature of the limbs in the 
Vertebrata.
We may not accept all that the author sets forth as to 
the identification of the various bones in the fin and shoulder 
girdle; but just as the hand can be derived from the lower form of 
limb, the reptilian paddle, and the paddle can be regarded as 
a transformed shark's fin, so the paired fins of bony fishes can be 
shown to arise in the same way as the Selachian, and to have quite 
as much morphological meaning.
Prof.
Prince's researches support 
Balfour and Thacher's view, in opposition to that of Gegenbaur and 
the German anatomists.
The latter regard the fish's fin as a 
transformed gill-appendage, and the shoulder as an altered gill- 
arch— a view which is really but a modification of Owen's older 
interpretation.
Prof.
Prince, we think, should not have omitted to 
notice that the presence of paired limbs is somehow related, in 
Vertebrates, to the presence of jaws.
Fishes like the lamprey, 
without jaws, have no limbs.
But perhaps Prof.
Prince would derive 
the mouth cartilages from elements other than branchial.
Be that 
as it may, it appears to be incontrovertible that the bony fish's fin 
arises, like the shark's, separate from the girdle in a horizontal plane, 
and cannot be a modified branchial appendage.
In this address much evidence is brought forward, embryological 
and anatomical, in favour of a return to Cuvier's interpretation, and 
an acceptance of Balfour's lateral-fin theory.
Prof.
Prince's view is 
not that taught by the majority of anatomists, and his lucid and 
even convincing exposition, in this notable inaugural address, is 
worthy of serious attention.
Inaugural addresses in German 
Universities are often of importance and value, witness those of 
Rosenberg, Swirski, and others, and Prof.
Prince has done well to 
mark his own inauguration by a contribution of such unusual interest 
as this.
XaturaJi-^t.
297 
AGRIMONIA ODORATA 
ADDED TO THE WEST YORKSHIRE FLORA.
WM.
WEST, Jux., 
Bradford, 
On Sept.
J 
plant {Agrimonia odorata MilL) on a hedge-bank sloping down to the 
river Rawthey, near Sedbergh.
The specimen from this locality 
which he recently showed me possesses the characters (such as the 
declming exterior spines on the scarcely-furrowed calyx-tube, the 
latter containing two seeds) which distinguish the plant from 
A, eiipatoria L.
I believe that the species has not previously been 
recorded for West Yorkshire, Mr. Lees remarking in his Flora 
{p.
207) that it should turn up about Kettlewell or Grassington.
Sept.
I sty 1 89 1.
NO TES~ ORNITHOL OGY.
^ 
Cream-coloured Variety of the Skylark at Harrogate.— A beautiful 
^ariety of the :5kylark {Alatida arvensis) was shot on the top of Birk Crag on 
f ^^v ^"^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^ uniform rich shade of cream all over, with the exception 
of the crest feathers, which were tipped with a beautiful shade of buff.— 
KlLEY Fortune, Harrogate, September 13th, 1S91.
Manx Shearwater in Upper Nidderdale.
— On Sept.
7th, when on our 
^ay to the moors, I was fortunate in discovering, in a house of call, a specimen of 
the Manx Shearwater {Puffiiius angloritm)^ which was obtained just below Loft- 
«ouse, last September (1890).
It was evidently exhausted when found, and no 
difficulty was experienced in capturing it.
— RiLEY Fortune, Harrogate, Sept.
^oth, 1891.
The Note of the Corn Crake.
— T had an opportunity this summer, 
which, I think, does not often occur, of seeing a Corn Crake in the act of utteriiii^ 
Its well-known sound.
I was watching it through a hedge, at the distance of 
a few yards, and it turned its head round over its back, and opened its lower 
niandible so widely that I could see down its throat, and in that position it gave 
forth its melodious note.
— R.
A. Summerfield, North Stainley, Ripon, 
-29th August, 1891.
Three Large Species of Birds Building- in one Tree, — At Thorpe 
^^ood, Kiveton Park, near Worksop, a Kestrel {Tinnunculus alaitdarius)^ 
Carrion Crow {Corvus corone)^ and Magpie [Pna rusticd) have each built their 
nest m one Scotch fir Ixqq^ and not 20 feet apart from each other.
The two 
former had their nests in the same tree last year, but the Magpie is an acquisition.
Up to the present time each species is bringing up its family in perfect friendliness 
with its neighbours.
-x\.
E. Hall, JVorbury, ShefHeld, May 13th, 1S91.
Hawfinches near Harrogate.
— Three examples of the Hawfinch {Cocco- 
ijiraustes vulgaris) were captured during July, in a net or bird- trap, at Wormald 
'Green, near Harrogate, by a railway official.
They were kept alive for some 
Weeks, but one of them having died, it was given to Mr. H.
Wood, of Harrogate, 
who brought the bird to me for identification.
It was an immature bird, apparently 
patched this season, probably in the neighbourhood where, with its companions, 
It was caught.
The Hawfinch, though by no means a common bird in our county, 
is, perhaps, more so than is usually thought, and nests in several localities, in 
some cases periodically.— J.
Backhouse, Harrogate, 8th August, 1S9K 
Oct. i8qi.
29S 
BRITISH DIPTERA.
An Account of British Flies (Diptera).
By the Hon. M.
Cordelia E- 
Leigh, F.E.S., and F.
V. Theobald, B.A., F.E.S.— Part I.
London: 
Elliot Stock, .
. .
1891.
A manual of the British Dipterous Insects has long been wanted, 
and we are pleased to see that an attempt is being made to supply 
the deficiency.
The instalment before us is part i, and is priced is.
How often the parts are to appear is not apparent, inasmuch as 
there is no introductory or explanatory matter prefixed or upon the 
cover; and our authors plunge at once into their subject by giving 
us, as their first chapter, a succinct summary of what is known of the 
fossil forms of the order.
The second chapter deals with the 
classification of Diptera, preceded by an introductory account oi^ 
the ancient and modern classification of insects generally.
The 
classification of Diptera adopted by our authors is that of Brauer, 
as adopted by Verrall in his 1888 List of British Diptera.
These 
two chapters occupy 20 pages, and at page 21 the systematic part 
of the work begins with Chapter IIL, devoted to the Fleas, or 
Aphaniptera, their metamorphoses, classification, larval anatomy, 
etc., and a brief account of each of the species recognised by 
Mr. Verrall We would su^^est to the authors that in their account 
of the species individually they should give all the detail obtainable 
as to habits, life-history, and distribution.
It is somewhat 
disappointing to refer to a monographic work and find that no 
localities are given, and in the case of the fleas to read that one 
species is common on the dog and fox, 'and most other members 
of the Canid^,' and that another infests sw^allows, pigeons, sparrows, 
*and other small birds,' when the point of interest is to know exactly 
what other members of the Canidse and what other species of small 
birds are infested.
We look forward with pleasurable anticipation 
to being able to notice the succeeding numbers of this work, whose 
authors have our best wishes for the success of their labours.
Ar<9 TE~MA MM A LI A .
Rabbit Swimming- across the Irthing*.
— While out fishing in the Irthmg 
at the beginning of this month, accompanied by my brother, my attention was 
suddenly called by him to a Rabbit {Lepus amiaihis) about 40 yards up stream, 
which leaped into the water and swam bravely across, thouq-h the river was 
as 
e 
running rather high at the time.
As this was a new sight to both of us, w 
looked on with surprise.
In a ver}- short time, however, the cause of the rabbit s 
swim appeared.
A Weasel [Mustela vulgaris) came hunting through the grass 
and weeds on the rabbit's track, right dowii to the water's edge, where, losing scent, 
the Httle creature commenced searching diligently up and down the shore, but- 
baffled 
, .__.
Rev. J.
Robinson, Walton Vicarage, 
Brampton, Cumberland, August 19th, 1S91, 
Naturalist 
299 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
ON THE WOLDS.
One of the regular recurring events of the August Bank Holiday is 
the excursion of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
The fourth 
meeting of the year took place on August 3rd, the place selected 
Wolds 
area of York Dale, between Fimber Station and Sledmere.
In the 
Explanation.— The arrows show the line of route, 
excursion-programme, the Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., describes 
the district as presenting as charming a picture of Wold scenery as 
heart can desire : ' Beautiful woods of Larch, Spruce, and Beech 
clothe the sides of the dales, intermixed at the base with Lilacs, 
Laburnums, and other flowering trees.' 
Oct. i&jj.
300 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION ON THE WOLDS.
Permission for the investigation of their respective estates had 
been kindly granted by Sir Tatton SykeSj Bart., and Mr. Y.
Lloyd 
Greame.
Altogether, between sixty and seventy members and 
associates attended, inchiding a goodly array of lepidopterists, who 
had been attracted by the note in the programme that the Marbled 
White Butterfly occurred in the district.
It is natural that the success attending excursions of this kind 
should be of a somewhat varied nature- Consisting, as it does, 
of so many sections, it is seldom that the Yorkshire NaturaHsts' 
Union holds a meeting without doing some good work.
It may be 
that of adding to the county list some new species, or perhaps 
recording a species new to the particular district in which the excur- 
sion takes place.
Sometimes it may be a mammal, sometimes an 
insect or a mollusc, not infrequently a plant or, as on the present 
occasion,' meeting with a form which has been lost sight of in the 
-county for many years.
Undoubtedly the ' find ' of the day was the 
Marbled White Butterfly {Aro^e galaiea), which has been regarded as 
extinct in Yorkshire for more than twenty years.
Several members had been on the ground early, and had spent 
some time in investigating the woods in the vicinity of Bessingdale 
End. The main body arrived on the scene about half-past eleven, and 
were met by the Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., the Vicar of Wetwang, 
an old and prominent member of the Union, under whose charge the 
excursion was practically conducted.
Leaving Fimber Station, the 
party proceeded some distance up York Dale and then divided, 
some continuing with their leader, and others, bent on individual 
research, roaming through the beautiful woods and grassy valleys, 
or settling down to quiet work in the chalk-pits, which are numerous 
in the district.
It would be impossible (and unnecessary) to chronicle 
the routes taken by each party, but Mr. Cole and his followers 
investigated York Dale, entered Badger Wood, and thence worked 
their way to Wetwang.
The time fixed for tea was four o'clock, and about this hour the 
party began to reunite at the Black Swan Inn, Wetwang.
A five 
hours' ramble in the open air is well calculated to induce a good 
appetite, even in the most dyspeptic individual, and no doubt 
everyone did justice to the fare provided.
After this part of the programme had been rehearsed, the members 
adjourned to the Schoolroom, which had been kindly placed at the 
disposal of the Union by the Vicar.
The sectional meetings were, as usual, held first, and at 5.15 
were followed by the general meeting, under the chairmanship of the 
Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A. A whisper having gone round th^^jiiany 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ON THE WOLDS.
301 
J 
members would have to leave soon in order to reach their homes the 
same day, t]ie minutes were taken as read.
Representatives from the following 17 Societies responded to the 
roll call : — Ovenden, Wakefield, Liversedge, Leeds, York, Malton^ 
Hull, Cleveland, Ackworth School, Scarborough, and Huddersfield 
Naturalists' Societies ; the Conchological Society ; Leeds Geological 
Association; the Halifax, Hull, and Goole Scientific Associations; 
and the Scarborough Philosophical Society.
A vote of thanks was then passed to Sir Tatton Sykes, Bart, and 
Mr. Y.
Lloyd Greame for granting permission for the Union to in- 
vestigate their estates, to Mr. Cole for leading the excursion, and 
also to Mr. M.
B. Slater, F.L.S., who, together with Mr. Cole, had 
assisted the Hon. Secretaries by contributing information concerning 
the district for the excursion-programme.
A brief outline of the day's work of each section was then pre- 
sented by the respective officers in charge, and their reports have 
been supplied as follows : — 
m 
The report of the Vertebrate Zoology Section was read by 
Mr. Thomas Bunker, of Goole, an ex-President of the Section, who 
mentioned that Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., and himself were the 
only representatives on the ground.
Mr. Waite writes ; — The most noticeable aspect of the district is 
the entire absence of water, not a stream or brook or ditch to be 
Seen anywhere.
This is owing to the geological formation, it being 
wholly clialk, which at once allows any rain to pass through it.
The 
duck ponds and cattle 'drinks' are artificial, being puddled with 
clay.
The water in these places is not by any means clear, and 
scarcely attractive to birds or small mammals, such as the Water Vole 
and Water Shrew.
In one of these ponds, however — which was 
partially dried up, and appeared as though it had not been used for 
many years — the water was clean, and was tenanted by a few Smooth 
Newts, Sticklebacks, and Water Beetles.
Thirty-seven birds were 
observed, of which nine were summer visitors, the remainder being 
residents.
A full list of the Vertebrates recorded on the excursion 
is appended : — 
Mammals.
Kedbreast.
Greenfinch.
Hedgeho^T.
Golclcrest.
Sparrow.
Red Field Vole Hedge Accentor.
Chaffinch.
Rabbit.
Great Tit. Linnet.
Coal Tit. Corn Bunting.
^^^^^' Blue Tit. Yellow Bunting.
Residents.
Wren.
Starling.
Song Thrush.
Pied Wagtail.
Jay.
Blackbird, Meadow l*ipit.
Jackdaw- 
Oct. 1891.
302 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ON THE WOLDS.
Carrion Crow.
Summer Visitors.
Amphibians.
Rook.
Whinchat.
Toad.
Skylark.
Redstart.
Froe.
Tawny OwL Whitethroat.
Smooth Newt.
Ring Dove.
Willow Warbler.
Pheasant.
Yellow Wagtail.
Fish.
Partridge, Tree Pipit.
Common Gull, Swallow.
Martin.
Swift.
Three-spined Stickle- 
back.
For the Conchological Section the report was given by one of its 
Secretaries, Mr. Lewis B.
Ross, F.C.S., of Driffield, who stated that, 
having been on the spot a couple of hours prior to the arrival of 
the 1 1.
20 a.m. train at Fimber Station, he had occupied the time by 
working the chalk-pit at Bessingdale End. He then conducted 
a small party, which included Mr. W.
W. Reeves, F.R.M.S., of 
London, Mr. W.
Hewett of York, etc., through York Dale and past 
Badger Wood to the Pump, thence across to Life Hill and along the 
high road to Wetwang.
The chalk-pit furnished an abundance of 
Helix ericetorum and H.
vi ^ 
a small pond near furnished the only aquatic shell of the day — the 
ubiquitous Lirmicea peregra .
In Bessingdale Wood Claiisilia laminata 
was fairly abundant at the foot of beech trees, whilst among the 
neixX^s Helix arbustorujH^ with its varieties mamiorata ^mdflavescens^ 
was found.
Passing along York Dale, Limax agrestis and, on the 
beech trees, Z.
arbonim were met with, and on the grass Arion ater 
and A, hortensis were plentiful.
On the beeches Bulimus obsciirus 
was fairly common, and amongst dead leaves were found Vitrina 
pellucida, Zua lubrica.
Helix acukata.
H tv^mcca.
Carychium viini- 
H 
fuivus, 
Helix cantiana^ H aspersa^ H, hortensis^ H nemoralis^ Zonites 
nitidulus, Z.
cry stall inus^ and Helix rufescens.
Mr. F.
W. Fierke 
and one or two other Hull conchologists also worked the district, 
and the slugs they collected were afterwards determined by 
Mr. Roebuck.
They were Arion ater, A, hortensis, A.
minivms^ 
A, boiirguignati^ Limax viaximiis, L, arbonim, and Z.
agrestis.
Altogether the total number of species observed atnounted to thirty- 
three, one of them being a water shell and seven slugs, the 
remaining twenty-five being land shells — not a bad record, con- 
sidering the small number of collectors on the ground and the 
limited amount of time at their disposal.
Mr. G.
T, Porritt, F.L.S., F.E.S., President of the Entomological 
Section, reports that the Section was well represented, those taking 
part in the excursion includmg Mr. N.
F- Dobree (Beverley), 
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ON THE WOLDS.
303 
Messrs.
Wm. Hewett and George Jackson (York), Messrs.
J. W.
Boult, W.
F. Baker, and M, Waller (Hull), himself, and others.
The 
most noteworthy event of the day was undoubtedly the capture of 
Arge ga/atea^ which, although mentioned in the excursion-programme 
by the Rev. E.
Maule Cole as one of the species to be looked for, 
was probably not expected to be found by any member on the 
ground, as it had been considered by lepidopterists as extinct in 
Yorkshire for probably twenty or twenty-five years.
Great was the 
gratification consequent on its capture, for it was one of the most 
interesting events the lepidopterists had had for some time.
Other 
species taken included Satyrus cegeria and S, IiyperanfhuSy the latter 
perhaps the most abundant butterfly seen in the district; Asthena 
bloincri and Vmusia cambricaria^ both common, but had evidently 
been out for several weeks ; Acidalia aversata^ the golden-brown, as 
well as the ordinary form ; Melanthia albicillata^ Abraxas uimaia, 
Coremia iinidentaria^ Cidaria immanata^ CucuUia verbasci (larvae), 
Scoparia idmella {- conspiamlis), Ti>rtrix cinnamomeanay common, 
and others.
In Neuroptera, Mr. Dobree secured a fine ^^schna 
juncea^ but the almost entire absence of water no doubt accounted 
for the great scarcity of members of this group.
And the only 
Orthopteron recorded was Stenoboihris viriduhis^ which was common.
Mr. W.
F. Baker, of Hull, reports of the Coleoptera -—Although 
It is the season of the year when the majority of the Coleoptera are 
passing through the larval state, there was yet a fair quantity obtained.
Proceeding along the line from Wetwang Station, Ocyptis oktis^ 
Pterostichus vulgaris^ P.
anthracinus, Harpalus ruficornls^ and Staphy- 
linns erythopierns were found beneath the stones lying along the 
sides.
Owing to the rain which was then falling heavily, sweeping 
hardly repaid the trouble, nothing but the common dandelion beetle 
being found.
Leaving the railway and going up by the chalk-pit to 
Bessingdale End, Notiophilus biguttatus was found in abundance at 
the side of an old tree-stump, while beneath the loose bark of 
a decaying tree was a species of / ceaerus.
Proceeding up York 
Dale, sweeping the nettles produced Apion radiolus, A.
niger^ Longi- 
tarsus jacob(B, Athotis hcemorrhoidalis, the large Click Beetle, and 
Sitones argejitatiis^ the delicate little green weevil.
Under the moss- 
grown bark of a decayed tree in Badger Wood was a fine specimen 
of Carabus violaceus.
Dung Beetles were by no means in abundance, 
Cercyon /icemorrhoidalis and Geotrnpes stercorarius being all of any 
note.
By shaking newly-mown grass on the Sledmere road were 
obtained C/iry some/a distinguenda, two species oi Siemis, and Sitones 
iineatus, whilst in the hedge-bottom a little further on was Pfuedon 
cochleariu.
Calathus vulanacephalus was found crossing the road, 
Oct. i8qi.
3^4 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION ON THE WOLDS 
and Ancho77ienn$ albipes on a bank at Life Hill.
The only aquatic 
species found was Hyd^vbius fiiscipes^ a small vegetarian beetle, 
which was obtained from a partially dried-up pond.
The Botanical Report was presented by Mr. M.
B. Slater, F.L,S., 
one of the Secretaries of the Section^ who writes : — The botanists- 
commenced their exploration immediately on starting from P'imber 
Station.
In walking up the fine York Dale they observed the 
numerous specimens of some of our rarer indigenous trees and 
shrubs which have been planted as ornamental fringes to the woods 
on each side of the dale.
Fine examples of the following were 
observed : 
\. 
Berberis vulgaris L, 
Euonymus europoeus L, 
Rhamnus catharticus L.
Pyrus aria Sm.
Pyrus aucuparia Giiert.
Cornus sanguinea L.
Viburnum opulus L, 
Viburnum lantana L, 
Lonicera xylosteum L 
etc.
Although the trees have all been planted, the sub-soil is suitable 
for their growth.
There are not many places \vhere such a fine 
collection of our rarer trees and shrubs can be seen.
At this season 
they were mostly in young unripe fruit.
At a later period of the 
autumn, m October, when the ornamental fruits of these various 
trees are ripe, the bright colours of their various fruits, varying in 
bright scarlet and crimson, black, purple, and orange, give a display 
which is well worthy of a visit.
The trees of each kind are numerous, 
and extend a distance of a mile or more up the Dale.
Some fine 
patches of Galium inollugo L.
were seen growing on the slopes of 
the woods, and large masses of Epilobinm angustifolium L.
var.
brachycarpum (Leight.) were found decorating some open spaces 
in newly-made plantations of coniferous and other timber trees.
On 
reaching Wetvvang, the 
rendezvous for the meeting, the 
botanists reported at their sectional meeting that upwards of one 
hundred Phanerogamous plants had been observed during the ramble.
The following comi)rise some of the rarer and most interesting plants 
seen : — Papaver dubium L., growing along wMth the much more 
common P, rhceas L., near the village of Wet wa ng ; Thlaspi 
arvense L., Reseda hitea L., R.
luteola L., Hypericum pulchrum L, 
H, hirsutum L., Ononis spinosa L., Anthyllis vulneraria L., Spinea 
Jilipendula L., Campanula gioinerata L.
The season was too late 
for Orchids, only the common Orchis maculata L.
being met with- 
At the upper part of York Dale the route taken was up an open 
grass dale, turning westward in the direction for Wetwang.
The 
grassy sides of this dale had large patches of the wiry grass, Brachy- 
podium pinnalum Beauv., upon it, and Bromus erectus Huds., 
Natur.^Ii'^t.
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION ON THE WOLDS.
305 
another somewhat rare grass, confined mostly to calcareous districts^ 
was seen.
None but the generally-distributed Ferns were seen, such 
as Aihyrium filix-fa'Viina Roth., Lastrea Jilix-mas Presl., and 
Z. dilatata Presl.; the last-named being by far the most common fern 
met with in the woods.
Cellular Cryptogams.
— The botanists who made this section 
of plants their main object of research, confined their exploration 
mostly to the trunks of the living trees growing up the sides of the 
dale.
Earlier in spring or later in the autumn are more favourable 
seasons for the collection of this tribe of plants, not many being in 
active growth at this season.
The following Mosses and Hepatics 
were collected : — 
M 
Isothecium myuruni PoH.
Neckera complanata L, 
Hypnum cupressifornie L.
Orthotrichum affine Schrad.
Hypnum resupinatum Wils.
Orthotrichum lyellii H.&T.
Plagiothecium denticulatum L.
Ulota briichii Hornsch.
Homalothecium sericeum L.
Zygodon viridissimus Dicks.
Leucodon sciuroides L.
All the above are of general distribution, and were gathered off the 
trees in the dale.
Thtddium re€0^^?uium Hedw.
was growing on 
grassy banks by the sides of the calcareous roads.
This moss has- 
not hitherto been recorded for the East Riding, although it was 
gathered last year near Sledmere by Mr. G.
Webster of York, and 
also previously in the neighbourhood of Settrington by Mr. Slater.
The plant is obtained in the calcareous tracts of the North Ridings 
in the Howardian tract, and in the neighbourhood of Hovingham, 
Hildenley, etc.
It has, however, hitherto not been gathered in fruit- 
It is not recorded in Dr. Parsons' list of East Riding Mosses.
Hepatics.
Lophocolea heterophylla Schrad.
Frullania dilatata L., in fruit.
Metzgeria furcata L.
Radula complanata L., in fruit.
All seen on the trees, and of general distribution.
A small patch of 
the rare Plilidmm ciliare Nees var, pidchrum was gathered from 
a tree in the wood in York Dale.
This is new to the East Riding, 
and is not in Dr. Spruce's list.
The Rev. E.
Maule Cole, F.G.S., reports for the Geological 
Section:— On reaching Wetwang Station at 9.25 the geologists 
from Hull, etc., were met by Mr. Wihiiot Cole, who con- 
ducted the party to a quarry east of the village, and on the northern 
slope of the slight eminence on which the village is built, chiefly for 
the purpose of showing the absence oi flint in the beds of the Upper 
Chalk.
Returning past the Vicarage, they were met by the conductor, 
5l^e__Rev. E.
Maule Cole, F.G.S., who guided them to a quarry on the 
Oct. 1891.
V 
^o6 NOTES AND NEWS.
O 
southern slope, where the Middle Chalk is found containing flints and 
curious nodules of chalk, indicating the passage from the Middle to 
the Upper Chalk.
Ajuifichytes ovatus is not uncommon here.
After 
a brief visit to the interesting old church, with its fine Norman font, 
the party visited a quarry at Rocklands in the Upper Chalk, which 
yields Belenmitella vuicronafa^ but ^^^i^' sponges.
Proceeding to 
Fimber Station, the main body of members from the West were met 
at 11.30, and a start was made up York Dale.
Near Mill Cottages 
a quarr}^ was inspected in the Middle Chalk, where a fine band of 
tabular flint, five inches thick^ is well exposed.
Here, the Hon. Sec, 
Mr. S.
Chadwick, F.G.S., of Malton, obtained many specimens of 
Ananchyfes ovafus^ a Micraster, Terebratula soniglobosa, Rhynconella 
manteliia7ia, several sponges, one in flint, and a beautiful coral.
After traversing the dales and w^oods, and examining the British 
entrenchments, which form so striking a feature on the Yorkshire 
Wolds, the conductor took the party to a quarry in the Upper Chalk 
at Carton Field House (Mr. R.
Megginson).
Here ///^'^^r^//// occur 
in profusion, as well as sponge remains, and thick seams of so-called 
Fullers' earth.
It was in this quarry that Mr. Cole obtained his 
unique sponge — so far unique that it is unknown at the Jermyn Street 
Museum, and Mr. J.
R. Mortimer only thinks that he has one like 
it in his magnificent collection at Driffield.
It is as yet unnamed.
During the walk, which was thoroughly enjoyed, Mr. Cole pointed 
out the accumulations of *grut' on some of the dale -sides, and 
attributed them to an Arctic condition of climate; as also, a 
remarkable depression on a dale side, which seemed to have been 
excavated by a lateral glacier infringing on the main floor.
The meeting was terminated by a vote of thanks passed to the 
Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A., for presiding, on the motion of the Rev. E.
Maul 
e Cole, M.A., seconded by Mr. Samuel Chadwick, F.G.S 
E.R.W.
# 
NOTES AND NEWS.
An important contribution to our knowledge of 'The SIul'S of Ireland/ from 
the pen of Dr. R.
F. Scharfif, E.Sc, Keeper of the Nat. Hist.
Museum at Dublin, 
has just been published as one of the memoirs of the Royal Dublin Society, and 
is illustrated by a coloured plate of the animals, and a plate of their anatomy.
The appointment of Organising Secretary to the Somerset County Council 
Technical Education Committee, at a salary of ;^400 per annum, has recently been 
conferred upon Mr. Charles Herbert Bothamley, F.I.C., F.C.S., of Leeds- 
Mr. Bothamley, who is a native of Lincolnshire, has for some years been assistant 
lecturer and demonstrator at the Yorkshire College, was at one time a very active 
member nf the Leeds Naturalists* Club, a familiar figure at several of the annual 
meetings of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, and will be much missed in Leeds.
Last year, it will be remembered, he was honoured with the post of President ot 
the Photographic Convention of Great Britain and Ireland when it held its 
meetings at Chester, 
Natarali-'*t, 
307 
ORNITHOLOGY AT DANBY-IN-CLEVELAND.
Forty Years in a Moorland Parish, Reminiscences and Researches in 
Danby-in-Cleveland.
By the Rev. J, C.
Atkinson, D.C.L., author of 
*A History of Cleveland/ etc.
Macmillan & Co. 1891.
Under this title the author has given us a charming volume; 
from preface to finish it has been very pleasant reading, and we close 
the book with regret, wishing that there was more of it.
In these 
days of discontent and increasing restlessness, it is specially pleasant 
to wander away with the author into the quiet restful dales of North- 
East Yorkshire, where the conditions of existence have continued 
for generations less exacting and with less wear to mind and body.
Forty years and upwards is a long time to have spent anywhere, 
even amongst the busy haunts of men and with plenty of congenial 
neighbours.
The writer^s lot in life, however, has been one of 
comparative seclusion and separation from the world in the upland 
parish of Danby-in-Cleveland, surrounded by vast and lonely moor- 
lands, and in a comparatively little known and rarely visited district, 
where, from its very remoteness and seclusion, the manners and 
customs, folk-lore and folk-speech have continued to linger with little 
alteration for a longer and to a later period than has, perhaps, been 
the case in any other part of the kingdom ; so that in reading this 
book we seem to be brought face to face with a distinct survival — 
fragment, as it were, stranded on the shores of time, of that 
renowned Northumbrian kingdom, which at one time extended 
unbroken from the shores of the Humber to the lowlands of 
Scotland.
Mr, Atkinson tells us in the preface to the first edition that during 
his long residence and seclusion in Danby he must have walked 
70,000 miles in the prosecution of his clerical duties alone, and much 
more than twice this for exercise and recreation, and that none of 
these long miles, however companionless, were really lonely, for to 
him there was ever matter for reflection and speculation in the 
beasts and birds, the flowers and insects he came across, the 
constantly shifting scenery, and the ever-varying atmospheric changes, 
never twice the same.
Years spent thus in these hill solitudes have 
not been wasted or thrown away, as all will admit who have read 
these reminiscences.
The book has already been so well received by the public, and 
favourably reviewed and noticed by the press, that we can afford 
^ow to pass over those many interesting chapters relating to the 
history, geology, antiquities, folk-lore, legends, superstitions, manners, 
and customs w^hich occupy the greater portion of the volume, 
Oct, i8qi.
3o8 REVIEW — ORNITHOLOGY AT DANBV-IN-CLEVELAND.
confining our remarks solely to such matters as more appropriately 
come within the scope of this journal, namely the natural history, 
and especially t"he ornithology of the district- 
In the two chapters given chiefly to ornithology the writer 
informs us that one of the boldest and most unabashed of the garden 
plunderers of berry-fruit at Danby was the Moor Blackbird or Ring 
Ouzeh In September they collect in flocks of some hundreds, and, 
in company with the dale Blackbirds, for a time continue to frequent 
the open moor to feed on bilberries.
These becoming exhausted, 
they make a raid on the gardens, and when the much-grudged supply 
of fruit is done, fall back upon the scarlet rowan-berries, and after 
these are finished, they will take their departure for more southern 
lands, not to appear again till the spring.
Mr. Atkinson warmly defends the useful Starling from the charge 
of taking strawberries, and with regard to the question which was 
recently ventilated in this journal, whether it brings off two broods 
or not in the season, is decidedly of opinion that under certain 
exceptional circumstances only this is the case, the first eggs or 
brood having been destroyed — a rule to which the Starling is no 
exception, and which holds good with many other species also which 
normally have only one brood.
We regret to learn that the cheerful and harmless Dipper is 
becoming a rare bird on the Cleveland becks and rillS.
Formerly, 
where the author used to see six to ten pairs, he now barely sees one.
This scarcity has been brought about through their wanton destruc- 
tion by the gun-carrying lout, and the same fate befalls the occasional 
Kingfishers which frequent the 'big beck/ and the rarer Great 
Spotted Woodpecker in its casual visits to the district.
At one time 
Green Woodpeckers were anything but uncommon, but what with 
the cutting down of the older timber and slaughter of occasional 
visitors by bird-murderers, their visits are now very exceptional.
Mr. Atkinson says the Raven has been extirpated during his 
time ; also the Barn Owl, which used to breed in the church tower; 
and the Wood Owl, if it exists still, is represented by one pair only.
The Merlin formerly bred in Danby Low Moor, near to the so-called 
British village, but this place knoweth them no more, and Mr.
Atkinson has not seen a Harrier or Buzzard for this last thirty years.
The keepers and watchers, — a class notoriously most ignorant of 
natural history, notwithstanding their great opportunities— do not 
as yet appear to have even recognised the valuable services of the 
harmless Kestrel in destroying the destructive smaller mammals.
One of the watchers informed the author one day, in the manner of 
one who had accomplished a feat, that he had been helping in_a^_r*iid 
Naturalist, 
NOTES : LEPIDOPTERA, 309 
on the * little red hawks' in Crunkley Gill, and that they had 
killed, little and big, seventeen.
A natural consequence of their 
merciless and short-sighted policy is an inordinate increase of Field 
Mice, both long tails and short tails.
Up to 1846-47 the Stock- 
dove was a rare bird in Danby, but now as many as six to ten pair 
breed annually.
In 1846 there was a brood of nine black game on 
the Low Moor, including two old birds, but, although none are known 
to have been shot or killed, in a year or two they entirely disappeared 
from the neighbourhood.
Of the rarer British visitors Mr. Atkinson has twice seen the 
Great Grey Shrike.
The rarest visitor to the parish recorded by him 
was a White's Thrush {Turdus varius)^ one Sunday afternoon on the 
grass imder his study window for perhaps ten or fifteen minutes, and 
which was leisurely examined through a pair of excellent field glasses.
Perhaps the strangest bird visitors to present themselves in the winter 
snows to be fed at the dining-room windows were a couple of Snipe, 
which came regularly two and sometimes three times a day, for eight 
or nine days continuously, to feed on bread soaked in milk.
All this and much more on the same subject about Corncrakes, 
Water 
Atkinson's volume, and 
we can only regret that space will not permit us to give a more 
general and extended notice of a thoroughly delightful book.
— J.C.
iVO TES~LEFWOFTERA.
Sphinx convolvuli at Bamsley.
— On August aptli I had brought to me 
a specimen of Sphinx convolvuli f »und at rest on a wall near the centre of 
the town.
As far as I am aware, this is the first appearance of S, lonvohult 
in this district since the memorable season of 18S7, during which year 10 specimens 
were reported, most of them netted whilst hovering over petunias.— Wm. E.
Brady, Barnsley, 31st August, 1891.
Larentia ruficinctata at Oughtershaw, Langstrothdale-— In the Sep- 
tember number of the * Naturalist' there is a note on the occurrence o^ Larcniia 
^ufii'iutiaia near Scarborough, and the non-occurrence o{ its usual food-plant 
Sajcify-aga gramdata.
I may state that I have repeatedly taken Z.
ruficinctata at 
Oughtershaw, hut have never noted S.
gramdata in this locality.
No record of 
this plant for Wharfedale is given in the 'Flora of West Yorkshire,' but it is, 
I am told, very plentiful in the glebe meadow at Burnsall.
With regard to 
Littondale, which runs along the south side of Langstrothdale, the Rev.^ W.
A. 
Shuffrey has only found Sax. gramdata in the church-yard and vicarage- 
grnunds of Arncliffe ; he observes that it grows in the neighbourhood of Malham 
Tarn— and for that locality Z.
ruficinctata has also been recorded.
Indeed, 
accurding to the excursion-circular of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, Malham 
>s the only West Yorkshire station recorded hitherto, a statement which requires 
tnodification.
— T.
B. WoODD, St. Peter's, Eaton Square, London.
[See records of the occurrences of Z.
rnficinctata in Yorkshire, in ' List of 
Yorkshire Lepidoptera,' pp.
46 and 180; and as to the food-plant, see note in 
the present number, p.
312, by Mr. J.
11.
Rowntree, on Saxi/raga gramdata near 
Scarborough.~Ed. Nat.].
Oct, 189T.
3IO 
NOTE—ARCH.^OLOG Y.
A Stone Celt from Castleshaw, Saddleworth.— The readers of 'The 
j\aturahst^ who take an interest in prehistoric implements will be interested to 
know that a very pretty, and almost perfect, stone celt was found in a hed of clay 
this morning at Castleshaw, Saddleworth.
The clay cutting averages from 
3 a.
6 m.
to 6 ft., and is 830 ft.
above the level of the sea.
I do not know how 
deep below the surface of the ground the celt reposed, as it was not found until 
the clay was being cut up and prepared for puddle.
It would be interesting to 
know this as fixing its position in situ, and enable us to form an approximate idea 
of the rate of deposition of clay in depressions of land on the Pennine slopes, and 
the results of rain-wash.
The longer axis of my celt is 4i in.
by 2* in.
at the broader cutting edge.
It IS beautifully polished, and coated with a thin film of porcelainised matter, and 
speckled m several places with dendritic markings, which establish its genuine 
character and age.
I am not sure of what kind of stone it is made, and reverence 
It too highly to chip off the smallest fragment which would disfigure it.
A few 
wave-lines of a darker colour, and inclining at an angle of fo^ pass through the 
centre of the smaller axis and add slightly to its beauty, and probably attracted 
the eye of the primitive man who shaped it.
The texture is fine--rained, and the 
rock may be greenstone, 
,.^*^^^^^^^^^^^ ^'^^^ey ^as now yielded me two celts similar in character, but 
ditferent m size.
I have always regarded this valley as one of the most recently 
iormed in Saddleworth, and I have no doubt primitive man limbered in its shady 
recesses long after he had retreated from the more rugged vales of the parish.
1 say shady recesses' advisedly, because I am sure, owing to its physical 
conformation, geological substrata, and shelter from the prevailing and destructive 
north-easterly winds blowing for weeks at the spring of the year, tree life in 
l^V /^T ^'^^ "^^ ^"^^' ^^^^ prolific, but more vigorous and healthy, and 
afforded shelter and protection to the early members of our race, who fashioned 
and used the implements to which I have referred.— \Vm. Watts, P\G.S., 
June nth, 1891.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The Rev. C.
G. Green is publishing a series of papers on 'The Rarer Birds of 
the West, in a magazine which by its interesting contents and general get-up does 
honour to Plymouth and Devon, viz., 'The Western Magazine and Portfolio,' 
which m appearance and style reminds one of the familiar ' Enirlish Illustrated.' 
A pleasantly-written little bonk by the Rev. Bennett George Johns, M.A., Vicar 
of \Voodmancote, Hants., lies before us.
It is published in a handsome pictorial 
doth cover by Isbister and Co.
, at 2s.
6d.
, and is entitled ' Among the Butterflies— 
a Book for "^ oung Collectors.' Twelve woodcut plates depict the various species, 
and a table at the end indicates the names, habitats and dates, both of the 
butterflies and their caterpillars.
A bit of good l)otanical work has been done in Yorkshire by a distinguished 
south-country botanist, Rev. W.
Moyle Rogers, F.L.S., who spent all August and 
ha U of September 1890, in collecting the Brambles and the Roses of the Yorkshire 
dales— about Helmsley and Northallerton, near Richmond and Settle, and along 
the length of Wensleydale.
This forms the subject of a paper entitled ' Notes on 
some of the Ruin and Rosu of the Yorkshire Dales/ which is published in the 
Journal of Botany ' for August, 
— i^OO^ 
' An Historical Account of the Genus Latirus (Montfort) and its dependencies, 
with descriptions of eleven new species, and a catalogue of Latirus and 
J_eristeniia,' which has just been published in the memoirs of the Manchester 
l^iterary and Philosophical Society, is our indefatigable friend Mr. J.
Cosmo 
ivielvi Is latest contribution to concholugical literature.
Eleven species are 
described and figured as new, bringing up the total numbers known to 62 of 
Latzrus, and 49 of Penstemia, or ui altogether.
Natur-Jsst, 
3IJ 
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
iu^ ixie captures oi a cat wnicn was ijiuijiiiig up a iaihii;- «.l i^.v.
«..jw......^ V 
that I obtained an example of this species, a very fine old male.
Thus th 
existence of these five species is established on satisfactory evidence, although th 
Mammalia in Upper Swaledale.— I spent the week from the 15th to the 
24th August in Upper Swaledale, staying at the Strands Farm, which is half-way 
between Gunnerside and Low Row, and availed myself of the opportunity to set 
half-a-dozen mouse-traps about the farm, with the view of ascertaining definitely 
what species of micro-mammals were to be found there, at an altitude of about 650 ft.
above sea-level.
The traps I used were of the * Cyclone' pattern, which is certamly 
the most effective I have ever seen.
It is an American patent, sold at fourpence, 
and entirely of metal, consisting of a flat bottom-plate, to which are attached 
a couple of powerful springs which act instantaneously, and mercifully kill the 
animal on the spot without damaging it for preservation.
The bait I used was 
powdered aniseed, which small mammals seem not to be able to resist.
The 
traps were shifted to different places two or three times a day, and by their means 
we secured the little animals by scores.
The animal of which we secured the 
greatest quantity was the Common Shrew {Sorex tetragonurtts), I had hoped to get 
the Lesser Shrew, but was unsuccessful.
The next most numerous species was the 
Bank or Red Field Vole {Ai-vicola glarcohts), of which we obtained a great many.
Of the Long-tailed Field-Mouse [Mits sylvaticus) we obtained three or four, and 
one verv young one was caught by the roadside and brought to me alive by some 
boys.
Of the House Mouse {Mas muscidus), one was caught when a trap was 
set close to the house, and one in a barn in the pasture.
The Short-tadedVole 
{Arvicola agresfzs) was never caught by the traps, and it was only upon requisition- 
ing the captures of a cat which was bringing up a family at the adjoinmg farm, 
Thus, the 
_pecies is estaoiisncu on ^aii?Mu.i-Lui^ .^vi^^.i*-^, M.^...*^^«fc, & 
actual numbers caught by the traps must not be too rashly assumed to represent 
their true relative abundance in the district.— W.
Denisox RoEBUCK, Sunny Hank, 
Leeds, August 30th, 1891.
Lon^-tailed Field Mouse near Alford, Lines.— On Feb. 13th, 18S6, 
I received from Mr. J.
E. Mason two Mns sylvaticus, the least-dainaged of tour 
squeezed to death by the weight of a plough which had cut into their wmter-nest 
at Rigsby.— W.
Denison Roebuck, Leeds.
Noctule Flying in Sunshine.— T, and no doubt many others, will remember 
the 13th inst.
as one of the most glorious days of the year ; I was out from early 
morning until late at night, and during the whole tmie I don t think I saw a single 
cloud.
The sun was intensely hot, and on crossing the \yharfe near Pool, about 
half-past ten in the morning, I was very much surprised to see a large bat tlying 
up and down the river in the brilliant sunshine.
It frequently flew within a tew 
yards of me, and I had no difficulty in recognising it as a Noctule (Vesperugi^ 
noctitla).
It was hawking for insects in company with Martms and ^^"^"^^^^f i"^' 
and although not so swift as these birds, its flight was much more rapid than 1 had 
thoujjht when seeing it fly at dusk.
. > 
The martins did not appear to understand their strange companion, and 
frequently darted towards it, but not, I should imagine, wuh any hostile intention; 
although at each manoeuvre of the martins the Noctule executed a rapid change ot 
direction, as though it did not regard the near approach of Us feathered 
companions as indicative of friendship.
. .
I frequently saw it drop a foot or two in the air, and^on one ^^casion,^when^t^ 
some 
large and"inTractab"l7^nsect "having been captired, and the anterior joint of the 
wing, with its well-armed thumb, is required to assist m retainmg 1 until 
masticated.' My experience of this bat is that it usually flies very high, but he 
one here mentioned confined itself to within a few yards of the ^;^^^^.f^^ff;"^ 
when it rose for the purpose of crossing the bridge.
Of course its action m this 
respect will be influenced by the position of its prey.
\^Kc^re' 
I have more than once seen the Noctule fly in early twihght, J>;^ "f,^^^^ !f ^ 
i" bright sunshine before noon.
Unlike the Owls, it would appear ^^ though t^^^^ 
Noctule was as capable of using its eyes in the sunshine as any ordinar> diurnal 
f'nimal.— Edgar R.
Waite.
The Museum, Leeds, Sept.
2ist, i&9i- 
took a 
this ac 
^quently saw it drop a foot or two in tne air, aau 0.1 uwc ^^^....w*., ,..
large fly within twenty feet of me, it must have dropped quite a yard 
tion Bell writes (British Quadrupeds, p.
23): 'It is occasioned by 
Oct. iSqi.
312 
PTEROPHORUS PALUDUM IN YORKSHIRE.
GEO.
T. POKRITT, F.L.S., 
Huddersficid \ President of the Entomological Section^ Yorkshire Xaturalist^ Union \ 
Author of ^ A List of Vorkshirc LepidoJ>ti'ra^ etc* 
It is with much satisfaction that I record the occurrence of so 
interesting a species as Pterophoriis palitdtuti in Yorkshire.
When 
collecting on Thorne Waste, in company with Mr. John Harrison, 
of Barnsley, on July i8th last, I boxed a ^ Plume' which both I and 
Mr. Harrison failed to recognise.
On making a careful examination 
of it last week, I found it agreed very closely with Dorsetshire 
specimens of P, pahidnm in my cabinet ; but as it was both a bigger 
specimen, and also in finer condition, than any in my series, together 
with my doubt as to the likelihood of pahiduui occurring so far 
north as Yorkshire, I at once sent it off to my friend Mr. Sydney 
Webb, of Dover, who is perhaps our best authority on the British 
* Plumes,* for his opinion.
His reply on returning the specimen was, 
as I had anticipated, "'Pallidum^ a very fine and large specimen/ 
Fterophorus pallidum has always been considered a very rare species 
in Britain, and for many years seemed to be confined to the 
Cambridgeshire fens, where it was taken very sparingly.
For many 
years back, however, it seems to have disappeared even from there, 
and was apparently lost in Britain, until some six years ago the 
Rev. O.
Pickard-Cambridge turned it up in Dorsetshire.
In 1886 
and 1887 a fair number were secured in the new locality, but smce 
then it appears to have been very scarce again there, so that its 
advent right on the open part of Thorne Moor is most welcome.
It is to be hoped, as is likely, that future investigation will prove it 
to be well established there.
^tk Sept.y 1 89 1.
NOTES— BOTANY.
granulata 
•Naturalist,' it is stated that Saxifraga gramilata does not grow in the neighbour- 
hood, whereas it occurs fairly commonly in several parts of the district round 
Scarborough, and actually within two or three miles of Hutton Buscel Moor.
J- H.
ROWNTREE, 
Wahlenbergia hederacea in Bcwland, Mid-West Yorkshire.
— A few 
weeks ago, when walking from Clitheroe to Lancaster, via Whitewell and Sykes, 
I was pleased to notice on the open fell-side, close to the high road, near 
Hareden, several hundred specimens of this beautiful plant.
This locality is in 
the Kibble district of West Yorks., but is not recorded in Mr. Lees' * Flora.' My 
friend, Mr. A.
Wilson, of Bradford, had previously gathered it in the same 
locality.
—John B.
Foggitt, Southport, September 5th, 1891.
3*3 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1890.
The present instalment has been compiled and edited by 
ALFRKD MARKER, M.A., F.G.S.
This list includes a few entries omitted in former years.
The 
bibhography might be rendered more complete if editors of 
periodicalSj secretaries of societies, and especially authors of papers 
m local journals, newspapers, etc., would send copies to the editor 
of this journal.' 
Reprints and authors' separate copies should bear the name of 
the publication, the number of the volume or part, the original 
Paging, and the date oi publication.
In the following list the titles only are given of papers published 
in 'The Naturalist/ 
The counties and vice-counties of which w^e take cognizance in 
these references are the following, as named and numbered in the 
Watsonian scheme : — 
53' I-incoln S.
\ 54, Lincoln N.
; 56, Notts.; 57, Derby; 58, 
Cheshire; 59, Lancashire S.
; 60, Lancashire W.
; 6r, York S.E.
; 
62, York N.E.
; (>i^ York S- VV.
; 64, York Mid W.
; 65, York N.W.
; 
66, Durham ; 67, Northumberland S.
; 68, Cheviotland ; 69, West- 
morland with Furness; 70, Cumberland; and 71, Isle oi Man.
Previous instalments of the Bibliography of Geology and 
Palaeontology have appeared as follows : 
For 1884 — 'Naturalist/ December 1S85, pp.
394-406.
1885 
1886 
1887 
1888 
1889 
H. Cooper Abbs.
yy 
J? 
>) 
yj 
November 1886, „ 349-362.
June 18SS, „ 178-188, 
February 1S89, ,, 61-77.
April 1890, „ 121-138.
November 1890, „ 339-350- 
York N.W- 
[Presidential] Address \.q .
. .
the Tyneside Naturalists* Field 
Club .
, .
May 24th, 1886 [describing the 'Buttertubs' between 
Wensleydale and Swaledale.
as explained by Mr. P^araday Spence ; a Shap 
Granite boulder at Saltburn-by-the-Sea ; geology of Salthurn CNpiained by 
W. Y.
Veitch].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Norlhumb.
Durh.
& Newc, vol.
8. part 3, 
1889, pp.
326-346.
S. A.
A[nAMSON].
York N.E.
-*--vw.v Aspects of Health Resorts.— IX.— Saltbum and District 
[geology de-scriDed and illustrated by views at Saltburn, Marske, and Staithes, 
and cliff-seclions].
Research, Jan. 1890, pp.
148-151 and woodcuts.
Oct. i8gi.
314 H[IU.[(IGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 189O.
S. A.
A[damsox], 
Yorkshire.
Scientific Research in Yorkshire [being an account of the ^vork and objects 
of the Yorkshire Boulder Committee, Fossil Flora Committee, Coast Erosion 
Committee, and Geological Photographs Committee].
Research, March 
1890, pp.
200-202, 
Percy Leonard Addison.
Cumberland.
Description of the Cleator Iron Ore Company's Barytes and Umber 
Mine ...
in the Caldbeck Fells [vein situated half-mile west of High 
Pike, at Hare Stones ; analyses of umber and barytes given].
Min. Proc, 
Inst.
Civ. Eng., vol.
cii.
pp.
283-291.
Anon, [not signed].
Westmorland.
Field-Meeting of the Kendal Natural History Society [at Longsleddale, 
Aug. 2nd; giving very brief summary of the geological observations].
Westm.
Note-Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, vol.
i, part 3, Sep. 1888, p, 65.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.W.
Dove Cote Gill or Dowker Gill Cavern [described; the total length of 
this limestone cavern is roughly 350 ft.].
Kendal Mercury and Times, April 
27th, 188S ; rep.
\Yestni, Note-Book, vol.
I, part 4, Dec. 1S88, pp.
184-187.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
[Appointment of a Committee to search for the remains of a gigantic 
Megaceros hibernicus, said to be buried in a marl bed on the estate of 
Ballalough, German], Ya Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 18S9, i.
36.
Anon, [not signed], York S.W.
Donations, etc.
[to Museum at Newcastle ; Sphenopteris artemisuefoUct 
from Fawdon Old Colliery; and specimens of Fluid Bitumen and 
Middletonite, from Middleton, near Leeds].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, voL lo, part 2 (1890)5 p.
293, 
Anon, [not signed].
W..
N.W., S.W 
List of.
. Donations to the Museum [at Newcastle] .
. , from Aug. loth, 
1888, to July 1st, 1889 [includes various fossils and rock-specimens from 
various localities].
Nat. Hist.
Trans- Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol, 10, 
part 2 (1S90), pp.
315-316.
Anon, [not signed].
Yorkshire.
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union— Geological Section [brief summary of the 
1889 excursions].
Research, Feb. 1890, p.
188.
Lane.
S. 
Anon, [not signed].
Several boulders of large size [found in cutting the Ship Canal opposite 
the Salford docks, described].
Research, April 1890, p.
230.
Anon, [not signed].
Cheshire.
[Discovery of Beds of Salt at Middlewich].
Research, April 1S90, p.
23 
Anon, [not signed].
2^1- 
Yorkshire.
ery.
XX.— The Late Mr. S.
A. Adamson, F.G.S.
[with 
a Meissenbach portrait, and memoir].
Research, April 1S90, pp.
228-230.
Lane.
S. 
Anon, [not signed]- 
Geological Sections on the Manchester Ship Canal: L [with figures, 
after photographs by E.
Ward, of drift sands and river gravels with pot-hole 
at Barton, and slickensided fault in Waterstones at Norton].
Research, 
April 1890, vol.
ii, page 232.
Anon, [not signed].
Cheshire.
Coal in Cheshire [announcing the intention of the Salt Union to bore for coaj 
beneath the salt-beds, and speculating on the prospects].
Research, April 
1890, vol.
ii.
pp.
217-218, 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: GEOLOGV and PALyEONXOLOOV, 1S90.
315 
Axon", [not signed].
Derbyshire.
The Railway Invasion of the High Peak [describing the district to be 
traversed by the Dore and Chiniey Railway, with a description of the 
geological structure of Kinderscout, Kdale, Castleton, and the neighbour- 
hood].
Manchester Guardian, April 8th, 1890.
Anon, [not signed].
. Line.
N. and S.
Murray's Handbook for Lincolnshire, with maps and plans [brief sketch 
of geology of couiity on pp.
5-7, with a note on the South Scarle boring].
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
The Geology of the Isle of Man [in five articles ; No. I, with sketch-map, 
is introductory ; II.
deals with the Skiddaw Slates, which form most of the 
island ; ITT.
the Carboniferous rocks, including the basement beds, the lime- 
stones, and the volcanic accumulations ; IV.
the granite masses of Foxdale 
and Dhoon, with some observations on the glacial phenomena ; and V.
dis- 
cusses more closely the conditions prevailing during Glacial times].
Manch.
Examiner for Aug. 9th, i6th, 23rd, and 30th, and Sep. 6th, 1890.
Anon, [not signed], York S.W.
Opening- out of a new Coal Field in Yorkshire [report of a meeting at 
Balne, near Drax, to consider the prospects of working coal under the 
Magnesian Limestone of that district ; decision to sink a shaft on Balne 
Moor ; a bore-hole 120 yards deep at Carlton Towers had given satisfactory 
results].
Yorkshire Post and Eastern Morning News, Sept.
27th, 1890.
J. C.
AxTROBus and F.
H. Hatch.
Cheshire- 
Preliminary Note on the Composition and Origin of Cheshire Boulders 
[recognising boulders of Muncaster granite, Buttermere ^ranophyre, and 
volcanic rocks from the Borrowdale series, with gabbro and basalt, possibly 
from Western Scotland ; besides quartzites, probably Carboniferous].
York- 
shire Post, Sep. 9th, 1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, p.
813 (1891).
J- R.
ASHWORTH.
Lane.
S. 
Thermometric Observations of Air and Water at Cowm and Spring 
Mill Reservoirs [tabulated].
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. and Sci. Soc, vol.
2, 
for 1889-90, publ.
1890, pp.
103-105 and double-page plate.
J. Backhouse, Jun. Durham.
A Weardale Lead Mine [visited and described].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., 
Feb. 15th, 1890.
xiv.
1-4.
Robert R.
Balderston.
Westmorland and York N.W.
The Cambrian Rocks and Silurian Base of Ewcross, Dufton, and Shap 
Wells [propounding an interpretation of the structure of the district founded 
on isochnal fold^ in the supposed Cambrians].
25 pp.
and map.
Lancaster 
(privately printed).
[Reviewed in Nat., Feb. 1891, pp.
63, 64].
S. Barher.
Cumberland.
A Boulder's Tale [account of a fall of a himdred-ton boulder from Ifelveliyn 
into the Wyihburn Valley], Sci. Goss., July 1890, p.
166.
H. C.
Beasley.
Lane.
S. 
Isle of Man.
Field Meeting at Burton Point [on July 20th, 18S9 ; noticing section of 
Middle Bunter].
Proc.
Liverp, Geol.
Soc, vol.
vi.
p. 216.
Alfred Bell.
The *' Manure" Gravels of Wexford [noting a Phocene fauna v^^hh A^assa 
re/i'cosa, etc., in the north of the Isle of Man].
Geol.
Mag., Jan. 1890, cUc. 3, 
vol.
vii.
pp.
35, 36.
York N.E.
Thomas Bell.
n the Middlesboroug-h Salt Works, and the Recent Boring: on the 
Lackenby Foreshore Estate [with details of boring to 1,806 ft.].
Trans.
Mancli.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xx., 1890, p.
5^; discussion, pp.
560, 561.
Oct. 1891.
3t6 bibliographv : geology and palaeontology, 1890.
T. G.
BONNEY, 
North -Western Counties.
Mr. Mallard Readers Interpretation of the Lower Trias Physiography 
[rejectin;^ the marine theory of the origin of the Banter beds of Cheshire and 
Lancashire, and maintaining the fluviatile theory of these strata, which are 
compared with the siib-A!pine drifts and ihe uagelflite and vtolasse of Switzer- 
land ; the materials are claimed to have been derived fr^m Scotland], 
Geol.
Mag., Feb. 1S90, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
52-55.
T. G, BoNNF.y.
North-Western Counties.
Mr. Mellard Reade on the Physiography of the Lower Trias [a reply 
to that writer], Geol.
Mag., May 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
235-237.
C. H.
BoTHAMLKY, York Mid W.
and S.W.
The Sulphur Waters of Yorkshire [the author divides them into two 
groups, one including the Harrogate waters, the other those of Askern ; the 
Jormer are deep>seated, and contain a large proportion of saline constituenis, 
among others, barium up to as much as 10 grains per gallon ; the Askern 
waters are of surface origin, and contain much organic matter ; a paper read 
before Brit.
Assoc.].
Leeds Mercury, Sep. 9th, 1890; Rep. Hrit.
Assoc, for 
1890, p.
779(1891).
WlI.LlAM BKOCKBANK, 
Lane.
S, 
The Levenshulme Limestones [limestones with Modiola iuaaidaini in the 
Upper Coal Measures, exposed in a railway-cutting between Fallowfield and 
Levenshulme].
Mem. and Proc.
Manch.
Lit. and Phil.
Soc, (4), vol.
iii.
pp.
209-211.
G. W.
IJuLMAN.
Northumberland.
On a Coal-Seam in the Bernician Series of Northumberland, and its 
Bearing on the Theory of the Formation of Coal.
Nat., Nov, 1890, 
pp.
321-322.
York S.E. and Line.
N. 
IL W.
Burrows, C.
Mavies Sherhorn.
and Ge<i.
Bailey.
The Foraminifera of the Red Chalk of Yorkshire, Norfolk, and 
Lincolnshire [describing and figuring many species, mostly from Speeton ; 
others from South Cave, Great Girendale [?
Givendale] and \Vhanam 
[? Wharrani], Yorkshire, and Candlesby, Lincolnshire], Journ.
R. Microsc.
Soc. Oct.
1890, pp.
549-566, plates viii.-xi.
\V.
Lower Carter, .Sec.
York Mid W.
Excursion to Garforth and Newthorpe [with account of the Magnesian 
Limestone, and an analysis by Mr. Fairley of that quarried at Garforth, 
containing 50*59 per cent, carbonate of lime and 3975 per cent, carbonate of 
magnesia].
Trans.
Leeds Geo!.
Assoc, part v.
pp.
51-53, 1889.
W. Lower Carter, Sec.
York Mid W.
Excursion to South Milford and Sherburn [with particulars about the 
Upper and Lower Magnesian Limestones].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc, 
part V.
pp.
54-56, 1889.
\V.
Lower Carter, Sec. York S.E.
KCursion to Broug-h and Elloughton [with observations on the gravels of 
Mill Hill and the Millepore Oolite of Brou-h and Lllerker].
Trans.
Leeds 
Geol, Assoc, part v.
pp.
56-59, 1889.
\V.
Lower Carier, Sec York Mid W- 
Excursion to Gig-gleswick and Langcliffe [the Carboniferous Limestone].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc, part v.
pp.
59-61, 1889.
W. Lower Carter, Sec 
York Mid W.
Excursion to the *' Haddockstones " and District [noting at Wormald 
Green the drift-capped Lower Magnesian Limestone (of which an analysis by 
Mr. Holme gives 71-125 per cent, carbonate of lime and 25*625 carlx>nate of 
magnesia), and at Haddockstones near Ripon the Millstone Grit].
Trans, 
Leeds Geo], Assoc, part v.
pp.
62-65, ^^89.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHV: GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 189O.
317 
W. Lower Carter, Sec.
York S.W.
Excursion to the Holme Valley [see Nat., 1889, pp.
204-206].
Trans.
Leeds 
GeoL Assoc, part w pp.
65-67, 18S9.
W. LowKR Carter, Sec. York S.W.
Excursion to Hebden Bridg^e and Crimsworth Dean [Kinderscout Grit 
and Upper Voredale Shales], Trans.
Leeds GeoL Assoc, pt.
v. pp.
67, 6S, 18S9.
W. Lower Carteu, Sec York Mid W.
Excursion to Ripley [etc., see Naturalist, 1889, pp.
69-70].
Trans.
Leeds 
GeoL Assoc, part v.
pp, 68-71, 1889.
W. I,owER Carter, Sec York N.W., Durham.
Excursion to Upper Teesdale [see Nat., 1889, pp.
285-290].
Trans.
Leeds 
GeoL Assoc, part v.
pp.
71-76, 1SS9.
W. Lower Carter, Sec York S.W.
Excursion to Eccleshill [noticing quarries in the Elland Flagstones, with 
slickensided fault-surfaces, etc.].
Trans.
Leeds GeoL Aj-soc, part v.
pp.
76-77, 1889.
S. Chadwtck.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists^ Union at Lowthorpe near DrifBeld [26th May, 
1890, Geology, pp.
208-209].
Nat., July 1890, pp.
203-209.
\V.
Cheetham.
Durham, Cumberland, York N,W.
and Mid W.
A Geolog-ical Tour through Durham into Cumberland [noting geological 
features, and giving an account o( the limestones quarried at Stanhope: 
abstr.
of paper read before Leeds GeoL Assoc]- Kesearch, April 1890, 
vol.
ii, pp.
23S-239.
Wm. Cheetham.
York Mid W.
On a Boulder with Cup and Ring Markings at Horsforth [six miles 
N.W. of Leeds; a boulder of Millstone Grit, five feet long].
Proc.
Yorks.
GeoL and Polyt.
Soc.
(N.S.) vol.
xi.
pp.
175-177, 
Mrss CoicNou.
York Mid W.
On a new species of Cyphaspis from the Carboniferous Rocks of 
Yorkshire [from the Pendieside Limestone of Butterhaw near Cracoe, named 
C, acauthina ; the genus hitherto not known above the Devonian], Quart.
Journ.
GeoL Soc, vol.
xIvL pp.
421, 422, with woodcut.
E. Maule Cole.
York S.E 
Coast Erosion in Yorkshire [stating the annual rate of destruction at various, 
points in fiolderness : Hornsea 6 ft.
10 in., Aldborough 5 ft.
\\ in., Tunstall 
6 ft.
9 in., Holnipton 4 ft.
5 in.]- Research, April 1S90, vol.
ii.
pp.
225-226.
E. M.
Cole.
Yorkshire,.
In Memoriam.
— Samuel Arthur Adamson, F,G.S. Nat., April 1890, 
pp.
117-119.
E. Maule Cole.
York S.E.
Notes on the Driffield and Market Weighton Railway [describing cuttings 
in the Chalk, Lias, etc].
Proc.
Yorks.
GeoL and Polyt.
Soc.
(N.S.), voL xi.
pp.
170-5.
E. Maule Cole.
York N.E.
On a Bed of Peat overlying a Lacustrine Deposit near Filey [first 
noticed by Phillips ; the peat is.
6 ft.
thick ; the formation of this and similar 
accumulations is explained by the existence of higher land to the east, now 
destroyed by the sea], Yorks.
Post,LeedsMercury»and Times, Sep. Iith, 1890.
George Ckewdson.
Westmld., Furness, Cumbld., York N.W.
Cambrian and Silurian Fossils itom Westmorland, Cumberland, and 
North Lancashire, in the Kendal Museum [given in tabular form, with 
perp endicular columns for the different formations ; 5 imertir sedis, I tracks- 
Dct. i8(jt.
3i8 bibliography: geology and palaeontology, 1890.
ft 
and markings, I Sponge, 40 Tlydrozoa (Graptolithina), 22 Actinozoa, 
12 Echinodermata, 3 Annelida, 34 Crustacea, 9 MoIIusca (Polyzoa), 48 
Brachiopoda, 28 Lamellibranchiata, 24 Gasteropoda, 8 Pteropoda, and 20 
Cephalopoda, are enumerated in the table, with clear indication of locality 
and horizon].
Westm.
Xote-Book and Xat. Hist.
Record, vol.
i. part 2, 
June 1888, pp, 34-44.
George Crewi:)SON.
Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness.
The Physical History of the Lake District [treated of from a broad and 
general point of view].
Westm.
Note-Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, vol.
i, 
part 6, June 1889, 134-144 (article unfinished, ends abruptly at foot of p.
144).
H. W.
Crosskey [Sec.].
York (all divisions), Durham, and Lane, S- 
Seventeenth Report of the Committee consisting- of .
• .
[nine names] 
...
for the purpose of recording the position .
. , [etc.] ...
of the Erratic 
Blocks of England, Wales, and Ireland .
. .
with particulars of many 
boulders in Yorkshire (see Natitrali^t) ; at Harton near North Shields; and 
at Newchurch-in Rossendale].
Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1SS9, PP- ^^S'^^7' 
j. R.
Dakyns.
York N.W„ Mid W., and S.W.
On the Changes of the Lower Carboniferous Rocks in Yorkshire 
from South to North [the four-fold division of the Millstone Grit in Derby- 
shire does not hold northward ; the Yoredale type of beds hardly exists south 
of Kelilewell ; going north from Coverhead cherty beds, etc., come in between 
the Main Limestone and the Millstone Grit; and the ganister beds in the 
Millstone Grit Ijecome more pronounced as we go northward].
Yorkshire 
Post, Sep. 6th, 1S90; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1S90, pp.
811, 812 (1891).
York Mid W.
and N.W.
J. R.
Dakyns, R.
H. Tiddeman, W.
Gunn, and A.
Strahan.
The Geology of the Country around Ingleborough, with parts of 
Wensleydale and Wharfedale.
Mem. Geol.
Surv., England and Wales 
(Explanation of Quarter-sheet 97 S.W.; New Series, Sheet 50) [describing 
the Lower Palaeozoics of Ingleton, Crummack, and Ribblesdale, the 
Carboniferous System, and the Glacial and Post-Glacial deposits : notes on 
the mica-trap dykes by F.
Rutley], Svo, 103 pp., London.
J. W.
Davis.
York S.W.
On Coelacanthus Philllpsli, Agassiz [a fish from the Lower Coal-Measures 
at Swan Bank Pit, Halifax ; description of the single specimen known].
Geol.
Mag., April 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
159-161.
James W.
Davis, ^ ^ York S.W., Northumberland S.
On the Dentition of Pleuroplax (Pleurodus), A.
S. Woodw.
[with 
passing references to F.
{P,) affifzzs Agass., occurring in a thin shale above the 
Better-Bed Coal of Clifton and Lowmoor, near Plalifax ; P, rankznei Ag., 
from the Xorthumberland Low Main Coal].
Ann. and Mag. N.H., Sixth 
Ser., No. 28, Ap. 1890, vol.
5, pp.
291-294 and pi.
13.
J. W.
nvvrs.
York S.W. and Mid W.
On Fossil Fish of the West Riding Coal-Field [an account of the 
various finds since 1S33, more than 50 species being now recorded from the 
district; paper read before the iirit.
Assoc.].
Yorkshire Post, Sept.
loth, 
1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
822-S23 (1S91).
J. W.
Davis.
York S.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Bretton Park [14th June, 1890, 
Geology, pp.
226-227].
Nat., Aug. 1S90, pp.
223-227.
Charles Davison.
Lane.
S. 
On the British Earthquakes of 1889 [including the one felt in Lancashire 
on Feb. loth, which disturbed a nearly circular area 55 miles in diameter; 
epicentrum two miles N.N.E. of Bofton, depth of seismic focus about 3I 
miles ; shock ascribed to a slipping of the Irwell fault].
Proc.
Roy, Soc, 
vol.
xlviii, pp.
275-277.
Naturalist, 
r I 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, iSgo. 319 
W, Boyd Dawktns.
York Mid W.
[Caverns and Subterranean Streams round Ingleborough, mentioned in 
discussing a paper by Mark Stirrup].
Trans.
Manch.
Geo].
Soc, vol.
20, 
part 16, 1890, p.
456.
C. E.
De Range.
Lane.
S. and Cheshire, 
Notes on the Geology of the Manchester Canal.
Trans, and Proc.
Chesterf.
Mid. Count.
Inst., voL i.
pp.
i et seq.
C. E.
De Range [Sec.].
Line.
S., Lane.
S., and Durham.
Fifteenth Report of the Committee consisting- of .
. .
[18 names] .
. .
for the purpose of investigating" the Circulation of Underground 
W^aters .
. .
[giving sections and other details of borings at Bourn, supplied 
by Mr. Jas.
Pilbrow; several localities in Lancashire, by Mr. A.
Timmins ; 
and at Seaton Carew, by Mr. W.
J. Bird].
Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1 889, 
pp.
71-S9 [75-84].
T. H.
Easterfield and J.
Mitchell Wilson.
York Mid W,, S.
W., S.E.
The River Aire — a study in River Pollution [i^iving a brief geological 
sketch of the Aire basin, and incidentally confirming the fact that the material 
of the * warp ' in the Yorkshire rivers is derived from marine erosion of the 
Holderness cliffs].
Leeds Mercury and Yorkshire Post, Sep. 9th, 1890.
^' Embletox.
Northumberland S 
On a Spinal Column of Loxomma Allmani, Huxley [see next entry].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
viii.
p. 349, 18S9.
13.
Emrleton.
Northumberland S, 
On the Spinal Column of Loxomma Allmanni, Huxley, from the 
Northumberland Coal-field [a fine specimen of this species, which, when 
alive must have been about 14 ft.
long].
Rep. 59th Meeting of Brit.
Assoc, 
Newc.-on-Tyne, 1888 (pub.
1889), pp.
580-581.
J- J.
FiTZPATRicK.
Derbyshire, 
Recent Discovery of a Bone Cave at Deep Dale, near Buxton [by 
Mr.
\Y.
iMilleit ; remains of Bos longifrons^ wild boar, brown bear {Ursus 
arctos)^ red deer, reindeer, etc., and Roman relics].
Proc.
Liverp, Geol.Soc, 
vol, vi.
pp.
200-206.
Arthur H.
Foord and G.
C. Crick.
Line.
N. or S., York N.E.
Descriptions of new and imperfectly-defined species of Jurassic 
Nautili contained in the British Museum {Natural History) [Nautilus 
iei-ebratus Dum., Upper Lias, near Lincoln, and N.
calioz'ievsis Opp., 
Scarborough, Kelloway rock, described and figured (woodcuts)].
Ann. and 
Mag. Nat.
Hist., Sixth Series, No. 2S, Ap. 1890, vol.
5, pp.
270 and 290.
Arthur H.
Foord and G.
C. Crick.
York N.E.
On some ne^«r and imperfectly-defined species of Jurassic, Cretaceous, 
and Tertiary Nautili contained in the British Museum (Natural 
History) [with adverse criticism, at p.
399, of a record fur Malton of Naut, 
radiadis J.
Sow.].
Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., Sixth Series, No. 29, May 
1890, vol.
5, pp.
3S8-409.
M. Foster, York S.E.
Geology of South-East Yorkshire, with remarks on the Great Ice Age 
[a lecture on the local geology, in the form of an excursion from the Hiimher 
to Cliffe, Hotham, Kettletlioipe^ Beverley, Hornsea, Hull, Hessle, Brough, 
South Cave, Sancton, and Market Weighton, giving a general description of 
the strata from the Trias to the Chalk, with the glacial drift and other 
superficial deposits].
24 pp., i2mo..
Market Weighton, no dale [1889?].
HiLDERic Friend, Cumberland, Lane.
S, 
A Mud-capped Dyke [in Cumberland; geologically considered].
Sci. Goss., 
_ Marc h 1890, pp.
57-59.
Oct. 1891.
20 BIELIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1890.
H. B.
Geinitz.
Lane.
S. 
On the Red and Variegated Marls of the Upper Dyas, near Manchester 
[recording, with critical remarks, twenty species of fossils; Sckizodtis, Aucella, 
gasteropods, etc.].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol, 20, part 19, 1890, 
pp.
537-554; translated from Sitz.
naturw.
Ges. Isis, Dresden, 1SS9.
J. E.
Georgk, 
Lane.
S. 
Microscopical Examination of two Glacial Boulders [by J.
S. Hyland ; 
one is a porphyritic felsite boulder at Mayer Library Walks, Bebington].
Proc.
Liverp, GeoL Soc.
, vol.
vi.
pp.
197, 19S.
John Charles Gill, 
Artesian Wells in 
Line.
S. 
Peterborough ; details of boring and analysis of water (by Prof.
Wanklyn)] 
Proc.
Inst.
Civ. Eng., vol.
ci.
pp.
218-22I.
J. G.
GooDCiiiLD.
York N.W, 
An Outline of the Geological History of Upper Swaledale.
Nat., 
Aug. 1890, pp.
243-247.
J. G.
GooDCHiLD.
Westmld., Cumbld., and York N.W.
Notes on some Observed Rates of Weathering of Limestones [tomb- 
stones at Kirkhy Stephen were found to have weathered at the rate of one 
inch in 500 years ; a limestone ' macadam ' at Tailbrig in 250 years ; a Yore- 
dale limestone near Penrith in 300 years ; and limestone at Askrigg in 240 
years].
GeoL Mag,, Oct. 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
463-466.
J. G.
GOODCHILD.
Westmorland 
Notes on Faults (abstract) [referring to the Pennine fault and also to the 
bearings of fauhs in the North of England generally ; these are as follows, 
from older to newer :~(i) N.
20° W., (ii) N.W., (iii) N.N.E., (iv) E.
20° N., 
(v) E.].
Trans.
Edinb.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
vi.
pp.
71-74.
J. G.
GooncHiLD.
Cumberland.
Notes on some Irregular Forms of Stratification [describing in particular 
the appearances in the Skiddaw Slates of the Caldbeck Fells].
Trans.
Edinb.
Geol, Soc, vol.
vi.
pp.
A. H.
Green.
Durham.
A word or two about the so-called Concretionary Structures in the 
Magnesian Limestone of Durham [brief notice only].
Rep. Brit.
Assoc.
for 1889 (pub.
1S90), p.
597.
W. S.
Greslev.
Derbyshire.
Evidence furnished by the Quaternary Glacial- Epoch Morainic Deposits 
of Pennsylvania, U.S.A., for a similar mode of formation of the 
Permian Breccias of Leicestershire and South Derbyshire [ascribing 
these breccias to glacial action: abstract only].
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, 
vol.
xlvi., Proc.
pp.
1 14- 1 1 5.
C. D.
Hardcastle.
York N.W, 
The Physical Features of Ingleton [noting the structure of the mountams 
and valleys, the swallowing of certain rivers, the caves of the district, the 
Craven and Pennine Faults, and the succession of the older rocks in the 
Twiss and Doe valleys].
Trans.
Leeds Geol.
Assoc, part v, pp.
16-26, 1889.
A. H[arker].
Cheviotland.
Fossil Foot-prints in the Carboniferous of Northumberland* Nat., 
Sept.
1889, p.
270.
Alfred Harker.
Cumberland.
The Basement Carboniferous Conglomerate at Ullswater.
Nat.,JtiIy 
1890, p.
202.
Alfred Harker.
Cumberland.
Notes on North of England Rocks: IL [various igneous rocks].
Nat., 
Aug. 1S90, pp.
237-242.
bibliography: geology and pal/eontology, 1890.
321 
Alfred Harker.
York N.E. and S.E.
Notes on North of England Rocks: III.
[Oolitic limestones].
Nat, 
Oct. 1890, pp.
300-304.
F. H.
Hatch.
York N.W.
On some West Yorkshire Mica-trap Dykes [from the Sedbergh district ; 
the rocks are minette ; characters described].
Yorkshire Post and Leeds 
Mercury, Sept.
9th, 1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
813-4 (1891).
A. H AVI LAND.
Isle of Man.
The Necessity for collecting" and arrang-ing the ascertained facts 
relating to the Glaciation of the Isle of Man. Yn Lioar Manninagh, 
vol.
i. pp.
57 et sequ., 1889.
A. Haviland.
Isle of Man* 
Aspects of Crags of the Manks Mountains in relation to the Glaciation 
of the Island.
Yn Lioar Manninagh, vol.
i. pp.
77 et sequ., i88g.
John Hawell.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Kildale-in-Cleveland [12th July, 
1890].
Nat., Sept.
1890, pp.
269-276 [Geology, 274-276.
See also Leeds 
Mercurj', July 17th, and Yorkshire Weekly Post, July 19th].
M. FoRSTER IlEDDLE.
Cumberland, 
On Dudgeonite, Hydroplumbite, Plumbonacrite, and Plattnerite [the 
first two doubtfully given for Cumberland, but more probably Leadhills], 
Mineralog.
Mag., No. 39, May 1889, vol.
8, pp.
200-203.
W. Heml\g\vay.
York S.W.
Notes on the Mineralogy of Barnsley [describing the various forms of 
carbon, sulphur, sodium, ammonium, magnesium, zinc, lead, barium, 
aluminium, calcium, silicium, iron, etc., found in the district].
Trans.
Barns.
Nat. Soc., 1885-6, vol.
5, pp.
3-7.
J. C.
B. Hendy, Derbyshire and Notts.
Notes on a * Wash-out* found in the Pleasley and Teversall Collieries, 
Derbyshire and Notts, [supplementing former note, and giving detailed 
description with sections].
Quart.
Journ.
GeoL Soc, vol, xlvi.
pp.
432-437.
^YiLLiAM Herdman.
Durham.
On the probable age of the Yoredale Rocks of Weardale, their deposition 
and denudation, with notes on the Glacial Epoch in Weardale, and 
on the formations now in progress, etc.
Durham Chronicle, Oct. 5th, 
l2Lh, 19th, 26th, Nov. 2nd, 9ih, i6th, and 23rd; 1888.
W. C.
Hev.
York N.E.
Exposure of Lower Lias at Redcar.
Naturalist, May 1890, p.
149.
C. J.
HiNDE.
York N.E.
On a new Genus of Siliceous Sponges from the Lower Calcareous 
Grit of Yorkshire [showing the little kidney-shaped bodies from Scarborough, 
first noticed by Dr. Sorby to be the globate spicules of a new sponge, here 
named Rhaxella perforata].
Quart.
Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xlvi.
pp.
54-61, 
and plate vi.
; Abstract in Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist., Sixth Series, Xo. 27, 
March 1890, vol.
5, p.
254.
Bernard Hobson.
Lane.
S. 
On Some Ophicalcite Erratics at Barton-upon-Irwell [blocks of contorted 
serpentinous linicstone, probably from lona].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol, Soc, 
vol.
xxi.
Part 3, 1890, pp.
84-90 ; discussion, pp.
90-94.
B, HoLGATE.
York Mid W.
and S.W.
The Carboniferous Strata of Leeds and its immediate Suburbs [th^ 
quarries opened for brick-making purposes afford a section of 300 feet thick- 
ness altogether, including four seams of coal, several fire-clays, and various 
shales, some black and oily; paper read ]>efore Brit.
Assoc], Yorkshire 
Post and Leeds Mercury, September 5th, 1S90, Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, 
N 
ov, 
PP- 795> 796(1891).
1891, 
w 
322 BIBLIOGRAPHV : GEOLOGY AND PAL/EONTOLOGY, 1890.
B. Hoi.GATE.
York Mid W.
and S.W.
Some Physical Properties of the Coals of the Leeds District [noting^ 
the differences in their appearance in various seams and their behaviour under 
different coriditions of combustion ; the dull-looking coals are largely com- 
posed of resinous spores; paper read before Brit.
Assoc.].
Yorkshire Post, 
September 5th, 1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
796, 797 (1891).
G- H.
HoLLiNGwoRTH.
Lanc.
S. 
On a Tree Branch found in the Drift [at 40 yards, in Bredbury Collieries^ 
with details of section].
Trans, Manch.
Geo!.
Soc, vol.
xx.
Part 20, 1890, 
pp.
566, 567.
H. H- HowKi.L 
Durham.
Note on the Classification of the Red Rocks in South- East Durham;: 
and on a possible Unconformity between the Trias and the Permian 
Limestone in the same District [upholding the view of the Geological 
Survey that the whole of the red rocks (containing the salt beds) between the 
Rhpetics and the Permian Limestone are Upper Trias, as opposed to- 
Professor Labour's opinion that the salt-measures are in the Upper Permian].
Geo!.
Mag., Jan. 1S90; dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
8-13.
^ Northumberland, Durham, 
Richard PIowse.
Cumberland, York S.W. and N.E.
Contributions towards a Catalogue of the Flora of the Carboniferous 
System of Northumberland and Durham, Part I.
[a catalogue of the 
Plutton Collection in the Museum at Barras Bridge, Newcastle].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
x, pp.
19-151, and plates i-vi, 1S88- 
R. HowsE.
. Durham, York N.E. and S.W.
Note on the South Durham Salt Borings, with remarks on the Fossils 
found in the Magnesian - Limestone Cores, and the Geologfical 
Position of the Salt [a comparison of the South Yorkshire beds; sections 
at Saltholme, near Ferrybridge, Knottingley, Askern, Brotherton, etc.].
Nat.
Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, Part 2 (1S90), pp.
220-226, 
Richard Howse.
Durham, Northumb.
S., Cheviotland* 
Catalogue of the Local Fossils in the Museum of the Natural History- 
Society [at Newcastle-on-Tyne ; with localities and references, and a few 
straligraphical notes].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc.^ 
vol.
10, part 2 (1890), pp.
227-288.
York N.E., Furness, Lincolnshire, 
\V.
H. HuDLESTON.
Lancashire, and Cumberland^ 
On the Geological' History of Iron Ores [noting their distribution, age, 
occurrence, and probable origin ; especially the magnetic ore of Rosedale 
(figured), the Northamptonshire ores, the Cleveland ores, the Frodingham 
ironstone, and the haematite deposits of N.
Lancashire and S.W. Cumberland]^ 
Proc.
Geo!.
Assoc, vol.
xi.
pp.
104-144, and plate ii., 1889.
\Y.
H. HuDLESTo.x. Lincolnshire and York N.E.
A Monograph of the British Jurassic Gasteropoda, Part I.
No. 4, 
PP- 193-224, plates xii.-xvi.
[describing and figuring numerous species of 
Neriniia (some new) from the Lincolnshire Limestone of Weldon, Great 
Ponton, etc., and some from the Dogger of Blue VVyke].
Paloeontographicai 
Society^ vol.
xliii.
(for 18S9, pub.
1890).
+ 
W 
Edward Hult..
anc 
n the Probable Average Depth at which Coal is now being worked 
in the British Isles [based upon facts afforded in the Coalfields of 
Lancashire and Cheshire, Yorkshire, Derbyshire, and Notts].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol 20, parts 14 and 15, 1890, pp.
417-425 ; discussion, part I7r 
pp.
464-474- 
NatiiraH&t, 
BIBLIOGRAPHV : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 189O- 323 
W. Maynard Hutchings.
Northumberland- 
Notes on the Probable Origin of some Slates [describing the microscopic 
characters of a series of fire-clays, micaceous sandstones, etc., in the Coal 
Measures at Seaton ; besides muscovite and biotite, with grains of quartz and 
felspar, the rocks contain zircon, garnet, rutile, anatase, epidote (secondary 
after biotite), and barium sulphate (in little tabular crystals), with a matrix of 
very minutely divided material].
Geol.
Mag., June and July, 1890, dec.
3, 
vol.
vii.
p. 264-273, 316-322.
-m- 
J. Sheakson Hyland, 
Westmorland 
On some spherulitic Rocks from Co. Down [with a passing reference to 
a perlitic felsite from Long Sleddale, Lake District].
Sci. Proc.
R. Dublin 
Soc, vol, 6, part 8, May 1890, p.
431.
J. ISMAY.
York S.W.
Some Account of the Parish of Mirfield (by Mr. Ismay) to a Friend in 
Cumberland, 1755 [referring to soils, building-stones, coal, springs, etc.].
Yorks.
Notes and Queries, Parts lo-ii, Jan. and April 1888; pp.
206-211.
J. M, Jeffcott.
Isle of Man.
Address of the Retiring President [referring to primeval forests and 
mammalian remains].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 1889, i.
56.
Osmund \Y.
Jeffs.
Cheshire, 
Field-Meeting- at Storeton Quarries.— May 21st, 1887 [brief account of 
geology].
Liverp.
Sci. Stud.
Assoc, Ann. Rep.
for 1887-88, p.
11.
OsMTJND \Y.
Jeffs.
Yorkshire.
Provisional List of Geological Photographs, arranged according to 
Counties.
. .
List No. i.
Part 11.— Yorkshire [48 photographs enumerated], 
Research, Jan. 1890, p.
158.
T. Rupert Jones, Westmorland and Northumberland* 
Sixth Report of the Committee, consisting of ....
on the Fossil 
Phyllopoda of the Palseozoic Rocks [noting a Cei-atiocaris^ possibly 
C iyrauiius^ from the Upper Coldwell Beds near Troutbeck, and Anthropo- 
dontoides bailesii from Northumberland].
Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1S8S, 
PP- 173, 174 (1889).
T. Rupert Jones and J.
W. Kirkby.
Lane.
S. 
On the Ostracoda found in the Shales of the Upper Coal-Measures 
at Slade Lane, near Manchester rdescribincr and fiirurinir six species of 
Carbonid], 
and plate.
W 
E, Jones.
York Mid 
, The Exploration of Elbolton Cave [near Thorpe, nine miles north of 
Skipton ; the upper layer has abundant neolithic remains ; the lower no 
human remains, but Be2irs(Ursusferox), Alpine Hares, Reindeer; work to be 
continued].
Leeds Mercury and Yorkshire Post, September 9th, See also 
report of excursion to Skipton, etc., Yorkshire Post, September Sth ; Times, 
September 9th, 1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
817, 8i8(iS9r).
E. Jones.
York Mid W- 
On the Further Exploration of a Cave at Elbolton, near Thorpe, in 
Craven [with notice of the various remains discovered in the cavej.
Froc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc, vol.
xi, pp.
3Q7"3IQ- 
A. J.
Jukes-Browne.
North-Western Counties.
The Physiography of the Lower Trias [criticisins: the arguments oi both 
Mr. Mellard Reade and Prof.
Bonney].
Geol.
Mag., May 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
220, 22 r.
Nov. 1891.
324 BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1890.
P. F.
Kendall.
Lane, S, 
Field Meeting at the Barton Section of the Ship Canal [account of 
excursion on May 25th, 1889, noticing Pebble Beds, Upper Mottled Sand- 
stone, etc.
; also erratics of Buttermere granophyre, Eskdale granite, Vewdale 
agglomerate, and Permian limestone].
Proc.
Liverp.
GeoL Soc, vol.
vi.
pp.
215-216.
Percy F.
Kendall.
Isle of Man.
Manks Minerals [Apatite and Tourmaline found at Foxdale, Sep. 1889 ; not 
included in Sir Warrington Smyth's list], Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, 
April i8go, p.
167.
r. F.
Kendall.
Isle of Man.
[Exhibition of Nassa serrata and a Columbella near sulcata, from the 
sands and clays of Northern Isle of Man].
Yn Lioar IVIanninagh, No. 5, 
Jan.
-Apr., 1890, p.
125.
3\ ^L C.
Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Fossil Shells from the Boulder Clay and Sand, North Ramsey [29 species 
enumerated as found ; of these eleven are of recent Manx forms ; and seven 
are already recorded in Cumming's list of Pleistocene Shells, which is 
reprinted here and includes 38 species], Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 4, 
Oct. 1889, vol.
i. pp.
96-98, 1889.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Flints from the Brooghs, North Ramsey [Isle of Man ; enumerated and 
described].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, Jan.-April 1890, pp.
I3I-I33- 
Robert Kiuston.
York Mid W.
and S.W.
The Yorkshire Carboniferous Flora [First Report on behalf of the 
Yorkshire Fossil Flora Committee, with a table of the Yorkshire Coal- 
Measures, a Bibliography of the subject, and a Synopsis of 120 species, 
including terminology, with references to descriptions and figures, and 
records of localities and exact horizons where each species has been found].
Trans.
Yorks.
Nat. Union, Part 14; pp.
I-64 and index on wrapper.
R. Laing.
Derbyshire and Notts.
On the Bone Caves of Cresswell, and Discovery of an Extinct 
Pleiocene Feline (Feiis brevirostris) new to Great Britain [found with 
various other remains in the Dog Hole cave].
Rep. 59th meeting of Brit.
Assoc, Newc-on-Tyne, 1889 (pub.
1890), pp.
582-584.
G- W.
Lamplugh.
York S.E.
On a New Locality for the Arctic Fauna of the "Basement" Boulder 
Clay in Yorkshire [describing the occurrence of a thin seam of sand with 
Astarte compressa, A.
boreaUs, Fecten isIaiuUcus^ Cyprina islandua, etc., m 
the Basement Clay at South Sea Landing, Flamborough ; this is a transported 
fragment of an old sea-bottom, as is the case with the similar occurrences at 
Bridlington and Dimlington].
Geol.
Mag., Feb. 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
61-70, 
with two figs, [a paper read before Brit.
Assoc, at Newcastle ; abstract in 
Rep, for 1889, pp.
590, 591 ; alsoNewc.
Daily Chron.
for Sept.
iSth, 1S89].
G. W.
Lamplugh, York S.E.
Note on a New Locality for the Arctic Shell-beds of the Basement 
Boulder Clay on the Yorkshire Coast [with list of 13 species of Mollusca 
found].
Rep. 59th meeting of Brit.
Assoc, Newc-on-Tyne, 1SS9 (pub.
1890), p.
590.
G, \Y.
Lamtlugh.
York S.E.
On the Boulders and Glaciated Rock-surfaces of the Yorkshire Coast 
[discussing the percentages of boulders from various sources found at different 
localities, which throw light on the movements of the ice: also noting a 
glaciated surface of Coralline Oolite at Filey Brig^^ ; paper read before Brit.
Assoc].
Yorkshire Post, Sept.
5th.
1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc for 1S90, 
PP- 797.798(1891).
Naturalist, 
bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1890.
325 
G. W.
Lamplugh.
York N.E. and S.E, 
East Yorkshire during; the Glacial Period [a general summary; during 
the formation of the Basement Clay the British ice was borne hack by that 
from Norway, which filled the northern part of the North Sea, faced the high 
cliffs near Speeton, over-rode the lower part of Flamborough Head, and filled 
the bay of Holderness; the Purple Clay, formed within the margin of the 
2ce, was contemporaneous with the intermediate gravels of other parts of the 
district; the Upper Boulder Clay was formed when the North Sea ice had 
somewhat receded and the British ice advanced over the old moraine].
Leeds- 
Mercury, Sept.
5th, 1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
798, 799 (1891).
G. W, Lamplugh.
York N.E.
The Neocomian Clay at Knapton.
Nat., Nov. 1890, pp.
336-33S.
Robert La\v 
Derbyshire.
On Bones of Pleistocene Animals found in a Broken-up Cave, in 
a Quarry, near Matlock, Derbyshire [recording Rhinocei-os tichorhinns^ 
cave-hyoena, bear, reindeer, fox, red deer, and bison, from Boden's Qviarry], 
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. and Sci. Soc, vol.
i. for 1878-88, pp.
15, 16; no date 
[? 1888].
W. M.
Lawrence.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire, 
Some Nuts [probably of Ccryhis avellana^ found partially petrified 35 feet 
below bed of Mersey].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Feb. 15th, 1890, xiv.
13.
E. LOVETT.
Cheviotland.
The Geology and Marine Fauna of the Fame Islands [with notes hy 
H. T.
Mennell, pp.
cxiv.-cxvi.].
Proc.
Croydon Nat. Hist.
Club, 1882-83, 
pp.
cxi-cxiv, 1884.
George Fosbery Lyster.
Lane.
S, and Cheshire.
Recent Dock Extensions at Liverpool .
. .
[etc.] .
. .
[with various 
notes of ^toXogxc^ interest ; paper followed by discussion].
Proc.
Inst.
Civ.
Eng., vol.
c. pp.
2-1 14.
IvisoN Macadam.
Derbyshire, Cheshire- 
Analyses of various Mineral Substances [including two samples of 
Elaterite from Derbyshire, and one of P'ichtelite from Handforth, Cheshire].
Mineralog.
Mag., No. 38, March 1SS9, vol.
8, pp.
135-^37- 
J. E.
Marr.
York N.W.
The Connexion betwixt Yorkshire and Scandinavia.
Nat., May 1890^ 
pp.
145-148.
F. Marshall, Derbyshire.
Penketh School Field Club [In Monsal, Miller's and Cressbrook Dales; 
Terebratula hastata, Pentamerns knightii^ and OrtJiis elegantida recorded].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., June 15th, 1890, xiv.
90.
Westm, and Furness.
J. A.
Martindale.
Our District [^Westmorland and Furness, defined, described, divided 
into six river basin districts, and illustrated by excellent map; of each district 
a brief geological sketch given].
Westm.
^oiQ Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, 
Part I, March 18S8, pp.
I -19 of N.H. Rec, with folding map.
Mathews.
^Westmorland, 
A Guide Book to Appleby, in Westmorland, and its vicinity [%vith a few 
geological notes, pp.
70-72J.
Appleby, no date [1890].
I- C.
Mjall.
York Mid. W.
Airedale : its Scenery, Historic Sites, Geology, and Natural History 
[pp.
1-42 of the Handbook for Leeds and Airedale, prepared for the use of 
the Brit.
Assoc.
; treats of Malhani Tarn and Cove, the Skipton district, the 
Lower Coai-Measures in Airedale, the geology of the country north of Leeds, 
and t_he extinct quadrupeds of Airedale].
Svo, Leeds, 1890.
326 bihliography: geology and palaeontology, 1890.
T, Carter Mitchell.
York N.E, and N.W.
On the Drift Deposits of the Vale of Mowbray [enumerating the various 
rocks met with as boulders ; sandstones, various hmestones, Shap and other 
granites].
Proc.
Yorks.
GeoL Soc.
(N.S.) voL xi- pp.
177-182.
Wm. Morrison.
Derbyshire.
Elaterite : a Mineral-Tar in Old Red Sandstone, Ross-shire [compared 
with same mineral found in the Carboniferous Limestone of Derbyshire].
Mineralog.
Mag., No. 38, March 1889, vol.
8, pp.
133-134.
G. II.
Morton.
Lane.
S. and Cheshire, 
Notes on the Banter and Keuper Formations in the Country around 
Liverpool [with details of thickness of the beds, description of the 
microscopic structure of the various sandstones, an account of the included 
pebbles (with notes by Professor Bonney), and considerations on the manner 
of deposition of the rocks].
Geol.
Mag., Nov, 1890, dec.
3, voL vii.
pp.
497-505; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
819-820 {1891).
(C.
T.] MussoN.
Nottinghamshire.
Sub-fossil Shell-Deposits in Nottinghamshire.
Journ.
of Conchology, 
voL iv.
No. 6, 1884.
H. Qliphaxt Nicholson, 
Cumberland 
Note on the Occurrence of Trigonograptus ensiformis, Hall, sp., and 
of a Variety of Didymograptus V-fractus, Salter, in the Skiddaw 
Slates [the former in the Upper Skiddaws (EllergiiL Beds) at Mosedale Beck 
near Troutbeck ; the latter, named van volucer^ from the Skiddaw Slates of 
Outerside near Keswick].
GeoL Mag., Aug. 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
340'3443 
with four woodcuts.
S. Sydney Platt.
Lancashire, Durham, Cumberland.
Notes on the Paving Stones used at Rochdale [noticing the Carboniferous 
grits of the district, the Whin Sill, the Threlkeld quartz-porphyry, etc.] 
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. and Sci. Soc, vol.
ii, for 18S9-90, pp.
4-21, and plate.
J, PosTLETinvAiTE.
Cumberland, 
The Borrowdale Plumbago, its Mode of Occurrence and probable 
Origin [brief abstract of paper, speculating on an origin of the Borrowdale 
graphite or plumbago similar to that which has been suggested for the 
Kimberley diamonds].
Quart, Journ.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xlvi.
Proc, pp.
124-125.
T. Mellard Reade.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Cause of the Coloration of Red Sandstones.
Nat., Jan. 1890, pp.
i, 2.
T. Mellard Reade.
North-western Counties.
Physiography of the Lower Trias [second paper, in answer^ to Prof.
Bonney's theory of a fluviatile origin of the Bunter and the derivation of the 
pebbles from Scotland].
Geo!.
Mag., April 1890, dec.
3, vol.
vii.
pp.
155-^57 
[also third paper], ibid, June, pp.
260-263- 
T. Mellakd Reade.
Lane.
S. 
Note on a Boulder met with in driving a Sewer Heading in Addison 
Street, Liverpool [a boulder 4 ft.
10 in.
long, of ' much altered volcanic 
tuff,' with its long axis pointing N.
32° W., which is the local direction of 
glaciation].
Proc Liverp.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
vi.
pp.
188, 189.
T. Mellard Reade.
Lane.
S. 
Note on some Mammalian Bones found in the Blue Clay below the 
Peat-and-Forest Bed at the Alt Mouth [determined by Mr. T.
J. Moore 
as red deer and horse].
Proc.
Liverp.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
vi.
pp.
213, 214.
J. F.
RoHiNsox.
Durham.
Limestone [a paper read at a meeting of the Vale of Derwent Naturalists 
Field Club, Nov. loth, 1888].
Consett Guardian, May loth, 1889.
J. F.
Robinson, Northumberland S.
and Durham.
On the Geology of the lower part of the Derwent Valley.
Consett 
Guardian, August i6th, 1889.
Naturalist 
BIBLIOGRAPHY; GEOLOGY AND PALv^ONTOLOGY, 1890.
327 
J 
J. F.
Robinson.
Durham.
On Coal, Consett Guardian, Nov. 15th, 1889.
J. F.
Robinson.
Northumberland S.
and Durham.
The Geological Aspect of the Derwent Valley.
Consett Chronicle, 
March ist, 1890.
T. O.
ROBSON.
Northumberland.
Notes on some variations in the Faulting- of Coal, observed in the 
. .
. Redheugh Colliery.
Trans.
N. Eng. Inst.
Min. and Mech.
Eng., 
vol.
xxxviii.
p, 49.
Charles Roeder 
Lane.
S. 
3me Newly- Discovered Species in the Upper Permian Deposits of 
Manchester [see Geinitz].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol, xx.
part 19, 
1890, pp.
535-537 et sequ.
Charles Roeder, 
Lane, S.
Notes on the Upper Permians, etc., at Fallowfield, lately laid open : 
Part I.
[full details of sections, with two plates].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, 
vol.
XX.
part 2 1, 1890, pp.
615-627 and 2 plates ; discussion, pp.
627-630.
Charles Roeder.
Lane.
S. 
Description of Fossils found in the Permian Upper Series, at Fallow- 
field [named by Prof.
Geinitz; see other entries].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, 
vol.
XXI.
part r, 1890, pp.
13-16; discussion pp.
16-19.
Charles Roeder.
Lan 
otes on the Permians and Superficial Deposits at Fallowfield [Part 2 ; 
local details, especially noticing the contortions in the Upper Permians at this 
locality].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xxi.
Part 3, 1890, pp.
104-113.
Charles Roeder.
Lane.
S. 
Notes on the Upper Coal-Measures at Slade Lane, Burnage [full 
details with measured sections and fossil lists : folding plate with section by 
T- Sington].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xxi.
Part 3, 1890, pp.
114-135 
and litho.
section ; discussion, pp.
135, 136.
A. W.
Rucker.
W., and Westmorland 
Underground Mountains (third paper) [tracing the distribution of terrestrial 
niagnetism in the British Isles ; the author shows that certain districts attract 
the north pole of the magnet, and these coincide with districts where either 
large masses of basaltic rocks occur, or crystalline rocks probably approach 
near the surface ; one such district runs through the Lincolnshire and York- 
shire Wolds to Settle and Appleby, and includes a line along which the 
Jurassic strata suddenly thin out, suggesting that crystalline rocks there 
approach the surface rather closely].
Good Words, March 1890, pp.
191-196 ; 
see also Rep. Brit.
Assoc for 18S9, pp.
5^6, 587.
-A.
W. RtcKER and T.
E. Thorpe, Yorkshire and Lincolnshire.
ridg 
Wash by Brigg, Howden, and Market Weighton, through the centre of the 
limestone district, and perhaps into the Lake district ; the greatest vertical- 
force disturbances being at Market Weighton and Harrogate].
Abstract in 
^^ature, April 24th, 1890, vol.
xli.
p. ^598.
York S.W.
R- Russell.
" the Geology of the Southern Portion of the Yorksh 
[general sections with local details and with especial reference t 
of Sheffield and Barnsley].
Troc.
Fed. Inst.
Min. Eng., vol.
l pp.
101-121 
James Shipman.
Nottinghamshire.
Geology of Nottingham: where and how to see it.
37th Ann.
Kep. Nott.
Nat. Soc.
for ibSg.
N 
<>v.
X891.
328 bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1890.
J. Ship: 
Nottinghamshire* 
The Geology of Nottingham [being abstract of paper read to Nottingham 
Naturalists' Society, Dec. loth].
Research, Jan. 1890, p.
167.
R. H.
Solly.
, Cumberland.
Pseudomorphs of Haematite after Iron Pyrites [from Ardbarrow Mine, 
Millom, Cumberland, etc.].
Mineralog.
Mag., No. 39, May 1889, vol.
8, 
pp.
183-185.
H. Speight.
York Mid W, 
Discovery of a Bone-Cave at Skirethorns near Grassington-in-Craven.
Naturalist, July 1890, p.
202.
WiLLL\M Spiers.
Some remarkable fossils : II.
Trilobites [noting PhilUpsia and Griffithstdes 
near Castleton].
Wesley Nat., April 1888, pp.
33-36.
William Spiers.
York N.E, 
Some remarkable fossils: III.
Corals [noting lliamnastnm ^ni^ Isastnra 
in quarries near Scarborough].
Wesley Nat., April 1SS9, p.
37.
THOMAb Stenhouse.
Lanc.
S. 
A Curious Coa!-Pit Water.
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. and Sci. Soc, vol.
2, 
for 1S89-90, publ.
1890, pp.
22-24, 
Mark Stirrup.
Derbyshire, 
Lanc.
S. 
ileged Recent Discovery of a Fossil Forest in Scotland [with references 
to Lancashire ones].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
20, parts 14 and 15?
1S90, pp.
412-416.
M. STiRRur.
Cheshire.
Large Boulder near Ringway [one iii ft.
long found near Ringway : a 
volcanic rock, probably from the Lake District].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, 
vol xxi.
part 3, 1890, pp.
83, 84.
Mark Stirrup.
Lanc.
S. 
Notes on the Carboniferous Insects found at the Commentry Mines 
(Allier), France [and brief notes as to such as are known in the Lancashire 
Coal-field].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
21, part 3, 1890, pp.
93-^^3 
T. Tate.
W 
Yorkshire Petrology, Part 1 1 : The Lamprophyres [describing and 
figuring the rocks of a number of dykes near Dent and Helmsgill].
Proc- 
Yorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc.
(N.S.), vol.
xi.
pp.
311-316, plates xiv, xv.
T. Tate.
York Mid W, 
On the so-called Ingleton Granite [quarried opposite Dale Barn, Ingleton ; 
the rock is a quartzose volcanic tuff, the fragments being mostly of quartzite, 
with crj^stals of quartz and felspar and pieces of rhyolite and andesile, in an 
ashy matrix; paper read before Brit.
Assoc.].
Yorkshire Post, Sept.
5th, 
1 890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1890, pp.
Soo, 801 (i8gi).
T. Tate.
York Mid W, 
Note on Phillips's Dyke, Ingleton [in the Coniston Limestone series, 
300 yards above Catleap waterfall, Storrs : the rock is a minette ; characters 
described ; paper read before Brit.
Assoc.].
Yorkshire Post, Sept.
9th, 
1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 1S90, p.
814 (1891).
F. S, Tellet.
Isle of Man.
[Discovery of Nassa serratula, Brocchi, in the Manx boulder formation, in 
the brooghs north of Ramsey], Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 1SS9, i.
3^- 
William TH0^^.soN.
Lanc.
S. 
On Leaves found in the cutting for the Manchester Ship-canal.
21 feet 
under the surface, and on the Green Colouring-matter contained therein [aspen^ 
oak, willow, hawthorn, etc, found near Irlam, with a plate giving section 
across the Partington coal-basin], Mem. and Proc Manch.
Lit. and PhiL 
Soc, series 4, vol.
ii.
pp.
216-219, ^889.
Natiirali>t 
bibliography: geology axd palaeontology, 1890, 329 
SiLVANus p.
Thompson.
York Mid W.
The Sources of the River Aire [describing an attempt to decide whether 
the Malham Cove stream is fed subterraneously from Malham Tarn ; no 
decisive results obtained; paper read before Brit.
Assoc.].
Yorkshire 
Post and Leeds Mercury, September loth, 1890; Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 
X890, pp.
821, 822 {1891).
R. H.
Tjddeman.
York Mid W- 
On Concurrent Faulting" and Deposit in Carboniferous Times in Craven, 
Yorkshire, with a Note on Carboniferous Reefs [to explain the discrepancy 
between the succession to the north and to the south of the Craven fauhs by 
the theory that the faults were formed during the dej^osition of the rocks].
Rep. Brit.
Assoc, for 18S9, pp.
600-603.
R. H.
TiDDEMAN.
York Mid W.
Carboniferous Rocks in the Upper Aire Valley and their Physical 
History [pp.
43-54 ^^ ^^^ Handbook for Leeds and Airedale, prepared for 
the use of the Brit.
Assoc.
; the author deals chiefly with the two very 
different types developed to the north and the south of the Craven faults, 
these faults being supposed to have been in process of formation while the 
rocks were being deposited].
8vo, Leeds, 1S90.
[For the ^knoll-reefs* see 
also report of excursion to Skipton, etc., Leeds Mercury, Sept.
8th, iSgo].
Qames] Tonge 
Lancashire, 
Notes on Coal Measure Fossils [and the present condition of collections].
Trans.
JTanch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xx.
Fart 20, 1S90, pp.
564-566.
H. G.
TowNSEND.
Derbyshire.
Mountain Limestone of Derbyshire [abstract of paper to Wakefield Nat.
Soc.].
Research, June 1890, p.
284.
J. Stanley Tute.
York Mid W, 
Notes on some singular Cavities in the Magnesian Limestone [near 
Worniald Green Station ; perhaps annelid borings]- Proc.
Yorks.
Geol.
and 
Polyt.
Soc.
(N.S.), voL xi, pp.
182-184, plate vi.
W. A.
E. UssfiKK.
Line.
N. and York S.E.
The Geolog-y of parts of North Lincolnshire and South Yorkshire 
(Explanation of Sheet 86) Mem. Geol.
Surv.
England and Wales [treats of 
the Trias and Rhcetic, the Lower Lias (with the Frodingham ironstone), 
Middle and Upper Lias, Lower Oolites (with the hydraulic limestone of Kirton, 
etc.), Middle and Upper Oolites, the Cretaceous (the Upper division of which 
unconformably overlaps the Lower or Neocomian), and the Superficial 
Deposits; lists of fossils and details of borings are given], Svo, viii + 231 
pp., London, 1890.
G. RoBT.
Vine.
York N.W., Furness, Derbyshire.
A Monograph of Yorkshire Carboniferous and Permian Polyzoa, 
Part IL [describing species from Hurst and Richmond, Holker Park, 
Casileton, etc.].
Proc.
Vorks.
Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc.
(N-S.), vol.
xi.
pp.
184- 
200, plate vii.
R- Walk DEN.
Lane.
S- 
*'Stig-mana ficoides" found in a Mine at Over Darwen, Lancashire 
[a specimen 16 ft.
long found at Cranberry Lane Colliery].
Trans.
Manch- 
Ceol.
Soc, vol.
XX.
Part 17, 1890, pp.
461, 462, and plate.
W1LLIA.M WAxrs.
York S.W.
Thermometrical observations of Atmospheric Air and Water at Piethorn 
and Denshaw [a series of figures and detailed observations from June 1889 
to May 1890].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
20, part 21, 1890, pp.
5S0-607.
William Watts.
Lane S.
Nitrogen Gas in Strinesdale Tunnel [outburst of gas from fissures in a 
white rock; analysis gave (by volume) 92 parts nitrogen and eight oxygen, 
with a trace of carbon dioxide].
Trans.
Manch.
Geol.
Soc, vol.
xx, Part 21, 
1890, pp.
608-609, ^^^ discussion, pp.
609-613.
;^;^o bibliography: geology and pal-^ontology, 1890.
Cheshire, Lane.
S., Northumb.
S., Durham, 
William Henry Wheeler.
York S.E., Line.
N. and S.
Bars at the Mouths of Tidal Estuaries [discussing their nature and the 
causes of their formation, with reference to the Mersey, Tyne, Tees, Ribble, 
Humber, and Wash ; paper followed by discussion].
Proc.
Inst.
Civ. Eng., 
vol.
c. pp.
1x7-216^ and pi.
v. 
Joseph W.
Williams.
North of England generally.
British Fossils, and where to seek them [one of the 'Young Collector' 
series, giving elementary information on the subject].
8vo, cloth, 96 pages, 
with woodcuts and a plate.
William Crawford Williamson.
Lane.
S. 
On the Organisation of the Fossil Plants of the Coal-Measures, 
Part XIV.
[describing the newly-discovered fruit of Calamites from Oldham].
Phil.
Trans.
Roy. Soc.
, vol.
clxxix.
B, pp.
47-57, pi.
viii.-xi.
, 18S8.
William Crawford Williamson.
York S.W. and Lane.
S. 
On the Organisation of the Fossil Plants of the Coal-Measures, 
Part XV.
[describing new species : Rachioptcris hirsuta and Rhizoninfii 
verticillatum from Halifax, and Rhiz.
reticidaium from Oldham], Phil.
Trans.
Roy. Soc, vol.
clxxx.
B, pp.
155-168, pi.
i.-iv., 1889.
William Crawford Williamson.
York S.W, and Lane, S.
On the Organisation of the Fossil Plants of the Coal-Measures, 
Part XVL [describing new species : Lepidodendron niundzim^ Z.
intermedhim^ 
and Z.
spenceri from Halifax, and L, parvttlztm from Oldham and Moorside ; 
also Rachioptcris irregularis from Halifax].
Phil.
Trans.
Roy. Soc, 
vol.
clxxx.
B, pp.
195-214, pi.
v.-viii.
W. C.
Williamson.
Lane.
S. and York S.W.
Report of the Committee, consisting of Professor W.
C. Williamson 
(Chairman) and Mr. W.
Cash (Secretary), appointed to investigate 
the Flora of the Carboniferous Rocks of Lancashire and West York- 
shire [consists of a memorandum on the present state of Prof.
Williamson's 
inquiry into the Microscopic Features of the Coal of the world, and into the 
Organisation of the Fossil plants of the Coal Measures ; with a reference to 
the identity of Lyginodendron oldhaminm and Rachiopteris aspera\ Rep.
59th Meeting of Brit.
Ass., Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1889 (publ.
1890), pp.
69-70.
E. Wilson.
Durham and York N.E.
On the Durham Salt-district [the author refers the saliferous beds of the 
Tees district to the upper part of the Trias (Waterstones); he discusses the 
probable area and distribution of the beds; Abstr.
Proc.
Geol.
Soc 
June 7th].
Quart.
Journ, Geol.
Soc, vol.
xliv.
pp.
761-7S2, with map and 
folding table of sections.
Also Research for December, vol.
i. pp.
92-93 and 
108-109 [an abridged account of the same subject].
A. Smith Woodward.
York N.E.
On the Palaeontology of Sturgeons ^Gyiosteiis mirabilis from the Upper 
Lias of Whitby described and figured: see following entry].
Proc.
Geol.
Assoc, vol.
xi.
Nos. I and 2, pp.
24-44, with pL i.
and 13 wood-cuts.
A, Smith Woodward.
York N.E.
The Fossil Sturgeon of the Whitby Lias.
Naturalist, April 1890, 
pp.
101-107, with eight woodcuts.
A. Smith Woodward and C.
D. Sherborx.
Northern Counties, etc.
A Catalogue of British Fossil Vertebrata [including synonymy, references 
to original descriptions and to type-specimens preserved in museums]; 
XXXV.
-r 396 pp.
8vo, London, 1890.
R. ZSIGMONDY.
Northumberland.
Fortschritte in der Thonindustrie [giving analyses of fireclays from 
Coatbridge and Newcastle].
Dinglers Polyt, Journ,, 1890, (6) xxvii.
pp-33-43- 
Naturalist, 
331 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION IN 
EDLINGTON AND WADWORTH WOODS.
On Wednesday and Thursday, the i6th and 17th of September last, 
the members of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union mustered in the 
neighbourhood of Doncaster for the purpose of conducting the last 
excursion of the year.
The first day was set apart as a Fungus Foray, and a full report 
of the proceedings will be found on pages 339-348.
oa, 
1>0N<^^ 
^^i^^.
4 *«tf ^ ^^ mf, 
!_• ** 
-r t »     * \ 
t 
.' 
^yyy 
* • 
*•- 
TTT^ii 
ColXX 
mswtfr 
ta « 
" _ * 
• ^ -* 
>« m 
^ • 
I 
V* 
•% 
fr^ ' -^ fc 
TflTell 
I 
fl; 
J 4.
^^ 
rsa 
VfVftV 
•* _ i 
iUp^^/ESlQ 
L 4 K I ^ 
Explanation.
— The Map is divided into square miles.
No attempt is made 
to show the paths in the woods.
The second day was organised as one of the ordinary meetings 
of the Union, and was attended by about sixty members and their 
friends, including most of the botanists who had been on the ground 
the previous day.
As on that occasion, the head-quarters were fixed 
at Doncaster, whence the woods at Edlington and Wadworth were 
^?_bejnvestigated.
ov.
i8<ji.
332 Y.N.U- IN EDLINGTON AND WADWORTH WOODS- 
Permission for the exploration of their properties had been kindly 
granted by Earl Fitzwilliam, Lady Copley, Mr. F.
J. Savile Foljambe, 
and the Denaby Main Colliery Co. Limited- 
Three routes were arranged for the investigation of the district- 
The main body left Doncaster Station on the arrival of the 
10.40 a.m., train, and, under the guidance of the following local 
members, namely, Messrs.
H. H.
Corbett, A.
E. Hall, F.E.S., 
W. Roberts, and G- Winter, proceeded to Edlington Wood, and 
then away into Wadworth Wood.
The second route was organised for the benefit of members 
geologically inclined.
They left Doncaster by the 11.33 train for 
Mexborough, and on arriving were met by the Resident Engineer 
(Mr. H.
W. Chambers), who arranged for them to descend the deep 
pit at Denaby Main.
On reaching the surface the party moved 
off to inspect a new shaft at Cadeby, and eventually returned to 
Doncaster.
A third party, to which the botanists attached themselves, chiefly 
indulged in fungus collecting, as on the previous day, those specially 
interested in this subject visiting Sandal Beat Wood.
All parties centred on the Glyn Hotel at five o'clock, where tea 
was ser\'ed.
An hour later the sectional meetings were held, and 
were succeeded by the general meeting, under the chairmanship of 
the Rev. Wm.
Fowler, M.A., Vicar of Liversedge, an Ex-President.
After the reading and confirmation of the minutes of the 
Sledmere meeting, the following persons were unanimously elected 
members of the Union, viz.
: Mrs. Vaughan, Doncaster; and Messrs.
T. C.
Heslington, Ripon, and Joseph Harrison, Staveley (Derbyshire).
Representatives from the following eighteen afifiliated Societies 
responded to the roll-call, viz.
: Heckmondwike, Barnsley, Wakefield, 
Ovenden, Liversedge, Bradford, Leeds, York, Sheffield, Dewsbury, 
Hull, and Harrogate Naturalists' Societies; Goole and Halifax 
Scientific Societies; Doncaster Microscopical Society; The Con- 
chological Society ; and Leeds and Hull Geological Societies.
On the motion of Mr. E.
Howarth, F.R.A.S., of Sheffield, 
seconded by Mr. J.
M. Kirk, of Doncaster, a vote of thanks was 
passed to the landowners who had granted permission for the L^nion 
to investigate their property; also to the various persons who had 
led parties or contributed to the excursion-programme.
The reports of the various Sections were next presented.
For the Vertebrate Zoology Section, Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S-, 
presented the report, the following account being supplied by 
Mr. Riley Fortune, F.Z-S., one of the Hon. Secretaries of the 
Section, who attended the meeting, but had to leave eariy^___H5 
Nattiralin- 
y.N.U. IN EDLINGTON AND WADWORTH WOODS.
333 
writes : — This Section was very poorly attended, Mr. Thos.
Bunker 
being the only representative on Wednesday, and Messrs.
Waite and 
Fortune on Thursday.
The district investigated did not yield very 
good results.
Five species of Mammals, 29 of Birds, and four 
Amphibians were the only vertebrates recognised during the two 
days of the excursion.
The small number of birds seen may easily 
be accounted for by the fact that most of the summer visitors had 
left our shores for warmer climes, and that the resident birds Avould 
most of them be moulting, and would consequently remain very 
quiet and unobtrusive.
The absence of water in the part of the 
district visited accounts for the fact that no fish were seen.
Mr. Bunker, who was present at the Wednesday's excursion and 
accompanied the mycologists, states that he saw or heard very few 
birds.
There were Swallows and Martins along the road; Magpies 
were common ; and he was told that a Woodpecker had been heard, 
but the species was not known.
He saw no game; and the only 
reptiles found were two toads.
On Thursday, Mr. Waite visited 
Wad worth Wood, and fell in with a party of about a dozen Jays and a 
small flock of Long-tailed Tits.
There were also a few Coal Tits and 
Great Tits searching about the w^ood.
Linnets and Redpolls were 
fairly common, but on the whole birds were scarce, and of no great 
interest.
After leaving the wood he called on the woodman 
(Mr. Clayton), who had two or three Dormice alive, which he had 
himself taken in Wadworth Wood.
An old disused quarry was next 
visited, and yielded both the Crested and Smooth Newts, which 
were found under stones among the damp herbage ; there w^as no 
visible water in the quarry.
Wadworth Wood also supplied the Carrion 
Crow, Squirrel, and Weasel.
The following is a complete list of the 
Vertebrates recorded: 
X 
Mammals, 
Mole, Dormouse.
Weasel.
Birds.
Song Thrush.
^lartin.
Blackbird.
Sand Martin, 
Redbreast.
Greenfinch.
Hedge Accentor.
Sparrow, 
Long-tailed Tit.
Chaffinch.
Great Tit.
Linnet.
Coal Tit.
Lesser Redpoll.
Wren.
Yellow Bunting.
Meadow Pipit.
Starling.
Swallow.
Jay.
Amphibians.
Great-Crested Newt 
Smooth New^t 
Squirrel.
Rabbit 
Magpie.
Jackdaw, 
Crow, 
Rook.
Skylark.
Woodpecker (sp ?) 
Ring Dove.
Pheasant.
Partridge.
Frog.
Toad.
ov 
1891 
334 Y.N.U. IN EDLINGTON AND WADWORTH WOODS.
For the Conchological Section, in the absence of all its officers, 
Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., Leeds, reported that he and 
Mr. Riley Fortune, F.Z.S., Harrogate, were the only conchological 
collectors present, and that very little had been done.
He had 
himself collected only in the vicinity and on the outskirts of 
Edlington and Wadworth Woods, where he had found Helix 
hispida in abundance, H.
rotnndata^ H.
aspersa^ IL nemoraliSy H, 
canttanaj Ziia lubrica^ Clausilia rugosa^ Papa unihilicata^ Vitrina 
pellucida^ Zonites cellarius^ Z.
allia?'i7is, Z.
nitiduhis^ Z, fulvus^ 
Z, purtis var.
?nargaritacea, and Z.
crystallinus \ and of slugs, Arion 
ater^ A, hortensis^ A, lwurgidgnaii\ A.
miniums^ and Liviax agrestis.
Mr. Fortune, collecting near Edlington village, added a couple of 
freshwater species to the list, Limnma peregra and Anodofita cygnea.
The whole list of moUusca for the day thus amounted to 22 species, 
of which only a couple were fluviatile ones, and five were slugs, the 
remainder land-shells.
For the Entomological Section, the report was given by one of its 
Secretaries, Mr. A.
E. Hall, F.E.S., who stated that the Section was 
well represented, the following members being present: Messrs, E.
G. 
Bayford (Doncaster), W.
E. Brady (Barnsley),^ H.
H. Corbett 
(Doncaster), G.
C. Dennis (York), R.
Button (York), A.
E, Hall 
(Sheffield), — .
Hawkins (York), W, Hewett (York), George Jackson 
(York), William Mansbridge (Horsforth), G.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., 
F.E.S.
(Huddersfield, President), and W, White (Sheffield).
He 
was sorry that the captures to report were so few, for, although the 
members worked hard, the results were not very satisfactory- 
Coleoptera were collected by Mr. E.
G. Bayford, who has 
furnished the following list.
There were a few species taken he 
has yet to determine, which, should they prove anything worth 
reporting, will be duly recorded in * The Naturalist,' Cychnis 
rostraluSj Loricera pilicornis^ FterosticJms siriola, P.
viadidtis^ P^ 
nigrita^ Coccinella septem-punctata^ C.
i o-punctata^ Halyzia 1 4- 
guttuia^ Sinodendron cylindricum^ Aphodius fcetejis^ A.
fossor^ 
Chrysomela hypericin Crepidodera ferruginea, C, atiraia (new to 
the district), and Apieropeda orbiadata.
Of Lepidoptera, the imagines noted were Vanessa io, En?2omos 
angidaria^ Cidaria immaiiata^ C russata^ Anchocelis litiira^ Xa?idna 
sdngo^ Euperia fidvago^ Folia chi^ Phisia ga?nma (common), Gonop- 
tera libalnx, Perorua comparana, P.
variegana, and Ephippiphora 
bimaadana ; and Larvae of Epione advenaria, Seleuta illustraria, 
Odonlopera bidentata^ Amphydasis betidaria^ Abraxas tdniata (ex- 
ceedingly abundant), Lomaspilis margiiiaia^ Enpitheda tristgftarta 
(taken by ]Mr. Jackson), E.
laridata (common on larch m 
Naturalist, 
Y.N.U. IN EDMNGTON AND WADWORTH WOODS.
335 
Wadworth Wood), £.
albipundaia^ Flatypteryx falcida^ Halias 
prastna?ui^ LithocoUetis spinohlla^ L, 7iice/Ii\ Cemiostoma scitella^ and 
Neptictda iityrella.
Of Trichoptera Sicnophylax concentricus,2iW^ of 
Orthoptera Mecofiema varia^ were taken.
It is an unusual pleasure on an excursion to record the capture 
of spiders, but on this occasion Mr. E.
Howarth, F.R.A.S., states 
that Mr. Thos.
Dobb and himself collected what spiders were to 
be found, but owing to the misfortune that they had only one bottle 
in w^liich to put their specimens there was a large mortality amongst 
them, and many of them were past recognition.
He has identified 
and preserved the following species : — Lycosa saccaia^ Cluhiona 
accentiiata^ Thomisns cristaius^ Linyphia triangularis^ L.
pratensis^ 
Epeira scalaris^ E, lutea, and E.
inclinata.
Mr. J.
A. Erskine Stuart, one of the Hon.
-Secretaries of the 
Botanical Section, and its only officer present, writes : — The results 
of this excursion, as far as regarded Phanerogamic Botany, were 
much above the average for September excursions, owing to the 
season being quite three weeks later than usual.
In Edlington 
Wood Aquilegia vulgaris^ H/iamrms frangula, J?, cathartiais^ Lysi- 
inachia nummidaria^ Viola reichenbachiana and Erythrea centanriuui 
were gathered.
Very httle seemed to be about, so Mr. Waterfall and 
himself made for Levet Hagg, on the Don, and traced the river up to 
Conisborough Castle.
In a quarry (limestone) at Warmsworth they 
gathered Inula cojiyza, Erigeron acre^ Verbasciun thapsns^ Daitcus 
carota^ Viola hirta^ and Centaurea scabiosa.
By the river-side 
Saponaria officinalis, Cera s Hum aqiiatiaimj Sagittaria sagittifolia^ and 
Potomageton pectinatus.
By the Warmsworth Crags they secured 
Geniiana amarella, Daplme lanreola^ Hypericum montanum^ and ^ 
Reseda luteola.
In the grounds of Conisborough Castle Helleborus 
viridis was in abundance, while on the Castle walls Parietaria 
officinalis was plentiful.
Besides these, Ptibus saxatilis was found on 
the roadside near Warmsworth, and Anthyllis indneraria, Galium 
modugo, and Solidago virgaurea were collected.
Many of the plants- 
^vere in fruit, but altogether the time was well employed, and they had 
to run to catch the train at Conisborough.
Salt's collection in the 
Sheffield Public Museum contains 1,300 species, having been consider- 
ably added to since his death in 1815.
His list of plants for the 
neighbourhood of Sheffield contains nearly all the finds of Sept 17th, 
^891, although many of the dates affixed go back as far as 1786, and 
even to 1773.
In the absence of all the officers of the Geological Section,.
Mr. T, H.
Easterfield was called upon to give a report of the work 
done.
He writes :— On the way to Conisborough a good section of 
N 
ov.
189X.
336 Y.N.U. IN EDLINGTON AND WADWORTH WOODS.
the Upper and Lower Magnesian Limestone and the Middle Marl 
was passed through and examined in the railway cutting at 
Warmsworth.
This is probably one of the finest existing sections of 
the Yorkshire Permian Rocks.
On arriving at Mexborough the party, eighteen in number, 
proceeded to the Denaby Main Colliery, w^here they were received 
with great kindness hy Mr. Chambers, who deputed Mr. Witty, one of 
his staflF, to take them down the shaft- Amongst other objects of 
interest in the colliery, a wall was pointed out which separates the 
working part of the colliery from a portion which has been on 
fire for some twelve years.
The new apparatus for washing coal was 
shown and explained to the party; though somewhat complicated in 
detail, the apparatus is fairly simple in principle, and appears to do its 
work satisfactorily.
After leaving Denaby, the geologists walked to Conisborough 
Station.
On the way the effect of a strike fault in altering the 
outcrop of the Permian Rocks was pointed out.
Close to 
Conisborough Station a section of Carboniferous Rocks capped 
by drift was examined.
A visit was afterwards paid to the new shaft now being sunk at 
Cadeby.
A section of the rocks already passed through was 
explained; it is stated that at this point there is a boulder clay 
containing w^ell-scratched boulders of Glacial origin and having 
a depth of 60 yards.
This is of interest owing to the comparative 
scarcity o[ glacial deposits in the Doncaster district.
In a quarry at 
the back of the colliery, there is a good section of the Lower 
Magnesian Limestone showing a small natural cave and some 
evidence of dislocation.
Photographs of this section were taken 
by Mr. M.
H. Stiles, The limestone contained numerous small 
specimens of Axinus {Schyzodns) ohscurns w^hilst numerous ferns, 
catamites, etc.
(genera and species not determined), were found 
in the Carboniferous Shale.
Before the party returned to 
Doncaster, thanks were formally tendered to Messrs.
Chambers 
and Witty.
The Chairman then announced that as the x\nnual Meeting of 
1892 would be the loist meeting of the Union, the presidency 
for the ensuing year had been offered to and accepted by 
Mr. Charles P.
Hobkirk, F.L.S., an old member and now the 
Chairman of the Executive Council.
A vote of thanks to the Rev. W, Fowler, M.A., for presiding 
passed on the motion of Mr. W.
White, of the Ruskin Museum, 
Sheffield, seconded by Mr. M.
H. Stiles, of Doncaster— concluded 
he meeting.— E.R.W.
Naturalist, 
337 
FISHES CAPTURED OFF WHITBY: 
Sept-Oct. 1891.
THOMAS STEPHENSON, 
Whitby.
Galeus canis.
Common Tope, Sept.
9th.
Caught off and 
brought into Whitby by John Waters, fisherman.
The Common Tope (here called the *Tom Ear/ and further 
North the 'Sweet William') is not so frequently caught off here as 
formerly.
The Picked Dog-fish {Acanthias vulgaris)^ likewise, is not 
I 
now nearly so abundant as in years gone by, when they were so 
numerous as to do considerable damage to the herring caught in the 
nets, by biting lumps out of them — hence the term 'bitten herrings.' 
They also caused great injury to the fishermen's nets.
I remember, 
when young, going into Whitby Roads; we generally got one or' 
more dog-fish on our lines during a day's fishing; now I never hear 
of such a thing.
Clupea finta.
Twaite Shad.
Sept.
9th.
Brought by H.
Freeman, 
fisherman.
The Allis Shad {Clupea alosd)^ better known here as the * Horse 
Mackerel/ and the Twaite Shad {CI finta)^ locally known as the 
'Rock Herring/ were both fairly common off this coast, but appear 
to have considerably decreased, as they are now seldom brought into 
this port.
This season I have seen but two of the latter, and heard 
of but one of the former being brought here.
Lamna cornubica.
Porbeagle or Beaumaris Shark.
Sep. 24th.
About 6 feet long; caught in the herring-nets.
Sept.
30th.
Another Porbeagle caught off and brought into 
Whitby by the crew of the Peterhead fishing boat 'Good 
News,' No. 490, P.D.
Oct. 13th.
8 feet long; brought into Whitby in fishing-boat 
B.F. 25.
I did not see the Porbeagle that was brought into this port on 
the 24th September, although it was exhibited in some parts of the 
town.
The one oh the 30th September I saw on the deck of the 
fishing boat * Good News/ No. 49°^ P-D-, and appeared to be 
little short of 6 feet in length, but I had not an opportunity to 
Pleasure it.
Both these were caught in the herring-nets In which 
they had got entangled, or rather rolled up, and to which, of course, 
they did much injury.
Beione vulgaris.
Garfish.
Oct 2nd.
Captured and brought 
imo Whitby by — , Waller, fisherman.
4 
I 
\ 
338 NOTES LEPIDOPTERAj ETC.
Lampris luna.
Opah or King-fish.
Not having observed in ' The Naturalist ' any record of the 
capture at Bridlington of the Opah or King Fish {^Lampris hind) in 
1889, I send copy of a cutting from the ^Whitby Times' of the 
2nd August, 1889 • 'A beautiful specimen of the Opah or King Fish 
was caught at Bridlington on Tuesday, having got into shallow water.
The measurement from the head to the tip of the tail is 3 ft.
4 in., 
and 2o\ in.
in depth.
The upper part of the back and sides are of 
a rich green, reflecting both purple and gold in different lights, 
passing into yellowish-green below.
Above and beneath the lateral 
line are various round yellowish-white spots, and all the fins are 
bright vermilion.
YarrelFs ^' History of British Fishes" states that the 
fish is extremely rare; and at the date of the first edition of ''British 
Zoology" only about five examples were recorded as having been 
taken — four of them in the north of the British Isles, and the other 
at Brixham in 1824.
Towards the end of 1838, a fine specimen was 
caught on that part of the Dogger Bank nearest Bridlington, and 
passed into the hands of Mr. Boker, of York.
The fish is common 
to the West Coast of Africa, and also the Eastern Seas.' 
NOTE— BOTANY.
Volvox.
— Mr. Hick, in his interesting paper on Klein's observations on 
Volvex in 'The Naturalist' for March 1890, states that the Volvox stellatus 
of Ehrenberg is the female colony of V^ gUbator; agreeing here with Dr. M.
C. 
Cooke, who, however, in his ' British Freshwater Alg^e ' calls Sphcerosi7'a volvox 
the male colony of K globalor^ whereas Mr. Hick states that this form is 
the male colony of another species ( Fl aureus).
In the Journal of the Royal 
Microscopical Society for April 1891 a brief summary of Klein's further researches 
appears, in which the following passage occurs : — * Dr. Klein states that the 
colonies of Fl globaior are exclusively non-sexual and monoecious (almost 
invariably proterogynous).' If this is so, what is the V, stellatus form?
Perhaps 
Mr. Hick or some one having access to Klein's original articles can explain ; a fuu 
resume of his further researches would no doubt be of interest to the many 
readers of ' The Naturalist ' who take an interest in Volvox, — C.
L. LORD, 
Goole, Oct. 189X.
NOTES—LEFIDOPTERA.
Sphinx convolvuli at Ripon.— On Sept.
25th I had brought to me a fine 
specimen of S, convolvuli^ found at rest in a garden in the centre of the town.
As 
far as I am aware, this is only the fourth appearance of S.
convolvuli in this 
neighbourhood.
— C.
Chapman, Museum, Park Street, Ripon, Oct. 13th, i89i' 
Late appearance of Abraxas ulmata.— On Saturday, Sept.
26th, whilst 
beating the full-fed larvae of this species near Kiveton Park, I was surprised 
to take a fine female imago at rest on the herbage just beneath the tree I was 
l)eating.
She is now depositing ova in the box where she is confined.— 
A, E.
Hall, Sheffield, Sept.
28th, 1891.
Naturalist: 
339 
FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER 
HENRY T.
SOPPITT, 
Bradford.
The Fungus Foray held in connection with the Doncaster excursion, 
on September i6th and lyth, was in every sense a success- It was 
the third foray of the Y.N.U, — the first taking place at Harrogate and 
Ripon in 1881, the second at Bramham and Harewood in 1888 — - 
and although the number of species collected was less than at the 
preceding ones, yet the interest and the enthusiasm exhibited were 
undoubtedly as great, and probably an outcome of the foray will be 
a welcome and much-needed accession to students of Yorkshire 
mycology.
As yet fungi have not received a fair share of attention 
from Yorkshire botanists, but it is evident there is a growing desire 
to know more about these plants, and if fungus forays were held 
more frequently in Yorkshire no doubt a useful purpose would be 
served.
There is no reason why a Yorkshire fungus foray should 
not be an annual event like that of the Essex Field Club and other 
Societies.
One important feature of our Yorkshire fungus forays is 
the fact that they are the means of bringing students of mycology 
together, and it was a pleasure, at Doncaster, to see so many familiar 
faces-^Mr. George Massee, F.R.M.S., of Kew, to whom the Union 
has been so much indebted in this respect ; Prof.
Plowright, M.D., 
of King's Lynn, who took an active part in the Union's first fungus 
foray ; Mr. Thomas Birks, of Liverpool ; Mr. W.
N. Cheesman, of 
Selby; Mr, Charles Crossland, of Halifax; Rev, W.
Fowler, M.A., 
of Liversedge; Mr. J.
W. Sutclifife, of Halifax; Mr. H.
G. Ward, of 
London ; and others — all apparently interested.
The headquarters of the Union during the two days was the 
Glyn Hotel, and shortly after 11 o'clock on Wednesday morning 
a conveyance was in waiting to take the party — about a score in all — 
to Edlington and Wadworth Woods, under the competent local 
guidance of Messrs.
H. H.
Corbett, J- M.
Kirk, and M.
H. Stiles, all 
of Doncaster.
After some delay, a start was made, and the party were conveyed 
at a merry pace to the hunting-ground, some three miles distant On 
arrival, operations commenced in good earnest, but it was soon found 
that fungi were conspicuous by their absence.
Almost in vain were 
specimens sought for, the only objects that could be found being 
Armillaria melleuSy Coprinus micaceus^ and one or two other very 
common species.
A stretch of pasture, contrary to expectation, was 
a failure, but at the upper end several fallen logs were examined and 
^^ neath o ne of them Mr. Crossland found Mertdius aureus, which 
340 SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER.
proved to be one of the ^finds' of the day, it being even doubtful 
whether it has been met with in Britain before.
Then an example 
was picked up of the rare Coprinus lagopus^ with its woolly stem.
At first Edlington Wood was a disappointment owing to its having 
recently been thinned in some parts and to dense undergrowth oi 
hazel and bramble in others, nevertheless a number of interesting 
fungi found their way into the baskets, including Hygrophorns cossusy 
which was abundant, PsalUota Ju^morrhoidarius^ not uncommon under 
the magnificent yew-trees, and several interesting species oi Lactarius.
After a half-hour's halt at 'the Cottage ' for refreshments, another 
portion of Edlington Wood was explored with satisfactory results.
Here Leptonia eiichrous^ Ilygrophonis chrysodon^ and Riissula aiirata, 
three truly handsome species, were met with, in addition to many 
others.
Time passed merrily along as the baskets were being filled, 
and in due course the party were conveyed back to Doncaster, and 
dined together at the Glyn Hotel.
A feature of the dinner was that fungi were served.
Only two 
species, however, were dealt with, viz., Coprifius coma f us and 
Hygrophorns eburneus^ neither of which gave satisfaction, the flavour 
being completely ruined by * Bovril ' or some such compound.
After dinner an adjournment was made to a room adjoining the 
hotel, which was set apart for the ' show,' and where the task of 
unpacking and arranging the specimens was commenced.
But so 
far as determining species was concerned, little could be satisfactorily 
done by candlelight; and beyond removing the fungi from the 
baskets— a goodly number of which were w^orthless through the 
carelessness of the youths who acted as 'carriers' — little else was 
done.
Here would have been an excellent opportunity for a 
mycological lecture, or the reading of short papers, had such been 
arranged, but unfortunately this had not been thought about, and it 
\vas left for the mycologists to spend the evening as they thought 
best, which they did.
However, early next morning the work of examining the fungi 
was resumed, and by nine o'clock the bulk of the species were 
labelled.
In addition to the fungi collected at Edlington and 
Wadworth woods, a large number of species had been brought from 
the neighbourhood of Halifax by Messrs.
Crossland, Lister, and 
Sutcliffe.
Mr. A.
Clarke, of Huddersfield, had sent a nice lot 
of Lepiota friesii var, acutesquamosus from near Huddersfield; 
^[r, Massee had found a batch of the rare Lycoperdon hoyht 
flourishing in Doncaster; Mr. Percy H, Grimshaw forwarded 
specimens o{ Lepiota cepcesiipes from a nursery at Ilkley; Mr* H.
G. 
Ward laid on the table an example of Volvarla parvulns from I.ynn; 
Naturalist, K 
SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER.
34I 
several specimens from Bolton Woods and Esholt were brought for 
identification; and a box received from Mr. William Hodgson, 
of Malton, contained an old and large specimen of Polyporiis 
squamosus.
Mr. Massee contributed largely to the interest of the 
show by some remarkably interesting sections of mycelium from 
abroad, and a number of beautiful illustrations of rare British 
fungi.
Although no excursion had been specially arranged for the 
mycologists on the Thursday, from enquiries it was learned that the 
woods at Sandal Beat might prove interesting.
After a conveyance 
had been sought, a party of nine undertook to explore these woods, 
which were quite of another character from those investigated the 
previous day.
At first fungi were tolerably abundant and in variety.
There 
were Collybia platyphyUus^ with its long, creeping mycelium ; Sphace- 
lotheca hydropiperis, a smut attacking the ovaries of Polygonmn 
hydropiper) Lacfarius suhu7iiho7iatHS^ a species that might easily be 
passed for a pale form of L.
rufus\ and numerous examples of 
a yellow Rtissiila with a granulose stem and pileus, which was 
thought by some to be Russida gramtlata Cke., while others said it 
w^as only immature R, ochroleuca Fr., and that the granules would 
disappear as the plant matured.
But this Russu!a is one of the 
commonest in Yorkshire, and apparently can be called anything.
Mr. H.
G. Ward was fortunate in detecting a smut attacking the 
ovaries of Holctis mollisl which ultimately proved to be Tilleiia 
rmnvenhofii^ a species hitherto unknown in Britain, 
Shortly after one the party returned to Doncaster^ well pleased 
with the morning's foray, and most of the afternoon was spent at the 
*show,' Later in the day several species were brought in from 
Edlington Wood, etc., the most interesting being Nydalts asterophora, 
t)y Mr. W.
White, of Sheffield.
The following is a list of the species collected or shown — 186 
species in all, of which 29 species and one variety are new to the 
West Yorkshire list.
HYMENOMYCETES.
AGARICINEAl.
Agaricus (Amanita) phalloides Fr. Edlington Wood.
Plan- 
tation, Ovenden (G.
1..
Lister).
Agaricus (Amanita) muscarius L.
Bolton Woods (H.
T. 
Soppitt).
Agaric us (Amanita) rubescens P.
Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Amanita) mappa Batsch.
Sandal Beat.
Nov. i8qi.
34- SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER 
ma 
S Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Lepiota) rachodes Vitt.
Edlington Wood.
*AgarIcus (Lepiota) friesii Lasch van acutesquamosus.
Near Huddersfield (Mr. A.
Clarke).
Agaricus (Lepiota) cristatus L.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Lepiota) granulosus Batsch.
Edlington Wood.
Sandal Beat.
Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
Agaricus (Lepiota) cepaestipes Sow, Ilkley (Mr. P.
H. 
Grimshaw).
Agaricus (Armillaria) melleus Fl.Dan. Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Tricholoma) rutilans Schreff.
Mixed wood, 
Hebden Bridge (James Needhara, of Woodend).
ricus (Tricholoma) portentosus Fr. Mixed wood, 
Hebden Bridge (James Needham).' 
Agaricus (Tricholoma) nudus Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) nebularis Batsch.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) clavipes Pers.
Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) phyllophilus Fr. Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) infundibuliformis Sch^ff.
Edlington 
Wood.
Agaricus (Clitocybe) metachrous Fr. Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Laccaria) laccatus Scop.
Edlington Wood.
Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Collybia) radicatus Relh.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Collybia) platyphyllus Fr. Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Collybia) maculatus A.
& S.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Collybia) velutipes Curt.
Halifax (C.
Crossland 
and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Agaricus (Collybia) butyraceus Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Collybia) confluens Pers.
Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Collybia) dryophilus Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Collybia) tuberosus Bull.
Edlington W^ood.
Agaricus (Collybia) cirrhatus Schum.
Edlington Wood.
Schum.
Halifax (C.
Cross- 
J 
muscigenus 
(Mycena) rugosus Fr. Edlington Wood.
(Mycena) galericulatus Scop.
Edlington Wood.
(Mycena) galopus Pers.
Edlington Wood.
(Mycena) polyg-rammus Bull.
Edlington Wood.
(Myc 
Edlington Wood- 
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER.
343 
(Mycena) lacteiis Pers.
Edlington Wood.
(Myc 
m 
Esholt.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Omphalia) umbelliferus Linn.
Northdean AVood, 
Halifax (C.
Grassland and J.
W. SutcHfFe).
Agaricus (Pleurotus) tremulus Schseff.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Pleurotus) applicatus Batsch.
Wadworth Wood 
(H.
H. Corbett).
cervinus Schasff.
Edlington Wood.
*Agaricus (Pluteus) ephebeus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Entoloma) fertilis Berk.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Entoloma) nidorosus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Entoloma) sericellus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Clitopilus) orcella Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Leptonia) chalybaeus Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Leptonia) euchrous Pers, Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Nolanea) pascuus Pers.
Pasture, Norland, Halifax 
(C.
Crossland and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Agaricus (Nolanea) mammosus T.inn.
Esholt (H.
T. Soppitt).
Agaricus(Pholiota) spectabilis Fr. Edlington Wood (W.White).
Agaricus (Pholiota) squarrosus Miill.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Pholiota) mutabilis Sch^fT.
Edlington Wood.
Ovenden, Halifax (G.
L. Lister).
Agaricus (Pholiota) radicosus Bull Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Inocybe) rimosus Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Mixed 
wood, Hebden Bridge (James Needham).
Agaricus (Inocybe) pyriodorus Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Inocybe) bongardii Weinm.
Edlington Wood.
* 
stuliniformis 
o 
\. 
:us (Flammula) inopus Fr. Edlington Wood.
:us (Naucoria) cucumis Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Galera) hypnorum Batsch.
Edlington Wood.
Northdean Wood, Halifox (C Crossland and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Agaricus (Galera) tener Schaeff.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Tubaria) furfuraceus Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Psalliota) sylvaticus Schaeff.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Psalliota) hsemorrhoidarius Kalchbr.
Edlington 
Wood.
Agaricus (Stropharia) aeruginosus Curt.
Edhngton Wood.
^venden (G.
L. Lister).
^OV.
1891.
•344   SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER.
Agaricus (Stropharia) semig-Iobatus Batsch.
Ecllington 
Wood.
*Agaricus (Stropharia) worthingtonii Fr. Edlington Wood.
^ Agaricus (Hypholoma) sublateritius SchcefF.
Edlington 
Wood.
Northdean Wood, Halifax (C.
Crossland and J.
W. 
Sutclifife).
^ Agaricus (Hypholoma) fascicularis Huds.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Hypholoma) capnoides Fr. Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Hypholoma) candoUeanus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Hypholoma) appendiculatus Bull Edlington 
Wood.
Agaricus (Hypholoma) velutinus Pers.
Sandal Beat.
Agaricus (Psilocybe) semilanceatus Fr. Edlington Wood 
(W.
White).
Agaricus (Panasolus) separatus Linn.
Edlington Wood.
Agaricus (Psathyrella) atomatus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Hebden Bridge (James Needham).
Agaricus (Psathyrella) disseminatus Pers.
Sandal Beat.
' Coprinus comatus Fr. Edlington Wood, 
• Coprinus atramentarius Fr. Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
Coprinus micaceus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Ovenden (G L.
Lister).
- Coprinus lagopus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Coprinus plicatilis Fr. Edlington Wood.
^Cortinarius (Phleermacium) sebaceus Fr. Mixed wood, 
(J 
*, 
m 
mac mm 
Edlington Wood.
macium; orichalceus Batsch.
Edlington 
Wood.
*Cortinarius (Myxacium) livido-ochraceus Berk.
Edlington 
Wood.
Cortinarius (Dermocybe) anomalus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Cortinarius (Dermocybe) cinnamomeus Fr. Edlington 
Wood.
Cortinarius (Hygrocybe) armeniacus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Cortinarius (Hygrocybe) junghuhnii Fr. Edlington Wood.
Paxillus involutus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Sandal Beat.
*Paxillus crassus Fr. Edlington Wood.
*Hygrophorus chrysodon Fr. Edlington Wood.
Naturalist 
SOPPITT : FUNGUS FOKAY AT DONCASTER.
345 
Hygrophorus eburneus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Hygrophorus cossus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Hygrophorus ceraceus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Hygrophorus conicus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Pasture, Lud- 
denden-dean, Halifax (C.
Crossland and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Hygrophorus psittacinus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Pasture, 
Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
Lactarius torminosus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius turpis Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius insulsus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius blennius Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius uvidus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius pyrogalus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius chrysorrheus Fr. Edlington Wood 
Lactarius vellereus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius exsuccus Smith.
Edlington Wood.
Lactarius quietus Fr.
*Lactarius subumbonatus Lind.
Sandal Beat.
Lactarius glyciosmus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Fir wood, 
Hebden Bridge (James Needham).
*Lactarius fuliginosus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius voiemum Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lactarius subdulcis Fr. Edlington Wood.
Russula nigricans Fr. Edlington Wood.
Plantation, Ovenden 
(G.
L. Lister).
Russula adusta Fr. Edlington Wood.
Russula densifolia Seer.
Edlington Wood.
Russula furcata Fr. Edlington Wood.
Russula virescens Fr. Edlington Wood.
Sandal Beat.
Russula rubra Fr. Plantation, Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
Edlington 
Wood.
Russula cyanoxantha Fr. Edlington Wood.
Russula emetica Fr. Edlington Wood.
Russula fellea Fr. Edlington Wood.
Russula ochroleuca Fr. Edlington Wood.
Sandal Beat.
Russula fragilis Fr. Edlington Wood.
Plantation, Ovenden 
(G.
L. Lister).
Russula lutea Fr. Edlington Wood.
Sandal Beat.
Russula depallens Fr. Northdean Wood, Halifax (C.
Cross- 
land and T.
W. Sutcliffe).
^ov.
i8qi.
346 SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER.
Cantharellus cibarius Fr. Edlington Wood.
Beech wood, 
Hebden Bridge (James Needham).
*Nyctalis asterophora Fr. Edlington Wood (Wm. White).
Nyctalis parasitica Fr. Edlington Wood.
Marasmius peronatus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Marasmius ramealis Fr. Edlington Wood.
Marasmius rotula Fr. Edlington Wood.
Marasmius epiphyllus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Lentinus cochleatus Fr. On stump, Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
/POL YPORE^E.
Boletus badius Fr. Northdean Wood, Halifax (C Crossland 
and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Boletus chrysenteron Fr. Northdean Wood, Halifax (C- Cross- 
land and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Boletus subtomentosus Linn.
Northdean Wood, Halifax 
(C.
Crossland and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Boletus edulis Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Boletus scaber Fr. Edlington Wood.
Polyporus squamosus Fr. Malton (W.
Hodgson).
Ovenden 
(G.
L. Lister).
Polyporus chioneus Fr, Edlington Wood.
*Polyporus fumosus Fr, Edlington Wood.
Polyporus annosus Fr. Luddenden-dean (C.
Crossland and 
J. W.
Sutcliffe).
Polyporus versicolor Fr, Edlington AVood.
Polyporus abietinus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Polyporus ferruginosus Fr. Edlington Wood.
Polyporus sanguinolentus Fr. Norland Clough, Halifax 
(C.
Crossland and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Polyporus vaporarius Fr. Edlington Wood.
Daedalea quercina Pers.
Edlington Wood, 
*Merulius aureus Fr. Edlington Wood.
HYDNEM.
Hydnum repandum Linn, Mixed wood, Hebden Bridge 
(James Needham).
Sandal Beat.
Hydnum alutaceum Fr. Edlington Wood.
Phlebia merismoides Fr. Edlington Wood.
Grandinia granulosa Fr. Sandal Beat.
Naturalist, 
SOPPITT : FUNGUS FORAY AT DONCASTER, .
347 
S 
Thelephora laciniata Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Thelephora sebacea Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Stereum hirsutum Fr. Edlington Wood.
Stereum rugosum Fr, Edlington Wood.
Hebden Bridge 
(James Needham).
Corticium arachnoideum Berk.
Luddenden-dean (C.
Cross- 
J 
CLA VARIEAL.
J 
Clavaria fastigiata Linn.
Edlington Wood.
Clavaria cristata Pers.
Elland (C.
Crossland anc 
Clavaria cinerea Bull.
Edlington Wood.
Clavaria inaequalis Fl.Dan. Edlington Wood.
ilaris Scop.
Edlington Wood.
Clavaria rugosa Bull.
Hebden Bridge (James Needham, 
of Woodend).
Calocera viscosa Fr. Sandal Beat.
Ovenden (G, L.
Lister).
Calocera glossoides Fr. Luddenden dean (C- Crossland and 
T. W.
SutcliffeV 
vermic 
EMELLEAi 
Dacryomyces stillatus Nees.
Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
GASTEROMYCETES.
Scleroderma vulsrare Fr. Edlington Wood.
m 
Edlington Wood.
*Lycoperdon hoylei Berk.
Doncaster (George Massee).
Lycoperdon gemmatum Batsch.
Edlington Wood.
Lycoperdon pyriforme Sch^eff.
Edlington Wood.
Ovenden 
(G.
L. Lister).
Lycoperdon perlatum Pers.
Bolton Woods near Bradford.
Ithyphallus impudicus L.
Esholt.
Sandal Beat.
Mutinus caninus Fr. Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
Sphaerobolus stellatus Tode.
Elland (C.
Crossland and 
J- W.
Sutcliffe).
DISCOMYCETES.
Helvella crispa Fr. Sandal Beat.
Leotia lubrica P.
Edlington Wood.
Leotia acicularis Pers.
Northdean Wood, Halifax (C Cross- 
_^id and J.
W. Sutcliffe).
Nov. 1891.
34^ ' NOTES AND NEWS.
Peziza aurantia CEd- Ovenden (G.
L. Lister).
"k 
Var. atro-marginata Phil.
& PL Edlington Wood.
^Peziza adse Sadl Edlington Wood.
Peziza vesiculosa Bull.
EUand (C.
Grassland and J, W» 
Sutcliffe.
Lachnea macropus Pers.
Edlington Wood.
Lachnea hemisphaerica Wigg.
Edlington Wood.
USTILAGINEL 
"'^Tilletia rauwenhofii F.
v. Waldh.
Sandal Beat.
*Sphace!otheca hydropiperis Schum.
Sandal Beat.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The August number of the Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society con- 
tains an elaborate and detailed memoir on ' The Shap Granite, and the Associated 
Igneous and Metamorphic Rocks,' by Messrs.
Alfred Harker, M.A,, F.G.S., and 
J. E.
Marr, M.A., Sec.G.S. The illustrations include woodcuts, a Sketch-map 
and two plates of Microscopic rock-sections.
^M.
At the beginning of August the Cumberland and Westmodand Association for 
the Advancement of Literature and Science held its annual meeting at Maryport, 
when the president, the Bishop of Barrow-in-Furness, delivered an address on the 
local archaeology of the neighbourhood of Kirkby Lonsdale — a district in which 
he had lived 26 years.
Mr. Gully, M.P. for Carlisle, was elected President for 
next year's meeting, and Mr. H.
L. Harker, of Silloth, was re-elected as honorary 
secretary, Mr. J.
G. Goodchild, F.G.S., as Editor of the Transactions, Mr. Robert 
Crowder as librarian, Mr. Goodchild as delegate to the British Association, the 
Rev. H.
A. Macpherson, M.A., and Mr. J.
N. Robinson as zoological recorders, 
and Mr. R.
Wood and Mr. William Hodgson, A.L.S., as botanical recorders.
Numerous interesting original papers were then read.
Mr. Goodchild lectured 
on 'Cumberland and Westmorland Limestones,' and Mr. J.
Postlethwaite, of 
Keswick, read a paper on * The Cleaved Ashes and Breccias of the Volcanic Series 
of Borrowdale,' subjects of great interest to geologists.
But perhaps the most generally interesting paper is the one by the Rev. H- A.
ety's forthcoming _.
_ 
awaited with feelings of keen anticipation, as nothing has been done in this depart 
ment of research since Dr. Heysham published his catalogue of local animals, s< 
that Mr. Macpherson's work will mark a distinct advance in knowledge.
The fruits of the visit which the Mayor of Halifax, Mr. James WiUiam 
Davis, F.S.A., etc.
(whom we are glad to be able to congratulate on having that 
dignity conferred upon him for a second term), and his friend Mr. A.
Smith 
Woodward, paid in 1889 to some of the principal museums in Sweden and 
Denmark, have appeared in the form of a lengthy paper illustrated by mnc 
beautifully lithographed plates, ' On the Fossil Fish of the Cretaceous Formations 
of Scandinavia/ published just a year ago as one of the parts of the quarto Scientinc 
Transactions of the Royal Dublin Society, and including a considerable number 
of species new to science.
_— — — 
Naturalis 
349^ 
OBSERVATIONS ON THE WHITE WAGTAIL.
O. V.
APLIN, M.B.O.U., 
Author of* The Birds of Oxfordshire* 
As I have recently (June, 1891) seen something of the White- 
Wagtail {Motacil/a alba) in Switzerland, I venture to add a few notes 
to those of Messrs.
Whitlock and J^Iacpherson.
I paid especial attention to two poiJits, viz., the amount o( black 
on the head of the adult female (vide ZooL, 1890, page 375), and 
the note of the White as compared to that of the Pied Wagtail.
I was only able to see three birds which I could be pretty sure 
were females, as the pairs were seldom together.
One of these, 
which I was able to examine at close quarters on the landing-stage at 
Thun, had a grey crown and occiput.
Another, one^ of a pair on a 
chalet roof in Meiringen, had a good deal of black on the head, 
although less, of course, than the male.
The third bird also had 
black on the head.
All the other adults that I saw had, more 
or less, black caps, and, of course, some of these may have been 
females.
The only sexed female I could find in the Bern Museum 
had moulted into autumn dress ; it had 710 black on the head, and 
an unsexed bird (apparently a bird of thej-ear), in autumn dress, had 
also a grey crown.
In the result my few observations seemed to^ 
confirm the opinion I expressed last year, that 'This grey-crowned 
plumage in Motacilla alba (female) can hardly be universal, or it 
would surely have been noticed by some ol the many ornithologists 
who have observed the White Wagtail on the continent.' 
As to the notes of the two species.
Having this matter in my 
J^ind I took every opportunity of listening carefully to the notes of 
e Pied Wagtail before leavmg England, and as a pair were building 
in some pollard willows in front of my windows I had considerable 
facilities for getting the notes well into my head.
The White 
Wagtail was considerably more common (in the lower grounds) in 
Switzerland than the Pied Wagtail is with us, so I heard a good 
niany.
I found, as I expected, great difficulty in coming to a con- 
clusion, for this reason : the note of the Pied Wagtail varies so much 
in pitch, intensity, and volume, that it seems impossible to say horn 
loud the average 'physic^ (to use the lettering mentioned by the late 
Frank Euckland) of that bird is.
The White Wagtail's note also 
varies according to my limited observation of it, and my study of it 
was sometimes embarrassed by the sound, so common in Switzerland,.
of rushing water ; nevertheless I had also a good many uninterrupted 
Ij^tenings.
The most I find myself able to say is that I never heard 
Nov, iSgti, 
th 
350 APLIN : OBSERVATIONS ON THE WHITE WAGTAIL* 
the White Wagtail utter a note so loud as those which the Pied 
Wagtail occasionally gives vent to.
The White Wagtail is certainly a most elegant bird, and I agree 
with Mr. Macpherson in thinking that it has a more graceful slender 
appearance.
The few skins I have by me seem on the whole to bear 
this outj but the Pied Wagtail, like many other birds, varies a little 
in size.
How far the more slender appearance in life may be due to the 
respective colours of the birds I cannot say.
Would the black bird 
naturally appear more robust than the grey one, or not?
I have 
rarely seen more elegant birds, both for shape and colour, than the 
full-fledged young White Wagtails^ which were especially nodceable 
when running over the newly-mown hay grass.
The whole of the 
upper parts, with the exception of the wings and tail^ are light dead 
grey (wanting the clear pearly hue seen in old birds), and there are 
none of the dusky shades seen in the young of the Pied Wagtails, 
nor any signs of the dusky bands at the sides of the cap.
A dark 
crescent on their light breasts is conspicuous.
An adult at Stansstad, 
with a little black on the head (and probably a female), was the only 
one I saw w^hich showed any mottling on the back; it was a peculiar 
looking bird, with almost a rusty shade about it It is a pity that 
the grey rump, as the distinguishing mark of the White Wagtail, is 
not better known, as a M.
yarrelli in autumn dress occasionally 
figures as J/, alba.
I often saw the White Wagtail perching on roofs (both those of 
chalets and of stone houses) in the towns and villages ; in Bern, 
InterlakeHj and Meiringen, for instance.
But I may say the same of 
the Pied Wagtail, more especially in villages (for our bird is not so 
fond of towns as his continental relation) in England.
The White Wagtail takes a great deal of insect food on the 
\^ang, and, I think, hawks flies to a greater extent than our bird 
does.
It was pretty to watch the former, old and young, at Meirin- 
gen flitting along the stone banks of the rushing river Aare, and 
hawking insects over the water.
Some would flit right across, 
fluttering and jerking in the air as they captured the flies by the way ; 
others, pausing a few seconds in mid-stream, returned to the bank 
they started from.
But winged insects are very abundant in 
Switzerland, and possibly tempt many birds to feed in this fashion.
Dippers were hawking for flies in the air in the same place.
I did not meet with the White Wagtail at a 
about 3,300 ft.
But this was in June, and 
one, snow lying in a large mass, where it had slipped down on to 
one alp as low down as about 4,000 ft.
In one locality (6,000 ft.) 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
35 I 
we failed to find the Grey Wagtails which usually spend the summer 
there, although I saw one on the same stream some way lower down.
Probably the White Wagtails would go up higher later on.
As Mr. Macpherson states that he does not remember having 
seen the Pied Wagtail feeding on the refuse of farm-yards, I may 
just mention that I have frequently observed this bird feeding in 
farm and cattle yards, both in summer and winter; the ftw birds 
which winter with us, indeed, are very partial to such localities, for 
there they can generally make sure of a supply of food.
I have seen one White Wagtail in England this year, viz., a male, 
by the brook close to this village (Bloxham), on the 26th April.
NOTES—ORNITHOLOG V.
White Variety of the Thrush in Upper Nidderdale.
— While grouse 
shooting on Deadman's Hill and Little Whernside, on August I2tb, a white 
Thrush {Titrdus f)iusicus) was seen, and on the 14th was shot by the side of the 
Nidd just below Deadman's Hill.
It proved to be a bird of the year, and the 
plumage was in very bad condition.
— Riley Fortune, Harrogate, Sept.
13th, 1891.
Late Nesting of Yellowhammer near Pickering.
— A friend and myself, 
while hunting for rabbits here on 2nd September, found in a furze-bush a Yellow- 
hammer {Emheriza citrinella)\ nest with three eggs, and these were hatched 
between Saturday the 5th and Monday the 7th September.
Is not this unusually 
late and worth noting?
— ^Herbert Prodham, Allerston, near Pickering, Oct. 7lh.
[Not very unusual.— W.
E.G.] 
Flamborough Bird-Notes.
—Large quantities of sea birds have frequented 
the cliffs and the coast of Flamborough this season.
Guillemots {Lomvia troile), 
l^azorbills {Alca tonia).
Puffins {Fraterciila mxtua)^ and Kittiwakes {Rissa 
tridactyla) ; also numbers of Sea Swallows {St£rna,spp,), Skuas {Stercorarius , J//.), 
and Gannets {Siila bassana), are seen along the coast.
I have by me a splendid 
variety of the Guillemot, nearly all white, obtained here this season.
On 
Sept.
17th I observed a flock of twenty-four Canadian Geese (^d'/-;//r/^r^;/^^i?/?j/j), 
flying over the Headland, going southward.
From the above date up to now 
several summer migrants have been making for the Headland, ready to take their 
departure.
Speaking to one of our farmers the other day, I asked him if he had 
seen any Hooded Crows {Corvus comix) this season.
The remark he made was : 
'there are sixteen old pensioners in that plantation who have been there all 
summer.*— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, Oct. 7th, 1891.
LOCAL LISTS OF 
A Catalogue of Local Lists of British Birds, arranged under Counties.
By Miller Christy, F.L.S* [Reprinted, with numerous additions, from 
The Zoologist, third seiies, vol.
xiv.
(July 1890), pp.
247-267].- Price 
Two Shillings.— London: R.
H. Porter .
. .
[&c.] * .
• 189T, 
This unpretending little brochure, which extends to 42 pages 
octavo, is the record of a vast amount of labour and research, which 
none but those who have undertaken work of a similar class can 
y and adequately, or even at all, appreciate.
Having ourselves 
full 
had occasion recently to make a tabulation which involved reference 
Kov. xagi.
352 REVIEW — LOCAL LISTS OF BIRDS.
to the local lists of our northern counties^ we found Mr. Christy's 
catalogue of great utility and very complete, the only omissions 
which we have been able so far to discover being the following ; — 
AiKiN {W.
O.).— Birds of Somersham, Hunts.
The Zoologist, 
1845, iii.
S55-856.
Briggs (J.
J.).— The Birds of Melbourne, [Derbyshire].
The 
Zoologist, 1849, pp.
2475, 2559, 2603, and 1850, pp.
2793, 
2817, and 2949.
Glover (Stephen).— A Sketch of the Zoology of Derbyshire 
. .
. Class 2.
Birds.— The History of the County of 
Derby, vol.
i. 1829, pp.
139-166.
Knox (A.
E.).
Notes on the Birds of Sussex.
The Zoologist, 
1843, i.
137 et sequ.
The first three, however, involve one of the statements which 
Mr. Christy makes in his introduction, wherein he cites Derbyshire 
and Hunts as among the counties to which but scant attention has 
been paid.
No doubt this still remains correct so far as regards 
Hunts, but in justice to Derbyshire, it is noteworthy that Mr. Briggs' 
list of the Birds of Melbourne is a very full and detailed account of 
the avifauna of the area of which it treats, while Glover's list includes 
as many as 165 species.
We note that in some few instances annotations are made, such 
as the number of species enumerated in some of the local lists, and 
statements as to the reliability or unreliability of the list.
It would 
perhaps have been better for the latter class of remarks to have 
been more uniformly and systematically given, and for the statistics 
to have been appended to every list, avoiding however the method in 
which Macpherson and Duckworth's ' Birds of Cumberland' is dealt 
with.
This is quoted under Westmorland on the strength of the 
sub-title 'With Notes of the Birds of Westmorland,' and a note 
appended to the effect that it enumerates 250 species.
A reference 
to the book itself, however, shows that the 250 species are 
Cumbrian, and that only an extremely limited number of birds are 
noted as having been observed for Westmorland.
We note also 
that our own journal is referred to throughout as ' The Naturalist 
(Y,N.U.)/ Wherefore the latter clause is not apparent ; reference 
to covers and title-pages will show that this journal is simply 
*The Naturalist,' and should be so quoted, with the addition of 
the year and page.
Mr. Christy has, however, done his work extremely well and 
with as near an approach to the completeness which he claims in 
his introductory observations as may reasonably be expected, 
and we heartily congratulate him upon the result.
— W.D.R- 
353 
STROBILOMYCES STROBILACEUS IN SOUTH- 
WEST YORKSHIRE.
HENRY T.
SOPPITT, 
Bradford.
Of the many fungi forwarded me from various localities during the 
past few weeks, none have proved more interesting than Strobilomyce^ 
strobilaceus Berk,, an example of which was recently sent by Mr. J, 
SutcliflTe, of Paddock.
The specimen — which is a good typical 
example — had been collected by Mr. Jolin Carter, of Huddersfield, 
iti a wood between Elland and Brighouse, near Tag Lock.
Mr. Carter has also, I am informed, met with this species once before 
3n the Huddersfield district, in Mollicar Wood near Farnley Tyas.
The records are interesting, as this species is regarded as ' very rare' 
so far as Britain is concerned ; hitherto, in fact, being confined to a 
few localities in the Midland Counties.
My first acquaintance with 
^t m a living condition was some nine years ago, at Woodeves 
Coppice, near Ludlow, while on a fungus foray with the Woolhope 
Club.
Mr, Geo. Massee, F.R.M.S., of Kew, has kindly furnished 
^e with its distribution, which is as follows: — ^ Bulstrode (Bucks), 
Lightfoot's original locality; Gopsall (Leicestershire); Ludlow (Salop); 
Haywood Forest (Hereford) ; most European countries, United 
States and Canada.
The head-quarters of the genus is in E.
Australia.' Now that the fungus has been found at Huddersfield, 
m all probability it will, with the increase of mycological students, be 
niet with in other localities.
2o//i November^ 1891.
NO TE—MA MM ALIA .
The Wild Cat in Cumberland.— In the September issue of * The Naturalist/ 
at page 258, in the 'Bibliography: Mammalia, 18S8/ appears, under the 
authority apparently of Mr. Gerald Lascelles, a statement that the true wild cat 
still exists in Cunilierland.
This I very much doubt.
It is quite true that at very 
rare intervals we hear of so-called wild cats being shot or trapped on our fells ; 
out none that I have ever seen during the last 60 years corresponded either in size, 
conformation, or markings with the true Fdis catits of naturalists, however they 
^ay be classed by sportsmen.
At the present moment may be seen in the hands 
of Mr. Robinson, a Workington taxidermist, what purports to be * a wild cat shot 
on Skiddaw,' which I agree with Mr. Robin.son in regarding as a waif from some 
^oniestic hearth, or possiblv the offspring of some such houseless wanderer.
The 
last bona fide wild cat o{ which I have any authentic record was killed by a private 
pack of foxhounds kept at Baldhow, under Great Meli Fell, at the close of last 
Century, or very early in the present one.
Full in sight from that mountain, at 
the northern base of Gowbarrow Fells, in the parish of Watermillock, lies ^thc 
straggling hamlet of Ulcatrow, popularly believed to be a corruption 01 Wiid-Cat- 
J^ow, and therefore a testimony oi the former existe"ce of the wild cat thereabouts 
5!2!?_il£iy remote period.— \yM.
Hodgson, Workinglon, October 30th, 1891.
354 
NOTES— BOTANY.
Varieties of Carex Goodenovii and Helianthemum Cham^cystus at 
Hayburn Wyke.— At the excursion of the Yorkshire Naturalists* Union to 
Hayburn Wyke on July iith, 1891, two plants were found which I think are worth 
recording.
Since I returned to London I have been lookiag over the gatherini^s of 
that day, and find amongst them the y2,x,jimceUa (Fries) of Carex Goodenovii (J.
Gay) 
(C.
vulgaris Fries).
It was growing in the bog on the small moor near Hayburn 
Wyke station, and one of our party, whose name I do not know, gathered a very 
pretty form oi Helianthemum Ckamcecislns (Mill.), with a brown spot one ach petal, 
which appears to be somewhat like a variety of the same plant found some years 
ago by Mr. W.
D. Snooke in the Uudercliff, Isle of Wight, the difference being 
that the Isle of Wight plant has one or more rings and ours a spot.
This is what 
Mr. A.
G. More says in the Supp.
Flo. Vect.
: ' Helianthemiun vulgaj-e (Goert), var.
/? 
petalis hasi-aHrantiis' Snooke (Flor.
Vectiana).
The flowers are marked with a 
dark yellow or orange ring at the base of the corolla.
Sometimes this ring is 
double, and I have seen occasionally a few purplish marks towards the top of the 
petals in the same flowers, but in other respects the variety does not differ from the 
usual form of //.
vnlgare,' J.
of Botany, 1S71, p.
136.— Walter W.
ReeVES, 
London, 29th October, 1891, 
Volvox.
— The passage quoted by Mr. Lord from the Journal of the Royal 
Microscopical Society is a good illustration of the fact that a condensed statement 
is not rarely ambiguous.
What the writer meant to say, I have no doubt, was 
this — that in Volvox glohator only two kinds of colonies are met with, viz., 
(l) Non-sexual ones and (2) sexual ones that are usually proterogynous.
At any 
rate this is what Dr. Klein himself states in the paper abstracted, a copy of which 
he has been kind enough to send me.
The importance of the statement is 
indicated by the next passage of the abstract in the Microscopical Journal, in 
which it is said that in V.
aitretis as many as twenty-one different combinations are 
possible and actually exist.
The fact is V.
aureus exhibits a remarkable case ot 
pleomorphism, for without losing its specific characters it presents itself in a large 
number of forms, differing in conaposition as regards sterile and fertile cells, ana 
the degree of development attained by the reproductive cells of the young colonies 
before they leave the parent colony.
In a still later paper by Klein the number 01 
observed varieties, so to call them, is increased to twenty-four, and he has come to 
the conclusion that they are due to the influences of the environment, and are 
especially dependent upon nutrition.
To this he looks for an explanation of the 
alternation of sexual and asexual propagation, and even for that of the sexual 
differences themselves.
In sharp contrast to all this V, globator seems to vary but 
little, and only occurs in the two forms mentioned above.
As to V* stellaius it is, 
as previously stated, generally spoken of as the female colony of V, globator.
Since, however, the sexual colonies are monoecious, it ought in strictness to be 
spoken of as the sexual colony of V.
globator with ripe oospores.
In Dr. Cooke s 
statement respecting Spluerosira volvox I think we have a survival of the confusion 
which has so loni^ prevailed in this country in connection with the species o 
Volvox.
— Thomas Hick, Manchester, November 14th, 1S91.
NO TE—L EPID OFTERA.
Lepidoptera in Upper Swaledale, Aug:ust 1890.— At the excursion of the 
Yorkshire Naturalists* Union to Keld and Kisdon, on August 3rd to 5th, i»90» 
the following lepidoptera were observed on the wmg-.—Chortobiuspam/'nilus, 
Ly€a:na alexis, Larentia cccsiata (abundant on the summit of Kisdon, flying otl n^ 
swarms from the stone walls on being disturbed), L, olivata (also plentiful in tne 
rocky gullies and watercourses descending from the moors), Melanippe montamua, 
Tanagra chitrophyUata, Caradrina cubicularis, and Pterophorus pterodactylns, ^ 
LarctUia olivata Mr. G.
T. Porritt informs me that it is met with ui ^^''^!^' 
Yorkshire localities, but that he has never taken it in the county himself.— J- "' 
Scarborough, 
Uaturalist 
355 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES 
FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT, IN THE 
AUTUMN OF 1891.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.E.O.U., 
Eafo7L Hallj Retford, 
Beyond my own personal observations on both sides of the Humber 
in the autumn of 1891, my best thanks are due in preparing this 
notice to Mr.-G, H.
Caton Haigh, of Grainsby Hall, for his many 
excellent notes, taken by him in connection with the Lincolnshire 
coast; also to Mr. Hewetson, of Leeds, and Mr. Philip Loten, of 
Easington, for information on the migration of birds on the coast of 
Holderness.
Tetanus ochropus (Linn.).
Green Sandpiper.
June 20th- 
Was first observed on this date on the Humber-side ponds on 
Easington fitties.
Generally, they visit our small streams and 
becks in July, and in August and wSeptember are often in 
considerable numbers.
Porzana maruetta (Leach).
Spotted Crake.
I saw one in 
Mr. Kew's shop which was killed against the telegraph wire, 
June.
Mr. Haigh told 
me 
that when snipe-shooting last year, he found two old nests, 
presumably belonging to the Spotted Crake, amongst sedges 
{Carex riparia) growing in an old disused river-channel, they 
were like those of a waterhen, but less in size, and composed of 
fine grasses and sedges.
Numenius phaeopus (Linn.).
Whimbrel.
Mr. Haigh saw 
a few at Tetney on July 9th, and I heard them passing over 
at Great Cotes on the i6th; very plentiful all through the 
season.
I saw a few at Spurn on Sep. 30th.
Totanus hypoleucus (Linn.).
Common Sandpiper.
A few 
in pairs on the coast-drains, in the second week in July.
On 
Aug. 5th I found them extremely plentiful on the mud-slopes of 
Tetney Haven, rising in quick succession so as almost to form 
a considerable flock, and, with bent wings, following the course 
of the outfall through the fitties, 
Totanus glareola (Linn.).
Wood Sandpiper.
Mr. Haigh 
flushed three, widely apart, on July 21st, from the sides of old 
disused creeks, amongst cultivated land near the coast.
Subse- 
quently several have been seen and obtained in August, on both 
^es of the Humber.
Altogether I have examined six, and all of 
35^   CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
these birds of the year.
Mr. Haigh says when flushed they rise with 
a single cry, and are not nearly so noisy as the Green Sandpiper; 
and when they alight again, it is invariably in rough herbage, 
and not on bare muds or banks, as the latter does.
Probably 
more examples have been seen this autumn than in the whole of 
the last ten years put together.
Totanus canescens (GmeL).
Greenshank.
July 2rst.
One 
seen and another heard at Tetney by Mr. Haigh ; this date is 
a very early one.
I saw several in the same locality on 
Aug. 5th, and again on Saltfleet fitties on the i8th.
They were 
pleasingly tame, having so far not been shot at.
On the latter 
day I got quite close to one feeding on the mud-slope of the 
Haven side, and was able to watch its movements.
GallinagO coelestis (Frenz.).
Snipe.
August 5th.
In consider- 
able numbers at this date, about the foreshores, near the coast.
These are not ' over-tlie-sea' snipe, but local birds, bred in the 
district, and which, about the middle of July, draw towards the 
coast-drains and fittie-pools.
Tringa canutus Linn.
Knot.
August 5th.
Some small flocks 
at Tetney.
Tens of thousands on tlie Spurn muds at the end 
of September.
A few old birds shot early in the season had 
faded red under-parts.
Saxicola oenanthe (Linn.).
Wheatear.
Aug. 5th.
I saw the 
first migratory Wheatears to-day.
On the 31st many lovely 
birds, and some Yellow Wagtails; and a month later, near the 
Holderness coast, Wheatears were still very numerous in fallow 
fields, and perching much on the low wind-clipt fences.
Last 
observed on October 22nd.
Nov. 8th.
A very fine adult male 
in winter dress this afternoon on Easington fitties; on the 
presumption that a late Wheatear might perhaps turn out one of 
the rarer species visiting these islands, I observed it for some 
time at close quarters with a glass, so as to be quite certain of 
its identity.
Totanus calidris (Linn.).
Redshank.
August 5th.
In flocks 
of twenty to thirty on coast, also rising singly ; very many seen.
Mr. Gatke writes : '14th August— commencing at 9 p.m., and 
lasting to 3 a.m. on 15th.
^Millions of T.
calidris, Niunenius 
pJiceopus and arqimfa, Charadrins Iiiaiicula, and all kinds of 
Trifigce, mixed with as many call-notes of kindred folks unknown, 
or in the general chaos not to be made out.
All must have 
crossed and passed over your part of the world.
Here atmo- 
sphtre pitch dark, with the last of a Scottish mist and almost 
caln / 
Natiiraiistr 
CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
357 
L 
W 
Squatarola helvetica (Linn.).
Grey Plover.
Aug. i8th.
T saw 
three together on Saltfleet fitties, two of these in perfect summer 
dress, and the other partly in transition to winter plumage.
A fiisv examples in summer dress were shot near Kilnsea in 
August.
Altogether, however, the Grey Plover has not been 
nearly so numerous this season as in late years.
Sterna cantiaca Gmel .
Sandwich Tern.
I saw a small band 
of these handsome Terns off Saltfleet Haven on Aug. i8th.
In 1889, on Aug. 31st, in the same locality, I had seen and 
recorded very great numbers.
Sterna macrura Naum.
Arctic Tern.
I found very consider- 
able bands on the coast in the third week in August, between 
Mablethorpe and Saltfleet Haven; also Common Tern, but in 
much less numbers.
Mr. Haigh saw a few Arctic Tern at 
Tetney on October 2n(l.
Calidris arenaria (Linn.).
Sanderling.
Fairly common in 
August and September on both sides of the Humber.
Upupa epops Linn.
Hoopoe.
One shot at Easington-in- 
Holderness, in August- 
Hydrochelidon nigra (Linn.).
Black Tern.
A few young 
birds on the coast early in Septeml)er.
Haematopus ostraleg-us Linn.
Oyster-catcher.
Sept.
2nd.
In flocks of hundreds on Lincolnshire coast.
Larus minutus Pall.
Little Gull Sept.
3rd.
One, immature, 
and an unusually dark-backed example, was shot by Mr. Haigh 
at Donna Nook.
Phalaropus fulicarius Linn.
Grey Phalarope.
Sept.
9th.
An immature female shot by Mr. R.
Hewetson on one of the 
ponds on Easington Humber-side fitties: a few pearl-grey 
feathers showing through the dark plumage of summer on the 
back.
Oct. 15th; one shot at North Cotes by F- Stubbs, on 
his inland pool where Lapwings are netted.
This, from Us 
small size I should say is a male.
Another was shot on the 
19th on the Humber-side ponds at Easington-in-Holderness, 
and again another, a female, on the 21st.
Tetanus fuscus (Linn.)- Dusky Redshank.
Sept.
9th.
One 
flushed by ^Ir. Haigh from an inland creek near the North 
Cotes bank.
Mr. Haigh, who meets with this somewhat 
uncommon species every year, says that on the wing its general 
appearance is much the same as the Redshank, but it is a longer- 
looking and slenderer bird and lacks the white patch on the 
_ wing so conspicuous in its congener.
It rises with a single 
^ec.
,89,.
3S8 CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMRER DISTRICT.
sharp note, often quickly repeated, mounting directly to 
a considerable height as if going away altogether, and as Ukely 
enough will suddenly swee};) down and alight at no great 
distance.
In 1890 he found five together in a disused and 
silted-up water-course in the middle of a wheat-field at North 
Cotes, 
Tringa minuta Leisl.
Little Stint.
Sept.
nth.
Mr. Haigh 
killed this and a Curlew Sandpiper at the same shot.
There 
were three of the former and two of the latter.
Both have also 
been seen at the Spurn ; and a Little Stint, but too far gone for 
preservation, was picked up on the warren, having been killed 
against the telegraph-wire.
Muscicapa atricapilla Linn.
Pied Flycatcher.
Sept.
nth.
A young bird of the vear was shot by Mr. Haigh far out on the 
fitties at Tetney, sitting on a lump of mud in one of the creeks.
Machetes pugnax (Linn.).
Ruff and Reeve.
These have 
been unusually common on both sides of the Humber, and 
Mr. Haigh thinks there have been more this year than in the 
last half-dozen years put together.
The majority obtained, 
several of which I have handled, have been Rufifs ; the Reeve 
appears to be the much less common of the two.
The last 
entry of them^in my note-book is five seen near Easington on 
Oct. 1 6th.
Tring^a striata Linn., Purple Sandpiper.
Sept.
19th.
An 
immature male shot near Kilnsea.
The Purple Sandpiper 
seems much less common in the autumn than formerly.
I used 
to meet with young in small flocks at Spurn in August and 
September.
Regulus cristatus Koch.
Golden-crested Wren.
After 
a N.E. gale on Sunday night, Sept.
20th, many hundreds were 
seen in the storm-dipt hedges surrounding the fields at Kilnsea 
on the 22nd and 23rd.
They had entirely gone within tw'enty 
four hours after the latter date.
F 
Vanellus vulgaris Bechst.
Lapwing.
Sept.
23rd and 24th.
There was a large passage observed on these days, across the 
Tetney fitties, by Stubbs, the bird fowler.
Oct. i6th.
Spurn ; 
half-gale from S.W.
; Lapwings were coming in continuously 
(luring day, and on Oct. 22nd, at Tetney, flocks to W.
all day.
Lanius excubitor Linn.
Great Grey Shrike.
Sept.
24th- 
An immature male, a very fine example, shot at Kilnsea ; finely 
vermiculated on the under parts.
Oct. 27th.
One seen at 
Easington, and several early in November.
Naturalist 
CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
359 
Falco ^salon Tunstall.
Merlin.
Sept.
24th.
I have an immature 
female, shot near Easington on this date.
Mr. Haigh saw one 
on the Tetney fitties on the 26th, and I saw at Mr. Kew's, of 
Louthj an immature female shot on October ist on the coast 
near Mablethorpe.
Nyctea scandiaca (Linn.).
Snowy Owl. Sept.
27th- One, an 
apparently pure white bird, was seen by Mr. Hewetson and 
Mr. Henry Marsh, of Leeds, myself, and another, in a fallow 
field near Easington lane end, and was under observation 
between five and ten minutes* The occurrence was fully 
recorded in 'The Field' newspaper of October 3rd.
Snowy 
Owls are reported as having been very common in the south 
of Norway this year, having followed the Lenmiings on their 
migration towards the coast.
Ruticilla phoenicurus (Linn.)- Redstart.
Sept.
28th.
One, 
a female or a young male, with Wheatears, near Easington lane 
end.
I saw another in a hedge at Out Newton, on Oct. 2nd.
Mr. Haigh also saw a Redstart in a hedge at Tetney on the 
same day ; these are late occurrences for this bird to be on 
passage up the coast.
The one seen by me on Sept.
28th flew 
down from a roadside hedge and picked up some small object 
from the grass ; it looked almost as dark as a Hedge Sparrow, 
which I thought it was, till I saw the red tail vis it flew up.
I did not see it again, although remaining near the place where 
it disappeared for some time, suspecting it might have been 
a young male of ^.
f/fjs.
Alauda arvensis Linn.
Lark.
Sept.
28th.
W. to S.W. strong.
On the coast, near Kilnsea, early this morning, I saw some small 
flights come in directly from the sea-horizon, flying low so as 
just to clear the water, and dispersing at once in the fields along 
the coast.
They passed in perfect silence and seemed very 
wing-tired and nearly exhausted.
Faint as a climate-changing bird that flies 
All night across the darkness, and at dawn 
Falls on the threshold of her native land, 
And can no more.
Mr. Haigh told me that, when on the North Cotes sands on 
October 2nd, he noticed Larks coming in all day, close to the 
ground, at intervals of about ten minutes and in flocks of less 
than a score.
Oct. 17th, Easington, constant all day to south.
Oct. 2ist, Tetney, almost contmuous all day to S.W. Oct.
2ist to 29th, Holderness coast, immense numbers with others.
I>cc.
1891 
.-;6o CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
o 
4 
Scolopax rusticula Linn.
Woodcock.
Sept.
28th.
One 
seen to drop in a bean-field at Kilnsea, Oct. i6thj half-gale 
from S.W.
; one seen.
Oct 26th, Spurn, first flight, wind 
N.E.5 but comparatively few on this and following days ; greatest 
number obtained by one gun — eleven.
Nov. 5th, there was 
a second flight at the Spurn this morning, with a N.E. wind.
A few single * cocks ' also have been dropping in at intervals 
since the first flight on October 26th.
Nov. 21st, a third flight, 
four shot at Kilnsea.
Podicipes fluviatilis (Tunst.).
Little Grebe.
Sept.
28th.
Three appeared for the first time this season, on the ponds near 
Kilnsea coast beacon.
Have been very common since this date- 
Cypselus apus (Linn.).
Swift, Sept.
30th.
I saw one near the 
Spurn lighthouse this morning.
Easington, Oct. i8th.
Swallows, 
House-Martins, and a few Swifts all day to south, low on sands 
and edges of cliff (Hewetson in litt.)- 
Anser brachyrhynchus BailL Pink-footed Goose.
Sept.
30th.
A large flock first appeared at Thorsway, on Lincolnshire Wolds, 
and others were heard passing over at Grainsby at daybreak on 
October 3rd.
Gulls.
Sept.
26th to 30th inclusive, Easington and Kilnsea shore.
The Gulls here are a wonder and marvel to me.
Where can 
they all come from, and whither do they go ?
Since Saturday 
morning the 26th, to Tuesday night the 29th, it has been blow- 
ing almost continuously strong from S.
and S.W., and during all 
this time Gulls have been passing, early and late, and all times 
during the day and probably also during the night, up the coast 
from the north to the south.
I never look from the window to 
the line of sea across the hollow in the land, but I see large 
Gulls beating past against a head wind ; no sooner has one lot 
gone than another comes in sight.
The number in each lot 
vary from half a dozen to a score and upward, now in close 
order and then in a straggling fashion.
The majority are Lesser 
Black-backed Gulls, both old and young ; sometimes Herring 
Gulls or Great Black-backed, also some Kittiwakes.
In four 
days the stream never diminished, but rather increased.
On the 
fifth day (Sept.
30th) they were still passing, but in greatly 
reduced numbers, and at considerable intervals of time between 
the flocks—perhaps sometimes for a quarter of an hour none came 
past.
On this last day, too, all I saw, almost without exception, 
were young Lesser Black-backs, in the first year's plumag^ 
Natiii-alist 
CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
36 1 
Falco tinnunculus Linn.
Kestrel, Have been extraordinary 
abundant in Holderness and North Lincolnshire in September.
I have never seen so many in any previous year.
A few 
Sparrowhawks also, but few compared with the former.
Phalacrocorax carbo (Linn.).
Cormorant, Is becoming a 
very common species about the estuary of the Humberj in 
localities on both coasts where only a few years since we very 
rarely saw one.
Corvus comix Linn.
Grey Crow, Oct. 6th, a few seen by 
Stubbs, at Tetney.
Several on the stubbles at early morning 
at Great Cotes on the loth.
Linota flavirostris (Linn.).
Twite.
Oct. 9th, Mr, Haigh, 
who was on the coast to-day, says Twites were coming in by 
thousands, and Rock-Pipits, Song-Thrushes, Starhngs, Robins, 
and Rooks were numerous.
Also Corn Buntings; a flock of the 
latter, numbering about 100, rose from turnips close to the coast.
Fringilla montifringilla Linn.
Brambling:, Oct. 9th, Mr.
Haigli picked up an old cock dead in the long grass on the 
North Cotes bank, where it had probably dropped exhausted on 
reaching land.
Oct. 22nd.
S.W. light; young female shot in 
same locality.
Asio accipitrinus (Pall.).
Short-eared Owl. Oct.
9th.
One 
flushed on a stubble at North Cotes, and the first I have heard 
of this season.
Oct. 24th.
A few near Spurn, a strong N.E.
wind blowing, and many in first week of November, 
Turdus merula Linn.
Blackbird.
Oct. 10th.
Early this 
morning it was evident that there had been a considerable 
influx of Blackbirds during the night.
I counted at Great 
Cotes in a few minutes at least fifty, also some Thrushes and 
Mistletoe Thrushes, pass from one thorn to another, and all 
working their way in the same direction from the coast mland.
Turdus torquatus Linn.
Ring Ouzel Oct. ist.
One shot 
at Little Cawthorpe, near Louth.
Oct. i6th.
One shot at 
Easington and another on the i8th, and from the 21st to the 
end of the month many adult, both male and female, came in 
on the Holderness coast with Fieldfares.
Fringilla ccelebs Linn.
Chaffinch, Oct. 15th.
Chaffinches in 
flocks to south.
2ist, wind S.
fresh, Tetney coast, large 
flocks all day to S.W.
Corvus frugilegus Linn.
Rook.
Oct. T6th.
S.W, half-a-gale, 
Easington coast, constant streams from sea-hori;^on inland.
22nd.
. Tetney, a few to south during day.
^^ec.
1891.
^62 CORDF.AUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
lynx torquilla Linn.
Wryneck.
Oct. 17th.
One, a male, shot 
Easington.
Strix flammea Linn.
Barn Owl. Oct.
17th.
Two at Easing- 
ton taken alive, tired out; several seen (Hewetson in litt.).
Oct. 24th, N.E. strong, one at Spurn with both the Short 
and Long-eared Owl.
Sturnus vulgaris Linn.
Starling'.
Oct. 22nd.
Great numbers 
in coast marshes at Great Cotes, Millions on fitties at Tetney 
(Haigh in litt,).
Plectrophanes nivalis (Linn.).
Snow Bunting.
Oct. i8th.
S.W. backing to S.E., strong, Easington, first seen on 
Lincolnshire coast, 29th.
Anser cinereus Meyer.
Grey-lag Goose.
One, which I saw 
at the shop of Mr. Jeffreys, Grimsby, was shot at by Mr.
Haigh on October 17th, on the sea farm at Tetney, and finally 
obtained on the 19th.
It was a small bird, and did not weigh 
more than 7 lbs.; when seen it was alone.
Several single Grey 
Geese were seen since the 17th, and, on the 21st, a flock of 
twenty passed inland from the coast near Tetney Haven.
Puffinus anglorum (Temm.).
Manx Shearwater.
I b^^^ 
met w^ith four inland occurrences this autumn — One, on the 
first of September, killed by a reaping machine at Wooton, m 
North Lincolnshire ; another, which I have, was picked up at 
Grainsby by a working-man, about the middle of October ; one 
also in Holderness, and another near Retford (Notts.).
Turdus iliacus Linn.
Redwing.
Oct. 21st, S.
fresh, Tetney; 
one flock to S.W.
— a few also in turnips.
There appears to have 
been a wonderful rush of migrants on this day ; Mr. Hewetson, 
writing from S.S.
' Gotha/ off south-east coast of Norfolk, says 
(and it is the same story so often told from our light-vessels) : 
* To-day, off Donna Nook, Boston Deeps, and Wash, con- 
tinuously an unceasing stream of migrants flymg S.W. by ^\• 
right in the wind.
Larks by thousands in continuous flocks.
Thrushes the same — one came into cabin.
Redwings— one 
also came on board.
Large flocks of Tree Sparrows, several 
on board.
Any quantity of Brambling, three caught, Starlings, 
Grey Crows, and a few Rooks; Pipits, many; one Ring Ouzel; 
male and female Chaffinches, innumerable.
I do not think I 
have omitted any ; but it was not possible to look eastward 
without seeing advancing flocks.
This lasted from noon till 
dusk.
Some were very tired, especially the Tree Sparrows, 
Chaffinches, and Bramblings, all of which kept to the ship.
We caught them with a basket and stick.' 
Naturalist^ 
CORDEAUX : NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
365 
Turdus pilaris Linn.
Fieldfare.
Oct. 27th and 28th, Strong 
N.E. wind.
A great immigration of Fieldfare on the Holderness 
and Lincolnshire coast.
On the 29th5 Mr. Haigh saw hundreds 
resting under the lee of the seabank all the way between Grain- 
thorpe and Saltfleet Havens.
Near Spurn, on the 28th and 
29th, the numbers are reported as immense.
On the 28th, T saw 
large flocks near Thoresby and Clumber Parks, in Notts.
All 
agree that the migration of these at Spurn, on the 27th, 28th^ 
and 29th of October was without parallel in the district, flock 
succeeding flock in quick succession, and passing along the coast 
from north to south.
Millions also of Larks and Starlings 
during the week.
A great many Hedge Sparrows and Blue Tits 
were also observed in the hedges at Easington.
Cygnus sp.
? Swan.
Oct. 26th.
Six, all adults, passed over 
Thoresby parish, in North Lincolnshire.
Alauda arborea Linn.
Woodlark.
Oct. 27th.
One shot 
the Spurn.
The Woodlark must be considered a rare migrant 
in the district.
Linota linaria (Linn.) ?
Mealy Redpole.
Oct. 30th.
A flock 
on the Humber side on Easington fitties; one was shot, and 
another also on the 28th.
On the 8th of November I saw 
some on the fittie-land near the Spurn with Linnets, and on 
heads of Aster tripolium^ four on a rail fence, others on Kilnsea 
Warren, near the pond.
In flight some show a very white rump, 
and this is as distinctive a feature as in the Curlew Sandpiper.
They are very wild and most difficult to observe, even with a 
glass, rising and going off on the least alarm.
Subsequently I had 
an opportunity of examining the skins of two at Mr. Loten's 
house, at Easington, one, a most beautiful male, with rose- 
coloured breast and rump, the latter without any dusky streaks ; 
the second had a white rump, also without streaks.
These are 
a slightly larger bird than those obtained at Spurn in i88i 
(three skins of which are now before me), and the tail is more 
deeply forked.
I have also an Heligoland example of an adult 
male, equally as brilliant as the one in Mr. Loten's possession, 
but having the rump streaked throughout with brown — as is the 
case with the examples obtained at Spurn in 188 1.
I am inclined 
to think these Easington birds of this autumn have come from 
high northern latitudes, and that they are mostly referable to the 
Linoia exilipes of Coues, a race, or perhaps sub-species, closely 
allied to Z.
homemanni found in Greenland.
Otocor3rs alpestris (Linn.).
Shorelark.
Oct 30th.
First 
occurrence this season on the coast.
On November 7th, a flock 
Dec. 189U 
364 - NOTES — BIRDS.
of eighteen seen in a locality where they regularly occur each 
winter.
L 
Corvus corax Linn.
Raven.
Mr. Jalland, of Hull, who was 
shooting at Kilnsea, told me that he saw a Raven come m 
on Nov. 5th, in advance of a flock of Grey Crows; the size 
in comparison with the Crows was very marked.
Picus major Linn.
Great Spotted Woodpecker.
One, 
which I have, was shot at Welwick, near Easington, Nov. 3rd.
It is a young male, with the red on the crown and occiput much 
broken into with black.
Another, also a male, was killed at the 
, same date at Roos, in Holderness.
Plectrophanes nivalis (Linn.).
Snow Bunting.
Nov. 8th.
I saw some very large flocks of old and young at Kilnsea to-day.
Hirundo rustica Linn.
Chimney Swallow- Nov, 8th.
I saw 
two on Kilnsea Warren on passage from north to south, and m 
both separate cases with Snow Bunting — a curious combination 
of spring and winter visitors.
One was seen at Grainsby on 
Nov, 13 th.
Colymbus septentrionalis Linn.
Red-throated Diver.
Nov.
8th.
Noticed several on the sea to the east of Spurn.
AZOTES— BI/^DS.
Marsh Harrier in Lincolnshire.— On the 30th September last year (1890), 
I obtained a Marsh Harrier (Circus rerui^inosus) in a poulterer's shop in Holborn.
It was in its first year's plumaq^e, and the salesman told me that it had been shot 
in Lincolnshire.
— Edgar R.
Waite, The Museum, Leeds, 17th Nov., 1891.
Cirl Bunting- Nesting- near Masham.—On August 24th, 1891, I sent what 
I took to be a young Cirl Hunting (Emberiza cirlus) to Mr. Eagle Clarke, of the 
Museum ol Science and Art, Edinburgh, and which has since been identified^ by 
him as being such.
This was taken by me from a nest found on August 20th, xn a 
young plantation of fir and spruce, within 200 yards of Burton House.
The nest 
was placed in a Scotch fir, a't a distance of about two feet from the ground, and 
was shrouded in tall grass, which had grown up into the lower branches.
It 
closely resembled that of the Yellow-hammer, and was also forwarded to 
Mr. Clarke, the young birds having just left it.
. , 
I was attracted to the spot by the shrill note of alarm of the hen bird, whic 1 
5 perched upon a neighbouring tree, having its beak full of insect food, witn 
ich it was feeding the fledglings.
After searching about, I soon discovered a 
was 
wh 
.Tii.uii X iuiu puit^iia.'icu irom near iNewton ad Dot ana Kepi m connucuicnt ^^' —- 
months; but as they were very wild and shy from the first, and did not settle, 
I decided to give them their liberty.
On September 5th, 1887, whilst procuring 
food for a tame Kestrel from a flock of Linnets and Veliow-hamniers, I found that 
I had unknowingly killed a young male Cirl I^unting in mistake for a hen \ejlow- 
hammer.
This leads me to think that the pair let loose in the autumn o^ iSa6 haU 
reared a brood in the following spring, to which the young male shot m the 
autumn of 1887 belonged, and that they have been the means of introducing a new 
species to the fauna of this district.—BASiL J.
Carter, Burton House, Masham.
>r3turali'^E, 
36 
^ 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
ARACHNIDA AND MYRIOPODA, 1884-1891.
Compiled by WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
Anon, [not signed] 
Yorkshire.
Yorkshire Folk-lore : with Notes Comical and Dialectic [' the other day 
I knocked a spider from my face, and a little girl, standing by, remarked^ 
*' You are going to have a fortune " ']• Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journal, Part I, 
Oct. 18S5, p.
2. 
Anon, [not signed].
York S.W.
Yorkshire Dialects [words used in Calder Vale, from Wakefield upwards: 
arran — spider ; arrandweb = spider's web], Yorksh, Folk-Lore Journ., 
Part I, Oct. 1885, p.
13.
Anon, [signed ' LB.'].
Yorkshire.
Spiders [unlucky to kill them ; money-spinners betoken good luck, etc.]- 
Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ,, Part 2, Jan. 1886, p.
22.
Anon, [not signed], York S.W.
Calder- Vale Words [as used from Wakefield upwards ; Cock-web, 
cob-web, arrand-web =^ spider's snare].
Yorksh.
Folk-Lore Journ., Part 7, 
Jan. 18S7, p.
no.
Anon, [signed 'R.L.'].
Durham.
Encounter between a Spider and a Wasp [described ; look place at 
Durham ; no specific names given].
Field, June 9th, 1888, p.
840.
J- Batalha-Reis.
Cheviotland.
Note on the Plants and Insects observed at the Wooler Meetings 
[Sept.
i6th and 17th, 1S87 : Gamaszfs coleopfratonifii L., parasitic on 
Geotntpes sylvaticus Fab. at Langleyford].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, Vol 10, part.
I (1888), p.
201.
O, P, Camuridge.
York Mid W.
and S.W.
Pseudoscorpions new to Britain [Ckernes nodosus from Bradford and 
Leeds; details given].
Nat., Dec. 1 884, p.
103.
O. Pickakd-Cambridge.
? 
On a New Species of Hsmaphysalis, C.
L. Koch, imported into 
England by Syrrhaptes paradoxus [this acarid sent by Prof.
A. Newton 
and by Mr. Tohn Cordeaux ; locahty not stated].
Ann. and Mag. N.IL„ 
Sixth Series, No. 17, May 18S9, Vol. 3, p.
406 and woodcut.
T. D.
A. CocKERELL.
Cheshire.
A September Walk through - .
. Cheshire .
• .
IPolydcsmus 
complanaius between Knutsford and Cheiford, Sep. nth, 1SS3].
Nat., 
Feb. 1886, p.
57.
W. W.
Fowler, Line.
N. or S.
[Exhibition of a number of minute Acarj\ which had been doing injury to 
fruit trees near Lincoln].
Froc.
Knt, Soc. Lend..
Oct. 6th, 1886, p.
xlvi ; 
Nat., Nov. 1 886, p.
348; etc, 
Hn-DERic FKiENr>.
, .
Cumberland.
The Life-history of the Eucbaris Mite \{Rkizo^^Iyphiis echinopus\ as 
observed attacking a florist's bulbs at Carlisle].
Wesl.
Nat., July 1889^ 
pp- 1 29-134 ^"*^ plate.
Dec, i8ot.
166 BIBLIOGRAPHY: ARACHNlDA AND MYRIOPODA, 1884-189I.
O 
HiLDERic Friend.
? Cumberland 
The American Cockroach [incidentally mentioning Theridion tepidarionim 
in a conservatory, presumably near Carlisle].
Sci. Goss., Aug. 1890, p.
I77- 
\V.
A. Gain 
Notts.
Centipedes [g;iving' his experience of Geophihis dectricus^ presumably in 
Notts.].
Sci. Goss., March 1889, p.
70, 
€. F.
George.
Line.
N. 
Arrenurus [a species found, presumably near Kirton-in-Lindsey, on 
3rd Aug., 1S85, which the recorder feels disposed to call A, luteuSy if not 
already named].
Sci. Goss., March 1886, p.
68.
C. F.
George.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Spurn Point [3rd Sept., 1884; 
Bdella hexopkthalma noted ; new to Britain].
Nat., Nov. 1884, p.
92.
C. F.
George.
Line.
N. 
Laelaps arvolica.
Parasite of Water Rat {Arvicola ampJiibius) [at 
Alford, found by J.
E. Mason ; two figures of the parasite given].
Sci. Goss , 
Jan. 1889, p.
6. 
C. F.
George.
? Line, N.
Parasites on Rats and Mice [La^Iaps arvolica George on Mus svlvaficus; 
locality not given, possibly Kirton-in-Lindsey].
Sci. Goss., May 1S89 p.
I16.
T. Gibson-Carmichael.
Cumberland, Westmorland.
A Chapter on the Centipedes and Millipedes [giving details of localities 
and habitat of Lithobius variegatits in the Lake District, from which area 
Z.yt'/yfd-a///j is apparently absent].
Nat. Monthly, Sept.
1SS7, p.
13- 
ii.
H. HiGGINS.
Lane.
S. 
President's Address.
Luminosity [including: observations made on 
Geophihis electrictis in his garden at Rainhill, which affords a considerable 
number].
Proc.
Liverp.
Nat. F.
Club for 1888 (publ.
1889), p.
19.
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. , 
Spiders at Louth, Lincolnshire [4 species named by O.
P. Cambridge ; 
Rpe'ira nmbratica^ Clubione brevipes, Troclwsa ruru'ola, and AmaHrobtus 
fenestraUs\ Nat., June 1S86, p.
170, 
H. Wallis Kew. Line.
N. 
A Half-Day's Ramble on the Lincolnshire Coast [at Mablethorpe, 
April 3rd, 1886 ; Tibelhis oblongiis (named by O.
P. Cambridge) noted].
Nat,, June 1886, p.
171.
H, Wallts Kew. Line.
N. 
Louth Naturalists' Society \Lycosa higubris, IValckenaera acuminata^ and 
Atta pubescens noted as taken].
Nat. World, Aug. 1886, iii.
158.
H. Wallis Kew.
' Line.
N. 
Evenings in Spring [near Louth; Julus terresiris noted].
Nat. World, 
Sep. 1886, iii.
161-162, 
H. Wallis Kew.
Line.
N. 
Chelifer DeGeerii Koch near the Lincolnshire Coast [at Mablethorpe, 
2nd Oct., 1S86 ; identified by O, P.
Cambridge, who had before only received 
it from Hastings].
Nat., Nov. 1886, p.
339.
IL Wallis Kew, Line.
N. 
Chrysis ignita preyed upon by Xysticus cristatus [at Grisel-bottom, near 
Louth].
Ent. Mo.
Mag., Nov. i886, xxiii.
136.
ir.
W^ALLis Kew. Line.
N. 
Natural History Rambles, No. i.
-In the Woods [near Louth; the 
capture of Epe'ira scalaris, E.
diadanata, ZiiJa atrica [= Ep. cnlophydla 
Black w.), Ep, quadrata, and Xystuus a-istatus noted].
Sci. Goss., Feb.
1S87, p.
31, ____ 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: ARACHNIDA AND MVRIOPODA, 1884-1891.
367 
H. Wallis Kew, 
Line.
N. 
Spiders obtained in North Lincolnshire, 1886 [a list, with localities and 
observations, of 68 species and one or two varieties, all named by 
O. Pickard-Cambridge].
Nat., Feb. 1S87, pp.
55-59.
H. Wamjs Kew.
Line.
N., Lane.
S. 
A year's Spider Hunting: [in 1886, about Louth ; numerous species 
mentioned, arranged by method of capture, as 'under bark,' etc.: casual 
references to Tarenfula 7?iiniata at Southport].
Young Nat., April 1887, 
viii.
57-61.
H. "Wallis Kew, 
Line.
N. and S, 
Lincolnshire Spiders [three new to the county list, Argyroneta aqnatica Bl., 
Linyphia vivax Bl., and Lycosa paliistris L.
; and notes also on Epeira 
scalaris^ E.
corniita^ and Ocyale mirahiHs \ localities stated for all; deter- 
minations by O.
Pickard-Cambridge].
Nat., Nov. iSSS, p.
329.
J. M.
Kirk.
York N.E.
Yorkshire Naturalists at Gormire Lake and Thirkleby Park [July 
1887; Aliinesium tardigrada nolt^\ Nat., Aug. 1887, p.
24 1.
J. M.
Kirk.
York Mid W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Harrogate [13th July, 1889 ; 
the microscopic forms observed included Atax histrioniciis {Hydrachna 
hisirionica) and Tardigrada\ Nat., Aug. 1S89, p.
244.
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Parasites [Lteiaps arvoika] on the Water Vole [at Alford, Lines.].
Nat., 
Feb. 1S89, p.
60.
A. D.
Michael.
Derbyshire- 
Three new parasitic Acari discovered in Derbyshire in autumn, 1888 ; 
JMyocoptes ienax Mich., parasitic on A^-vicola agrestis ; Syvibiotes iripiiis 
Mich, on Erinacetis ; and Goniomerus niusculinus Alich.
on Arvicola agrest{s\ 
Proc.
Linn.
Soc, Feb. 5th, 1S89; Zoo!., March 1889, p.
U2.
Albert D.
Michael.
Line.
N. 
British Oribatidae.
. .
. London : printed for the Ray Society.
MDCCCLXXXIV.
[an octavo volume of 336 pages, and plates i.-xxiv.
and 
A-G ; this valuable work contains the following North of England records: 
Oribata qitadricornuta Michael, p.
251, 'Mr. C.
F. George has found this 
species at Kirton-in-Lindsey, Lincolnshire'; Cephciis hifidaiiis Nic, p.
291, 
'I only know 
of Kirton-Lind 
Dr. George Job 
Trans.
Berw.
Nat. F.
Club, vol.
ii.
1849, pp.
221-289, vol.
iii.
1853, p.
113].
A. D.
Michael.
Cumberland, Westmorland.
Nevr British Oribatidae [* Cephem bifidahts is a rare species, very difficult 
to obtain .
.   Last autumn at K^.^wick (Cumberland) I came across 
three or four living adult specimens' (p.
386); Notaspis serrata, sp.
nov., 
' I have taken it more abundantly at Ambleside, Westmorland, and Keswick, 
Cumberland' (p.
390); Dauums sufflexns, sp.
nov., 'I have found a sinj-le 
specimen at Keswick, Cumberland' p.
395]- Journ.
R. Micr.
S., June 1SS5, 
V, 385-397, 
Albert D.
Michael.
Cumb., WestnL, Isle of Man, York Mid W.
British Oribatidse.
. .
, VoL IL London : Printed for the Ray Society.— 
MDCCCLXXXVIIL [an octavo volume of pp.
xii.
-h 337-657, and plates 
XXV.
-liv.
; this volume contains the following north -country records: 
Notaspis serrata Mich., * .
. .
found .
. .
and more abundantly at 
Ambleside (Westmorland) and Keswick (Cumberland) ' (p.
369) ; N, momlipes 
first found .
. ii^ some material sent to me from near 
Dec. lEgi, 
36S bibliography: arachxida and myriopoda, 1884-1891.
segnis (Herm.), *I have found ihem [adult and nymph] more on the 
Yorkshire and Cumberland hills than anywhere else' (p.
521); n.r\A PeloJ^s 
phitonoUts Koch, 'the specimens which were reared were found at Keswick in 
Cumberland ' (p.
575)].
A. D.
Michael.
Derbyshire.
On some unrecorded Parasitic Acari found in Great Britain [near 
Cbatsworth, Derbyshire, summer, 1888; Myocoptes tenax, n.
sp., on 
Arvicola agrestis\ Symbiotes tripilisy n.
sp., oxi Erinacetis \ and Gonioiuerus 
(n.gen.) nitisctilintis^ n.sp., on Arvicola agresfis\ Tourn.
Linn.
Soc, Zool., 
No. 123, Dec. 31st, 1889, XX.
400-406, and plate 26.
R. Xewstead.
Cheshire.
Insects, &c., taken in the Nests of British Vespidse [include of 
Acarida, Uropoda eio?igata Halid., Ince, Cheshire; Glyciphagus spinipes at 
Chester *Cop' ; and a species of Tiroglyphus, Cheshire ; details as to host, etc., 
given], Ent. Mo.
Mag., Feb. 1891, p.
40.
George W.
Oi.dfield.
York Mid W.
and N.E.
Epeira diadema and Salticus scenicus in Yorkshire [found on Ingle- 
borough and at York respectively].
Nat., March 1884, ix.
I37"I38- 
Frederick O.
Pickard-Cambridge.
Cumberland, Cheviotland.
Descriptive Notes on some obscure British Spiders, with Description 
of a New Species [begins by mention that Amanrobhis fmestralis Stroem, 
Lycosa agricola Th,, Ciyphcvca silvicola Black w., Ccclotes atropos Walck., 
and Tmet icu s scopiger Qxwh^^ all rare in the extreme south of England, are 
abundant in Cumberland ; Leptyphantes zebrinus Menge, Cumberland, 
described; L.
^^/re/Wr(?/iZ Wider, very common, described ; Z./m/tWa Simon, 
described, four males and one female (new to Britain) taken, iSth Sept., 
1S90, beneath stones on the steep sides of Swirrel Edge, close to summit of 
Ilelvellyn, where they were apparently plentiful; Tmeticus niger, sp.
nov., 
described, ten taken, i8th Sept., 1S90, beneath loose stones on summit of 
Helvellyn, females usually beneath webbing; Miaoiieta subliniis Cambr., 
Cheviot Hills, and described in a list of Araneidea and Phalangidea of 
Berwickshire and Northumberland, in Proc.
Berw.
N. H.
Club, 1875, vn.
314; found, Sept, 1890, beneath stones on steep sides of one of the passes 
of Helvellyn, seven or eight of both sexes], Ann. and Mag. N.
H.,Jan. 1891, 
Sixth Series, vii.
69-87, and plate 2.
G. PuLLEN.
Derbyshire, 
Notes from Derby [capture of Epeira qiiadi'ata\ Young Nat., Oct. 1S85, 
p. 239.
Herbert Stone.
Notts- 
[Nidus of Epeira fusca from Sherwood Forest, exhibited to Birmingham 
N.H.S,].
Midi.
Nat., July 1889, p.
170.
E. L.
Trouessart.
Durham, Northumb., York N.E.
Synoptical Revision of the Family Halacaridae \Rhomhognathus seahami 
(Hodge), Seaham Harbour, littoral zone; R.
7ugrescens Brady, a smgie 
specimen in a pool of fresh water on the rocks, Northumberland (Brady) ; 
A', minutiis (Hodge), Seaham, littoral zone (Hodge); Simognathus scnipius 
(Brady), Durham and N.
Yorkshire, Robin Hood's Bay (Brady) at 35 fathoms ; 
Halacarus striatiis Lohm., North Sea, upon Thttiarla thuia, off Newcastle- 
on-Tyne (Giard) ; //.
rhodostigma Gosse, North Sea, Northumberland; 
H. oculatiis Hodge, North Sea, Seaham (Hodge) ; and Leptognathiis fakatiis 
Hodge, laminarian and coralline zones, Northumberland (Hodge) noted: 
localities not altogether reliable, author seeming to think Seaham is in 
Northumberland].
Ann. and Mag. N.H., Sixth Series, No. 26, Feb. 1890, 
vol.
5, pp.
172-192.
Tuff EN West.
York Mid W.
The Zebra Hunting-Spider— Salticus scenicus [refers to seeing it in old 
time, 'on the steps leading up to our father's warehouse, in dingy, smoky, 
sooty Leeds I'].
Journ.
of Micros, and Nat. Sci., Jan. 1884, iii.
^^j_ 
Naturalist, 
3^9 
ARE THE SAME SPECIES OF BIRDS 
MORE PROLIFIC IN NORTH THAN IN SOUTH 
AND MID EUROPE?
JOHN P.
THOMASSON, 
Bolton^ Lancashire.
Mr. Robert Collett, in his Review of the Bird Fauna of the 
neighbourhood of Christiania (1S64), states the above as a fact, and 
gives as one instance the Whinchat, the number of whose eggs he 
says is oftener seven than six, whereas in South and jMid Europe 
they seldom number more than six, and often only four are laid.
He also states that the eggs of the Chiftchaff are ' nearly always 
eight in number,' whereas Yarrell says * usually six,' the number 
contained in the only two nests I have myself seen.
Of the Willow Warbler, Collett states the eggs to be ' nearly 
always seven,' Yarrell six or seven, and though Seebohm says *five to 
eight/ it is possible that the latter figure refers to his Siberian 
experience.
It would be interesting to know if any of your readers 
have found in this country eight eggs in the nests of the Willow 
Warbler, Wood Wren, or Chiffchaff, or seven eggs in those of the 
Tree or Meadow Pipit- In Norway last year I was surprised to 
flush a Meadow Pipit from seven eggs, but I found that a friend in 
the same district had also found two nests with seven in eacli- Other 
nests I found the same month contained five (perhaps six), five, six, 
six, and six eggs, or eggs and young.
I have only touched upon the 
subject as one of some interest.
It would need an extensive series of 
statistics to enable one to pronounce any opinion upon it.
Mr- Collett states that in Norway the Meadow Pipit and Gray- 
headed Wagtail go up on to the fells to nest, rarely doing so in the 
lowlands, as the former commonly does in England, and the latter on 
the Continent.
The Brambling, a bird nearly allied to the Chaffinch, 
but which only nests in the north, certainly lays more eggs 
than the latter bird.
Seebohm says, 'Six is the usual number 
of eggs, sometimes there are only five, and occasionally as many as 
seven/ This agrees with my o^n experience in Norway, where 
I have found one nest at least with seven eggs, a friend found another 
last year with seven, Wolley also found a nest with seven (in 
Lapland ?) and another friend, while with me in Norway, found a 
Dec- 1891.
z 
37<^ THOMASSON : ARE THE SAME SPECIES OF BIRDS MORE 
nest with eight eggs.
Of the Chaffinch in Norway, CoUett says : 
* Eggs, generally five, seldom four;' which, as to England, would be 
put more accurately perhaps as ^four or five/ 
Collett mentions finding a nest of the Redstart on the Dovre 
Fell, Norway, with nine eggs, the usual number in England, 
according to Seebohm, being *five or six, occasionally seven, and 
even eight' Hewitson says, * five to eight.' Speaking of the 
Christiania district, Collett says : ' The eggs are nearly always seven 
in number, sometimes only six, seldom eight/ He appears never to 
have found as few as five- As to the Black Redstart, the nearest 
allied species, which does not nest in the north, its eggs, according 
to Seebohm, are usually five, * sometimes only four are laid ; and six, 
and even seven, have been recorded/ 
Of the Robin in England, according to Hewitson, ' the eggs are 
mostly four or five, sometimes six, and even seven in number.' 
According to Seebohm ' the eggs of the Robin are from five to 
eight, but probably six may be taken as an average clutch.
Whereas Collett (Christiania district) says : ' The number of the 
eggs is as often seven as six,' thus never supposing the bird to lay as 
few as five.
Of the Garden Warbler, Hewitson says : ' The eggs are four or 
t 
five/ Seebohm ; ' Four or five, in some cases as many as six ; 
whereas Collett, again in Christiania district : * Oftener five than six, 
thus mentioning five as the minimum number.
Of the Whitethroat Hewitson says : ' The eggs are four or five 
and sometimes six in number ;' and Seebohm : ' From four to six; 
whereas Collett says : * The eggs are nearly oftener six than five m 
number/ 
The word ^nearly' — in Norsk ^naesten' — seems to have got m 
by mistake, or I have failed to translate it properly.
Seebohm says the eggs of the Wren ' vary from four to six, and 
even eight or nine in number.
Clutches of still larger numbers are 
on record, but are very exceptional.' Hewitson says : ^ Notwith- 
standing the number of eggs which the Wren has been said to lay, 
I have never succeeded in finding more than eight, and rarely more 
than seven/ Collett says : * The eggs are generally^eight in number.
Turning to another genus, Hewitson says that the eggs of the 
Red-backed Shrike 'are four or five in number;' Seebohm, 'from 
four to six;' while Collett says of the Christiania district : * The eggs 
are oftenest six, sometimes only five in number/ 
My own experience of this bird is that in Surrey I have flushed 
birds from two nests with five eggs each, and found another nest with 
seven eggs.
At Wiesbaden, Germany, I have flushed birds from five 
Naturalist, 
.J 
PROLIFIC IN NORTH THAN IN SOUTH AND MID EUROPE?
37 1 
and from six eggs, and found a nest with five young, while in a single 
hedge in Jutland a friend and myself found, on the nth June, nests 
from which we flushed the birds containing respectively seven and 
four eggs, and seven callow young.
This was in North Jutland, 
latitude about 56f°, whereas Christiania is in latitude 60"", Surrey 
5ii\ and Wiesbaden 50^ The evidence in this case is therefore 
very inconclusive- 
A friend tells me he has once (or twice?) found five eggs in the 
Curlew's nest in England.
Since writing the above I have come upon the following 
remarks by Mr. Meade Waldo in the 'Ibis' for 18S9, which it 
may be of interest to quote : — 
' I am much struck by the small number of eggs laid by many 
birds here' (Teneriffe).
'I have never seen more than three eggs 
in a Blackbird's nest, very often only two, and frequently one.
Phylloscoptis rufus (Chiffchaff) lays four eggs, occasionally five, often 
only three ; the Robin generally three, often only two, occasionally 
four or five.
The tgg of the Robin is very richly marked and large, 
and is as different from the egg of our Robin as the bird itself is.
The Gold-crests {Reguhis cristatus) lay but five eggs, often only 
four ; the egg is exactly like our bird's, but I often find a double- 
yolked one.' 
NOTES AND NEWS.
A type collection of British Coleoptera is being formed for the Museum at 
Bo!ton-Ie-Moors by Mr. C.
E\ Stott, of Manchester Roady liolton, Lancashire, who 
will be glad to receive assistance from willing coleopterists.
— >C£>< 
It gives us the greatest pleasure to announce that our valued friend and 
contributor, the Rev. H.
A- Macpherson, M.A., is issuing prospectuses of a new 
^ork, * A Vertebrate Fauna of Lakeland/ which he defines as including Cuml)erland 
and Westmorland with Lancashire North of the Sands.
It is to be in one volume, 
with illustrations, and to have an introductory chapter on the topography of the 
district, by R.
S. Ferguson, F.S.A, Mn Macpherson aims at supplying as 
Complete an account of the vertebrate animals of Lakeland as our present state of 
knowledge renders possible.
The materials he has brought together during the 
labours of nine years embody much fresh information.
While his first endeavour 
has been to make a contribution of real scientific value to British zoology, he has 
not_ neglected such records or descriptions of a more popular nature as may attract 
to it the attention of the sportsman and the general reader.
The prolegomena 
win include biographical sketches of the chief Lakeland naturalists, an account of 
cave deposits and other Pleistocene remains, a sketch of the earliest local museums, 
a summary of the variations of colour obser\'ed in local specimens, a description 
of the fauna] changes, and other general matters.
The price to subscribers will 
^ 2 IS., and as soon as a sufficient number of names have been received by the 
author to warrant its issue the printing will be begun, and the book published by 
David Douglas, Edinburgh, with whose series of Vertebrate Faunas of Scotland, 
by Messrs.
Harvie-Brown and Buckley, this volume on Lakeland is apparently to 
be uniform, or at any rate similar.
The price is to be raised as soon as the 
^^liljcripuon list is closed.
Dec. iSqi.
372 
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Late Occurrence of House Martins at Boroug-hbridge.— I saw three 
House Martins {Chelidon tirbica) flying about the streets of Boronghbridge this 
afternoon.
I watched them for some time, and they several times came past my 
carriage within a few yards.
I never saw any so late before so far north.
— 
Rn. Paver-Crow, Ornhams Hall, Boroughbridge, 19th November, 1891.
Grey Phalarope near Harrogate,— On October i6th, a specimen of the 
Grey Phalarope {Fhalaropits fitlkarius) was shot in a marshy field at Beckwith- 
shaw, near Harrogate.
It is a male bird, and was shot with a catapult.
When 
seen it was exceedingly tame, as it allowed several shots to be fired before it was 
secured.
— R1LF.Y Fortune, Harrogate, Nov. 8th, 1891.
Grey Phalarope at Ackworth.
— On the 22nd of October last, Mr. C.
I. 
Evans, of Flounders College, Ackworth, sent to me, for identification, the much 
mutilated skin of a bird.
It proved to be a Grey Phalarope {Phalaropus fulicarhis), 
in winter plumage.
Mr. Evans has since forwarded me the following particulars 
as to its capture.
The bird was shot by the side of a public highway close to 
Ackworth, by George Moxon, on the i6th of October.
Several persons had 
observed the bird by the roadside for some hours previous to its being shot, and 
had noticed how very tame it was.
My informant observes : ' After passing 
through the hands of two or three people the skin eventually came into mine 
in the same condition as when I forwarded it to you.' — EDGAR R.
Waite, The 
Museum, Leeds, Nov. 9th, 1891.
Flamborough Bird Notes,— Since Oct. 21st, we have had great arrivals of 
Woodcocks {Stolopax riisticola)^ Hooded Crows \Co7'vus corjztx), and flocks of 
Jackdaws [C.
vtonedidd]^ seen coming in from the sea.
Fieldfares { Ttmhts pilaris\ 
Redwings (7".
iliaais)^ Snow huntings {PlectropJianes nivalis)^ and Shore Larks 
{Otocorys alpest^'is), have arrived on the Headland.
Some four or five Great 
Shrikes {Lanius excuhltor), also half-a-dozen Peregrine Falcons (Fa ica peregrin us), 
and, strange to say, two large Eagles (I/aliaetus albicilla) have been seen about the 
Headland.
Nov. 17th, I had brought in, to preserve, a splendid specimen of the 
AVaxwing {Ampelis garrulus), shot by Mr. John Huddleston, farmer, Flam- 
borough.
Nov. i8th, just at dusk, I saw two Swallows [Htrimdo rustica) flying 
about the streets of Flamborough.
Innumerable quantities of sea-birds have been 
seen along the coast, and the fishermen inform me they have seen immense nocks 
of Kittiwakes (Rissa tridactyla).
At the North Landing, Mr. Saltfleet shot a 
Sabine's Gull {Xema sahinii), a very fine specimen.
Three large Whales have been 
cast upon the beach, also another one seen off the South Landing.
— MaTTHEV 
Bailey, Flamborough, Nov. 20th, 1891.
Buffon's Skua at Workington.— On the morning of Monday, ^^^.^91^°^ 
the present month, after the extraordinary high tide of the previous midnigni, 
which had invaded the lower parts of the town, doing considerable damage, 1 w 
walking along the beach on the north side of the mouth of the River I^^''^^?
' 
when I picked up the dead body of ' :rd, which I saw floating about among tn 
surf and wreckage.
Having but an ^lifferent acquaintance with sea-birds, an 
merely supposing the specimen to be a luembef of the Skua family, I forwarde 
detailed description of the bird to my friend.
Rev. H.
A. Macpherson, M.B.O.LJ., 
of Carlisle, from whose reply I quote — 'Your bird is probably Buffon s Skua 
{Stercorarius parasiticus)^ and very likely one which Mr. Thomas Mann snot ^ 
and lost.
There have been about ten of these Skuas secured altogether, nv 
young and five old birds.
All that I have seen are of this species, and yours, no 
<ioubt, came with the rest, struck by a gale when migrating down Channel on 
October i6lh.' The Mr. Mann here referred to is a very intelligent farmer, wno 
lives about ten miles north of Workington, and has devoted a good deal V^, ^*^^ 
and study to the ornithology of the Solway, assisted by his brothers, with tne 
result that they possess a very fine collection of shore birds, shot and set up »>' 
their own hands.
— \V.
Hodgson, Workington, October 30th.
J^aturalis^ 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
373 
CONTRIBUTORS.
Aplin, Oliver V., M.B.O.U., 349, 
Archer, H.
T., 6.
Backhouse, James, F.z.s., 148, 178, 297.
Bailey, Matthew, 12, 79, 139, 182, 35 1, 372.
Baker, W.
F. , 303.
Baldwin, E.
T., 214.
Barker, Reginald H., 277.
Bayford, E.
G., 252, 282, 334.
Bedford, James E., f.g.s., 69.
Brady, W, E., 309.
Brook, R.
G., 139.
Brownridge, Charles, M.uc.E., F.G.S., 291.
Bulman, G.
W., m.a., b.sc, 43.
Burton, J.
J., 260.
Carter, Basil J., 364.
Carter, W.
Lower, m.a., f.g.s., 239.
Chapman C, 338.
[275, 35^- 
v-iarke, Wm. Eagle, F.L.S., M.B.o.u., 185, 
<-ole, Rev. Edward Maule, M.A., F.G.s., 
r u- .
t'7' ^^3.
282, 305.
Colhnge, W.
E., m.c.s., 75.
Urhett, Herbert H., m.r.c.s., i, 155.
Cordeaux,John, M.B.o.u., 21, 209,241, 355.
<-rossland, Charles, 20.
^avis, J.
PercyA., 294.
^avy, Joseph Burtt, 39, 65, 144.
Easterfield, T.
H., b.a., 3 
^mmet, John, f.l.s., 208.
Gierke, F.
W..
175.
|.oggitt, JohnB., 312.
£.oggitt, Wm., 239.
Fortune, Riley, F.Z.S.
, 12, 49, 237, 
p. , ^ [297, 332, 35^ 372, 
iriend.
Rev. Hilderic, F.L.S., 13, 62, 
Gardner, John, F.E.S., I18.
J:^eorge, C.
F,, M.r.c.s., 124.
Wkhild.
T. G., F.G.S., F.Z.S., 
Gnmshaw, Percy H., 275.
Hall A.
E., F.E.S., 297, 324, 338.
(jarker, Alfred, m.a., F.G.S., 15, 38, 63, 
Harrison, J.
W., 117, 134.
[I45> 3^3- 
Head, H.
W., 287.
Hewett, William, 6, 214, 238.
^ey.
Rev. W.
C, M.A., M.C.S., 1S2, 215- 
*»*ck, Thomas, b,a., b.sc, 167, 354- 
Hobkirk, C.
R, F.us., 3, 20, 67.
j:> 
264, 
373- 
276.
203, 21S.
Hodgson, Wm., a.l.s., 7, 42, 49» 353^ 372.
Holgate, Benj., F.G.S., 266.
Holtby, A.
C, 282.
Howarth, Elijah, f.r.a.s., iSi, 335.
Kirk, J.
M., 177.
Knubley, Rev. E.
P., M 
.A., M.B.O.U., 177) 
[208.
Larder, E., 214.
Lee, Phineas Fox, 3.
Lofthouse, T.
A., 287, 
Lord, C.
L., 338.
Loten, Philip W., 134- 
289, 
Macpherson, Rev. H.
A., M.A., M.B.o.u., 
Martindale, G.
E., 134- l^^S^ 211, 242.
Mason, T.
Eardley, 178.
-^ [124, 134.
Nelson, Thos.
H., M.B.o.u., 116, 117, ii9» 
Nelson, Wm., m.c.s., 234* 268, 273.
Parkin, George, 117.
Paver-Crow, Rd., J.P., 372.
Payne, J.
H., 37.
Piatt, T.
E., 134- 
Porritt, Geo. T., f.l.s., f.e.S., 15, 
[155, 176, 265, 277, 302, 
Prodham, Herbert, 35 J.
118.
^12.
Reade, T, Mellard, C.E., f.g.s.
, 179.
Redman, C, 118.
Reeves, W.
W., F.R.M.S., 252, 354.
Roberts, George, 231.
Robinson, Rev. J., 298.
Roebuck.
W. Denison, f.l.s., 27, 125, i57j 
[187, 189- 20a 253, 3"' 334, 35^ 3^5- 
Rowntree, James Henry, 238, 265, 3^2, 
^ [354- 
Seward, A.C., m.a., f.g.s., I49- 
Shackleton, Abm., 79.
Shuffrey, Rev. W\ A., M.A., 51.
Slater, Rev. H.
H., M.A., F.Z.S., 143- 
Slater, Matthew B., f.l.s., 6, 290, 304.
Soppitt, H.
T., 279, 291, 339^ 353- 
Stephenson, Thomas, 337- 
Stuart, I.
A. Erskine, 265, 2S9, 335- .
Summeffieid, Rev. R.
A., b.a., 117, »o5» 
[182, 297.
Thomasson, John P., 369.
Thompson, M.
L., 238, 2S7.
Thompson, .Misses R- F.
& F.
I ., 252.
Tomlin, J.
R. B., B.A., M.c.s., n?- 
^ec.
1 89 1.
374 
CLASSIFIED 
CONTRIBUTOR S~-co?itm7ied, 
Waite, Edgar R., f.l,s,.
8i, 144, 165, 171, 
[214, 233, 261, 282, 299, 
[3^^ 331^3^4.
371, 372.
Wakefield, Bishop of, 229.
Ward, Thomas F., 202.
Waterfall, Charles, 50.
Watts, Wm., F.G.S., 310.
West, William, F.L.S., 139, 243.
West, William, junr., 241, 297.
Whitlock, F.
B,, 38, 46, 183.
Woodcock, W.
H., Sec, 12.
Woodd, C.
H. B., TJ.A., 13s, 140 
Woodd, Rev. T.
B., B.A., 309- 
Woodthorpe, E., 68.
BOOK NOTICES; 
J. C.
Atkinson.
— Forty years in a Moor- 
land Parish, 307-309.
J. E.
Bagnall.
— Flora of Warwickshire, 
67-68, 
R. R.
Balderston.
^Cambrian and Silurian 
Rocks of Ewcross, Dufton, and Shap, 
63-64.
Christian Knowledge Society.
— Natural 
History Print Series, i66.
Miller Christy.
— Catalogue of Local Lists 
of British Birds, 351-352.
J. W.
Ellis.
— Lepidoptera of Lancashire 
and Cheshire, 15-16.
Johnnie Gray.
— Through Airedale, from 
Goole to Malham, 231-232.
C. G.
Green.
— The Rarer Birds of the 
West of England, 310.
Richard Howse.— Catalogue of Fishes of 
Northumberland and Durham, 187-1S8.
R. Howse.— Guide to the Collections of 
Local Fossils in the Newcastle Museum, 
260.
B. G.
Johns.— Among the Butterflies, 3 *o- 
M. C.
E- Leigh and F.
V. Theobald.
—An 
Account of British Flies (Diptera), 298.
Edward Mawley-— A Simple Method ot 
taking Phenological Observations, 166.
J. C.
Melvill.
— Historical Account ol 
Genus Latirus, 310, ^ u 
E. E.
Prince.— Development and Morpti- 
olog>' of Pectoral Fins in Teleostean 
Fishes, 295, , 
J. W, Tutt.— The British Nocture and 
their Varieties, 277-278.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Map of Conisborough and Edlington, 
Map of Grassington District, 262.
Map of Hayburn Wyke District, 284.
331 
Map of Leckby Carr District, 234.
Map of Sledmere and Wetwang, 299 
Arachnidaand Myriopoda: Bibliography 
for 1S84-1891, 365-368.
Birds : Bittern at Warrington (W.
H. 
Woodcock), 12.
Fishes : Bibliography for 1886 to 18S8, 
27-37- 
Flowering Plants: Bibliography for 1887, 
126-133; for iS88, 189-199.
Geology and Palseontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1890, 314-330; List of Geo- 
logical Photographs from Cheshire (J.
E. Bedford), 71-72.
CHESHIRE.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 18^9^ 
157-165; A Comparison of the Lepi- 
dopterous Fauna of Yorkshire and Lan- 
cashire and Cheshire (G.
T. Porntt), i5- 
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1888, 254 
Death of 
David 
0. 
A. 
259.
Personal Notices : 
Mackintosh, 242; Paper ^^7 
Walker on Pherusa, 260 ; ^Obituary 
Notice of D.
Mackintosh (0.
W. Jensj, 
271-272.
CUMBERLAND.
Arachnidaand Myriopoda: Bibliography 
for 1S84-1S91, 365-306.
Birds : Water-Rail near Workington (W.
Hodgson), 49; Some Notes on the White 
Wagtail (H.
A, Macpherson), 211-212; 
Buffon's Skua at Workington (W.
Hodgson), 372.
Fishes: Bibliography for 18S6-1S88, 27- 
37 ; Notice of a paper on Cumbrian 
Fishes by H.
A. Macpherson, 348.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography for 1887^ 
125-133; for 1888, 189-199; Disappear- 
ance 
auue of Plants in Cumberiand^ ("^^ 
Hodgson), 7-12 ; Osmunda rega hs m ^ ^ 
Lake District (C.
P. Hobkirk), 2"' 
CEnanthe lachenalii in Cuniberlana, 
rectification (W.
Hodgson), 42- y 
eology and Paleontology: ^\^j'P 
graphy for 1890, 3^-330; -^^''T %.
Cumberland and Westmorland * 
Harker), 15; Ancient Lavas ol ^ 
English Lake District (A.
Harker), ^-^^ 
147; Geological Papers byj- G.
^o 
child and J.
Postlethwaite, 34^- 
Natural'^' 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
375 
CUMBERLAN Y)—contmned, 
Lepidoptera: Bib]io£rraphy for 1S89, 157- 
165.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1S88, 254- 
259 ; Rabbit swimming across the 
Irthmg (J.
Robinson), 298 ; Wild Cat in 
Cumberland (W.
Hodirson), 353.
Personal Notices: Papers by J.
G. 
Goodchild, J.
Postlethwaite, and H.
A. 
Macpherson, 348, 
I 
Societies: Annual Meeting of Cumberland 
and Westmorland Association, 348.
Vermes ; Earthworms of the North of 
England (H.
Friend), 13-15 ; Some 
Annulosa from Cumberland and York- 
shire (H.
Friend), 62-63.
Vertebrate Fauna of Lakeland (H.
A. 
Macpherson), in preparation, 371.
DERBYSHIRE.
Arachmda: Bibliography for 1884-1891, 
_^365-368.
IvV ^^"^^^^ ^"^^ ^^ Borrowash {F.
B. 
Vvhitlock), 49 ; Occurrences of Uncom- 
mon Birds in Derbyshire (E.
Howarth), 
181 ; Local Lists of Derbyshire Birds 
cited (W.
D. Roebuck), 352.
Wishes: Bibliography for 1886 to 1888, 
^27-37.
i^ lowering Plants: Bibliography for 
10S7, 125-133; for 1888, 189-199; 
Discovery of Carex montana and other 
Plants in Derbyshire (C.
Waterfall), 50.
Geolog-y and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1890,315-330; Leveillia wood- 
wardi at Winster (R.
B. Kewton), 1S8.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1889, 
158-165.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1SS8, 254- 
259.
Personal Notices : Sir V.
Harpur-Crewe 
elected F.E.S., 156.
Arachnida; BibHogaphy for 1884-1891, 
365-368.
^^ ^ ^ ^ ' 
fiirds : Crossbills and Crested Ti*t in Dur- 
ham (T.
H. Nelson), 116; Ornithological 
Wotes from Redcar and Teesinouth for 
1890-91 (T.
H. Nelson), 119-124 ; Birds 
found by N.
Wearmonth in Upper Tees- 
aale (J.
Backhouse), 148.
*^ishes: Bibliography for 1886-1888, 27- 
37 ; Review of R.
Howse's Catalogue of 
i'lshes of Northumberland and Durham 
(Editor), 187.
lowering Plants: Bibliography for 
IS87, 128-133 ; for 1888.
190-199 ; Dis- 
appearance of Plants in Yorkshire and 
DURHAM.
Durham (C P.
Hobkirk and P.
F. Lee), 
3-6 ; Hieracium orarium in Durham and 
West Yorkshire (G- E.
Martindale), 134.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1890, 3 1 4-330- 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1889, 
157-165.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1888, 254- 
259.
Personal Notices : Death of H.
B. Brady, 
115, 156; of Robert Calvert (T.
H. Nel- 
son), 116-117 ; of Nicholas Wearmouth 
(J.
Backhouses T48 ; New Fellows of 
Entomological Society, 156; Paper by 
C. O.
Trechmann.
213.
Arachnida and Myriopoda : Bibliotrraphy 
for 1884-1891,365-368.
^irds: Bittern at Warrington (W.
H» 
\Noodcock), 12; Great Northern Divers 
and Long-tailed Duck near Morecambe 
IT' ^" ^'^^son), 117; Bittern near St.
Helens (R.
G. Brook), 139, 
^Oleoptera ; Miscodera arctica and Ptero- 
stichus Dsthiops in Lancashire (C.
Red- 
man).
118, 
i^ishes: Bibliography for 1886 to 1888, 
'•lowering Plants : Bibliography for 
1887, 126-133; for 1888, 190-199.
Geology and Palaeontology: Biblio- 
paphy for 1890, 314-330 ; List oi Geo- 
logical Photographs from Lancashire 
(J.
E. Bedford), 72 ; Stalagmites of Sand 
'^- J^J^lIard Reade), 179-180.
Bee. I fox.
LANCASHIRE.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1S89, 
157-165; Comparison of the Lepidop- 
terous Fauna of Yorkshire and Lanca- 
shire and Cheshire (G.
T. Porritt),* 15-16.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1888, 255- 
259.
Museums : First Report of the Man- 
chester Museum, 213.
Personal Notices : P.
L. Davies elected 
F.G.S.,45; S, J.
Capper elected F.E.S., 
156 \ H.
IL Higgins.
Presidential Ad- 
dress on Land and Freshwater MoUusca 
of Liverpool, 166 ; John Vicars made 
Mayor of Bootle, 166 ; Papers by Prof 
K. J.
Harvey Gibson, 242; Paper by 
T. Mellard Reade, 260; J.
C. Melvill, 
Paper on the Genus Latirus, 310.
Societies : Transactions of Rochdale 
Literary and Scientific Society, 156.
376 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
LINCOLNSHIRE.
Arachnida : Bibliography for 1884-1891, 
365-368.
Birds : Ornithological Notes from the 
Humber District in the autumn of 1890 
(J.
Cordeaux), 21-26 ; Bittern at Goxhill 
(J.
W. Harrison), I17 ; Ornithological 
Notes from the Ilumber District (J.
W. 
Harrison), 134; Jackdaws in Cockering- 
ton St. Mary's Churchwardens' A ccovmts, 
1734 (J.
B. Davy), 144; Tawny Owl at 
Grantham (E.
Howarth), 181 ; Bird 
Notes from North Lincolnshire, ^larch 
to May, 1891 (J.
Cordeaux), 209-210; 
Two Cuckoos' Eggs in one nest near 
Louth (E.
Larderjj 214; Ornithological 
Notes from the Humber District (J.
Cordeaux), 355-364; Marsh Harrier in 
Lincolnshire (E.
R. Waite), 364.
Fishes: Bibliography for 1886-1888,27-37.
Flowering Plants: Bibliography for 1887, 
12S-133; for 1888, 190-199; Notes on 
the Rev. W.
Fowler's List of Lincolnshire 
Limestone Plants (J.
B. Davy), 39-42 ; 
Additions to the Flora of the Alford 
District of North Lincolnshire during 
1890 (J.
B. Davy), 65-66 ; Geum 
urbanumnearAlford{E.Woodthorpe),6S.
Geolog-y and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1890, 315-330- 
Hymenoptera : Preponderance of the 
Female in Sirex at Kirton-in-Lindsey 
(C, F.
George), 124.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for iS 19, 159- 
165 ; Acronycta alni Larva in North 
Lincolnshire (E.
Woodthorpe), 68.
Mammalia: Bibliography for iSSS, 254- 
259 ; Churchwardens' Accounts at 
Cockerington St. Mary's, near Louth 
(J.
B. Davy), 144 ; Parish Accounts, 
Kigsby with Ailby, 178; Longtailed 
FieldMousenearAlford(W.D. Roebuck), 
311- 
Museums: Bolton, 371.
Personal Notices: Canon Fowler re- 
elected Sec. E.S., 156; C.H. Bothamley 
appointed Organising Secretary for 
Technical Education in Somersetshire, 
306.
ISLE OF MAN.
Arachnida : Bibliography for 1SS4-1S91, 
367-368.
. 
Fishes: Biljliographyfor 1886-1888,27-37.
Flowering Plants : Bibliography for 1887, 
127-133; for 1888, 195-199- 
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1890, 314-330 ; List of 
Photographs from the Isle of 
Bedford), 72.
: Bibliography for 1889, 
157-165.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1888, 256- 
259.
Geological 
Man (J.
E. 
Lepidoptera 
NORTHUMBERLAND.
Arachnida: Bibliography for 1884-1891, 
365-368.
Birds : White-tailed Eagle at Eshott (H.
T. Archer), 6; Is the Starling double- 
brooded?
(R.
Fortune), 49; Icterine 
Warbler at Nevvcastle-on-Tyne (J.
Cor- 
deaux), 241.
Fishes: Bibliography for 1886-1888, 27- 
37 ; Review of R, Howse's Catalogue of 
Fishes of Northumberland and Durham 
(Editor), 187-188.
Flowering Plants : Bibliography for 
1887, 126-133; for 1888, 191-199- 
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1S90, 314 330 ; Origin of the 
Drift Sands and Gravels of Northumber- 
1889, 
land (G.
W. Bulman), 43-45- 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 
159-165.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1888,254-259.
Personal Notices: Memoir of John Han- 
cock, 188 ; Paper by R.
Howse, 260.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Arachnida and Myriopoda; Bibliography 
for 1SS4-1891, 365-368.
Birds ; Pine Grosbeak in Notts (F.
B. 
Whitlock), 38 ; Ornithological Notes 
from Notts (F.
B. Whitlock), 46-49 ; 
Yellowshank at Misson (E.
R. Waite), 
107 ; Great Spotted Woodpecker in 
Notts (T.
E. Piatt), 134; the Pied and 
Wagtails in Notts (F.
B. Whit- 
^ S3 - 1 85 ; Manx Shearwater in 
(J.
Cordeaux), 362 ; Fieldfare in 
(J.
Cordeaux), 363.
White 
lock), 
Notts 
Notts 
Fishes : Bibliography for 1886 to 1SS8, 
Flowering Plants : Bibliography for 
1887, 126-T33; for 1888, 193-199- 
Geology and Pal2eontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1S90, 321-330 ; List of Geo- 
logical Photographs from Notts (J.
E- 
Bedford), 72-73.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 18S9, 
164-165.
Mammalia : Bibliography for 1888, 256- 
259.
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
377 
WESTMORLAx\D AND FURNESS, 
Arachmda and Myriopoda : Bibliography 
for 1884-1891.
365-368.
^ ^ ^ 
Birds: Rev. H.
A. Macpherson's new 
Vertebrate Fauna of Lakeland, 371.
Mshes : Bibliography for 18S6 10 1SS8, 
Flowering Plants : Bibliography for 
1^57, i26-£33 ; for r888, 189-199 ; 
Hieraciurn gibsoni in Westmorland 
lU b.
Martindale', 134.
Geology and Paleontology.
JJiblio- 
graphy fur 1890, 314-330; Minerals in 
J^umberland and Westmorland (A.
Har- 
fh n^ ' ^^^ S^'isement Conglomerate of 
V ^^^^^^i^-^i-ous in Westmorland and 
V orkshire (A, Marker), 38 ; Review of 
i^alderslon s Cambrian and Silurian 
Rocks of Ewcross, Dufton, and Shap 
(A.
Harker), 63-64 ; Ancient Lavas of 
the English Lake District (A.
Harker), 
145-147; Harker and Marr on Shap 
Granite, 348.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1889, 
„i57-i65.
Mammalia : Bibliography for iSSS, 254- 
259- 
Personal Notices : Lyell Medal given to 
Prof.
T. McK.
Hughes, 115; G.
A. 
Booth elected F.E.S., 156; Death of 
W, J, Stephens, 270 ; Paper on Shap 
Granite, by A.
Plarker and J.
E. Marr, 
348.
Vermes : Earth-worms of the North of 
England (H.
Friend), 13-15.
Actinozoa : 
YORKSHIRE.
wj I .X ^'^''^-Anemones at Hayburn 
Wykej.
p. A.
Davis), 294.
S'.^^^^ ^^^^^^^^ ^^^ 18S4-1891, 
mzj' Sp^'^e^s at Ediington Wood 
i^^.
Howarth), 335 
Archaeolog:y : A Stone Celt from Castle- 
s^aw, Saddlevvorth (W.
Watts), 310.
B^rds: Eared Grebe near Y^rk (W.
ilevvett), 6 ; Shoveller near Harrogate 
it' ^^m""^^* ^^' Flamborough Notes 
yvi.
Eailey), 12; Ornithological Notes 
irom the Humber District in the autumn 
^\ 1^90 (J.
Cordeaux), 21-26; Is the 
^tarling.Double-brooded?
(R.
Fortune), 
49; Hamborough Notes (M.
Bailey), 
79; Vertebrates of the Western Ainsty 
yf- K.
Waite), 82 and 87-1 lO; \Vhite 
Grouse and White Partridges in York- 
snire (H.
A. Macpherson), 115; Water 
^ail at North Stainley, near Ripon (R.
A, bummerfield), 117; Great Northern 
Divernear Wakefield (G.
Parkin), 117; 
ornithological Notes from Redcar for 
1890-91 (T.
PL Nelson), 1 19-124; Gold- 
crests and Redstarts at Easington-in- 
Holderness (P.
W. Loten), 134; Spring 
^^grants in Cleveland (T.
H. Nelson), 
f34; Hawfinch at Whitkirk, near Leeds 
U. E, Piatt), 134; Vertebrate Fauna of 
^ngstrothdale.
Mid-west Yorkshire (C.
H, B.
Woodd), 136-138; Flamborough 
^otes{M, Bailey), 139; Brambling and 
Goosander near Ripon <R.
A. Summer- 
fie d), 165 ; Yellow Wagtails at Ghais- 
P' i* ^^'^a^^fedale (E.
R. Waite), 165 ; 
^irds and Snow in May at Harrogate 
\t., R.
Waitei, 165; Birds at Malham 
and Gordale (E.
R, Waite), i73-«74; 
Recurrences of Uncommon Birds in 
^outh Yorkshire (E.
Howarth), iSi-i82; 
^i^Potted Crake at .North Stainley, near 
Ripon (R.
A. Summerfieid), 182 ; Flaai- 
borough Notes (^L Bailey), 182; the 
Yorkshire example of the Lesser Kestrel 
(W.
E. Clarke), iS6 ; Raven in Upper 
Swaledale (J.
G. Goodchild), 204 ; Un- 
seasonable Weather in mid-^Iay at 
Staveiey, near Boroughbridge (E.
P. 
Knubley), 20S ; a Talking Sparrow (E.
M. Cole), 213 ; Hooded Crow on Board 
Ship at Hull (E.
T. Baldwin) 214; 
Turtle Dove near Robin Hood's Bay (E.
R. Waite), 214; Birds and Snow in May 
at Goathiand (W.
Hewett), 214; Birds 
at Leckby Carr (R.
Fortune), 237-238; 
Icterine Warbler at Easington-in-lfolder- 
ness : an addition to the Yorkshire 
Avifauna (J.
Cordeaux), 241 ; Early 
Notice of the Pink-footed Goose in 
Yorkshire (H.
A. Macpherson), 242 ; 
The Chough in Yorkshire (H.
A. Mac- 
pherson), 252; Birds at Grassington (R.
Fortune, 264-265 ; Blue Tits at Borough- 
bridge (A.
C. Holtby), 282 ; Pheasant 
Nest by Roadside (E.
M. Cole), 282 ; 
Birds at Hayburn Wyke (E.
R. Waite), 
285 ; Cream-coloured Skylark at Harro- 
gate (R.
Fortune).
297; Manx Shear- 
water in Upper Nidderdale (R.
Fortune), 
297; Note of Corncrake (R.
A. Summer- 
field), 297; Three Large Species of 
Birds Building in One Tree (A E.
Hall), 
297 ; Hawfinches near Harrogate (J.
Backhouse), 297; Birds at York Dale 
and Sledmere (E.
R. Waite), 301 ; J.
C. 
Atkinson's observations on Birds at 
Danby-in-Clevelnnd {J.
Cordeaux), 30S; 
Birds at Ediington and Wadworth (K.
Fortune), 333 ; White Thrush in Upper 
Nidderdale (R- Fortune), 351 ; Late 
Nesting of Yelluwhammcr near Fickenng 
(H.
Prodham), 3Sr; Flauiburough .Notes 
37^ 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
Y O R K S H I R Y.— continued.
(M.
Bailey), 351 ; Ornithological Notes 
from the Humber District (J.
Cordeaux), 
355"364 ; Cirl Bunting Nesting near 
Masham (B.
J. Carter), 364 ; Late 
Occurrence uf House Martins at Borough- 
bridge (R.
Paver-Crow), 372 ; Grey 
Phalarope near Harrogate (R.
Fortune), 
372; Grey Phalarope at Ackworth (E.
R- Waite), 372 ; Flamborough Notes 
(M, Bailey), 372- 
Ccelenterata : Sertularia filicula and 
Tethya at Hayburn Wyke (J, P.
A. 
Davis), 294.
Coleoptera : Necrophorus ruspator at 
IMalham (E.
P. Knubley), 177 ; Beetles 
at Leckby Carr (M.
L. Thompson and 
W. Ilewett), 238-239 ; Pyropterus 
nfiinis pear Doncaster (E.
G. Bayford), 
252 ; Beetles at Hayburn Wyke (M.
l! 
Thompson), 287 ; Beetles at York Dale 
and Sledmere (W, F.
Baker), 303 ; 
Beetles at Ediington and Wadworth (E.
G. Bayford), 334.
Crustacea : Gammarus pulex at Malham 
and^ Gordale (E.
P. Knubley), 177 ; 
Marine Crustacea at Hayburn Wyke (J.' 
P. A.
Davis), 294.
•Cryptogfaxnia : Disappearance of Mosses 
at Terrington Carr (M.
B. Slater), 6 ; 
]\Iosses, Desmids, Diatoms, and Alg^e 
in Peat Deposit at Filey (E.
M. Cole), 
18 ; Fungi new to West Yorkshire (c!
Crossland), 20 ; Numerical Comparison 
of the West Yorkshire, Leicestershire, 
and Warwickshire Floras (C.
P. Hob- 
kirk), 67-68 ; List of Langstrothdale 
Fungi (C.
H. B.
Woodd), 140-142 ; 
Volvox in Yorkshire (T.
Hick), 167-170; 
Diatoms and Desmids at Malham and 
Gordale (J.
U. Kirk and E.
P. Knubley), 
1 77 ; List of Additions to the Freshwater 
Alga; of We^t Yorkshire (W.
West), 
243-252 ; Geaster hygrometricus in 
Wharfedale (P.
H. Grunshaw), 275 ; 
Additions to West Yorkshire Fungi,' 
Hymenomycetes (H.
T. Soppitt), 279- 
282 ; Mnium hornum in Bolton Woods 
(H, T.
Soppitt), 282; Mosses and 
Hepatics at Hayburn Wyke (M.
B. 
Slater), 290 ; Fungi at Hayburn Wyke 
(H.
T. Soppitt), 291 ; Mosses and 
Hepatics at York Dale and Sledmere 
(^L B.
Slater), 305 ; Fungus Foray at 
Doncaster, with List of Fungi collected 
(H T Soppitt), 339-34S ; Strobilomvces 
strobilaceus m South-west Yorkshire 
(H, T.
Soppitt), 353, 
Diptera : Ifcmatopota pluvialis, Cleg, at 
Hayburn Wyke, 2S7.
' t>.
*^^ 
Echinodermata : At Hayburn Wyke (T 
I. A.
Davis), 294.
"'' 
Fishes : Bibliography for 1 886 to 1888, 
27-37'; Vertebrates of the Western 
Ainsty (E.
R. Waite), 83, and 111-114; 
Abundance of Haddocks off the Coast 
of Redcar (T.
H. Nelson), 124; Verte- 
brate Fauna of Langstrothdale (C.
H. B.
Woodd), 139; Fish at Malham and 
Gordale (E.
R. Waite), 174 ; Ten-spined 
Stickleback near Leckby Carr (W.
Nel- 
son), 235 ; Fishes at Leckby Carr (R.
Fortune), 237-238 ; Fishes at Grassing- 
ton (R.
Fortune), 265 ; Freshwater and 
Marine Fishes at Hayburn Wyke (E.
R. Waite), 286-287; Marine Fishes at 
Hayburn Wyke (J.
P. A.
Davis), 294 ; 
Stickleback at York Dale and Sledmere 
(E, R.
Waite), 301-302; Fishes captured 
off Whitby, September-October 1891 
(T.
Stephenson), 337-338.
Flowering: Plants : Bibliography for 
1887, 125-133 ; for 1888, 189-199 ; 
Epilobium angustifolium at Wheatley 
Wood (H.
H. Corbett), 2 ; Disappear- 
ance of Plants in Yorkshire (C.
P. Hob- 
kirk and P.
F. Lee), 3-6 ; Vegetable 
Remains in Peat deposit at Filey (E- M.
Cole), 18; Acorus calamus in South 
Yorkshire (J.
H. Payne), 37; List of 
Flowering Plants and Ferns of Litton- 
dale (W.
A. Shuffrey), 51-61 ; Numerical 
Comparison of the West Yorkshire, 
Leicestershire, and Warwickshire 1* loras 
(C.
P. Hobkirk), 67-68 ; Disappearance 
of Yorkshire Plants (A, Shackleton), 79" 
80 ; Lysimachia vulgaris near Thome 
Waste (G.
T, Porritt), 118; Hieracium 
orarium in Durham and West Yorkshire 
(G.
E. Martindale), 134; Sedum rhodi- 
ola, Leontodon hirtus and Arctostaphylos 
uva-ursi in Yorkshire (W.
West), i39j 
Glyceria fluitans, Lotus uliginosus and 
Callitriche at Salterhebble (C.
Cross- 
land), 168; Plants at Malham and 
Gordale (W.
N. Cheesman), 177-^7^?
Plants in Upper Swaledale(T.
F. Uard), 
202 ; (J.
a Goodchild), 206 ; Ferns in 
the Frost (John Emmet), 20S ; tn- 
seasonable Weather in mid-May at 
Staveley, near Boroughbridge (L.
r. 
Knubley;.
208; Some Word-piciures 
taken from Nature (W.
C Hey), 2iy 
218; Swaledale Plants (J.
G. Ooort- 
child), 218; Plants at Leckby Carr 
(W, Foggitt), 240 ; Cochlearia anglica.
Carduus acauHs, and Cuscuta europa^a 
at Malham (W.
West, jun.), 241 ; C^?^J 
vulgaris var.
longibracteata near Pickering 
(W.
W. Reeves), 252 ; Saxifraga opt^' 
sitifolia at Moughton (R.
J- and 1*.
^  
Thompson), 252 ; Plants at Grassin^- 
ton (J.
A. Erskine Stuart), 265-26O .
>'aturaU=5| 
t 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
Y O R K S H I R Y.—contimi€iL 
379 
Geranium sylvaticum at Cracoe (W, 
Nelson), 269 ; Rosa mollis in Grass 
Wood (\V.
Nelson), 269 ; Asplenium 
ruta-murariaat Sandal (\V.
Nelson), 273; 
Plants at Hayburn Wyke (J.
A. Erskine 
Stuart), 289; Agrimonia odorata added 
to the West Yorkshire Flora (W.
West, 
jun.), 297; Plants at York Dale and 
Sledmere (M.
B. Slater), 304 ; Saxifraga 
granulata in Wharfedale (T.
B. Woodd), 
309 ; Saxifraga granulata near Scar- 
borough (T.
H. Rowntree), 312 ; Wah- 
lenbergia hederacea in Bowland (J.
B. 
Foggitt).
312 ; Plants at Edlington and 
Wadworth (J.
A. Erskine Stuart), 335 ; 
Polygonum hydropiper and Holcus 
mollis near Doncaster (H.
T. Soppitt), 
3^1 ; Varieties of Carex goodenovii and 
Heliantbemum chama^cystus at Hayburn 
Wyke (W.
W. Reeves), 354.
Geology and Palaeontolog-y : Biblio- 
graphy for 1890, 313-330; Peat Deposit 
at Filey (E.
M. Cole), 17-19; the 
Basement Conglomerate of the Carbon- 
iferous in Westmorland and Yorkshire 
(A.
Harker), 38 ; Boring for Coal at 
Balne, 45 ; Review of Balderston's 
Cambrian and Silurian Rocks of Ewcross, 
^ufton and Shap (A.
Harker), 63-64 ; 
First Report of the Geological Photo- 
graphic Committee of the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union (J.
E. Bedford), 
^9-74 ; Boulders at Guisborough (W.
C 
Hey), 182 ; Three species of Leveillia 
from Holland, 188; Geology of Upper 
Swaledale(T.
G. Goodchild), 203-208; 
Geological Photographic Committee, 
231 ; Geology of Leckby Carr (W.
L. 
Carter), 239 ; Geolog}^ of Grassington 
^nd Cracoe (B.
Holgate), 266-26S ; 
Geology of Cloughton and Hayburn 
vvykes (C.
Brownridge), 291-294 ; 
Geology at York Dale and Sledmere (E.
^1.
Cole), 305 ; Geology at Conisborough 
and Edlington (T.
H. Easterfield), 
^epidoptera: Bibliography forl889, 157- 
J05 ; Additions to the Yorkshire 
i«r the Doncaster district (H.
^orbett), 1-2 ; Comparison of l..^ 
Eepidopterous Fauna of Yorkshire and 
i-ancashire and Cheshire (G.
T. Porrltt), 
^5-»6; Moths i^d.
on by Bats in the 
^estern Ainsty (E.
R, Waite), 83; 
Dasycera oliviella at Kildale in Cleve- 
»^nd, a correction (J.
Gardner), 118; 
Coliix sparsata and other lepidoptera 
near Thorne Waste (G.
T. Porritt), iiS ; 
Hybernia leucophiearia van nigricaria 
at Doncaster (H.
H. Corbetti, 155; 
i£]2^tera at Malham (G.
T. Porritt), 
^«c.
1891.
List 
H. 
the 
177 ; at Leckby Carr (J.
H. Rowntree), 
238 ; Lepidoptera at Grassington (J.
PI.
Rowntree), 265 ; Larentia ruficinctata 
near Scarborough (R.
H. Barker), 277 ; 
Lepidoptera at Play burn Wyke (H.
W, 
Head and T.
A. Lofthouse), 288; 
Marbled White at Sledmere (E.
R. 
Waite), 300 ; Lepidoptera at York Dale 
and Sledmere (G.
T. Porritt), 303 ; 
Sphinx convolvuli at Barnsley (W.
E. 
Brady), 309 ; Larentia ruficinctata at 
Oughtershaw, Langstrothdale (T, B.
Woodd), 309; Pterophorus paludum in 
Yorkshire (G.
T. Porritt), 312 ; Lepi- 
doptera at Edlington and Wadworth (A, 
E, Hall), 334 ; Sphinx convolvuli at 
Ripon (C.
Chapman), 338 ; Late 
Appearance of Abraxas ulmata at Kive- 
ton Park (A.
E. Hall), 338; Lepidoptera 
in Upper Swaledale (J.
H. Rowntree), 
354.
Mammalia : Bibliography for 1888, 253- 
259 ; Vertebrates of the Western Ainsty 
(Edgar R.
Waite), S2-86 ; Vertebrate 
Fauna of Langstrothdale, Mid-west 
Yorkshire (C.
H. B.
Woodd), 135-137; 
Red Field Voles at Lotherton (E.
R. 
Waite, 144; Common Field Voles at 
Eccup (E.
R. Waite), 144; Mammalia at 
Malham and Gordale (E.
R. Waite), 
174; Carnivorous propensities of the 
Water Rat (J.
Backhouse), 178; Mammals 
at Leckby Carr (R Fortune), 237 ; Cat 
Suckling Rabbits near York (J, J.
Burton), 260; Mammals at Grassington 
(R.
Fortune), 264; Daubenton's Bat 
added to the Yorkshire Fauna (W\ E, 
Clarke), 275 ; Badger in South York- 
shire (E.
G. Bayford), 282; Rabbit at 
Hayburn AVyke (E.
R. W^aite), 2S6 ; 
Mammalia at York Dale and Sledmere 
(E, R.
Waite), 301 ; Mammalia in Upper 
Swaledale (W.
D. Roebuck), 311 ; 
Noctule Flying in Sunshine at Poole (E.
R. Waite), 31 1 ; Mammalia at Edlington 
and Wadworth (R.
Fortune), 333; Whales 
at Flamborough (M.
Bailey), 372.
Mollusca : Observations on the Burrowing 
Habits of certain Land and Freshwater 
Molluscs (W.
E. Collinge), 75-79; 
Mollusca at Malham and Gordale (F.
W. Fierke), 175-176; Mollusca in Upper 
Swaledale (W.
D. Roebuck), 202 ; 
Mollusca at Leckby Carr (W\ Nelson), 
234-235, 240; Mollusca at Grassington 
(W.
Nelson), 268-270 ; Extracts from a 
Conchologist's Note Book <W.
Nelson), 
273274 ; Mollusca at TTayburn Wyke 
(T.
A. Lofthouse), 289 ; Marine Shells at 
Hayburn Wyke (J.
I\ A.
Davis), 294 ; 
Mollusca at York Dale and Sledmere 
38o 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
Y O R K S H I R Y.— continued.
(L.
B. Ross and F.
W. Fierke), 302 ; 
Mollusca at Edlington and Wadworth 
Woods (AV.
D, Roebuck), 334.
Museums ; Ancient Marbles in Leeds 
Museum, 166; Re-arrangement of it, 166.
Neuroptera and Trichoptera : Neurop- 
tera, Trichoptera, etc.
, near Thorne 
Waste (G.
T, Porritt), 118; at Malham 
and Gordale (G.
T. Porritt), 177 ; at 
Grassington(G.T. Porritt), 265; ^schna 
juncea at Sledmere (G, T.
Porritt), 303 ; 
Stenophylax concentricus at Edlington 
and Wadworth (A.
E. Hall), 335.
Orthoptera : Stenobothris parailelus near 
Thorne Waste (G.
T. Porritt), 118; S.
viridulus at York Dale and Sledmere 
(G.
T. Porritt), 303 ; Meconema varia 
in Wadworth Wood (A.
E. Hall), 335.
Personal Notices : New Yorkshire 
F.G.S.'s, 45 ; Lyell Fund presented 
to G.
W. Lamplugh, 115; Death of 
Nicholas Wearmouth (J.
Backhouse) , 
148 ; W.
West on ' Conjugazione delle 
Zignemee,* 156; Yorkshiremen on the 
Council of the Geological Society, 156 ; 
A. E.
Hall elected f.e.s., 156; Lord 
Walsinghani chosen v.p.e.s., 156; A.
T. Watson on tube-building of Terebella 
littoralis, 166 ; George Massee, paper on 
the Life-History of a Stipitate Fresh- 
water Alga, 166 ; Resignation of Secre- 
taryship of Leeds Philosophical Society 
by R.
Reynolds, 166 ; Biography of 
Geo. Roberts, 166 ; J.
W. Davis made 
Mayor of Halifax, 166 ; Death of John 
Harrison, of Wilstrop (W.
E. Clarke), 
185-186 ; B.
Holgate, lecture on Coal, 
212 ; Death of Tuffen West.
213 ; Lord 
Walsinghani installed as High Steward 
of Cambridge University, 243; Paper by 
W. Warren, 260 ; by A.
Harker, 270 ; 
by L.
B. Ross, 270 ; forthcoming book 
by Rev. W, Thompson, 274 ; R.
F. 
Scharff's paper on Irish Slugs, 306 ; 
C. H.
Bothamley appointed Organizing 
Secretary for Technical Education in 
Somersetshire, 306 ; Rev, W.
Moyle 
Rogers' notes on Yorkshire Rubi and 
Roses, 310; Paper by A.
Harker on 
Shap Granite, 348 ; J.
W. Davis re- 
elected Mayor of Halifax, 348 ; Paper 
by J.
W, Davis on Fossil Fish of vScandi- 
navian Cretaceous Formation, 348.
Reptiles and Amphibians ; Vertebrates 
of the Western Ainsty (E.
R. Waite), 
Z-^ and iio-iii ; Vertebrate Fauna of 
Langstrothdale (C.
H. B.
Woodd), 
138-139; Reptiles and Amphibians at 
Leckby Carr (R, Fortune), 237 ; 
Reptiles and Amphibians at Grassington 
(R.
Fortune), 265 ; Reptiles and Frog 
at Hayburn Wyke (E.
R. Waite), 2S6- 
287 ; Amphibia at York Dale and 
Sledmere (E.
R. Waite), 300-301 ; 
Amphibia at Edlington and Wadworth 
(R.
Fortune), 333.
Societies : Yorkshire Naturalists' Union 
29th Annual Report for 1890, 219-223 ; 
Annual Meeting at Halifax, 224-229; 
Geological Photographic Committee, 
231 ; Severn Valley Field Club in 
Yorkshire, 260.
Vermes : Earth-worms of the North of 
England (H.
Friend), 13-15 ; Some 
Annulosa from Cumberland and York- 
shire (H.
Friend), 62-63; Furcularia 
reinhardtii at Malham Cove (J.
M. Kirk), 
177 ; New Yorkshire Earth-worms (H, 
Friend), 276-277 ; Flustra foliacea at 
Hayburn Wyke (J.
P. K.
Davis), 294.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Birds : Are Starlings Double-brooded ?
(H* H.
Slater), 143-144; Buzzard in 
Captivity, 270 ; Observations on the 
White Wagtail (O.
V. Aplin), 349-351 ; 
Are the r-ame species of Birds more pro- 
lific in ^^ ^rth than in South and mid- 
Europe?
(J.
P. Thomasson), 369-371.
Cryptogamia : Volvox, a query (C- L.
Lord), 338 ; Volvox and its Life- 
History (T.
Hick), 354.
Geology and Palaeontology : 
Climates (A.
C. Seward), I49-155 ; 
Stalagmites of Sand {T.
Mellard Reade), 
179-180.
^Mediterranean Naturalist' (The), 274.
Mollusca : Observations on the Burrowing 
Habits of Certain Land and Freshwater 
Fossil 
Molluscs (W, E.
Collinge), 75-79; (B.
Tomlin), 117 ; Newton and Norman on 
the proposed Abandonment of Cyclo- 
stoma, 199.
New Zealand Journal of Science, 270.
Newspaper Botany : (W, Whitwell), 295.
Personal Notices : J.
E. Marr elected 
F.R.S., 188.
Postal Concessions on Natural History 
Specimens, 212.
Phenology^ History of, in England, 
Germany, and Sweden, 213.
Societies : Anniversary Meeting of En- 
tomological Society of London, 156 ; 
Statistics of its Fellowship, 156; Publi- 
cation of a Record of Excursions of the 
Geologists* Association, 274.
Printed by M*^Corquodale & Co. Limited, Leeds 
t: 
fe 
< Vr 
W 
^4 
X 
o 
to 
tn 
O 
a 
a 
C 
"5 
,0 
•D 
^ 
<u 
a 
(0 
0" 
« 
u 
u 
X 
u 
o 
s 
u 
(A C 
k — 
X C 
^ O 
** 2 
Ki 
60 
r; 
-J 
s 
«; 
Q 
2 
^ 
h 
*^ 
**^ 
i 
* 
^ 
I 
r 
o 
X 
CD 
Q 
*^ 
L 
S,.
5 
-•» 
*  
« 
- 
"^ 
01 
H«4 
a 
iN< 
•*a 
>v 
« 
XI 
w 
D 
No, 186.
JANUARY 1891.
m\nii^' ,, 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
-*^ 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
r. 
CONDUCTED IJV 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WITIC THE ASSISTANCE IK SPECIAL DEPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT EAKEK, F.R.S., F.L.S..
Royal Herbarium, Kew; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
Miisenm of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A..
F.G.S., 
St. John s College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
Dewsbury ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S..
F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Huddersfield ; 
\V.
BARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R. M.S., 
38, Sholebroke Avenue, Leeds.
Additions to the Yorkshire L'st of Lepidoptera for the Doncaster District — 
HcTheTt H.
Corbeit, M,R.C,S.
,. ..
.- 
Disappearance of Plants in Yorkshire— CAo^.
P, Hobkirk, F.L,S., and P.
F. Lee 
Disappearance of Plants in Cumbertand~/J>'////a/w Hod^sony A»LS, 
Earth-Worms of the North of England — Rev. Hilderic Friend, F.L.S, 
A Comparison of the LepJdopterous Fauna of Yorkshire and Lancashire 
and Cheshire— G.r./*.
Peat Deposit at FHey— ^^^ F.
Maule Cole^ M.A,, F.CS 
Fung?
new to V/est yorkshire— Charles Cross land 
Ornithologicat Notes from the H umber District in the Autumn of 1890— 
/o/i/t Cordeauar, M.
BM.
U, 
Bibliography: Fishes, 1886, 1887, 'iBBB— Editorial 
Notes— Ornithology 
Wfaite-tailed Eagle in Northumberland—//.
T, Archef: Eared Grebe near 
York— fK.
Htiv€ii\ Shoveiter near Harrogate— /^rVr-j Fortune, F.^.S.; 
Fbmborough Notes— •^.
Bailey \ Bittern near Warrington — 
Woodcock, 
PACiH 
I & 2 
3 to 6 
7 to 12 
13 to X3 
15 & 16 
17 to 19 
20 
2X to 16 
27 to 32 
6 & 12 
//'.
H. 
Note 
Botany ..
.. ..
.. ..
• ....
Osmunda recalls in the Lake DUtrict -C.
F. Hohkirh, F.F,S, 
20 
Note — MineraJogy 
Miiicrals in Cumberland and Westmorland— .-f- //.
XS 
ifc_j'>._ 
LONDON : 
-4.
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C.
Mt-CORQUODALE & Co, LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON' ; 
AND 
Leeds; Easinghai-l Street.
\ 
AW Communications should be Addressed:— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist, 
Sunny Bank, Leeds* 
PRiCE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free 
THE :NATXJIIAIjIST.
Du»'inz the next feiv months it is hoped to insert the following articles: — 
I^otes on Lincolnshire Xjimeatone Plants.— J, Burtt Daw.
On the Origin of the Upper Drift Sands and Gravels of ]S"orthumberland 
— G.
W. BuLMAN, M.A., B.Sc.
The riowering Plants and Ferns of liittondale,— Rev.
\V.
A. Shuffrev, M.A 
Bibliography: Phanerogamic Botany, 1837.
On the Study o'f Watural History.— H.
E. Dresser, F.L.S., F.Z.S.
Osprey in Nottinghamshire.
~F.
B. Whitlock.
Report of Yorkshire Geological Photograph Committee,— J.
E. Bedford, F.G.S, 
Vertebrate Fauna of Langstrothdale— C.
H. B.
Woodd, B.A.
Vertebrates of the "Western Ainsty.— Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S.
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTEBRATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Bein^ a Catalogue of British MaramaU, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, showing 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BV 
WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, RL.S., & WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.LS.
PRICE Ss. ed, MAY BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STREET, COVEXT GARDEX.
LONDON.
EXTRACTS FROM REVfHWS.
'The authors of this catalogue may take a pride in their work, which has evidently been 
executed with most conscientious care.
They have given a short introductory exposition of the 
principles by which they have been guided, and an excellent brief sketch of the phyi^ical aspects 
of Yorkshire, and the summary of the results of their investigation of its Vertebrata.
The little 
book is a most valuable contribution to British zoological literature.' — Ann.
&* Mag. Nat, Hist, 
*The work is an excellent one of its kind.* — AthentFum.
THE INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL 
(THE JOURNAL OF THE POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL AKD WESLEY 
NATURALISTS' SOCIETIES).
Editors — Alfred Ai-len, Hon. Sec.P.M.S.
; Rev, \V.
Spiers, M.A., F.G.S., Sec.
PUBLISHED MONTHLY, PRICE SIXPENCE.
Contains a number of valuable and interesting articles relating to Microscopy and the alhed 
Sciences, written by Specialists, and illustrated with Lithographic Plates and Wood Engmvings.
I        i 1       —      -     __i 
fBATT.T.IKRE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.O.
Lonaon:|p_ H.
EELLY, Castle Street, City Eoad.
New Tork: THE SCIENCE CO., 47, Lafayette Place.
idiW 
MADAGASCAR!
w 
"- " • V • r^^n ' -^ — — ^— — T^"^T~r'^M~rM~~VT~~i~~rM^'^^~^~i~n'M""M'^MTTTn'M^'^'M~~i~~^~ ^n ^^^^^^^^^ ~ ^^~ ^^ 
L 
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS Is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post-free.
Prices considerably reduce ', 
Correspondence in French and German.
Naiuralist, Membre de la Son'ti Entomolo^rique de France et de '^ 
SoiiJ:J £i.:^//:.'-^^/^uf de Zurich^ 
Annanarivo, Madagrascar, vid Marseille, 
No. 187.
FEBRUARY 1891.
J 
:n 
f c ^ 
C 
^ 
i: L 
^ 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
"Mit 
NATIKAL HISTORY FOR THK XORTI!
OF FNGLAND 
c 
-I 
4 ^ '" 
Q 
^1 
CON'DUCTEn BY 
w'u.
di:nisox roebuck, f.l.s., 
Sunny Hank, Leeds; 
WITH THK ASSfSTANCK I\ SPRCIAI.
UK PA RCM KN I S OF 
? « 
- 
J. OILHERT BAKEK, F.R.S., F.T..S., 
Royal Herliar-UM!, Keu ; 
\\\ KACiI.E Cr.AKKK, F.[,.S-, M.II.U.U., 
Mu>eniii of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED BARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
St, John s College, Caniliridge ; 
CHAS.
r. HOHKIRK, F.L.S.
, 
De\\ shiirv : 
geor(;e '[\ I'ORRriT, f.l.s., f.e.s., 
Gretnfield Hon-e.
Hutider>field ; 
\V.
HARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R. M.S., 
38, Sholehroke Avenue, T.eeds, 
s.- ^ ™ 
•i n 
f 
^ 
^^ 
^ 
s* 
* ^» 
l 
s 
C5 
*5 
s 
i % 
i « 
S 
.:l #n 
^b 
^ J 
n 
fei^ih 
:j 
t 
^^ 
I* 
; J 
4 
J 
^ 
r 
7 "^ 
t w 
^* 
v«l 
X 
Al* 
-'^ 
^ 
^^ 
^^ 
« 
tep 
t: 
.0 
-*N 
^ 
<« 
^ 
!ft 
; S 
4 
c 
w 
-\ 
^ 
^m^ 
«* 
X 
4^ 
^ 
BibMography: Fishes, 1886, 1887, ^SBB- Ftittorial ..
Pine Grosbeak in Notts— ^' B.
Whithck 
Notes on the Rev. W.
Fowler's List of Lincolnshire Limestone Plants— 
J> Burft Daiy 
On the Origin of the Upper Drift Sands and Gravels of Northumberland— 
O. /( * nulntan, M,A .
, B.Sc.
. .
Ornithological Notes from Notts.
Autumn and Winter, ^^90'9^~F./i.nytfflock 
Discovery of Carex mor*:: a, etc., in Derbyshire— C^^rM- /TWtv^/^r// ..
The Flowering Plants and Ferns of Littondale— ^^^ IK A.
Shuffrey, J/..L ..
Some Annulosa from Cumbertand and Yorkshire— A^ct\ Hihierk Ff-ic - \ F.L.S, 
Cambrian and Silurian Rocks of Ewcross, Dufton, and Shap (Review) 
Note^Geoiogy 
I he Ha^cnitint Conglomerate of the Carhoniferoiis in Westmorland and Vork- 
<.niTtt~-A{j .
{ Utirker, J/, A., F.C.S.
Note— Phanerogamic Botany 
Aconis calamus in South Vorkshire— /• ^- Fayne ; (F^nanthe lachcnalii in 
Cumberland: a rectification — fF///.
Hodgson^ .\.L.S.
Notes-Ornithology 
L the Starling Poiible-brofxled?— .ff/Vi-jf For^ung, F.Z,S.
\ Water-Rad near 
Workington : ll'?n.
//^igsoji, A.L.S.
Notes and News ...
PAGE 
to 37 
38 
39 to 42 
43 to 45 
46 to 49 
30 
51 to 61 
62 & 63 
63 & 64 
38 
37 & 42 
49 
45 
te 
LONDON: 
IxiVE^i.i. Kkkve i't Co., 5, Hf.nrietta Street, Covkni (iAki'KS, E.C\ 
M^C'oHorotiALK & Co. LiMriRD, Caroingion Sikkei, Euston ; 
AN-lJ 
Lkeds: RAi»ir*GHAi.i. Stkkkt 
«0 
PRIC 
Ai!
Communications should be Addressed :^ — 
The Editors of The Naturalist,* 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
SIXPENCE /by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free.
THE NATUHALTST.
Vitrift^ the ne.v£ /ew months it is hoped to insert the folloivin^ articles: — 
Bibliography: Phanerogamic Botany, 1887, 
The Bnrrowing Habits of Certain Land and Freshwater Molluscs 
W. E.
Coi-LINGE.
Beport of Torkshire Geological Photograph Committee.— J.
E. Bedford, F.G.S.
Vertebrate Fauna of Langstrothdale— C.
H. B.
Woonn, B.A.
Vertebrates of the "Western Ainsty.- Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S.
On the Study of IVatural History.— H.
E. Dkesser, F.L.S.
, F.Z.S.
Osprey in Nottinghamshire.— F.
B. Whitlocec.
Noxv ready.
Demy %vo^ rvith Map, Price 7s.
6d.
•'""'OTION TO THE FLORA OF DERBYSHIRE, 
By the Rev. W, H.
PAINTER, 
m 
i 
Corr.
Mem. Birmingham Nat. Hist, and Micro.
Society, 
Giving a brief description of the Physical Features of Derbyshire, and 
a h'st of all the Flowering Plants and Ferns found therein, with their Principal 
Habitats.
G. BELL & SONS, LONDON.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDEN TS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by JOHN W.
TAYLOR, F.L.S.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchulogists of the day.
— Vol. VL commenced January 18S9, Vol..-*.
I., IL, IIL, IV., and V.
may still Le had.
This Journal, edited by Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Sovereign Street, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the .Secretary, who may 
be addressed at the Museum, Leeds.
MADAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post - free.
Prices considera!)ly reduced.
Correspondence in French and German (English not understood).
:f.
sikor 
5 
N^uraliSt^ Membre de la Soci r.
EHtofio't^iifm >.r> l^^.^ite ef de la 
Si'i'f..'".- Entofuol^gii^ne de Zuruh 
Annanarivo, fVladafifasc ar..r ' ' Marsa \\^ 
fli 
i) 
J 
U] 
si) p; 
-'_ »- 
1 ^ X 
i ^ w 
E .
1 tL' 
.t <n 
£ i 
Q ^ 
(j « 
© '.
"5 
•Q V 
2 « 
- x 
^~ 1—* 
^ ^ ^ 
L U 
c 
£ 
ii 
'5 u 
« C 
u — 
5fl -.
« a 
« :: 
.5^ 
1 >  = 
^^ ^^ 
W "^ 
-= .0 
J ^ ^ 
r :- - 
w 
5 
a; 
to 
© 
V 
O ^ 
Xi 
2 
V 
© 
J) 
— r* 
3: 
- T 
^Q 
( 
No. 188.
MARCH 1891.
•\.-.Zj^ 
MONTHLY lOUKNAL OF 
ki* 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
CONDUCTED V,\ 
WM.
DKNISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Bank, Leeds ; 
WITH THE ASSrSTANCK IN SPF.CIAI.
DKIARTMENTS OF 
J. OlLfiERT I^AKEP.
F.R.S., F.T..S., 
Royal Heri>ar:iun, Kew ; 
W. FAGLK CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
Mnseum of Science & Art, Kdlnburgli ; 
ALFRED MARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
St. John s College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK.
E.L.S..
Dewsbury : 
GEORGE T.
I'ORRnX F.r..S., E.E.S., 
Greenfiekl House, Hudder>field ; 
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F R.
M.S..
38, Sholebroke Avenue, Leed^.
Additions to the Flora of the Alford District of North Lincolnshire during 
1890 — /.
Burtt Davy .
. 
Bagnali's Flora of Warwickshire (Review) 
First Report of the Geo'ogical Photographic Committer of the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Un\on~James E, Bedford, KG.S 
Observations on the Burrowing Habits of Certain Land and Freshwater 
Molluscs^ IF, E.
Coi/in^ 
Disappearance of Yorkshire PVsinis - A l- mhum S....k/t:.
: 
Vertebrates of the Western Avn^Xi— Fd^ar R .
ll'aite, f\L ^' 
!'A(;ti 
65^66 
67 & 68 
69 to 74 
Not 
Note 
Lepidoptera ..
.. " 
Acronycta alui Larva in Xorth Lincolnshire 
Ornithology..
Flamborough W\Td't^otS:—Maftk:' Baliey.
IS ^o 79 
79 & £0 
Si to 96 
68 
F..
li'(^>iJt/N->r/*t\ 
¥ It 
« 
79 
LONDON : 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Hknrietta Strekt, Covent Gardjln.
KX\ 
M<^CoRQUO0ALK & Co. Llmited.
Cardingion Street, Euston ; 
ANi> 
Lp^-rs-;: BASiNGUAi.t. Street.
* 
Alt 
Communications should be Addressed: — 
The Editors of The NaturaJist/ 
Sunny Sank, Leeds 
PRICE SIXPENCE {by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRlPTiON (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free.
THE NATTJIIALTS T.
Ditrhig the next few mortths if is hoped to insert the followino artides\~ 
Vertebrates of the Western Ainsty.-EDGAK R.
Waite, F.L.S.
Bibliography: Phanerogamic Botany, 1887.
Miscodera ai'Ctica and Pterostichus sethiops in Ijancashire.-C.
Redman*.
"White Grouse and White Partridges in Yorkshire.— Re\.
H. A.
Macihekson^ 
Vertebrate Fanna of Langstrothdale— C.
H. B.
Woodd, B.A.
On ihe Study of I^atural History.— H.
E, Drksrek-, F.l.S..
F.Z.S.
Osprey in !N"ottinghanishire.— F.
E. Whitlock.
THE BRITISH NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural Histuiy, conducted by John E.
Rorson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of - 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G, COVERDALE, London.
C. S.
GREGSON, UverpooJ.
Dr. ELLIS.
Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G. ELISHA, London.
" SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post W^^.
Monthly Siipptemeuts are' given, intended to furm when complete separate niaiuials of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural Historj^ of British Butterflies, by 
J. W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all 'reputed' species, and full 
bibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other ci>innuuiications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
THE ENTOMOLOGIST'S RECORD 
AND JOURNAL OF VARIATION.
Edited pv J.
W. TUl T, F.E.S.
W. H ALLEN & CO., 13.
Waterloo Place.
: 
An Illustrated Monthly Journal of General Entomology, dcvotetl specially 
to the interests of British working LepJdopterists, jmblished 15th of each month.
Subscription 6s.
per annum, post free, commencing April 1890, may be sent to 
the Editor, c\> Mr. E.
Knight, 18 and 19, Middle Street, Aldersgate, E.G.
MADAGASCAR!
Mv 1 ace Li i of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the .service 
of all the world, gratis and post - free.
l^rices considerably reduced, 
CorresDondcMice in French and German fEntrli.-h not understood).
F^ SIKORA 
5 
Natitraiisi.
Membrc de la SiKietc EiitomoL^:::^^ Jc Fro   ^ ef d^^ f'^ 
SMi'tJ Entomolo^i^iijue de Zurich^ 
Annanarivo, Madagfascar^ » '^ MarseiJIe 
1. -' '.* 
0) 
' ] ^ 
'to 
.t: </i 
Q 
5J 
CD 
(0 
<i 'J 
0) 
s 
3 
c 
23 
J 
a ^ 
= 2 
(A 
c - 
v« 
<& 
k 
« 
C 
^ 
<♦- 
X 
5 
I 
I 
No. 189.
APRIL 1891.
WKf 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
*i; 
'^'- 
x^ 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
CONDUCTED iiY 
WM.
DENIS ON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE IN SPECIAL DEFARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Royal Herbarium, Kew ; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE.
F.L.S,,M.B.O.U., 
Museum of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED MARKER, M.A., F.G.S-, 
St, John s College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, FX.S., 
Dewsbury ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Hudder>ficld ; 
W. HARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R. M.S., 
38, Sholebroke Avenue^ Leeds.
Vertebrates of the Western f^\n%\^—Ed^ar R.
IVaite, F.L.S 
White Grouse and White Partridges in Yorkshire— A%t'.
//.
A, Macpkerson, 
M.A.,M,B,O.U., Etc.
.. ..
.. 
In Memortam — (Robert Calvert) 
Wiscodera arctica and Pterostichus aethiops in Lancashire— C.
Redman 
Ornithological Notes from Redcar for ISG0-9i — T.
H. JVehon^ M.B.O.U,^ Etc.
Bsbliograpby— PVanero^amic Botany 18S7 
Notes— Ornithology 
Water Rail at Xorth Stainleynear Ripon— ff/T'.
R, A .SummerfieUi , B.A.
; Great 
Northern Diver near W^akcfield — Geo. Parkin ; Greac Northern Divers and 
Long-taileti Duck near Morecambe — T.
H. Neisan^ M.B.O.U,^ Etc*', 
Bittern in North Lincolnshire—/.
IV.
Harrisim.
Molfusca ..
. .
.. 
Burrowing Mollusca— i?.
TovdiUy B.A,^ 3f.C,S., Etc.
-Entomology ' ..
.. ..
Dasycera oHviella at Kiidale-in-CIeveland— y.
Gardner, E.
E.S.
; Coib'x sparsata 
and other Lepidoptera, Neuroptera, Trichoptera, and Orthoptera, near 
Thome Waste.— GfiJ.
T. P&rriit, F.L.S,, f.B.S, 
Note— Fishes 
Abundance of Haddocks off the coast of Redcar — T.
H. Nehon^ M.B.O. l/\j Etc, 
Note — Hynr\enoptera 
Preponderance of the Female In Sircx— C E.
George^ M,R,€ S.
Notes and News 
fAGE 
97 to 114 
116 & xt7 
119 to 124 
125 to 128 
117 
Note 
Notes 
X17 
118 
X24 
134 
115 
LONDON : 
LovELL Reeve S: Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, EX.
McCORQUODATE & CO.
LlMlTFT^, CaRDINGTON StREET, EuSTON ; 
A N- O 
Leeds: Basin<;hall Strket, 
I 
t 
riMwi 
A!l Communications should b« Addressed: — 
The Editors of The Naturalist,' 
Sunny Sank, Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (b/ Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post free.
NA TURA LIST.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
T. Mellard Reade.
— List of his Scientific Papers and Works.
8vo., Nov. 23rd, 
1890].
[Author.
York School Nat. Ilist., etc, Society, — 57th Ann. Rept., Jan. 1S91.
[Society.
Birmingham Nat. Hist, and Mic. Soc.
— Cist of Members, Jan. 1S91.
[Society.
Cumberland and Westmorland Association.
— Trans., No. 15, 1S89-90.
[Society.
Paul Leverkiihn.
— Fremde Eier im Nest.
8vo, 1891.
[The Author.
Journ.
of Conchology, Vol. 6, No. 9, January 1891.
[Conchological Society.
Essex Naturalist, Vol. iv, Nos. 10-12, October-December, 1891.
[Essex Field Club.
Grevillea, quarterly record of Cryptog.
Bot.
, No. 9 1 , Mch. 1891 .
[Dr, M.
C. Cooke, ed.
Manchester Geological Soc.
— Trans., vol.
21, parts 2 to 5, 1890.
[The Society.
Philadelphia Acad, of Nat, Sci.
— Proc, 1890, part 2, April September.
[Academy, 
Notarisia, Ann. 6, No. 23, 28 Febbraio, 1S90.
[Dr. David Levi-Morenos, Redattore.
Manchester Lit. and Phil.
Soc.
— Mem. and Proc.
,4lh Series, voL4jNos.i, 2, 1890-91.
[The Society.
Nuova Notarisia, 2 Marzo 1891.
[Dr. G.
B. de Toni, redattore, Padova, Italia, 
Natur.^ Novitates, 1891, No. i, Januar.
[Friedlander & Sohn, pubs.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 128, March 15, 1891.
[J.
E. Clark & others, Editors, York.
Yorkshire County Magazine, Part 3, March 1891.
[J.
Horsfall Turner, editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom..
Vol. 6, No. 179, March 1891.
[Camb.Ent. CL, U.S.A.
Science Gossip, No. 315, for March 1891.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 3, for March 1891.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg, 15, Nr. 4, Feb. 28, 1891.
' [Orn. Vereins in Wien.
Entomologists' Rec.
&Jn. of Variation, No. 12, March 15, i89i.[J.W.Tutt, editor.
Journal of Microscopy, N,S., Vol. i,No.3, March 1891.
[Bailliere & Co. publishers.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 159, Nfarch 1891, [Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, Vol. 15, No. 171, March 1891.
[J.
E. Harting, editor.
MADAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post-free.
Prices considerably reduced.
Correspondence in French and German (English not understood).
SIK:OIiA 
5 
Naturalist^ Membre de la Socute Eiitomolo^ique de France et de la 
Saciete Entomologique de Zurich, 
Annanarivo, Madag^ascar, vkt fVlarseille 
For Sale.
— Talbot s Birds of Wakefield, 2s.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist.
Im; ->ved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instruction- 1/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting/ illustrated, 34d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pup;^, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out *on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
€tc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
ANIIVCAIL, EYES 
OF EVERY DESGRiPTiON SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES.
J L.
ROSENKRANZ, 
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by JOHN W.
TAYLOR, F.L.S- 
L 
H-^ 
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles* dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol. VI.
commenced January 1889.
Vols.
I., IL, III., IV., and V.
may still be had.
This Journal, edited by ^Ir. J.
W. Taylor (who aiay be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Sovereign Street, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, who may 
be addressed at the Museum, Leeds.
Noxv ready, Defjiy 8z'o, with Map^ Price 73* ^- 
CONTRIBUTION TO THE FLORA OF DERBYSHIRE.
By the Rev. W, H.
PAINTER, 
Corr.
Mem. Birmingkaiu Nat. Hist, and Micro.
Society.
Giving a brief description of the Physical Features of Derbyshire, and 
a list of all the Flowering Plants and Ferns found therein, with their Princpal 
Habitats.
G. BELL & SONS, LONDON.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects, 
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTEXDED HY A.
B. FARN, 
T/te Chapter on Cohopteray by Edxvard Namnan.
CONTEXTS.— How to obtain the Egs by searcliing ; boxing female moths; pairing insects.
How to obuin Larv^ by beating ; the Uigneli tray ; sweeping ; searching by night ; how to rear 
the larvae; sleeving; hybernating larv.-c ; parasites; pre^^erving larvae.
Pf^pA digging; preserv- 
ing pupae; forcing pupse.
Thk Fkkfect Issect.
— Localities; net.
mothing : houeydcw ; 
sugarinc: light; indoor light: grouting: smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould ;cabiv\ets and store boxes; painting; arrangement and iiomenc.atnre : number of speci- 
mens 3iX\A manner of placing; tran^m ion by post; eutonioiogtcal diary: books, MiCRO- 
t,EPiDovTERA; Cos,Kui-rER A ; Hvmenohtera; BR£EuiN<i of Call-Fi.iks.
PRICE ONE SHlLLfNG.
LONDON: SOXNENSCflEIN c% ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE, 
//; PariSy at One Shillings "^vo^ imth Engrar^ings^ 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
By HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., RZ.S., etc., 
Editor 0j the yd and ^fh Velumes of Yarrelts * Hist&ry 0/ British Birds.
' 
Ei'Urt/i Editien, 
To be completed in about 20 monthly j^rts.
^^ROS^^ZECTTJS OInT -iV:E='i:MaTCA.a?XOI>r, 
GURNEY d?
JACKSON (Successors to Mr. Van VooRijT), 1, Paternoster Rr.w.
THE NATURALIST.
During the next few months it is hoped to insert the folloivin^ articles 
Fossil Climates.— A.
C. Seward, M.A,, F.G.S.
Vertebrate Fauna of Langstrothdale— C.
H. B.
Woodd, B.A, 
The Fungi of Langstrotlidale.— C.
Haaepden B, Woodd, B.A.
The Ancient Lavas of the English Lake District.— A.
Harker, M.A., F.G.S.
Are Starlings Double-hroodedP—REv. H.
H. Slater, M.A., F.Z.S.
(other contri 
butions to print at same time will be acceptable).
On the Study of Natural History.~H.
E. Dresser, F.L.S-, F.Z.S.
Osprey in I9"ottinghainsh.ire.— F.
B. AVhitlock.
( 
NATURALIST' REPRINTS 
Kg. L — List of Land and Freshwater MoUusca of Lancashire, by Robert 
Stand EN- 
No. II.
— Bird-notes from Hellg-oland for the year 1886, by Heinrich Gatke, 
L 
Xo. III.
— Heligoland, !)y Joiix Cordeaux, iNI.B.O.U.
(with autotype plate of 
views of Mr. Ciatke's garden).
NINEPENCE EACH, POST FREE.
From the Publishers of *The Naturalist/ Leeds 
Now ready ^ %vo, cloth ^ pr.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA 
5 
By G.
T, PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c., of the 1*340 species of macro- 
and micro-Iepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; ptarticulars of local variation 
in species; with ail other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DEXISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
E..rONSONBY KNUBLEY, Staveley Rectory, Leeds; 
EDGAR R.
WAITE, The Museum, Leeds.
LATURE OF COLOURS 
FOR THE USE OF NATURALISTS, 
AND ORiriTHOLGGISTS' COMPEIi'DIUM.
Bv ROBERT RWGWAY.
of the Smithsonian Institution 
-^^ — ™   ^-|- 
PRiCE 17s., POST FREE.
MAY BE HAD OF THE EDITORS OF THE 'NATURALIST.' 
LITTLE, BROWN & CO., BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A.
i 
J 
'  ffl 
c 
CO 
I 
X 
C 
I n 
23 
3 a 
X 
c 
a 
Q 
15 
13 
Q 
1 
SB 
a) 
CO 
1. 
o 
u 
1 
I 
! 
c 
o 
Si 
,"^'1 
I 
!3 5J 
£ 
J3 
.^ 
t1 
i 
^1 a V 
2: 
5^ 
rs 
O 
S -c 
44 
^ 
* 
w 
s- 
«» 
^ 
^- 
No. 190.
MAY 1891.
"isitft.
Tf.ir:'^, 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
CONDUCTED UV 
WiM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunnj' Hank, Leeds; 
WITH THK ASSISTANCK EN SPKCrAI.
DEPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Royal Herbarium, Kew ; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S..M.B.O.U., 
Museum of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A..
F.G.S,» 
St, Johns College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
Dewsbury ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRIIX F.L.S,, F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Huddersfield ; 
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., 
;$8j Sholebroke A\eiii;e, Leeds.
Bibliography— Phanerogamic Botany, 1887 
Hieracium orarium in Durham and West Yorkshire^ — C, £.
Martindaie 
Vertebrate Fauna of L:.
- s t rothdalc, Mid-West Yorks.— C.
//".
BJVaodd, B.A.
Langstrothdale Fungi—C.
//.
£. M'oodd, B.A 
Are Starlings Double-Brooded ^^Rez: Henry H.Siater,yf.A.,F.Z.S.,M.B.OA\ 
The Ancient Lavas of the English Lake District- Alfred Harker.M .A.^ F.G.^.
In Mernoriam--(XiCHOL.AS Wearmouth) 
Fossil Ciimates— .^.
C. Srzvard, JI.A., J'\G.S 
Bibliography: Lepidoptera.
1889 
Notes— Ornithology 
Ornitholagical Notes from the Humber district— y.
fK Harriso^i ; Goldcrests 
and Redstarts at Lasins:ton-ia-JioIderness — Philip W.
Loten ; Spring 
Migrants in Cleveland — T.
H, Xdsan\ Great Spotted Woodpecker and 
Hawfincn in Notts, nnd Yorkshire— 7*.
B. Plait; Biilern licar St. Hc!en>, 
Lancashire— /i.
G. Brook; Flamborough Bird-Notes— JAz//^£^' Ba''y.
Note— Phanerogamic Botany ..
.. ,.
Sedu0i Rhodiola DC—H'm, West, P.L.S.
Notes— MamnriaHa -• • .
Churchwardens' Accoimts.
Coclcerington St. Mary's.
North Lincolnshire ~ 
y.r 'tt ^ : r; Red Keld Vo!e> near Lotherton, Vorksiiire— — Edgar K .
lVaite,f.L,S.
; ComiUfm Field Voles at ILct^M^—KdgnrK.Waite^F.LS.
Note -Leptdoptera 
I^.
J>emia Icucophearia var.
nigricaria at Dotvcaster— //.
H. C&r^trti^Tl.K ,C.S., 
and G~ T.
Purriti, PL.S.
N^ot«5 artd News 
129 to 133 
134 
140 to 142 
143 ^^ 144 
145 to 147 
148 
149 to 155 
iS7 to 160 
134 & 139 
»39 
144 
»S5 
r56 
LONDON : 
LovKi.i Kekve iK: Co..
5. IIknkietta Street, Covknt Gakdkn.
E.C.
1 '^.* r > 
{^(.^p-nv: PtAsrN*.-.
^t I- Stkkvt 
AH Commi^nicsLVion^ should b« Addressed: 
The Editors of *T^ Naturalist/ 
ounr.y Bank.
Leeds.
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFiCE only), 5s,, post free 
The NATURALIST.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
The Coachologist, Vol. i, No. i, March 25th, 1891.
[\V.
E. Collinge, Editor.
New Zealand Journ.
of Science, Vol. i, No. i, Jan. 1891.
[The Editor.
The Monist, Vol. i, No, 3, April 1891.
[The Editor, Chicago, U:S.A.
Entomological Society of London.— Transactions for year 1890.
[The Society.
D. Embleton.— Memoir [with portrait] of John Hancock.
1S91.
[The Author.
Alfred Harker.— Petrol.
Notes on Some Boulders fromE.
York, 1SS9.
[The Author.
A, Harker.— Contortion and Metamorphism, 1890, 8vo.
reprint.
[The Author.
A. Harker.— Woodwardian Museum Notes, 8vo.
reprint, April 1891.
[The Author.
Rochdale Lit. and ScL Soc.
— Trans., Vols, i and 2, 1878-90.
[Society.
Smithsonian Institution.
— Report for 1888, in two volumes.
[The Institution.
Journ.
of Conchology, Vol, 6, No. 10, April 1891.
[Conchological Society.
Manchester Geological Soc.
--Trans., vol.
21, part 6, 1891.
[The Society, 
Berichtiib.
d.Verlagsthatigkeitv.
Friedlander& Sohn,No. 16, 1890, Oct- Dec.[Pubs.
Mineralogical Magazine, VoL 9, No. 43, March 1891.
' [Mineralogical Society.
Notarisia, Ann. 5,No.22,3i Dicembre, 1890.
[Dr. David Levi-Moreno^,Redattore.
Manchester Lit.
& Phil.
Soc.—Mcui.& Proc, 4th Series,vol.4, No. 3, 1S91.
[Society.
New Vork Microscopical Soc— Journ., Vol. 7, No. 2, April 1891.
[The Society.
Scottish Naturalist, N.S., No.
^2^ April 1891.
[Prof.
J. W.
H. Trail, co-editor.
Revue Bryoiogique, iS^' Annee, 1891, No. 2.
[M.T. Husnot, redacteur, Cahan.
Naturae Novitates, 1891, Nos. 2 to 4, Jan.
-Feb.
[Friedlander & Sohn, pubs.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 129, April 15, 1S91.
[J.
E. Clark & others, Editors, Vork.
Yorkshire County Magazine, Part 4, April 189X.
[J.
Horsfall Turner, editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom., Vol. 6, No. 180, April 1S91.
[Camb.Ent. CI., U.S.A.
Science Gossip.
No. 316, for April 1S91.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 4, for April 1S91.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg.
15, Nr. 7, 15 April, 1891.
" [Orn. Vereins in Wien.
Entomologists' Rec.
& Jn. of Variation, No. i, April 15, 1891.
[J.
W.Tutt, editor.
Journal of Microscopy, N.S., Vol. i,No.4, April 1S91.
[Bailliere &Co. publishers.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 160, April 1891.
[Birmingham Nat. Hist.
Soc.
The 7.oo\Qg\%t^ 3rd Series, \^oI.
15, No. 172, April 1891.
[J.
E. Harting, editor.
Now ready ^ %vo.
doth^ price 6/-, post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA 
5 
y G.
T. PORRiTT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c., of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary inforniation on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DEXISON ROEBUCK, Sunny iJank, Leeds; 
E. PONSOXBY KNUBLEY, Staveley Rectory, Leeds; 
EDGAR R.
WAITE, The Museum, Leeds.
For Sale.
— Talbot's Birds of Wakefield, 2s.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) ami Metal Blowpipe with instructions r/'j free.
• Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3id.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-biovvn and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvse, and Pup», 
Ar^i^cial Ejes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &€., sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
«lc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lbts free.
JS^l^XlMLiELlL.
EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES.
J L.
ROSENKRANZ.
THE INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE 
.(THE JOURNAL OF THE POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL AND WESLEY 
NATURALISTS' SOCIETIES).
Editors— Alfred Allen, Hon. Sec.P.M.S.
; Rev, W, Spiers, M.A., F.G.S., &c, 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY, PRICE SIXPENCE- 
Contains a number of valuable and interesting articles relating to Microscopy *aiid the allied 
Sciences, written by Specialists, and illustrated with Lithographic Plates and Wood Engravings.
- /BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
^^ "^^'VC.
H. KELLY, Castle Street, City Road.
^ew York: THE SCIENCE CO., 47, Lafayette Place.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDEN TS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by JOHN \V.
TAYLOR, F.L.S.
Contains Descriptions and Fig^ures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
^Vol. VL commenced January 1SS9.
Vols.
I., IL, III., IV., and V.
may still be had.
This Journal, edited by Mr. J- W.
Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steim Colour Printing Works, Sovereign Street, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of nevv members may be had from the Secretary, who may 
be addressed at the Museum, Leeds.
THE BRITISH NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of^ 
G. C.
BfGNELL, Piymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
C S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpoot.
J. P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G* ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, pst free.
Montlily Siipplements are given, iutended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
T. W.
Dale, of GlanvJIles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all 'reputed' species, and fufl 
bibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuhcs, rendering it the most complete worfc yet issued.
AH orders and other commtmications to be addressed to JOHN E.
SOBSCHt, Hartiepoof, 
THE ENTOMOLOGISTS RECORD 
AND JOURNAL OF VARIATION.
Edited by J.
W. TUTT, F.E.S.
VOL.
I now complete, with FOUR CHROMO-LITHO.
PLATES.
An illustrated Monthly Joomal of General Entomofogy, devoted specially 
to the interests o( British working Lepidopterists, publishe ' 1 5th of each month.
Subscription for VoL II, 6s.
per n.nnurn, post free, cotnineacing April 1S91, may be 
sent to the Editor, c/o Mr. E.
Knight, 18 and 19, Mividle Street, Aldersgate, E.G.
THE NATXJRAIjIST.
During ike next few months it is Jtoped to insert the foilozvins articles 
Some "Word-Pictures from Nature.— Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A.
Report on the Erosion of the Yorkshire Coast.— Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., 
F.G.S.
The Yorkshire Der^\^ent and its Fishes.- Hubert Dacre.
Are the Same Species of Birds more prolific in IN'orth than in South 
and Mid Europe ?— John F.
Tho:^iasson.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEX, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. EARN.
The Chapter on Cokopte-ra^ by Edivard Newman.
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching ; boxing female moths ; pairing insects.
How to obtain Larv^ by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; searching by night ; how to rear 
thelarvze; sleeving; hybernating larvse ; parasites; preserving larvse.
Pupa digging; preserv- 
ing pupae ; forcing pupae.
The Perfect Ls^ect.
— Localities; net; mothing ; honeydew ; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould; cabinets and store boxes ; painting; arrangement and nomenclature; number of speci- 
mens and manner of placing; transmission by post; entomological diary; books.
Micro- 
LEprDOpTERA: CoLEOPTEKA; Hymenoptera ; Breeding OF Gall-Fi.ies.
PRICE ONE SHiLUNG.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & ALLEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
El 
In PariSy at One Shilling, Svo, with Engravings, 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
Bv HOWARD SAUNDERS, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., 
J 
Editor of the yd and ^th Volumes of Yarrelts ' History of British Birds,^ 
Fourth Edition.
To be completed in about 20 mtjnthly parts.
SIE^IEOTTJS OZT JLIPI^XaTa^^ 
GURxVEV k JACKSuN (Successors to Mr. Vax Voorst), i, Paternoster Row.
Notu ready.
Demy %vo, with Map, Price 7s, 6d.
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE FLORA OF 
1 
Bv THE Rev. W, H.
PAINTER, 
Corr, Mem. Birnmigkam Nat. Hist, and Micro, Society, 
p4J^ 
Giving a brkf description of the Physical Features of Derbyshire, and 
a list of all the Flowering Plants and Feras found therein, with their Principal 
Habitats.
G. BELL & SONS, LONDON 
No. 192.
JULY 1891.
* V 
.4* 
F-^^ 
- t 
ft 
l'iii.i:i^j,l^.,, ^ 
'   " ►**4*lt,.
> 
MONTHLY JOURNAL 
NATUrUL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF 
CONDUCTED BV 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WITH THE ASSISTANXE IN SPECIAL DEPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.l^.S., F.L.S., 
Royal Herbarium, Kew ; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U..
Museum of Science Sc Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A..
F.G.S., 
St. John's College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
Dewsbury ; 
GEORGE T, PORRITT, F.L.S..
F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Hiiddersfield ; 
W. EARWELL TURNER,' F.C.S., FR.M.S., 
38, Sholebroke Avenue.
Leeds.
V * 
* fe 
Bfbliogpapby— Phanerogamic Botany, 1833 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Upper Swaledale 
Bird-Notes from North Lincolnshire, March, April, f/i^.y,'\S9^—yc/lnCor£ieau.^ , 
M.B.O.Cr 
Some Notes on the White Wagtail— ^r:\ //*.
A. MacphersoHy M.A., M.B.OM.
Some Word-Pictures taken from Nature— AVt'.
IV.
C. Hey^ M.A.
J AGF 
• » 
t * 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union ; 29th Annual Report 
Yorkshire Naturalists* \^n\on : Annual Meeting at Halifax 
Notes — Climatology ..
.. 
F,-as in the Ftost—yo/ift Eminet^ F.L,S.\ Unseasonably Weather :n MidO-^ y 
(Staveiey, near Borough bridge)— A'^r.
E. P.
K '.'/', M,A.t M.B.O. U.
Notes— Ornithoiogy ..
.. 
Two Cuckoo's Egg 
193 
to 199 
200 
to ao8 
209 
^; 2to 
21t 
& 212 
3U5 
to 2l8 
219 Xo 223 
224 
20S 
in one Nest— ^.
Larder\ Hoxied Crow on JBoard Ship 
3X4 
E. T, Baldzvin ; Turtle Dove near Robin Hood'5 Bay— i£'t/^«r R 
IVaiUt J^.Z.S.
; Birds and Snow in May (.Ooath!..
•)— :  V/ii 
/fi 
Note — Botany 
SwaiecUle PUnts— ?.
G. Goodc^Uid, E.G.S,, 
21S 
B,0-t'.
Notes and News • ^^> 213, 213 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrtetta STKEi^.i, Covent Garden.
E.C.
M CORQUODALE & CO.
LlMITEP.
CaRDINGTON STREET, EtJSTON ; 
an:' 
Lt.k-ds: BASiNt^HALi, Street.
» 
t 
Alt Communfcatfons should be AddressetS:— 
The Editors of 'The Natura^^st/ 
Sunny 8ji'^^'<, Le«u».
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFF iCE only), 5s,, post fr^e 
The NATURALIST.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Xat. Hist, Joiirn., X6.
131, June 15, 1S91.
[J.
E. Clark & others, editors, York.
Psyche: joiirn.
of entbm., Vol. 6, No. 182, June 1S91.
[Camb.Enl. CI., U.S.A.
Science Gossip.
Xo. 31S, for June iSgi, [Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 6, for June 1891.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Entomologists' Rec.
&: Jn. of Variation, Nos. 3 and 4, June i and 15,1891.
[Editor.
Journal of Micro3copy,N.S., Vol. i,Xo. 6, June 1891.
[Bailliere & Co. publishers.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 162, June 1S91.
[Birmingham Nat. Plist.
Soc.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, Vol. 15, No. 174, June 1891.
[J.
E. Harting, editor.
Essex Naturalist, Vol. v, Nos. i-5,Januaiy-April, 1891.
[Essex Field Club.
Greviliea, quarterly record of Cryptog.
Bot.
, No,92, June, 1891 .
[Dr. M.
C. Cooke, ed.
II NaturalistaSiciiiano,ann.
lOjU.
5, Febbraio, 1S91.
[Signor Enrico Ragusa.
The Conchologist, Vol. i, No. 2, June 24th, 1S91.
[W.
E. Collinge, editor.
Journ.
of Conchology, Vol. 6, No, ii, July 1S91.
[Conchological Society, 
Notarisia, Ann. 6, No. 24, 30 Aprile, 1891.
[Dr. David Levi-Morenos,Redattore.
Naturae Novitates, 1891, Nos. 5 to 8, Marz-April.
[Friedlander & Sohn, pubs.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg.
i, Nr. 9-10, 15-31 Mai, 1891.
[Orn. Vereins in Wien.
The Mediterranean Nat., VoL I, No. i, June 1st, 1891.
[J.
H. Cooke, editor.
British Association.— Report of 60th meeting, Leeds, 1S90.
[The Association.
J. C.
Atkinson, — Forty years in a Moorland"^ Parish, 8vo, cloth, 1891, 
[Macmillan & Co., publishers.
Johnnie Gray.— Through Airedale fromGooletoMalham, Svo, cloth, 1891.
[Author.
J. CChay ton— Notes on the Salmon Tribe of theTees,8vo, 1890.
[W.
Dresser, pub.
East of Scotland Union of Nat. Socs.— Proc.
Montrose meeting, 1890.
[The Union.
Alfred Harker.— Rocks from the Tonga Islands, 8vo reprint, 1891.
[Author.
Benj.
Holgate.— Some Physical Properties of Coal, 8vo reprint, 1891.
[Author, 
Liverpool Nat. F.
Club.— Proceedings for 1890, 8vo, 1891.
[The Club.
THE BRITISH NOCTURE AND THEIR VARIETIES 
) 
<--" 
By J, W.
TUTT, F.E.S.
VOLUME L, PRICE Ss. 6d.
NET.
Published 
or 
This Volume has already been largely subscribed for by many of our leadin 
British, North- American, Australian, and Continental Lepidopterists.
It is trusted that as many entomologists as can do so, and who have not yet 
subscribed, will send in their names to the author, 
J, W, TXTTT, Westcombe Hill, S.E.
NOTICES AND OPINIONS, 
'* Advanc : collectors will not be able to do without the new book if they do not often want 
to have to deal with varietal names unintelligible to them" (iTuekhn Borse, June ist, 1S91).
" I bel-.eve that your British Xeciu^e- and c-Jr Varieties will be a permanent authoritv on its 
interesting subject.
The varieties will all have to be worked cut as you ha\   ione, a> well as the 
species' uA.i!g.
K. Grote, Bremenj June 3rd, 1S91).
" I must compliment you upon the success of 
the first volume.
It contains a vast amount of matter and useful information and gives evidence 
of creat care in its production " (Birmingham).
**It is of the greatest interest and a vaUiable 
addition to our bibliography on Entomology " (London).
" On the -.vhole it is of great merit 
and will be very useful, especially m the matter of what was first figured and described as types.
This, alone, is information which_ has hitherto been very expensive to p - _r_-.
^einz that one 
must have all the entomological literature extant, to have any knoT*iedge tt aii on i le subject " 
Warrington).
*' I must congratulate you on having accomplished the ^^^r r- ;: f .v^-t is a 
most valuable contribution to entomologicai science" (Armagh).
' *.lay the recoitd volume be as 
good as the one before me'' (Lc;.Jon).
'* It appears as if it will be o^ Treat use ' (L.-crpooI)* 
'* It is a great t.
r< and takc.^ ijme reading, bur i^ most interesting'^ (Winchester).
*' It '!
'Ni .
f ' :;.
y €o " ':::,:' - .^e to me" ^C ;>»>, ^ Appears toi>e a valuaUW^and exh^, ' ewoik 
Mr:-, am).
It is a n\ '"' j : "  : e bo.k" (BognorX "A valuaDle -'..
h: h I hope 
before long %vt1I be completed " (Oxford).
'It will le a valuable aid in findi:-,: the ^ -rect 
nomenclature in that complicatetl work of — ning --rt r'n ^^-^^cies uhich are .>u..jecc co mu-a 
variation " (Preston).
'*The utility of be'-p';^ aLile to put your hatid upon a v^^'Tr'*- ntainin^ aU 
the material rc^;^".:'"c-' :\i the r.> .•ient, with no time for research, cannot be *^; ..
:. Vour b'_.
:-: 
fii!fi!s th;- c :r;.
.:.::.;:;.
^r.J .' _..;s t'j me to b^ an important c.jntr:'  ,.';'.
. .
:.j e..: '."" ' C--^^ 
5 > ^\,AiX< 
For Sa!e.— Talbot's Birds of Walcefield, 2S.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free, 
* Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting/ illustrated, 3id.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches xvith date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pup^e, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites, Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &c., sent out ^on approval/ 
J. & W.
DAViS (Naturaiists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
Fete, is John Eggieston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free.
Al^IIVIJLJl. EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES.
J. L.
X>r>esde3a, 1* (Gei?rk"ia.xi3r) 
i 
NATURALIST' REPRINTS.
No. L— List of Land and Freshwater Mollusca of Lancashire, by Robert 
Staxdex.
Jv'o.
IL— Bird-notes from Heligoland for the year 1S86, by Heixrich Gatke, 
Ko. III.— Heligoland, by John Cordeaux, :\LB.0.U.
(with autotype plate of 
views of Mr. Gatke's garden).
NINEPENCE EACH, POST FREE.
From the Publishers of *The Natviralist/ Leeds 
Now read)\ compkU^ 8v<?, clotk^ with Coloured Map, price £1 \s, od, 
THE FLORA OF WEST 
* 
By FREDERIC ARNOLD LEES, M.R.C.a, etc 
This, which forms the and Volume of the Botanical Series of the Tr ctions, i> perhaps 
the most complete work of the kind ever issued for any district, incuiding detailed and full 
records of 1,044 Phaiierogams and Vascular Cryptogams, n Characeas, : 1** Mosses, xoS Hepatics^ 
258 Lichens, 1,009 Fungi, and 382 Freshwater Algae, making a total ci j,i6o species.
LoxDOX: LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden; 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DEXISOX ROEBU 
E. PONSOXBY KXUBLEV 
EDGAR R.
WAITE, The Museum, Leeds.
^I FV ' f S^^"^>' S^nk, Leeds.
THE ENTOMOLOGISrS RECORD 
AND JOURNAL OF VARL4TI0N.
Edited by J.
W. TUTT, F.E.S.
VOL.
! now complete, with FOUR CHROrvIO-LITHO.
PLATES.
An Hiustrated .Mon-Jily Journnl of Genera!
Ento.i'ology, a.,.oteJ 'specially 
to the interests o{ British vjtking Lepidopterists, published x5thofeach month.
Subscriptionfor V, I II, 63.
per annum, post free, commenc;.
j, April 1S9I, maybe 
sent to '^0 Editor, c o >tr.
E. K:/^'.*, iS and 19, Middle Street, Aldersgate, EX.
THE I^ATTJUAIjIST.
During the 7iext fei-u jnoriths ii is hoped to insert the folloivijig articles', — 
Keport on the ICrosion of tlie Yorkshire Coast.— Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.
A., 
- F.G.S.
The yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes.— Hudert Dacre, 
Are the Same Species of Birds more prolific in I^orth than in South 
and Mid Europe ?— Jokx P.
Thomasson.
Additions to the Algae of ^\^est Yorkshire.— Wm. West, F.L.S.
MADAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the semce 
of all the world, gratis and post-free.
Prices considerably reduced* 
CorresDondence in French and German (Enelish not understood).
F. sxK:omL 
J 
Naturalist^ Memhre de la Societe Entomologiqite de F-ranca €t de la 
Sociiti Entomologiqtte de Zurich^ 
Annanarfvo, Maciagrascar, via Marseille 
Just Published, Cj'Oujh 8vo, Cloth limp^ Zl^ PP"> S-^* ?
^^l^ 3^- 9^- 5 ^y ^^^^ 
THROUGH 
K.oi«i: 
Bv JOHNNIE GRAV (H.
Speight), 
M €7 fiber of the Y-.^rkshire Naturalists Union', the Bradford Katuralists^ Society \ &^c.
Author of ^A Tourist's View of Ireland,' 'Pleasant Walks around Bradford/ &a " 
This voluminous, original work, a large proportion of which is printed in a small but clear 
tfpe, embraces Historical, Descriptive, and Natural History notices of the whole of the Aire 
valley, with complete Itineraries of the country lo to 20 miles around the principal places.
The work also contains exhaustive introductory chapters on the 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and ANGLING in AIREDALE.
SEVENTY IlLLUSTRATIOKS AKD MAP.
LEEDS : Walker & Laycock, BRADFORD : T, Break & Co, Ltd, 
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
PRICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY.
Edited by C.
G. Barrett, J.
W, Douglas, W.
W, Fouler, M.A., F.L.S.,.
R. McLachlan, r.R.S-, E.
Saunders, F.L.S., and 
H. T, Sxainton, F.R.S.
This Magazine, commence J in 1864, contains standard Ar'.I:!.- and Njtes 
on all subjects connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of 
the British I^Ies.
Subscription — Six Shil!:n^5 per annum, post free, 
London; GURNET k JACKSON (Mr, Van Voorst's Successors), I, Paternoster Bo^.
N.B.— A Second Surie-^ was commenced with the Number for January 1S90.
No. 193.
AUGUST 1891.
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
•-ik 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
CONDUCTED 1?Y 
WM.
DEN I SON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE tN SPECIAL DEi'AKTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Royal Herbarium, Kew; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S..
M.B.O.U..
Museum of Science & Art, EdiuUurgh ; 
ALFRED MARKER, M.A,, F.G.S..
St, John's College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F,L.S..
Dewsbury ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Huddersfield; 
W. HARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., 
38, Sholebroke Avenue, Leeds.
§onicx\is: 
FAGH 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union: Annual Meeting at Halifax {continued)..
Through Airedale: from Gooie to Malharri (Review) 
325 to 231 
331 & 233 
j The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Leckby Carr ..
23310240 
icterine Warbler at Easington in Hoiderness: An Addition to the Yorkshire 
Avlfaiuna.
- /okn CtprJc'aux, M.B.O.l/.
Early Notice of the Pink-Footed Goose in Yorkshire—/?^?.
//.
A. Macpherson^ 
M.A,,M.B,OM, ..
.. 
Additions to the Freshwater Alg^ of West Yorkshire— ?K.
W-Vj?, F.L.S.
Bibliography— Mammalia, 1883 
Note— ecology 
Geological Photographic Comnihtee of the V.N.U- 
Notes^Botany .
. .
. -^ 
I!ifalham PUnis— JJ>^.
IVest, jun.; Ch-^ra vulgaris (L.) ^-ar.
Jongibracteata 
(Kuetz.) — Walter \P\ K*:€Vfs\ SaAifraga oppositifolia at Moughton — 
K. F.^" F.
P. ThompSiiH.
Note— Ornithology 
The Chough in Yorkshire—iirj'.
H, A.
Mac^htrsm, M.A,, M.B.O.lf.
Note— Coleoptera 
Pyropterus affiniA near Doncaster— £".
G. Bayford, 
Notes asid News 
941 
343 
243 to 233 
353 to 356 
331 
241.
352 
252 
242 
LONDON: 
I.ovKLL Reeve & Co., 5, IlKNRiiirrA Street, Covent Garden, E.C:, 
NKCoRQUODALK ^.^ Co. LIMITKD, CARIilNaTON StKEET, EuSTON ; 
Lhhds: BAsiNtiMAi.r, Strhrt.
lA&Ud^ 
AW Con^r -untcations should be Addressed:— 
The Editors of 'The Naturalist/ 
Sunny Bank, Leeds 
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence;.
ANNUAL SUBSCRlPTiON (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post fr^^ 
The NATURALIST.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Philadelphia Acad, of Nat. Sci.
— Proc, 1891, part r, Jan.
-April.
Botanical Exchange Club of British Isles.
— Report foriSgo.
New 
[Academy.
[The Club.
New Zealand Journ.
of Science, Vol. i, No. 3", February 189T.
[The Editor.
Berichtub.
d.Verlagsthatigkeit v.
Friedlander&Sohn, No- 1 7,1891, Jan.
-Mar.
[Pubs, 
w York Microscopical Soc.
— Journ., Vol. 7, No. 3, July 1891.
[The Society.
Scottish Naturalist.
N.S., No. zi, July 1S91, [Prof.
J. W, H.
Trail, co-editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom., Vol. 6, No. 183, July 1891.
[Cauib.Ent. CI., U.S.A.
Science Gossip, No. 319, for July 1891.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 7, for July 1891.
[Mr, John E.
Robson, editor.
Entomologists' Rec.
& Jn. of Variation, No. 5, July 15, 1891.
[Editor.
Journal of Microscopy,N.S., Vol. i,No. 7, July 1891.
[Bailliere & Co. publishers.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, Vol. 15, No, 175, July 1891.
[J, E.
Harting, editor.
Notarisia, Ann. 6, No. 25,3oGiugno, 1891.
[Dr. David Levi-Morenos, Redattore.
Natur;Te Novitates, 1891, Nos. 9 to 11, May-June.
[Friedlander & Sohn, pubs.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg.
15, Nr. 13, Juli 15, 1S91.
[Orn. Vereins in Wien.
Insecten-Borse, 8 Jahrgang No. 14, 15 Juli, 1891.
[Editors, Leipzig.
The Nautilus — Vol. 4, in 12 numbers.
May 1S90— April 1891.
[Editors.
Alfred Harker.
— Rocks from the Tonga Islands, 8vo reprint, June 1891.
[Author.
Reprints of three papers on Priority in Demonstrating the Toxic Effect of Matter 
accompanying the Tubercle Bacillus and its Nidus, 8vo, 1891.
[Acad.
Philad.
B. G.
Johns.
— Among the Butterflies, 8vo cloth, 1891.
[Isbister & Co., publishers.
1 
Now ready ^ %vo.
dotk^ price 6/-, post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA 
B/ G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Contains copious records of the localities, &c,, of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit tbe county ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists* Union, 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
E. PONSONBY KNUBLEY, Staveley Rectorj^ Leeds; 
EDGAR R.
WATTE, The Museum.
Leeds.
For Sale.
—Talbot's Birds of Wakefield, 2s.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist, 
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions I/3 free.
' Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3Jd. free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvse, and Pupae, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
Ail 
specimens, ^c, sent out 'on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, KenU 
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
I^ ts free.
AlNTIlVIAi:^ EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES.
J. L.
ROSENKRANZ, 
X>i?^sd^Tt, 14 (0*ii:»iit^ainy 
\ 
THE BRITISH NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E, Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of- 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpoo!.
Dr. ELLIS, LiverpooL U.
P. SOUTTER, Bishop Auckrand, 
G. ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB.
Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to form when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
J. W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton, It contains an account of all 'reputed* species, and full 
bibliographical details of the references to the various species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
INDISPENSABLE TO, STUDEN TS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited Ly JOHN W.
TAYLOR, F.L.S.
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, ])y the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
-^ Vol. VL commenced January 1SS9.
Vols.
L, H., in.
3 IV., and V.
may still be had.
This Journal, edited by Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Sovereign Street, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s.
per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, who may 
be addressed at the Museum, Leeds.
THE INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE 
(THE JOURNAL OF THE POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL AND WESLEY 
NATURALISTS* SOCIETIES).
Editors — Alfred Allex, Hon. Sec.
P.M. S.; Rev. W.
Spiers, ALA., F.G.S., &C- 
PUBLfSHED MONTHLY, PRICE SIXPENCE.
Contains a number of vahiabic and interesting articles relating to Microscopy and the allied 
Sciences, written by Specialists, and iHiistrated with Lithographic Plate-s and Wood Engravings, 
rBAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King William St., Strand, W.C.
^10.
H. KELLY, Castle Street.
City Road, 
li^'^^ York: THE SCIENCE CO, 17, Lafayette Place.
'NATURALIST' REFRINTS~No. L 
iVATER MOLIOSCA OF LANCASHI 
This paper contains not only Mr. Standen's own observations^ but those of Me?:srs, R.
D, 
Darbishire.
T. Rogers, W.
H. Heathcote, J.
A. Har^reaves, F.
C. Long, H.
Stephensr^n.
and 
other conchologists.
and the observations pubhshed in Dy a's list of 1850, and in Hardy's 
\<ts of 1864 and 1865, are repro ' i.ed for comp-ir!
n, 
tr 
Price 9d.
(By post, 9id.) 
To be had from the Publishers of the •Naturalist/ Sunny Bank, Leeds.
TSJB I^ATXJIIAIjIST.
During ike nexi Jew ?no}iths it is hoped to insert the fjUoivijig articles*.
— 
^Report on the Erosion of tlie Yorkshire Coast.— Kev. E.
Maule Cole, M.
A., 
F.G.S, 
The YorksMre Der^svent and its Fishea.— Hubert Dacre.
Are the Same Species of Birds more prolific in iN'orth than in South, 
and Mid Europe ?— John' P.
Thomasson.
lueaves from a Conchologist's I^ote-Book.— W.
Nelson, M.C.S 
Ne^ir Yorkshire Earth- Worms.
—Rev. Hilderic Friend, F.L.S.
Observations on the ^WTiite Wagtail.— ^Oliver V.
Aplin, M.B.O.U.
Just Published.
Crozvn 8zv, Ciotk HmJ^, Zl^ PP-i 5-^- J ^^h 3-S".
9^.
; By Pasty 45, 
THROUGH AIREDALE : 
ZB^^aoiyn C3-OOIL 
Bv JOHNNIE GRA\.^ (H.
Speight), 
Metnher of the Yorkshire Naiuraltsts Umon; the Bradford Naturalists Society, cj^c^ 
Author of 'A Tourist's View of Ireland/ * Pleasant Walks around Bradford,' &a 
This voluminous, original work, a Urge proportion of which is printed in a small but clear 
type, embraces Historical, Descriptive, and Natural History notices of the whole of the Aire 
valley, with complete Itineraries of the country lo to 20 miles around the principal places.
The work also contains exhaustive introductory chapters on the 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and ANGLING in AIREDALE.
SEVEKXy ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP.
LEEDS : Walker & Laycock.
BRADFORD : T.
Erear & Qo. Ltd, 
MADAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post - free- Prices considerably reduced- 
Cnrre^iDondence in French and German fEneHsh not understood).
Nattiralisty Membre de la Socieie Entomohi^ujue de France et de la 
Socit'te Entomologiqne de Zurich^ 
Annanarlvo, Madagascar, vld Marseille.
E BRITISH NOCTURE AND THEIR YAR 
) 
Bv J.
W. TUTT, F.E.S.
VOLUME L, PRICE §s.
6d.
JNt:*T, 
Published by Swan, Souaenscliein & Co., Paternoster Square, W.C.
This Volume has already been largely subscnl>efl for by many of our leading 
Briilsh, North-American, Austraiian, and Continental Lepidopterists, 
It is trusteii that as many entomoloi^ists as can do so, and who have not yet 
subscribed, will send in iheii names to the author, 
J. "W.
TUTT, Westcombe Hill, S.E.
No. 194.
SEPTEMBER 1891.
'^HlW 
MONTHLY lOUKNM 
NATURAL MISTOKY FOR THE NORTFI OF ENGLAND 
coNPUCTEi) nv 
\VM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Banlc, Leeds; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCK IN SPKCIAI, UEFARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKEK, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Koyal Herhariuiii, Kew ; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.5..
M.ILO.U., 
Museum of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED MARKER, M.A., F.G-S., 
St. John's College, Canibridge; 
CHAS.
r. HOBKIRK.
F.L.S., 
Dewshnry ; 
(;K0RGE T.
PORRFIX F-L.S., K.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Hudder.-«fieM ; 
\V.
IJARWELL TURNER, F.C.S..F.R. M.S..
38, Sholebroke Aveuiie, Lctfds.
tA<iH 
Contents: 
Bibliography— Mammalia, 1888 {continued) 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Grassington ..
In Memoriam— (Daniel Mackintosh.
F.G.S.) ,.
271 & 272 
257 to 259 
2^1 to 269 
Extracts from a Conchologist's Note-Book— ?^7///aw Nelsan, Ji/.CS, ..
Daubenton's Bat Added to the Yorkshire Fauna— (f.
Ea^fe Clarke, F.L.S 
New Yorkshire Earthworms — Re7f, Hilderic Frknd^ F'^L.S, ..
., 
Variation in British Noctuae (Review) 
Additions to West Yorkshire Fungi (Hymenontycetcs^— iV.
I\ So^pitt ..
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Hayburn Wyke 
Note— Fungi 
Geaster hygrometicus Fr. ia Wiiarfedale — Percy M.
Grimsh 
Notc- 
273 ^^ 274 
276 & 277 
277 & 27S 
279 to 283 
283 to 288 
\*i %\~ 
Lepidoptera .
. 
Larentia ruficiiictata near ScorWrough — Reginald //.
Barker.
^11 
Note 
G. Bay/ord.
-Mammalia 
Badger in South Vorkshi 
Notes~OrnHho!ogy 
Blue Tits— .4.
C. H^ti^l Pheasant Ne^t by RoaiMUc— ^^.
E, 3rauU C&le, 
Af.A; F.G.S.
Notes and News 
2S3 
aS2 
260, 270, 274 
LONDON : 
LovsLL Reeve Sc Co., 5, Hf.nkietta Street, Cjvent Garden EX\ 
M^'CoKnuoDA!
r *?t Co. Limited, Cardington Street, Euston; 
ANU 
Lei-,-,.
BAstsanj^tt.
Stkekt.
-^v+T- *— r   T H-«^F-— -^i !
-  - 
t 
Ail Communications should be Addre^wd:— 
The £ditpr» of "The Natiurallst/ 
Sunny Bank, Leeds.
PRICE S!XPENCE <by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SU8SCRiPTi0^4 (from the OFFICE onfyV 5s., post free 
A Monthly Journal of Natural History for the Northern (Jou^iiks of England, viz.:— 
Nokthu:mrkkland, Durham, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshirk.
Derbyshire, Cheshikl 
Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland, and the Isle of Man, 
The 
NA TURA LIS T.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Eastbourne NaL Hist.
Soc.— Trans., N, S., VoL 2, Part 4— 1 889 90.
[Society.
Yorkshire Geol.
and Polyt.
Soc— Proc, N.S., Vol. 1 1, Part 3— 1891, [Society.
J. C.
MelvilL— Historical Account of the Genus Lathits^ 8vo.
reprint, 47 pp.
arul 
plate, 1S91.
[The Author.
J. W.
Williams.
— The Telescope (Young Collector Series), 8vo.
cloth, 1891.
[Swan, Sonnenschein k Co., publishers.
Revue Bryologique, iS*-* Annee, 1891, No. 4.
[M.
T. Husnot, redacteur, Cahan.
Yorkshire County Mag., Parts 7-8, July- Aug. 1S91.
[J.
Horsfall Turner, editor.
Bristol Nat. Soc.— Proc, N.S., Vol. 6, Part 3 (1890-91).
[Society.
Iluddersfield Nat. Soc.
— Monthly Circular, Nos. 18-19, June-July, 1891.
[Society.
Smithsonian Institution.
— Report for 1889, Vol. I, 1890.
[The Institution.
Manchester Geological Soc— Trans., vol.
21, parts 7-10, 1S91.
[The Society.
Manchester Lit.
& Phil.
Soc— Mem.
& Proc, 4th Ser.,vo!.4,Nos,4-5, 1891.
[Society.
The Midland Naturalist, Nos. 163-4, July-Aug. XS91.
[Birmingham N.
H. S.
The Mediterranean Nat., Vol. r, Nos. 2-3, Juiy-Aug. 1891.
[J.
H. Cooke, editor.
New Zealand Journ.
of Science, Vol. i.
No. 4, July 1S91.
[The Editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom., Vol. 6, No. 184, Aug. 1891.
[Camb.Ent. CI., U.S.A.
Science Gossip, No. 320, for Aug. 189 1.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 8, for August 1S91.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Entomologists' Rec & Jn. of Variation, No. 6, August 15, 1891.
[Editor.
Journal of Microscopy,'N.S.,Vol. i.No. 8, Aug. 1891.
[Bailliere & Co. publisher-.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, Vol. 15, No. 176, Aug. 1891.
[J, E.
Ilarting, editor.
Naturre Novitates, 1891, Nos. 12 to 15, June-Aug.
[Friedlander & Sohn, pubs.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg.
15, Nrs. 11 to 14, Juni-Juli 1891.
[Orn. Vereins in Wien.
Insecten-Borse, 8 Jahrgang, No 
13.
I Juli, 1S91.
[Editors, Leipzig.
The INSECT HUNTER'S COMPANION.
By the Rev. JOSEPH GREEN, M.A.
Being instructions for Collecting, Rearing, Setting, and Preserving Butterflies and 
Moths, Beetles, Bees, Flies, and other Insects.
THIRD EDITION.
REVISED AND EXTENDED BY A.
B. EARN, 
The Chapter en Coleopiera^ by Ediuard Newman, 
CONTENTS.
— How to obtain the Egg by searching ; boxing female moths ; pairing insects.
How to obtain LARV^t by beating ; the Bignell tray ; sweeping ; searching by night; how to rear 
the larvae; sleeving; hybernating larvae ; parasites ; preserving larvae.
Puva digging; preserv- 
ing pupae: forcing pup*e.
The Perfect Insect.
— Localities; net; raothing ; honeydew ; 
sugaring; light; indoor light; grouting; smoking; killing; relaxing; setting; grease; mites; 
mould; cabinets and store boxe^ ; painting; arrangement and nomenclature; number of speci- 
inens and manner of placing; transmission by post; entomological diary; books.
MiCRO- 
LEPiDOPTERA ; Coleoptera; Hvmenoptera ; Breeding OF Gall*Fi.ies.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SONNENSCHEIN & AL LEN, PATERNOSTER SQUARE .
For Sale.— Talbot's Birds of Wakefield , 2s.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free.
* Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 3|d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvae, and Pup«* 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specimens, &:c., sent out *on approval.' 
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
L ists free.
ANIlWrAlli EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRiPTiON SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES.
J. L.
( 
) 
THE BRITISH NOCTUil AND THEIR VARIETIES, 
By J.
W, TUTT, F.E.S.
VOLUME L, PRICE 5s.
6d.
NET.
Published by Swan, Sonnenschein & Co., Paternoster S<iuare, "W.C.
This Volume has already been largely subscribed for by many of our leading 
British, North-American, Australian, and Continental Lepidopterists.
It is trusted that as many entomoloi^ists as can do so, and who have not yet 
suhscribed, will send in their names to the author, 
J. Mr. TUTT, \^estcombe Hill.
S.E.
MADAGASCAR I 
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post-free.
Prices considerably reduced.
Correspondence in French and German (English not understood).
SIKORA 
9 
Naturalist^ Memhre de la Societe Entomologiqtte de France et de la 
Socu'tc EntomoIogiqHe de Zni-ich^ 
Annanarivo, IVIadagrascar, via Marseille 
/// Parts, at One Shilling, Svo, xvith Engravings^ 
An Illustrated Manual of British Birds 
By HOWARD SAUxXDERS, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., 
Editor of the yd and ^th Volumes of Yarrelts ''History of British Birds.' 
Fourth Edition.
To he completed in about 20 monthly parts.
:E>:eosx^:E]GTTj3 oi^ ^:pjPLxcA.Txoisr.
GURNEY J^' JACKSON (Successors lo Mr. Van Voorst), i.
Paternoster Ro.v.
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
PRICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY, 
Edited by C.
G- Barrett, J.
W. Douglas, W.
W. Fowler, M.A..
F.L.^., 
R- McLachlan, F.R.S-, E.
Saunders, F.I^S., and 
il.
T, Stainton, F.R.S, 
'i'his ^TagazinCj commenceti in 1864, contains standard Articles and Notes 
on all subjects connected with Entomology, and esjH^cially on the li iects of 
the British Isles* 
Suhscription—Six Shillings per annum, post free.
London: GUBMEY & JACKSON :Mr. Van Yoorst*s Successors), 1, Paternoster Bow.
N.B.^ — A Second Series was commenced with the Nu >.jer for January i 
THE I^^ATXJEATjTST 
»K -.
_ ri d 
During the next fe7v months it is hoped to insert the followtJig articles: — 
J 
Heport on the Erosion of the Yorkshire Coast.— Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., 
F.G.S 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Pishes.— Hubert Dacre.
Are the Same Species of Birds more prolific in North than in Sotith 
and Mid Europe ?
— John P.
Thomasson.
NOMENCLATURE OF COLOURS 
FOR THE USE OF NATUF?ALISTS, 
AND OENITHOLOGISTS' CGMPEN-DIUHd.
By ROBERT RIDGWAY.
of the Smithsonian Institution 
PRiCE 17s., POST FREE, 
MAY BE HAD OF THE EDITORS OF THE 'NATURALIST/ 
LITTLE, BROWN & CO., BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A- 
Just Published, Crtmrn 8vct, Cloth limp, 370//- ?
5-^- ; -^^A 3-^' 9^^- \ ^y Post^ 4-f.
THROUGH 
lA' 
By JOHNNIE GRAV (FI.
SrEicHT), 
Mcmherofthe Yorkshire Naturalists Union \ the Br adfo>d Xaturalists' Society, d^c.
Author of 'A Tourist's View of Ireland/ 'Pleasant Walks around Bradford/ &c.
This voluminouSj original work, a large proportion of which is printed in a small but clear 
type, embraces Historical.
Descriptive, and Natural History notices of the whole of the Aire 
valley, with complete Itineraries of the country lo to 20 miles around the principal place?.
The work also contains exhaustive introductory chapters on the 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and AMGLING in AIREDALE.
SEVENTY I L.
LUST RAT IONS AND MAP.
LEEDS : Walker & Laycock.
BRADFORD : T.
Break & Co. Ltd, 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
RATE FAUNA of YORKSHIRE 
Being a Catalogue of British Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians and Fishes, &howi'ng 
what species are or have, within historical periods, been found in the county.
BY 
WH.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., & WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.LS.
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAV BE HAD OF THE AUTHORS, OR OF 
LOVELL REEVE & CO., 5 HEXRIETI'A STREET.
COVEN T GARDEN.
LONDOX.
EXTHAGT3 FROM REVIEWS.
*The authors of this C3f-i^?ue may take a pride in their work, which ha* evideirtJy been 
executed with most conscientious car-^.
They have given a sh=.rt nnroductory' exp.>:,aion or the 
principles by which they have Ucn -aided, and an exoHIent brief sketch of the phy^cai a.«pects 
of Yorkshire, .uvJ the summary or" i::e results of the^r investigation of it-; Vertcbraca.
I^he Lulc 
book i-s a most valuable contributi mi to British zoohigic^l hterature.
—.-{n^.
&* Ma^- J^^t.
tits,.
*Thc work xh an excellent one of its SsXtx^-'—Aikenmum.
No. 195.
OCTOBER 18£1 
^ 
* 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
^..
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF FNGFAN 
CONDUCTED T.Y 
\VM.
DEN I SON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
Sunny BanV, Leeds; 
r 
WITH THE ASSISTAVCK IM SPF.CIAL DKPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILI^ERT BAKER.
F.R.S., F.L.S., 
W, EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., ALH.O.U., 
IMiisemn of Science & Art, Etlinburgli ; 
ALFRED MARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
St. Jahti's College, Caiiibridge; 
CHAS.
P. HODKIRK, F.L.S., 
Dciv.sburv ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., f.E.S,, 
Greenfield House, Hu(ider>rield ; 
W. HARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R.^LS., 
38, Sholebroke Avenue, Leeds.
k w 
^ ^ 
4 
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Havburn Wyke {fiondudeif) 
Recent Views on the Developjnent ot the Pectoral Fins in Fishes (Review) 
Agrimonia ox^orsi\^L added to the West Yorkshire Flora— //*///.
H'est^jun, ..
British Diptera (Re^iew) 
The Yorkshire Naturahsts' Union on the Wolds 
O'nithologv at Danby-in-Cleveland (Review) 
Pterophorus paiudum in Yorkshire — Gi'o- T.
r&ri'iit, I'.L.S..
P\E.S.
Bbliography— Geology and Palaeontology, ^BSC^-^/Jrei/ //arA-er^ 3/,A.,FM.S, 
Notes— Ornithology 
Cream -co loured variety of the Skylark at Harrogate~/^//<>' Fortttne^ F.Z S.
; 
Manx Shearwater in L^pper Nidderdale — Riiey FurinHg^ F.Z S.
The 
Note of the Corn Crake— /i^^ A*.
A, Sitmnttrfi^ld^ B^A,\ Three I-arge 
Species of Birds Builditig in one Tree — A.
R^ Haiij F.E.S.
; Hawrinches 
near Harrogate—/.
BctckkmiSCj F.Z^S.^ M.B.O.O'.
Note?
Mammalia..
Rabbit S\vimming across the Irthtng — Ket', /.
Kirbinsi^n'; Mammalia in L^pper 
Svvaiedale— W'\ Denison Koel'uck, F.L.S.
; l^^ng-tailed Field Mouse near 
Alford, Lines.
— fV.
Dehhon RneHtck, F.L.S.
; Noctule Flying in Sunshine 
— Etigar K.
H'aite, F.L.S.
-Lepidoptcra ., ,.
.. ..
.. ....
Sphin.v convolvuli at Barnsley — H'm.
E. Brady \ Larentia rulicinctata at 
Oughtershaw, Langs trothdale — RertK T.
S. ttoodd^ S.A., L/..B.
Note — Archseology ..
.. .
.  - 
A Stone Celt from Castleshaw, Saddleworth^ — fP'm.
iVntts, F.G.S.
-Botany 
S.L.\ifraga graiiulaia near Scarborough — /.
H. K(ftvntrte\ Wahlenbergia 
hetleo.
. .1 in Bowland, Mid-We-t YotkAdr^—Jahn B.
Fi>gg^ztt.
Ndtes and News 
rAtiH 
289 »o 295 
295 & 296 
297 
293 
299 to 306 
307 to 309 
313 to 320 
297 
298, 3x1 
Notes 
3^9 
N 
3 to 
3^2 
295, 3o^r :>^o 
LONDON : 
LOVELL KeEVE & CO„ 5» iiF.NRIETTA SiKKET, CoVE.\T Gar1>EN, K.t*.
MtCORQrODALF.
& C6, LlMITF.D, CaROLNGTON StREET, KtKSTON; 
AMD 
Leeds: Basinghaii.
Stkbet, 
AH CommuntcatJons should be Addressed:— 
The Editors ot ' Tiie Naturalist,' 
Sunny Bank, LeeUi, 
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post '^t&9 
The NATURAL/Si: 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
M- Cordelia E.
Leigh and F, V.
Theobald,— An Account of British Flies (Diptcra) 
Vol. I, part I, 1 89 1.
[E.
Stock, publisher.
J. C.
M Ivill.
— An Historical Account of the Genus Latirus (Montfort), etc.
Svo, 1891, [The Author.
Brit.
Assoc.
— Handbk.
forCardifF& District.
8vOj cloth, 1891.
[Local Committee.
Some Account of the Bute Docks, Cardiff, Svo, cloth, 1891.
[Rev- E, P.
Knubley.
Cardiff Tide Tables and Almanack for 1S91.
Small Svo, boards, 320 pp., 1S91.
[Rev. E.
P. Knubley.
The Western Magazine and Portfolio, Vol. 4, No. 39, Sept.
1891.
[Rev. C.
G. Green.
Edward E.
Prince.
— The Development and Morphology of the Pectoral Fins iji 
Teleostean Fishes.
4to, 1S90.
[Author.
Royal Dublin Society.
— Sci. Trans., Vol. 4, Parts (>-Z^ 1890-1.
[Society.
Royal Dublin Soc.— Sci. Proc, Vol. 6, pt.
10, & Vol. 7, pts, 1-2, iS^-i.
[Society.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 132, Sep. 15, 1S91.
[J.
E. Clark & others, editors, York.
Essex Naturalist, Vol. v.
No. 6, June, 1891.
[Essex Field Club.
II Naturalista Siciliano^ann.
lo.n. 1 1, A^^osto, 1891.
[Signer Enrico Ragusa.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 165, September 1891.
[Birmingham N.
H, S.
The Mediterranean Nat., Vol. I, No. 4, September 1891, Q.
H. Cooke j editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom,.
Vol. 6, No. 1S5, Sept.
1S91.
[Camb.Ent. CI., U-S.A.
Science Gossip, No. 321, for Sept.
1891.
[Messrs, Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 9, for Sept, 1891.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Entomologists* Rec.
& Jn, ofVariation, No. 8, September 15, 1891.
[Editor.
Journal of Microscopy, N.S.» Vol. I, No. 9, Sept.
1891.
[Hailliere & Co. publishers.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, Vol, 15, No, 177, Sept, 1891, [J.
E. Harting, editor.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg.
15, Nr. ij^ September 15, 1891.
[Orn, Vereins in Wien.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENT S AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF CONCHOLOGY 
Edited by JOIIX W.
TAYLOR, F.L.S.
^ I        
Contains Descriptions and Figures of New Species and Varieties, Geographical 
Lists, and Original Articles, dealing with all departments of the science, by the 
leading Conchologists of the day.
— Vol, VI.
commenced January iSSg. Vols, 
L, II., III., IV,, and V, may still be had.
TLIa Journal, edited by Mr. J.
W. Taylor (who may be addressed c/o Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printing Works, Sovereign Street, Leeds), is the organ 
of the Conchological Society, to whose members it is supplied in return for the 
subscription of 5s, per annum.
Forms of proposal of new members may be had from the Secretary, who may 
be addressed at the Museum, Leeds.
For Sale,— Talbot's Birds of Wakefield, 2s.
6d- AJdress, Eds. Naturalist.
Improved Egg Drills (2 sizes) and Metal BL.
vpipe with instructions r/3 free.
ints on Eg^ Collecting and Nesting,' illustrated, 34d.
free.
Birds' Skins, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp.
All 
specinaens, <5:c., sent out on approval.
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFO RD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
^tc,, ?s John Eggteston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Lists free* 
ANTIlVrAL EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTiON SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES 
J. L.
ROSEN KRANZ, 
J[>z*esdejn, 1.4 (Gesir^innaiirty^ 
Bird-Nesting in North-West Canada 
WALTER RAINE, 
Sun, Lithigraphiiio and Printiu'j Co.» TvtOnUi- Cumtdu.
Finely lliusir£iteci with Photo-Eng;ra.vin£^s and Coloured Plates 
Trice ?2-00j 7s- 6d.
English Money.
To SubscriLers ordering before Oct. 30th, S1.25 ; 
5s.
English Money.
10 cents <or 5d.) extra for postage.
book 
It describes in an 
interesting manner the experience of the writer and his collectors in a region which might be 
called the Ornithologists' Paradise.
The country explored stretches from Winnipeg to within 
sight of the Rocky Mountains, a distance of nearly one thousand miles, and, as might be expected 
in such a wide tract of country, many rare birds were found breeding.
It gives a full account of 
the Nesting Habits of such birds as Canada Goose, American Wigeon, Buffle- Headed Duck, 
Canvas-Back, Little Brown Crane, Vellowshank, Wilson's Phalarope and Snipe, Avocet, Buff- 
Breasted Sandpiper, White Pelican, American Goshawk, Hawk Owl, Rusty Grackle, McCown s 
Lougspur, Chestnut-Collared Longspur, Pigeon Hawk, Bonaparte's Gull, and other rare species.
It also contains Plates of many of the above Birds' Nests and Eggs ; and also gives Coloured 
Plates of Eggs of Yellowshank, Wilson's Phalarope, Knot, etc.
The Eggs of the Knot have 
never previously been figured in any ornithological work.
This book will be found interesting reading to British as well as American Ornithologists, as 
It describes the nests and eggs of many species which occur in Europe as occasional visitors.
The price to subscribers ordering before October 30th will be $1*25 ; to British Ornithologists, 
five Shillings, The illustrations are worth the money.
Send in your order at once, as only a limited number of copies will be printed.
THE ENTOMOLOGIST'S RECORD 
AND JOUR NAL OF V ARIATION.
Edited by J.
W. TUTT, F.E.S.
VOL, 1 now complete, with FOUR CHROMO-LITHO.
PLATES.
An Illustrated ilonthly Journal of General Entomoiogy, devoted specially 
to the interests of British working Lepidopterists, published 15th of each month.
Subscription|br \'ol.
II, 6s.
per annum, post free, commencing April iSgr, may he 
sent to the Editor, c/o Mr. E.
Knight, 18 and 19, Middle Street, Aldersgate, E.G.
/?/jV Fublislied.
Crown '&vo.
Cloth limp, 370//., 5^.
; Net,  y.
<)d.
; By Pat, 45.
THROUGH AIREDALE 
'/.
By JOHNNIE GRAY (H.
Speight), 
Member of the VorksMre Naturalists Union \ the Bradford X at urn lists' Society, ^c\ 
Author of ' A Tourist's View of Ireland,' ' Pleasant Walks around Bradford/ &c.
Thrs voluminous, original work, a large proportion of which is printed in a small but clear 
type, embraces Historical, Descriptive, and Natural Histor>^ notices of the whc!e of the Aire 
valley, with complete Itineraries of the country lo to 20 mdes around the principal places.
The vvurk also contains exhaustive introductory chapters on the 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and ANGLING in AIREDALE.
SEVENTY II-L.USTRATIONS AND MAP.
LEEDS : Walker & Laycock.
BRADFORD : T.
Break & Co. Lro.
MADAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post-free.
Prices considerably reduced.
Corre: : :.
lence in French and German (Enp-lish not understood^ 
JF.
SIKORil 
9 
yaluraitst^ Membre de la Soeu'ie Entomahgi^ui de frame et dt /a 
Annanarivo, Madagascar, rht Marseille 
TflE :NrATXJilAIjIST.
Durhiz the next feiv months it is ho/^ed to insert the piiowin<^ articles',— 
Report on the Erosion of the "S^orkshire Coast— Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A..
F.G.S 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Pishes.— Hubert Dacre.
Are the Same Species of Birds more prolific in Worth than in South 
and Mid Europe ?— Johx P.
Thomasson.
Notes on Polyzoa found at Cleethorpe?.— George R.
Wikv,.
SupDlementary List of Plintsof liangstrothdale.— Rev. T.
B. Woodd, B.A.,LL.B 
Observations on the White Wagtail.— Oi.ivet!
V. Apun, M.B.O.U.
]N"otes on the Ijong-Eared Eat in Captivity.— M.
L. Thompson-.
f 
Just Fztblished, Crown %vo^ Cloth^ 2s, 
PHOTOGRAPHY T™" MICROSCOPE 
By F.
W. JvIILLS, 
Member of the Camera Ctnb, the Httddersfield Photo^ra/hic Socicij, the Postal 
Microscopical Socu'ty, etc., 
WITH A CHAPTER OX MOUNTING OBJECTS, 
Ev T.
CHARTERS WHITE, M.R.C.S., F.R.M.S., 
Author of "An Eleinentary Manual of Microscofical Manipulation'' 
ILLUSTRATED 
London Ilikfe & Son, 3.
St. Bride Street, Ludgate Circus 
i^iELBouRNK W.
Watsot & SoNS, 251, Swanston Street.
New York: ANruoNv & Co., 591, Broadway.
THE BRITISH NOCTU^ AND THEIR VARIETIES 
s 
Bv J, W.
TUTT, F.E.S.
VOLUME I., PRICE Ss. 6d.
NET.
Published by Swazu Bonnenschein & Co., Paternoster Square, "W 
bee 
British, North- American, Australian, and Continental Lepidopterists.
It is trusted that as many entomologists as can do so, and who have not yet 
su) -scribed, will send in their names to the author, 
J. isr.
TXJTT.
Westcombe Hill, S.E* 
Ntnv ready.
Demy %va^ with Map, Price 7s, 6d- 
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE FLO 
By TUg Kev. W.
H. painter.
Com Mem. Binnmgkam Nai. IUsi, and Mkro.
Socwly.
Giving a brief dcs€riptir>a of the Fh}-^-cnl Feature^ of Derbyshire, and 
a list of al!
the Flowering Plants and Ferns fuurid therein, uith their Principal 
Ilabitat.s.
C. BELL & SONS, LONDON'- 
No. 196.
NOVEMBER 1891.
; 
^*44J 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
'-U* 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
CONDUCTED ISY 
W M 
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE IN .SPECIAL DEPAR IMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER.
F.R.S..
F.L.S..
Royal Herbarium, Kew ; 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S.,M.B.O.U"..
Museum of Science Sc Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED HARKER, M.X., F.G.S., 
St. John's College, Cambridge; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
Deusbury ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S..
Greenfield House, HudderaJfield ; 
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.C.S.,F.R.M.S-, 
38, Sholebroke Avenue, Leeds.
gonfcnfs: 
Bfbliography—Geotogy and Palasontofogy, 1890 (concluded)— ^^r^^/ Marker^ 
M.A,,F.G.S.
The yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Ediington and Wadworth Woods 
Fishes Captured off Whitby, Sept.-Oct., ^B^^~~T horn as Stephenson 
Fungus Foray at Do n caste r—Zf^wry T".
Soppitt ..
Observations on the White Wagtail— <9.
V, Apihi, M.B.O.U.
Uoca!
Lists of Birds (Review)..
Note— Botany 
Volvox — C.
Z- Lini.
Notes — Lepidoptera 
Sphinx convoIvuH at Ripon— C Chapman ; Late appearance of Abraxai 
ulmata— vi.
£. Hall^ F.E.S, 
Notes— Ornithology ..
". 
White Variety of the Thrush in Upper Nidderdale — Riley Fortune^ F.Z.S.
; 
Late Nesting of Yellowhammer near Pickering — Herbert Prodham\ 
Flamborough Bird-Notes — Matthew Bailey.
Notes and News 
PAGE 
321 
to 
330 
33 i 
to 
336 
337 
& 
338 
339 
to 
348 
349 
to 
351 
331 
& 
352 
338 
338 
331 
348 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Stkeet, Covem Garden, E.G.
McCORQUODALE & Co, LIMITED, CaRDIN'GTON STREET, EusTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Easinghalx, Street.
Ail 
Communications should 
The 
be Addressed: — 
tors of 'The Naturalist,' 
Sunny Bank, Leeds, 
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence), 
ANNUAL SUBSCRfPTION (from the O'FFICE only), 5s., post free 
lie NATURALIST.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Revue Bryologique, l8e Annee, 1891, No. 5.
[M.
T. llusnot, redacteur, Cahan.
Yorkshire County Mag., Parts 9-10, Sept, -Oct. 1891.
Q. Horsfall Turner, editor.
Nat. Hist, k Scientific Book Circular, No. 112, Geology, pt.
2. [\V.
Wesley & Son.
Nat. Hi^t.
Journ., No. 132, Oct. 15, 1891, [J.
E. Clark & others, editors, York.
The Midland Naturalist, No. 166, October 1891.
[Birmingham N.
H. S.
The Conchologist, VoL i, No. 3, Sept, 29th, 1S91.
[W.
E. Collinge, editor.
The Mediterranean Nat., Vol. i, No. 5, October 1891.
[J.
H. Cooke, editor.
Bericht lib.
d. Verlagsthatigkeit v.
Fricdiander & Sohn , No. 1 8, 1 89 1 , Apr.-Jun.
[Pubs.
Scottish Naturalist, N.S., No, 34, Oct. 1S91.
[Prof.
J. W.
H. Trail, co-editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom,, VoL 6, No. 186, Oct. 1891.
[Camb.Ent. CI., U.S.A.
Science Gossip, No. 322, for Oct. 1S91.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part 10, for Oct. 1891.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Entomologists' Rec.
& Jn. of Variation, No. 10, Oct, 15, 1891.
Q, W.Tutt, editor.
Journal of Microscopy, N.S., Vol, i,No. 10, Oct. 1S91.
[Bailliere& Co. publishers.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, VoL 15, No. 178, Oct. 1S91.
[J.
E. Ilarting, editor.
Notarisia, Ann. 6, No. 26,31 Agosto, 1891.
[Dr. David Levi-Morenos, Redattore.
Naturae Novitates, 1891, Nos. 16 to 19, Aug.-Oct.
[Friedlander & Sohn, pubs.
Die Schwalbe, Jahrg.
15, Nr. 19, October 15, 1891.
[Oin. Verenis in Wien.
Berwickshire Nat. Club.— Proceedings for 1S89, VoL 12, No. 3.
[The Club.
S. L.
Mosley.— History of British Birds, Nests, and Eggs, Nos. 66 and 67.
[Author.
Leeds Geological Association.
— Transactions, Part 6, 1890-1S91.
[Association.
Manch.
Geog.
Soc.
— Journal, 1890, VoL 6, Nos. 1-3, Jan.
-March.
[Society.
» „ — Geographical Education: Rep. by Education Comm.
[Soc.
A. Harker &; J.
E. Marr.
— The Shap Granite & associated Rocks, SVO.1S91.
[Authors.
F. W.
Mills.
— Photography applied to the Microscope, 1891.
[The Author.
H. A.
Macpherson.
— Introd.
to Studyof British Birds (Y.C. series), 1891.
[Publisher 
Major-Gen. Macintyre — Hindu-Koh, 8vo cloth, 1891.
[Blackwood & Sons, pubs.
'A Son of the Marshes.' — On Surrey I-IiIls,8vo cloth, 1 89 1.
[Black wood ifcSons,pubs.
-w 
Just Published.
Cro%vn 8vo, Cloth limp^ 370//., 5^.
; Net^ y, c^l.
; By Posty 4^.
THROUGH AIREDALE : 
By JOHNNIE GRAY (H.
Speight), 
Member of the Yorkshire Naturalists Union ; the Bradford Naturalists Society ; 6*t'.
Author of ' A Touri&fs View of Ireland,* * Pleasant Walks around Bradford/ &c 
This voluminous, original work, a large proportion of which is printed in a small bat clear 
type, embraces Historical, Descriptive, and Natural History notices of the whole of the Aire 
valley, with complete Itineraries of the country 10 to 20 miles around the principal places.
The work also contains exhaustive introductory chapters on the 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and ANGLING in AIREDALE.
SEVENTY IL-L-USTRATIONS AND MAP.
LEEDS: Walker & Laycock.
BRADFORD: T.
Bre.^r & Zo. Ltd.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: Dr. J.
W. Ellis, from Howard Place, 
Shelton, Stoke-on-Trent, to iS, Flodney Street, LiverpooL 
For Sale.
— Talbot's Birds of WakeHcid, 2s.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist.
Improved Egg Drills {2 sizes) and Meiai Blowpipe with instructions 1/3 free* 
* Hints on Egg Collecting and Nesting/ illustrated, 3^d.
free.
Birds* Skins» 
Eggs (side-blown and in clutches with date), Lepidoptera, Ova, Larvse, and Pupse, 
Artificial Eyes, and all kinds of Naturalists' Requisites.
Lists, one stamp, AH 
specimens, &c., sent out *on approval/ 
J. & W, DAVIS (NaturaHsts), DARTFCRD, Kent.
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Mu/.is, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston.
Park Place, Sunderland Lists free.
ANIIMCAI.
EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLfED AT LOW PRICES.
J. L.
ROSEN KRANZ, 
IJpesdLen, 14 (Gcx-wiany 
1 
Just Published, Croivn Sro, Clothy 2s, 
PHOTOGRAPHY x^r MICROSCOPE, 
By R W.
mills, 
Member of the Camera Club, the HuJdersfield Photographic Society, the Postal 
Microscopical Society ^ etc., 
WITH A CHAPTER ON MOUNTING OBJECTS, 
By T.
charters ^VHITE, M.R.CS., F.R.M.S., 
Author of "An Elc^ncntary Manual of Microscopical Manipulation.
London ...
Iliffe & Sox, 3, St, Bride Street, Ludgate Circus.
Melbourne W.
Watson ^ Sons, 251, Swanston Street.
New York ...
...
Anthony & Co., 591, Broadway, 
THE BRITISH NOCTURE AND THEIR 
By J.
W. TUTT, F.E.S.
ij-Trf   ^M   ^ 
VOI^UME L, PRICE 5s.
6d.
NET.
Published by Swan, Sonnenschein & Co., Paternoster Sciuare, W.C, 
This Volume has already been largely subscribed for by many of our leading 
British, North-American, AustraHan, and Continental Lepidopterists.
It is trusted that as many entomologists as can do so, and who have not yet 
subscribed, will send in their names to the author, 
J, "W.
TUTT, ^Westcombe Hill, S.E.
'NATURALIST' REPRINTS— No. L 
LIST OF 
LAND & FRESHWATER MOLLUSCA OF LANCASHIRE.
'—• 
This paper contains not only Mr. Standen's own observations, but those of Messrs.
R. D.
Darbishire.
T. Rogers, W.
H. Heathcote, J.
A. Hargreaves, F.
C. Long, H.
StephcnsoHi and 
other conchologtsts, and the observations published in Dyson's list of 1S50, and in Hardy's 
lists of 1864 and 1S65, are reproduced for comparison.
Price 9d.
(By post, 9id.} 
To be had from the Publishers of the 'Naturalist,' Sunny Bank, Leeds.
Noxv ready, complete, S^'^ ^^"t^^^^j unik Coloured Map, price £l \s.
od.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE.
By FREDERIC ARNCED LEES, M.R.C.S., etc.
. lliis, which forms the 2nd Volume of the Botanical Series of the Transactions, xs perhaps 
the u*wjt complete work of the kind ever issued for any district, inchiding detailed and fuJl 
records of x.044 P»ianerog[ams and Vascular Cryptogams, 11 Charace«e, 348 Alosses, ro8 Hepatics, 
258 Lichens, 1,009 ^i^i^g*> ^'^^ S^-^ Freshwater Aljja:, .^Xlng a total of 3,160 species.
London: LOVELL REEVE & CO., S, Henrietta ^u:jt, Covent Garden; 
Or the work may be had from the Hon. Sees, of the Y.N.U., 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK,!
.. r.
r t ^ 
E. FONSONEY K:XUBLEV, j ^umiy Bank, Leeds, 
EDGAR R.
WAITE, The Museum, Leeds.
THE ISTATTJUALIST.
Durhi^ the yie.xi /eiv months it is hoped to itiseri the follounn^ artides: — 
Report on tlie Erosion of tlie yorksliire Coast.
— Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., 
F.G.S.
Tlie Yorksliire Derwent and its Pish.es.
— Hubert Dacre.
Are tlie Same Species of Birds more prolific in iNorth than in South 
and Mid Europe ?— John P.
Thomasson'.
T3"Gtes on Polyzoa found at Cleethorpes.— George R.
Vine.
Supplementary List of Plants of Langstrothdale.— Rev. T.
B. Woodd, B.A.,LL.B.
Notes on the Ijong-Eared Bat in Captivity.— M.
L. Thompson.
i 
NATURALIST' REPRINTS.
No. I.
— List of Land and Freshwater Mollusca of Lancashire, by Robert 
Stan DEN.
No. II.
— Bird-notes from Heligoland for the year i886j by Heixrich Gatke, 
C.M.Z.S, 
No. III.
— HeIig"oland, by John Cordeaux, M-B.O.U.
(with autotype plate of 
views of Mr. Gatke's garden).
NINEPENCE EACH, POST FREE.
Froin the Publishers of 'The Naturalist/ Leeds 
MADAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post - free.
Prices considerably reduced.
Correspondence in French and Gemian (English not understood).
IlilOI^A 
5 
Naturalist^ Membre de la Societe Entomologiqtte de France et de la 
Societe Entofnolorifiue de Zurich.
AnnanarivOj IVIada.grascar, via IVIarseiile 
Bird-Nestina' in North-West Canada.
VVALTER RAINE, 
Han Lith'H/i'aphiii.a and Piin( ...j Co., Toronto, C ..JflEa.
Finely !liustra.tcd with Photo-Eng^ra-viii^s ixnd Coloured Plates.
Price 12.00; 7s.
6d.
Engiisb Iiloney.
To Subscribers ordering before Oct. 30th, fl.25; 
5s.
English M;::iey.
10 cents (or 5d.) extra for postage.
The above book gives an account of a co" cting trip to the North West.
It cie^ribes in an 
iiiteresting manner the experience of the v-xiter and his collectors in a region which might be 
called the Ornithologists' Paradise.
The country- explored stretches from Winnipeg to within 
sight of the Rocky Mountains, a distance of nearly one thousand inile:s, and, as might be expected 
in such a wide tract of country-, many rare birds were found breeding.
It giv' .^ full account of 
the Nesting Habits of such birds a^ Canada Goose, American Wigeon, BufHc- Headed Duck, 
Canva.s-Back, Little Brown Crane, Yellowshank, Wilson's Phalarope and Snipe, Avocet, Buff- 
Breasted Sandpiper.
White Pelican, American C hawk, Hawk Owl, Rust>' Crackle.
McCowns 
Longspur.
Chestnut -Collared Longspur, Pigeon Hawk, Bonaparte's Gull, and other rare species.
it also contains Plates of many of the above Birds' Nests and Egg^ ; and also gives Coloured 
Plates of Eggs of Yellowshank, Wii^ion's Phaiarope, Knot, etc.
The Eggs of the Knot have 
never previously been figured in any ornithological work.
, ^ - l .
• 
This book will be found Interesting reading to British as well as American Qmitho.ogists, as 
it describes the nests and eg|^ of many species which occur in F:arope as occasional visitors.
The price to subscribers ordering before October 30th wiH be $1-25 ; to British Ormth^..'e,.3ts» 
Five Shillings.
The illustrations are worth the money.
Send in your order at once, as only a limited number of coj..
,.> a ill be printed.
No. 197.
DECEMBER 1891.
0; 
J 
c 
CO 
be 
c 
X 
c3 
O 
Z C- 
6 
Q 
3 
a 
a 
en 
O 
o 
o 
r- 2 
c 
O 
o 
^ 
« •-• 
00 
.5?
"a 
a 
(0 
c 
a 
5 
o 
h 
J 
OS 
Q X 
00 45 
"-' 
0^ 
O XI 
x.^ 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
xXATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAX 
CONDUCTED UV 
\VM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Sunn}- Bank, Leeds; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE IN SPECIAL DEPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
Royal Herbarium, Kew ; 
\\\ EAGLE CLARKE, F.L,S., JLB.6.U., 
Museum of Science & Art, Edinburgh ; 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
St. John's College, Cambridge ; 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
Dewsburv ; 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S., 
Greenfield House, Hudderbheld ; 
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.C.3..
F.R.M.S., 
38, Sholebroke Avenue, Leeds.
Strobilomyces strobilaceus in South-West Yorkshire— //>«ry T.
Soppitt 
Ornithotogrcal Notes from the Humber District, In the Autumn of.
1891 — 
John C(yj'deanx, M.B.O.U, 
Bibliography— Arachnlda and Myrlopoda, ^Z^^^%^^ — n\ D.
Roebuck, F.L.S.
Are the Same Species of Birds more prolific in North than in South and 
Mid Europe?— /t'/iw P.
T/wmasson 
Note— MammaJia 
The Wild Cat in Cumberland — W'/«.
Hodgson, A.L.S.
Notes— Botany _ 
Varieties of Carex Goodenovit and HeUanthemum Charncecv=;tiis at Havbu : 
Note— Lepidoptera ..
. .
.. ..
Lepidoptera in Upper SwaJedale, Augui^t 1S90— /.
H. Ko-zLmtrce, 
Notes— Ornithology ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. 
Marsh Harrier in Lincolnshire — Edg^at- R.
Waite, F,L.S.
\ Girl Bunting 
Nesting near Ma^ham— i5(2jr// /.
Carter \ Late Occurrence of H ^e 
Utartins at Boroughbridge — AW.
Pazer-Cnrw^ J-P- \ Grey Phalarope near 
Harrogate — Riley F&rtune, P.Z.S.
; Grey Phalarope at Ackworth — Ed^ar 
R. Watte, F.L.S, ; Fiamborough Bird-Notes — Mattkexi* Bailey ; Euffoti's 
Skua at Workington — W.
Hodgson^ A.L.S.
Notes and News , ..
., 
Title-page, Preface, and Index to the Volume.
PAGE 
353 
355 to:% 
365 to 36S 
56c, to 571 
^53 
354 
354 
364 & 372 
J/ 
LONDON: 
LovELL Reeve 5c Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Cox'ent Garden,.
E.C.
McCORQUODALE & CO.
LlMITED, CaRDIXGTO.N STREET, ECSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds: Basinghali.
Street.
All Communications sbOLild be Addressed: 
The Editors of *The Naturafrst/ 
Sunny Bank, Leeds, 
PRICE SIXPENCE (by Post, Sevenpence).
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION (from the OFFICE only), 5s., post iret 
The NATURALIST.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
W. Crouch.
— L.
& W, Moll., ofWanstead District, Svo. reprint, 1891.
[Author.
A. Harker.
— Petrological Notes on Rocks from the Cross Fell lulier.j Svo. reprint, 
1S91.
_ [Author.
T. D, A.
Cockerel!.
— Geographical Distribution of Slugs, 8vo, rept., 1891.
[Author.
Nova Scotia Institute.
— Proceedings 18S9-90, Vol. 7, Part 4.
[The Institute.
Cardiff Nat. Soc< — Report &Transactions-Vol. 22, 1890, in 2 Pts.,8vo.
[The Society.
F. V.Theobald,— An Account of British Diptera, Part 2, 1891.
[E.
Stock, publisher.
Manchester Geographical Society.— Journal, Vols, r, 2, 3, & 6.
[The Society.
Geo. Massee.
— British Fungi, Phycomycetes, & Mtilaginese, Svo. cloth, 232 pp.
& 
8 plates.
[Reeve & Co., publishers.
Nat. Hist.
Journ., No. 134, Nov, 15, 1891.
[J.
E. Clark & others, editors, York.
New York Microscopical Soc.
— Journ., Vol. 7, No. 4, Oct. 1891.
[The Society.
The ^Midland Naturalist, No. 167, November 1S91.
[Birmingham N.
H. S.
The Mediterranean Nat.^ Vol. I, No. 6, November iSgr.
[J.
H. Cooke, editor.
Psyche: journ.
of entom..
Vol. 6, No. 187, Nov. 1891.
[Camb.Ent. CL, U.S.A.
Science Gossip.
No. 323, for Nov. 1891.
[Messrs.
Chatto & Windus, publishers.
The British Naturalist, Part !i, for Nov. 1891.
[Mr. John E.
Robson, editor.
Entomologists' Rec.
& Jn. of Variation, No. 11, Nov, 16, '1S91.
Q. W.Tutt, editor.
Journal of Microscopy, N.S., Vol. i,No. 11, Nov. 1891, [Bailliere & Co. publishers.
The Zoologist, 3rd Series, Vol. 15, No. 179, Nov. iSgi.
[J.
E. Harting, e Titer.
5 
Just Published.
Crown %vo^ Clothe 2s, 
PHOTOGRAPHY Tthk MICROSCOPE 
By F, W.
mills, 
Mejnder of the Ca7nera Club^ the Hudih-rsfield Photographic Society, the Postal 
Microscopical Society^ etc., 
WITH A CHAPTER ON MOUNTIXG OBJECTS, 
By T.
charters WHITE, M.R.C.S., F.R.M.S., 
AittJior of ^^ An Elementary Manual of Microscopical Manipulation.
RATED.
> , 
London Iliffe & Son, 3, St, Bride Street, Ludgate Circus.
Melbourne , W.
Watson «S: Sons, 251, Swanston Street, 
Xe'.v York Anthony & Co., 59i» Broadway.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: Dr. J, W.
Ellis, from Howard Place, 
Sheiton, Stoke-on-Trent, to iS, Rodney Street, Liverpool.
For Sale.
— Talbot's Birds of Wakefield, 2s.
6d.
Address, Eds. Naturalist.
specimens, &c., sent out *oji approval.
J. & W.
DAVIS (Naturalists), DARTFORD.
Kent- 
The cheapest dealer in Birds, Skins, Eggs, Butterflies, Moths, Foreign Shells, 
etc., is John Eggleston, Park Place, Sunderland.
Li^^s free.
ANIlVTAlLi EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLIED AT LOW PRiCES.
J. JL.
ROSENKRANZ, 
The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine.
PRICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY.
Edited by C.
G. Barrett, J, \V, Douglas, W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., 
R. McLachlan, F.R.S., E.
Sau.xders, F.L.S., and 
H. T.
Staintox, F.R.S.
This ^lagazinCj commenced in 1864, contains standard Articles and Notes 
on all subjects connected with Entomology, and especially on the Insects of 
the British Isles.
Subscription^Six Shillings per annum, post free.
London: GURriEY & JACKSON (Mr. Van Yoorst's Successors), I, Paternoster Bovr.
N.B.
— A Second Series was commenced with the Number for January 1890.
THE BRITISH NATURALIST.
A Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robso.v, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various departments of- 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
G. COVERDALE, London.
C- S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
Dr. ELLIS, LiverpooL J.
P- SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland.
G. ELISHA, London.
SYDNEY WEBB.
Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free.
Monthly Supplements are given, intended to farm when complete separate manuals of the 
various groups treated upon.
That now issuing is a Natural History of British Butterflies, by 
J, W.
Dale, of Glanvilles, Wootton.
It contains an account of all * reputed' species, and full 
bibliographical details of the references to the vaHqus species in the Entomological works of the 
past two centuries, rendering it the most complete work yet issued.
All orders and other communications to be addre>sed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool.
Bird-Nestin2' in North-West Canada.
BY WALTER RATN'E, 
Sun Lithtgraphing '"'"f Printing Co., TorontOy Canada.
Finely lUustrated with Photo-En^ravingrs and Coloured Plates.
Price $2.00 Ts. 6d.
English Money.
Tc Subscribers ordering before Oct. 30th, 91.25 
53.
English Moaey.
10 cents (or 5d.> extra for postage.
The above book gives an account of a collecting trip to the North West.
It d-.
^ribes in an 
inter "mg manner the experience of the writer and his collectors in a region which mignt be 
called the Ornithologists' Paradise.
The country explored stretches from Winnipeg to within 
sight of the Rocky Mountains^ a distance of nearly one thousand mtlesj and, as might be expected 
in such a wide tract of countrv, many rare birds were found breeding, ft j^i.-i - full account of 
the Nesting Habits of such lairds as Canada Goose, American Wig_„n.
Bnffle- Headed Duck, 
Canvas-Back, Little Brown Crane, Yellowshank, Wilson's Phalarope and ijnipe.
A -t, Buff- 
Br red Sandpiper, White Pelican, American G ' k.
H k Owl, Rusty Gr ':le, McCown s 
L ^^spur.
Chestnut-Collared Longsptir, Pigeon Hawk, Bonaparte's Gull, and other rare >pccics.
It also contains Plates of many of the above Birds' Nests and Egs-'-* : and also gives Coloured 
Plates of Eggs of Yellowshank, Wilson's Phalarope, Knot, &ic.
The Eggs of the Knot have 
never pre%-iously been figured in any ornithological work.
This book will be found inter^ting reading to Brie' ' - well as American Omithologi-:-.
as 
it t' :ribes the nests and e^^ ^ many species which occur in Europe as occasional visitOFS.
The price to subscribers ordering before October 30th will be $1*25 ; to British Ornithologists, 
Five Shillings.
The illustrations are worth the money.
Send in vour order at once, as ^..^y a limited number of copies will be prints 
TISH HOCTUyE AND THEIR VARIET 
? 
Bv J.
W. TUTT, F.E.S.
VOLUME I., PRICE 5s.
6d, NET.
Published by S^an, Sonnenscliein & Co., Paternoster Squai^, 'W.C.
-^- — -          
This Volume has already been largely sul.-ribecl hx ly many of uur le: 'ing 
Bnti?>h, Norih- American, Australian, and Continental Lepidopterists.
It h trusted that as many entomolc^ists as can do so, and who have not yet 
sijb:-cnLc K will ^^nd in their names to the author, 
J. W.
TUTT, Westcombe Hill, S.E.
th:e natttji a l I s t .
During the 7iexi fe'w months it is hoped to insert the folloiving articles', — 
, J 
Heport on TorksMre Botany for 189Q.— C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., and P.
F. Lek.
Keport on th.e Erosion of fhe Yorkshire Coast.— Rev. E.
Maule Cole, M.A., 
F.G.S 
Occurrence of Sno%%^ Goc?3 in ^orthnmberland.— Geokge Bolam.
liincolnsliire T^aturalists at Gibraltar Point.— J.
Burtt Davy.
Bird- and Fish-ITotes from Whitby.— Thomas Stephexsox.
Avifauna of Arkengarthdale, Swaledal© and the Ke\v Forest.— J.
E. Tinkler 
K'otes on Poiyzoa found at Cleethrorpes.— George R.
Vine.
Supplementary^liistof Plants of Langatrotlidale.— Rev. T.B.WooDD,B.A.,LL.B, 
The yorksMre Derwent and its Fishes.— Hubert Dacre.
Testacella scutulum at Headingley, Leeds.— Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S 
IsTote on the Metamorphosed Skiddaw Slates.— Prof.
H. Rosenbuch 
IJy'otes on the XiOng-Eared Bat in Captivity.— M.
L. Thompson-.
Further Remarks on the Burro^'ing Habits of Land ani Freshwater 
Molluscs.
— W.
E. Collinge.
A^ow reaJ'y, ^vo, ciotk^ price 6/-, post free.
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPTERA 
By G.
T. PORRiTT, F.L.S.
? 
Contains copious records of the localities, &c., of the 1,340 species of macro- 
and micro-lepidoptera known to inhabit the coiintj' ; particulars of local variation 
in species ; with all other necessary information on the subject.
To be had only from the Hon. Secretaries of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
WM.
DEXLSOX ROEBUCK, Sunny Bank, Leeds; 
E. PONSONBY KXUBLEY, Staveley Rectory, Leeds ; 
EDGAR R.
WAITE, The Museum, Leeds.
THE INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY AND NATURAL SCIENCE 
(THE JOURN'AL OF THE POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SOCIETY).
Eoitor— ALFRED ALLEX, Hon. Sec.
P.M.S.
Published Quarterly, Price One Shilling & Sixpence.
Contains a number of" valuable and interesting articles relating to Microscopy and the allied 
Sciences, written by Specialists, and illustrated with Lithograpluc Plates and Wood Engravings.
_ jEAILLIEEE, TINDALL & COX, 20, King WiiUam St, Strand, W.C.
London: ^^ H.
KZLLY, Castle Street, City Eo.id.
Few York: THE SCIENCE CO., 47.
Lafayette PI ice.
Crown Sz'L\ Cicth ////;/, 370//-, 5^.
; iVety y.
gd, ; Bj Post^ ^.
THROUGH AIREDALE : 
IE" 
TO 
By JOHXXIE GRAV (H.
Speight), 
Mend-er of the Y&rkshire Kituralisis' Unions the Bradfrrd X.xiuralist£ Society \ 
Author of 'A Tourist's View of Ireland,' * Pleasant Walks around Bradford/ &c.
This voluminoas.
origrfnal work, a large proportion of which is printed in a small but clear 
type, embraces His.
-.leal.
Descriptive, and X;;:..;.;!
History notices of the vv'_,!e of the Aire 
valley, vvith complete Itineraries of the country lo to 20 mdes around the principal ^   
The work also ctMitninr e?:>i:i-;>Etve introductory chrptcrs on the 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and ANGLING in AIREDALE, 
SEVENTY I t-LUST RATIONS AND MAP.
LEEDS : Walker & Lavcock.
BRADFORD : T.
Brear & Co. Ltd.