THE 
AT 
RAL 
A 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
ST 
9*7 
NATURAL HISTORY FOR THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
EDITED BY 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
Recorder to and Ex-President of the Conchological Society; Joint Hon. Secretary 
of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union ; Joint-Author of a * Handbook of the 
Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire'; Hon. Member of the Bradford 
Naturalists' and Microscopical Society, Cleveland Naturalists' 
Field Club, Malton Naturalists' Society, Liverpool 
Naturalists' Field Club ; etc., etc.
; 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE AS REFEREES IN SPECIAL DEPARTMENTS OF 
J. GILBERT BAKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
W. EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A., F.G.S., 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F.L.S., 
GEORGE T.
PORRITT, F.L.S., F.E.S.
W. BARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R.M.S 
1893.
LONDON: 
Lovell Reeve & Co., 5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, E.C 
M c CORQUODALE & Co. LIMITED, CARDINGTON STREET, EUSTON ; 
AND 
Leeds : Basinghall Strbet.
1893.
k 
PREFACE, 
The Editor has again to record his thanks to those who 
have contributed to the continued success of the Magazine, 
whether as contributors of articles or notes, or as supporters 
and readers of the journal.
He would venture to suggest that in certain parts of 
the field which the journal occupies, he would be glad to 
have more contributions for insertion in the future than 
'The Naturalist' has been favoured with during the year 
i 
now drawing to a close.
And he might remind all 
supporters that the complexion which the journal assumes 
depends far more upon his supporters than upon himself, 
and that, therefore, should any one desire to see any 
particular department of natural history or any particular 
county in the north of England more adequately catered 
for, the remedy lies to some extent in his own hands.
Let such a one forward articles or notes bearing thereupon, 
and he will find that he will have the ready assistance 
of the Editor in the matter.
One more request.
Short notes of important and 
interesting occurrences are the life-blood of such journals.
Will all readers therefore furnish such brief notices when- 
ever suitable topics come under their observation ?
The NATURALIST 
For 1 
NORWEGIAN BOULDERS IN HOLDERNESS.
ALFRED HARKER, M.A., F.G.S.
The geologist whose lot is cast in East Yorkshire has no opportunity 
of examining igneous and crystalline rocks in place without making 
somewhat extended excursions.
As a compensation for this, 
however, he has close to hand, in the boulders of the Holderness 
Boulder-Clays, specimens of many rocks of unique interest easily 
collected and studied.
These are the spoils of the great Norwegian 
ice-sheet which, during the maximum glaciation of the region, 
crossed the North Sea, grounded in face of the chalk cliffs of 
Speeton, invaded the then bay of Holderness, and mingled its 
burden of foreign material with that brought by native ice from the 
English uplands.
The boulders from Norway may be collected 
from the clays, especially the Basement-Clay of Dimlington and 
Bridlington, or from the beach south of Flamborough Head.
They 
have been recorded by the officers of the Geological Survey, by 
Mr. Lamplugh and the present writer, and by various local workers.
Many of them are of such characters as to be distinguished at 
a glance from all rocks of local origin, or from the igneous rocks 
transported from Teesdale, the Cheviots, or the Lake district.
Two 
or three leading types are worthy of brief remark.
(I.) Angite-Syenites.
— After the close of the Silurian period there 
were intruded among the Silurian strata of southern Norway a group 
of crystalline igneous rocks of peculiar types.
Chemically they are 
remarkable for their richness in soda, and the mineralogical and 
structural characters of some of them distinguish them, in the eyes of 
the petrologist, from the rocks of all other districts.
One marked 
type, largely developed in the coast-stretch between Christiania and 
Langesundstjord, is a variety of augite-syenite which Brogger has 
named laurvikite, from the town Laurvig.
Boulders of this rock are 
not difficult to find on the Holderness coast.
It is rather coarsely 
crystalline, and presents a handsome appearance on a broken 
surface from the broad cleavage-faces of the felspars, the lustrous 
black augite, and the occasional flakes of dark or golden-brown 
mica.
The felspars are often grey or dark in colour, and some- 
Jan. 1893.
HARKER*.
NORWEGIAN BOULDERS IN HOLDERNESS.
times show a beautiful iridescence on their planes.
This, with the 
rather coarse texture of the rock and the tendency of the augite to 
assume a diallagic appearance, points to deep-seated consolidation 
of the rock-mass from which our boulders are derived.
A micro- 
scopic examination of thin slices of the rock reveals some interesting 
features, especially the curious intergrowths of different kinds of 
felspar to form composite crystals.
(II.) Rhomb-porphyries.
— Another type of rock associated in its 
home with the preceding, and also recognisable as boulders in 
Holderness and Norfolk, is that which Norwegian geologists have 
long known under the name Rhombenporphyr, Its distinguishing 
feature is the occurrence of abundant porphyritic crystals of a felspar 
crystallised with an unusual habit, such that its outlines, as seen, for 
instance, upon the smooth surface of a boulder, have often the form 
of a rhomb.
The crystals may be sharp-angled or rather rounded at 
the edges, and they frequently show irregular patches in their interior 
of different material, as if affected by corrosive action.
They usually 
have a dark-grey colour.
The fine-grained ground-mass in which 
these crystals are embedded is of a paler grey colour with a violet 
tone, but, when more weathered, it often assumes a reddish tint.
It 
is chiefly felspathic, but a microscopic examination discovers other 
minerals, such as augite, apatite, and little flakes of dark mica.
(III.) Saussurite-Gabbros.
— These rocks belong to another set 
of post-Silurian intrusions, found in western Norway and especially 
in the district around Bergen.
They present considerable variations 
in appearance, but, speaking generally, they are evidently crystalline 
rocks of moderately fine to rather coarse texture, and in hand- 
specimens show little more than dark green hornblende set in 
a dull white felspathic-looking substance.
This latter is partly 
decomposing felspar, never showing the bright cleavage-planes of the 
minerals in the augite-syenites, partly the minutely granular material 
rather vaguely denominated ' saussurite/ By Reusch and other 
workers in Norway the rocks are conveniently termed saussurite- 
gabbros : the great alterations they have certainly undergone render 
their original character a matter of some doubt.
The so-called 
saussurite is an aggregate of albite, epidote, zoisite, actinolite, etc., 
often requiring very thin slices and high magnifying powers to 
resolve it ; for the most part it must be formed by the destruction of 
a lime-soda-felspar.
The patches of hornblende are no doubt in 
great measure secondary too, and this is indicated in hand- 
specimens by their green colour and frequent fibrous structure.
Several boulders of saussurite-gabbros have been collected from the 
beach between Bridlington and Flamborough.
Naturalist, 
* 
HARKER : NORWEGIAN BOULDERS IN HOLDERNESS.
3 
(IV.) Granites.
— Among the granites we find less strongly 
distinctive features to warrant identification of the specimens with 
particular masses in situ ; still there can be no doubt that the great 
majority of the granite boulders in the Holderness clays must be 
referred to Norwegian sources.
The only British granites that we 
should naturally expect in this connection are those of Shap Fell 
and of the Cheviots; the former and apparently one variety at least 
of the latter can be recognised, but the greater number of the 
specimens belong to types widely different.
Many are grey granites 
with brown mica (biotite) as a characteristic mineral; others, often 
of greenish grey colour, show both brown and silvery white micas.
These rocks are of medium to fine texture.
In thin slices they 
show bending of the micas and felspars and disturbance of the 
optical properties of the quartz, causing it to give only incomplete 
extinctions when rotated between crossed Nicol's prisms.
These 
are well-known effects of the stresses which accompany great crust- 
movements, and the granites in question doubtless formed part of 
the gneissic areas of southern and western Norway.
We also find 
among the boulders a red granite of coarser grain than the 
preceding, consisting essentially of flesh-coloured felspar with 
a smaller proportion of grey quartz and a little brown mica.
The 
microscope shows that the felspars are mostly microcline and 
microperthite ; the evidences of violent mechanical disturbance seen 
in the other granites are here wanting.
This type of rock may be 
referred with considerable probability to the district west of 
Christian ia, where similar granites occur in intrusive masses of 
rather later date than the augite-syenites and rhomb-porphyries.
(V.) Gneisses and crystalline schists.
— Rocks belonging to these 
divisions are found among our boulders in great variety, and there 
can be no doubt as to their Scandinavian origin, but we have not 
enough information respecting the great development of crystalline 
rocks in Norway to enable us to refer individual specimens to 
precise localities.
One type well represented is a banded horn- 
blende-gneiss showing lenticular white and dark streaks about half 
an inch wide, rich in felspar and in hornblende respectively.
The 
quartz is partly interstitial, partly in rounded grains enclosed by the 
hornblende.
Another type has the dark streaks composed largely 
of deep brown mica, with some silvery white mica in addition, the 
flakes set parallel to the general direction of banding.
Another 
rock is richer in felspar and of finer texture, showing a compact 
white mass enclosing grey quartz-grains and black crystals, about 
one-fifth of an inch long, of hornblende with parallel arrangement.
Still another type is finegrained and dark, the most conspicuous 
Jan. it .
4 NOTES AND NEWS.
element being dark brown mica in little glistening parallel flakes, 
while a lens shows black hornblende in addition.
Hornblende-schists 
and mica-schists are found also of various types, one not uncommon 
among the boulders being a dark mica-schist enclosing dark red 
garnets round which the streaks of filmy brown and pale micas bend 
like the grain of wood around knots.
A finer-grained type has 
smaller garnets, and the white mica more prominent relatively to 
the dark.
Other types met with among the Holderness boulders might be 
referred to, but with less certainty as to the precise locality of their 
home ; such, for instance, as certain quartzites possibly from the 
quartzite-conglomerates of the Bergen district ; and no doubt many 
of the remarkable metamorphic rocks there studied by Reusch may 
have furnished specimens to the ice-sheet which reached our shores.
Further examination would be certain also to detect more types 
from the Christiania district ; probably the red quartz-syenite which 
Brogger has named ' nordmarkite/ which covers a considerable area 
of ground, and his ' laurdalite,' a rock allied to the augite-syenites 
noticed above, but containing, in addition, the minerals elseolite and 
sodalite.
Indeed an English mineralogist might, perhaps, profitably 
search among our boulders for examples of the 'syenite-pegmatite 
veins ' in which the geologist just named has found so long a list of 
rare and remarkable minerals.
I have said enough, however, to 
show that these strangers among our local boulders, although they 
form but a small percentage of all those embedded in the clays and 
washed out on to the modern beach, may usefully occupy a collector 
in the district and afford material for interesting petrological studies, 
while illustrating one of those links between Yorkshire and 
Scandinavia of which another writer has spoken in a recent volume 
of ' The Naturalist.' 
NOTES AND NEWS.
Entomological science has to mourn the decease of one of its most eminent 
votaries, Mr. Henry T.
Stainton, F.R.S., having succumbed to a long and painful 
illness on the 2nd of December.
The value of the work which he has accom- 
plished in the study of our Lepidoptera generally, as well as in respect of his 
favourite group the Tineina, can scarcely be over-estimated, while his personal 
qualities have endeared him to all his contemporaries, as well among those who 
knew him only by his writings as among those who had the pleasure of his 
personal friendship.
Mr. Stainton's last piece of work was the Editorship of the Ray Society '$ 
reproductions of Buckler's exquisite drawings of the Larvae of British Lepidoptera ; 
a work which only his fatal illness compelled him to relinquish; and we under- 
stand that it was a great satisfaction to him in that illness that he was able to 
induce so competent a successor as Mr. Geo.
T. Porritt to promise to continue 
it for the future, a satisfaction which will be shared by all who know Mr. Porritt, 
and the work he has himself achieved in working out the transformations of rare 
species of Lepidoptera.
— W.D.K.
Naturalist, 
5 
BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT 
IN THE AUTUMN OF 1892.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Eaton Hall, Retford.
In publishing this notice in ' The Naturalist ' on the migration of 
birds in the past autumn in the Humber district, I have again to 
express my best thanks to those friends and correspondents on each 
side of the Humber who have sent me their notes and observations.
In Yorkshire, I am more particularly indebted to Mr. H.
B. Hewetson, 
of Leeds, and Mr. Philip Loten, of Easington.
In Lincolnshire, to 
Mr. G.
H. Caton Haigh, of Grainsby Hall ; in the latter case the 
notes sent have a special value as being nearly continuous and the 
observations of a very keen and competent naturalist, who has at his 
command every facility for the pursuit of a favourite study.
It will be observed that the chief interest of the past season has 
been in connection with the two ' great rushes ' of migrants, first on 
September 20th and 21st, and again on October 13th to 16th, under 
exactly the same meteorological conditions ; also in the most unusual 
number of rare or occasional wanderers which have turned up in the 
district.
So far I have not been able to record either Shore-larks or 
Lapland Buntings, both of which species appeared on the Norfolk 
coast after the easterly gale of October 14th, and the latter in 
extraordinary numbers so as to considerably exceed the total of all 
the known occurrences hitherto recorded in Great Britain — in fact 
more than double the record.
Pernis apivorus.
Honey Buzzard- June 21st.
An immature 
male was shot at Enholmes Hall, Patrington.
The stomach 
contained remains of thrushes' eggs, grubs, and beetles.
Hirundo rustica.
Swallow.
July 14th.
Wind N., much rain, 
very cold.
Many young which had left the nests at Easington, 
died of cold and exposure, and some of the old left the 
neighbourhood.
On October 14th, at the same place, I counted 
fourteen young on a spout which was carried across the gable of 
a house.
Last seen in North Lincolnshire on October 30th.
Numenius phaeopus.
Whimbrel.
August 1st.
Fairly 
common on the coast at this date and to the end of September.
Squatarola helvetica.
Grey Plover.
August 1st.
Three 
young of the year seen by Mr. Haigh at Tetney.
Several, both 
adult and young, on the coast between Kilnsea and Spurn on 
Jan. 1893.
6 - CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT 
October 13th ; one which I shot when flying from the land to 
the coast, had as much soil adhering to the forehead and bill as 
might contain several seeds of plants.
Haematopus ostralegus.
Oyster-catcher.
August 1st.
Large 
flock near Tetney Haven.
September 6th.
Flock of forty off 
Stallingborough fitties, some distance within the Humber.
A few 
at Spurn on October 13th.
Tringa canutus.
Knot.
August nth.
Young buff-breasted 
Knot in flocks on coast Birds with the under parts faded to 
pale-orange, and the shiny black feathers on the upper parts 
almost white, have been unusually numerous at Spurn.
Two 
also in rich plumage — little faded — were shot near Tetney on 
September 1st.
The flights this autumn have been unusually 
large.
Enormous masses of young Knot were seen on the beach 
at Sandy Island, Heligoland, on September 4th.
Totanus canescens.
Greenshank.
August 12th.
A few on 
the coast near Tetney.
Were fairly common on both sides of 
the Humber to the end of September.
I shot one near 
Kilnsea on October 13th, but lost it in the sea, and saw a single 
bird on the fitties near Tetney on November 3rd — a late date.
Calidris arenaria.
Sanderling.
August 12th.
Some on Lincoln- 
shire coast.
Oct. 1 2 th ; of three shot at the Spurn to-day not one 
was quite in winter plumage.
Machetes pugnax.
Ruff.
August 19th.
Ruff and Reeve 
seen by Mr. Haigh on North Cotes shore.
One, a young male, 
shot near Kilnsea, in September.
Muscicapa atricapilla.
Pied Flycatcher.
August 19th.
Mr. Haigh saw many young birds on Lincolnshire coast, near 
North Cotes; some also were seen in the Spurn district.
Mr. H.
B. Hewetson, in the last fortnight in August, when 
returning from Sweden to Hull, in s.s.
' Cameo,' writes, * about 
mid-ocean two Pied Flycatchers, a young Redstart and Sanderling 
came on board/ There was again a very considerable 
arrival of the species on the Lincolnshire coast on Sept.
7th, 
seen by Mr. Haigh, c scattered and single all along the sea-bank 
and adjoining hedges, from North Cotes to Grain thorpe Haven.
7 
Heligoland.
4 Enormous numbers of Muscicapa Inctuosa and 
Sylvia phcenicurus have been visiting the island, beginning with 
the former as early as August 8th; 18th a perfect rush; 4th 
Sept., again from noon a great many; wind in the morning 
light \\\, changing at 12 p.m. to N.
On the 21st again a rush 
of above, mixed with trochilus, hortensis, and a sprinkle of 
rubtcula andsuca'ca (H.
( Like).' 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTKS FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
7 
Saxicola cenanthe.
Wheatear.
August 14th to end of 
September ; great numbers on passage from N.
to S.
along 
coast at intervals.
On Sept.
18th, Mr. H.
B. Hewetson, of 
Leeds, in company with his two sons, observed a russet- 
coloured Wheatear with the sides of the head and throat black, 
near the chalk embankment at the Spurn ; he wrote, ' I was 
quite close to it for some time as we walked along, it flew on 
with a party of Wheatears.' It may have been an adult male of 
Saxicola stapazina or perhaps S.
deserti; but presuming that 
Mr. Hewetson's sketch of the head of this bird, which he sent 
me shortly after seeing it, is absolutely correct as to the 
extension of the black to the lower throat, it is suggestive rather 
of S.
melanoleuca (Giild.), the eastern form of the Black-throated 
Chat.
On Oct. 16 th, I saw a few Wheat ears which had come 
in with the 4 great rush' on 14th and 15th, perched on rails 
and hedges — large fine brown birds — near Kilnsea and 
Easington shore.
Totanus glareola.
Wood Sandpiper.
Sept.
1st.
Mr. Haigh 
reports a bird of the year, shot from a pond in Grainsby Park.
Limosa lapponica.
Bar-tailed Godwit.
Aug. 22nd.
A flock 
was seen by Mr. Haigh on the coast — very considerable numbers 
on the mud within the Spurn in September.
Have been very 
common in the Humber during the autumn.
Tringa minuta.
Little Stint.
Aug. 19th.
A pair seen on the 
Lincolnshire coast, and after this very numerous both there and 
at the Spurn, and in the latter locality in flocks of various sizes 
up to forty together, to the middle of September.
On the 16th 
Mr. Haigh shot one near Saltfleet Haven, and saw another.
Tringa subarquata.
Curlew Sandpiper.
From the middle 
of August to the middle of September very common on both 
sides of the Humber.
At Spurn several were shot having the 
underparts more or less a faded red or mottled with dull red, 
all the most richly-coloured obtained being, as Mr Hewetson 
informs me, old females.
Those obtained on the Lincolnshire 
coast had buff breasts.
Last observed on Lincolnshire coast by 
Mr. Haigh on October 5th.
Anthus pratensis.
Meadow Pipit.
August 24th.
Great 
numbers on passage.
Swarming on Lincolnshire coast.
Mareca penelope.
Wigeon.
August 26th.
First Wigeon on 
coast.
October 9th.
Six young of year on sea-ponds at 
Easington — four shot.
Jan. 1 
S CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT 
Phylloscopus trochilus.
Willow Wren.
September ist.
Mr. Haigh reports a considerable movement on the Lincolnshire 
coast.
The last local bird seen by me was on September 25th.
On October 14th and 15th, with an easterly gale and continuous 
rain there was a large immigration on the Holderness coast, the 
hedges and gardens near Kilnsea swarmed with them.
Those 
I observed were very distinctly brownish on the upper surface, 
and the eye-streak was not very clearly defined.
Tadorna casarca.
Ruddy Sheld-drake.
September ist 
One, a female, apparently in immature plumage, was shot from 
a pond on Humberstone ' fitties ' by a Cleethorpes gunner, and 
is recorded by Mr. G.
H. Caton Haigh (Zool., 1892, p.
360) in 
whose collection it now is.
Querquedula circia.
Garganey.
September 19th.
A young 
male was shot near Easington.
This is the first autumn 
example I have ever had to record in the Humber district.
Puffinus anglorum.
Manx Shearwater.
One was killed 
z against the telegraph-wire near Easington in September.
Mr. Gatke, writing from Heligoland, says that on October 21st 
one was obtained there, the first occurrence since fifty years 
ago, when it was not unfrequent 
Motacilla raii.
Yellow Wagtail.
September 13th.
Mr. Haigh 
observed a great immigration of this species on the Lincolnshire 
coast, young and old, all day, continuously from east, in flocks 
of five to fifty.
For a detailed account of the migration of 
M. 
Ruticilla phoenicurus.
Redstart.
September 21st.
Mr. Haigh 
writes : — ' We have had the heaviest rush of small insect-eating 
birds that I have ever seen.
On the 20th the wind shifted to 
N.E., and in the evening of that day it blew hard and rained 
in torrents all night.
On the 21st I went down to the coast and 
found all the hedges swarming with Redstarts ; some had got 
as far inland as Grainsby village (about five miles from coast).
Other small birds were Whitethroats, Robins, Pied and Spotted 
Flycatchers, Wheatears, Hedge Sparrows, and a few Blue Tits.
When the hedges were beaten the little birds came out in 
clouds, the Redstarts more numerous than all the rest put 
together.' 'On the 22nd Redstarts had decreased and Robins 
increased/ Between Easington and the Spurn on the 21st and 
the 22nd, a great many Redstarts.
In connection with this 
immigration of Redstarts and Robins see Mr. J.
H. Gumey's 
•Notes from Norfolk' (Zool., 1892, p.
401).
At Heligoland on 
Naturalist, 
CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
9 
the 2 1 st, a rush of Redstarts, and a sprinkle of Robins and 
Bluethroats.
October ioth.
Spurn.
One young male shot.
15th.
One male seen.
Mr. Haigh shot one on the 19th, 
thinking it might be R.
titys.
Erithacus rubecula.
Robin.
September 21st.
First immigration 
as recorded above.
Again on October 14th, 15th, and 16th.
Easterly gales and heavy rain.
An immense arrival in the Spurn 
district.
Thousands came in and the hedges and gardens about 
Kilnsea and Easington were full of Robins.
I counted up to 
fifty in one part of the warren-house garden in company with 
Goldcrests and Willow Wrens ; many also had dropped in the 
long sea grass on the sand-hills, and some caution was necessary 
to avoid stepping on them, so reluctant were they to move.
The movement extended also to the Lincolnshire and Norfolk 
coasts.
Heligoland, Mr. Gatke says: — 'We had rubecula and 
Regulus on the nth, 12th, and 13th, the former in great 
numbers.' 14th.
' Only in the morning great rush over the 
island, but not staying/ The arrivals on the Holderness 
coast had all of them very pale-coloured breasts.
Accentor modularis.
Hedge Sparrow.
September 21st.
Many 
on the Lincolnshire coast, first flight.
October 14th to 16th.
Great numbers at Spurn, Kilnsea, and Easington, with others.
Ruticilla suecica.
Red-spotted Bluethroat.
September 
21st.
Mr. Haigh writes : — ' On a hedge at North Cotes I saw 
an immature Bluethroat ; it came out and sat on a twig within 
three feet of my face.
Subsequently I got a snap shot at it, 
but falling, probably only winged, in very thick cover, was not 
recovered, although I spent most of the afternoon with two men 
looking for it' In the Spurn district one at least was seen ; in 
Norfolk also' a few Bluethroats' (Zool., 1892, p.
401).
Heligoland, 
September 21st.
'A sprinkle of rubecula and suecica" 
Anthus obscurus.
Rock Pipit September 22nd.
First 
noticed on migration on Lincolnshire coast.
October 3rd, more.
On November 3rd, I saw many between Tetney and Grainthorpe 
Haven, chiefly confined to the banks of the outfall drains which 
cross the ' fitties.' 
Plectrophenax nivalis.
Snow Bunting.
October 3rd.
First 
flock seen at Easington.
October 13th to 16th.
A few adult 
birds.
October 22nd.
A large flock came in at North Cotes.
Again on October 28th, Mr. Haigh saw large flocks of Snow 
Bunting coming in from sea on Lincolnshire coast.
November 
20th.
At this date Mr. Hewetson reports 'there are tens of 
thousands of Snow Bunting about Kilnsea.
I never saw any- 
Jan. i8g3- 
IO CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
thing at all like it — shore and cliffs and stubbles alive, in flocks 
like Dunlin or Knot.' Nov. 29th.
Lincolnshire coast, immense 
immigration, inland to S.S.W., continuously to 3.30 p.m.
Anser brachyrhynchus.
Pink-footed Goose.
Flocks arrived 
on the coast in the fourth week of September.
Scolopax rusticula.
Woodcock.
Sept.
24th.
A few early 
birds in the Spurn district.
Oct. 13th to 16th.
First flight, 
night of 14th or on early morning of 15th — of fourteen shot on 
this day, all of which I examined, seven were presumably young, 
having the outer web of the first primary brownish and with 
regular notch-like markings through its length, four had the 
outer web greyish-white and the notches obliterated ; of the 
remaining three the markings were of an intermediate character, 
perhaps birds of the previous year.
Presuming that the clear- 
ness or otherwise of the notches is indicative of youth or age, 
it would seem that both the old and young migrate at the same 
* 
date and in the same flight.
Asio accipitrinus.
Short-eared Owl. Oct.
14th to 16th.
A few came at the same date as the Woodcock.
I have an 
example shot this year at Spurn on August 6th — a very early date.
Falco aesalon.
Merlin.
Several seen about Kilnsea first fort- 
night in October.
Asio otus.
Long-eared Owl. Oct.
15th.
One shot on the 
sand-hills.
Phylloscopus superciliosus.
Yellow-browed Warbler.
Oct. 7th.
Mr. Haigh has recorded in 'The Zoologist/ 1892, 
p. 413, having shot one from a hedge near the sea-bank at 
North Cotes.
In his letter to me announcing the capture, he 
says, ' It is the fattest little bird I ever skinned/ 
Regulus cristatus.
Gold-crested Wren.
Oct. 14th to 16th.
Easterly gale, heavy rain, and very thick at sea.
An enormous 
immigration of Goldcrests into the Spurn district, much the 
largest I have seen or recorded.
One on 13th, wind N.
; great 
numbers on 14th, E.
gale ; but on the 15th they seemed to have 
increased tenfold, swarming in every part of the district wherever 
any shelter or cover could be found — hedges and gardens were 
full — and the tiny birds so tame that they might have readily 
been taken with a butterfly net.
Many were killed by country 
boys, and the village cats had a grand time of it, so also had the 
Grey Shrikes.
The sallow-thorns covering the sand-hills between 
Kilnsea and the Point were densely crowded, each little migrant 
an animated olive leaf with a lady-bird on the stalk.
On the 
Lincolnshire coast, Mr. Haigh says, ' The rush of Goldcrests 
Naturalist.
CORDEAUX: BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBKR DISTRICT, II 
was quite unprecedented in my experience.
I did not see one 
on the 13th, but on the 14th and 15th they swarmed in even- 
hedge in thousands, and were so tame that they could almost be 
taken by hand.
Robins and Hedge Sparrows are also numerous.' 
On the Norfolk coast on the 15th, Robins are reported 6 in 
hundreds/ ' Goldcrests in swarms.' They are also named in 
Mr. M.
Bailey's Flamborough Bird-notes, Nat. 1892, p.
326, in 
swarms after the 13th.
How much further to the north and 
also south this remarkable immigration extended we have 
unfortunately no means of knowing.
Regulus ig-nicapillus.
Fire-crested Wren.
October 15th.
When watching the Goldcrests passing inland from the coast 
to-day, I had the good fortune to see for some minutes a fine 
adult male Fire-crested Wren which came into the hedge under 
which I was sheltering, and perched on a twig close to my face, 
having first made an attempt to alight on the stick of an open 
umbrella held horizontally across the shoulder.
It was a finer 
example than one I got from Easington in 1889 (Nov. 4th).
Amongst the many thousands of Goldcrests this was the only 
one I came across, although making much careful search.
Lanius excubitor and L.
major.
Great Grey Shrike.
October 
15th.
Mr. R.
Hewetson and Mr. Craggs Clubley, of the Warren- 
house farm, when looking for woodcock saw twenty Grey Shrikes 
between Kilnsea and Spurn — five or six together, the rest singly.
On the morning of the 16th I saw seven or eight between 
Easington and Kilnsea.
One of these I beat from a black-thorn 
thicket where he was doing his best to circumvent a Goldcrest, 
the place swarming with them.
Another was hovering kestrel- 
like over a stubble-field, and often changing position from place 
to place, others on the wing or perched on the highest twigs in 
hedge-rows, one on the telegraph wire.
In the warren-house 
garden a handsome adult male, with one wing spot, strove hard 
to catch a Robin, both chaser and chased threading their way 
through several clumps of broom and gorse ; finally the Robin 
got into an elder bush, and the Shrike just above him ready to 
seize ; luckily for the intended victim, he managed to drop into 
a hole in some loose rockwork.
The Shrike watched the spot, 
his head on one side, most intently, like a cat ; but after a time 
gave it up, perching on the handle of a spade, from which point 
of vantage he speedily pounced on a Goldcrest, seizing it by 
the nape, and the last I saw of him was trying to fasten it on 
the spikes of a wire fence.
The mob of small birds in this 
garden, and the Goldcrests in the black-thorn, did not show any 
Jan. 1893.
12 CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
dread of the Shrike, although in their very midst, treating him 
as a most harmless and privileged guest, and in very singular 
contrast to the commotion amongst small birds 
4 When the falcon's shadow saileth across the open shaw.' 
Here too, in this garden, was a cat, so gorged with small birds 
as to be incapable of further mischief.
Grey Shrikes are 
reported at Flamborough at the same date, but so far I have 
heard of none on the Lincolnshire coast.
In Norfolk, two were 
shot near Yarmouth, and others seen about the 16th, as 
Mr. Gurney informs me.
Gallinago ccelestis.
Common Snipe.
October 14th to 16th.
Many came in at the same time as the woodcock.
Also the 
4 first flight' of foreigners, September 20th and 21st.
Local 
birds were shot near Kilnsea as early as third week in August.
Gallinago gallinula.
Jack Snipe.
October 14th to 16th.
The same remark will apply, but in less number.
First shot by 
Mr. Haigh on September 24th.
Pratincola rubicola.
Stonechat.
October 13th.
A few near 
Kilnsea, greatly increased on 14th to 16th by both adult and 
young birds.
Turdus merula.
Blackbird.
October 15th.
E. gale, rain.
In very considerable numbers on the Yorkshire and Lincolnshire 
m 
coast, and not observed before this date in any number.
Turdus torquatus.
Ring Ouzel.
September 21st and 22nd.
One picked up killed against telegraph - wire at Easington, 
several seen there same date.
October 15th.
E. gale, rain.
Many about Kilnsea and Spurn.
Lincolnshire coast, pretty 
common on 14th and 15th.
I found none near Kilnsea on 
1 6th, and Mr. Haigh says on the 19th 'all the Ring Ouzels 
have left.' They are as a rule very soon off again, rarely 
remaining longer than a day or two anywhere when on passage.
November 7th.
At Easington, several seen.
Turdus iliacus.
Redwing.
October 13th.
A few in bents 
and sallow-thorns on Spurn coast, more towards evening.
On 
the 14th and 15th, great flight with others.
Turdus musicus.
Song Thrush.
October 10th.
I flushed 
several to-day from swedes when shooting along Dimlington 
high land and close upon the cliff edge.
From their manner 
they were evidently fresh arrivals in the previous night.
Great 
numbers came in from the 13th to 16th and subsequent days.
Turdus pilaris.
Fieldfare.
A few on October 16th, but the 
multitude after this date, following the gale and not preceding 
it.
October 22nd.
First seen on Lincolnshire coast.
Naturalist 
CORDEAUX : TURD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
1 3 
Cypselus apus.
Swift October ioth.
One seen at dusk near 
Easin^ton.
Corvus cornix.
Hooded or Grey Crow.
October 3rd.
First arrivals on the Lincolnshire coast.
The main body did 
not arrive till the 16th at early morning, when many were seen 
about Spurn and Kilnsea.
These likewise followed the easterly 
gale and did not precede it.
Vanellus vulgaris.
Lapwing".
September 24th.
On Lincoln- 
shire coast several flights about this date, and on October 4th 
and 5th.
Great numbers also from October 16th to 20th, the 
fag-end of the < great rush.' On November 3rd, on the coast 
between Tetney and Grainthorpe Havens I noticed Lapwings 
in very considerable flocks arriving from the east at short 
intervals, flying very low and passing inland ; the movement 
ceased at 2 p.m. The wind on the previous night had been 
east and squally.
This day, however, for sunshine and 
temperature was a midsummer one, and almost too warm to 
carry winter clothing.
There were very few birds to be seen 
on the coast beyond the noisy Redshank and a few handsome 
Redwing in the bents.
In the afternoon, however, as the tide 
came in, vast flights of Knot and Dunlin got on the wing and 
went careering southwards — now invisible, and then instantly 
passing into clouds of drifting snow-flakes.
Through the morning 
I had marked along the outer rim of the horizon those long 
white lines suggestive of breakers, but these never changed 
their outlines, and with the aid of a glass became speedily 
resolved into thousands of gulls on distant sands.
I have 
walked this coast for nigh forty years now, in all seasons 
and weathers — other old haunts have changed their character, 
but this changeth not — it is ever the same, ' the level 
waste, the rounding grey ' — a dreary interminable expanse 
of mud, shifting sand, and water ; a foreground of low sand- 
hills, barren or clothed with reed-like grasses and prickly sallow- 
thorn, 'fitties/ broken by creeks and spread with irregular 
shallow pools of brackish water fringed by a dense growth of 
salt-loving plants.
* Miles and miles and miles of desolation !
Leagues on leagues without a change !
Sign or token of some eldest nation 
Here would make the strange land not so strange.
Time forgotten, yea since Time's creation, 
Seem these borders where the sea-birds range.' 
Tringa alpina.
Dunlin.
Oct. 13th.
One near Kilnsea with 
black breast* 
Jan. 18Q3.
14 CORDEAUX: BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
Buteo lagopus.
Rough-legged Buzzard.
Oct. 15th.
Two 
seen on coast near Kilnsea ; other buzzards seen about this time 
but not identified.
Alauda arvensis.
Sky- Lark.
Oct. 13th to 20th.
Great 
immigration.
Sturnus vulgaris.
Starling.
Oct. 13th to 20th.
The same.
Many were killed against the telegraph - wires on Kilnsea 
Common and towards Spurn.
Corvus frugilegus.
Rook.
Oct. 15th to 19th.
Great 
immigration.
Uria troile.
Common Guillemot Oct. 16th.
I found one 
in full winter plumage, and in excellent condition, dead in a lane 
near Easington.
It was a storm-driven bird, and had been 
brought inland by the easterly gales of the previous day.
Alcedo ispida.
Kingfisher.
Oct. 20th.
I saw the first on 
Cotes Beck.
Mr. Haigh also saw the first he has seen this 
season on the Lincolnshire coast.
Phylloscopus rufus.
Chiffchaff.
Oct. 14th.
Mr. Haigh shot 
the only one he has ever seen on migration on the Lincolnshire 
coast.
Garrulus glandarius.
Jay. Oct.
12th Mr. Haigh, writing from 
Grainsby Hall, says: 'We had very large numbers here on the 
1 2th and again on the 15th/ None have been observed at 
Heligoland.
Sylvia nisoria.
Barred Warbler.
Oct. 19th.
One, a bird of 
the year, was shot by Mr. J.
W. Jalland, of Hull, at Easington 
at this date, thinking it might be a Bluethroat.
This is the 
second example recorded from that locality.
It was exhibited 
by Professor Xewton at the meeting of the Zoological Society 
in London on November 1st, and subsequently acquired by 
Mr. W.
Eagle Clarke for the Science and Art Museum, 
Edinburgh.
Columba palumbus.
Wood Pigeon.
Oct. 23rd.
Migratory 
flock seen at Grainsby.
Fringilla montifringilla.
Brambling.
Oct. 30th.
Two flocks 
of these handsome finches were seen near Easington by 
Mr. Jalland.
Also a few Shore-larks.
Coturnix communis.
Quail.
Nov. 3rd.
One was shot near 
Easington, and another near Hornsea, in the third week in 
September.
Novem r 22nd, 1892.
Naturahsi 
5 
BRITISH FUNGUS FLORA.
British Fungus Flora : A Classified Text-book of Mycology.
By 
George Massee.
In three volumes.
Vol. I.
Price 7s.
6d.
Geo. Bell 
and Sons, London, 1892.
The student of British Mycology is ready to admit that for many 
years he has had to labour under difficulties, owing chiefly to the fact 
that no text-book was available on the subject containing descriptions 
of the British species.
After a mycological excursion, he considered 
himself lucky should he succeed in determining one-half of the 
species collected.
The doubtfuls, as a rule, were pitched into the 
dust-bin, a ready method of settling them, and there can be no 
question that many good species — and probably new ones — have 
often found their way into that useful receptacle.
It is more than twenty years since Dr. Cooke published the 
1 Handbook of British Fungi,'* a work which has served its purpose 
admirably and to which most British mycologists of to-day are 
indebted for their first acquaintance with our mycological flora.
But since the publication of the Handbook, mycology has advanced 
by leaps and bounds in every direction, and the number o( British 
species has almost doubled.
So that there is not much cause to 
wonder that an up-to-date edition has often been devoutly wished 
for.
Yet where was the person competent to bring out a work 
dealing with something like five thousand species ?
And when 
Stephenson's 4 Hymenomycetes Britannici" (1886), Phillips" * British 
Discomycetes' (1887), Plowright's 'British Uredinese and Ustilagineas* 
(1889), and other monographs made their appearance, it was apparent 
that our mycological flora was to be dealt with piecemeal, and the 
student rested content, awaiting further monographs.
No one in this country knew more of the disadvantages of 
mycological students than our esteemed member of the Y.N.U., 
Mr. George Massee, of Kew, and no one was more competent to 
supply the requirements of students.
The first volume of * British 
Fungus Flora* will therefore be hailed with delight, and we have 
pleasure in stating at the outset that the work is a truly honest 
production, and full of merit.
It is in every sense well 'got-up,' the 
paper, printing, and binding leaving nothing to be desired.
The present volume is devoted to Basidiomvcetes, and in the 
introduction a well-written but brief description is given of the nature 
and origin of Fungi.
After describing the characteristics of the 
Basidiomycetes the work practically begins.
Unlike previous books 
on this subject, the (iastromycetes take the lead, and it is at once 
evident that the author has taken pains to make the species of this 
group more easy of recognition than they have hitherto been.
Jan. i8qj.
1 6 REVIEW: BRITISH FUNGUS FLORA.
The Order Pilacrese with its single genus of two species, hitherto 
classed with the Hyphomycetes, is doubtless rightly placed, as a 
connecting link between the Gastromycetes and Hymenomycetes.
A good account is next given of the structure and chief characteristics 
of Hymenomycetous fungi, after which follow descriptions of the 
families and species.
In previous works it has been the custom to 
commence this group with the highest-developed species and proceed 
downwards, but Mr. Massee does not always believe in following 
a beaten track, and has preferred to begin with the lowest forms, 
Tremellinese.
We do not, however, see any advantage in the change.
Much labour has been bestowed upon the family Thelephorese, and 
several new genera have been created.
It is evident that the author 
has been at a loss what names to adopt for these new genera, and in 
our opinion it would be quite as easy to select a characteristic name 
both for genera and species, rather than after individuals.
In the Polyporese the dividing of Folyporus into four genera is a 
welcome innovation, and will prove useful to the student.
Turning to 
Agaricineae — the black- and purple-spored sections of which occupy 
the remainder of the volume — opinions will differ as to the advisability 
of elevating all the sub-genera to the rank of genera.
Mr. Massee's 
idea is that more good than harm will be effected by the change.
The 
blackish-spored section (Melanosporas), include Anellaria, a small and 
well-marked genus split from Panceolus, and Gomfthidius — which is 
placed here 'purely on technical grounds' — together with Coprinits, 
Panaohts, and Psathyrella.
In the purple-spored section (Porphryo- 
spone), the name Agaricusis applied to the hitherto sub-genus Psalliota.
The student will no doubt soon familiarise himself with the 
alterations, which have been made for his benefit.
An especial 
feature in this volume is the excellent manner in which the 
descriptions of species have been drawn up.
In addition to the 
original description, which in some cases is lengthy, notes from other 
authorities are given, together with those of the author, in fact 
Mr. Massee takes the student as it were by the hand and does nearly 
all for him except the collecting.
The small drawings illustrating more 
than a hundred species, are a valuable accompaniment to the text.
We have already had an opportunity of putting the work practically 
to the test, and it fulfils its purpose extremely well.
And we have not 
the slightest hesitation in saying that it should be in the hands of 
every student, and on the shelves of every naturalist's library as a work 
of reference.
A little more care in correcting proofs of future volumes — 
which, we trust, will not be long delayed — will perhaps prevent 
printer's errors, which, although few in number, here and there have 
slipped through.
H. T.
S. 
Naturalist, 
17 
A CHECK-LIST OF BRITISH EARTH-WORMS.
Rev. HILDERIC FRIEND, F.L.S., 
Author of * Flowers and Flower- Lore J Idle, Bradford.
The past year has been the most fruitful on record in its 
bearings on the number and distribution of our indigenous terrestrial 
annelids.
Hitherto no list has been prepared by means of which 
collectors could check their local species, and the time seems to 
have arrived when such a catalogue should be drawn up for future 
reference.
Several ends will thereby be secured.
We shall see, in 
the first place, exactly how many British species were known to 
science when the year 1892 closed its record of research.
We shall 
have a clue to the distribution of the species.
A guide will be 
afforded to collectors who wish to identify their captures, and, 
finally, a list will be provided for checking the same when found in 
any given locality.
Our earthworms fall under four genera, and number at present 
25 species.
I shall give a brief outline of each genus, then the 
names of the species, with the number of girdle and band segments, 
and their known distribution in counties.
The figures in the form 
of a fraction denote the number of the segments covered by the 
girdle in the normal condition, and the number of the girdle 
segments on which the tubercula pubertatis, i.e., the clitellar papillae 
or bands, are situated.
Thus f^vfi would signify that the girdle 
covered segments 24 to 31, on two of which, viz., the 26th and 27th,.
papillae or bands occur when the worm is adult.
I. GENUS LUMBRICUS.
Lip forming with the first ring a perfect mortise and tenon.
Girdle of five or six segments — the four innermost carrying a band 
on each side.
Setae eight on each segment in four couples, the 
individuals near together.
Male pores on the 15th segment with 
or without papillae.
Colour dark-red or brown with iridescence.
Cylindrical in front, tail flattened.
Exude slime when irritated, but 
no turbid liquid.
Five species at present known in the British Isles.
1. Lumbricus terrestris Linn, ffzff Distribution— Sussex, 
Kent, Middlesex, Surrey, Essex, Norfolk, Leicestershire, 
Hertfordshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Oxford, Northants, 
Sark, Devonshire, Gloucester, Bucks, Nottinghamshire, Lan- 
cashire, Montgomery, Northumberland, Yorkshire, Westmor- 
land, Cumberland, N.
Wales, S.
Scotland, Ireland.
New 
records wanted.
Jan. 18Q3.
1 8 FRIEND : A CHECK-LIST OF BRITISH EARTH-WORMS 
2. Lumbricus rubellus Hoffm.
f|zff- Distribution — Same 
as No. i.
3. Lumbricus purpureus Eisen.
ffzff- Distribution — Same 
as No. 1.
4. Lumbricus rubescens Friend.
§$l£f.
Distribution — 
Sussex, Kent, Middlesex, Norfolk, Gloucestershire, Yorkshire, 
Lanarkshire, Down, Dublin.
5. Lumbricus papillosus Friend.
#fz|f Distribution — 
Co. Dublin, Ireland.
[On the Continent L.
meiibceus Rosa, 
has similarly only five girdle segments.
These species have 
hitherto not been found in England.] 
II.
GENUS ALLOLOBOPHORA.
Lip partially dovetailed into first ring.
Girdle segments from 
four to ten in number.
Tubercula pubertatis on consecutive or 
alternate segments, either as papillae or forming a distinct band.
Setae eight in four couples, more or less irregularly disposed.
Male 
pores as in Lumbricus.
Colour-range very wide — brown, clay, flesh, 
green — seldom iridescent.
Usually cylindrical throughout.
Exude 
slime or turbid fluid, sometimes very pungent.
Nine British species 
known.
6. Allolobophora longa Ude. ffZff. Distribution — Same 
as No. 1.
7. Allolobophora profuga Rosa.
ff"§i- Distribution — 
Nottinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Montgomery, N.
Wales, 
Gloucestershire, Norfolk, Yorkshire, Westmorland.
8. Allolobophora turgida Eisen.
|fT|4- Distribzitioh 
Sussex, Essex, Devonshire, Norfolk, Yorkshire, Somersetshire, 
Wilts, Herts, Lancashire, Middlesex, Notts, Dublin, Down, 
Kerry, Kent, Westmorland, Cumberland, Gloucestershire, 
Montgomery, N.
Wales, Lanarkshire, Perth.
Formerly 
confused with the next ; on which account the earlier 
records for Nos. 8 and 9 are unreliable.
9. Allolobophora trapezoidea Duges.
[z |.
Distribution — 
Essex, Norfolk, Nottinghamshire, Somersetshire, Yorkshire, 
Gloucester, Bucks, Oxford, Herts, Cumberland, Lancashire, 
Lanarkshire, Westmorland, Montgomery, N.
Wales, Kerry.
See No. 8.
Note that in one case the papilke are on two 
alternate segments (31 : 33), while in the other they cover 
three consecutive segments (31-33).
10.
Allolobophora mucosa Eisen.
ffrjf; Distribution 
Sussex, Devonshire, Norfolk, Essex, Nottinghamshire, Vork- 
Xaturalist, 
friend: a check-list of British earth-worms.
19 
shire, Lancashire, Oxford, Leicestershire, Montgomery, 
Northants, Somersetshire, Herts., Cumberland, Westmorland, 
Dublin, Down, Kerry, Lanarkshire, Perth.
11.
Allolobophora chlorotica Savigny.
§r;ir?:f3* Distribu- 
tion — Same as No. 1.
12.
Allolobophora cambrica Friend, ff.fjrifs- Distribu- 
tion — Montgomery.
Note that while the girdle-formula is 
the same as No. 11, the two worms are totally different 
internally and externally in every other respect.
13- Allolobophora foetida Savigny.
flzfg.
Distribution 
Same as No. 1.
This is the angler's Brandling.
14- Allolobophora hibernica Friend.
f^Z§x- Distribution 
Dublin, Louth (Ireland).
III.
GENUS DENDROB.KNA.
A group of small rose-brown worms found in decaying trees, 
with setae usually in eight rows, and very delicate lip, whose insertion 
into the first ring varies widely.
They exude a small quantity of 
yellow fluid from the dorsal pores, which begin between the 5th 
and 6th segments.
See Friend, Journ.
Linn.
Soc, Zoology \ vol.
xxiv, 
p. 292 et seq.
; and Essex Naturalist^ Jan. 1893.
There are six 
known species in Great Britain.
15- Dendrobaena celtica Rosa.; %\.
Distribution — Kent, 
Sussex, Devonshire, Gloucestershire, Yorkshire, Northants, 
Oxford, Somerset, Lancashire, N.Wales, Lanarkshire, Dumfries.
16.
Dendrobaena arborea Eisen.
$l~^l- Distribution 
Norfolk, Essex, Sussex, Gloucestershire, Yorkshire, Cumber- 
land, Hertfordshire, N.
Wales, Dublin.
17- Dendrobaena boeckii Eisen.
fflff- Distribution — York- 
shire, Lanarkshire (Scotland).
Only two authenticated 
records.
Earlier records belong to the next.
A boreal 
species.
18.
Dendrobaena subrubicunda Eisen.
\ z%% Distribu- 
tion — Same as No. 1.
2 <;— :i 1 
19- Dendrobaena constricta Rosa.
-'„ " .
Distribution 
Sussex.
A southern and continental form.
20.
Dendrobaena eiseni Levinsen.
~V'~- Distribution 
Sussex, Essex, Norfolk, Devonshire, Yorkshire, Gloucestershire, 
Hertfordshire, N.
Wales, Cumberland, Dublin.
Jan. 1893.
20 BOSTRICHUS CAPUCINUS IN IMPORTED OAK AT HULL.
IV.
GEXl'S ALLURUS.
Male pores on segment 13.
Semi-aquatic.
Five known British 
species.
21.
Allurus tetraedrus Savigny.
ff~§jr.
Distribution — Same 
as No. 1.
22.
Allurus amphisbaena Duges.
--v 2 \ Distribution— 
Sussex.
An element of doubt lingers around this species 
which I hope to be able soon to remove.
23.
Allurus tetragonurus Friend.
if^ff Distribution— 
N. Wales (Bangor).
24.
Allurus flavus Friend.
||z|i.
Distribution — Cumberland^ 
Yorkshire.
25.
Allurus macrurus Friend, £-$Zf§.
Distribution — Dublin.
I omit all allusion to aliens imported with soil from abroad, as 
well as doubtful species which need confirmation.
The consignments 
which reach me week by week from Ireland give promise of new 
species, and I should be delighted to receive material from the Isle 
of Man, the Scilly, Orkney and Shetland Isles, the Highlands of 
Scotland, and other unworked parts of the kingdom.
Worms may 
be sent in tin boxes with soft moss, when they will arrive in clean 
condition for immediate study.
NO TE— COLE O PIER A .
Bostrichus capucinus in Imported Oak at Hull.
— I have received from 
Mr. Stevenson, a timber merchant of this town, some specimens of a wood-boring 
beetle which infested some foreign oak he had.
This oak had been received from 
Odessa in Sept.
1891, and no traces of anything of the sort were observed when 
it was sawn up at the latter end of that year, but some he had left was noticed 
about a month ago to be bored with holes about -^th of an inch in diameter, by 
the larva of a beetle.
Luckily, however, it appears to have confined its 
depredations principally to the outer ' sap-wood/ and it has only occasionally 
bored into the solid wood.
Most of the beetles escaped before they were noticed, 
but a few were captured and given to me.
These turn out to be Bostrichus 
capucinus 1 a beetle very rare indeed for England, and which does not appear to- 
have been taken at all since 1867.
It is a striking looking beetle about 9 mm.
in 
length, the head and thorax being black and very rugose, while the elytra and 
part of the abdomen are red.
The Rev.
\Y.
W. Fowler, who kindly named it for 
me, gives the following records for this beetle in his ' Coleoptera of the British 
Islands': — 'Very rare, does not appear to have been taken for many years.
Stephens gives as localities London district, Cromer, Derbyshire, Notts, and 
Bewdley.
In Dr. Power's collection there is a specimen from E.
Brown's 
collection taken at Burton in 1867, and another from Bentley's collection.
Mr. Dale records the capture of one ...
at Glanville Wootton, July 2nd r 
1854.
Mr. Rye ('British Beetles,' p.
146, 1866) records a specimen as recently 
taken near Highgate on a felled oak.' The borings of this beetle are very 
shallow, as a rule not more than an inch in depth and then proceeding laterally.
It is very probable that all our specimens have been imported from the Continent 
with the timber, and it is almost certain that in this record, the eggs were on the 
oak when it arrived in this country, although they were not noticed.
— 
Walter F.
Baker, 5, Cavendish Square, Hull, Dec. 13th, 1892.
Naturalist 
21 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
DIPTERA, 1888, 1889, 1890, and 1891.
The present instalment (which is the second instalment of the 
Bibliography of Diptera) has been compiled and edited by 
WM, DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
The first instalment, covering the years 1S84 to 1887 inclusive 
appeared in 'The Naturalist' for January 1889, p.
17.
Anon, [signed ' Entomologist '].
Line.
S. 
The Hessian Fly [(Cecidomyia destructor) ; a popularly written account ; 
incidental mention that 'South Lincolnshire .
. .
has suffered considerably 5 ].
Journ.
of Horticulture; reprinted in Journ.
of Microsc, Jan. 1888, p.
15* 
Axon, [not signed].
York S.E.
The Hessian Fly [Cecidomyia destructor] from Russia [at Hessle near 
Hull, observed by Edm. Riley].
Land and Water, Jan. 7th, 1888, p.
24.
Anon.
[Ed. Field].
York S.E.
Insects [Chforops teniopus] destructive to Barley [at Melbourne, Yorkshire ; 
species determined by Eleanor A.
Ormerod].
Field, Sep. 1st, 1888, p.
345.
Francis G.
Binnie.
York Mid W.
List of Cecidomyidae found near Tadcaster [18 species, of genera 
Cecidomyia, Diplosis, and Hormomyia y are included, with localities and 
character of gall indicated].
Nat., Ap. 1889, pp.
101-102.
E. Brunetti.
Line.
N., Cheshire.
Notes on Diptera in 1888 [Eutobmts rufibarbis Mg., one, sent from 
Lincolnshire ; Dasyphora cyanel/a, rather rare, a pair from Rigsby, Lines.
; 
Graphomyia picta Zett., the first specimen (a female) I have been able to 
keep, from Lincolnshire; Phora rufipes, some from Chester].
E. M.
M., 
May 1889, pp.
281-282.
E. Brunetti.
York S.W.
List of the British Strati omyidae, with analytical tables and notes 
[Chrysonotus bipitnctatus Scop., Yorkshire (p.
132) ; Microchrysa flavicornis 
Mg., var.
cyaneiventris, one specimen in coll.
R. H.
Meade, taken near 
Bradford (p.
133)].
Ent., May 1889, pp.
I3 2 - J 33' 
E. Brunetti.
Line.
N. 
Notes on Diptera, in 1889 {Cecidomyia destructor Say, Alford, bred by 
J. E.
Mason from 1888 puparia].
Ent., Ap. 1890, p.
123.
H. Shortridge Clarke.
Isle of Man.
D. Embleton.
Durham, Westmorland, York N.W.
A Catalogue of the Place-Names in Teesdale [including one derived 
from the Midge; see pp.
xiii, 99, 126 (Flea), 141 and 169 (Mawks or 
Maggots— on Sheep)].
Nat. Hist.
Trans, of Northumb., Durham, and 
Newc.
, vol.
ix, part i (1887), PP* i-xviii and 1-223.
Tan. 1893.
22 BIBLIOGRAPHY \ DIPTERA, l888, 1889, 189O, 1891.
Edward A.
Fitch.
W 
Two New Essex Gall-makers [one of which, Cecidomyia cardaminis 
Winnertz, on Bitter-cress, was first received by him from Harrogate, June 
1 2th, 1882; Peter Inchbald's account of life-history quoted], Essex Nat., 
Sept.
1887, pp.
178-179.
IIilderic Friend.
% Cumberland.
Silloth in June \Tipula maculosa noted as occurring along with the 'common 
daddy-longlegs' (?
7\ o/eraaa)].
Sci. Goss., July 1889, p.
156.
A. E.
Hall.
York N.E.
[Cleg, Hizmatopota phivialis, noted by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union 
at Hayburn \Yyke [on July nth, 1891].
Nat., Sept.
1891, p.
287.
H. H.
HlGGINS.
Lane.
S. 
[Occurrence of Anthrax hottentota at Crosby in 1890 ; Lane, and Chesh.
Ent. Soc.,Sept.
8th, 1890].
E.M.M., Oct. 1890, p.
274.
Peter Inchbald.
York S.E, 
Phytomyza chserophylli [the autumn generation abundant in the leaves 
of Ch&rophyllnm syivestre and more abundantly in those of C.
temuhan ; 
presumably at Hornsea ; life-history stated].
Ent., Jan. 1889, p.
22.
Peter Inchbald and R.
H. Meade.
? York S.E.
Notes upon Phytomyza chaerophylli, Kait.
[reared from CJuerophyilwn 
temuhtm ; locality not stated, but may possibly be Hornsea, whence Inchbald 
dates his note : Meade's contribution is a full description of the insect].
Ent., Ap. 1889, p.
87.
Peter Inchbald.
York S.E.
Cecidomyia lychnidis (Heyd.) [on Lychnis dioica, presumably at Hornsea, 
but place not stated].
Ent., Nov. 1889, P« 284.
Berry Kexdrick.
Cheshire* 
The Hessian Fly and some of its Congeners [the appearance of Cecidomyia 
destructor at High Leigh near Warrington being reported, investigation 
proved the pest to be Chlorops ttcniopits ; the determination confirmed by 
Miss E.
A. Ormerod ; account of the attack given ; extracts from Miss 
Ormerod's papers given].
Young Nat., Jan. 1888, pp.
1-7.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man, ' York/ 
Our Insect Enemies : Cutworm [larvae of Tifula oleracea, T> macu 7 osa, and 
T. paludosa ; particulars detailed as to ravages committed in the Isle of Man 
(also near York, p.
30) and suggestions made].
Back Trans.
I. of Man 
N.H.S., pp.
29-36 ; publ.
with Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 1889.
H. WALL1S Kew.
Line.
N. 
[A List of] Diptera from the Alford and Louth Districts of Lincolnshire 
[giving localities and dates, 38 species for Alford and 17 for Luuth, the 
former determined by E.
Brunetti, the latter by G.
H. Verrall].
Nat., 
July 1888, pp.
217-218.
JAMES Eardlev Mason.
Line.
N. 
[List of 41] Diptera from the Alford District of Lincolnshire [with 
localities and dates given ; all identified by G.
H. Yerrail].
Nat., June 1890, 
pp.
165-166.
R. H.
Meade.
Derbyshire, York S.E.
Second Supplement to Annotated List of British Anthomyiidas [Myd«-a 
nigricola Fall., Baslow, Derbyshire, July 1887; Spilogaster at ripe s sp.
now, 
described from two males, Hornsea near Hull, June 1889 ; S.
fratercula 
Zett., Baslow, a single male, July 1889].
E. M.
M., Nov. 1889, pp.
424-426.
[Triihophthicns hirsutiilus Zett., Baslow, Derbyshire, July 1887, 1 males, 
It. H.
M.].
E. M.
M., Dec. 1889, p.
449.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: DIPTERA, 1888, 1S89, 1890, 1891.
23 
R. H.
Meade.
Westmorland and Furness, Cheshire.
Additions to the List of British Anthomyiidae [Mydma affinis sp.
n., two 
males near Lake Windermere several years ago, another at Grange-over- 
Sands in June 1890; also in the Lake District : Homalomyia vesparia sp.n., 
bred from Vespa germanica at I nee, Cheshire, together with Horn, canicular is 
L., and Acanthoptera inanis Fin.
; Limnophora litorea Fin., two males at 
Grange-over-Sands, June 1890].
E.M.M., Feb. 1891, pp.
42-43; Bibliog.
Note in Ent. Record, Feb. 16th, 1891, p.
307.
R. H.
Meade.
Furness.
Annotated List of British Tachiniidae [including a note of Bigonicheta 
spinipennis Mgn. captured by writer in 1886 near Ulverston, Lancashire], 
E.M.M., May 1891, p.
128.
\Macquartia tenebricosa Mgn., both sexes found 
near Lake Windermere].
E.M.M., June i89i,p.
155.
[ExoristamutabilisFln., 
near Ulverston, a female, Aug. 1888].
E. M.M., Dec. 1891, p.
327.
L. C.
Miall.
* Lanes.,' 'Yorks/ 
The Fresh-Water Harlequin Chironomus, and its Development [the 
larvce abound in the inky streams of Lancashire and Yorkshire].
Research, 
March 1890, p.
210.
York S.W.
S. L.
Moslev.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Holmfirth [10th June 1889; Culex 
pipieus, Tipula oleracea, 71 maculosa^ Sargus cuprarius (pupse, since bred), 
Syrphus ribesii, Syritta pipiens, and Lttcilia aesar noted].
Nat., July 1889, 
p. 203.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire, 
Insects, &c, taken in the Nests of British Vespidse [in Cheshire; 
Cyrtoneura stabulans Fall., Homalomyia canicularis L., H.
vesparea Meade, 
n.sp., Phora rufipes Meig., Acanihiptera inanis Fall., and Volucella bombylans 
L. var.
plumosa mentioned, with host, locality, date, and other details].
E.M.M.,Feb. i89i,p.
41 ; Bibl.
Notice in Ent. Record, Feb. 16th, 1891, p.
307.
R. Nkwstead.
Cheshire* 
A query as to the Food of certain Dipterous larvae found in nests of 
Vespidce [in Cheshire; notes on Homalomyia canicularis L.].
E. M.
M,, 
March 1 89 1, p.
78.
Eleanor A.
Ormerod.
York S,E.
he Hessian Fly [Cecidomyia destructor] and its introduction into 
Britain [recording the results of examination of imported straw at ports of 
entry, thousands of bales of straw being examined at Hull under the superin- 
tendence of E.
A. Riley, result being negative].
Trans.
Herts.
Nat. Hist.
Soc, Vol. 5, part 6 (Oct. 1889) p.
173- 
Geok e T.
Porritt 
Man 
[Diptera taken on] an Entomological Expedition to .
. the Isle of Man 
[in June 1887 ; three Tipulidre — Amapolis littoralis, Pedicia rivosa, and 
Ptylhoptera contaminala near Douglas — named by R.
H. Meade].
Nat., 
Ap. 1888, p.
107.
Edward Riley.
York S.E 
Welton 
W 
Nat., Feb. 1888, p.
46].
Edward Saunders.
York £ 
Notes on a British Flea— Typkopsylla asszmilis, Tasch.
[found on Sorex 
vulgaris at Sheffield, etc.].
E. M.
M., June 1891, p.
170.
Derbyshire.
G. A.
Smallwood.
and 
at Wellington, near Burton-on-Trent].
Ent., Jan. 1889, p.
21.
Jan. 1893.
24 ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON.
II.
T. SOPPITT.
York S.W.
A Swarm of Diptera [Borborus equinus Fallen] in February [17th, near Idle, 
in immense numbers ; determined by R.
H. Meade].
Nat., Ap. 1889, p.
102.
F. V.
Theobald.
Northumberland, Lincolnshire.
An Account of British Flies (Diptera).
. .
Part II.
[Dated 1891 : at 
p. 57 the ravages of Cecidomyia destructor in Northumberland and Lincoln- 
shire (the latter of which has suffered from the worst attacks) are noted].
Subsequent parts of this work not seen.
G. H.
Verrall.
' Lake District,' Derbyshire.
List of British Tipulidae, &c.
("Daddy-Longlegs "), with Notes 
\Dolichopeza sylvicola Curt., the Lake District ; Tipula signata Stseg., near 
Buxton, two taken by Mr. Theobald].
E. M.
M., June and July 1888, 
pp.
20 and 24.
G. H.
Verrall.
Westmorland.
Critical Notes on Diptera \Chironomus flexilis L., near Rydal, confirmed], 
Ent., May 1890, p.
152.
Chas.
H. H.
Walker.
Cheshire* 
Microscopical Notes [on the Cheshire side of the Mersey; Musca 
vomitoria, M.
c&sar, and Corethra plumicornis (larva), noted 25th May, 
1889].
Young Nat., Sep. 1889, pp.
185-188.
NO TES—LEPID OPTERA.
Entomological Society of London.
— November 2nd, 1892.— Mr. S.Stevens 
exhibited, for Mr. J.
Harrison, of Barnsley, and read notes on, a beautiful series 
of Arctia lubricipeda var.
radiata, which had been bred by Mr. Harrison this 
year.
Mr. C.
G. Barrett exhibited dark varieties of Acronycta leporina, bred by 
Mr. J.
Collins, of Warrington.
Mr. J.
A. Clark exhibited a long series of 
remarkable varieties of Liparis monacha^ bred from a pair taken at Scarborough.
Several of the specimens were as light in colour as the typical form of the species ; 
others were quite black ; and others intermediate between these two extremes.
Entomological Society of London.
— December 7th, 1892.
— Mr. F.
W. 
Frohawk exhibited a living specimen of the larva of Carterocephalus palamon 
{Hesperia paniscus), hybernating on a species of grass which he believed to be 
Bromus asper.
The Rev. Canon Fowler and Mr. II.
Goss expressed their interest 
at seeing the larva of this local species, the imagos of which they had 
respectively collected in certain woods in Lincolnshire and Northamptonshire.
Mr. Goss stated that the food-plants of the species were supposed to be Plant ago 
major and Cynosurus cristatus, but that the larva might possibly feed on Bromus 
asfer.
Mr. C.
G. Barrett exhibited a long series of remarkable melanic and 
other varieties of Boarmia repandata, bred by Mr. A.
E. Hall from larvce 
collected near Sheffield.
— H.
Goss and W.
W. Fowler, Hon. Secretaries.
NOTES AND NEWS.
, There is a very interesting paper in our contemporary ' The Natural History 
Journal' for Oct. 15th, 1892, by Mr. J.
Loveh F.R.Met.S., upon 'The Cloud- 
burst at Round Hill, Langtoft,' in East Yorkshire, and its destructive effects, 
which are described in detail, explained, and illustrated by a sketch-map, and a 
couple of reproductions of photographic views, one showing the manner in which 
the hill-side was torn up by the three water-spouts.
The   Entomologist's Monthly Magazine ' for November 1892, contains an 
obituary notice of the late John Thomas Harris, F.E.S., of Burton-on-Trent, 
a keen coleopterist and good botanist, one of the founders and an early President 
of the Burton-on-Trent Natural History Society.
Naturalist, 
25 
WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
FROM THE HERBARIUM, CATALOGUES, ETC., OF 
THE LATE Mr. JOHN TATHAM, OF SETTLE.
WILLIAM WHITWELL, F.L.S.
Through the painstaking kindness of the Misses R.
F. and 
F. P.
Thompson, of Settle, I was enabled to contribute a large 
number of records to Mr. F.
Arnold Lees' ' Flora of West Yorkshire, 
based upon specimens and memoranda left by their grandfather, the 
late Mr. John Tatham.
The examination of Mr. Tatham's herbarium 
and notes was not, however, begun until the printing of the ' Flora ' 
was somewhat advanced, and in consequence many items of value 
obtained thereby were too late to be of service then.
Also, the 
arrangement of the collection is on the Linnaean system : this 
occasioned the omission of various others.
In addition to his actual herbarium specimens, and a catalogue 
of them, Mr. Tatham left numerous memoranda in note-books and 
in his copy of the late Mr. Henry Baines's ' Flora of Yorkshire.' 
From the three sources the Misses R.
F. and F.
P. Thompson have 
compiled a supplementary list of West Riding localities for which 
Mr. Tatham's name may stand as authority, and have favoured me 
with it.
I have checked the list with the ' Flora of West Yorkshire,' 
and after careful consideration of the several items (and in a number 
of cases the obtaining of the actual specimens, most of which 
Mr. J.
G. Baker has obliged me by examining) have made the 
subjoined extracts from it.
Mr. F.
A. Lees has referred ('Flora/ page 233, etc.) to 
Mr. Tatham's repute as an observer.
The following brief biographical 
details will not be out of place respecting one whose name will 
always claim honourable mention in the annals of Yorkshire botany.
For these also I am indebted to his grand-daughters.
John Tatham was born at Settle, Yorkshire, on the 20th 
September, 1793, and was educated at the neighbouring and well- 
known Giggleswick Grammar School.
He served a seven years' 
apprenticeship to Mr. Thomas Thompson, of Liverpool, in the 
business of chemist and druggist, and continued with him for two or 
three years afterwards as assistant.
Returning to Settle, he entered 
into partnership with his father, in the same line, and at Settle he 
passed the remainder of his life.
It was during his residence at Liverpool that Mr. Tatham first 
turned his attention to botanical study, a favourite recreation with 
Jan. 1893.
26 whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
his master, and the interest then awakened remained active to the 
last, and has proved hereditary in his family.
In 1 841 John Tatham was elected a member of the Edinburgh 
Botanical Society.
He also joined the London Botanical Society, 
and through this double membership plant-specimens of his 
collecting became widely distributed and his name well known.
He 
was likewise one of the original members of the Ray Society, 
founded in 1844.
Mr. Tatham supplied lists of the plants of the 
Settle region to Dr. John Windsor for the ' Flora Cravoniensis,' and 
to Mr. Henry Baines for his ' Flora of Yorkshire ; ' also to the 
' Phytologist ' (Vol. I., page 87).
John Tatham was one of the party whose visit to Teesdale in 
1844 resulted in the discovery of Are n aria uliginosa Schleich., its 
other members being James Backhouse, sen.; James Backhouse, jun.
(afterwards the author of the ' Monograph of the British Hieracia'); 
G. S.
Gibson, of Saffron Walden, and Silvanus Thompson.
In 1849, 
and again a few years later, he made a tour in Scotland in company 
with the elder Backhouse ; many characteristic Highland plants 
collected by him then are now in my possession.
The delight in natural history pursuits, and particularly in 
botanical science, which has so long happily characterised the 
Society of Friends, found full illustration in the present instance, 
as the families of Tatham and Thompson both belonged to that 
religious body.
Mr. Tatham died at Settle on the 12th January, 1875.
He was 
twice married.
His widow died on the 30th January, 1892, at the age 
of 94 years.
She preserved his herbarium with great care, and was 
much interested in every recognition of Mr. Tatham's botanical work.
Silvanus Thompson, youngest son of Mr. Thomas Thompson, 
married Mr. Tatham's second daughter.
He was for many years 
a master in the large Friends' School at Bootham, York, and there 
did much to foster a love of natural science among the boys.
Two 
of his pupils afterwards became distinguished botanists : Mr. J.
Gilbert 
Baker, F.R.S., of Kew, and the late Mr. James Backhouse, of York 
('British Hieracia').
He, as well as his father-in-law, contributed 
records to Baines's 'Flora,' the 'Phytologist,' etc.
One of his sons 
is the well-known Principal of the Technical College, Finsbury 
Dr. Silvanus Phillips Thompson, F.R.S.
— noted for his contributions 
to electrical and magnetic science, and recently the discoverer of 
a second habitat for our Yorkshire Arenaria gothica Fries.
Mr. and Mrs. Thompson each had plant collections representing 
their earlier botanical work, and on their marriage these were combined 
to form one herbarium.
When in 1864 Mr. J.
G. Baker's house at 
Naturalist, 
WHITWELL : WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
27 
Thirsk was burnt down, his collections were destroyed, together with 
the greater part of the sheets of his just-printed 'North Yorkshire.' 
The joint Thompson herbarium was therefore given to Mr. Baker, 
but on his removal to Kew a private collection became unnecessary 
to him.
At that time a request came from Sir James Hector for the 
supply of a typical series of British plants for the Wellington Museum, 
N.Z., and the Thompson-Baker collection was forwarded in 
response to the application, a selection from it having first been made 
for the British Herbarium at South Kensington.
Mr. S.
Thompson died at Settle on the 3rd February, 1881.
Mrs. Thompson died there in March, 1891, in the house in which 
she was born.
For perfect gentleness and sweetness of character,, 
warm, self-forgetting friendliness, and bright, thoughtful sociability, 
their names will long be cherished — by the writer and by many 
others who had the privilege of knowing them.
TATIIAM RECORDS.
The page given after each plant-name is that of the 4 Flora of West 
Yorkshire/ 
H. indicates a specimen collected by Mr. Tatham himself, or not 
bearing another person's name.
Personal Names mark specimens so authenticated, actually in the 
herbarium now.
C. indicates species named in Mr. T.'s final catalogue of his collec- 
1 
tion, though the specimen is not now there.
MS.
indicates species named in his manuscript notes elsewhere, 
usually in his copy of Baines's ' Flora of Yorkshire/ 
It has been considered advisable to obtain a number of the 
herbarium specimens for examination.
Most of these have 
been submitted to Mr. J.
G. Baker : such are marked 
(J 
W 
Feizor Botanic Garden records (see for explanation Epimedhun 
alpinum L.) are included in square brackets.
These are 
retained in case of possible escapes.
RANUNCULA CEsE.
Thalictrum calcareum Jord.
(as ma/us Sm.).
Page 113.
R. Limestone hills, near Settle (J.G.B.).
MS.
Thalictrum flavum L.
Page 113.
R. Oustre-bank Wood (J.G.B.).
H. This locality is sometimes 
in the   Flora ' assigned to the Lune district.
It is a 
hanging wood on the bank of the Ribble between Settle 
and Stackhouse.
Jan. ifc 93 .
28 whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
Ranunculus heterophyllus Fr.
(as aquatilis var.
heterophyllus).
Page 115.
R. In the Ribble.
C. 
Ranunculus trichophyllus Chaix.
(as aquatilis var.
Pantothrix).
Page 118.
R. In the Ribble.
C. 
A. 
Lenormandi Schultz.
Page 119.
id of Rothersdale ; J.
Backhouse.
Ranunculus auricomus L.
Page 121.
R. Lord's Wood.
H. ' In all our woods.' MS.
Trollius europaeus L.
Page 123.
R. Near Stackhouse.
H. 
Helleborus viridis L.
Page 124.
R. Near Lumb (Little Bank Farm).
H. 
L. In a meadow at Wharfe.
MS.
Helleborus fcetidus L.
Page 125.
R. Near Lumb (Little Bank Farm).
H. 
L. At Feizor, abundant.
C 'Wild.' MS.
Aquilegia vulgaris L.
Page 125.
L. Winskill Wood, Feizor.
H. 
BERBER A CEsE.
[Epimedium alpinum L.
Page 128.
L. Clapham's Botanic Garden at Feizor.
H. Mr. R.
Clapham 
had a botanic or apothecary's garden at Feizor, from 
which a number of non-local plants found their way into 
Mr. Tatham's collection.
' Escapes ' from this garden 
are quite possible.] 
PA PA VERA CEsE.
Papaver somniferum L.
Page 129.
C. Lumb Bank, near Heptonstall j Sam/.
Gibson.
Papaver dubium L.
Page 129.
R. 'Ingfield.' H.
'Quite unknown here till the house 
known as Ingfield was built, about 1844.
After the 
foundation was dug, the surrounding land was red 
with it' /.
FUMARIACEsE.
Corydalis claviculata DC.
Page 131.
R. Cockit Moss.
H. 
CR UCIFER& 
Sisymbrium Sophia L.
Page 136.
L. Clapham village (J.G.B.).
H. 
Naturalist, 
whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
29 
Erysimum cheiranthoides L.
Page 137.
R. Near Settle.
MS.
Cardamine amara L.
Page 138.
R. Beggar-wife Bridge.
H. 
Cardamine hirsuta L.
Page 128.
R. ' Common.' H.
and C.
This is quoted, as well as the next, 
to show that Mr. Tatham distinguished them as 
segregates.
No dates are given.
Cardamine sylvatica Link.
Page 139.
R. Near Settle, ; abundant.' H.
Arabis Thaliana L.
Page 140.
R. On Castleberg.
C. No Ribble locality is given in ' Flora/ 
Arabis perfoliata Lam. Page 140.
D. Wath-upon-Dearne (no date).
G. P.
Nicholson.
Barbarea praecox Br. Page 141.
R. Langcliffe Lane.
H. 
Armoracia rusticana Baumg.
Page 143.
R. Between Settle and Long Preston.
H. 
Draba muralis L.
Page 144.
A. Malham Cove (1832).
MS.
Lepidium campestre Br. Page 149.
R. Ribble Banks.
H. Settle Churchyard.
MS.
RESEDACE.E.
Reseda lutea L.
Page 151.
R. Giggleswick.
H. 
VIOLA cl\ / :.
Viola lutea var.
amcena Syme.
Page 156.
R. Attermire.
' On our hills.' C.
Specified separately from 
lutea proper.
But amcena only means a purple-flowered 
lutea, at any rate here, and the distinction is valueless.
Wholly yellow flowers, wholly purple ones, and variously 
intermediate ones — partially yellow and partially purple 
are found on the Attermire slopes.
I think, however, 
that the wholly yellow are the first met with on ascending 
the hill, and that the purple element appears gradually 
upwards, but without actually prevailing at any level.
DROSERACE.E.
Drosera rotundifolia L.
Page 157.
R. Cockit Moss.
H. Helwith Moss, given under L.
m the 
1 Flora,' should be under R.
Jan. 1893.
30 whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
CAR YOPHYLLA CE.E.
Silene maritima With.
Page 161.
L. Whernside.
J. 7!V note in his   Baines.' 
Silene Armeria L.
Page 162.
L. Ingleton.
C. 
Lychnis vespertina Sibth.
Page 162.
R. Near Nappa.
H. 
Stellaria nemorum L.
Page 165.
R. New Hall, near Settle.
H. 
Arenaria trinervia L.
Page 167.
R. Near the paper mill, Settle.
H. 
HYP ERIC A CEsE.
Hypericum Androsasmum L.
Page 172.
R. Craven Bank Wood.
C. and MS.
( s= on High Rigg (Craven 
Bank) a little above the new buildings of Giggleswick 
Grammar School).
Hypericum hircinum L.
Page 172.
R. 6 Bank of Ribble a little below the Railway Bridge : August 
1855.' H.
( = below Gildersleets on the road from 
Settle to Rathmell j Misses Thompson).
Hypericum dubium Leers.
Page 173.
R. Near Stainforth.
MS.
MALVACEAE.
Malva sylvestris L.
Page 176.
R. Oustre-bank Wood.
H. 
A. Near Skipton.
C. 
Malva rotundifolia L.
Page 176.
R. Giggleswick.
H. On Castleberg, Settle.
MS.
GERANIA CEsE.
Geranium sanguineum L.
Page 178.
R.   In most of our woods.' MS.
Geranium phaeum L.
Page 179.
R. Little Bank (W.W.).
H. 
Geranium sylvaticum L.
Page 179.
R. fc In all our alpine limestone meadows.' MS.
Winskill 
Wood.
Swabeck Meadows.
C. 
A. Gordale.
C. 
Geranium pratense L.
Page 179.
R. Common.
C. 
[Impatiens Noli-me-tangere L.
Page 184.
L. Feizor botanic garden.
.//".] 
Naturalist 
WHITWELL: WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
3 1 
RHAMNACEAl.
Rhamnus catharticus I- Page 186.
R. 'In all our woods.' MS.
SA PI NBA CEsE.
Acer campestre L.
Page 187.
R. Between Hellifield and Otterburn.
H. 
LEG UMINIFERM.
Ulex Gallii Planch, (as nanus).
Page 188.
L. Near Ingleton.
> 
R. Wigglesworth.
J" Both noted h lJ /R m his ' Bames ' 
Undoubtedly Gallii % but there are no West Yorkshire 
specimens.
All those in the collection from other parts 
are really Gallii (J.G.B.), though all marked nanus.
Genista anglica L.
Page 188.
R. Cockit Moss.
H. 
Genista tinctoria L.
Page 188.
R. Tarn field, H.
(= Site of Gigglesvvick Tarn.) 
Trifolium medium L.
Page 193.
L. Clapham.
H. 
Trifolium arvense L.
Page 194.
D. Adwick-upon-Dearne.
G. P.
Nicholson.
Trifolium elegans Savi.
Page 195.
R. Beggar-Wife Bridge: 1848.
H. 
Astragalus Hypoglottis L.
Page 198.
D. Wath-upon-Dearne.
G. P.
Nicholson.
(No doubt near 
Wath, i.e., upon the Magnesian Limestone 6 or 7 miles 
distant ; F.
A. Lees.) 
Astragalus glycyphyllos L.
Page 198.
D. Near Brodsworth.
G. P.
Nicholson.
Vicia tetrasperma Mcench.
Page 200.
D. 'Very common about Wath, 1836/ H.
Orobus tuberosus L.
var.
tenuifolius.
Page 203.
R. Lodge Gill.
H. One specimen has narrow and broad 
leaves on different stems springing from the same root.
ROSACEA 7 ..
Prunus insititia L.
Page 204.
R. Giggleswick Scars.
C. 
[Potentilla fruticosa L.
Page 211.
L. Feizor (W.W.).
R. Clapham.
Only marked as ' Keizor,' 
but no doubt either < Botanic Garden ' or a duplicate 
specimen.] 
Jan. 1893.
32 WHITWELL : WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
Comarum palustre L.
Page 212.
R. Cockit Moss.
H. 
Rubus suberectus Anders.
Page 213.
A. Near Malham Cove.
MS.
D. Near Newbridge, 1843.
S. Gibson.
Rubus fissus Lindl.
Page 213.
C. Carr Green, 1843.
S. Gibson.
Rubus plicatus W.
& N.
Page 214.
C. Carr Wood, 1843.
•$.
Gibson.
C 
ifolius).
Page 214.
3 (T.G.B.).
S. Gibson 
rhamnifolius W.
& N.
Page 214.
C. Near Halifax.
R. Ley land.
With reference to the note in 
the • Flora 9 respecting this record, the specimen has 
been submitted to Mr. J.
G. Baker, but it is found to be 
too imperfect for identification.
Rubus affinis Auct.
Ang. Page 215.
R. Lane at Stackhouse.
MS.
A. Malham Cove, MS.
ifolius).
Page 216.
C. 
(J.G.B.).
R. Ley land.
pinifolius v.
pnlchellus).
Page 2 1 8.
C. Lew Bank, 1843 (J-G.B.).
S. Gibson.
Rubus Radula Weihe.
Page 219.
C. Carr Wood, near Halifax, 1843.
S. Gibson.
Rubus Koehleri Weihe.
Page 219.
R. Peart's Crags, Stackhouse Lane.
MS.
C Near Halifax, Aug. 1837.
JZ.
Ley land.
This Halifax 
specimen is named glandulosus.
But ' most likely 
Koehleri '' (J.G.B.).
Rubus corylifolius Sm. Page 221.
L. Crow-nest Wood.
MS.
C. Mytholmroyd (as sublustris).
S. Gibson.
Rubus caesius L.
Page 221.
R. ' All our woods/ ' Common/ MS.
Rubus saxatilis L.
Page 222.
L. Feizor, <N:c.
— common.
MS.
R. Oustre-bank Wood.
H. 
Dryas octopetala L.
Page 224.
W. Arncliffe.
H. 
North Yorks.
Top of Cronkley Fell.
H. 
Naturalist, 
whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
33 
These are quoted for the sake of a note with the 
Cronkley Fell specimen — ' Supposed to be different from 
the Arncliffe one, as it flowers later/ 
Rosa spinosissima L.
Page 225.
R. Alpine Woods near Settle: June 1833.
^ 
Lynn Gill, 1842.
H. 
Rosa involuta Sm. var.
Doniana.
Page 225.
L. Ingleton.
H. Feizor.
' per R.
Clapham!
Rosa canina var.
dumetorum Thuill.
Page 228.
R. Buck Ha' Brow, Stackhouse H.
Rosa canina var.
Borreri Woods.
Page 230.
R. * Common.' MS.
Cave Ha' Wood (as inodord).
H. 
Rosa arvensis Huds.
(marked ' arvensis, Anglice.').
Page 230.
W. Heselton Gill.
H. 
L YTHRA CE&.
* 
Lythrum salicaria L.
Page 233.
R. Nappa.
H. Near Giggleswick.
MS.
Within three miles 
of Settle.
Marked as such, Mr. J.
G. Baker informs 
me, in a catalogue supplied to Mr. Watson.
A. ' Malham Tarn : J.
Tatham ' — is entered in the ' Flora of 
West Yorkshire/ by transcript from Miall and Carrington's 
6 Flora/ It is strange that no mention of Malham Tarn 
is found in any of Mr. T.'s own notes, and that there is 
no specimen in his herbarium.
The only record of the plant for the Tarn is in the 
M. and C.
'Flora,' and the only authority given is 
Mr. Tatham's.
Professor Miall informs me that it was 
taken from a marked list sent to him by Mr. Tatham.
Mr. Walter Morrison, the courteous owner of the 
Tarn House estate, has favoured me with a letter in 
which he states that the Purple Loosestrife is well known 
to him from its beauty on some of the reaches of the 
Thames, and that he has never seen it at the Tarn.
It is 
not known at the Tarn, either, to his gardener, Mr. T.
Coulthard, who is well acquainted with the local plants.
Professor Miall himself, and Mr. William West of 
Bradford, both inform me that they have not met with it 
in the locality.
Mr. F.
A. Lees has not seen it there.
I am compelled therefore to the opinion that some 
mistake was made in connection with the original marked 
list, and that the species must still be considered as 
Feb. 1893.
C 
34 WHITWELL : WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES, 
belonging only to the valleys.
Its range is given in 
'North Yorkshire' as 0-250 feet.
Giggleswick Tarn 
(see c Flora of W.
Y.'), however, would give it a further 
extension to between 500 and 550 feet.
ON A GRA CEsE.
Epilobium angustifolium L.
Page 234.
R. Near Long Preston.
H m 
HALORAGACEJE.
Hippuris vulgaris L.
Page 239.
R. Cockit Moss, 1843.
* Very fine.
1 H.
and C.
Myriophyllum verticillatum L.
Page 238.
A. Canal near Skipton.
S. Gibson.
CUCURBITA CE^E, 
Bryonia dioica L.
Page 241.
D. Fields about Ackworth.
H. 
GR OSSULA RIA CEjE.
Ribes rubrum L.
Page 242.
R. 4 Common.' MS.
Ribes petraeum Sm. Page 242.
A. Gordale.
If.
The two forms are quoted to show that Mr. Tatham 
recognised the distinction between them.
CRAS8ULACEM.
Sedum villosum L.
Page 244.
A. Between Settle and Kirby Malham.
H. 
[Sedum album L.
(as anglicum).
Page 244.
L. Feizor (Botanic Garden) (J.G.B.).
H. and MS.] 
SAXIFRA GA CE/E.
Saxifraga hypnoides var.
platypetala Sm. Page 249.
R. Winskill Wood, 1850.
H. 
Saxifraga hypnoides var.
hirta Don. Page 249.
R. Near Settle.
C. 
Chrysospienium alternifolium L.
Page 250.
L. Crow Nest Wood.
MS.
R. Huntworth Gill.
MS.
A. Janet's Cave.
MS.
Naturalist, 
WHITWELL : WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
35 
* 
UMBELLIFERsE.
Cicuta virosa L.
Page 252.
L. Near Wharfe.
C. Inconclusive, however.
No specimen.
Possibly only noted from Miall and Carrington, who give 
' Near the Wharfe, Hasling Ford.' 
Pimpinella magna L.
Page 255.
R. Giggleswick Scar (W.W.).
H. 'Common/ MS.
This 
increases the range to 550 or 600 feet.
Sium angustifolium L.
Page 256.
R. Near Giggleswick Scar.
H. 
iEthusa Cynapium L.
Page 258.
R. Gildersleets.
If. The Misses Thompson report specimens 
there in 1888 four feet in height 
Fceniculum vulgare Gaert.
Page 258.
R. Giggleswick.
C. 
Meum athamanticum Tacq.
Page 259.
R. Near Giggleswick.
?/ 
CORN A CE/E.
Cornus sanguinea L.
Page 265.
R. Banks above Settle on the cliff (J.G.B.).
If. Limestone 
cliffs above Settle.
C. 
R UBIA CE/E.
Galium boreale L.
Page 269.
R. Peter's Castle.
H. 
A. Gordale.
Malham.
MS.
W. Near Kettlewell.
H. Kilnsay Crag— fine.
C. 
VALERIANA CE/E.
Valerianella dentata Koch.
Page 275.
A. Malham Cove.
MS.
COMPOSITE.
Silybum Marianum Gsert.
Page 277.
L. Birks, near Clapham.
H. 
Carduus nutans L.
Page 278.
• A.
Near Malham Tarn, east end.
H. 
Carduus acanthoides L.
Page 278.
R. Attermire pastures.
H. Langcliffe Lane.
H. 
Centaurea Scabiosa L.
Page 283.
A. Pontefract.
B. Thompson.
Feb. 1893.
36 whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
Filago minima Fries.
Page 289.
R. West of Giggles wick.
MS.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum L.
(as rectum).
Page 289.
L. Feizor: 1833.
R. Clapham.
Pastures near Feizor.
MS.
Gnaphalium dioicum L.
Page 290.
R. Huntsworth pasture.
H. 
Senecio erucifolius L.
(as tenuiflorus).
Page 292.
R. Near Langcliffe.
If. Raysack Hill, near Settle.
MS.
Senecio saracenicus L- Page 293.
L. Ingleton.
If. Austwick.
MS.
R. Cammock (Settle).
MS.
Bidens tripartita L.
Page 294.
R. Near New Hall.
H. 
Petasites officinalis Mcench.
Plantafem.
Page 298.
R. Ribble banks (W.W.).
H. 
Leontodon hirtus L.
Page 300.
R. ( Common/ MS.
(in his 'Baines').
Probably an error 
for hispidus.
Tragopogon porrifolius L.
Page 302 (but not named).
D. Brods worth.
G. P.
Nicholson.
Taraxacum officinale var.
laevigatum DC.
Page 302.
R. Langcliffe Lane.
H. 
Taraxacum officinale var.
palustre DC.
Page 302.
R. Lodge Gill pastures.
MS.
Hieracium anglicum Fries, (as Laivsoni).
Page 306.
R. Hills above Settle.
H. Catterick and Stainforth.
MS.
Hieracium anglicum Fries (as Bypochceris metadata).
Page 306.
R. Attermire Scar (J.G.B.).
If.
Hieracium Gibsoni Backh.
(as ccesium var.
bifidum).
Page 307.
R. Giggleswick Scar.
If.
Hieracium vulgatum Fries., form maculatum Backh.
Page 309.
R. Giggleswick Scar.
MS.
Hieracium tridentatum Fries.
Page 310.
R. Oustre Bank Wood, 1844 (J-G.B*).
H. 
Hieracium prenanthoides Vill.
Page 310.
R. Oustre Bank Wood.
H. 
Hieracium crocatum Fries (as rtgidum).
Page 311.
R. Attermire Scars, July 1848 (J.G.B.).
If.
Hieracium villosum L.
Page 311.
R. Wood above Stainforth.
Note in his ' Baines/ Doubtless 
anglicum ; see ' Flora.
Naturalist, 
whitwell: west Yorkshire records and notes.
37 
ERICA CEsE.
Vaccinium Vitis-idaea L.
Page 317.
R. Penyghent.
Cleatop Park.
MS.
Arctostaphylos Uva-ursi Spreng.
Page 318.
C. Near Heptonstall, May 1829.
H. Ley land.
Pyrola minor L.
Page 321.
L. Clapdale Wood.
jR.
Clapham.
A. Wood near Gordale House.
C. Wood near Malham.
Note in copy of ' Baines.' 
Monotropa Hypopitys L.
Page 322.
W. Thorp Arch Woods (no date).
H. Baines.
APOCYNACE&.
Vinca minor L.
Page 323.
R. Castleberg.
Winskill Wood.
MS.
GENTIA NA CEM.
Menyanthes trifoliata L.
Page 327.
L. Lawkland Moss.
MS.
R. Lodge.
H. 
CON VOL VULA CE^E, 
Convolvulus arvensis L.
Page 329.
A. Road between Keighley and Bingley.
If.
Convolvulus sepium L.
Page 329.
R. Giggleswick.
H. 
SOLANACEJE.
[Atropa Belladonna L.
Page 322.
L. Feizor (Botanic Garden).
H. and MS.] 
Hyoscyamus niger L.
Page 322.
R. Langcliffe Lane.
H. 
SCROPHULARIA CEJS.
Verbascum Thapsus L.
Page 333.
R. Tarn Lane.
MS.
Scrophularia Ehrharti Stev.
Page 335.
R. Long Preston.
Near Nappa.
MS.
Linaria vulgaris Mill, status Peloria.
Page 338.
A. Near Pudsey, Yorkshire, 1844.
H. 
Veronica montana L.
Page 341.
L. Cave Ha' Wood.
H. 
Melampyrum pratense var.
montanum Johnst.
Page 346 
L. Near Feizor, &c.
C. 
Feb. 1893.
38 WHITWELL : WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
LABIA TM.
* 
Lycopus europaeus L.
Page 349.
R. Beggar- Wife Bridge.
H. Willow Island (Settle).
MS.
Mentha viridis L.
Page 351.
R. Willow Island.
H. An escape.
Mentha viridis var.
crispa.
Page 351.
R. Cammock, Settle (J.G.B.).
H. An escape.
Mentha rubra Sm. Page 352.
R. Willow Island.
H. Beggar-Wife Bridge [as gentilis, but 
is rubra : J.
G.B.I H.
Mentha 
Page 353- 
R. Giggleswick.
MS.
Salvia Verbenaca L.
Page 357.
R. Gathered near Settle.
MS.
Scutellaria minor L.
Page 358.
C. Hebden Bridge.
H. Baines.
Ballota nigra L.
Page 359.
L. Near Feizor.
C 
W. Common about Knaresborough.
MS.
Galeopsis versicolor Curt.
Page 361.
R. Near Lodge.
H. Settle Ings, 1841.
MS.
Lamium incisum Willd.
Page 363.
R. ' A common weed.' H.
[Teucrium Chamaedrys L.
Page 365.
R. Feizor (Botanic Garden ).
H.~\ 
BORAGINACEsE.
Borago officinalis L.
Page 370.
R. Bridle road from Rathmel to Malham.
MS.
Cynoglossum officinale L.
Page 371.
L. Feizor.
R. Clapham.
This appears to be a legitimate 
wild growth, not a 'Botanic Garden' record, as it is 
included in Herbarium, Catalogue, and MS.
PRIMULA CEM.
Anagallis tenella L.
Page 379.
R. Dub Cote (Horton-in-Ribblesdale).
H. Cockit Moss.
H. 
CHENOPODIA CE&.
Chenopodium glaucum L.
Page 384.
R. Ribble bank.
C. 
Chenopodium rubrum L.
Page 384.
R- Ribble banks.
C. 
Naturalist, 
WHITWELL : WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
39 
POL YGONA CEsE.
[Rumex alpinus L.
Page 388.
L. Feizor Botanic Garden.
P. Clapham\ 
AMENTIFER&.
Populus canescens Sm. Page 401.
W. Hesleden Gill.
C. 
CONIFER/E.
Juniperus communis L.
Page 409.
R. Moughton : common.
C. 
Juniperus communis L.
var.
nana Willd.
R. c Common.' C.
Query : only stunted communis ?
HYDROCHARIDA CE^E.
Hydrocharis Morsus-ranae L.
Page 422.
R. Cockit Moss.
C. If correct, this record would give 
a range of 500 feet instead of only 0-100 as in the ' Flora/ 
But Mr. J.
G. Baker informs me that its accuracy is most 
unlikely.
Mr. F.
A. Lees observes — 'Impossible.
Utterly 
opposed to all we know of the Frog-bit.
It would not 
live over the season if put in an open-air pool — could 
not perfect its winter buds.* 
QRCHIDACEM.
Orchis pyramidalis L.
Page 423.
R. Near Langcliffe (J.G.B.).
H. The full record is—   Miss 
Swale's field at Langcliffe called "the Stubbins." ' MS.
notes in 'Baines' stand thus — 'Near Settle' ; 'Langcliffe/ 
'Wath' in the 'Flora' is an error — apparently in 
transcript.
The next species was intended.
Orchis ustulata L.
Page 424.
D. Wath-upon-Dearne, 1836.
G. P.
Nicholson.
Spiranthes autumnalis Rich.
Page 431.
D. Near Wath-upon-Dearne.
G.P.Nicholson.
(See Astragalus 
hypoglottis.
) 
LI LI A CEsE.
Allium oleraceum var.
complanatum Bor. Page 447- 
R. Castleberg, Settle.
MS.
C YPERA CEsE.
Scirpus multicaulis Sm. Page 454- 
R. Tarn field, Giggleswick.
C. 
Feb. 1893.
40 WHITWELL *.
WEST YORKSHIRE RECORDS AND NOTES.
Scirpus sylvaticus L.
Page 456.
R. Littlebank and Scaleberg pastures, Settle.
C. 
Carex acuta L.
Page 464.
R. Lodge, near Anley.
C. 
Carex rigida Good.
Page 465.
R. Fountain's Fell (J.
G.B.).
H. Fountain's Fell, 1849.
MS.
Carex vulgaris Fr.
(as ccespitosa).
Page 465.
D. Near Hebden Bridge.
H. See c Flora,' var.
Idiogynea.
The Herbarium contains also specimens from S.
Gibson, 
from this locality, marked var.
dioica, var.
duplex, and 
var.
chlorocarpa.
Carex ampullacea Good.
Page 474.
R. Ribble bank.
C. 
Carex vesicaria L.
Page 474.
R. Willow Island.
C. 
GRAMINEM.
Phalaris canadensis L.
Page 476.
R. Roadside, Settle.
C. 
Festuca ovina L.
forma vivipara.
Page 489.
L. Ingleborough.
H. 
i Ovina proper and vivipara on the same bunch' (J.T.).
FILICES.
Hymenophyllum unilateraie Willd.
Page 499.
L. North of Ingleton and Lunesdale.
C. 
Blechnum boreale Sw. Page 501.
R. Gill near Buck Ha' Brow, Aug. 1849.
H. 
Athyrium Filix-foemina a.
rhaeticum Roth.
Page 504.
R. Scaleberg pastures.
C 
Scolopendrium vulgare Sm. Page 506.
C. Hebden Bridge, 1841.
S. Gibson.
L YCO PODIA CEsE.
Lycopodium alpinum L.
Page 5 1 7.
R. 'Common.' Storthgill.
C 
Lycopodium Selago L.
Page 518.
L. Ingleborough: July 1849.
H* 
EQUISETACE/E.
Equisetum hyemale L.
Page 521.
L. Near Sedbergh, 1844.
C. 
Natural 
41 
THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
Rev. JULIAN G.
TUCK, M.A., 
Tostock Rectory, Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk 
As our greatest English poet has recently passed away from us, 
and has (to quote his own words) 'gone ....
from this room 
into the next,' it may not be deemed unfitting to offer a tribute 
to his memory in the pages of ' The Naturalist ' by quoting a few 
passages from his voluminous writings illustrative of bird-life.
If 
the late Poet-Laureate were not an ornithologist in the sense in 
which many readers of this journal can claim the title, it is 
impossible to read his poems without recognising in him a keen 
observer of nature and a lover of birds, especially of the song-birds 
which can be seen and heard around such an English country home 
as the Lincolnshire rectory in which Alfred Tennyson was born, and 
under the roof of which he passed the early years of his life.
Beginning with ' Claribel,' the poem which stands first in most 
editions of Tennyson's writings, we meet with the lines — 
Her song the lintwhite swelleth, 
The clear-voiced mavis dwelleth, 
The callow throstle lispeth.
and in ' Mariana ' he alludes to a sound well known to his readers 
alike in town and country, 
The sparrow's chirrup on the roof.
Going on through the group of poems collectively entitled 
* Juvenilia' we have the two songs dedicated 4 To the Owl.' Did the 
poet in his school-boy days go bird-nesting, and thus disturb the 
slumbers of the white owls which lived in the tower of his father's 
church?
Possibly he did, since we read- 
Alone, and warming his five wits, 
The white owl in the belfry sits.
In the second of these songs the sonorous cry of the brown owl is 
splendidly described as 
. .
. .
A lengthen 'd loud halloo, 
Tuwhoo, tuwhit, tuwhit, tuwhoo-o-o.
Perhaps the   Dying Swan ' appeals more to the lover of poetry 
than to the naturalist ; but in the l Miller's Daughter ' we have an 
allusion to 
. .
. .
some wild skylark's matin song, 
and also to the dove, which seems to have been a special favourite 
with the Laureate ; 
And oft I heard the tender dove 
In firry woodlands making moan.
Feb. 1893 
42 TUCK : THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
'CEnone' leads us in thought to wilder scenes, but described 
with no less accuracy ; to 
Dark tall pines, that plumed the craggy ledge 
High over the blue gorge, and all between 
The snowy peak and snow-white cataract 
Fostered the callow eaglet.
while the 'May Queen' brings us home again, with its references to 
birds more or less familiar to most of us ; 
The building rook 'ill caw from the windy tall elm-tree, 
And the tufted plover pipe along the fallow lea, 
And the swallow 'ill come back again with summer o'er the wave.
Everyone who has lived near a rookery, or walked in spring over 
a farm in search of plover's eggs, and heard the oft-repeated shrill 
'pee-wit, pee-e-wit,' must admit the graphic accuracy of these lines.
Then, like the owl, the blackbird has a little sonnet specially 
addressed to him ; his depredations on the summer fruit seem 
to have been more readily condoned by the poet than by most 
owners of gardens, from the first two stanzas, 
O blackbird !
sing me something well ; 
While all the neighbours shoot thee round, 
I keep smooth plats of fruitful ground, 
Where thou mays't warble, eat, and dwell.
The espaliers and the standards all 
Are thine : the range of lawn and park : 
The unnetted blackhearts ripen dark, 
All thine, against the garden wall.
Describing the fresh beauty of an ideal May morning in the 
1 Gardener's Daughter/ the poet introduces the chorus of varied bird 
music ; 
From the woods 
Came voices of the well-contented doves.
The lark could scarce get out his notes for joy, 
But shook his song together as he neared 
His happy home, the ground.
To left and right 
The cuckoo told his name to all the hills ; 
The mellow ouzel fluted in the elm ; 
The redcap* whistled ; and the nightingale 
Sang loud, as tho' he were the bird of day.
i 
St. Simeon Stylites is made to speak of his solitary devotions 
thus : 
I drowned the whoopings of the owl with sound 
Of pious hymns and psalms ; 
and in the   Golden Year ' we find the monarch of the bird-world 
contrasted with one of the smallest subjects of his kingdom ; 
Shall eagles not be eagles ?
wrens be wrens ?
If all the world were falcons, what of that?
The wonder of the eagle were the less, 
But he not less the eagle.
* Goldfinch or Redpoll.
Naturalist.
TUCK : THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
43 
'Locksley Hair contains almost in its opening lines a fine piece 
of word-painting ; 
'Tis the place, and all around it, as of old, the curlews call, 
Dreary gleams about the moorland flying over Locksley Hall.
As one reads the passage there appears to rise before the eye the 
lonely gray old house, standing on the 'dreary moorland,' from 
which the flights of curlews make their way at the fall of the tide to 
the ' barren shore.' In the same poem comes the well-known 
allusion to the increased beauty and lustre of the plumage of birds 
at the vernal season ; 
In the Spring a fuller crimson comes upon the robin's breast ; 
In the Spring the wanton lapwing gets himself another crest ; 
In the Spring a livelier iris changes on the burnished dove ; 
In the Spring a young man's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love.
Any reader of 'Locksley Hall' who has stood waiting for the evening 
flight of ducks in the fading light of a December day, and has 
watched the lines of rooks going overhead to their roosting-place in 
some distant wood, their calls sounding clear through the frosty air, 
can appreciate the force of the line which mentions 
The many- wintered crow that leads the clanging rookery home.
Another description of bird-life on a spring morning is given us 
in 'Sir Lancelot and Queen Guinevere.' 
Sometimes the linnet piped his song ; 
Sometimes the throstle whistled strong ; 
Sometimes the sparhawk, wheePd along, 
Hushed all the groves from fear of wrong.
The 'Poet's Song' introduces us to a musician chanting 
A melody loud and sweet, 
That made the wild swan pause in her cloud, 
And the lark drop down at his feet.
The swallow stopt as he hunted the bee, 
The snake slipt under a spray, 
The wild hawk stood with the down on his beak, 
And stared, with his foot on the prey.
And the nightingale thought, 'I have sung many songs, 
But never a one so gay, 
For he sings of what the world will be , 
When the world has died away.' 
Allusions to the song of the nightingale are somewhat numerous 
in Tennyson's writings ; perhaps the happiest of all is that in the 
'Grandmother.' This most loveable old lady is represented as 
telling her little grandchild how some seventy years ago she 'stood 
by the road at the gate' to meet her lover, when in the still summer 
evening ; 
The moon like a rick on fire was rising over the dale, 
And whit, whit, whit, in the bush beside me chirrupt the nightingale.
Feb. 1893.
44 TUCK : THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
There are few Tennysonian characters better known than his 
1 Northern Farmer.' The old man, lying on his deathbed, tells his 
daughter of the improvements he has made in his holding, the chief 
of which was his having * stubbed Thurnaby waaste.' Here there 
was a   boggle,' or ghost, which had summary notice to quit 
Moast loike a butter-bump, fur I heerd 'um aboot an 3 aboot, 
But I stubb'd 'um oop wi 5 the lot, an' ra'aved an' rembled 'um oot.
Mr. Cordeaux, in his ' Birds of the Humber District' (p.
104), gives 
1 butter-bump ' as the provincial name of the bittern, and in 1872 
writes of its becoming extinct as a resident ' from forty to fifty years 
since.' Probably when Tennyson was a boy at Louth Grammar 
School the booming of the bittern was a familiar sound to him, and 
the name of * butter bump' would doubtless have been about 1820 
a ' household word' at Somersby Rectory.
The passages in the 4 Princess ' relating to birds are not many, 
but most interesting.
Hilarion, speaking of his ambition to win the 
Princess Ida, is made to say, 
' The crane, 1 I said, ' may chatter of the crane, 
The dove may murmur of the dove, but I 
An eagle clang an eagle to the spheres.' 
In this poem is introduced the song to 'the swallow winging south/ 
and when the voice of the disguised Hilarion sounds rough and 
coarse in comparison with the tuneful trebles of the 'sweet girl- 
graduates,' the Princess thus criticises his efforts — 
Marsh-divers rather, maid, 
Shall croak thee sister, or the meadow-crake 
Grate her harsh kindred in the grass.
Hilarion declares that in his boyish days everything spoke to him 
of her to whom his first love was given : 
At eve and dawn 
With Ida, Ida, Ida rang the woods ; 
The leader wild -swan in among the stars 
Would clang it.
Perhaps the best comment that could be made on these lines is 
an extract from Mr. Cordeaux's book, quoted above.
He writes 
(p.
156): 'The cry of the wild swan is extremely wild and musical.
Some years ago, during the prevalence of a severe " blast," I saw 
forty-two of these noble birds pass over our marshes, flying in the 
same familiar arrow-head formation as wild geese use — a sight not to 
be forgotten, not alone for their large size and snowy whiteness, but 
their grand trumpet-notes.
Now single, clear, distinct, clarion-like, 
as a solitary bugle sounds the advance — or the tongue of some old 
hound, uplifted when the pack runs mute with a breast-high scent: 
then, as if in emulation of their leader's note, the entire flock would 
Naturalist, 
TUCK : THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
45 
burst into a chorus of cries, which, floating downwards on the still, 
frosty air, had every possible resemblance to the music of a pack of 
foxhounds in full cry — sounds which have doubtless given rise to 
the legend, common in some form or other to all the northern races, 
of the demon huntsman and his infernal pack.' 
One other passage from * Princess Ida' may be quoted, referring 
to the self-destruction of migratory birds against the glass of 
a lighthouse, a subject to which the Lincolnshire ornithologist 
mentioned above and others have devoted much careful attention 
of late years, though at the time (1847) that 'In Memoriam' was 
first published it had been little thought of.
Fixt like a beacon-tower above the waves 
Of tempest, when the crimson-rolling eye 
Glares ruin, and the wild birds on the light 
Dash themselves dead.
Boadicea, anticipating the avenging of her wrongs, calls on the 
carnivorous birds to gather around the corpses of her Roman foes : 
Bark an answer, Britain's raven !
bark and blacken innumerable, 
Blacken round the Roman carrion, make the carcase a skeleton, 
Kite and kestrel, wolf and wolfkin, from the wilderness, wallow in it.
Very fresh and bright and breezy is 4 The Window, or the Song 
of the Wrens.' The accepted lover, rejoicing in the arrival of 
a letter containing the answer he has longed for, but hardly ventured 
to expect, calls on all the birds to share his joy: 
Be merry, all birds, to-day, 
Be merry on earth as you never were merry before, 
Be merry in heaven, O larks, and far away, 
And merry for ever and ever and one day more.
Why?
For it's easy to find a rhyme.
Look, look, how he flits, 
The fire-crowned king of the wrens, from out of the pine !
Look how they tumble the blossom, the mad little tits !
4 Cuckoo!
cuckoo !
' was ever a May so fine?
Why?
For it's easy to find a rhyme.
O merry the linnet and dove, 
And swallow and sparrow and throstles, and have your desire !
O merry, my heart, you have gotten the wings of love, 
And flit like the king of the wrens with a crown of fire.
Why ?
For it's ay, ay, ay, ay.
Neither 'In Memoriam' nor 'Maud' contain much especially 
attractive to the ornithologist.
The former has allusions to the 
linnet, the lark, and to ' the distant sea ' ; 
Where now the seamew pipes, or dives 
In yonder greening gleam.
Feb. 1893.
4 6 
TUCK : THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
'In Memoriam' also contains the stanza which some years ago gave 
rise to a correspondence in one of the weekly papers as to the claims 
of the wheatear* or the kingfisher ; 
When rosy plumelets tuft the larch, 
And rarely pipes the mounted thrush ; 
Or underneath the barren bush 
Flits by the sea-blue bird of March.
In the first part of   Maud ' we find the lines — 
The May-fly is torn by the swallow, the sparrow is spear 5 d by the shrike.
And the whole little wood where I sit is a world of plunder and prey.
Coming now to the * Idylls of the King ?
which many lovers of 
Tennyson's poetry consider to be the very crown of his work, and 
perhaps that by which he will be best known a century hence, we 
meet with many striking references to bird-life.
In the   Coming of 
Arthur ' the small birds' well-known habit of flying after the cuckoo 
is alluded to in the King's speech — 
I have seen the cuckoo chased by lesser fowl, 
And reason in the chase.
A little further on in the same idyll we read — 
The swallow and the swift are near akin.
. 
In l Gareth and Lynette,' when Gareth invokes the * birds that 
warble to the morning sky,' Lynette retorts, 
"What knowest thou of birds, lark, mavis, merle, linnet?
The heron has mention made of him in the suggestive lines — 
Nigh upon that hour 
When the lone hern forgets his melancholy, 
Lets down his other leg, and stretching, dreams 
Of goodly supper in the distant pool.
The next idyll, 'Geraint and Enid,' has a passage of great beauty, 
in which Geraint is described as.
hearing Enid, then unknown to 
him, singing a song, which was to him like a sudden and unexpected 
burst of music on an April morning, causing the hearer 
To think or say, * There is the nightingale.' 
Again, Geraint is represented as 
Glancing all at once as keenly at her 
As careful robins eye the delver's toil ; 
a pretty simile suggested by the robin's well-known habit of waiting 
in attendance on a gardener when turning over the soil, and bringing 
worms to the surface.
Dwellers near the few places in which the stone-curlew breeds 
will be well able to understand Enid's nervous alarm when 
The great plover's human whistle amazed 
Her heart, and glancing round the waste she feared 
In every wavering brake an nmbuscade.
c '.
. u.n ul tl.« ill k r \) ct.' p.
jo.
Natural I?
t. 
TUCK : THE ORNITHOLOGY OF TENNYSON.
47 
1 Merlin and Vivien ' has several allusions to falconry.
Queen 
Guinevere declares her intention to 
Ride a-hawking with Sir Lancelot.
He hath given us a fair falcon which he trained, 
We go to prove it.
Lancelot 
Q 
Unhooded casting off 
The goodly falcon free ; she towered; her bells, 
Tone under tone, shrilled ; and they lifted up 
Their eager faces, wondering at the strength, 
Boldness and royal knighthood of the bird 
Who pounced her quarry and slew it.
In ' Lancelot and Elaine   the royal sport is introduced again.
Elaine asks the Prince : 
* Why slight your king, 
And lose the quest he sent you on, and prove 
No surer than our falcon yesterday, 
Who lost the hern we slipt him at, and went 
To all the winds?' 'Nay, by mine head,' said he, 
' I lose it, as we lose the lark in heaven, 
O damsel, in the light of your blue eyes.' 
Elaine, in another part of the idyll is likened to 
A little helpless, innocent bird, 
That has but one plain passage of few notes, 
Will sing the simple passage o'er and o'er 
For all an April morning, till the ear 
Wearies to hear it.
Either the chaffinch, greenfinch, or yellow bunting might be the bird 
referred to.
Again, when the short life of the   lily maid of Astolat ' 
is nearing its close : 
Death, like a friend's voice from a distant field 
Approaching thro' the darkness called ; the owls 
Wailing had power upon her.
We have in the 'Last Tournament ' a spirited passage, introducing 
with noteworthy accuracy two well-known birds.
Tristram, addressing 
Isolt, is made to say : 
Worldling of the world am I, and know 
The ptarmigan that whitens ere his hour 
Woos his own end ; we are not angels here, 
Nor shall be : vows — I am woodman of the woods, 
And hear the garnet-headed yaffingale* 
Mock them.
Most lovers of wild birds are fond of the lintwhite or linnet, and 
the late Laureate seems to have been no exception.
The few 
quotations here culled from his works may fitly conclude, as they 
began, with a mention of that charming little bird.
The lines are 
from the novice's conversation with the Queen in 'Guinevere': 
* Green woodpecker.
Feb. 1803.
48 tuck: the ornithology of tennyson.
Himself beheld three spirits mad with joy 
Come dashing down on a tall wayside flower, 
That shook beneath them, as the thistle shakes 
When three gray linnets wrangle for the seed.
The passages given above were nearly all found marked in a then 
complete edition of Tennyson's works published in 1878; within the 
last few years a small volume has been published, ending with the 
now familiar   Crossing the Bar/ This contains the ' Progress of 
Spring,' which is, as might be expected, rich in allusions to summer 
birds.
Up leaps the lark, gone wild to welcome her, 
About her glance the tits, and shriek the jays, 
Before her skims the jubilant woodpecker, 
The linnet's bosom blushes at her gaze, 
While round her brows a woodland culver* flits, 
Watching her large light eyes and gracious looks, 
And in her open palm a halcyon sits 
Patient — the secret splendour of the brooks.
e * * * * 
Now past her feet the swallow circling flies.
A clamorous cuckoo stoops to meet her hand.
****** 
The blackcap warbles, and the turtle purrs, 
The starling claps his tiny castanets.
It must not be thought that the quotations here given contain 
all the allusions to our British birds in the Laureate's works.
The 
writer of this paper has not all the published writings of Lord 
Tennyson at hand for reference, and the reading of the latest poems, 
published during the last ten days, is to him a pleasure to come.
It 
may safely be said that any one who chooses to explore the rich 
literary mine which the late Laureate has left open for his country- 
men will find many others for himself; but possibly some of those 
given above may be new to many readers of the 4 Naturalist,' and 
interesting, since every one of the birds mentioned (with the possible 
exception of the ptarmigan) has been met with in one or other of the 
counties enumerated on the cover of this journal, and the majority 
of them breed annually in the North of England.
Nor does it come 
within the aim of this paper to speak in laudatory terms of the great 
poet's life and work; that has been done already in pulpit and 
press by some of the ablest tongues and readiest pens in the land, 
and will be done again and again A far on in summers that we shall 
not see.' But should it be the means of leading even one reader to 
peruse his Tennyson with fresh or renewed interest, it will not have 
been written, or, perhaps it should be said, compiled, in vain.
All Hallow stide, 1892.
* Wood Pigeon 
Naturalist, 
49 
3 n "251 c m oriam.
T. J.
MOORE.
The death of Mr. Thomas John Moore, C.M.Z.S., A.L.S., curator 
of the Liverpool Museum, which occurred on the last day of 
October, takes from amongst us one of the kindliest and most 
genial of men and a most devoted public servant.
For more than 40 years Mr. Moore spared himself neither time 
nor labour in building up and utilising for the instruction ot the 
public and the advancement of science the magnificent collections 
that have placed the Liverpool Museum in the front rank of 
provincial museums.
Other museums there are of older date, but m 
Feb. 1893.
50 IN MEMORIAM T.
J. MOORE.
their now recognised position as free places of interest and instruc- 
tion for the public the Liverpool Museum has practically been the 
pioneer of museums in the provinces, and from its very inception 
Mr. Moore has been the curator of it.
The great care and 
knowledge displayed in its arrangement, and the foresight, skill, and 
inventive faculty manifested in the cases and fittings are the best 
testimony to the unwearied energy and marvellous ability of its 
curator.
In speaking of himself, Mr. Moore said : — 4 My life has been a 
specially quiet, simple, and uneventful one.
I have served but 
three masters — the Zoological Society of London ; Edward, thirteenth 
Earl of Derby, at Knowsley ; and the Corporation of Liverpool, and 
this in unbroken sequence.' 
Mr. Moore was born in London, in 1824.
His father was a 
Norfolk man, and soon after his marriage obtained an appointment 
on the staff of the Zoological Society.
Here from his early childhood 
his son became a careful observer of animals, living and dead, and 
acquired that love for the study of Natural History that remained 
with him and increased with increasing years.
Here, too, in his 
youth, he made the acquaintance of Gould — who was curator to the 
Zoological Society — ,Waterhouse, Martin, and other naturalists of 
repute who were then on the staff.
In 1843 he received and accepted 
the offer of an appointment, under Lord Derby, as assistant to 
Mr. Thomson, Superintendent of the menagerie and aviary of that 
nobleman at Knowsley, where Lord Derby had devoted a hundred 
acres of land and as many of water to the well-being and comfort of 
the magnificent collection of mammals and birds that he had got 
together from all parts of the world, besides a well-stocked museum 
of stuffed and mounted specimens inside Knowsley Hall.
For eight 
years Mr. Moore remained at Knowsley, surrounded by unrivalled 
opportunities for the study of Natural History, and that he availed 
himself fully of these opportunities the Liverpool Museum sufficiently 
shows.
The advantage of being thus placed, where a careful study 
of the living forms and habits of animals could be made, is well seen 
in the life-like attitudes of form and grouping which so pre-eminently 
characterise the stuffed specimens in the Liverpool Museum.
On the death of the Earl of Derby, in 1851, his collection of 
stuffed specimens and skins was offered to the Corporation of 
Liverpool on condition of its being maintained for public use.
The offer was accepted, and an Act of Parliament obtained author- 
ising the establishment of a Museum and Library in Liverpool.
The Museum was first opened in Duke Street, Mr. Moore being 
appointed Curator, and under his superintendence the Derby 
Naturalist.
IN MEMORIAM T.
J. MOORE.
5 I 
Collection, which numbered over 18,000 birds, 1,200 mammals, and 
300 reptiles and fish, the greater part of which were staffed, were 
removed from Knowsley to their new quarters in Liverpool to be 
freely available evermore for the use and instruction of the public.
The work of arranging and labelling a collection of this magnitude 
was sufficient, one would have thought, to satisfy for a long time the 
desires of the most energetic, but Mr. Moore never wearied in his 
endeavours to form a museum illustrative of the entire animal 
kingdom and commensurate with the high position in wealth, 
intelligence, and population of the town of Liverpool.
The result 
was that in a few years the collections had so grown as to require 
greatly increased accommodation, and this was found for them by the 
late Sir William Brown, of Liverpool, who, in i860, erected at his 
sole cost, the Library and Museum building which stands on a site 
in the street bearing his name, and is known to visitors from all parts 
of the globe.
The history and development of the Liverpool 
Museum is practically the history of the life and work of Mr. Moore, 
for never had any institution a more zealous and enthusiastic worker 
at its head, nor one whose manner was more likely to gain friends 
and helpers to its cause.
Mr. Moore fully recognised how greatly 
the museum would be benefited if the large mercantile marine of the 
port could be sufficiently interested in its work to avail themselves 
of the splendid opportunities they had of collecting marine 
specimens on their varied and extended voyages.
He quickly 
imparted some of his own zeal to the captains of merchant ships, 
and he published for their use a pamphlet of suggestions pointing 
out how best to obtain and preserve marine animals, both living and 
dead, also providing dredges, nets, and preservatives, for use on 
board ship.
The Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool 
furthered his efforts by conferring the keenly appreciated honour of 
associate member on those captains who carried out the suggestions 
and made collections for the museum.
This produced a commend- 
able spirit of rivalry, which resulted in great advantage to the 
museum and a considerable addition to its collections.
Amongst 
the methods used for importing living fish was a glass vessel, which 
obtained the name of the ' Mortimer Fish Globe/ on account of its 
very successful use by Captain Mortimer in the first instance, and 
afterwards by other captains in bringing living fish from various 
foreign places, and this globe is likely to become historical from the 
later important use to which it has been applied.
It consists of a 
round globe with a wide opening at the top, the base resting on 
a circular piece of wood, from which a number of cords passed 
unwirds an d were joined together on a ring above the mouth of the 
Feb. 1893.
52 IN MEMORIAM T.
J. MOORE.
jar.
The jar could be hung up by this ring so as to swing freely with 
the motions of the ship without any friction, and its contents could 
always be under observation, thus making it a source of interest and 
attraction to the captain and others on board.
There was much 
less likelihood of the contents being thrown out than would have 
been the case if it had rested solidly on the ship, and doubtless the 
motion of the water was better suited to the well-being of the fish 
than if it had been still.
At any rate experience has proved that up 
to the present this has been the most successful means of transport- 
ing living fish on long voyages, and Mr. Moore by its means was 
enabled to accomplish the task, previously attempted in vain, of 
sending living soles to America for the purpose of acclimatising 
them to American seas.
Dr. Spencer Baird, who was very desirous 
of introducing some of our British food fishes into American waters, 
had sent a special commissioner to England to carry out this object, 
and 700 soles were sent in tubs, but only three arrived alive in America, 
and after other efforts had been made and had failed, Mr. Moore was 
appealed to.
He sent a number of the Mortimer Fish Globes each 
containing four soles, and with scarcely a fatality in the whole series 
the soles arrived alive and well in America, these being the first that 
had survived the transatlantic voyage.
Mr. Moore also tried to 
acclimatise the American Clam {Venus mercenaria), to our coasts, 
and laid down a number of living specimens in the Mersey, but not 
with any decided success.
But not only was he successful in enlisting the services of sea 
captains for the museum, but many travellers and sportsmen under- 
took, at his request, to obtain specimens for the museum, and many 
rarities were added in this way.
One of these deserves special 
mention, on ^account of its striking appearance and great rarity in 
collections.
This is the Rocky Mountain Goat, which was specially 
obtained for the museum by Mr. St.
George Littledale, and an 
interesting paper on it was read by Mr. Moore to the Liverpool 
Literary and Philosophical Society, and published in their 
proceedings.
It was my good fortune to be associated with Mr. Moore, as 
principal assistant in the museum, for seven years, and I have 
always retained for him feelings of sincere regard and affection.
His kindness of heart and intensely sympathetic nature, together 
with his ever ready help in promoting the comfort and welfare of 
those associated with him, endeared him to all the staff, all of whom 
felt it a pleasure to carry out his wishes.
Mr. Moore was a man of 
untiring energy, and he would continue at any work he had in hand 
without any regard, for the time being, to the desirable calls for 
Naturalist 
L 
IN MEMORIAM — T.
J. MOORE.
53 
bodily sustenance, and I have repeatedly been with him working in 
the museum until the small hours of the morning.
This, no doubt, 
had its effect on his health in due course, or we should not have 
lost, before even he had reached the years of threescore and ten, a 
man of his vigorous constitution.
He had a wide and deep general 
knowledge of the animal kingdom, but was in no sense a specialist, 
though probably as a result of his training and vocation he was more 
intimately acquainted with the mammalia than any other class of 
animals.
With a museum covering such a wide range as the 
Liverpool Museum it would have been thought that specially trained 
assistants were necessary, but this he never had, preferring rather to 
take youths into his service to learn their work with him.
In one respect, however, most valuable aid was given him and 
help that he was always most anxious should be fully recognised.
This was by the Rev. H.
H. Higgins, M.A., who for more than 
thirty years has given his spare time and labour ungrudgingly, and 
one might almost say lovingly, to the work of arranging, illustrating 
and describing the series of invertebrates which fill the twenty table 
cases that occupy the floors of the upper rooms of the museum, 
besides in many other ways interesting himself in the welfare of the 
museum.
Mr. Moore was always ready to assist in any and every 
way students and scientists who wished to make use of the Liverpool 
Museum, but he had not, unfortunately, the pen of a ready writer, 
so that his contributions to literature are but scanty.
But many 
notes of high scientific value were contributed by him to the 
Literary and Philosophical Society's Proceedings and other local 
publications.
In one of these, on the Rocky Mountain Goat, 
I have already referred, and next in importance to this was a paper 
on Hybrids among Pheasants, also published in the Literary 
and Philosophical Society's Proceedings.
He was for some time 
President of the Liverpool Marine Biology Committee, and 
published in their Report for 1889 an account of the Seals and 
Whales of the Liverpool District.
In the earlier days of the 
museum the naturalists of Liverpool published a Naturalists' Scrap 
Book, to which Mr. Moore was a frequent contributor, and recorded 
the occurrence of several species new to the district, including 
Johnston's Hump-backed Whale {Megaptera longimana); Pallas's 
Sand Grouse in Cheshire in 1863; the Twaite Shad (Alosa 
ulgaris) ; Opah or King Fish (Lampris git tt at us) : Short Sun Fish 
{Orthagoriscus mola)\ Angel Fish (Squatina angiitis) \ Eledone 
cirrhosus; Portunus arcuatus ; Argulus foliaceus \ Pherusa mulleri^ 
and several others.
His name has been given to two species, 
Delphin tis moorii, described and figured by Dr. J.
E. Gray in 
Feb. 1893.
54 ' NOTES AND NEWS.
the Proceedings of the Zoological Society, 1865, p.
736; and 
Murcenichthys tnoorii, described by Dr. A.
Giinther in ' Catalogue of 
Fishes/ vol.
8, p.
53.
He was for many years a Corresponding 
Member of the Zoological Society, and quite recently was elected an 
Associate of the Linnean Society.
I cannot do better than close this notice by an extract from a 
short reminiscence of himself that appeared in a Liverpool paper 
about two years ago, which gives us not only a good insight into his 
character, but also shows that when he did write he could do so 
with a good deal of literary skill and charming felicity of expression.
i It will thus be seen that my life has been, as I said at the outset, 
a quiet and uneventful but busy one.
It has also been a happy one.
I have been happy in my work, lessened only by my inability to 
accomplish more ; happy in my business associates, and with friends 
of kindred tastes ; very happy when seals or whales have ventured 
sufficiently near to Liverpool to allow of my making their personal 
acquaintance, as I have done with some half score of them.
Happier still when once on a time I was called from my mid-day 
chop to inspect a collection of Dodo bones, which I bagged for the 
museum before I finished that chop, and sorted and matched and 
named before I supped at two in the morning.
Happiest of all 
when Sir J.
Pope Hennessy, in March 1879, exhibited to me and a 
select circle of friends at the museum a living baby hippopotamus 
from Liberia, the first of its kind — living or dead — ever brought to 
Europe, and which sat for his photograph with all gravity (see the 
H Graphic " of that year).
I am undecided in my mind, however, 
whether that happiness was not equalled, or even excelled, in June 
1876, on supping at Eberle's Hotel with Pongo, the gorilla, and his 
friends and importers, eminent German men of science from the 
Gaboon on their way to Berlin, and who had previously given me 
an interview with him as recorded in the "Times," and who were 
good enough to bring him to the museum to see his splendid stuffed 
relation, then recently presented to us by Mr. Henry Duckworth, of 
this city.
That was a day !' — E.
Howarth.
NOTES AND NEWS.
We have received from the author (Rev. W.
H. Painter) a carefully compiled 
account of 'The Botany of Biddulph and the Neighbouring Parts of North 
tafTord shire.' The pa] r is a reprint from the 'Midland Naturalist,' and deals 
with three districts : the Valley of Biddulph, the Valley of the Trent, and the 
Rudyerd Basin.
The total number of plants mentioned is 389, and a curious and 
interesting feature of the paper is a list of several common plants which the 
author has not yet seen in this part of the countv, and which he believes to have 
become extinct.
Under this category come such common plants as Erophila 
ulgaris, Silene cuciibalus, Potentilla ansenna, Epilobium palustre, etc.
N at u raits 
55 
NEW BRITISH WORMS 
Rev. HILDERIC FRIEND, F.L.S 
I recently received a consignment of earth-worms from the 
neighbourhood of Bangor, which contained, in addition to some 
species new to Wales, one which is new to Britain, and probably to 
science also.
I have named it Allurus tetragonurus, and my reason 
may at once be assigned.
In 1874 Dr. Gustaf Eisen published in 
the Ofversigi af KongL Vetenskaps-Akad., No. 2, a paper on New 
England and Canadian Worms, in which he described, among 
others, a tiny species from Niagara, which he regarded as the type 
of a new genus.
The genus he named Tetragonurus or the 
quadrangular-tailed, and supplied the following diagnosis : 
'Body cylindrical in front, quadrangular behind.
Male pores 
on segment 11 [= the 12th segment according to our method of 
reckoning] ; setae in approximate pairs.
Lip or prostomium not 
dividing the first ring or peristomium.
It comes nearest to the genus 
Allurus, from which, however, it is distinguished by the position of 
the male pore, which in Allurus is on segment 12 [= 13 in English], 
but in Tetragonurus on 11 [ = 12], as well as by the lip failing to 
cut into the buccal segment or peristomium/ 
Eisen next supplies the specific details of Tetragonurus pupa.
1 Lip or prostomium small, acuminate in front, pallid, not dividing 
the peristomium.
Male pores small, but conspicuous.
The girdle 
prominent, usually composed of five segments, viz., 17-21 [= 18-22].
Tubercula pubertatis conspicuous, three on each side of the girdle, 
occupying the 18th, 19th, and 20th segments [= 19, 20, 21].
About 40 segments in all ; length about 25 mm.' Some Swedish 
comments are added, from which, in addition to the foregoing facts, 
we learn that there are only ten segments between the male pore 
and the first body segment; the tubercula are in the form of a wart- 
like prominence or keel, extending over three segments ; the girdle 
is well marked and easily distinguished from the adjoining portions, 
and stretches over five segments, one of which is before and 
the other behind the segments bearing the tubercula; the colour 
is sienna brown, becoming light red on the back part.
The 
worm closely resembles Allurus, to which it approaches more 
nearly than to any other, if one has regard to the living form ; 
while it also frequents similar habitats, namely, such places as 
lie near to water.
Feb. 1893.
56 FRIEND : NEW BRITISH WORMS.
Eisen supplied an illustration with his diagnosis, but thus far I have 
found no one who has discovered the worm elsewhere.
Early this year 
I took a form in the South of England which I thought would prove 
identical therewith, but some leeches devoured all my specimens on the 
journey to the north.
I have now to describe the worm from Bangor, 
which very nearly resembles Eisen's species in some respects, though 
it is abundantly distinct therefrom in others.
For the specimen I am 
indebted to Rev. Mr.
Shankland, of Rhyl.
tetrazonurus 
to 
what cylindrical before, quadrangular behind and tapering from the 
girdle towards each extremity, so that the hinder part of the tail is 
only half the diameter of the girdle.
The girdle is very prominent, 
of a yellowish orange colour and closely fused, so that the segments 
are made out with difficulty.
The fore part of the body is sienna 
brown, the hinder part a dull yellow-brown, closely resembling the 
light variety of Allurus (A, luteus Eisen, not A.
flavus Friend).
Total number of segments, about 85.
The head is very small and 
does not cut the first segment ; the male pores are also very small 
and inconspicuous, but are certainly situated on segment 13 as in 
other species of Allurus, and not on the 12th as in Eisen's 
Tetragonunts.
The position of the male pores is a splendid guide 
to genera, but the attachment of the head or prostomium to the first 
segment is so variable that it cannot be relied upon.
I have shown 
this in connection with a small Dendrobsene which was formerly 
called Lumbricus eiseni Levinsen, but which at present stands closely 
related to the tree-worms.
The question now remains — Did Eisen make a mistake about 
p 
I dare not insinuate such an idea, 
because with the exception of Rosa we have no foreign authority 
who can compare with him in accuracy of observation.
For the 
present, therefore, we must assume that we have two worms which 
are practically identical in every respect (length or number of 
segments being no criterion) except in the position of the male pore, 
which in our British species is on the 13th segment and so ranks 
it with Allurus ', but in America is on the 12th and so constitutes 
a new genus named Tetra go mints.
If this is a fact, it must have 
a meaning, and it will be interesting to observe how future research 
will enable us to decide the question.
Meanwhile it is very pleasant 
to be able to add a new species to our indigenous list, if not to the 
records of science.
The tabular view of the two worms which 
I append will show at a glance the differences and similarities 
existing between them.
No. 1 represents Tetragonurus pupa Eisen; 
No. 2 stands for Allurus tetragonurus Friend.
Naturalist, 
NOTES — MAMMALIA AND ORNITHOLOGY.
57 
Segments occupied by 
No.
Girdle.
Tubercula.
Male Pore, 
Total 
merits.
Length.
Colour.
l8-22 
19-21 
12 
40 
25 mm 
Brown 
18-22 
19-21 
13 
85 
30 mm 
Brown.
A batch of worms sent me by Mr. Trumbull, L.R.C.S., from 
Malahide, Dublin, in November contained a worm which I took 
at first to be the same as the foregoing.
I now find it to be a new 
species of Allurus, possessed of a very long tail.
I have named it 
A. macrnrns, and am giving a description in a forthcoming issue of 
form 
the 'Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy.' 
tree-worm from the same locality must at present be referred to the 
Celtic worm, Allolobophora celtica Rosa, var.
rosea Friend.
For fuller 
details the reader is referred to this month's ' Essex Naturalist.' 
NOTE— MAMMALIA.
Otter at the Mouth of the Humber.
— I much regret to record, at a time 
when many of our most interesting population in fur and feather are verging on 
extinction, that a fine dog Otter (Lutra Intra), weighing 21 lbs., was shot at 
daybreak on Dec. 9th, when running in the long grass near the Humber side of 
the Spurn, not far from Kilnsea.
It had doubtless come up from the river to 
meet its fate immediately on landing.
— John Cordeaux, Eaton Hall, Retford, 
nth Dec, 1892.
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Manx Shearwater at Sykehouse near Halifax.
— A few days since a fine 
specimen of the Manx Shearwater {Puffinus anglorum) was picked up exhausted, 
but alive, by Mr. fames Sewell at Sykehouse, and is now in the possession of 
Mr. James Peel, "taxidermist, Greetland, Halifax.— C.
C. Hanson, Greetland, 
Nov. 10th, 1892.
Flamborough Bird-Notes.
—A change in the weather would be a grand 
thing for the birds.
The poor things are having a severe time of it this season, 
owing to the continual hard frost and the many northerly storms which brought 
several species from the far north.
On fan.
2nd an Iceland Gull {Lams leucopterus) 
was shot at the North Landing.
To-day (Jan. nth) I observed a pair of 
Glaucous Gulls (Z.
glaucus) passing over the headland.
On Jan. 7th, eleven 
Swans [Cfgnus sp.) passed over the headland making for the sea.
The sea birds, 
i.e., the Guillemots (Lomvia troile) have arrived in large numbers along the coast.
The other day a boy brought me a Lapland Bunting {Calcarius lapponkus) which 
he had caught in a snare.
Another one was shot— they are very scarce in this 
neighbourhood.
I am informed of two Goldfinches {Canhtelis e/egans) having 
been shot ; they are also very scarce.
A great many Woodcocks ( pax 
rusticola) have fallen to the gun ; I have also heard of some being caught in a 
nearly perishing condition this severe weather.
— Matthew Baii.ky.
Flam- 
borough, Jnn. 12th, 1893.
Feb. 18Q3.
5 8 MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
NOTE—FUNGI.
Castle Howard Fungi: A Correction.
— In the list of Fungi collected at 
the Castle Howard and Malton Forays, published in 'Naturalist/ Dec. 1892, 
p. 365, Sporodinia asperigllus Schrot., is entered for Castle Howard ; and 
Sporodinia dichotoma Corda, for Welham Park.
These two names are 
synonyms, and were entered by an oversight.— Ch as.
Crossland, Halifax, 
Dec. 17th, 1892.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Inula helenium in Furness.— In the December ( 1892) number of this journal 
Mr. Lister Petty states that since my grandfather, Mr. Atkinson, recorded the 
occurrence of Inula helenium in the neighbourhood of Dalton-in-Furness, no one 
has seen a single plant there.
I may, however, say that I distinctly remember, 
when a boy, seeing a plant in bloom within a mile or two of Dalton.
It was by 
the side of an occupation road, in a hollow caused by removing gravel for the 
purpose of repairing the road.— E.
T. Baldwin, 88, St. James' Street, S.W.
NO TE—L EPID OPTERA .
The supposed Scarborough specimens of Liparis monacha, etc.— 
It is unfortunate that the record of the melanic and other specimens of Liparis 
monacha, exhibited by Mr. J.
A. Clark at the meeting of the Entomological 
Society of London on November 2nd last, has this month found its way into 
'The Naturalist' (page 24).
At the time Mr. Clark was breeding these 
specimens, he was under the impression that their parents had been captured at 
Scarborough, and in that belief, a full page plate of the varieties, accompanied by 
an explanatory paper by Mr. Clark, appeared in the 'Entomologist's Record' of 
October 15th last.
On seeing the plate and paper, knowing that Z.
monacha was 
not known to occur at Scarborough at all, I was at once convinced that a serious 
mistake had occurred somehow, and as the melanic specimens represented the 
well-known Continental variety eremita of the species, I had a strong suspicion as 
to what was the real origin of the specimens.
Accordingly I wrote to my friend, 
Mr. J.
H. Rowntree, of Scarborough, telling him my suspicion, and requesting 
him to kindly investigate the matter.
This he very promptly did, the result 
Proving exactly as I had anticipated, that the melanism was not only not 
\orkshire, but not even British.
On acquainting Mr. Clark with the result of 
our investigations, he at once probed the matter to the bottom on his own 
account, and having satisfied himself he had been totally misled, published an 
explanatory note in the November number of the   Entomologists' Record,' 
which was followed in the December number by a note from each of the dealers 
through whom the specimens had been procured, both of them admitting that the 
eggs which had produced the moths had been obtained from a cross between an 
ordinary specimen taken in the New Forest and a Continental example of the 
variety eremita.
r 
From the report of the same meeting too, one would suppose that the beautiful 
specimens oiArctia lubncipeda var.
radiata, exhibited on behalf of Mr. Tohn 
Harrison, of Barnsley, were Yorkshire specimens, whereas Mr. Harrison obtained 
their parents from Lincolnshire.
The remarkable melanic varieties of Boarmia re P andata from Sheffield, 
exhibited on behalf of Mr. A E.
Hall at the December meeting (Nat., p.
24), 
were the same form which I took at Iluddersfield in 1887, and the form 
JmSSS ?
J mCet \ ng ?
e Lntomol °S ica l Society of London in Februarv 
.\ S ( ffi a V ?' P ' J 00 ,* - ?
1S J*?* 1 ?* to find thi * grand variety occurs alsb 
^ Sheffield, and no doubt when looked for it will turn up in other parts of the 
5 "f 1 rT; T 1 V roh ?
h] Z ln simiIar Realities in Lane hire.
-Geo. T.
Pokki 1 t, 
liuddershelci, Jan. 2nd, 1893.
Naturalist.
59 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
MAMMALIA, 1889-1891.
The present instalment of Bibliography has been compiled and 
edited by 
\VM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
Previous instalments of the Bibliography of this group of animals 
have appeared as follows : 
For 1884, in * Naturalist," February, 1885, pp.
152-156.
m 1885, » August, 1886, pp.
239-241.
5? 
> * 
1886-7, „ April, 1889, pp.
1 15-127.
1888, „ August, 1891, pp.
253-259.
The intent of these bibliographical citations is to give a complete 
series of references to books, papers, and records which have been 
printed or published with regard to the ten northern English counties 
and the Isle of Man, and to indicate the gist of the contents of each 
in as concise a form as may be consistent with making these papers 
of interest and of value to persons engaged in geographical natural 
history work.
In the case of long lists or papers, the very briefest 
indications only are given, reference to the original work or 
paper being necessary.
In the case of short records, however, the 
convenience of the user of the bibliography necessitates the giving 
of fuller detail and the name of every species included, or even by 
giving the whole substance (destitute of verbiage) to obviate the 
necessity of further reference.
No apology need be given for giving 
matter of this kind in ' The Naturalist ' ; it may not be of interest to 
casual readers, but to actual workers it will be of decided use.
Anon, [not signed].
Line.
N. 
Capture of a Whale [20 feet long, on foreshore at Bennington near Boston, 
1 a few days ago ' : species not named].
Land & Water, Aug. 4th, 1888, 132.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.E.
George Markham Tweddell [with footnote that in 1535 a c sea-man ' 
(probably a Seal— Phoca vitulina) was captured at Skinningrove, and kept 
many weeks on raw fish, but escaped to the sea ; and it is added that visitors 
to Hull Trinity House Museum will remember seeing relic there of another 
'sea-man'].
Yorksh.
Genealogist, Part 14, Jan. 1889, Vol 2, p.
12.
Anon, [signed ' Borderer *].
Furness.
Cumberland.
Marten [Mustela marUs\ in the Lake District [a tine female trapped at 
Seathwaite Tarn, near to Coniston Old Man; the species described a m 
extremely rare, but found occasionally about Dow Crag M*d Seathwaite Tarn, 
and also in the Scafell district].
Field, March 23rd, 1S89, p.
422.
Feb. 1893.
6o BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1 889-9 1.
Anon*, [not signed].
Notts.
White Hares [Lepus europaus] in Notts [repeating records of three instances 
from the Zoologist].
Land and Water, Ap. 6th, 1889, p.
442.
Anon, [signed ( Boss '].
York N.W.
Otter Hunting in Wensleydale [killing Lutra near Cover Bridge, near 
Middleham, and at Burton Beck].
Field, June 1st, 1889, p.
777.
Anon, [signed 'Stormer'].
Cumberland, Furness, Lane.
W. 
The Kendal Otter Hounds [killing examples of Lutra at Grimeshill, on the 
Lune, in Coniston Lake, and in River Irt at Holmrook].
Field, June 1st, 
1889, p.
776.
Anon, [signed 'Falcon'].
Northumberland S.
Otter Hunting in the Tyne [at Riding Mill, and Harbottle Island].
Field, 
June 15th, 1889, p.
847.
Anon, [signed ' Ragman '].
Furness, Cumberland.
The Kendal Otter Hounds [in pursuit of Lutra Intra at Broughton-in-Furness, 
Eskdale, and Copplehow Moss], Field, June 15th, 1889, p.
846.
Anon, [signed 'The Border Tyke'].
Cumberland.
The Carlisle Otter Hounds [and Lutra near Wetheral, Armathwaite, etc.].
Field, July 20th, 1889, p.
100.
[At Wreay on the Petteril].
Field, 
Aug. 17th, 1889, p.
240.
[On the Esk at Longtown].
Field, May 23rd, 
1891, p.
770.
Anon, [not signed].
Line.
S. 
Otters [Lut?-a Intra] on the Welland [one weighing 21 lbs.
shot near 
Deeping St. James, and five seen at Uffington Springs], Land and Water, 
Sept.
14th, 1889, p.
339.
Anon, [not signed].
Lane.
S. 
Ancient Red-deer [Cervus elaphus'] Horns [found in the old bed of the 
Irwell during the Manchester Ship Canal excavation].
Land and Water, 
Oct. 26th, 1889, p.
544.
Anon, [signed ' Ed/].
York N.
E, 
Large Rats [(Afus decuruanus) ; one weighing 28 lbs., and 23 inches long, 
caught Aug. 1881, at Geo. Edson's, Malton], Field, Dec. 28th, 1889, p.
906.
Anon, [not signed].
York N.W., Northumberland S.
List of .
. .
Donations to the Museum [at Newcastle] .
. , 
from Aug. 10th.
1888, to July 1st, 1889 [Sciurus vulgaris from Cotherstone ; 
skeleton of Afus decumanus with abnormal teeth, Carr's Hill, Whitfield : and 
large do.
from Callerton], Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and 
Xewc, vol.
10, part 2 (1890), p.
312.
Anon, [signed ' Secretary ].
Lane.
S. 
Penketh Field Club [Musiela ermtnea, M.
vulgaris, Mm decumanus, on a 
keeper's gibbet near Bold Park].
N.H.J., March 15th, 1890, xiv.
30.
Anon, [not signed].
York S.
E. 
Ancient Relics : British and Roman [at Skipsea, in the Cliff, where 
remains of Red and Fallow Deer {Cervus elaphus and C.
dama) are found ; 
see Poulson].
Yorksb.
Notes and Queries, part 19, April 1890, p.
270.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Phenolog-ical Observations [in the Isle of Man; Common Bat (?
Vesperugo 
pipistrellus) appears, Feb. 17th ; Manx close season for Hares (Lepus timidus) 
begins, Feb. 1st].
Vn Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, April 1890, p.
161.
Anon, [not signed].
York S.W.
Genealogical Notes from Wakefield Manor Rolls [Ric Thornhill pardoned 
for taking a Stag (Cervus elaphus) in Saltonstall, 1274].
Yorksh.
Notes and 
Queries, Part 19, April 1890, p.
299.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: mammalia, 1889-91.
61 
Anon, [signed ' R.T.
(Edlingham, Alnwick, Northumberland) '].
Cheviotland.
Albino Moles [( Talpa europtea) trapped on Edlingham Farm near Alnwick, 
one last year, four this].
Field, April 5th, 1890, p.
500.
Anon, [signed 'C.P/].
Notts.
Rat [Mus decumanus] -Catching" [at Oxton ; account of dexterous capture of 
a large number].
Field, April 5th, 1890, p.
504.
Anon, [signed ' Dyer '].
York N, E.
Sir C.
Leg'ard's Otter Hounds [accounting for several Ltdra in the Derwent 
at Forge Valley].
Field, May 10th, 1890, p.
665.
Anon.
[Newspaper paragraph].
Cumberland.
The West Cumberland Otter Hounds [in the Egremont district; Lutra in 
the River Calder].
Field, May 24th, 1890, p.
746.
[At Maryport and 
Arkleby].
Field, May 31st, 1890, p.
810.
Anon, [signed 'Th' Little Owd Chap'].
Cumberland.
The Kendal (Mr. Tattersall's) Otter Hounds [in Eskdale, Cumberland; 
sport with Ltttra Intra], Field, May 31st, 1890, p.
810.
Anon, [signed 4 Th' Little Owd Chap'].
Lane.
W., Lane.
S., York Mid W.
Mr. Tattersall's (The Kendal) Otter Hounds [at Halton near Lancaster ; 
a dog otter {Lutra lutra) 17 lbs.
killed].
Field, July 26th, 1890, p.
146.
[On the Ribble and Hodder at Brungerley and Grindleton Bridges ; bad 
weather ; Lutra not seen].
Field, Aug. 30th, 1890, p.
357.
[At Mytton 
Bridge near Whalley and up the Hodder to Whiteweli; a 15 lbs.
Lutra killed].
Field, September 20th, 1890, p.
441.
Anon, [signed * Ardaros'].
York N.W.
Mr. Wilkinson's Otter Hounds [in pursuit of Lutra in Wensleydale ; sport 
at Jervaulx Abbey, Bolton Woods, and in Burton Beck].
Field, June 7th, 
1890.
p. 850.
Cumberland.
Anon, [signed « J.R.B.'].
Cat suckling Leveret [= young Lepus europaus, at Egremont, CumberJai d].
Field, June 7th, 1S90, p.
852.
Anon, [signed •Viator'].
York N.E. and S.E.
Sir Charles Legard's Otter Hounds [and their success after Lutra in tne 
Rye and Derwent ; a kill near Howe Bridge].
Field, June 14th, 1890, p.
874.
[After Lutra on the Costa at Howe Bridge, near Pocklington, and on the 
Rye and Derwent], Field, May 23rd, 1891, p.
77°- 
Anon, [signed 'A.'].
York Mid W.
Otter Hunting in the Wharfe [near Harewood Bridge: a 22.J lb.
dog Otter 
{Lutra lutra) killed 26th June, by Col. Dawson's new pack, the Weston 
Otter Hounds].
Field, July 5th, 1890, p.
35.
Anon, [signed < Ellen' and 'E.H.B.'].
Cumberland.
The West Cumberland Otter Hounds [at Bridgefoot, Rivers Morron and 
Derwent, Cockbridge on the Ellen ; good sport; two notes].
Field, Aug. 16th, 
1890, p.
251.
York Mid W.
Anon, [signed 'Airedale'].
Colonel Dawson's (Weston) Otter Hounds [at Eastburn Beck and Lothers 
dale Beck, at Carr Head and Malsis; good sport after Lutra].
Field, 
Aug. 30th, 1890, p.
357.
York S.E.
Anon, [signed 'Tyke'].
Sir Charles Legard's Otter Hounds [at Thicket Priory and on the Derwent 
and Pocklington Canal ; female Lutra killed].
Field, Sep. 13th, 1890, p.
426.
Anon, [signed < Old Madge '].
Cumberland.
West Cumberland Otter Hounds [at Bullgill and Arkleby ; good spoit 
with Lutra].
Field, Sep. 20th, 1S90, p.
441.
Feb. 1893 
62 BIBLIOGRAPHY : MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
[Mammal observed at an] Excursion to the Mull Hills [Isle of Man, 
24th May, 1887 ; an Erinacens europt€iis\ Back Trans.
I. of Man N.H.S., 
i. 117 ; publ.
with Yn. Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, Oct. 1890.
Anon, [signed 4 F.
R.'].
Isle of Man.
Fight between Magpie and Rat [(J/us decumanus) in a corn-field near 
Ramsey, Isle of Man].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, Oct. 1890, i.
204.
Northumberland S.
Anon, [signed 'Ed.'] 
Large Rabbit and Hare [editorial comment that the largest hare {Lepus 
ti?nidus)oi which they have record, is one of 13^ lb., killed by R.
Henderson, 
at Longwitton, Northumberland].
Field, Feb. 14th, 1891, p.
215.
Anon, [signed * North Staffordshire'].
? Derbyshire.
White and Pied Stoats [(Mustela er mined) : upwards of a dozen have been 
seen and killed by keepers about ' The Peak ' during the past severe winter, 
more than average, although five or six are killed every winter].
Field, 
April nth, 1891, p.
538.
Anon, [signed 'P.Q.'].
Lane.
W., Furness.
Mr. R.
Carnaby Forsters Otter Hounds [in pursuit of Lutra at Halton- 
on-Lune, Hornby Bridge, Underley, Windermere, etc.].
Field, July 4th, 
1891, p.
11.
Anon, [signed ' C.'].
Cumberland.
West Cumberland Otter Hounds [in pursuit of Lutra at Mary port, the 
Ellen, Keswick, Cockermouth, Braithwaite, etc.].
Field, July 4th, i89l,p.
n. 
Anon, [signed * Otter '].
York N.E.
Sir Charles Legard's Otter Hounds [in pursuit of Lutra in Forge Valley 
and Troutsdale].
Field, Aug. 1st, 1891, p.
203.
ANON, [signed ' C.W.
(Withernsea, Yorkshire) '].
York S.E.
Hare {Lepus timidus] taking to the Sea [at Withernsea, Dec. 6th, 1891, 
to escape from a dog, and swam past all three lines of breakers].
Field, 
Dec. 12th, 1891, p.
892.
Samuel Allenby.
Line.
N. 
Albino Hedgehog [(Erinaeeus europaus) at Cad-well near Louth ; perfectly 
white with pink eyes].
Field, Nov. 9th, 1889, P- o6 7- 
J. C.
Atkinson.
Wild Cherrv 
York N,E.
[(Mus sylvaticus) at Danby-in-Cieveland, where also A rvicola agrestis occurs].
Nat., Feb. 1889, P- 54- 
James Backhouse, jun.
York N.W.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Upper 
Teesdale [in Aug. 18S9 5 Talpa and Sorex\ Nat., Oct. 1889, p.
291.
James Backhouse, jun.
YorkS.E.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Kirkham 
Abbey and Acklam Brow [on Sept.
4th, 1889 ; Sorex, Talpa, Lepus 
funiculus and L.
timidus noted].
Nat., Nov. 1889, p.
341.
J. Backhouse.
W 
arnivorous propensities in the Water Rat [an anecdote of a Lepus 
cuniculus being killed by five Arvicola amphibia near Church Fenton, July 
1890].
Nat., June 1891, p.
178.
York S.E.
on Oct. 4th, 1889 ; 
Matthew Bailey.
Seal [presumably Phoca viiulind\ at Flamborough [ 
it escaped], Nat., Nov. 1889, P- 322.
Matthew Bailey.
YorkS.E.
Seal [Phoca vitulma] at Flamborough [observed near the South Landing in 
mid-Sep. 1890].
Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
304.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
63 
Matthew Bailey.
YorkS.E.
Flamborough Bird Notes [with mention also of three or four large Whales 
seen], Nat, Dec. 1891, p.
372.
A. B.
Rochkort Battye.
Northumberland.
Tracks and Tracking on English Ground.
Smaller Mammals [with 
figures of their foot-prints ; and incidentally referring to Mus decumanus as 
a farmers' plague in Northumberland], Field, Aug. 24th, 1889, p.
276.
E. G.
Bayford.
W 
Badger [Me/es taxus] in South Yorkshire [on the line between Hampole and 
Adwick-le Street about 6 years ago].
Nat., Sep. 1891, p.
282.
Harry B.
Booth.
W 
Natterer's Bat [Vesperiilio nattereri] at Bingley, Yorkshire [obtained from 
the belfry tower, identified by W.
D. Roebuck].
Nat., March 1891, p.
96.
John Bowman.
• Durham.
Foxes [ Vulpes vulgaris] bred in confinement [at Polam Grange, near 
Darlington].
Field, May 17th, 1890, p.
708.
F. Boybs.
York S.E.
Bat [ Vespertilio pipistrelhts\ flying in winter [about the streets of Beverley ; 
occurrence of an albino a year or two ago mentioned].
Field, Dec. 20th, 
1890, p.
911.
Wm. E.
Brady.
W 
Food of the Rough-legged Buzzard [at Bessecarr, near Doncaster, 1888, 
and near Barnsley in 1876: had a Mole (7 a/pa europtca) and Rat {Mu 
deeumanus)].
Nat., Jan. 1889, p.
24.
W. D.
B[raithwaite].
York 
Ackworth N.
H. Excursions Tto Fricklev Common : Arvicoia 
S.W.
igrestis 
noted].
N. H.
J., Sep. 15th, 1891, p.
105.
J. J.
Burton.
Near York.' 
[Young Rabbits (Ltpus cunicufus) suckled by a cat, near York].
Nat., 
Sep. 1 89 1, p.
260.
L. Buttress.
Notts.
Polecat [Muste/a putorius] in Nottinghamshire [caught alive in the Forest, 
a few miles from Retford, Jan. 1891].
Zool., Nov. 1891, p.
424.
If.
\Y.
Cambier.
Lane.
S. 
Grey Variety of the Black Rat [caught in the refrigerator of a ship 
carrying frozen mutton between the Plate River and Liverpool ; Oldfield 
Thomas refers it to Mm alexandrinus, the grey form of M.
rattus].
Field, 
Jan. 26th, 1889, p.
126.
James Carter.
York N.W.
Notes from North Yorkshire \_Vesperugo noctu/a found on the ground at 
Mashani beneath a piece of dung ; sent to Edinburgh Museum].
Field, 
April 12th, 1890, p.
518.
James Carter.
W 
Unusual Fecundity in Hare [ (Lepas timidus) near Masham ; five leverets 
in one nest this summer].
Field, Sep. 20th, 1890, p.
462.
James Carter.
Wounded Rabbits biting [near Masham ; Lepus cuniadus fr 
so, and also /.
timidus].
Field, September 27th, 1890, p.
493 
James Carter.
W 
York N.W.
_ v ^Js vulpes] on the Warpath [at Burton House, Masham ; 
interesting account of tracking one's footprints in fresh snow].
Held, 
Jan. 24th, 1891, p.
120.
Feb. u 
64 bibliography: mammalia, 1889-91.
James Carter.
York N.W.
Otter \_Lutra Intra] devouring a Drake [at Burton House near Masham].
Field, April nth, 1891, p.
538.
Alfred C Chapman, Durham or Northumberland?
Natural History Notes from the North [of England, written from 
Leamside, co.
Durham, but not localised, and dealing with habits, etc., of 
Vulpes, Leptis funiculus ', and Mustela vulgaris].
Field, Aug. 2nd, 1890, p.
201.
J. E.
Clark.
YorkS.E.
[Young Shark (species not stated) and Pkoca vitulina seen near Filey Brig].
N.H.J., Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
167.
Wm. Ea<;le Clarke.
York N.W.
Daubenton's Bat [ Vespertilio daubeutonii] added to the Yorkshire Fauna 
[one shot on the Yore at Masham, Aug. 19th, 1891, by Basil Carter].
Nat., 
Sep. 1891, p.
275.
Wm, Eagle Clarke.
York N.W.
Daubenton's Bat [ Vespertilio daubentonii] in Yorkshire [one shot on the Yore 
at Masham, 19th Aug., 1891 ; new to Yorkshire].
Zool., Oct. i89i,p.
395.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. and Cheshire.
Curious Visitors at Sugar [near Warrington ; Rats (Mus decumanus) very 
troublesome].
Young Nat., June 1890, p.
118.
Edward Com her.
Cheshire.
Black Variety of the Water Vole [Arvicola amphibia] in Wirral [one shot 
close to Parkgate, winter of 1881-82].
Zool., Oct. 1891, p.
384.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E., Line.
N. 
Bottle-nosed Dolphin [Delphinus tursid] in the Humber [at Tetney Haven, 
25th Aug. 1888; refers also to one at Spurn, Sep. 1879].
Nat., Jan. 1889, p.
6. 
John Cordeaux 
York S.W.
Wild Cat [Felis catus] in Yorkshire [repeating from Murray's ' Handbook for 
Yorkshire ' the Barnborough tradition].
Zool., June 1890, p.
215.
J. Qordeaux].
York N.E.
[Inordinate increase of Mus sylvaticus and Arvicola agrestis at Danby-in- 
Cleveland, resulting from destruction of Kestrels, noted in reviewing J.
C. 
Atkinson's 'Forty Years in a Moorland Parish'].
Nat., Oct. 1891, p.
309.
John Cordeaux 
York S.E.
A White Porpoise \[Phoca>na cotnmunis) off the Holderness Coast, near 
the Spurn, seen Oct. 5th].
Zool., Nov. 1891, p.
425.
William Cross.
Lane.
W. 
Among- the Fylde Flowers.
I. Lytham and St. Anne's-on-the Sea 
[Lepus cummins noted in passing].
Wesl.
Nat., Jan. 1889, p.
322.
J. BuRTr Davy.
Line.
N. 
Churchwardens' Accounts, Cockerington S.
Mary's, North Lincolnshire 
[with entries of Talpa^ Vidpes and Lutra, 1732, 1735, an( l *744]- Nat., 
May 1 89 1, p.
144.
William Scarth Dixon.
and Mid W 
In the North Countrie.
Annals and Anecdotes of Horse, Hound, and 
Herd.
[Gives historical notices of Fox-hunting in Yorkshire from 1686 
down].
London : Simpkin, Marshall & Co. York : Sampson Brothers, 
1889.
[See Review in Field, July 13th, 1889, p.
45.
Not seen by 
compiler].
J. \V.
Fawcett.
Northumberland S., Cumberland, Durham.
Otters [Lutra lutra] in the North [brief particulars given of several 
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Durham captures].
Nat., April 1890, 
p. 120.
Naturalist.
BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
65 
J. \V.
L. T.
Fawcett.
Durham.
Seal [Haliclnerus gryphus] on Coast of Durham [one Mch. 17th, 1887, between 
Hartlepool and Seaham ; measurements given].
Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
255.
Thomas Ford.
Line.
N 
Badgers \Meles tax us] in Lincolnshire [several on the Hundon estate near 
Caistor].
Field, Jan. 12th, 1889, p.
51.
R. Fortune.
York Mid W.
A trap for Field Mice [near Harrogate ; old tin -can contained eight ; 
species not stated].
Zool., April 1890, p.
134.
Riley Fortune.
York N.W.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Leckby 
Carr [on May 18th, 189 1 : Ennaceus, Sciurus, J fits decumanus, Arvicola 
amphibia, A.
ag/estis, Lepus timidus, L.
cuniculus].
Nat., Aug. 1 891, p.
237.
Riley Fortune.
York Mid W.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Grassington 
[20th June, 1 89 1 ; Vespertilio mystacinus and Myoxus recorded as new to 
the recorded fauna of the district ; Mustela vulgaris, Scitirus, Arvicola 
amphibia, A.
agrestis, Lepus timidus, and L.
cuniculus also noted].
Nat.,.
Sep. 1 89 1, p.
264.
Riley Fortune.
York S.W.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Edlington 
and Wadworth Woods [near Doncaster, 16th and 17th Sep. 1891 ; Talpa, 
Muscardinus, Mustela vulgaris, Sciurus and Lepus cuniculus].
Nat., Nov.
i89i,p.
333- 
J. W.
Foster.
Notts.
Badger [Meles taxus] near Nottingham [one weighing 34 lbs.
caught on 
E. W.
Field's Aspley Hall Estate].
Field, Jan. 5th, 1889, p.
27.
F. G.
Fryer.
York N.
E. 
Two dead Foxes [(Vulpes vulgaris) in Nova Scotia Wood near York].
N.H.J.
, May 15th, 1890, p.
76.
W. A.
Gain.
Notts.
Squirrels [Sciurus vulgaris] and their Nests [as noted in the Dukeries, 
Sherwood Forest ; the young never leave the nest during the summer in 
which they are born].
Sci. Goss., Aug. 1889, p.
189.
Robert Garner.
Isle of Man 
Notes on the Natural History of the Isle of Man [discussing former 
occurrence of Megaceros, absence of Talpa, doubts as to Arvicola amphibia, 
and queries about tailless Felis catus].
Trans.
I. of Man N.H.S., vol.
1, 
1879-84 (publ.
1888), pp.
85-90.
C. F.
George.
Line.
N. 
Parasite of Water Rat (Arvicola amphibius) [found at Alford by J.
E. Mason].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1889, p.
6. 
C. F.
George.
? Line.
N. 
Parasites on Rats and Mice [Mus sylvaticus specified ; locality not given, 
but probably Kirton-in-Lindsey].
Sci. Goss., May 1889, p.
116.
T. Gibbs, Tun.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature for 1882 [at Bretby near Burton-on-Trent: ' Bat ' (species 
not stated) seen 26th Feb.].
7th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.H. and 
Arch.
Soc. for year ending 31st March, 1883, p.
16.
T. G[ibbs, Jun.].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1884 [[an.
8th, Bat seen at Burton-on-Trent].
9th Ann.
Rep. Burton-on-Trent N.H. and Arch.
Soc, for 1884, pub.
1885, p.
23.
March x?93.
66 BIBLIOGRAPHY : MAMMALIA, 1 889-9 1.
G. T.
Groves.
YorkN.E.
Hare [Lepus timidus] swimming' [across the Derwent near Ayton, 
Sep. 10th, 1889].
Field, Sep. 21st, 1889, p.
416.
G. H.
Caton Haigh.
Bat [ Vespertilio daabentojiii\ resting on the Water 
Grimsby].
Zool., Nov. 1889, p.
434.
James Hardy.
Line.
N. 
Cheviotland.
Report of the Meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the 
year 1888 [horns of Red Deer (Cerz'us elaphus)^ 12 or 13 points, at Broom- 
park, Northumberland, found in draining a marsh; also at Shawdon, great 
ravages at Lincombe dean by Arvicola amphibia].
Proa Berw.
Nat. Club 
for 1888 (pub.
1889), vol.
12, pp.
175, 178, and 179.
James Hardy 
Cheviotland 
Report of the Meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the 
year 1889 [with notes as to Meles taxus and Canis vulpes at Linhope Linns ; 
and former as still at Thrunton Crags].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 18S9, 
vol.
12, No. 3 (pub.
1890), pp.
449 and 453.
II.
S. Harland.
Lane.
W. 
Rare Birds and Mammals preserved at Brighton [a cream-coloured 
Arvicola agresiis captured near Garstang 'about a month ago'].
Field, 
Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
248.
H. S.
Harland.
York S.W.
Weasel [Mustela vulgaris] attacked by Hawks and Magpies [at a country 
house some three miles out of Sheffield; the combat described].
Field, 
July 5th, 1890, p.
9. 
J. E.
Harting.
Cumberland.
[Pine-Marten (Martes sylvestris)^ trapped in Cumberland, exhibited], Proc.
Linn.
Soc, Ap. 5th, 1888, p.
11.
Northumberland, Cumberland, Durham, 
J. E.
Harting.
Yorkshire, Lancashire.
The Roe- Deer, Capreolus caprea [treated of as a British species ; its 
former occurrence in Northumberland, Cumberland, Durham, Yorkshire, 
Lancashire referred to in a passing sentence].
Zool., March 1889, PP- 81-82.
Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, 
J. E.
Harting.
Durham, Cheviotland.
Daubenton's Bat, Vespertilio daubentonii, Leisler [treated of as a British 
species : reference made to its occurrence at Ulleswater, July 1863, Grasmere, 
Carlisle, Durham, Darlington, Shotiey Bridge, Auckland St. Andrew, Long 
Benton, and Twizel].
Zool., May 1889, pp.
161-166.
J. E.
Harting.
W. and Mid W..
Durham 
Natterer's Bat, Vespertilio nattereri [giving localities in Lincolnshire, 
Yorkshire, and Durham, at p.
247].
Zool., July 1889, pp.
241-248.
J. E.
Harting.
Cumberland.
Distribution of Natterer's Bat [ Vespertilio nattereri] in Britain [giving some 
Cumberland records in detail, on the authority of H.
A. Macpherson].
Zool., Aug. 1889, p.
309.
Cheviotland, Northumberland S., Notts, 
J. E.
Harting.
York S.W. Mid W., Lane.
S., Line.
N., Cumberland.
English Deer-Parks [giving particulars, historical and otherwise, as 
given by various old writers, and the dates of the extinction of Centts 
elaphus as a wild animal in various districts ; mention also of C.
dama and 
C capreolus\ Zool., May 1890, pp.
153-160.
Naturalist, 
HIBLIOGRAPHY : MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
67 
J. E.
Harting.
The Wild C 
W 
Yorkshire Vertebrata, and afterwards giving in detail the Barn borough 
Legend], Zool., May 1890, p.
176.
J. E.
Harting.
Cheviotland.
Wild 
Journal for 1833 and from the Middlewick Journal or Cheshire Advertiser of 
Dec. 14th, 1746].
Field, Sep. 6th, 1890, p.
392.
J. E.
Harting.
Cheviotland, Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
Wild White Cattle [(Bos taurus) ; enumerating the herds, with a slight 
history, and an account of the transference of a Chartley bull and a Vaynol 
heifer to the Zoological Gardens; woodcut given of the head of a Chillingham 
bull].
Field, Dec. 13th, 1890, p.
881.
J. E.
Harting.
Durham.
The Serotine, Vesperugo serotinus [noting that there is said to be one, 
taken at Cleadon in 1836, in the Newcastle Museum, and surmising that it is 
more likely V.
noctula, forgetting that this point had already been settled 
and notes published in the Zoologist].
Zool., June 1891, p.
205.
J. E.
Hasting.
Line.
S., Notts., Cheviotland.
Albinos and White Varieties [with details of the Duke of Portland's 
herds of 150 white Fallow Deer (Cervus da ma) and 16 white Red Deer 
(C.
elaphus) which are kept apart ; and notice that there are a few white 
C elaphus in Earl Brownlow's park, Belton House, Grantham, and at 
Alnwick Castle].
Field, July 18th, 1891, p.
%%.
J- E.
Harting.
Yorkshire, Line.
N. and S., Lane.
S. 
The Polecat, Mustela putorius [a copious account of present knowledge 
of its distribution, Lincolnshire (near Grantham, etc.), Yorkshire, Durham, 
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness, with some details, 
and also lengthy narratives of its being hunted in the Lake district, and 
about Rochdale; and notices of Ferrets (M.furo) in 1621 in the Household 
Book of Lord William Howard of Naworth].
Zool., Aug. 1891, xv.
281-294, 
and plate 3.
J« E.
Harting.
Lane.
W 
The Fox, Vulpes vulgaris [a general account, notes on first institution of 
hunting].
Zool., Sep. 1891, xv.
321-334, and plate 2.
Northumb.
S., York S.W., Westmd., Furness, Cumb., 
J. E.
Harting.
Line.
N. and S., Cheshire.
The British Marten.
Martes sylvatica, Nilsson [a genera and historical 
account of the species as British; extracts from old records of the Neviles of 
Chevet, 1526, a Lincolnshire sportsman's diary of 1825, and description of 
the method of hunting in Cumberland, which is the only English county 
where the Marten is still a beast of chase ; and full details as to what is 
recorded or known of it in Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, 
Durham, Yorkshire, Furness, Cheshire, and Lincolnshire, besides other parts 
of England].
Zool., Nov. and Dec. 1891, pp.
401-409, and 45°~459i and 
plate 4.
A. H 
AVI LAND.
Isle of Man.
Facts 
re nee made 
The Necessity for Collecting and Arranging the Ascertained 
relating to the Giaciation of the Isle of Man [discussed, and referenc 
to the occurrence of Cenus m areros\ Back Transactio 1 of the Isle of 
Man N.H.S., p.
64; published with Vn Lioar Manninagh, No. 4, Oct. 1889.
John Haweu..
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Kildale-in-Cleveland [12th July, 
1890 ; the geological report notes that horns of Cervus elaphus and 
C. tarandus have been found in the peat-bed near Kildale Station].
Nat..
Sep. 1890.
p. 274.
March 1893.
68 BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
John Haw ell.
York N.E.
Bats Flying" in Sunlight [as observed at Ingleby Greenhow ; species not 
stated].
Sci. Goss., Aug. 1891, p.
187.
J. S.
Hodgson.
Westmorland.
A Bat [?
Vespertilio pipistrellus] at 1 p.m.
[seen near Milnthorpe, Sep. 30th; 
sunny day], N.
H. J., Dec. 15th, 1889, p.
172.
\Ym. Hodgson.
Cumberland.
The Wild Cat [Felts coins] in Cumberland [expressing doubt as to certain 
records, and giving the latest authentic record].
Nat., Dec. 1891, p.
353.
Richard Howse.
Durham, Northumberland S.
Catalogue of the Local Fossils in the Museum of the Natural History 
Society [at Newcastle ; including records of Cervus elaphtis, C.
capreolus, 
C. alces, Bos primigenius.
Sits scro/a, Megaceros hibetnicus and Elephas 
primigenius in Northumberland and Durham].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part 2 (1890), pp.
228-229.
A. Hughes 
York N.
E. 
[Nest of Young Squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris) at Stockton near York].
N.H.
[., 
May 15th, 1889, p.
67.
A. S.
Hutchinson.
Derbyshire.
White Stoats [Mustela erminea] in Derbyshire [localities given for a dozen 
examples, killed since February began].
Field, April 4th, 1891, p.
477.
Henry Hyde.
Cheshire.
[Mole (Talpa europaea) noted at an] excursion to Ashley, for the Bollin 
Valley [on April 21st, 1888].
Rep. and Trans.
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Ass. for 
1888 (publ.
March 1889), p.
30.
Henry Hyde.
Derbyshire.
[Weasels (Mustela vulgaris) noted on an excursion to] Glossop, for 
Mossy Lea [on July 14th, 1888].
Rep. and Trans.
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Ass.
for 1888 (publ.
March 1889), p.
36.
James Ingleby.
York Mid W.
Scarcity of Lesser Horse-shoe Bat [Rhinolophus hipposideros] in Nidderdale 
[where it occurs at Ned Hole].
Nat., Feb. 1889, p.
54.
A. G.
Jarvis.
Line, N.
Squirrels [Sciunts vulgaris] and Fungi [at Wood hall Spa, July 1890].
Nat., 
Aug. 1890, p.
228.
J. M.
Jeffcott.
Isle of Man.
Address of the Retiring President [with references to remains of Cervus 
elaphus and C.
megaceros in Manx peat-bogs ; ' feeaih ' given as Manx name 
of former].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 1889, i.
56.
J. M.
Jeffcott.
Isle of Man.
Address of the Retiring: President [of the Isle of Man N.H.S., 
delivered 27th March, 1890; on Manx words in general ; craitnag=Bat 
(Vespertilio pipistrellus) from craitnagh, wrinkled; mwaagh=Hare \Lefnis 
fimtdms); assag= Stoat (Mustela erminea) ; keirey = Sheep {Ovis aries) ; 
Conning = Rabbit (Lepus cuniculus) and Roddan = Rat (Mus decttmanus) are 
corruptions of English words coney and rat (?
ratten), the animals not being 
indigenous as Manx].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, Jan.-April 1890.
p. 155.
F. P.Johnson.
Cumberland.
Hybernation of Squirrels [(Sciurus vulgaris) ; near Brampton the writer 
would undertake to find traces in the snow whenever the ground is covered].
Zool., April 1 89 1, p.
152.
J. E.
Kelsall.
Line.
N., Derbyshire.
Distribution of Daubenton's Bat^ [Vespertilio daubentonii] in Britain 
[referring briefly to records for Lincolnshire and Derbyshire].
Zool., 1889, p.
308.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
69 
P. M.
C. K[ERMODE].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [with Manx dates for Common Bat ( Vespertilio 
pipistrellus)\ appearance].
Vannin Lioar, No. I, Jan. 1889, i.
19.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Tumuli on Snaefell and Sky-hill [with incidental mention that Garner 
attributes the absence of small bones (so abundant in English tumuli) from 
the tumuli, to the absence of Arvicola amphibia from the Manx fauna].
Back Transactions of Isle of Man N.
H. S., i.
29, publ.
with Yn Lioar 
Manninagh, No. 2, April 1889.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Notes on Manks Mammals [given in some detail ; the Tailless Cat (Felis 
catus), Cervus megaceros (extinct), C.
elaphus and C.
dama (both introduced 
within historical times but soon extinct), Vespertilio pipistrellus, Plecotus, 
Eriuaceus, Sorex araneus, Mustela erminea, Mus sylvaticus, Jlf. musculus, 
M. decumanus, Lepus timidus, L.
cuniculus, Phoccena communis, and a whale, 
probably Bahcnoptera boops, noted, with details as to occurrence (several 
others mentioned as not occurring), Manx vernacular names and superstitions, 
etc.].
Back Transactions of Isle of Man N.
H. S., i.
pp.
43-49, publ.
with 
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 3, July 1889.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Address by the Retiring President .
. .
delivered .
. .
March nth, 
1886 [gives titles of papers dealing with the Manx Fauna].
Back Trans.
I. 
of Man N.
H. S., i.
72 ; publ.
with Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 4, Oct. 1889.
P. M.
C. Ki.rmode [Secretary].
Isle of Man.
Exhibition of the Horn of a Roe Deer {Cervus capreolus) found near the 
Round Tower, Peel].
Proc.
I. of Man N.
H. S., July 12th, 1889; Yn Lioar 
Manninagh, No. 4, Oct. 1889, i.
95.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
The Antiquities of the Parish of Bride [with a note anent Lough 
Pherrick, that if ever there were Otters {Lutra Intra) in the Island they may 
have been met with in this Lough].
Yn Lioar Mannin., No. 7, Oct. 1890^.183.
E. P.
Kxubley.
York N.E.
[Mammal observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Robin 
Hood's Bay [21st June, 1889; Lepus cuniculus'].
Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
229.
G. W.
Lamplugh.
York S.E.
Fossils from the Sewerby Cliff-beds [E/cphas primi genius ^ E.
antiquus, 
Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus ai?iphibius y Equus, Cerz>us ;// iceros, Bos primi- 
genius, Bison, Hytcna, Arvicola amphibia, mentioned, some with uncertainty].
Rep. 58th Meeting of Brit.
Ass., Bath, 1888 (pub.
1889), p.
334.
Cumberland, Westmorland, York N.E., 
Rawdon Lee. Cheshire, Durham.
Otters [Lutra Intra] and Otter Hunting" [giving a list of the otter-hound 
packs and discussing the scarcity or abundance of otters in various districts of 
British Isles ; five packs are kept in our northern counties].
Field, 
April 26th, 1890, p.
599.
B. B.
LeTall.
York "N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [note of a 'gallows tree* at 
Langwith with about 100 moles (Talpa etiroptea) on it].
N. H.
[., Dec. 15th, 
1889, xiii.
168.
R- L[ydekker].
Lines., Notts., York S.E.
The Present Distribution of the Beaver [(Castor fiber) sketched; reference 
also made to remains found in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, to the fact that 
the place in Yorkshire where remains were found (Wawne) is cl to a place 
named from the animal (Beverley); and to the name of Bevercater (Notts.)].
Fiekl, Jan. 3rd, 1891 p.
9. 
March 1893.
70 bibliography: mammalia, 1889-91.
CUMMING MACDONA.
Cheshire.
Fox [Cams vulpes\ swimming [across Chapel Mere, Cholmondeley Park, 
Malpas, Cheshire, on an island in which it was rearing a litter].
Field, 
July 26th, 1890, p.
160.
H. A.
Macfherson.
Cumberland.
Squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) feeding on Fungi [in Cumberland].
Nat., Dec.
1890, p.
356.
H. A.
Macfherson.
Cumberland, Furness.
The Polecat [Mustek putorius] in Wales and Cumberland [in which county 
it is quite rare or nearly extinct ; Aleles now extinct ; Maries getting scarcer 
every year, though it still occurs in Westmorland; Erinaceus referred to].
Zool., Sep. 1891, pp.
342-344.
T. G.
Maghie.
Cumberland.
Unusual Fecundity in Hare [(Leptts timidus) ; five leverets noted in one 
nest, 27th July, 1890, at Wragmire Bank, near Carlisle].
Field, Sep. I3 tn ?
1890, p.
404.
Jas. Eardley Mason*.
Line.
N. 
Parasites on the Water Vole [(Arvicola amphibia) found at Alford, 
28th October, 1888].
Nat., Feb. 1889, p.
60.
James Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Badger [Meles tax its'] in Lincolnshire [one found 15th March, 1890, in 
Gayton Fen, crossed the river Eau into Withern Fen, and finally taken near 
Strubby Church ; weight 18 lbs.].
Nat., April 1890, p.
120.
J. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Parish Accounts, Rigsby with Ailby, North Lincolnshire [from 1686 to 
1710; entries of sums paid ioxVulpes, Meles, Lutra\ Nat., June 1891, p.
178.
Philip B.
Mason.
Hybernation of Squirrels [{Sriurus vulgaris) ; at Drakelow Hall, near 
Burton -on -Trent they remained active throughout the whole of the recent 
severe and prolonged frost].
Zool., April 1891, p.
151.
L. C.
Mi all.
York Mid W.
Natural History of the Aire [repeating Gale's record (1710) of Lutra in the 
Aire].
Handbook for Leeds and Airedale.
Prepared for the use of the 
British Association, Leeds, 1890, pp.
22, 2^, and 24.
Derbyshire.
L. C.
Mi all.
Yorkshire.
Extinct Quadrupeds of Airedale [mentioning Hippopotamus, Elephas 
priwigeu/us, Bos pritnigemus, at Wortley and Lothersdale ; Ursus antos, 
Can is lupus, Hycena, Felis lynx, E.
leo, Tarandus rangifer, Cervus 
megaceros, Bison, Rhinoceros, all alluded to as having been once inhabitants 
of Yorkshire], Handbook for Leeds and Airedale.
Prepared for the use 
of the British Association, Leeds, 1890, pp.
39-40.
A. D.
Michael.
Derbyshire.
On some unrecorded Parasitic Acari found in Great Britain [at Chatsworth, 
autumn of 1888, on Arvicola agrestis and Erinaceus europceus], Journ.
Linn.
Soc, Zool., No. 123, Dec. 31st, 1889, xx - 400-406; Zool., March 1888, p.
112.
J. Grafton Milne.
Lane.
S. 
Extracts from Lancashire Churchwardens' Accounts [Rochdale, 1640, 
Erinaceus; 1642, Vulpes; Oldham, 1734, Ryton, Chaderton, 1735, and 
Crompton, 1735, Erinaceus].
Nat., May 1889, p.
142.
T. H.
Nelson.
York N.E.
Common Seal [P/ioco vitulind\ at Coatham [a young one shot 5th March, 
1890].
Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
120.
T. H.
Nelson.
York N.W., Durham.
Whale [Hyper n rostratus] at the Tees Mouth [caught at South ( iare ; 
account of capture; slight description of example].
Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
228.
Natural; 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
7 
T. II.
Nelson.
YorkN.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Kildale-in-Cleveland [with note 
that the Badgers (Meles taxus) reported from Ingleby are doubtless from 
Mutton Woods, where they have been turned down ; also of a hybrid Lepus 
timidus x cuntculus shot at Easby].
Nat., Sep. 1890, p.
271.
Charles Oldham.
Derbyshire, Cheshire.
Whiskered Bats [Vespertilio my st acinus] in Derbyshire [at LaihkiH Dale 
near Bakewell, Jan. 1st, 1889; comparison made of habitat ol this and 
Alderley Edge, Cheshire, examples].
Zool., Feb. 1889, p.
68; and Nat., 
Feb. 1889, p.
59.
Chas.
Oldham.
Cheshire.
Bank Vole [Arvicola glareolus] and Short-tailed Vole [A.
agrestis] in 
North Cheshire [at Northenden ; also Mus sylvaticus, and So rex telragonunts 
or minutus; M it stela vulgaris growing rarer].
Zool., March 1890, p.
98.
Chas.
Oldham.
Lane.
W. 
Whiskered Bat [ Vespertilio mystacinus] in Shropshire and Lancashire 
[one caught in a bedroom at Lytham, July 1888].
Zool., Sep. 1890, p.
349.
Chas.
Oldham.
Lane.
W. 
Albino Long-eared Bat [Plecotus auritus] in Lancashire [killed by R.
Standen at Goosnargh, Aug. 1866, uniform light cream -colour], Zool., 
Sep. 1890, p.
349.
Chas.
Oldham.
Cheviotland.
Alleged Antipathy of Cattle to Deer [criticized from observation of Bos 
taunts, Cervus elap/ius, and C.
dama at Chillingham Park].
Zool., Dec.
1890, p.
453.
Charles Oldham.
Cheshire, York Mid W.
The Lyme Park Herd of Wild White Cattle [(Bos taunts); a full historical 
and descriptive account of what is known of the herd, and of their being 
crossed in 1859 with a cow and bull-calf, the last survivors of the G is burn e 
herd ; measurements of skulls and heads given, and woodcuts showing forms 
of horns prior and subsequent to the Gisburne cross in 1859].
Zool., March 
1891, pp.
81-87.
Jno. D.
Patchett.
Notts.
Water Rat [Arvicola amphibia] and Eel [on the river Greet; eel swallowing 
the rats tail for a worm, and releasing it].
Field, Sep. 12th, 1891, p.
431.
Ali red E.
Pease.
" York N.E.
Habits of the Badger [(Meles taxus) as observed at Pinchinthorpe, 
Guisbrough].
Field, Jan. 19th, 1S89, p.
94.
John Peers.
Lane.
S 
Weasel [Mustela vulgaris] defending Young [at Penkett near Warrington; 
circumstantial narrative].
Field, Aug. 15th, i89i,p.
284.
J v • Philipson.
Cheviotland.
Address to the .
. .
Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club, read .
. .
May 15th, 1889 [noting Cervus dama in Eslington Park].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
X rthumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part 2, 1890, p.
404.
G. Plllen.
Derbyshire.
Curious visitors at Sugar [on two occasions a mouse (species not stated 
perhaps Mus musculus)].
Young Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
36.
Thomas Reed.
Northumberland S.
Caesarian Operation on a Hare [{Lepus timidus) at Capheaton, Newcastle 
on-Tyne].
Field, Dec. 14th, 1889, P- 862.
J. Kobi )\.
Cumberland.
Rabbit [Lepus cuntculus] swimming across the Irthing [being pursued by 
a we asel, Mustela vulgaris].
Nat., Oct. 1891, p.
298.
March iSq^.
72 bibliography: mammalia, 1889-91.
W. Denison Roebuck.
York N.W.
Mammalia in Upper Swaledale [recording the trapping of Sorex tetra- 
gonicnts, Arvicola glareola, A.
agrestis, Mus sylvaticus, M.
musculus and 
at Strands farm, near Gunnerside, Aug. 1891].
Nat., Oct. 1891, p.
311.
W- Denison Roebuck.
Long-tailed Field Mouse [Mus sylvaticus] near Alford, Lines, [at Rigsby, 
Feb. 13th, 1886].
Nat., Oct. 1891, p.
311.
C. R.
Roeder.
Isle of Man.
[Manx] Folklore [concerning Leptis timidus\ Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 9, 
April-Oct. 1891, p.
290.
J. H.
Salter and N.
Neave.
Lane.
S. 
Manchester Notes [anent a Bat out at 4.45, Feb. 1st].
N.H.J., April 
15th, 1890, p.
56.
J. H- Salter and N.
Neave.
Derbyshire or Cheshire.
On the Derbyshire Border [of Cheshire, near Macclesfield ; Dormouse 
{Myoxus avellanarins) caught almost on the moors].
N. II.
J. , Sep. 15th, 
1890, p.
102.
William Shand.
Northumb.
S. 
Weasels [Mustela vulgaris} attacking a Dog [at Berridge Hag, near 
Morpeth; circumstantial account].
Field.
July 25th, 1891, pp.
130-131.
\V.
E. Sharp.
Cheshire.
The Coleopterest [sic] in Delamere Forest [with note that three centuries 
ago it formed part of the great woodlands that occupied all West Cheshire, 
and owed to the Abbot of St. Werburg in Chester a Stag [Cervus elaphus) 
and six Bucks (C.
datna) annually].
Brit.
Nat., Nov. 1891, p.
239.
F. Sissoxs.
Notts.
Sissons's M Beauties of Sherwood Forest " : a Guide to the M Dukeries " 
and Worksop [with notices of the Deer (Cervus elaphus and C.
rfama) in the 
various parks ; also of a large herd of pure white Deer at Welbeck ; and that 
the herds at Welbeck are carefully replenished by importations from Scottish 
forests].
Second edition, 8vo, 1888, pp.
51, 56, 60, 65, and 103.
A. B.
S[kip\vorth].
Line.
N. 
Badger [Meles faxus]in Lincolnshire [one taken at Holbeck Mall near Horn- 
castle, weighing 26 lbs.
10 oz., a few days ago].
Field, Jan. 5, 1889, p.
27.
Edward II.
Smart.
York N.E.
Field Voles [Arvicola agrestis] in North-East Yorkshire [destructive to 
strawberries near Northallerton].
Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
304.
Thomas Southwell.
Line.
S. 
[Phoca vitulina] in the Wash [between Norfolk and South 
Lincolnshire; the Grey Seal (Halichccrus gryphus) occasionally met with].
Z00L, Oct. 1890, p.
383.
Peter Spicer.
W 
Fox [Vulpes vulgaris] Curiously Marked [killed in Lord Zetland's country, 
Yorkshire: quite white head with patches].
Field, May 3rd, 1890, p.
638.
C. E.
Stott.
Jackdaw killing; [Water] Rats [ irvicola amp 
process described].
Z00L, Nov. 1890, p.
437.
M. Tail.
Cheshire.
All Yorkshire.
-egendary references to the Boar of Bradford, the White Doe of 
Ry) stone, the Hart-leap near Richmond, the Dragon of Wantley, the Felon 
Sow of Rokeby ; also to the remains of various mammals in Kirkdale Cave, 
and Victoria Cave at Settle].
Yorkshire; Scenes, Lore and Legends [Leed>.
1888] pp.
9, 25, 31, 38, 41, 49, 53- 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
73 
T. Talbot, Isle of Man, 
Tailless Cats [of the Isle of Man, discussed at some length, with numerous 
extracts from various authors].
Trans.
I. of Man N.
H. S., vol.
i. 1879-84 
(publ.
1888), pp.
96-116.
E. Tandy.
Cumberland.
Whiskered Bat [ Vespertilio tnystacinus] in Cumberland [on the Solway ; 
once or twice occurred before in the county].
Zool., March 1890, p.
99.
Earl of Tankerville.
Cheviotland.
The Chillingham Wild Cattle [a detailed account of experiments in crossing, 
with other notes on the herd, illustrated by fine woodcut from a photograph].
Field, Aug. 16th, 1890, p.
249.
Thos.
Thompson.
Durham.
Varieties of Mole [(Talpa europaa) near Winlaton, caught Jan. nth; pied 
example ; description given].
Field, Jan. 18th, 1890, p.
83.
C. F.
T[horne\vill].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1884 [at Burton-on-Trent ; Lutra Intra seen at 
Burton Bridge, April 23rd].
9th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
H. and 
Arch.
Soc, for 1884, publ.
1885, p.
24.
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1886 [for Burton-on-Trent ; Bat noted flying at 
4 p.m., 2 1st March], nth Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
H. and Arch.
Soc, for 1886, publ.
1887, p.
22.
Wm. Turner.
Cumberland.
On Fossil Bones of Mammals obtained during- Excavations at Silloth 
[including those of Bos primigenius, Cervus elaphus, and some Cetaceans, 
probably Bahenoptera musculus and a Globiocep/ialus].
Proc.
Roy. Phys.
Soc. Edinburgh, vol.
8, part 2, Session 1884-85, publ.
1885, pp.
333-338.
Line.
N., York S.E., Cumberland, 
William Turner.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
On the Occurrence of the Bottle- Nosed or Beaked Whale (Hyperoodon 
rostratns) in the Scottish Seas, with Observations on its External Characters 
[and recapitulation of occurrences in the Humber in 1837 (skeleton in Hull 
museum), at Flimby near Cockennouth in September 1839, another same 
time on East Hoyle Bank, three near Liverpool in 1850, 1852, 1853, the last 
at East Hoyle Bank, one in Sept.
1858, and a female and young in Sept.
1867, near the entrance to river Ouse].
Proc.
R. Phys.
Soc. Edinburgh, 
vol.
9, part 1, session 1885-86, publ.
1886, pp.
26-27.
Wm. Turner.
York S.E., Line.
N. 
On the Occurrence of Sowerby's Whale {Mioopteron bidens) in the Firth 
of Forth [with brief allusions to the one at the mouth of the Humber in 
Sept.
1885, recorded by Clarke and Southwell].
Proc.
R. Phys.
Soc.
Edinb., vol.
10, part 1, 1S88-S9 (publ.
1889), pp.
5-6.
Rudolph Virchow.
Isle of Man.
Anthropology in the Last Twenty Years [with a note on the Tailless 
Cats (Felis catus) of the Isle of Man].
Smithsonian Report to July 1889, 
publ.
1890, p.
569, translated from Corr.-Blatt d.
deutsch.
Ges. f.
Anthrop., 
Ethn.
und Urgeschichte, Jahrg.
20.
no.
9, Sept.
1889, pp.
89-100.
Edgar R.
Waite.
Y <> rk s - w - 
[Mammalia observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Holmfirth 
[10th June, 1889; Lepus cuniculus and JMustela vulgaris noted].
Nat., 
July 1889, p.
202.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
[Mammalia observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Harrogate 
[13th July, 1889; Talpa, Sciurus, Arvicola amphibia, A.
agnstu* Lep** 
timidus, and L.
cuniculus noted on walking by Hookstone to Fullwith and 
Rudding Park].
Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
236.
March 1893.
74 BIBLIOGRAPHY: MAMMALIA, 1889-91.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York S.W.
[Mammalia observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Bretton 
Park [14th June, 1890 ; Cervus dama, Talpa, Sorex tetragonurus, Arvicola 
amphibia, A.
agrestis, and Lepus cuniculus noted].
Nat., July 1890, p.
224.
Edgar R.
Waite.
YorkS.E.
[Mammalia observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Low- 
thorpe near Driffield [26th May, 1890; Arvicola agrestis and Lupus cuniculus 
noted].
Nat., July 1890, p.
205.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Natterer's Bat [Vespertilio nattereri] near Thorp Arch [one picked up 
July nth, 1890; a few details given], Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
255.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Vertebrates of the Western Ainsty [giving detailed notices of 26 species of 
mammalia].
Nat., March 1891, pp.
81-86.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Red Field Voles [Arvicola glareolus] near Lotherton, Yorkshire [attracte 
by and killed with linseed oil].
Nat., May 1891, p.
144.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Common Field Voles [Arvicola agrestis] at Eccup [where they abound ; 
burrows confined to a restricted tract of grass near the margins of Eccup 
reservoir].
Nat., May 1891, p.
144.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Malham 
and Gordale [nth Sep. 1890; Mustela vulgaris ', M* erminea, Lepus cuniculus 
and Arvicola amphibia].
Nat., June 1891, p.
174.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York N.E.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Hayburn 
Wyke [on July nth, 1891 ; Lepus cuniculus only].
Nat., Sep. 1891, p.
286.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York S.E.
[Mammals observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union on the 
Wolds [at Sledmere and York Dale, 3rd Aug., 1891 ; Erinaceus, Arvicola 
glareolus, and Lepus cuniculus].
Nat-, Oct. 1891, p.
301.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Noctule [Vesperugo noctula] Flying in Sunshine [by the River Wharfe near 
Pool, 13th Sep., 1 891].
Nat..
Oct. 1891, p.
311.
John Watson.
Westmorland.
Westmorland Heronries [with an allusion to Gough finding remains 
of Arvicola amphibia in stomach of a fortnight-old Heron at Dallam Tower, 
and to another case of a Heron disgorging the same animal when fired at] 
Westm.
Note Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, vol.
1, part 6, June 1S89, p.
126.
E. W.
West.
Derbyshire.
The Kestrel a Mole[7^//tf ^r^^z^-killer [in North Derbyshire; an 
instance detailed].
Field, Dec. 14th, 1889, p.
862.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
White Hares [Lepus europuiis] in Nottinghamshire [at Bestwood and 
Rufford ; three examples in 1888].
Z00L, April 1889, p.
143.
T. D.
White.
Derbyshire.
White Stoat [Mustela erminea] in Derbyshire [noted while hunting Feb. 4th, 
1 89 1, with the Axe Vale Hounds at Wiscombe Park].
Field, Feb. 14th, 
1 891, p.
226.
James Wood.
Line.
N. 
An Albino Hare [(Lepus timidus) shot at Grimoldby, near Louth, Oct. 1889].
Field, Oct. 26th, 1889, p.
604.
N:uu.ra 
75 
GLACIAL BOULDERS IN CALDERDALE.
JAMES SPENCER, 
Halifax ; Member of the Yorkshi?e Boulder Committee.
Geologists tell us that the Glacial epoch was ushered in by a period 
of gradually increasing cold, which ultimately became so intense 
that the mountainous districts of Norway, Scotland, and the north of 
England became enveloped in a thick mantle of snow and ice.
Then glaciers began to form on the mountains and upland valleys, 
from whence they radiated in all directions, but as soon as local 
obstacles were surmounted they all took a southward direction down 
the country and finally became confluent, forming one vast sheet of 
ice which covered Scotland and the north of England, and filled up 
the beds of the North and the Irish Seas with a vast thickness of ice.
The route taken by many of these glaciers can be traced by the 
boulders which they dropped while on their way down the country.
The glacier which brought down the boulders of granite, syenite, 
trap and volcanic ashes, etc., that now occupy so many miles ot 
the bed of the Calder appears to have originated in the Galloway 
Mountains (south-western corner of Scotland).
Starting from the 
neighbourhood of the Sol way, with its burden of ' Crififel ' granite 
boulders it came down the western coast* bounded on the west by 
the great glacier from the north, which occupied the bed of what is 
now the Irish Sea, and on the east by the land.
It then spread over 
Morecambe Bay, where it was joined by a great glacier from the 
western side of the Lake District, bringing with it a vast quantity of 
Lake District rocks, including Eskdale granite, Ennerdalegranophyre, 
quartz felsite from St. John's Vale, Borrodale ashes, and many other 
characteristic rocks from that district.
The now greatly augmented glacier still kept to the western coast 
until it reached the neighbourhood of Blackpool and Lytham, where, 
probably meeting with less resistance from the land ice and being 
impelled by the great glacier on the west, it was forced across the 
plain of North Lancashire, engulfing and overtopping hills of from 
* It is possible that the ' Criffei ' granite may have crossed direct south over 
the Solway, and thence over the high ground on the north of the Lake District, 
and in this way have been commingled with the Lake District boulders, and thi 
may have occurred either before or after the great glacier which carried the 
' Criffei ' granite from west to the east.
Be this as it may, that well-known 
granite has been recognised, both in Lancashire and Caldtr lale.
March i8g^.
76 SPENCER: GLACIAL BOULDERS IN CALDERDALE.
1,200 feet to 1,450 feet in height on its route, with the same ease as 
a storm-swollen brook envelopes and overtops the boulders in its bed, 
it finally impinged against the steep flanks of Blackstone Edge and 
the western end of the Walsden Pass.
When the glacier reached 
Blackstone Edge it had become greatly reduced in thickness, which 
was at that place estimated by the late Captain Aitken at about 
1,150 feet.
So that only a limited portion of the ice-sheet, with its 
burden of far-travelled rocks, was pushed over the Pennine Chain 
and found its way into Calderdale, the great bulk of the glacier being 
turned down the western flanks of the Pennine Chain into the plain 
of South Lancashire.
This range of high ground is in the neigh- 
bourhood of Littleborough and Burnley cut through by two deep 
passes — namely, those of Walsden and Cliviger.
Now, as the height 
of the Walsden Pass is only 627 feet and that of Cliviger 768 feet 
above sea-level, it must be evident that, unless these passes were 
either non-existent at that time or they were filled up by some 
means or other, the ice-sheet must have been pushed through them, 
down to Todmorden and thence down the valley of the Calder.
The general opinion of those most familiar with the facts of the case, 
is that the level of these passes has not materially altered since 
pre-Glacial times.
Hence, in order to keep back the ice-sheet, they 
must have been filled up by some means or other, otherwise the 
passes would have been strewn with boulders dropped from the 
glacier.
Now, one of the most strange and puzzling facts in con- 
nection with the glacial phenomena of our district is that there are 
absolutely none of those foreign boulders to be met with in either 
of these passes.
Let the diligent student search these passes as long and as 
carefully as he may, not a single erratic of either granite or any 
other far-travelled rock will reward his search.
But if he choose to 
ascend the hill on either side of the Walsden Pass, especially that 
on the south, he will walk over a great thickness of them for a long 
distance up the hillside and close to the edge of the pass, and up 
to the height of 1,150 feet or more above the sea-level, and in 
walking over the hill he may meet with some of them here and there 
until he reaches Walsden, which lies on the eastern side of the chain.
How to account for this strange fact was for a long time a puzzle to 
local geologists.
At length my friend, the late Captain Aitken, in 
order to account for the absence of glacial boulders from these 
passes, propounded the theory that these passes had become jammed 
full of local ice from the surrounding hills during the earlier portion 
of the glacial period, so that the great Lancashire ice-sheet when it 
reached the locality, found those passes full of compact ice which 
N aturalist, 
spencer: glacial boulders in calderdale.
77 
formed a barrier equal to the rocky chain itself.
In the deep 
hollow in which the town of Todmorden now stands and the many 
deep dales around, the local ice would be held in a compact mass, 
and the peculiar configuration of the ground would have a tendency 
to retain and preserve the local ice, nearly if not quite up to the 
general level of the Pennine Chain ; so that the main body of the 
Lancashire glacier would be effectively prevented from passing 
through these passes into Yorkshire.
Nevertheless, both Captain 
Aitken and myself were satisfied that our Calderdale boulders of 
granite, etc., had somehow and by some means come over the 
Pennine Chain, and somewhere near the Walsden pass.
We had 
assured ourselves of this by a careful examination of our Calderdale 
boulders and by comparing them with those of East Lancashire.
When I first began to study this most interesting subject, having 
no particular theory of my own to support, I naturally inclined to the 
one which appeared to me to be the most plausible, and which 
seemed to be supported by the greatest weight of evidence and 
authority within our district, and that was the theory, that our 
Calderdale boulders had come from the east.
Very early in my 
geological rambles I found a limestone boulder almost entirely full 
of small Rhynchonellse near Widdop's Cross, at the height of about 
1,200 feet above sea-level, on the southern flank of Boulsworth Hill, 
and a short distance on the Yorkshire side of the boundary line 
between Yorkshire and Lancashire.
This boulder and its enclosed 
shells strongly reminded me of a very similar limestone boulder 
which only a short time previously I had met with on the Yorkshire 
coast at the foot of Castle Hill, Scarborough.
The Rhynchonella 
found in the Widdop boulder appeared to me, and also to those persons 
to whom I showed them, to be closely allied, if not identical, with 
Rhynchonella socialis of the oolitic boulder from Scarborough Castle 
Hill.
At my request, Captain Aitken took some of the Widdop boulder 
and its inclosed shells and submitted them to some great authority, 
probably Mr. Davidson, who declared the fossils to be a Rhynchonella 
from the Mountain Limestone.
This settled the matter, and it was 
evident that this boulder had come over the ridge at Widdop's Cross 
from Cant's Clough, where a large number of limestone boulders 
may still be found, and not from the east as I had imagined.
These 
limestone boulders are very rich in Mountain Limestone corals, 
encrinites, producta, spirifera, etc., and they occur in great numbers 
on the north end of the Burnley (Cliviger) Pass, and also all around 
the flanks of Boulsworth Hill and the upland valleys in that 
neighbourhood, where they have in former days been largely used for 
burning into lime.
This locality seems to have been occupied in the 
March !893.
78 SPENCER: GLACIAL BOULDERS IN CALDERDALE.
Glacial period by a great glacier from the north, which brought down 
from Craven and the neighbourhood the limestone boulders now 
found in the district There appears to be no evidence to show that 
the Lancashire glacier with its boulders of granite, etc., ever reached 
the Cliviger Pass.
But there is some evidence to show that a small 
portion of the Craven glacier did come over this Pass, bringing with 
it limestone boulders.
My friend, the late Mr. A.
Stansfield, of Todmorden, informed 
me that, with the exception of a local deposit of limestone boulders 
once met with in an excavation 18 feet deep below the surface at 
Cornholm, no drift deposits had ever been met with in the neigh- 
bourhood of Todmorden.
Many years ago, while on an excursion 
on Wadsworth Moor, an old friend of mine, a farmer who lived in 
the locality, called my attention to a local deposit of well-glaciated 
limestone boulders which had been exposed in an old occupation 
road leading on to the land.
They were found on the edge of the 
moor at an elevation of about 1,150 feet above the sea-level.
It would, therefore, appear from these three deposits of limestone 
boulders that a small portion of the Craven glacier found its way, 
most probably over the southern flanks of Boulsworth Hill, into 
Calderdale.
But the number of limestone boulders is very limited 
in comparison with the number of granite and other erratics which 
came over the ridge at Walsden.
I subsequently found that the 
Geological Surveyors had also come to the conclusion that our 
Calderdale boulders had come over the Pennine Chain somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of Walsden.
Some time after seeing the 
opinion of the Geological Surveyors on the subject, I paid a visit to 
my friend, Mr. R.
Law, F.G.S., then of Walsden, and we both went 
over that district together, when we traced the granitic boulders here 
and there from Walsden to the other side of the hill, near the 
Walsden Pass.
I was satisfied that those erratic boulders we had 
seen had come over the hill, and therefore that we had good grounds 
for believing that our Calderdale boulders of granite, etc., had come 
over by the same way.
From Walsden we pass down the valley to 
Hebden Bridge,"" and thence to Mytholmroyd, where Mr. Thomas 
Ashworth, a local observer from Hebden Bridge, once discovered 
a considerable number of granite boulders.
From this place down- 
wards I have found these far-travelled boulders at Luddendenfoot, 
at Sowerby Bridge, and at North Dean, where they were exposed 
during the excavations made in widening the railway viaduct over 
the Calder, and from whence I obtained a large number of 
* Where the late Dr. Alexander has recorded the finding of boulders of granite 
and other foreign ro:ks during the making of the railway.
Naturalist, 
NOTES- — OR N ITHOLOGY.
7 9 
characteristic boulders.
But at Elland they may be seen exposed 
in the banks of the Calder and good specimens obtained, and they 
are frequently met with in sinking wells and in making excavations 
near the Calder from Elland down to Dewsbury and Wakefield.
The following section was exposed in sinking for the foundations 
for the piers of the railway arch across the river Calder at North 
Dean.
Soil ...
Fine Sand 
• * • • *   
* • • « • 
• % • **• *•• ••• • * * 
ft.
ins.
I O 
8 o 
Gravel, with boulders of local sandstones 2 o 
Boulders of local rocks with a large percentage of foreign 
rocks, granite, syenite, traps, etc 5 O 
No bottom reached, the foundations of the piers being laid on this bed.
The majority of the boulders were well rounded, thus indicating 
that they had been worn by being knocked against each other in the 
river.
They are smooth, and no striae or scratches were visible on 
any of them.
The general character and order of succession of these Glacial 
deposits in Calderdale, appears to be (i) surface soil, (2) a thick bed 
of sand with clay lower down the river, (3) gravel with boulders of 
local rocks, (4) gravel with local boulders, mixed with a large 
percentage of boulders of granite, syenite, quartzite, basalt, trap, 
volcanic ash, etc., which as a rule seem to repose upon the solid 
rocks at the bottom of the valley.
Boulders of the following characteristic rocks occur in the valley 
of the Calder.
St. John's Vale quartz-felsite Micaceous trap, 
Buttermereand Ennerdalegranophyres, Volcanic ash, 
Eskdale granite, Amygdaloidai trap, 
Syenite.
Eycott Hill basalt, 
Wastdale granite, Quartzite, and quartz rock, 
Criffel granite, Felspar-porphyry, etc., 
Basalt, Limestone and Chert.
Most of these rocks appear to have come from the western side 
of the Lake District, but some have been derived like the Criffel 
granite from Scotland.
NO TES— ORNI THOL OGY.
Spotted Crake at Otterington.— An immature specimen of the Spotted 
v-rake [Porzana maruetta), was shot near Otterington, Noveml r 1891, and is 
n ow m my possession.— Wm. Heweti, 12, Howard Street, York, Feb- iSth, 1893.
Bittern near Driffield.— A fine female specimen of the Bittern (/ *Mrm 
^w), was shot at Little Driffield on the 9th January, 1893.— Wm. HtWETT, 
I2 ; ^Howard Street..
York, Feb. iSth, 1893.
M ^rch i8q 3 .
fco 
NO TES— ORNITHOL OGY.
Flamborough Bird-Notes.— Since last writing (January 12th, 1893) we have 
had a great rush of Fieldfares ( Tiirdus pilaris).
I do not remember the time when 
so many have arrived on the headland.
I am informed that one night when the 
wind was blowing from the north-east with a gentle breeze and very foggy, the 
Lighthouse was literally covered with Fieldfares and Blackbirds (T.
merula).
Large flocks of Snow Buntings {Plectrophanes nivalis) arrived on the headland ; 
also about the same time several Red-necked Grebes (Podiceps griseigcna) were 
seen along the coast.
The other day I had brought in a Red-breasted Merganser 
(Mergus serrator) by one of our fishermen, having been picked up at sea while 
attending to the fishing lines.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, Feb. 15th, 1893, 
Great Northern Diver at Workington.— For some weeks past a strange 
bird had been noticed in the Solway, in the neighbourhood of Workington and 
the mouth of the Derwent, which local bird-fanciers, who haunt the shore, were 
unable to recognise.
More attempts than one had been made to capture the 
unknown feathered visitor.
Shots had been fired without result, it being a difficult 
bird to kill, in consequence of its habit of swimming with only its head exposed 
above the level of the water.
At last it was secured by Mr. Percy, a Workington 
blacksmith, who fired at it from the pier, and succeeded in putting a single 
pellet through its head.
The bird proved to be a fine specimen of the Great 
Northern Diver {Colymbus glacialis), a bird apparently of the first year, as the 
plumage, though very fine, wants the white bands round the upper and lower 
parts of the neck, which distinguish the species when adult.
The bird is now in 
the hands of Mr. Robinson, the local taxidermist, of Peter Street, in this town, 
to whom it has been entrusted for setting up.
Mr. Robinson informs the writer 
that Mr. Percy has in his possession an example of the Purple Heron (Ardea 
purpurea), which he shot some years ago, when flying overhead in the dusk of 
the evening, near the reservoir belonging to one of the local iron furnaces.
— Wm. Hodgson, A.L.S., Workington, Feb. 10th, 1893.
NOTES AND NEWS.
In the June 1892 issue of the 'Journal of Botany/ Mr. George Massee has a 
paper on ' Some West Indian Fungi,' illustrated by three coloured plates.
We have received from Messrs.
Swan Sonnenschein & Co., a copy of their 
recently published work in which Mr. Frank E.
Beddard, M.A., F.R.S.E., treats 
of 'Animal Coloration,' the sub-title defining it as an account of the principal 
facts and theories relating to the colours and markings of animals, it is a hand- 
some cloth-bound volume of 288 pages 8vo., dated 1892, and includes many 
figures and four coloured plates.
Few people surely can have such advantages 
as Mr. Beddard has of studying ' Animal Coloration ' and the character of the 
book now before us shows that he is fully alive to these advantages.
The work 
from beginning to end is full of scientific facts, clearly and pleasantly told, many 
of them the result of careful observations and experiments made by the author 
himself.
Although not absolutely free from error, the work may be taken as 
a fair and business-like treatise of the subject in hand.
Mr. Beddard would 
perhaps have been justified in giving his book such a title as ' The Coloration of 
Insects and Reptiles,' as the information about these creatures is far in excess of 
that relating to mammals and birds.
What the author alludes to on page 44, 
where he writes of Lamms collaris having a red iituier-sitrface or even le?non 
yellow we cannot pretend to say, but certainly we fail to see why Dr. Gadow 
should be saddled with such a statement.
Whatever species may have been 
thought of by Mr. Beddard, the interest of the record, if a bona-fide one, of 
course remains the same.
Apropos of the remarks on page 55, we would 
recommend a perusal of Lord Walsingham's valuable paper * On some probable 
causes of a tendency to melanic variation in Lepidoptera of High Latitudes/ 
published in the Transactions of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, part 8.
The 
subject arrangement of the book, with its four beautifully coloured plates will, we 
feel sure, make it a popular one, and for reference the list of authors' names 
appended is most convenient.
Naturalist, 
8i 
SCORPiENA DACTYLOPTERA ON THE 
YORKSHIRE COAST: 
AN ADDITION TO THE FAUNA OF THE BRITISH 
NORTH SEA AREA.
T. H.
NELSON, M.B.O.U., and WM.
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S., Etc.
On the 2nd of February last, one of the Redcar fishermen brought 
me a strange-looking fish, which had been found, washed up by the 
tide, on Coatham sands.
Not being able to identify it myself, 
Mr. Roebuck forwarded the specimen to Mr. W.
Eagle Clarke of 
the Edinburgh Museum.
— T.H.N.
On examination I found the specimen greatly resembled 
Sebastes norwegicus in general appearance, but differed in the 
following important points, namely: (1) In having the interorbital 
space concave, not flat; (2) the dorsal spines longer than the 
dorsal rays, instead of shorter; (3) the lower jaw (dentary) was 
not prominent ; (4) the upper posterior angle of the operculum 
reached to the lateral line, and was not spined at its apex.
Thinking 
that these peculiarities — though they are certainly very marked — 
might, perhaps, be characteristic of the youth of Sebastes norwegicus, 
I wrote to my friend Mr. Boulenger, of the British Museum, 
describing them, and afterwards sent him the specimen.
He informed me that the specimen was a young Scorpczna 
dactyloptera De la Roche = Sebastes dactyloptents (De la Roche) t 
(Giinther, Cat. Acanth.
Fishes, II., p.
99), a species whose range 
is known to extend to the S.W. coast of Ireland, in deep water, 
where several specimens were taken in 1889, from 250 fathoms 
(Giinther, Ann. and Mag., N.
H. (6), iv., 1889, p.
417)- This has 
hitherto, I believe, been the only British record.
The species is 
described by Dr. Giinther as being common in the Mediterranean, 
and at Madeira, where Lowe found it in 250-400 fathoms; and it 
is not uncommon on the coast of Norway, in depths of from 
100-300 fathoms.
The specimen was 4*8 inches in length, and of a beautiful 
golden-red colour, with a somewhat mottled appearance, due to 
a slight want of uniformity in the tint.
In conclusion, it affords me much pleasure to acknowledge 
my indebtedness to Mr. Boulenger.
— W.E.C.
March 1893.
r 
82 
MELANISM AND MELANOCHROISM.
Melanism and Melanochroism.
By J.
W; Tutt, F.E.S.
Mr. Tutt has done wisely in bringing together, in book form, the 
series of papers on this subject which has appeared in the pages of 
the 'Entomologists' Record.' They form a very valuable contribution 
to the literature which has during the last few years appeared on 
Melanism in lepidoptera.
Mr. Tutt's theory is, that nearly all 
melanism has its origin in moisture, or, as he terms it, ' humidity,' 
combined with natural selection; and he undoubtedly brings together 
many telling facts in support of this view.
Some of his arguments 
are no doubt open to question, and indeed, as one reads through the 
book, objections to many of the statements constantly occur to one's 
mind.
The fact is that probably no theory will ever be found to 
account for all cases of melanism, but that some or all of the various 
theories combined, in greater or less degree under diverse conditions 
in different localities ; or in other words, that one or more theories 
together may give a satisfactory and correct solution in one part of 
our islands, and other theories equally so elsewhere ; the result in 
all cases, no doubt, being 'natural selection,' in the direction of 
'protection,' and consequent 'survival of the fittest.' Mr. Tutt 
deserves the thanks of all lepidopterists for the clear and exhaustive 
way he has argued the probabilities in favour of his theory, and the 
book ought certainly to be read and studied by every one interested 
in this important, and now fascinating subject.
G. T.
P. 
NOTES AND NEWS.
The thick double part (Nos. 199-200) of the Botanical Series of the Journal of 
the Linnean Society, issued last April, is exclusively devoted to papers by two 
well-known Yorkshire botanists, Mr. William West, F.L.S., and Mr. Thomas 
Hick, B.A.
, B.Sc. The latter gentleman's share amounts to but seven lines, in 
which Xenophyton is proposed as a substitution for a name previously given to 
a new Fossil Plant described by him in a former paper.
The paper by Mr. West, to which therelore the part is devoted, and which 
runs to 114 pages, illustrated by seven plates of figures beautifully drawn by his 
son, Mr. G.
S. West, forms another ot that most indefatigable and energetic 
botanist's contributions to our knowledge of the distribution of Freshwater Alga?, 
this paper dealing with those of the West of Ireland, collected in July 1S90, and 
in August of the year following.
The total number amounts to 617 specie 
6 sub-species, 97 varieties and yj forms, of which 34, 7, 47 and 28 respectively 
are described for the first time as new to science.
One of the new species — Cosmarium mtttallii — is named after Mr. West's 
botanical companion in these and many other tours, Mr. William Nuttall, of 
Bradford ; and another — Euastrum tumerii—dAtei another able and well-known 
student of these lowly plants, Mr. W.
Barwell Turner Leeds.
Naturalist, 
83 
NORTHUMBERLAND BIRD-NOTES.
F. B.
WHITLOCK, 
Bees ton, Notts.
Want of time has prevented me from thanking Mr. G.
Bolam for 
the copy of the note relating to the interbreeding of the Kestrel 
and Merlin in 1886, as recorded in the Proceedings of the Berwick- 
shire Naturalists' Club.
A few further words will, I think, finally 
clear the matter up.
The original note I see refers the locality 
where the circumstance took place to ' Barra Crags,' a spot about 
a mile from the nest I visited.
Now, in the previous year, 1885.
a pair of Merlins (Falco'cesalon) bred at Barra Crags, and the young 
birds and parents were all captured as detailed in Mr. Thompson's 
note.
Fortunately these birds were preserved, and I have seen them 
in a case at a gamekeeper's house in Harbottle.
The female shows 
hardly a trace of the slate colour exhibited by an older bird, and 
might be mistaken for a Kestrel by an inexperienced observer.
Mr. Thompson at the time I knew him was suffering from a weakness 
which no doubt clouded his memory, and he appears to have mixed 
up the circumstances relating to this pair of Merlins with those 
relating to the pair which bred at Linnshiels Loch, of which 
I recently gave the history in the ' Naturalist.' His note, too, men- 
m 
tioning the Dotterel (Endromias morinellus\ no doubt refers to the 
Ringed Plover {/Egialitis hiaticitla).
Before I left Harbottle in 
1886, I furnished him with a list of birds I had observed during my 
visit.
Amongst others I mentioned the Ringed Plover or Ringed 
Dotterel, but he appears to have added the word 'common' on his 
own responsibility, as I only met with two pairs.
I was very pleased to see a very nice increase in the number of 
breeding birds of this species on my recent visit.
I think there 
must be quite twelve pairs now.
I noticed four nests containing 
e ggs.
Amongst other birds, I also noticed rather more Redshanks 
(Tetanus calidris) in the neighbourhood than in 1886.
I picked one 
up dead, which a hawk had struck.
The skin of the neck was badly 
torn.
A keeper remarked to me that, let a new pair of birds, 
moderately conspicuous in plumage or habit, take up their residence 
in a neighbourhood where they were previously unknown, one of 
them was sure to be killed by a hawk.
I also picked up a domestic 
pigeon, wounded in the neck in a similar manner.
Readers of the ' Naturalist ' will remember an article on ' The 
Birds of Upper Coquetdale,' which appeared, I think, in 1885, from 
the pen of Mr. John Cordeaux.
In some subsequent articles \n the 
Waxh 2 
84 WHITLOCK: NORTHUMBERLAND BIRD-NOTES.
4 Field/ he mentions the Dunlin (Tringa alpina) as a bird likely to 
be found breeding in or near the Cheviots.
I am pleased to say 
I met with three pairs and found two unfinished nests, from one of 
which the female ran with uplifted wings.
Another bird I was rather 
surprised to meet with was a single specimen of the Oystercatcher 
{Hcematopus ostralegns), which rose from a large bank of shingle.
It was doubtless an accidental visitor from the coast.
Common 
Sandpipers (Tringoides hypoleucos) were very numerous and breeding 
early.
I noticed that in laying they often took an interval of rest 
before the full clutch was completed.
It is, I believe, generally 
supposed an egg is laid every twenty-four hours.
Amongst the smaller birds the Wood Warbler (Phyl/oscopus 
sibilatrix)^ Coal Tit (Parus ater), and Redstart (Ruticilla phanicurus) 
were fairly common.
On the other hand, the Pied Wagtail {Motacilla 
lugnbris) and Grey Wagtail (Af. melanope) were much less numerous 
than in 1886; the latter, I am sorry to say, was quite scarce.
The 
Dipper (Cincliis aqtiaticus)^ too, had decreased in numbers, no doubt 
owing to the severity of recent winters.
The Pied Flycatcher 
(Muscicapa atricapilla) is still represented by a single pair.
It is 
remarkable that they do not increase, as they are rarely molested.
I saw a single individual of Ray's Wagtail {Motacilla rail) at 
Alwinton, and close at hand I nearly trod on a Corn Crake (Crex 
pratensis).
The latter species was very plentiful, and as the grass 
was short I had frequent opportunities of observing their habits.
On one occasion I witnessed a desperate fight between two rival 
males, the female standing near, calmly looking on.
I was pleased to see young Ravens (Corpus corax) in a nest, 
nearly able to fly.
I have no doubt they would get off a few days 
later.
Ornithologists will learn with pleasure that a large landowner 
in the neighbourhood has forbidden the destruction of Kestrels, and 
as the district abounds with nesting-sites this species should soon 
become common.
A keeper related a curious anecdote respecting a pair of Sparrow 
Hawks (Accipiter nisus) which he had found nesting in a wood.
He 
first shot at the female, but she escaped with a broken leg and flew 
away, as he thought, to die.
In the meantime the male procured 
a fresh mate, but she was soon shot, and he himself shared a similar 
fate the same day.
A day or two later the keeper passed the tree 
containing the nest, and to his great surprise off flew the wounded 
female.
He was too astonished to shoot, so that, I am glad to say, 
she finally escaped, as she did not afterwards return to her eggs.
Walking on the moors near Harbottle one evening, I came across 
a family of four newly-hatched Golden Plovers {Charadrius plitvialis).
Naturalist, 
WHITLOCK : BIRD-NOTES FROM NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
85 
On examining one of them, I noticed it possessed an abnormal 
growth on the tarsus, in the shape of a long hind toe.
Though the 
young birds were squatting only a few inches from the nest, I saw 
no traces of any egg shells.
February 2nd, 1 893.
BIRD-NOTES FROM NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, 1892-3.
F. B.
WHITLOCK, 
Beeston, Notts.
The past year (1892) has not been remarkable for any great 
abundance of any species of bird nor for the occurrence of many 
rarities.
The most noteworthy visitors, perhaps, were a pair of 
Honey Buzzards (Pernis apivorus), one of which was shot at the end 
of July at Hucknall Torkard.
It was a very clean and brightly 
coloured specimen, and had no doubt been blown over from the 
Continent by the strong east winds which prevailed during the latter 
part of the month.
Its companion escaped.
It will be observed 
that Mr. Cordeaux records a specimen in the Humber district about 
the same time.
On the 29th October, House Martins (Chelidon urbicd) were 
seen lingering in the suburbs of Nottingham.
On the 3rd of the 
following month a Spotted Crake (Porzana maruetta) was shot 
Beeston.
They seldom linger much later with us.
On the 5th two 
now Buntings (Plectrophanes nivalis) were brought to my house.
They had been shot on the Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire portions 
of the Trent, about Barton Ferry.
I saw others a week later.
The 
weather at the time was very mild, with light winds.
At one of our 
local taxidermists' shop I saw a beautiful variety of the Woodcock 
{Scolopax rusticola).
The primaries and tail were beautifully barred 
with silvery grey.
It was an exceptionally fine bird in every respect.
On 23rd or 24th December a beautiful immature specimen of the 
Little Gull {Larus minutus) was shot on the Trent in the borough of 
Nottingham.
It is now in my possession.
During the frost the following ducks were noted on the Trent : — 
Mallard (Anas boschas), Wigeon (Mareca penelope), Teal (Quergue- 
dula crecca\ Scaup (Fuligula marila\ Tufted Duck (P.
crista ta\ 
Golden-eye {Clangula glaucion), and Pochard (Fuligula ferina).
On 1 nh January of the present year a Green Sandpiper (Helodromas 
iropus) was shot in Nottingham Meadows.
On 29th 1 saw a 
flock of ten Bullfinches (Pyrrhula eurepcca), and a few Bramblings 
Fringitla montifringiUa\ an unusual sight here.
February 2nd, 1 893.
March i8q-?.
86 
I 
NOTES AND NEJi'S.
The Council of the Geological Society has awarded to Mr. J.
G. Goodchild, 
F.G.S., the balance for this year of the Wollaston Donation Fund, established 
* to promote researches concerning the mineral structure of the earth.' 
In various Parts of the Transactions of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh for 
the past few years are some valuable and interesting papers by Mr. Philip Sewell, 
of Whitby.
One on i The Colouring Matters of Leaves and Flowers ' appeared 
in 1888 in Part 2 of Vol. 17 ; and in 1889 an elaborate account of the botanical 
collection made on the coasts of Lapland and of the Yugor Straits (N.W. Siberia), 
during the voyage of the   Labrador ' in 1888, appeared in Part 8 of the same 
volume.
The latter paper includes a summarised list of all the species known 
from the Islands of Novaya Zemlya and Waigatz, and from the North Coast of 
Western Siberia.
One of the species of Carex collected by Mr. Sewell at Vardce is described 
by Messrs.
C. B.
Clarke and Arthur Bennett as new, with the very suitable name 
of Carex sewellii.
A figure of the plant is given as a plate.
The 19th volume of the Edinburgh Botanical Society's Transactions, published 
in 1891, contains a trio of papers by Mr. Philip Sewell of Whitby.
The first 
deals with the ' Use of Sphagnum Moss in the Open-Air Gardening in the 
Riviera,' more especially as adopted in Mr. Hanbury's garden at La Mortola.
The second paper consists of ' Observations upon the Germination and Growth of 
Species of Salvia in the Garden of Thomas Hanbury, Esq., F.L.S., at La Mortola, 
Ventimiglia, Italy,' the notes made during a period of five months during the 
winter of 1889-90.
The last is entitled   Observations regarding the Flora of the 
Alpes Maritimes,' and deals with the subject from a climatological point of view.
Yorkshire is fortunate in being able to claim so competent and able an observer 
among her sons.
Messrs.
Dulau & Co. have lately (1892) issued the ' Annals of British Geology, 
1891,' edited by Mr. J.
F. Blake, M.A., F.G.S., President of the Geologists' 
Association.
Geologists will hail with pleasure this second volume, and it is to 
be trusted that its author may continue to produce a similar volume for many 
years to come, as the usefulness of such volumes, both to the working student, 
amateur or professional, can scarcely be exaggerated.
As the author states, 
several improvements and alterations have been made on the first volume, and he 
further states in his preface that ' the quality of the support which this publication 
has as yet received is more gratifying than the quantity ....
and the 
series can only be continued beyond a third volume, if it be made at least self- 
supporting.' We ardently hope the latter consummation will be at least fulfilled 
if not surpassed.
The reports of papers, read and published, are full and in some 
cases almost exhaustive, and will serve admirably to indicate to all workers what 
has been done in any particular branch, and where to find it.
The work 1 
divided under seven heads, viz.
:— General Geology, pp.
1-53; Stratigraphical 
Geology, 53-173 ; Paleontology, I73" 2 43 (again subdivided into various classes) ; 
Mineralogy, 243-255; Petrology, 255-313; Economics, 314-330 ; Maps and 
Sections, 330-336, with a final chapter on Foreign Geology and Supplement.-.
Space will not allow us to particularise many of the various subjects of interest 
recorded, and we must confine ourselves to Yorkshire Records.
In these, we 
find no less than 40 papers on Yorkshire Geology, more or less fully recorded, 
including the works of the following authors, amongst others : — Prof.
Williamson, 
F.R.S., Messrs.
J. AY.
Davis, F.G.S.
(several), J.
G. Goodchild, and others (on 
the Geology of Mallerstang and district), R.
H. Tiddeman, G.
W. Lamplugh.
Rev. E.
M. Cole, B.
Holgate, E.
Jones (Elbolton Cave), H.
Speight, J.
F. Blakt 
G. R.
Vine, W.
Cash, J.
Spencer, Thos.
Tate, A.
Iiarker, C.
Brownridge, and 
others, nine of them being papers published in 'The Naturalist.' The work i 
also illustrated by seven plates and maps.
We regret to notice one mistake— in 
.he Index — where 'The Naturalist 7 appears as the organ of the Yorkshire Gcolog.
and Poly tech.
Soc, instead of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.
We heartily 
commend the book to all students of Geology.
_^___ 
Naturalist, 
87 
ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM NORTH 
NOTTS FOR 1891-92.
LEONARD BUTTRESS, 
Grove Rectory , Retford.
Turdus pilaris.
Fieldfare.
In 1892 the last flock was seen 
on May 28th, and the first on October 15th.
Wind E.
Daulias luscinia.
Nightingale.
First heard singing April 
25th, 1892.
Wind N.W.
Phylloscopus sibilatrix.
Wood Wren.
First seen on Gringley 
Common, on April 15th, 1892.
On the 29th, Mr. Cordeaux 
saw several in the forest beyond Hard wick.
May 28th, four 
or five in full song in the forest near Clumber.
From May 30th 
to September 27th, Wood Wrens might be seen every day in 
the park plantations (Grove).
Locustella naevia.
Grasshopper Warbler.
May 2nd, 1892.
E. strong.
One, singing, near Grove Moor.
On July 7th, 
I saw a young Grasshopper Warbler, just able to fly.
Parus ater.
Coal Titmouse.
April 19th, 1892.
Building, 
in a small hole, in an ash tree in Castle Hill Wood.
Sitta caesia.
Nuthatch.
November 27th, 1892.
One in Grove 
Park plantation.
Motacilla alba.
White Wagtail.
April 16th, 1892.
I saw two, 
on the river at Eaton, with several M.
/ugubris.
Sept.
24th.
Mr. Cordeaux this morning saw a pair of immature White 
Wagtails on the roof of an outhouse in his garden at Eaton.
Lanius excubitor var.
major.
Great Grey Shrike.
A male 
of the variety formerly known as Pallas's Grey Shrike, L.
?najor y 
was shot by a keeper at Wheatley, on Nov. 27th, 1891.
Its 
stomach contained the remains of a large beetle and shrew mouse.
Coccothraustes vulgaris.
Hawfinch.
This species is exceed- 
ingly common in the woods and plantations here throughou 
the year.
Chrysomitris spinus.
Siskin.
May 28th, 1892.
S. To-day, 
while driving with Mr. Cordeaux in Clumber Park, near the 
Apley Head Gate, we came upon a small flock of Siskins, 
feeding in the tops of some larch trees.
Acanthis rufescens.
Lesser Redpole.
January nth, 1892.
Snow.
One, in a flock of finches at the moat (Grove) ; and 
about this date Mr. Cordeaux saw one at Retford.
On May 31st 
the nest of a Lesser Redpole, with four eggs, was taken in the 
grounds of the Grammar School, Retford.
March 1893.
88 BUTTRESS : ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM NORTH NOTTS.
Acanthis flavirostris.
Twite.
March 24th, 1892.
One, near 
Retford.
Plectrophanes nivalis.
Snow Bunting.
A male was obtained 
near Retford, on February 12th, 1891.
Garrulus glandarius.
Jay. A flock of twelve or more in 
Castle Hill Wood, on April 16th, 1892.
Alauda arborea.
Wood-lark.
Seen, and heard singing on 
Gringley Common, May 8th, 1892.
Caprimulgus europseus.
Nightjar.
A female shot near 
Headon, October 16th, 1891.
July nth, 1892, Mr. Cordeaux 
heard many in the forest, near Osberton.
lynx torquilla.
Wryneck.
May 6th, 1892.
N.E. On the 
edge of the forest, near Ollerton.
Alcedo ispida.
Kingfisher.
November 2nd, 1892.
One, in 
a garden, at Retford.
Buteo vulgaris.
Common Buzzard.
One, passing N.
at 
Grove on January 6th, 1892.
Falco peregrinus.
Peregrine.
In the earlier part of June 1891, 
a female was obtained at Laxton, having struck at a wooden 
decoy pigeon.
Falco aesalon.
Merlin.
An adult male was seen by the 
keeper, near Castle Hill Wood, about July 12th, 1891.
Another 
male was seen by Mr. Cordeaux at Babworth, about Feb. 1st, 1892.
Querquedula crecca.
Teal.
Two couple on the river at Eaton.
April 2nd, 1892.
A male, shot at Mattersey, October 27th.
Fuligula cristata.
Tufted Duck.
August 24th, 189 1.
Old 
birds with young, on Clumber Lake.
On April 26th, 1892, 
a pair on the river at Eaton.
May 6th.
N.E. About twenty 
pairs on the lake at Clumber (Nat., 1892, p.
186).
May 21st.
W. A pair, at Eaton.
May 28th.
S. About twelve pairs, 
just below the lake, on the river at Clumber.
June 27th.
About 
forty males counted, at one place, on Clumber Lake.
Mergus serrator.
Red-breasted Merganser.
Feb. ntl 
1 89 1.
A female, shot near Retford.
Columba cenas.
Stock Dove.
A great many pairs breeding 
in hollow oaks, in Grove Park, as usual.
Turtur communis.
Turtle Dove.
About May 25th, 1892.
Mr. Cordeaux heard one at Eaton.
June 17th, a pair in the 
Grove Park plantation.
On June i8th, another pair was seen 
at Lady Wood, near Grove.
July 7th, Turtle Doves nesting 
in Eaton Wood (Cordeaux).
Natural 
BUTTRESS : ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM NORTH NOTTS.
89 
Porzana bailloni.
Baillon's Crake.
On February 13th, 1891, 
the bird-stuffer at Retford showed me a small Crake, which has 
since turned out to be this species.
It had been obtained at 
Bolam, near Retford, a few days before, and appears to be the 
first specimen recorded for the county.
Rallus aquaticus.
Water Rail About May 21st, 1892, 
Mr. Cordeaux heard the note of a Water Rail in a thicket near 
the river at Eaton.
Fulica atra.
Coot.
Pair swimming with young on the river 
below Clumber Lake, on June 27th, 1892.
Charadrius pluvialis.
Golden Plover.
Several black-breasted 
specimens shot in the Idle valley during the autumn of 1891.
April 1 6th, 1892.
Flock of about thirty near Eaton.
October 
22nd.
Forty or fifty with Lapwings at Eaton, very noisy.
Phalaropus fulicarius.
Grey Phalarope.
Oct. 20th, 1891.
One,   in nearly completed winter plumage,' shot on the Trent, 
at Holme, near Newark.
Scolopax rusticula.
Woodcock.
April 16th, 1892.
About 
this date the keepers saw several in the woods and plantations : 
and some evidently bred.
April 22nd, one in Spring Wood, 
Grove.
Gallinago ccelestis.
Common Snipe.
On March 16th, 1892, 
Mr. Cordeaux wrote that there were Snipe, in pairs, in the 
meadows, near the river at Eaton.
On April 2nd there were 
several in the same place ' drumming/ and also on the 16th.
Gallinago gallinula.
Jack Snipe.
1891.
Abundant in a 
drain near Grove throughout January.
On the 13th six were 
shot there.
October 22nd, 1892, one, on the river near 
Eaton.
Tringa canutus.
Knot.
One, in immature plumage, shot at 
Newark-on-Trent, on Jan. 20th, 1891.
Calidris arenaria.
Sanderling.
Two or three were seen every 
morning from July 20th.
1891, until August 19th, at a pool near 
Gringley Wood.
On one occasion only was one seen in the 
evening.
Machetes pugnax.
Ruff.
On October 14th, 1891, Mr. Cor- 
deaux saw about a dozen — ruff and reeve — flying to and fro, 
over a partly flooded meadow near Eaton.
Totanus hypoleucus.
Common Sandpiper.
April 30th, 1892.
N. One, at a stream between Sturton and Hole.
July 10th.
One. flying about Clumber Lake.
March 189 
Wood 
90 BUTTRESS : ORNITHOLOGICAL NOTES FROM NORTH NOTTS.
Totanus ochropus.
Green Sandpiper.
On Sept.
26th, 1891, 
an immature female was shot at a pond, near Grove.
Oct. 18th, 
1892.
N.E. One, near Retford.
Totanus calidris.
Redshank.
On March 16th, 1892, 
Mr. Cordeaux wrote that there were three pairs in a meadow by 
the river at Eaton, very noisy; and on April 2nd we counted 
about twelve pairs in the same place.
By May 21st, it was 
evident by the flight and call-notes of the birds, that there were 
young about.
June 21st.
I heard some calling this evening 
by the river.
Totanus canescens.
Greenshank.
On the evening of June 
30th, 189 1, one rose from a pond near Gringley 
flew down to the moat at Grove.
Numenius arquata.
Curlew.
August 21st, 1891.
Five 
flying over at Grove.
September 3rd.
Six more passing over 
S.W. August 1st, 1892.
At 5 a.m. a flock of fourteen passed 
over at Grove.
About September 8th, Mr. Cordeaux saw ten 
passing at Eaton, and on September 9th five passed S.
at 
Grove.
Hydrochelidon nigra.
Black Tern.
August 27th, 1891.
Two settled at a pond here this afternoon.
Larus marinus.
Great Black-backed Gull.
September 
10th, 1 89 1, sixteen passing here, seven in immature plumage.
January 24th, 1892, fourteen passed over near Grove Moor, 
amongst them several immature birds.
Rissa tridactyla.
Kittiwake.
July 12th, 1891, one flying 
over near Gringley Wood.
December 24th, one on the river 
at Eaton.
Mergulus alle.
Little Auk. One was shot on the Forest.
a few miles from Retford, on January 12th, 189 1 (Zoologist.
1891, p.
194).
Podiceps cristatus.
Great Crested Grebe.
On September 
rd, 1892, an immature specimen, with striped cheeks and 
neck, was obtained near Babworth.
Puffinus anglorum.
Manx Shearwater.
In the first week 
in September, 1891, one was caught alive by a collie dog, 
at Treswell (Zoo!., 1891, p.
428).
On September 10th, 1892, 
another was caught alive, at Belmoor, near Sutton, and brought 
in a basket to Retford, w r here it was killed and preserved.
It 
seemed very lively, biting when a hand was brought near it.
Procellaria pelagica.
Storm-petrel.
November icth, 1892.
About this date one was obtained near Worksop, where it was 
preserved.
Naturalist, 
9 1 
THE PLANTS OF 
LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD, LANCASHIRE 
LISTER PETTY, 
Ulverston.
I he part of Lancashire in which the accompanying list was made 
is the triangular portion which runs up between Westmorland and 
Yorkshire ; between Kirkby Lonsdale and Ingleton, and whose base 
is the Lune.
The boundaries are, of course, those of the above 
counties until Greta Bridge is reached, when my line follows the 
river.
Within this area, with elevations of 150 ft.
to 2,000 ft., 
almost every variety of situation — that is, taking into consideration 
the surface geology — may be found, the highest points being the 
County Stone 011 Leek Fell, 2,000 ft., and Gragreth Fell, 
2 >°57 feet.
The only stream of importance is' Leek Beck, 
which, rising suddenly in Ease Gill, runs almost straight to the 
Lune ; past Leek Mill, Cowan Bridge, and Burrow (an old Roman 
station), to Burrow Mill.
Anyone seeing it from the bridge at 
Burrow would have an idea that the local proverb, 'As rough as 
Leek Beck,' was an attempt by our forefathers to malign the stream.
It is true, nevertheless.
Thousands of tons of stones have been 
carried down by the (at Burrow Bridge) quiet-looking stream.
Large quantities have been used for building purposes, Leek 
Church, Vicarage, Schools, and many houses.
Immense quantities 
still remain, intermixed with uprooted trees and shrubs at the sides 
of the Beck, and occasionally form long islands.
From whence do 
all these stones come ?
Follow the Beck from Long Gill to Leek, 
and the reserve supply will be seen ; besides this will be seen, on 
the fell i pot-holes ' from small to deep, fantastic devices on the 
limestone, and a perfectly dry, stony gill.
Across the centre portion 
°f the district runs the old Roman road (10th Iter of Antoninus), 
scarcely visible in many places shown on the ordnance map of 1850, 
but unmistakable in others.
As usual, the line is perfectly straight, 
though now represented by a shady lane which is not* This 
lane is called in my list the   Roman road/ which, so far as I am at 
present concerned, commences near Collin-Holme, and runs out at 
Wandlc Barn, on the Westmorland boundary.
The railway station 
of Kirkby Lonsdale is in Lancashire, not more than a mile and 
The best account I know of the Roman road is in Trans.
Hist.
Soc. Lanes, 
and Ches., vol.
i., 1849, pp.
68-76, by J.
Just, who mentions the variation of the 
' -^ent lane from the line of the original road.
March iS 
92 PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
a half from the town and half a mile from the county boundary.
Only about half of the district above sketched has been worked 
over.
Treading in the footsteps of no predecessor Avho has printed 
his list, the aim has been to make as ftw mistakes as possible.
My thanks are due to Mr. J.
Cosmo Melvill for confirmations in 
naming and many suggestions ; and to Miss Maudsley for specimens.
Anemone nemorosa L.
Below High Bank, Leek.
On 
Roman road.
Ranunculus hederaceus L.
Side of stream near High Bank.
Stream on low slope of Leek Fell j and other localities.
Ranunculus Flammula L.
Side of Leek Beck.
Side of 
stream on Roman road.
Ranunculus acris L.
Road-sides.
Roman road.
Fields 
about Leek.
Ranunculus repens L.
Banks of Leek Beck and road-sides.
Ranunculus Ficaria L.
Road-sides ; Leek, Cowan Bridge, 
Overtown.
Caltha palustris L.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Side of stream on 
Roman road.
Nasturtium officinale R.Br. Side of Leek Beck.
Cant 
Beck ; and in many of the streams in the district.
Barbarea vulgaris R.Br. Road-side, near High Lodge, Leek.
Arabis sagittata DC.
Ease Gill.
Cardamine pratensis L.
Banks of Leek Beck.
Fields about 
the Green.
Cardamine hirsuta L.
Road-sides and wall-tops, Leek.
Roman road.
Erophila vulgaris DC.
Amongst stones on Leek Fell (1,200 ft.).
Cochlearia alpina Wats.
Side of Leek Beck above Cowan 
Bridge.
Sisymbrium officinale Scop.
Road-side near Burrow.
Sisymbrium Alliaria Scop.
Road-side near Leek Villa.
Brassica Sinapis Visiani.
Road-sides and fields, Leek, Cowan 
Bridge, Overtown, Burrow.
Capsella Bursa-pastoris Moen.
Road- and field-sides about 
Leek.
Viola canina L.
Hedge-banks near Hipping Hall.
Viola sylvatica Fr. Banks of Leek Beck, in the copses.
Viola tricolor L.
Road-side, Overtown to Burrow.
Near 
Yenholmes Hall.
Naturalist.
PE1TY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
93 
Polygala vulgaris L.
Hedge-bank near High Bank; below 
Anneside (low slope of Leek Fell).
Polygala serpyllacea Weihe, depressa Wend.
High up on Leek 
Fell, beyond the highest farm.
Lychnis alba Mill.
Specimen forwarded to me by Miss Maudsley, 
of Cowan Bridge — near the Green.
Lychnis diurna Sib. Banks of Leek Beck.
Roman road and 
field-sides.
Lychnis Flos-cuculi L.
Sides of Leek Beck and other streams.
Roman road.
On the fell, near Anneside.
Cerastium glomeratum ThuilL Side of Leek Beck, amongst 
the undergrowth.
Cerastium trivale Link.
Side of Leek Beck.
Stellaria media Cyr. On Roman road and other road-sides.
Stellaria graminea L.
Road-side near Leek.
Stellaria uliginosa Murr.
Side of a stream on Leek Fell, 
900 feet, and other boggy stream-sides.
Arenaria serpyllifolia L.
Road-side, Leek to Cowan Bridge.
Sagina procumbens L.
Road-sides and field-roads about 
Cowan Bridge and Leek.
Spergula arvensis L.
Road-side near Kirkby Lonsdale 
Station.
Montia fontana L.
Stream-sides on Leek Fell and Graygarth 
Fell.
Hypericum perforatum L.
Banks of Leek Beck and road- 
sides.
Hypericum quadrangulum L.
Side of Leek Beck near 
Leek Mill.
Road-side ditch top, Cowan Bridge to Kirkby 
Lonsdale Station.
Hypericum humifusum L.
Hedge-bank near Hipping Hall, 
and similar localities.
Hypericum pulchrum L.
Road-side, Cowan Bridge to Leek.
Malva moschata L.
Side of Leek Beck.
Linum usitatissimum L.
One plant on road-side between Low 
Lodge and Hipping Hall.
Geranium phaeum L.
Road-side near Burrow, pointed out to 
me by Miss Maudsley.
Geranium pratense L.
Road-sides, fields, and on railway 
embankments from Hipping Hall to Yorkshire boundary.
Geranium molle L.
Road-sides near Leek, and other road-sides, 
Lancashire 
March 1893.
94 PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
Geranium dissectum L.
Road-side, Leek to Cowan Bridge.
Road-side, near Kirkby Lonsdale Station.
Geranium lucidum L.
On the 'skew* bridge over the 
railway near Cowan Bridge.
Walls about Hipping Hall.
Geranium Robertianum L.
Walls and road-sides, Leek ; 
Cowan Bridge ; Overtown ; Burrow.
Oxalis Acetosella L.
Hedge-bottoms near High Bank.
Banks 
of Leek Beck.
On Roman road.
Ilex Aquifolium L.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Road-side hedges and 
in copses and woods, about Leek and Cowan Bridge.
Hedge, 
Roman road.
Acer Pseudo-plantanus L.
Cowan Bridge.
Leek.
Probably 
planted all through the district when occurring as trees.
Many 
'bushes' on banks of Leek Beck and hedges; possibly seedlings.
Ulex europaeus L.
Banks of Leek Beck.
Roman road.
On 
road-sides towards the Fell.
Cytisus scoparius Link.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Ononis repens L.
Railway embankment, between Cowan Bridge 
and Yorkshire boundary.
Trifolium pratense L.
On Roman road, and road-sides and fields 
generally.
Trifolium repens L.
Roman road.
Trifolium procumbens L.
Road-side, Leek to Cowan Bridge ; 
and road-sides generally.
Trifolium dubium Sibth.
Banks of Leek Beck and road-sides 
and hedge-banks.
No T.filifortne L.
so far as I have seen.
Lotus corniculatus L.
Banks of Leek Beck, etc.
Common 
enough.
Lotus uliginosus Schk.
(L.pilosus Beeke).
Sides of Leek Beck.
Vicia Cracca L.
Field-hedges near Leek.
Roman road.
Vicia sepium L.
Near Leek, in hedge.
Vicia sativa L.
Hedge-bottom near Cowan Bridge.
A few plants.
Lathyrus pratensis L.
Side of Leek Beck.
Roman road.
Prunus communis Huds.
Side of Leek Beck.
Roman road, 
hedges, and elsewhere.
Prunus Avium L.
Banks of Leek Beck, and trees in the woods.
Prunus Padus L.
In hedge, Yenholmes Hall to County Stone 
(towards Burton-in-Lonsdale), with P.
communis ; and in hedges 
scattered through the district.
Spiraea Ulmaria L.
Side of Leek Beck.
Hedge-bottoms, Roman 
road.
X;* rural i$t.
PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
95 
Rubus Idaeus L.
Wood near Park House.
Side of Leek Beck, 
Roman road, etc.
Rubus Chamasmorus L.
Leek Fell, 1,800 feet.
Recorded by 
Johnson in the appendix to his edition of Gerarde's Herbal!, 1633, 
p. 1630, as 'on Graygreth, a high fell on the edge of Lancashire ; ' 
possibly my locality.
(Not found, so far as I know, in North 
Lancashire.) 
Geum urbanum L.
Sides* of Leek Beck.
Roman road and 
generally.
Geum intermedium Ehrh.
Seen once only, hedge-side between 
Whoop Hall and Kirkby Lonsdale Station.
Geum rivale L.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Roman road.
Fragaria vesca L.
Banks of Leek Beck.
Roman road and 
other hedge-banks.
Potentilla Fragariastrum Ehrh.
Hedge-banks near Hipping 
Hall.
Near Overtown.
Potentilla Tormentilla Neck.
Roman road and other road-sides.
Potentilla reptans L.
Hedge-banks near Ireby, etc.
Potentilla Anserina L.
Roman road and road-sides generally.
Alchemilla vulgaris L.
Road-sides and fields about Cowan 
Bridge and Leek.
Poterium Sanguisorba L.
Banks of Leek Beck and in the 
pastures.
Rosa arvensis Huds.
Road-side, Cowan Bridge to Park House.
Side of Leek Beck.
Pyrus Aucuparia Gaert.
Roman road and in hedges and woods.
Crataegus oxyacanthoides Thuil.
Hedge between railway 
bridge and Yenholmes Hall.
monogyna jacq.
Roman road.
Side of Leek Beck, 
etc.
Seems to be the usual hedge form.
Saxifraga tridactylites L.
Walls at Leek.
Walls at Hipping Hall.
Saxifraga hypnoides L.
Ease Gill.
Chrysosplenium oppositifolium L.
Stream-side near High 
Bank and in many of the damp hedge-banks and stream-sides.
Ribes Grossularia L, Side of Leek Beck.
Hedges near 
Hipping Hall.
Ireby.
Ribes rubrum L.
Side of Leek Beck.
Hedge.
Cowan Bridge 
to Kirkby Lonsdale Station, in fruit.
Sedum telephium L.
Road-side, Leek to Cowan Bridge.
Roadside near Ireby.
**ar,:h 1897.
96 PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
Sedum album L.
Walls about Leek, no doubt introduced.
Sedum acre L.
Walls at Leek and Ireby.
Sempervivurn tectorum L.
On roof of an out-house at Collin- 
Holme.
Callitriche (stagnalis Scop.
?) Stream near Hipping Hall.
Epilobium hirsutum L.
Road-side ditch on Roman road.
Epilobium montanum L.
Roadside near Leek.
Circsea lutetiana L.
Copse, side of Leek Beck.
Road-sides, 
frequent.
Sanicula europaea L.
Amongst the undergrowth, side of Leek 
Beck.
Under the trees near Anneside on Leek Fell.
Ease 
Gill.
Apium nodiflorum Reichb.
Stream, side of Roman road.
CEgopodium Podagraria L.
Side of Leek Beck above Cowan 
Bridge.
Conopodium denudatum Koch.
Banks of Leek Beck, and 
road-sides and fields.
Myrrhis Odorata Scop.
Road-side near Leek Church.
Side of 
Leek Beck, near Leek.
Overtown.
Road-side at Ireby, 
plentiful.
Anthriscus sylvestris Hoftm.
Side of Leek Beck.
Heracleum Sphondylium L.
Sides of Leek Beck and in the 
fields.
Daucus Carota L.
Side of Roman road.
Hedera Helix L.
On Roman road, and on trees, hedges, and 
walls.
Sambucus nigra L.
In hedge, Roman road.
Sides of Leek 
Beck and in hedges throughout the district.
Viburnum Opulus L.
Hedges on Roman road.
Sides of Leek 
Beck.
Hedge, road-side to Kirkby Lonsdale Station, etc.
Lonicera Periclymenum L.
Hedges, Roman road and about 
Leek.
Hedge near High Bank, the highest point I have seen 
it here, circ.
650 feet.
Galium Cruciata Scop.
Roman road.
Galium verum L.
Hedge-bank near Todgilber.
Side of Leek 
Beck near Leek Mill.
Galium MollugO L.
Road-side, Cowan Bridge to Kirkby Lonsdale 
Station.
Road side past Yenholmes Hall.
Galium saxatile L.
Hedge-banks near Cowan Bridge, and 
generally from Roman road up to the Fells.
Naturalist, 
PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
97 
Galium palustre L.
Side of stream on Roman road and side of 
Leek Beck.
Galium Aparine L.
Near Cowan Bridge.
On Roman road and 
generally.
Asperula odorata L.
Park Wood.
Sherardia arvensis L.
Amongst stones, banks of Leek Beck 
above Cowan Bridge.
Valeriana officinalis L.
Roman road.
Scabiosa arvensis L.
Sides of Leek Beck; and meadows* 
hedge-banks and road-sides.
Bellis perennis L.
Common everywhere, to high on the fells.
Achillea Millefolium L.
On Roman road and road-sides and 
fields, common.
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum L Roman road and 
generally in fields and road-sides.
Tanacetum vulgare L.
Very abundant about the beck at high 
end of Ireby.
Tussilago Farfara L.
In the copse, side of Leek Beck ; and 
road-sides, common.
Senecio vulgaris 1 » Roman road, common.
Senecio sylvaticus L.
Side of Leek Beck and amongst the 
undergrowth.
Senecio Jacobaea L.
Roman road and other road-sides and 
fields.
Senecio aquaticus Huds.
Side of Leek Beck.
Arctium minus Schk.
On broad grassy verge of Leek Beck 
above Cowan Bridge, and on road-sides.
Cnicus lanceolatus Hoffm.
Roman road and marginal sward of 
Leek Beck.
Cnicus arvenis Hoffm.
Banks of Leek Beck.
Road-side, 
e to Jogging Bridge.
Centaurea nigra L.
Roman road, etc., common.
Lapsana communis L.
Roman road.
Road-side near Ireby.
Crepis virens L.
On walls and hedge-banks about Cowan 
Bridge and Leek.
Hieracium Pilosella L Road-sides and hedge-banks about 
Cowan Bridge and Leek.
Hieracium boreale Fr. Road-side between Overtown and 
Burrow, 
Hypochaeris radicata L.
Hedge-banks and walls about Cowan 
Bridge and Burrow.
a x 
98 PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
Leontodon hispidus L.
Road-sides about Cowan Bridge and 
Leek.
Leontodon autumnalis L.
Bank of Leek Beck.
Taraxacum officinale Web, Road-sides and fields, common.
Sonchus oleraceus L.
Hedge-bank near Hipping Hall.
Campanula latifolia L.
Roman road.
Road-side near Over- 
town.
Road-side, Cowan Bridge to Westmorland boundary.
Campanula rotundifolia L.
Side of Leek Beck ; near 
Yenholmes Hall ; etc.
Vaccinium Vitis-idaea L.
With Rubus Chamcemorus on Leek 
Fell.
Vaccinium Myrtillus L.
Leek Fell and many hedge-banks.
Calluna Erica DC.
Leek Fell.
Graygreth Fell.
Erica Tetralix L.
Leek Fell.
Erica cinerea L.
Leek Fell.
Primula vulgaris.
Banks of Leek Beck ; Roman road ; near 
Burrow.
Lysimachia nemorum L.
About sides ot Leek Beck.
Fraxinus excelsior L.
Banks of Leek Beck.
In hedges and 
many isolated trees.
MyOSOtis palustris With.
Side of a back-water of Leek Beck, 
near Burrow.
Myosotis arvensis Hoffm.
Road-side near Ireby.
Grass-road 
at Low Gale.
Myosotis versicolor Reichb.
Side of Leek Beck and other 
stream-sides.
Calystegia Sepium R.Br. Hedge near Overtown 
Solanum Dulcamara L.
Side of Leek Beck.
Verbascum Thapsus L.
Fell Lane, near Leek (Miss Maudsley).
Linaria Cymbalaria Mill.
Walls at Ireby.
Linaria viscida Moench.
On railway line, from Cowan Bridge 
to Yorkshire boundary.
Plentiful in the six-foot.
Scrophularia nodosa L.
On Roman road.
Road-side near 
Hipping Hall.
Road-side between Todgilber and Ireby.
Mimulus luteus L.
Margin of a back-water of Leek Beck, 
near Burrow.
Digitalis purpurea I - Roman road and other road- and field- 
sides.
Veronica arvensis L Field-roads and wall-tops, Leek and 
Cowan Bridge.
Naturalist, 
PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD, 99 
Veronica serpyllifolia L.
Roadsides.
Cowan Bridge to Kirkby 
Lonsdale Station.
1,800 feet on Leek Fell.
Veronica officinalis L.
Bank of Leek Beck, below Cowan 
Bridge.
Veronica Chamcedrys L.
Roman road.
Banks of Leek Beck 
and road-sides.
Veronica Anagallis L.
In the stream near the Green.
In the 
stream that divides the counties (Lanes, and Yorks.) near 
Stainderber Barn.
In stream between Hipping Hall and the 
Bar (it has no name that I could find).
Veronica Beccabunga L.
Side of stream, Roman road.
Side 
of Leek Beck.
1,600 feet on Leek Fell.
Euphrasia officinalis L.
Banks of Leek Beck.
Leek Fell 
(not gracilis Fr.) and road-sides.
Bartsia Odontites Huds.
Road-side near Kirkby Lonsdale 
Station.
Pedicularis palustris L.
On Leek Fell, near Anneside.
Rhinanthus Crista-galli L.
Roman road.
Fine specimens in 
some of the hay grass — too fine to please the farmer.
Pinguicula vulgaris L.
Various localities on Leek Fell.
Mentha hirsuta L.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Grassy bank of 
Ireby Beck.
Thymus Serpyllum Fr. Banks of Leek Beck and upon the 
Fell.
Nepeta Glechoma Benth.
Banks of Leek Beck and hedge- 
banks.
Prunella vulgaris L.
Roman road and fields and road-sides.
Stachys Betonica Benth.
Roman road and other road-sides.
Stachys sylvatica L.
Copses about Cowan Bridge and Leek, as 
often outside as in them.
Galeopsis Tetrahit L.
Road-side, Overtown to Burrow.
um 
Roman road.
Teucrium Scorodonia L.
Sides of Leek Beck and in almost 
every lane.
Ajuga reptans L.
Near High Bank.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Roman road.
Plantago major L.
Road-sides and fields, Leek, Cowan Bridge, 
Overtown, Burrow, Ireby.
Plantago media L.
Roman road.
Cowan Bridge.
Plantago lanceolata L.
Road-sides, Cowan Bridge and 
generally.
Vil 1893.
IOO PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
Leek.
ium album L Road-sides and rubbish-heaps about 
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricus L.
Fell Side ; High Bank ; 
Low House ; Leek; all outside houses.
Road-side, Jogging 
Bridge to Yenholmes Hall.
Polygonum aviculare L.
Road-side, Cowan Bridge.
Polygonum Persicaria L.
Road-sides, Leek, Cowan Bridge, 
Yenholmes Hall.
Polygonum Bistorta L.
Side of lane near Leek Villa.
Bank 
of Leek Beck above Cowan Bridge.
Burrow.
Rumex Acetosa L.
Roman road and other road-sides.
Rumex Acetosella L.
Roman road, etc.
Euphorbia Helioscopia L.
Oat-field near Yenholmes Hall.
Mercurialis perennis L.
Cowan Bridge.
Leek.
Burrow.
Ulmus campestris Sm. Sides of Leek Beck.
Some fine trees 
at Leek and in Burrow Park.
Humulus Lupulus L.
On a wall at Cowan Bridge (not planted).
On a wall at Overtown end of Roman road.
Urtica dioica L.
From Roman road upwards.
Alnus glutinosa L.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Roman road and in 
hedges.
Corylus Avellana L.
Hedges.
Leek, Cowan Bridge, Roman 
road.
Quercus Robur L.
Trees in fields and hedges and woods.
Leek, Cowan Bridge, Roman road, Burrow Park, etc.
Fagus sylvatica L.
Hedges, Roman road.
Fine trees in 
Burrow Park.
Single trees occasionally.
Salix fragilis L.
As bushes, side of Leek Beck.
Salix Smithiana Willd.
Side of Leek Beck.
Salix Capraea L.
Roman road and in hedges about Leek.
Populus nigra L Amongst the 'bushes/ banks of Leek Beck, 
below Cowan Bridge.
Planted ?
Listera ovata K.Br. In plantation near the skew bridge, near 
Cowan Bridge.
Railway Embankment between Cowan Bridge 
and the Green.
Orchis mascula L.
Road-side, Roman road and in the fields,, 
frequent.
Iris Pseudacorus L.
Stream-side, Roman road.
Galanthus nivalis L.
In some of the old orchards (Miss 
Maudsley).
Naturalist, 
PKTTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
IOI 
Tamus communis L.
In hedges, Roman road.
Allium ursinum L.
Banks of Leek Beck, etc.
Scilla nutans Sm. Under the trees, bank of Leek Beck 
j 
j 
Leek Fell.
Pasture at Low Gale.
. Abundant on Leek Fell.
Juncus effusus L.
Roman road.
Side of Leek Beck.
Juncus conglomerates L.
Roman road.
Side of Leek Beck.
Near Anneside on Leek Fell.
Luzula campestris DC.
Leek Fell.
Fields about Cowan 
Bridge and Leek.
Luzula multifida Lej. Leek Fell.
Arum maculatum L.
Amongst the undergrowth, side of Leek 
Beck.
Hedge-side near Hipping Hall.
Lemna minor L.
Road-side stream between Whoop Hall and 
Westmorland boundary.
Eleocharis palustris R.Br. Leek Fell.
Eriophorum vaginatum L.
1,700 feet on Leek Fell.
Carex remota L.
Sides of Leek Beck.
Carex glauca Murr.
Side of Leek Fell near Low Gale.
900 feet 
on Leek Fell.
Anthoxanthum odoratum L.
Road-sides and fields near Leek.
Alopecurus geniculates L.
Road-side near Leek.
Alopecurus pratensis L.
Road-side, Leek to Cowan Bridge, 
and in the fields.
Phleum pratense L.
Fields about Cowan Bridge and Leek.
Agrostis vulgaris With.
Fields about Cowan Bridge and Leek.
Wall-top near Jogging Bridge.
Deschampsia caespitosa Beauv.
Roman road.
Holcus lantanus L.
Roman road and wall-tops about Leek.
Trisetum flavescens Beauv.
Banks of Leek Beck below 
Cowan Bridge.
Arrhenatherum avenaceum Beauv.
Road-side near Fell 
Side.
Road-side, Cowan Bridge to Kirkby Lonsdale Station.
Cynosurus cristatus L.
Common everywhere from Roman 
road to top of Leek Fell.
Melica uniflora Retz.
In wood on road to Park Mouse.
Dactylis glomerata L.
Everywhere common— fields and road- 
sides.
Briza media L Banks of Leek Beck.
L ell.
April TS03.
102 PETTY : THE PLANTS OF LECK AND NEIGHBOURHOOD.
Poa pratensis L.
Road-sides and fields, Leek and Cowan Bridge.
Poa trivialis L- Fields.
Leek, Cowan Bridge, etc.
Festuca elatior L.
In fields near Collon Holme.
On Leek 
Fell (near Fell Side), 1,000 feet.
Festuca pratensis ?
Side of Leek Beck.
Bromus sterilis L.
Side of wood near Park House.
Bromus mollis L.
Road-sides and fields.
Leek and Cowan 
Bridge.
Lolium perenne L Side of Leek Beck.
Common everywhere 
in the fields and road-sides.
Lolium italicum Braun.
A few plants on Roman road.
Agropyron caninum Beauv.
Amongst the 'bushes,' side of 
Leek Beck above Cowan Bridge.
Nardus stricta L.
Leek Fell.
Pteris aquilina L.
From Roman road to Leek Fell.
Lomaria Spicant Desv.
Leek Fell.
Ease Gill.
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum L.
Wall at Hipping Hall 
and on the bridge.
Asplenium viride Huds.
Ease Gill.
Asplenium Trichomanes L Walls at Hipping Hall.
Ease Gill 
Asplenium Ruta-muraria L.
Walls at Leek.
Overtown.
Burrow.
Ease Gill.
Athyrium Filix-fcemina Roth.
Roman road and side of 
Leek Beck.
Athyrium Filix-fcemina var.
Rhceticum.
Roman road.
Scolopendrium vulgare Sym. Ease Gill.
Cystopteris fragilis Bernh.
On bridge at Hipping Hall.
On 
bridge over Eller-beck.
Ease Gill.
Lastraea Oreopteris PresL Leek Fell.
Ease Gill.
Lastrsea Filix-mas PresL Roman road.
Sides of Leek Beck, 
and hedges about Leek.
Lastraea dilatata PresL Road-side near Burrow.
Polypodium vulgare L.
Roman road.
Side of Leek Beck, etc 
Phegopteris Robertiana A.Br. Ease Gill.
Phegopteris polypodiodes Fee. Under the trees near Anneside 
on Leek Fell.
Equisetum arvense L Roman road and other damp places.
Chara fragilis Desv.
In a small back-water of Leek Beck belov 
Cowan Bridge.
Naturalist, 
103 
BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT 
IN THE WINTER OF 1892-1893.
( Continued from page 14.) 
JOHX CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Eaton Hall, Retford* 
Anser segetum.
Bean Goose.
One was shot on Dec. 3rd 
by Stubbs, the wild-fowler, at North Cotes, from a party of four.
This, which was a very fine example, was sent by Mr. Caton 
Haigh to Professor Newton.
Scolopax rusticula.
Woodcock.
January 4th, 1893, a ver Y 
considerable arrival on night of 3rd, or early morning of 4th, 
with a N.E. wind.
This flight on the English coast extended, 
as far as my information goes, from Flamborough Head to the 
mouth of the Thames.
Great numbers also occurred along the 
East coast of Scotland on the same date, January 3rd and 4th, 
Wind N.N.E. These Scotch birds may not have been all 
immigrants but also emigrants, representing a local movement 
from the interior to the coast, brought about by the arctic 
weather at the commencement of the year.
This arrival of Woodcock in January is interesting, as so far 
this has been an exceptionally poor woodcock season for the 
sportsman in Great Britain.
The first flight has already been 
• recorded in 'The Naturalist/ 1893, p.
10, on October 14th and 
15th, but no second, or November flight, was observed on the 
east coast.
The January flight of cock, therefore, may be either 
the delayed c second flight ' — unless this has passed over 
unobserved — or may have consisted of frozen-out birds from 
the Continent, which, but for an exceptionally severe season 
abroad, would not have visited us.
In the winter of 1890-91 we had three distinct flights of 
Woodcock, namely in October, November, as is the rule, and 
a third flight on January 12th.
It is singular that no Woodcock 
whatever have been observed at Heligoland this winter.
Ampelis garrulus.
Waxwing*.
Early in January, and subsequent 
to the flight of Woodcock, a sprinkling of Waxwings arrived, and 
they have now been recorded in all the eastern counties, from 
Northumberland to Kent, and also in Cambridgeshire.
I have 
heard of at least ten Lincolnshire examples; one which I saw in 
Mr. Jeffrey's shop at Grimsby was an adult full-plui ed male ; 
another was found dead by a boy, on the road-side, in the parish 
of North Thoresi .
late in J bruary.
104 CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE H UMBER DISTRICT, 
Somateria mollissima.
Common Eider.
A magnificent adult 
male, in full plumage, now in Mr. Hewetson's collection, was 
picked up dead on the beach near Spurn, on January 16th, by 
the postman.
It had evidently been shot at sea and wounded 
in the head.
Mergus merganser.
Goosander.
A remarkably fine old 
male, also in most perfect plumage, and excessively fat, was 
shot near Hornsea on January 14th ; it was set up by Mr. Loten, 
of Easington.
Acanthis linaria.
Mealy Redpole.
A few were seen by 
Mr. Hewetson on Kilnsea Warren, on February 5th.
One had 
been brought to Mr. Loten in the preceding week.
One in my 
possession was shot at Out-Newton on January 16th.
On 
February 25th, Mr. Hewetson and myself observed a most 
beautiful Redpole, as regards size and colour, on Kilnsea Warren.
It was feeding on the margin of a rain-pool along with some 
very white Snow Bunting, but remained after these had flown.
At first sight I thought it was a wounded Snow Bunting, but on 
approaching within fifteen feet saw it was a Redpole.
The general 
colour was pure white, the darker portion being a few cinereous 
streaks on the back and head, the wings and tail somewhat 
darker, but all these dark markings very light and subdued, the 
underparts and rump pure white, but suffused with a delicate 
flush of rose — like an after-glow — a blood-red patch on forehead.
I watched it for some time with the eye, and also through the 
glass, and have rarely seen anything prettier amongst birds, 
more particularly when the charming little fellow was clinging 
to the sides of a dead thistle.
The chief peculiarities were its 
size and its exceeding whiteness, and the lovely pink suffusion 
on rump and breast.
It probably represented a wanderer from 
a very high latitude, and may be referred to Acanthis hornemanni 
of Holboll, the Linaria canescens of Gould.
My readers will 
find an excellent illustration of this in Plate 5, Hancock's 
' Birds of Northumberland.' 
Turdus pilaris.
Fieldfare.
February 4th, a very considerable 
immigration about Kilnsea and Easington, scattered all over the 
country and swarming in every grass field.
Mr. M.
Bailey, in 
this journal, has already noticed the great arrival at Flamborouyh.
I saw numbers of fine old full-plumaged birds near Kilnsea n 
February 25th.
Dendrocopus major.
Great Spotted Woodpecker.
Alto 
gether I have heard of four occurrences during the winter in the 
Lincolnshire marsh district, two of which I have seen.
Naturali-r, 
CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
105 
Bernicla brenta.
Brent Goose.
Numerous at the entrance 
of the Humber since Christmas.
On February 25th, I watched 
through the glass a 'gaggle' of about seventy feeding' in shallow 
water, with an ebb tide, over a small bed of shore grass (Zosftra), 
in the bay at Spurn ; these were small and dark in appearance, 
and their distance from the shore was not over one hundred 
and fifty yards.
Two-thirds of the flock had only their rumps 
above the water, the rest of the body below the surface, as they 
pulled and nibbled the grass ; the remainder swimming sentry 
till their turn came.
These geese were feeding most greedily, 
and seemed little alarmed, although we stood in full view.
All 
the time they kept up a continuous musical cry, like a pack of 
hounds.
The eagerness with which the geese fed made me 
exclaim to Mr. Hewetson, 6 They must be expecting a storm/ 
and in less than twelve hours it came from E.
and X.E., with 
heavy driving snow and rain.
Stubbs, of Tetney, shot three 
white-bellied Brent Geese from a flock of five, in January, and 
one of these was sent by Mr. Haigh to the Edinburgh Museum.
Mr. Haigh says he has never seen more than five or six of them 
together, and then always by themselves.
Fuligula ferina.
Pochard.
Stubbs shot four out of a bunch of 
five, on January 9th, at Tetney ; three of them were beautifully 
plumaged males.
Mareca penelope.
Wigeon.
Have been exceedingly plentiful 
during the winter on the Humber.
February 25th, the males 
are now in perfect plumage.
Turdus torquatus.
Ring-Ousel.
On Feb. 25th Mr. Hewetson 
and myself, when out for a walk, saw two Ring-Ousels, adult 
males, in a paddock, near the Coastguard station, at Kilnsea.
I was anxious to make a nearer acquaintance with these, as, on 
the grass, and also in flight, they showed much more white on 
the wing than I recollect having seen on any of the Ring-Ousels 
obtained in the same locality in the autumn, several skins of 
which I have now before me.
These may have been the 
T. alpestris (C.
L. Brehm) from central or southern Europe.
We borrowed a gun at a n< ^hbouring farm, but after following 
them from place to place, had to abandon the pursuit.
The 
occurrence of Ring-Ousels in February is in itself an interesting 
fact, of which there is no previous record in the district.
Sturnus vulgaris.
Starling.
On February 25th, Mr. Hewetson 
shot eight from a large flock on grass-land close to the coast, 
at Kilnsea.
They were all the so-called purple-headed race 
which comes to us on migration from the east in the autumn, and 
April 189 
Io6 NOTES LEPIDOPTERA AND FISHES.
were even more richly coloured on the head than in the very 
beautiful figure of this Starling given by Lord Lilford in his 
'Illustrations of British Birds/ No. xxii.
In these Kilnsea 
examples, the only tinge of green about the head was on the 
auriculars, the colour of the remainder being perhaps best 
expressed as a purple-lake, with the feathers of the flanks under 
the wings a deep violet, and much richer than these parts when 
compared with the examples of the green-headed race (5".
vulgaris) 
procured in the same week.
These former appear to be 
intermediate between the Common Starling and S.
menzbieri, in 
which last the ear-coverts are said to be purple.
It will be seen that the outbreak of almost arctic severity over 
Europe at the end of 1892 and commencement of 1893, correlates 
with a great rush of various species on the east coast.
First we 
have Woodcock on January 4th, followed by Waxwing, Mealy 
Redpole, and an enormous inrush of Snow Bunting, old Fieldfare, 
and Blackbirds, with a few Ring-Ousels.
At the same time, all 
wild fowl, as geese and duck, have been exceptionally numerous.
March yd, 1S93.
NO TE—LEPID OPT ERA 
Variation in Yorkshire Lepidoptera.
— At a meeting of the Entomological 
Society of London, held February 8th, 1893, Mr. G.
T. Porritt exhibited two 
varieties of Arctia fabric ipeda from York ; an olive-banded specimen of Bombyx 
quercus from Huddersfield .; and a small melanic specimen of Melanippe hastata 
from Wharncliffe Wood, Yorkshire.
NO TE— FISHES.
Herrings confined in a Pond.
— Adjacent to the estuary of the Humber, 
and not a stones throw from New Holland on the M.
S. and L.
railway, there 
exists a pond, some three acres in extent, which has been excavated to furnish 
clay for the neighbouring brickyard.
Communication is effected with the 
Humber by means of a clew, which is so contrived that water may come in 
occasionally but not go out.
The water is therefore necessarily of a brackish 
nature, but grows a coarse aquatic vegetation, which enables it to sustain animal 
life.
Among its inhabitants may be noticed Salmo trutta, Osmerus eperlanus^ 
Platessa flesus^ and Clupea harengus.
These last seem to breed here every 
season and are somewhat dwarfed, the largest not exceeding five or six ounces, 
owing probably to the limited food supply of their habitat.
They rise constantly 
for flies, and are readily taken by rod and line, the cockle proving the most 
seductive lure.
Hull anglers, keenly alive to the novelty of capturing herrings, 
cross the Humber every winter in dozens for that purpose, at which season they 
feed best.
Locally they are known as pilchards, but the back tin and other 
reliable distinguishing marks proclaim them to be the herring.
— H.
MOODY 
Foster, Hull.
Dec. 8th, 1892.
This interesting note recalls to mind Varreli's record, as quoted in the 
1 Handbook of the Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire p.
129, of Col. Meynell, of 
Varm, keeping Smelts (Osmerus eperlamts) for four years in a freshwater pond 
having no communication with the sea.
where they continued to thrive and 
propagated abundantly.
When the pond was drawn, the fishermen of the Tee 
cot dered that they had never seen a finer lot of Smelts, there being no loss of 
flavour or uality.
— YV.D.R.
Naturali 
107 
THE CRAVEN HIGHLANDS.
The | Craven [ and | North- West Yorkshire Highlands.
| Being a complete 
account | of the | History, Scenery, and Antiquities ( of that Romantic 
District.
| By j H.
Speight, | (Johnnie Gray), ] Author of ''Through 
Airedale from Goole to Malham,""etc.
| Illustrated, j London: | Elliot Stock, 
1892.
This charming book, which is got up in a very handsome green 
cloth case, on which is given a view of Catterick Force, extends to 
47° octavo pages, every line of which is of value or interest.
We 
do not remember to have seen a more perfect work of its kind.
Throughout it bears the marks of close practical acquaintance with 
every nook and corner of the very extensive tract of country which 
is included, as well as of unwearied industry and indefatigable 
research among books and documents.
There scarcely seems to be 
a fact connected with any locality in a topographic sense of which 
our author does not appear to be in some way or other cognizant, 
so that as regards matters of fact or circumstances of local interest 
the book may fairly be regarded as being what it is described on its 
title-page, ' complete/ Its literary style is such as to add considerably 
to its merit.
The book is eminently readable, with a slight sprinkling 
of anecdotal digression, but without any descent to the wordiness 
and dififuseness which so often makes a local guide-book wearisome 
to the reader.
Mr. Speight succeeds in so keeping the attention of 
his readers as to carry them with him from place to place, and in 
such a manner as to make it difficult to lay the book down before 
finishing it.
A native of the district, our author still keeps his local 
patriotism well within bounds, and sound judgment reigns supreme 
throughout.
Little is said in praise but what will be amply endorsed 
by others who have had the opportunity of forming their opinions 
from the independent and unbiassed standpoint of a casual visitor.
F«e illustrations to the book, mostly Meissenbach reproductions, 
strike us as being exceptionally clear and good, and in several 
instances (e.g. the Devil's Bridge at Kirkby Lonsdale, pp.
274-5) 
are exquisitely beautiful.
Scientifically, Mr. Speight has interspersed his work with 
references to the natural phenomena of the district, its geology and 
physical configuration, its flora, and to a certain extent its fauna also.
There are several most valuable prefixes to the book, most of which 
are purely historical in scope, but those giving the exact heights of 
mountains, roads and passes, of towns, villages and hamlets, and 
particularly the tables, absolute and comparative, of the rainfalls 
registered in 1889, 1890, and 189/, are most useful from oar point 
of view.
Amongst other subjects which receive attention we may 
note that the contents of the Giggleswick Museum, the ancient 
Afaril 1893.
IOS BOTANICAL ' WAIFS ' IN CUMBERLAND.
canoe from Giggleswick Tarn, the explanation of the mechanism of 
the Ebbing and Flowing Well, the various Caves which abound in 
this permeable limestone tract, the scientific worthies of the district, 
which include names so distinguished as Faraday and Sedgwick 
(it is by the way, news to us to learn that Faraday is dubbed ' Sir'), 
the Craven faults, a note by Mr. J.
W. Carter on the Coleoptera of 
Ingleborough Hill, Mr. Baker's notes on the plants of the same 
mountain and of Penyghent, the birds of Malham Moor, and not 
a few notes on the florulas of particular spots, all receive passing 
attention.
The only piece of adverse criticism that occurs to us is 
the author's frequent use of the title ' Professor' for individuals who 
do not hold such a post.
In these days of professors of 
sleight-of-hand, swimming, etc., it scarcely appears to us to be so 
much a title of honour that it need be applied to any one other 
than the holder of an endowed chair in one of our universities.
But 
this is a very small point, and does not detract from the merit 
of a work which we regard as a model well worthy of imitation in 
other districts.
— W.D.R.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Botanical 'Waifs' in Cumberland.
— Under this title Mr. W.
Hodgson, A.
L.S., of Workington, has reprinted his interesting paper from the 
1 Transactions of the Cumberland and Westmorland Association,' on the flora of 
the ballast-heaps, and other suchlike places in Cumberland.
To quote, with the 
limited space at disposal, is dangerous.
Species from Chili, Montevideo, Rosario, 
Brazil, California and other parts of the United States, Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, 
Corsica, etc., being represented.
Two only shall be given.
Xicotiaua tabacutn 
(tobacco), on the accumulation of ashes and rubbish at the Derwent Tin Plate 
Works, and from the same locality a plant of Lycopersicum escitlatum (tomato \ 
and g at Parton, during the summer of 1889,' several plants of tomato appeared, 
4 the fruit developed to considerable size.' There must have been a good bottom 
heat, or the plants would not have done so well in the open air.
One paragraph 
from a paper which would yield many, must suffice : * In bringing these remark- 
to a conclusion, allow me briefly to refer to a singular side issue wdiich has been 
raised in connection with the find at the Derwent Tin Plate Works in 1889.
I had made some reference to the discovery' to 'Mr. H.
Thompson, F.R.C.V.S., 
of Aspatria .
. .
and he was anxious to know the degree of heat to which 
the material would be exposed, when in use at the Tin Plate Works.' Approximately 
it was 85 to 90 .
l The question was then started as to what amount of heat 
some of these necessarily very minute seeds — those of Mentha Requiem for 
example — were calculated to sustain, without injury to their germinating power.
Mr. Thompson, who is president for the year of an association of his professional 
brethren, at their annual meeting, held in Edinburgh, made incidental reference 
to the facts communicated to him by myself.
He was asked by a gentleman 
present — Mr. Phillips .
. .
whether the seeds might not have been wind- 
blown from plants in the immediate neighbourhood of the Tin Plate Works.
The 
president's reply distinctly negatived the suggestion; whereupon Mr. Phillips 
replied that, taking into account the heat and friction described without injury to 
the germinating powers of the seeds, it was not unreasonable to suggest that the 
bacilli of anthrax might be contained in cotton cake, surviving the heat, etc.
The question thus raised remains for solution.' Possibly Mr. Hodgson may extend 
his inquiries, ami publish them in a more accessible place than the transactions of 
1 local society.— Listf.r Petty, Ulverston, February 17th, 1893.
Naturalist.
ioy 
THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE 
AND ITS SIXTH YEAR'S WORK, 
THOS.
TATE, F.G.S., 
Leeds', Honorary Secretary to the Committee* 
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee have comparatively few erratic 
blocks to report this year, nearly all the known examples having 
been previously recorded.
This being the case, they have been at 
liberty to make important advances in their method of research, and 
to devise new modes of operation.
During the year their attention has been mainly given to 
maturing a scheme for the careful and exact exploration of special 
glacial districts not hitherto investigated.
They began with the 
valley of the River Calder, including its tributaries, from its source 
to its junction with the River Aire near to Castleford.
This valley 
has been subdivided into geographical areas, each of which is now 
placed in charge of willing helpers, under the supervision of a sub- 
committee.
Exceptionally good work has already been done by 
Mr. John Burton, of Horbury, who, patiently following the excava- 
tions necessary for the new sewage works, has collected an extensive 
series of typical boulders, the identification of which promises to 
lead to some valuable results.
These the committee hope to embody 
in their next annual report.
They intend also to present a similar report on the Sedbergh, 
Oarsdale, and Dentdale district, now being investigated after the 
same fashion.
During the past year a sub-committee has been engaged upon 
the preparation of a new and enlarged Glacial Map of Yorkshire, on 
a scale of one inch to the mile; towards the cost of which map this 
committee gratefully acknowledges a grant of £i ios.
od.
from the 
Erratic Blocks Committee of the British Association.
The following erratic blocks have been recorded during the past 
year : 
Reported by Mr. J.
J. Marshall, Chemist, Market ll'eighton.
On Mr. Brough's farm, Reformatory Road, Market Weighton, 
an isolated Jurassic sandstone boulder, to x 13 x 10 inches, angular 
with rounded edges; no rocks like it near, but gravels and sands of 
^ similar character ; recently found when ploughin now removed 
t(l near the farmhouse.
April 
IIO TATE: THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
Reported by Mr. John Stears, Hull.
On England Hill farm, near Winestead, Holderness : a mountain 
limestone boulder 4-3 x 2-3 x 17 feet, sub-angular, resting on a 
gravelly bed; under 50 feet above sea-level.
Some years ago 
a larger boulder of the same colour, weighing several tons, was 
found in the same field and broken up for road-metal.
Reported by Mr. John H.
Phillips, Hon. Sec.
of the Scarborough 
Philosophical Society.
(iRoup of Erratic Boulders.
In the garden of King's Cliff Hospital, Scarborough, 58 boulders 
of all shapes and sizes from 4 feet 8 inches and 26 inches in 
circumference up to 11 feet 8 inches by 9 feet 6 inches; striations 
nearly illegible.
They include four basalts, two hard limestones, and 
52 Shap Fell granites from half a hundredweight up to two tons in 
weight.
Collected by their former owner, Mr. John Wharton, from the 
coast and highways in the immediate neighbourhood.
The estate has recently been sold and is to be converted into 
a winter garden ; but it is hoped this fine group of erratics will be 
transferred to the Scarborough Museum.
Reported by Mr. Thos.
Tate, F.G.S.
Ribblesdale.— Swanside Wood, east of Sawley Abbey, on the right 
bank of Swanside beck ; altitude 350 feet.
I.— 'Brockram,' somewhat bleached, 14x7x6 inches, rounded.
May be from the Permian conglomerate of Black Burton 
(the Leek Beck brockram), which is indistinguishable from 
that of the vale of Eden.
II.— Black limestone breccia, richly veined with calcite and 
hmonite; 12x6x6 inches; very angular.
Parent rock 
unknown.
Ingleton.
I.- Right bank of Dale Deck, a little above Phillip's • Dyke ; 
altitude 470 feet.
Helmsgill Lamprophyre, 6' x 3' 3" x 1' 7"; 
subangular.
II.— Right bank of Dale Beck, near the Mealbank limekiln ; alti- 
tude 400 feet.
Helmsgill lamprophyre, 6ft.
x 5ft.
x 3ft.
6in.
; 
angular.
Microscopic sections of these two boulders are described 
and figured in Proceedings of Yorkshire Geological and 
Polytechnic Society, vol.
xi.
p. 311, plates xiv.
xv.
Naturalist, 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY AND COLEOPTERA.
Ill 
Dewsbury.
— Gasworks, Savile Town; altitude 125 feet.
I- — Ennerdale granophyre, 12x8x6 inches ; well worn.
II.
— Buttermere granophyre, 7x5x5 inches ; rounded.
Church Street, opposite County Court ; from excavations 
for main drainage : 
HI- — Ennerdale granophyre, 16x7x4 inches; oval, very much 
worn.
Horijury Bridge.— Altitude 100 feet.
I- — Ennerdale granophyre, 7x4x4 inches ; well worn.
Wakefield.- — Thornes Lane, below suspension bridge; altitude 
76 feet.
I. — Ennerdale granophyre, 6x4x3 inches ; well rounded.
Iees Side.
— Shap granite, Armboth quartz felsite, and Carrock Fell 
gabbro have been obtained in boring operations, ranging from 
30 to 120 feet at North Ormesby and South Bank, as well as 
north of the Tees estuary, by the reporter.
Mr. Harry Midler, of West ChiselhurstTark, Eltham, Kent, has 
contributed an interesting report of a large Igneous boulder observed 
near to New Barns, Arnside, but it lies outside of the area under 
the supervision of this committee, and the particulars have been 
transferred to the North-West of England Boulder Committee for 
verification.
NOTES -ORNITHOLOG Y.
1 " h axw * n £ s near Louth.
— A flock of five waxwings {Ampclis garrulus), 
(M K W - rC feedin S in a ha wihorn hedge, in a field near Louth, was shot to-day 
an \ -3 k kj a man who was lark-shooting.
He shot two early in the morning, 
sa g °!
ns a S am tvvo or three hours later, secured the other three in ahout the 
sauie place, two of which are now in my possession.
— K.
Larder, 33, Mercer 
K °vv, Louth, March 3rd, 1893.
in P?
currence of the Bohemian Waxwing near Hull.-— In the last week 
ebruary four Bohemian Waxwings {Ampelis f>arrulus) were shot on Hessle 
^rnnion, near Hull, and are now in the hands of Mr. W.
Ward, of Cambridge 
[v reet > * or preservation.
The presence of this interesting bird, so conspicuous by 
ihp Unu ^ e uax il P s t0 its wings, is due, no doubt, to the exceptional severity of 
f e weather on the Continent.— H.
M. Foster, Hull, nth March, 1893.
NOTE COLEOPTERA 
straw w*t rostratus near Ulverston.— In March, 1892, whilst lifting some 
s   Wnic h had been laid on a flower-bed, I disturbed an individual of th 
days ft apParenlly a male ' After examinin £» il was allowed to go.
A few 
then h War .
ds > on e— probably the same— appeared in one of the greenhouses ; 
other WC - nl lnt ° ' the bott]e »' but unfortunately it was left there too long.
No 
all lik 8 ?
601 !
11011 haS COme under m y notice, although stones have been turned, and 
_ r *!: y P Iace s searched.
Probably it is as uncertain here as in other localities 
USTER p ETTYj Ulverston, March 7th, 1893 
A Pnl i8q 3 .
112 
LITHOCOLLETIS CERASICOLELLA, 
A SPECIES NEW TO THE BRITISH FAUNA, 
AT DONCASTER.
H H.
CORBETT, M.R.C.S..
Doncastcr.
I have pleasure in adding the above species to the British list.
Last autumn I collected the mines of the larva in the leaves of 
Prunus avium % and I have now bred a few of the imagines.
One 
of the latter I have sent to Mr, Barrett, who confirms my opinion 
that it is undoubtedly Lithocolktis cerasicolella Herr.-Schaff.
Appended is a description of the mine, the larva, and the imago.
The mine is elongate, and is placed between the lateral veins of 
the leaf of P.
avium, reaching from near the mid-rib towards the 
margin.
The larva is pale yellow, second segment orange yellow.
Head, 
dark brown or black.
Legs, grey.
The imago belongs to the pomifoliella group, and is very like 
Z. spinicolella, but the following points serve to distinguish it from 
that species : 
The first dorsal streak is more gradually curved, and its apex 
does not point in a line continuous with the basal line.
The third 
dorsal streak is very small, and never joined to the third costal 
streak.
The third and fourth costal streaks are united by some 
white scales above the sub-apical black spot.
NOTE— BOTANY.
is quadrifolia in North Notts.— We found this handsome plant 
abundant in several of the woods and plantations in this neighbourhood in May 
last (1892), especially in places where the underwood had been cut and cleared 
away.— Leonard Buttress, Grove Rectory, Retford, March 20th, 1893.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Badger on Towton Battle-field.— A fine female Badger (Meles taxus) was 
caught in a trap in Renshaw Wood, Towton, near Tadcaster, on Wednesday, 
March 15th.
From her appearance it is evident that family matters will shortly 
occupy her attention.
I may state the trap was not set for her, nor was she much 
hurt, being caught by the toes.— Riley Fortune, Harrogate, 20th March, iS93' 
Early Appearance of the Noctule.— On the 9th March, my fiiend the 
Rev. R.
A. Summerfiekb B.A., Vicar of North Stainley, near Ripon.
sent me 
a \ -ctule {Vcsperngo noctula), which one of his sons had shot on the wing in 
Inroad daylight, on the Sth, at that place.- -\V.\i.
Dfmson ROEBUCK, Leeds- 
March 20th, 1893.
Naturalist, 
"3 
AMERICAN WHITE -THROATED SPARROW 
IN HOLDERNESS: 
AN ADDITION TO THE YORKSHIRE AVI-FAUNA.
* * 
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Eaton ffai/, Retfoi-d.
At the commencement of this year, Mr. G.
W. Jalland, of Holderness 
House, near Hull, a practical and observant naturalist, saw amongst 
the birds he was in the habit of feeding on his lawn, one with which 
he was not acquainted, and which he suspected might be a wanderer 
from some distant part of the world.
The bird remained about the 
grounds for six weeks, and its identity not having been determined, 
was shot on February 1 3th, and sent in the flesh to Mr. P.
Loten, of 
Easington.
I am indebted to Mr. Hewetson, of Leeds, for a very 
full description and excellent and correct water-colour of the bird, 
exai 
American Bunting {Zonotrichia albicollis Bonap.), and presumably 
a mature male in winter plumage.
Subsequently, on February 25th, 
I had the opportunity of examining the bird at Mr. Loten's house, 
at Easington, and verifying my previous supposition.
The drawing 
was also sent by Mr. Hewetson to Professor Newton, who says in 
reply that he thinks there can be no doubt about the accurate 
determination as Zonotrichia albicollis.
There are two almost black stripes on the crown separated by 
a median one of pale buff or dirty white.
A broad superciliary 
stripe from the base of the mandible to the occiput, bright yellow as 
far as the middle of the eye, and then pale buff, A broad dark 
patch on side of head enclosed between dark lines, one of these 
running through the region of the eye, the other forming the rictal 
treak.
Throat a smoky, silky-white, and sharply defined against 
the bluish-grey of sides of head and breast.
This is margined 
w *th a narrow black maxillary line.
Edge of wing bright yellow, 
axillaris also yellow.
The whole of the breast and flanks are 
marked with indistinct and very fine horizontal streaks, visible only 
ln SOme lights.
Back and scapularies rufous brown, streaked with 
darker; wings extend little beyond root of tail : tail rather long, slightly 
rounded, dark olive brown ; two narrow white bands across wing 
'averts ; legs and edges of mandibles flesh colour.
Length 7 inches.
April rRn : 
H 
114 NOTES AND NEWS.
The White-throated Bunting has occurred twice before in Great 
Britain, once on the Aberdeenshire coast in 1867, and also more 
recently near Brighton.
Zonotrichia leucophrys, the White-crowned Bunting, a closely 
allied species, is known to visit South Greenland sparingly in the 
spring, where it probably breeds.
February 2&t/i, 1893.
NOTES AND NEWS.
In the December 'Journal of Botany' is a notice of Mr. W.
H. Pearson's 
reprint of Lejeunece Madagascarienses, originally published in the Christiania 
Videnskabs Selskabs Forhandlingar, 1892.
The same writer publishes a description and figure of a new British 
Hepatic in the 'Journal of Botany' for September 1892, Marsupella [Cesia] 
conferta (Limp.) Spruce, which was found on Ben Nevis by Mr. W.
West in 1880.
Recent elections to the Fellowship of the Linnean Society have included the 
name of Mr. William Whitwell, of Balham, who during his residence in York- 
shire has done good work for the botany of that county.
Among recent elections to the Fellowship of the Entomological Society of 
London we note the names of Mr. Geo.
C. Dennis, of York, and Mr. William 
Man^bridge, of Horsforth near Leeds.
Among those recently elected to the privileges of F.G.S. are Mr. W.
Gregson, 
of Baldersby, near Thirsk, and Mr. J.
W. Stather, Secretary of the Hull 
Geological Society.
In * Nature' for Jan. 5th, 1893, Prof.
W. A.
Herdman propounds the outline 
of a scheme for what will be a very useful series of handbooks (on the principle 
of the British Floras — brief, terse, diagnostic), of the British Marine Fauna.
Would that this was carried out in such branches as Entomology as well.
The following extract from 'Wild Spain, 5 by Abel Chapman and Walter J.
Buck 
(p.
249), bears on an article which Mr. John P.
Thomasson contributed to the 
'Naturalist' of Dec. 1890 : 'One circumstance deserves passing remark — the 
relatively small number of eggs laid in the south than is the case with many of the 
same species further north.
In Spain, several of the warblers lay only four eggs ; 
the Blackbird, as a rule, but three, and these much brighter coloured than at home.
5 
The new part of the Proceedings of the Yorkshire Geological and Polytechnic 
Society contains some brief notes by Mr. G.
W. Lamplugh, F.G.S., on 'The 
Flamborough Drainage Sections.' We fear that this will be the last, for the 
present, of the author's valuable contributions to the Glacial geology of Fast 
Yorkshire.
Mr. Lamplugh is now on the staff of the Geological Survey, and is 
stationed in the south of the Isle of Man.
We have pleasure in calling attention to the List of 'Plants of the District,' 
by our valued contributor, Mr. Lister Petty, of Ulverston, which occupies pages 
63-66 of Atkinson's ' Guide to Grange and Arnside.' The plants are enumerated 
under their respective natural orders, the commoner species being omitteH.
Other matter of interest to naturalists in the Guide book is a chapter for angler-.
'i he Guide itself is well illustrated, has a good map, and is calculated to be of 
value to visitors.
There is one point to which we would call the publisher' 
attention, and that is the absence of any date of public at ion.
We trust that new 
editions, bus they arc successively called for, will lie dated, and so add value to the 
book and its contents.
N jralis: 
"5 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
BIRDS, 1890.
The present instalment has been compiled and arranged by 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK.
F.L.S.
The previous instalments of the Bibliography of Birds have 
appeared as follows: — 
For 1884— in 'Naturalist/ March and April 1885, pp.
185-200, 
continued in May 1885, „ 222,-227.
1885 — ?3 September 1886, „ 260-272.
1886-— ,, May and June 1889, „ 145-175.
1887 — 19 August and Sept.
1889, ,, 249-270.
1888 — „ June and July 1890, „ 177-198.
?i 
?? 
• > 
>? 
r* 
18S9 
;' 
( April and May 1S92, „ 121-136.
( Sept.
and Oct. 1892, „ 281-291.
1 he counties and vice-counties of which cognizance is taken are 
the following, as named and numbered in the Watsonian scheme : — 
53, Lincoln S, ; 54, Lincoln N.
; 56, Notts.; 57, Derby; 58, 
Cheshire; 59, Lancashire S.
j 60, Lancashire W.
; 61, York S.E.
; 
62, York N.E.; 63, York S.W.; 64, York Mid W.; 65, York N.W.; 
66, Durham; 67, Northumberland S.
; 68, Cheviotland; 69, West- 
morland with Furness ; 70, Cumberland ; and 71, Isle of Man.
The remarks prefixed to the Bird-bibliography for 1886 (published 
in the 'Naturalist 7 for May 1889, p.
145) are equally applicable to 
the present instalment.
Anon, [not signed].
Northumb.
S., Cheviotland, Durham.
List of .
, .
Donations to the Museum [at Newcastle] .
. .
horn August 10th, 1888, to July 1st, 1889 [ Tringwdes kypoktuos shot on the 
Leazes (H.
A. Innes); Corvus comix, Xunnykirk (Mrs. Noble); Larus 
nddntndus, bird of the year, Hebburn reservoir (Tas. S.
Forster); Sym-Jiaptes 
paradoxus killed at Cragside (Jno. Hancock); pied Turdus mertda shot at 
the Felling, Xov. 1888 (Rev. E.
Ilaythor nth wake); Trwga alpina shot at 
Holy Island (J.
D. Walker); Colymbus septentrionaiis shot there (H.
C. 
• ?w* n i ' S/ercoran " s pomatorhinus shot about 1867 at Prestwick Car 
r /-' Beck ) ; flve ^ociothraustes vulgaris shot at Beau front (A.
Robson) ; 
Lerthta shot at Wood burn (Edward Newton); two Loxia curri rostra shot 
at Uinlaton (Thos.
Thompson)].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and 
«ewc, vol.
10, part 2 (1890), pp.
312-313.
™»- [signed <T.
D. (Friends' Retreat, Heslington-road, York)'].
York N.E.
Thrush [Turdm m$tsicus\ 's Eees in February [28th, near York].
**ld, March 8th, 1890, p.
360.
**£*.
[signed   Secretary '].
Lane.
S. 
C \ \\\ ^ ie ^ Club \Sturnus vulgaris descending a bedroom chimm \.
v p.J.j March 15th, 1890, p.
29.
n6 bibliography: birds, 1890.
Anon, [signed 'G.
H. B.
(Hyde, near Manchester)'].
Cheshire, 
Destruction of Plover [ Vanellus vulgaris] s' Eggs [about Hyde they are 
decreasing].
Field, April 19th, 1890, p.
587.
Anon, [signed 'T.
D. (York)'].
'York.' 
Blackbird [ Tardus merula] occupying deserted nest of Thrush [( T.
musicus) 
near York].
Field, May 3rd, 1890, p.
646.
Lane.
Sr 
Axon, [signed <W.
H. B.'].
Sheldrake {Tadorna carnuia] and Great Spotted Woodpecker [Dendrocopus 
major] near Liverpool [on banks of Alt, and at Blundellsands, Oct. 1889 ; 
details given].
Field, June 7th, 1890, p.
852.
Axon, [signed *E.C.
(Lilburn Tower, Northumberland) '].
Cheviotland- 
Pheasant [P/tas/auus cole hie us] nesting in a Silver Fir [at Lilburn Tower ; 
in an old nest of Columba palumbtts\ Field, June 14th, 1890, p.
892.
Anon, [not signed].
York Mid W.
Ellesmere School, Harrogate [at Pateley Bridge ; young Tardus 
torquat us noted}.
N.H.J., June 15th, 1890, p.
90.
Anon, [not signed].
Derbyshire.
Penketh [excursion to Monsall Dale, 23rd May; egg of Cinclus 
obtained].
N.H.J.
, June 15th, 1890, p.
92.
Anon, [not signed].
York S.W. and N.E.
Extracts from an Ornithological Diary [for 30th March and 3rd April, 
r88o.
; Galhnago culestis and Lniota r it f est ens at Rawcliffe ; Z.
linaria round 
York; and Pants palustris in Stockton Woods].
N.H.J., Tune 15th, 1890, p.
9°- 
Anon, [signed 'J.
C. J ].
Westmorland.
A Swallow [species not stated] caught on a Fish-hook [near Miller 
Bridge, Ambleside].
Field, June 23rd, 1890, p.
979.
Anon, (signed 'C.F.T.Y., C.E.'].
? Notts 
Sparrowhawk [Accipiter rnsus] caught by a Locomotive [of Midland 
express on its way to London from Nottingham, June 14th, 1890 ; within 
a lew days a Perdix einerea caught by an engine on the same line ; localities- 
not given].
Field, June 28th, 1890, p.
979.
Anon, [signed 'Constant Reader'].
York N.E.
Woodcock [Scolopax rusticola] caught in a Vermin Trap [at Kilburn, 
Hambledon Hills, near Thirsk, 2lst July; young bird, evidently reared 
there].
Field, July 26th, 1890, p.
160.
Anon, [signed 'H.
C] 
Derbyshire.
Thrush [Turdus musicus] roofing its nest [at Pinxton, Derbyshire].
Field, 
Aug. jo, 1890, p.
346.
Anon, [not signed].
Lane.
S. 
Penketh Boys' Field Club [notes on Pants ocruleus, Locustella, PhylU opu 
silnlatrix (in Brock Yalley near Preston), and Acroccphalus phragmitis (nest at 
Sankey)].
N. 11.
J., Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
no.
Cumberland, Derbyshire, Lane.
S. and W., Notts, 
Anon- [editorial].
York Mid W.
and N.E- 
Migrant Table, No. 14, 1890 [giving dates of arrival of 28 species of 
birds at Kolton (Cumberland).
Baslovv near Chesterfield, Manchester, Mans- 
field, Penketh, Preston, kawdon, York, and Wigton ; averages also shown 
special remarks on C r, Cueu/us, and Hiruudo], N.
H. [., Sep. 15th, 
1890, p.
117.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
[Birds observed on an] Excursion to the Mull Hills [Isle of Man, 
24th May, 1SS7 ; Lomvia iroile in numbers].
Back Trans.
J. of Man 
N.H.S., i.
117 ; publ.
with Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, Oct. 1890.
Naturalist 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
I I 7 
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Notices of Books .
. .
The Surnames and Place Names of the Isle 
of Man. J)y A.
W. Moore [with passing references to niditication of Falco 
peregrinus and Corvus corax near St. Maughold's Chair; and to 'garee vreck ' 
as the Manx name for Hicmatopus ostralegus], Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, 
Oct. 1890, i.
200-201.
Anon, [signed ' F.
R.'].
Isle of Man.
Fight between Magpie [Pica rustical and Rat [in a cornfield near Ramsey, 
Isle of Man, described].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, Oct. 1890, p.
204.
Anon, [signed ' Beverley '].
York S.E.
Arrival of Wild Geese [(Anser brachyrhynchus) on the Wolds, Sep. 25th, 
1890; and flock of 38 seen 27th].
Field, Oct. 4th, 1890, p.
501.
Anon, [signed 'Beacons'].
Northumberland and Durham.
A Day's Bird-Nesting - in Northumbria [place not stated ; Corvus corax, 
Loxia curvirostra, Nit wen ins arquata, Phasianus, Acredula rosea, Cine ins, 
Motac ilia melanope, Phyiloscopiis sibilatrix, Sylvia atricapilla, Tardus merit la, 
Fringilla c&lebs, Syrnium aluco, Columha cenas, Muscicapa atricapilla, 
Gallinula chloropus, Gallinago ccelestis, Emberiza scha nidus, Pica caudata, 
Scolopax, Dendrocopus major, Phyiloscopiis trochilus, P.
ritftis, LocttsteUa, 
Acrocephalus phragmitis, Cotile, Sylvia hortensis, Muscicapa grisola, Garrulus, 
Sylvia cinerca, Tardus musicus, Asia otus, and Caprimulgus referred to].
Field, Oct. nth, 1890, p.
538.
Vnon.
[signed ' F.
W. H.'].
Line.
N. 
Buzzard \_Buteo vulgaris] in Lincolnshire [one shot near Kirton-in-Lindsey 
i the other day' ; 20 in.
long, 3 feet across wings ; in the second note, writer 
justifies himself for killing the bird].
Field, Oct. nth, 1890, p.
538, and 
Oct. 1 8th, p.
599 ; followed by severe criticism by M.
G. Watkins, Field, 
Oct. 25th, 1890, p.
616.
\nox.
[ n ot signed].
York S.W.
Migrant Returns [from Ackworth ; giving dates for Ciiculus, Crex, Chelidon, 
and Hirundo\ N.H.J.
, Oct. 15th, 1890," p.
136.
Anon, [signed ' Ed. 5 ].
Durham.
Nocturnal Migration of Birds [with footnote as to Hirundo rustica seen 
at Blaydon-on-Tyne, Nov. 10th, 1890].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
Vx« >.\.
[not signed].
Northumberland S., Cheviotland, and Durham.
Memoir of the late John Hancock, of Newcastle-on-Tyne [with 
references to Tot an us gl areola, Am pel is garruliis, Fuligula istata, Capri- 
mulgusruficollis, Aquilai via, sxidSyrrhaptes].
Zool., Dec. 1890, pp.44i-447- 
iNON.
[not signed].
York N.E.
\Alcedo and Cinclus, frequenting Ayton School Grounds, becoming 
very tame owing to the inclemency of weather (Nov. 24th, 1890)].
N. II.
]., 
Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
165.
Line.
N. 
Hknrv V.
Allison.
Great Grey Shrike [Lamm excubitor\ and Peregrine Falcon [Falco 
peregrinus\ in Lincolnshire [at Grainthorpe Fen and Tothill Wood, near 
Louth, respectively].
Zooh, March 1890, p.
106.
Henry F.
Allison.
Line.
N. 
Shore Lark [Otecmys alpestris\ in Lincolnshire [at North Somercotes, 
I-eb.
nth, 1890].
Z00L, June 1890, p.
224.
Hknry f.
Allison.
Line.
S. 
Kingfisher [Alcedo ispida] flying into a House [in a village near Beckingham, 
Newark, Sep. 7th, 1890].
Zool., Nov. 1890, p.
438.
,{ enry F.
Allison.
Line* S.
Hawfinch [CoccothramUs ; ulgaris] in Lincolnshire [at Beckingham near 
Newark 5 shot down by gardeners].
Zool., Dec. 1S90, p.
4^5- 
Vil 18 
IlS BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
Oliver V.
Aplin.
Notts.
The Grey and the White Wagtails {Mot ac ilia melanope and M.
alba\ 
in Oxfordshire [with a passing reference to the coloration of a Rainworth 
killed example].
Zool., Oct. 1S90, p.
374.
Notts, Northumberland S., Durham, Cumberland, Furness, 
O. V.
Aplin.
Lane.
W„ York S.E., S.W., and N.E., Line.
N. 
On the Distribution and Period of Sojourn in the British Islands of 
the Spotted Crake [(Porzana maitietta) ; being a series of collected records 
for the various counties, and some generalised conclusions].
Zool., Nov.
1S90, pp.
401-417.
H. T.
Archer.
Cheviotland.
Late Breeding of Starling- [Sturnus vulgaris} in Northumberland [near 
Alnwick, November 1889].
Nat., Jan. 1890.
p. 15.
James Backhouse, Jun. York N.E.
Turtle Dove [Turfur orienialis] in Yorkshire [one, in first 
plumage, near Scarborough, Oct. 23rd, 1889].
Nat..
Sep. 1890, p.
258.
Vnrk N.W.
J. Backhouse, Jun. York M 
Yellow Wagtail [A/otacilla ran] in Swaledale [exceedingly common 
Muker ; an addition to Goodchild's list].
Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
318.
James Backhouse [Jun.].
York Mi< 
Yorkshire Notes on the Tree Sparrow [{Passer montanus) ; notes on habit>, 
nidification, etc., at Wilstrop near York].
Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
355.
W 
T. C.
Bacon.
Isle of Man.
Fieldfare [ Tardus pilaris] killed by a Peregrine [(Falco peregrin us) on the 
cliffs of the Isle of Man].
Field, May 24th, 1890, p.
772.
Matthew Bailey 
York S.E.
Flamborough Bird-Notes [anent Migratory Movements of Alauda 
arvensis, Carvus monedula, Scolopax rusticola, Junius torquatus, Regulus 
cri status, Rut ic ilia phanicurus, Lanius excubitor, and one Otocorys\ Nat., 
Jan. 1890.
p. 14.
[Anent occurrence of Iynx % Xema submit, Una gtylle, 
Lams mimttus, and Hydrochelidon nigra], Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
318.
[Great 
rush of Scolopax rusticola, Oct. 20th-2ist, 1890].
Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
335- 
[Anent occurrence of two Xema sabinii, and movements of Rissa tridactyla].
Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
354.
Matthew Bailey.
York S.E.
Shore-larks [Olocorys al/>estris] at Flamborough [a dozen shot and several 
more seen, 21 Dec. 1889].
Nat., Feb. 1890.
p. 46.
Matthew Bailey.
York S.E.
Flamborough Notes : Arrival and Departure of Birds [dates given for 
Pratincola rubicola, Motacilla lugubris, Saxicola ananthe, Regulus cristatus, 
Corvus eornix].
Nat., May 1890, p.
149.
Geo. Barchard.
York S.E.
Stork [Cicou alba] in Holderness [one shot at Mappleton near Hornsea, 
2nd Aug. 1^90: dimensions and details given; note also that Phalacrocora 
carbo shot a few years ago at Mappleton is now in writer's collection].
Field, Aug. 9th, 1890, p.
214.
H. G.
Barclay.
Cheviotland.
Protection of Birds on the Fame Islands [with notes as to Fratercula, 
Lo/nvia, Larus argentatus, Sterna macrura, S.
dougalli, S.
cantiaca f 
Somateria mollis sima % Phalacrocorax carbo, ^Egialiti, hiaticuia, Tadorna 
cornuta, Larusfuscus, and Rissa].
Zool., Jan. 1890, p.
26.
S. Barklev.
York S.E.
Sabine^s Gull [Xema sabinii] at Flamborough [two shot the Head, 
Sep. 9th].
Field, Sep. 13th, 1890, p.
404.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: birds, 1890.
119 
C. k.
Beaumont, Lane.
S. 
A Ramble Round Daisy Nook [near Oldham ; Alauda arvettsis, Tardus 
musicits, Erithacits, and 7\ mem la * noted].
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. and Sci.
Soc, vol.
2, for 1889-90, publ.
1 890, p.
70.
H. Benson.
York S.E.
Two-barred Crossbill [Loxla bifasciata] in Surrey [and near Easington, 
Holderness, 12th Aug., 1889].
Zool., Jan. 1890, p.
18.
rEORGE Bolam.
Cheviotland, Northumberland S., Durham.
Some Notes on the Occurrence of Pallas's Sand Grouse, Syrrhaptes 
Paradoxus, (Pallas) in the District, during the recent visitation of the species 
to this country [giving particulars and details of Northumberland, Durham, 
and Scottish occurrences].
Proc.
Bervv.
Nat. Club for 1889, vol.
12, No. 3 
(publ.
1890), pp.
542-551.
Harry B.
Booth.
York Mid W.
Bird-Notes from the Malham District [treating in chatty way of 
JMotacilla rati, AT.
melanope, Cinchts, Alcedo, Tringoides, Ardea cinerea, 
Muscicapa atricapilla, Fitlica, Acroceplialus phragmitis y Corvits moneditla, 
Colitmba anas, Saxicola ccnanthe, Columba pa turn bus, Tinnuncnliis, Tardus 
torquatus, Nit m cuius arquata, J 'and I us, Tot anus calidris, Gal linago en testis, 
Tringa alpina, Charadrius pluvial is, / $opu$ scot ic us, Perdix cinerea, 
Gal tin it la cklerofnts, Anas boschas, Fuligula ci'istata, Phylloscopus sibilatrix, 
Syrnium alttco, Caprimitlgtts, Strix Jlavimea, Corvus corouc, and Tardus 
pilaris], Nat., Sep. 1890, pp.
259-261.
Harry B.
Booth.
York Mid W.
Albino Greenfinch \Ligurinus clitoris] near Bradford [among a flock near 
Baildon Moor, April nth, 1890].
Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
335.
J. Wallace Bowers.
'York.' 
Destruction of Plovers [ Vanellus vulgaris^ Eggs [about York ; the bird 
is not becoming extinct].
Field, April 19th, 1^90, p.
587.
t Botes.
York S.E. and N.E.
Great Plover or Thick-knee [CEdtcnemus scolopax] near York [still breeds 
in a few East Riding and one North Riding locality].
Field, Tan. 12th, 
1890, p.
51.
F- Bo yes.
York S.E.
Tits [Pants major] killing Bees [near Beverley].
Field, Jan. nth, 1890, 
p. 56.
F. liQVE 
York S.E.
The Migration of Woodcocks [(Scolopax rusticola) ; note in criticism of 
some by John Cordeaux, and recapitulating some of the writer's Holderness 
experience ; reference made also to migration of Turdus iliacus, 7\ pilaris, 
7\ meritla, 1\ musicits, Corvus comix].
Field, Nov. 22nd, 1890, p.
779.
1-- Boyes.
York S.E.
Swifts {Cypselits aptts] rising from the Ground [giving observations made 
in the East Riding, also upon their sleeping in the daytime].
Field, Dec. 6th, 
1890, p.
850.
F. Boyes.
York S.E.
Abundance of Snipe [(Gallinago calestis) near Beverley, during the present 
winter; Anas boschas also mentioned].
Field, Dec. 20th, 1890, p.
892.
F - Boyes.
York S.E.
Little Grebe [ 7achybaptes fluviatilis] occurring in East Yorkshire during 
the autumnal migration ; note of one at Waikington, situated on the Wolds, 
some three miles above Beverley].
Field, Dec. 20th, 1890, p.
910.
F - Botes, York S.E.
Pheasants [P/iasianus colcliicus] swimming [an instance near Beverlev cited].
£ield.
Dec. 20th, 1890, p.
911.
April 18 
120 BIBLIOGRAPHY!
BIRDS, 1890.
F. BOYES.
York S.E. or S.W.
Bittern [Botaitrus stellaris] in Yorkshire [one shot by a bargeman 'somewhere 
between' Wakefield and Beverley; and one exposed for sale in Hull market].
Field, Dec. 27th, 1890, p.
948.
Thomas Bunker.
York S.W.
Turtle-Dove \Turtur communis] and Nightingale [Daulius Istscinia] near 
Goole [at Rawcliffe, the first, male, shot 8th May].
Nat., June 18S9, p.
182.
Thomas Bunker.
York S.E.
Storm Petrel \_Procdlaria pelagic a] at Howden, Yorks.
[20th Oct. 1890, 
killed by telegraph-wires ; two previous Goole occurrences known} Nat., 
Nov. 1890, p.
352.
E. Burton.
Durham.
Rook [Corvus Jntgilegits^s Nest with Eggs in November [near Durham].
Field, Nov. 8th, 1890, p.
698.
Basil Carter.
York N.W.
Starling [Sturnus vulgaris} Nesting in February [on the 4th near Catterick].
Field, Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
248.
Basil Carter [misprinted ' Garten'].
York N.W.
Great Grey Shrike [Lamm excubitor] in North Yorkshire [quoting two 
instances at Masham].
Field, March 8th, 1890, p.
360.
Basil Carter.
York N.W.
Scarcity of Goldfinches [CardueZis elegans) near Masham ; common a few 
years ago, but now merely a straggler ; decrease attributed to bird-catchersj.
Field, Aug. 30th, 1890, p.
346.
James Carter.
York N.W.
Goosander [Mergus merganser] near Masham [on ' 10th inst.,' male observed 
but not captured].
Field, March 8th, 1890, p.
360.
James Carter.
York N.W.
Notes from North Yorkshire [arrival of Tetanus ealidris, Saxicola 
tvnantke, P/iylloscoptts rufus at Masham ; Perdix cinerea run over by train at 
Masham Station].
Field, April 12th, 1890, p.
518.
Alfred C Chapman.
Northumberland S.
Long-tailed Duck [HareZda gladalis] inland in Northumberland [near 
Haydon Bridge, where also have occurred Fuligula cristata, Clangula, Anas 
bosc/ias, Querquedula crecca, Turdus iliacus f and T.
merula ; dates and other 
details given for some of these].
Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
2. 
Alfred C.
Chapman.
? Durham, Northumberland, and Cheviotland.
Natural History Notes from the North [of England, not localised, 
but written from Moor House, Leamside, co.
Durham, deal with habit- 
migration, etc., of PJiyZloscopus trocZiiZus, Sylvia cinerea, Hiruudo, Chelidon, 
Asioottts, Capri mulgtis, Linota jlavirostris, Emberiza miliar ia, Ardea cintrca* 
Cypselus, Motacilla melanope, M.
lugubris, M.
raii, Phylloscopus ru/us 9 
Gallinago calestis, PJianicnra rutuilZa, Pyrr/iula, ReguZus cristatus, Tardus 
viscivorus, both Nummii % Ckaradrius pluviahs, Tot amis caluins, Tringohies, 
Tringa alpina, Falco peregriuus, and Lagoptts scoticus\ Field, Aug. 2nd, 
1890, p.
201.
Fred Chapman.
' York N.W.
Breeding x>f Heron [Ardea cinerea] in Wensleydale, N.
W. Yorks.
[a pair 
nesting in a rookery between Carperby and Thornton Rust].
Nat., July 
1890, p.
210.
J. Chapman.
York N.E.
Alpine Swift [Cypselns melba] at Scarborough [one picked op dead, haying 
been seen to approach from the seaward and drop to the ground ; identified 
by Mr. Mot ley, taxidermist, King Street, Scarborough].
Field, Oct. 18th.
1890, p.
599.
Naturalist.
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
121 
Chesh., Cumb., Derbyshire, Durham, Lane.
S. and W., 
Line.
N. and S., Cheviotland and Northumb.
S., Notts, Westmd., 
Miller Christy.
York S.E., N.E., S.W., Mid W., N.W.
A Catalogue of Local Lists of British Birds [giving titles of numerous 
works for the various counties; Isle of Man omitted].
Zool., July 1890, 
pp.
247-267.
J. E.
Clark.
York N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [Wild Geese near York reported].
N. II.
[., Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
10.
J. E.
Clark.
' York.' 
York [notes, re Erithacus, Turd as merula, T.
music us, and Alanda art/en ].
N. H.
J., Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
15.
H. V.
Coates.
Lane.
S. 
Penketh Field Club [list of birds reaches 44, including Charadrius 
pluvialis, Parus ater, P.
palustris, and Con-its corone], N.
H. J., April 15th, 
1890, p.
51.
F. Coburn.
Lines.
Hybrid between the Grey and Red-legged Partridges [(Perdix citurea 
and Caccabis rufa), seen at Birmingham in a hamper of game from Lincoln- 
shire ; described, editorial note appended, and repeated at p.
446, that it 
was an immature Red-leg (Caccabis rufa)].
Zool., Oct. 1890, xiv.
384.
and 
Dec. 1890, xiv.
466.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. 
Curious Visitors at Sugar [near Warrington ; Caprimulgus europteus 
nightly one year].
Young Nat., June 1890, p.
118.
Edwap.d Comber.
Cheshire.
Hawfinch [Coccotkraustes vulgaris] breeding in Wirral [at Ashfield, near 
Xeston, this summer], Zool., Oct. 1890, p.
390.
Edward Comber.
Cheshire.
Spotted Crake [Crex porzarni] in Wirral [one picked up under telegraph 
wires close to Neston, 26th Aug. 1890].
Zool., Oct. 1890, p.
390.
John Cordeaux.
Line.
N., York S.E.
Ornithological Notes from the Humber District in the Autumn of 1889 
. [anent Loxia bifasciata,Strepsilas, Hecmatopus, Nitmenius plucopus , A", an/uata, 
Qiterquedula erecca, Tot a nits canescens, Linota ntfescens, Hydrochelidon nigra , 
Syrrhaptes, Tringa camttus , Sterna cantiaca, Stercoraritts crepidatus, Calidris, 
Procellaria pelagica, Ruticilla, Sax kola tenant he, JMuscicapa atricapilla, 
Motaeilla rati, Anthus pratensis, Emberiza schoeniclus, Titrdus music us, lynx, 
Parus major, P.
catruleus, P.
ater, Gallinago gall inula, Dendrocopus major, 
GarrulitSy Porzaua maruetta, Phalai'opus fulicarius, Totanusfuscus, Machctt .
Vanellus, Cfuysomitris, Eruberiza hortulana, Columba palumbits, Turdus 
pilaris, Corvus corax, C.
corone, C.
comix, C.
frttgilegus, C.
monedula, 
Plectrophancs nivalis, Regulus cristatus, Cinclus melanogaster, Scolopax 
rusticola, Tordus torquatus, Sturnus, Linota linaria, Fringilla montifringilla, 
Otocorys, Lanius excubitor, Tringa minuta, Rallus, Haliaetus albicilla, 
Tiinga striata, Archibuteo, Charadrius pluvialis, Certhia.
Regulus ignica- 
pillus, Ruticilla titys, Hirundo, Chelidon, Stercorarius pomatorhinus, Puffinus 
major, and Lams leucopterus ; notes on occurrence, migration, habits, etc.].
Nat., Jan. 1890, pp.
5-1 1.
John Cordeaux.
Line.
N. 
The Two-barred Crossbill [Loxia bifasciata] in Lincolnshire, etc.
[Heligo- 
land notes given ; the Lincolnshire locality was South Cockerington near 
York S.
E. 
Louth, autumn of 1889].
Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
2. 
John Cord \ux.
Probable Occurrence of Phylloscopus superciliosus (Gm. near Spurn 
heen by II.
B. Hewetson in October 1889, in hi garden at E ington].
>-at., Feb. 1890, p.
38.
A pril 189 
122 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRD-.
1890.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E. and S.W., Line.
N. and S.
The Ruff and Reeve [Machetes pnignax\ in Lincolnshire [treating in con- 
siderable and most interesting detail of the history of this as a Lincolnshire 
bird, with notices also for East Yorkshire, and also of Eudromias, Anas 
boschas, Mareca, Fubgula ferina, Tringa canutus, Squat arola, Limosa, 
Totanus calidris, Numenius arquata, Charadrius pluvialis, Gallinago 
ccelestis, and Tot, glareola\ Field, April 26th, 1890, p.
593 ; rep.
Zool., June 
1890, xiv., 204-209.
John Cordeaux.
Line.
N., Cheviotland.
Wheatear \_Saxicola a*nanthe\ in North Lincolnshire in March [giving 
several INI arch and even February dates for North Lincolnshire, Fame 
Islands, etc.].
Zool., May 1890, p.
185.
John Cordeaux.
Line.
N., York S.E.
Have we two sorts of Woodcock [{Scolopax rusticola) discussed].
Zool., 
June 1890, p.
220.
John Cordeaux.
Line.
N., York S.E.
Ornithological Notes from the Humber District, May 1890 [anent nesting 
of Falco tesalon, Corvus coroiu, movements of Squatarola, Tringa alpina y 
Strepsilas, Numenius plmopus, Calidris, ILwmatopus, Totanus calidris, 
Eudrom ias (local name at Spurn, 'Land-Dotterel'), and Iringoides, nesting 
of .
Egialitis hiaticula, arrival of Museicapa atricapilla, Ruticilla phanicurus, 
Sylvia atricapilla, S.
hortensis, Phylloscopus trocliilus, occurrence of Lanius 
collurio, Connis corone, Anthns obscurus, nesting of Emberiza scJurniclus, 
arrival of HintJido, C/ielidon, Cotile, Cypselus, nesting of Sterna miuuta, 
occurrence of Turtur communis and Syrrhaptes, nesting of Li not a camndnna, 
(Bent-Linnet), and nesting of Passer montanns], Nat., July 1890, pp.
199-202.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E.
Woodcocks {(Scolopax rusticola) ; details of observations made on the 
Holderness coast, Oct. 19th, 20th, 21st ; Lomvia troile, Corvus comix, 
Tardus merida also noted].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E.
The Migration of Woodcock [(Scolopax rusticola) in Holderness ; note 
explanatory of remarks criticised by F.
Boyes].
Field, Nov. 29th, 1890, p.
816.
John Cordeaux.
York S.E., Line.
N. 
Pine Grosbeak in Heligoland— Shore Larks [Otocorys alpestrts] in the 
Humber District [the latter occurring during December in tens of thousands 
on the Humber district sea coast].
Field, Dec. 27th, 1890, p.
948.
R. Cotton.
Derbyshire.
Purple Sandpiper [Tringa maritimd] in Derbyshire [two seen (one shot) 
on the Burton Corporation Sewage Farm].
Field, Dec. 6th, 1890, p.
850.
J. II.
Crosland.
York Mid W., Lane.
W. 
[Nest of Stonechat (Saxicola rubicola) near Settle, 19th June; young 
Numenius arqitata and egg of Lagopus lagopus also ; at Sandside, Morecambe 
Bay, Carduehs elegans, Strix /lammca, Cafrimnlgus^ and Cinclus].
N. H.
T-> 
Oct. 15th, 1890, p.
13T.
J. H.
Qrosland] 
York N.E.
[Eight Numenius arquata at Langwith, near York, Aug. 29th, 1890].
N. If. J., Oct. 15th, 1890, p.
132.
J. Herbert Crosland.
York N.E.
Martins \Chelidon urbica] in October [at St. Mary's, York, on the 3rd, 
a nest].
N. H.
J., Oct. 13th, 1890, p.
136.
J. H.
Crosland.
York N.E.
[Bird-Notes from near York, 1890; nest and young of Ruticilla phanicurus 
and Syrnium aluco, 30th Aug.
; Ardea cinerea and Lams argtntatus seen 
over the city, 25th and 2Sth ;p.
- Chelidon still at a nest in St. Marv's, 
3rd Oct.].
N. II.
J..
Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
151.
Naturalist.
bibliography: birds, 1890.
123 
R. W.
C[rosland].
Lane.
W. 
[Locustella naevia and Certhia at Sandside, Morecambe P>ay].
N. H.
I., 
Oct. 15 th, 1890, p.
1 3 1.
R. W.
Crusland.
York N.E.
[Co/ He by the Ouse, Oct. 2nd, Alcedo on the Foss, Oct. 4th, both at York], 
N. H.
J., Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
151.
William Cross.
Lane.
W. 
Among the Fylde Flowers — The Woodlands [near Lytham : mention 
of Corz>us frugilegus, Turdus viscivorus and Gal Unit la cJiloropus\ Journ.
of Microsc, July 1890, pp.
203 and 205.
Matthew T.
Culley.
Cheviotland.
Natural History Notes [from Coupland Castle, anent Chelidon, Gall inula, 
Chloropits, and Motacilla yarrclli nesting on the estate in 1887].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 1888 (pub.
1889), voJ - I2 » P« 393- 
F. Curtis.
York N.E.
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [notes anent Corvus comix y Ardea 
cinerea % Falco tinnunculus , and Turdus iliacus, near York].
N. H.
J., 
Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
10.
F. Curtis.
Lane.
W. 
The Dead Lamb and its Mother [on the Fells near Garstang ; notes on 
Lagopus lagopus, Charadrius plurialis, Numenius arquata, Turdus torquatus, 
Tringoides, Pratincola rubicola, P.
rubetra].
N. II.
J., Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
1 18.
Fredk.
Curtis.
Lane.
W. and S.
Bird Notes for March [anent Geese, Turdus viscivorus, T.
musicus, 
T. merula % Fringilla Calebs, Corpus monedula, Sturnus, Parus major, 
P. caruleus, P.
ater, P.
palustris, Larus ridibundits, Emberiza scha:iiu\its, 
Ant hits pratensis, Motacilla Jugubris.
M. mela7iope> Linota rufescens, Anas 
boschaS) Cine ins, Lagopus, Mareca % and Saxicola ananthe\ N.
H. T-, 
May 15th, 1890, p.
79, 
T[homas].
D[arley].
'York.' 
Golden Eagle [Aquila ckrysaitos] seen near York [on Oct. 24th ; Editor 
pertinently asks how writer would distinguish the flight from that of the Sea 
Eagle or even a Buzzard].
Field, Nov. 1st, 1890, p.
668.
Thomas Darley.
'York/ 
The Golden Eagle [Aquila c/uysactos] at York [the writer's original 
specific determination defended, and the bird's appearance and flight 
described].
Field, Nov. 8th, 1890, p.
698.
Charles Delmar.
Line.
N. 
Eagle in Lincolnshire [one supposed to be Aquila ekrysaitos shot in Squire 
Miner's wood at Southrey, near Bardney, 8th Nov.
; measures 6 ft.
7 in.
across the wings and weighs 11 lbs.; account of capture given].
Field, 
Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
Charles Dixon.
Cheviotland, York S.E.
With the Birds on Cliffs and Rocks [with wood-cut of Robin Lythe 
Mole at Flamborough.
and notes on Fratercula arctica on the Fames ; 
a gossipping paper].
Leisure Hour, Oct. 1890, pp.
680-5.
W. A.
Durm-ord.
York S.W.
Nesting Habits of Swallows [{Hirttndo rustica) presumably at Elsecar, 
carrying white feather in its feet when building ; editorial note considers this 
an accident].
Field, May 24th, 1890, p.
772/ 
W. A.
Du rnford.
York S.W.
Corncrake [Crex pratensis] perching on a Tree [on 3rd May, presumably at 
Elsecar].
Field, May 24th, 1890, p.
772.
J. W.
Fawcett.
Durham.
5 e ^ ree ~Sparrow [Passer montanus] in the County of Durham [with 
details of habits, nidiheation, and localities].
Nat., Sep. 1890, pp.
277-278.
April 1893.
124 BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIROS, 189O.
J. W.
Fawcett.
Durham.
The Tree Sparrow [Passer moiitamts] in County Durham [notes on habits, 
nidification, interbreeding with P.
domesticus, etc.].
Nat., Dec. 1890, pp.
353-354- 
Mi C.
Fishwick.
Furness.
A Few Lancashire Peculiarities, as noted by Drayton [in the Polyolbion, 
1622 ; the barnacles and geese referred to].
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. and Sci.
Soc. for 1878- * 888, publ.
1888, p.
62.
Riley Fortune.
W, 
Notes on the Starling [(Sturnus vulgaris) ; its habits, cries, nidification, 
and benefit to agriculture, as observed near Harrogate].
Nat., June 1890, 
pp.
167-168.
R. Fortune.
W 
and White 
Snipe [Gaiiinago ca: testis] '$ Nest with five eggs 
[Tardus merit la] near Ripon [both seen June 1st].
Nat., July 1890, p.
210.
R. Fortune.
W 
Notes on Migrants about Harrogate [Crex very scarce this year ; Hi run do 
and Ckelidon beginning to regain their lost ground ; Motacilla alba unusually 
light in colour].
Nat., July 1890, p.
210.
Riley Fortune.
W 
[A pair of] Redshanks [Tot an us calidris] Breeding in Ripon Parks [J 
1890].
Nat., July 1890, p.
210.
une 
Riley Fortune.
W 
Albino Blackbird [Turdus meruld] near Harrogate [one captured 2nd June 
near Beckwithshaw].
Nat., July 1890, p.
210.
Riley Fortune 
W 
Curious Incident relating to a Blackbird [Tardus meruld\ 's Nest [at 
Harrogate ; a nest not forsaken when the tree on which it was built was 
moved].
Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
250.
Alfred Fryer, Jun. Cheshire.
The Rock Thrush [Monticola saxatilis] in Cheshire [seen (and observed 
closely for five minutes) on the Overton Hills, near Frodsham, April 4th, 1891; 
supposed to be a male ; description given], Zool.
, May 1890, p.
187.
J. H.
Fryer.
W 
York, Bootham.
Natural History Club [Notes on Turdus pilaris % 
T. merit la, Ligurinus, Hirundo, Vanellus % Lanes argentatus, Accipitfr nisus, 
Accentor, and Corvus tnonedula in the Vale of York].
N. H.
J., June 15th, 
1890, p.
92.
Robert Garner.
Isle of Man.
Notes on the Natural History of the Isle of Man [with a surmise that the 
bird which Camden calls 'maup' and says is not found in the Island, is 
Paras ccvruleus, which is in Staffordshire called 'Tom maup' or 'Tom naup'].
Trans.
I. of Man X.
II.
S., vol.
i., 1879-84 (publ.
1888), p.
88.
J. G.
( »OI" HILO.
W 
Some of the Birds observed in Upper Swaledale [a list of 79 species, 
with remarks, and a few local names].
Nat., Aug. 1890, pp.
248-250.
Lin. Greening.
Cheshire.
April 1890, p.
71.
J. II.
Gurney, Jun.
Warrington [at 
given].
Young 
York N.E.
Redbreasted Flycatcher [Muscicapa parva] at Scarborough [obtained 
Oct. 23rd, 1889, in a wood swarming with newly-arrived Regulus cristatus 
and Scolopax rusticola ; the seventh British specimen].
Nat.
. Jan. 1890, p.
14- 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
. 125 
J. H.
Gurney, Jun. York S.E.
White Variety of the Little Gull [{Larus minutus) shot near Flamborough 
Head, Oct. 29th, 1889; now in coll.
John Marshall (Taunton)].
Zool., Jan.
1890, p.
19.
J. H.
G[urney]., Jun. York N.E.
Red-breasted Flycatcher [Muscicapa parva] in Yorkshire [one, immature, 
shot in a wood near Scarborough, Oct. 23rd ; skin in possession of Mr. John 
Morley].
Field, Jan. 18th, 1890, p.
83.
York S.E.
J. H.
Gurney, Jun.
White Varieties 
sea off Flamborough Head on Oct. 29th, 1890; now in Mr. Marshall's 
collection].
Field, Jan. 25th, 1890, p.
138.
J. H.
Gurney, Jun.
York S.E. and N.E.
Ornithological Notes from Norfolk [including- notes as to Loxia bifasciata 
and Keguhis cristatus in Yorkshire].
Zool., Feb. 1890, pp.
57, 58.
J. H.
Gurney, Jun. Northumberland S.
Martinique Gallinule [Porpliyrio martinicu$\ in Hants [and in Northumber- 
land (from Hancock)].
Zool., Feb. 1890, p.
74.
J. H.
Gurney, Jun.
White Varietv of the Little Gull \Lartts mimttus\ at Flamb 
York S.E.
Oct. 29th ; now in John MarshaU'scollection of varieties].
Nat., Feb. 1890^.38.
J. H.
Gurney, Jun. York N.E.
On the Claim of the Pine Grosbeak \Pinicola enuci atari to be regarded 
as a British Bird [discussing the Whitby records].
Zool., April 1890, pp.
125-129.
Durham, Cumberland, ?
Derbyshire, 
J. H.
Gurney.
York N.E., Mid W., and S.W.
England 
7/ 
cristatus) giving collected records for Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, 
Derbyshire (but this was at Meersbrook, Yorkshire) ; altogether 22 British 
specimens are noted, of which 7 are for Yorkshire alone].
Zool., June 1890, 
xiv.
210-213 
J. H.
Gurney.
Cumberland.
berland 
in that county on Aug. 24th, 1866, was the earliest in date (except one) of all 
the 235 Phalaropes killed in Britain that year].
Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
354.
( '• H.
Caton Haigh.
Line.
N 
and 
in Lincolnshire [several of the former noted, at North Cotes, Tetney, Marsh 
Chapel, and Grainsby, and one of the latter, at mouth of Humber, winter 
1889-90].
Zool., April 1890, p.
140.
G. H.
Caton Haigh, 
Wheatear f.SVr vim!,, 
Line.
N* 
for further information as to Mr. Harrison's record], Zool., May 1890, p.
187 
G. H.
Caton Haigh.
Line.
N. 
Arrival of Fieldfares {(Turdus pilaris) of Redwings (7.
iliacus), and 
Grey Crows (Corvus comix) in the Lincolnshire marches ; dates given for the 
last half dozen years ; note also of all the five common British Turdi bein 
seen at one time].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
C. A.
Ham»\d.
Lane.
W„ 
Little Stint \Tringa minuta] on the North- West Coast [giving extract 
from game-book recording Tringa subarquata (8 killed) and 7\ minut 
(} killed and several seen) at Arneside, Lancashire, Sep. 7 tn and 8th, 1876].
Field, Oct. 18th, 1890, p.
599.
April 189 
126.
bibliography: birds, 1890.
James Hardy.
Cheviotland.
Report of the Meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club for the 
year 1889 [noting Ampelis garrulus shot at Glanton Pyke, Whaup or Curlew 
Moor a name for Glanton Hill ; Lams ridUnindus and Hirundo noted at 
Ingram Haughs, 29th May ; Corvus corax bred near the Linns, Linhope.
1889 ; one shot in Cheviot in the winter ; Turdus torquatus at Linhope 
Linns; Cuculus, Alauda arvensis t J'aucllus, Anthus, Sax fro/a, Pratiueola 
rubetra, and Tringotdes noted on the Breamish ; Cypsdus, Chelidon, and 
Hirundo at Branton ; Phylloscopus trochilus, J'auellus, Cuculus, Numenius 
arquata, Ardea ciuerea, Alauda arvensis, Charadrius, St urn us, Tinmtncukts 3 
Accipiter uisus, Sylvia atricapilla, S.
cinerea, Phylloscopus sibilatrix, Anthus, 
Tringdtdes y Saxicola, Ruticilla phanicurus, and Corvus corax noted, with 
particulars, for various localities in Cheviotland ; Fringilla Calebs, Sturnus 9 
Muscicapa grisola at Kielder ; numerous birds specified as of the district of 
Kidder Burn (England) and Upper Lidderdale (Scotland), including both 
Pratincole on the Caldron Burn and on the Deadwater, Lagopus scoticus and 
Tetrao tetrix on Thorlieshope, Gallinago cosiest is on Deadwater ; Anas 
boschas at Harelaw Hill, and Saxicola at Paston].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club 
Club, for 1889, vol.
12, No. 3 (pub.
1890), pp.
436-506.
H. S.
Harlan d.
Northumberland S.
Rare Birds and Mammals preserved at Brighton [with mention of the 
Yellow-browed Warbler Phylloscopus superciliosus) captured some forty or 
fifty years ago near Newcastle, Northumberland ; now supposed to be in 
a private collection].
Field, Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
248.
H. S.
Harland.
York S.W.
Weasel attacked by [two] Hawks and [three] Magpies [(Pica rustica), 
the 'hawks' not named; the combat, which began by the Weasel attacking 
a Pheasant, described].
Field, July 5th, 1890, p.
9. 
Robert P.
Harper.
York N.E.
Notes from Scarborough [anent Falco peregrtnus^ Stercorarius parasiticus, 
S. catarrh actes, S.
pomatorhinus, Fulmarus, Larus mar in us, P.
glaucus 9 
Z. minutus, Porzana maruetta, Lanius excubitor, cinnamon-coloured Fringilla 
Calebs, Puffin us griseus, P.
major, Procellaria leucorrhoa, Coly minis septen- 
trionalis, Podiceps auritus, and Muscicapa parva\ Zool., Jan. 1890, p.
21.
R. P.
Harper.
York N.E.
Eared Grebe [Podiceps nigricollis] near Scarborough [one shot Dec. 16th, 
1889; the only Scarborough example, although P.
auritus is not uncommon].
Zool., Feb. 1890, p.
j j.
R. P.
Harper.
York N.E.
Little Auk [Alergulus alle] at Scarborough [six examples during the last two 
months; particulars of capture given], Zool., April 1890, p.
143.
York Mid W.
John Harrison.
A Plea for the Starling [(Stun/us vulgaris} based upon personal experience 
at Wilstrop Hall ; and also mentioning the measures taken against Passer 
domesticus in Cheshire and near Wilstrop].
Nat., Feb. 1890, pp.
45-46 ; note 
thereon, N.H.J.
, March 15th, 1890, p.
35.
J. W.
Harrison.
Line.
N. 
Wheatear [Saxicola tcuauthe] in North Lincolnshire in March [one at 
Goxhill, 23rd ; earliest date on record].
Zool., April 1890, p.
144.
J. W.
Harrison.
Line.
N. 
Increase of Jack Snipe [Limnocryptes gaJlinula] in North Lincolnshire 
[at Goxhill ; notice also of Gallinago caiestis].
Zool., June 1890, p.
224.
* 
Northumberland S.
R. C Medley.
Notes on the Birds which frequent the Hallington Reservoirs [near 
Corbndge-on-Tyne ; Larus ridibundus (a breeding colony), L.
fuscus, 
L. canus, Sterna fuviatilis, S.
ectutiaca, Phalacrocorax car bo.
Anas boscha.
,. 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: birds, 1890.
127 
Querqttedula crecca^ Clangula glaucion, Mareca Y Tadortia cor nut a, Ftdigula 
feri$ia % Chaulelasmus sire penis, Dafila, Coly in bus glacial is.
Mere us merganser^ 
A user cine reus, A.
segctum, Cygnus bezvickii* Fuliea, both Nutucnii.
Vanellus % Ardea cinerm % Totanus ealidris, Tringotdes, Gallinago ccei /j, both 
Limos<e, Tringa alpina, AZgialitis iiiatieula, Tringa minute, laeliybaptes, 
and Podiceps nigricollis, noted, many common, and some regularly nesting].
Xat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, pan 2, 1890, pp.
397-399.
William Hkwktt.
York S.E.
The Small-end Colouring of Eggs [discussed, with notes on Lomvia 
troile, Alcatorda, Kissa, and Fratereula, at Flamborough Cliffs].
Sci.
(ioss., 
Dec. 1890, pp.
276-7.
John F.
Hills, Secretary.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Penketh School Field Club [notes on Alcedo (Padgate and Sankey Brook), 
Sylvia rufa (Halton), Mot act Ha rai/\ Parus palustris, Cueulus, Hirundo y 
Acrocephalus phragmitis s Corvus comix and Columha palumbus\ N.
H. J., 
May 15th, 1890, p.
72.
John F.
Hills, Secretary.
Lane.
S., Cheshire, Derby.
Penketh School Field Club [Corvus frugilegus 9 Ligurinus, Parus c&ruleus, 
Coin in ba anas, Regttlus eri statics, Anas boschas, Cine Ins, Corvus inonedula, 
Phylloscopus rufus, and /'.
troehilus\ N.
H. J., June 15th, 1890, p.
90.
W. Hodgson.
Cumberland.
An Albino Wheatear [Saxicola anant/ie~\ in Cumberland [near Workington, 
April 15th, 1889, one, in company with a dozen in ordinary plumage].
Xat., 
Jan. 1890, p.
11.
Edw. B.
Holwell.
York S.E.
White Jay [Garrulus g/andarius] in Yorkshire [one killed at Osgodby near 
Selby, Nov. 15th, having evaded shooting all through the summer ; descrip- 
tion given].
Field, Nov. 29th, 1890, p.
816.
H. Knight Hors field.
York Mid W.
Stone-Chat \Pratineola rubieola] at Headingley, Leeds [seen 24th Feb., 
1890 ; first instance so near Leeds].
Nat., April 1890, p.
120.
Richard Howsi 
Durham.
Cataiogue'of the Local Fossils in the Museum of the Natural History 
Society [at Newcastle ; includes a record of the Great Auk {A lea impennis) at 
Marsden].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newcastle, vol.
10, 
part 2 (1890), p.
229.
Henry Hyde.
Cheshire.
[Alauda arvensis noted at an] Excursion to Ashley, for the Bollin Valley 
[on 21st April, 1888].
Ren. and Trans.
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Ass. for 1888 
(publ.
March 1889), p.
30.
Peter Inchbaux York S.E.
Grey Shrike [Lamins excubkorl\ near Hornsea [an old female in fine 
plumage killed at Arram Hall, ' 20th of this month,' presumably Tan.].
Field, 
Feb. ist ?
1890, p.
158.
Peter Inxhbald.
York N.E.
Supposed Occurrence of the Blue Thrush [Montieola cyan us] at Scar- 
borough [seen in company with Tardus musicus and l\ liseivorus on 
Oliver's Mount; described as thrush-like in appearance and closely 
resembling the blue thrush of Italy and the Riviera ; surmise that it may be 
an escaped bird].
Field, Oct. 18th, 1890, p.
599.
Pkter Inchbald.
York S.E.
The Rock Pipit [Anthus obseurus] in Holderness [its occurrence in small 
Sights at Hornsea since Oct. 20th, and habits described].
Field, Nov, Sth, 
1890, p.
698.
^pril 1893.
128 BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, l8gO.
[Peter] Inchbald.
York S.E.
Shore Larks [Oktcorys alpestris] on the East Coast [at Hornsea and 
Spurn, some recently].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
Peter Inchbald.
York S.E.
Arrival of Snow Buntings [{Pltctropkanes nivalis) in Holderness, pre- 
sumably at Hornsea; a flock of fifty or sixty seen 3rd Nov., 1890].
Field, 
Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
Peter Inchbald, 
York S.E.
Contents of Gizzard of the Rock Pipit [(Antlius obscurus) near Hornsea, 
consisted almost wholly of beetles].
Field, Nov. 29th, 1890, p.
816.
J. M.
Jeffcott.
Isle of Man.
Address of the Retiring President [of Isle of Man N.
H. S., delivered 
27th March, 1890 ; on the Manx language ; gollan-geayee, * fork of the wind 
— Swallow {Hii undo rustica) ; eeun = the generic term for bird J.
^n 
Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, Jan.
-April, 1890, p.
155.
A. \Y.
J< hnson.
Lane.
W. or S., York S.E. and N.E.
[Nurnenius phaeopus, Tringa alpina, and Larus ridibundus, last in winter 
plumage, sent from Preston by F.
Curtis ; and Alcedo ispida seen from the 
train, near Pocklington, 18th Oct.].
N. H.
J., Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
151.
[Comts comix at Boot ham, York, 30th Oct., 1890].
N. H.
J., Dec. 15th, 
1890, p.
167.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
The Antiquities of the Parish of Bride [Isle of Man ; Loughs Cranstall 
and Pherrick harbour Fulica, Podiceps, Spatula and Fuligula ferina\ \ n 
Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, Oct. 1890, i.
183.
P. M.
C. Kermode [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [giving Manx dates for Turdus musicus, 
T. merula, Troglodytes \ Alauda arvensis, Corvus frugilegus % Saxicola 
truant he, Turdus viscivorus, Scolopax rusticola, Hi run do rustica, Vanelms 
vulgaris, Sula bassana, Phylloscopus trochitus, Luculus, Cotile, Cypselns, 
Fringella calebs, and Crex\ Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, April 1890, 
pp.
160-163.
[Dates given for Scolopax rusticola, Turdus iliacus, and Corvus 
frugtiegus\ Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 7, Oct. 1890, i.
198.
E. P.
Knubley.
W 
reat Spotted Woodpecker \Dendrocopus major'] 
[a male, shot Nov. 8th].
Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
14.
Cheshire.
J. II.
Lkche.
White Robins [Erithaeus rubccula] and Starlings [(Stumus vulgaris) near 
Chester ; the Robins this year, the Starlings at the same place nearly thirty 
years ago].
Field, July 26th, 1890, p.
160.
P..
B. L[e].T[all].
York N.E., S.E., Mid W.
York, Bootham.
Natural History, &c, Club [notes anent An /-(species 
not stated) Etubcriza sc hoe nidus, Alcedo, Saxicola osnauthc, Tetanus calidris, 
Ana boschas, Parus major, Garrulus, Phylloscopus trochilus, Gallinago 
cau 'is, Larus, Ardea ciiurea, Corvus frugilegus, Accipiter uisus, Pica, 
Acrcdula caudata, Regulus cristatus, Pyrrhula, Motacilla mclanopc, Cinclus, 
Passer dottiest icus, Columba palumbus], N.H.J., May 15th, 1890, pp.
75-7^- 
B. B.
LkTall.
York Mid W.
[Nest of Tringoides hypoleucos near Thorp Arch, June 7th, 1890, in 
precisely same spot a- in 1889].
N.H.J.
, Oct. 15th, 1896, p.
132.
B. B.
LeTall.
York Mid W.
[Cinclus aquaticus on the infant Aire, near Malham].
N.IIJ., Nov. 15th, 
180, p.
151.
Naturali- 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
129 
Roger Lofthouse.
York N.
E., Durham.
Bird-Notes from the Tees District, during the late autumn and winter 
months, 1889-90 [anent the movements and occurrences of migrant and rare 
species; Tringa alpiua, JEgialitis hiaticula, Sterna Jluviati 'lis \ S.
macntra, 
Tringa canutus, Tadonta cornuta, Calidris, Tringa subarquata, T.
mmuta, 
Numenius arquata, Querquedula crecca, IJmosa lapponica, Strips Has, 
Hydrochelidon nigra, Sterna caniiaca, Machetes pugnax, Porzana ma, < uetta, 
Phalacrocorax carbo, Saxicola a nan the, Mot ac ilia lugubris, A lamia an ens is, 
Vanellus vulgaris, Sturnus vulgaris, lynx, Pastor roseus, 1 unfits pilaris, 
T. iliac us, Corvus comix and Syrrhaptes mentioned].
Nat., April 1890, 
pp.
97-98.
York N.E., Durham.
T. A.
Lofthouse.
Arrival of Summer Birds [near Middlesbrough ; dates for Phylloscopus 
rufus, Hirundo, Sylvia atricapilla, Phylloscopus trochilus, Motacilla rail, and 
Cotile].
Field, Ap, 26th, 1890, p.
594.
Gumming Macdona.
Sheldrake [Yadorna cornuta] near Liverpool [stating, in criticism of note by 
6 W.
H. B./ that a pair visit Hoylake Golf Links every year to breed, and 
are now to be seen daily].
Field, June 14th, 1890, p.
892.
Northumberland, Durham, Cumberland, 
H. A.
Macpherson.
Westmorland, Lancashire, Yorkshire.
The Goldfinch [a lengthy and interesting article on the diminution in 
numbers and restriction in range of Carduelis elegans, with much detail as to 
its habits, migration, range, etc., and as to its former abundance and present 
scarcity in Northumberland, Durham, Cumberland, ^'estmorland, Lancashire, 
and Yorkshire].
Field, Aug. 9th, 1890, p.
214.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Wildfowl on the Solway [scarce, owing to mild winter ; Anas boschas, 
Bernicla leucopsis, Dafila, Chaidelasmus, Spatula, Querquedula crecca, 
Fuligula ferina, F.
cristata, F.
marila, Clangula glaucion, CEdemia nigra, 
CE.
fusca, Harelda, Bernicla brenta, A user segetum, A.
brachyrhynchus, 
A. albifrons, Mergus merganser, Mergus (sp.
not stated), A/.albeltus, Tadorna 
cornuta, Mareca, Colymbus glacialis, and C septentrionalis mentioned, with 
detail as to Clangula].
Field, Jan. nth.
1890, p.
56.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland, York S.E.
Storm Petrel [Procellaria pelagica'] in Summer [in Cumberland in 1841, 
near Spurn, and elsewhere; details].
Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
48.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness.
The Tree Sparrow [Pas r montanus] in the Lake District [where it breeds 
in three stations : near Howtown ; near Kirkoswald ; and in another 
Cumberland coast locality ; full discussion of habits, nidification, etc.].
Nat., 
March 1890, pp.
92-94.
York N.W.
H. A.
Macphrrson.
The Dotterel [Eudromias morinellus] in Yorkshire [near Dent, and on Woo 
Fell ; extracts from correspondence of T.
C. Heysham, about 1831].
Nat., 
March 1890, pp.
95-96.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland, York S.E.
The Shorelark [Otocorys alpestris] in Cumberland [on the salt-marshes, Feb.
1890 ; general notes also on the species are given, and as to its food at 
Spurn].
Nat., April 1890, pp.
115-116.
York N.E., Northumberland, 
H. A.
Macpherson.
Lincolnshire, Cumberland.
Auction Sale of North of England Rarities [Whitaker's duplicates : 
Ardetta minuta, Scalby Beck ; Stercorarius catarrhactes, Scarborough ; 
Pastor roseus, Yorkshire ; Sterna dougalli and Procellaria pelagica from coast 
of Northumberland ; Podiceps auritus from the Lincolnshire coast ; and 
Loxui bifasciata from Cumberland ; dates and other details given].
Nat., 
July 1890, p.
210.
lay ,8 9i .
130 bibliography: birds, 1890.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Lane.
W. and S., Notts., Furness.
Notes on Birds from Lancashire.
Extracted from Letters of the late 
James Cooper [1840 to 1844 ; Tot anus canescens, Tringa subarquata, Limosa 
lapponica, Machetes, Upupa, Totanus glareola, Lanius exctcbitor, Mergulus alk, 
Tringa striata, Squatarola, Calidris, Hydrochelidon nigra, Tetanus fuscus, 
Eudromias, Sterna macmra, Numenius pJucopus, Mofacilla alba, A nth us 
obscurus, Procellaria leucorrhoa all noted near Preston and Ulverston, and 
Milvus ictinus and Otis tetrax near Newark-on-Trent].
Nat., Aug. 1890, 
pp.
234-236.
H. A.
Macpherson, Cumberland.
The Greenshank ( Totanus glottis) [an interesting account of the bird, 
its habits and occurrence on the Solway, etc.].
Field, Sept.
13th, 1890, 
p. 404.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Spotted Redshank [Totanus fuscus'] in Cumberland [three killed in 1888 and 
1889].
Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
318.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland, Furness.
The Little Stint ( Tringa minuta) [an interesting and detailed account of 
its occurrence in Cumberland, on the Solway Firth, and its absence from 
Furness and Walney Island ; notes also on T.
subarquata in Furness, Machetes, 
Strepsilas, and Tringa canutus in their passage across the Pennine Range].
Field, Oct. 4th, 1890, p.
501.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Garganey [Querquedula ctrcta] in Cumberland [an adult female shot on the 
coast, 15th Aug., 1890].
Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
320.
II.
A. Macpherson.
Cheviotland, Durham, Lincolnshire, Cumberland.
Eagles in the North of England [being records extracted from the 
' Gentleman's Magazine,' for Cheviot Hill in 1751, Ryhope near Sunderland 
in 1765, and Lincolnshire in 1784, and their breeding in the Lake District to 
within the last years of the 18th century; Aquila chrysaetos and Haliactus 
albicilla referred to], Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
323.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Grey Phalarope [Phalaropus fulicaruts] in Cumberland [and its dates of 
appearance noted in recording one on the coast, 23rd September, 1890].
Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
335.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Westmorland.
Montagu's Harrier [Circus cineraceus] in Westmorland [one killed near 
Burgh, 15th Sept., 1890; has also occurred in Cumberland and on Walney 
Island].
Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
352.
H. A.
Macpherson.
* Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cumberland.
Shorelarks [Otocorys alpestris] and Buntings [a general article, with but 
casual references to the occurrence of the Shorelark in Yorkshire, Lancashire, 
and Cumberland].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
745.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Nocturnal Migrations of Birds [in Cumberland ; flights of Tringa alpina, 
T. canutus, CEdemia nigra, Numenius arquata, Tringoides, Turdus iliacus, 
Alauda arvensis, Larus fuscus, and Saxicola ananthe, at different dates].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
Furness.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Shore-Lark [Otocorys alpestris} on Walney Island [one shot Oct. 1890].
Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
354.
H. A.
Macpherson.
Cumberland.
Bewick's Swan [{Cygnus bewicki) and its occurrence in Cumberland in 
1889, discussed at considerable length ; the occurrence of one in 1890, aUo 
of Numemu arquata and M ;us vn anser on the Solway marshes 
Field, Dec. 20th, 1890, pp.
910-91 1.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: birds, 1890.
131 
H. Stapylton Marshall.
Cheshire.
Reported Occurrence of the Cuckoo [Cuculus canorus] in March [on the 
12th at Woodchurch near Birkenhead; editor knows no authenticated instance 
before April].
Field, March 15th, 1890, p.
399.
J as.
Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Great Spotted Woodpecker [Dendrocopus major] near Alford [an adult 
female shot at Ailby, 25th Nov., 1889].
Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
14.
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line, N.
Storm Petrel [Procellaria pelagic a] near Alford in 1888 [seen 14th Nov., 
at Thoresthorpe, and killed two days later], Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
46.
G. W.
Murdock.
Westmorland.
Swallows in March [Chelidon noted at Kendal on March 16th ; Sturmts 
vulgaris noted as now in great numbers around Kendal, where they were 
unknown fifty years ago].
Field, March 29th, 1890, p.
472.
G. W.
Murdoch.
Kendal.
Woodcock [Scolopax rusticola] nesting in the Lake District [at Arnside ; 
particulars given ; has also nested at Levens], Field, April 19th, 1890, p.
587.
Newman Neave.
Cheshire.
Rainow, nr.
Macclesfield [notes on Dendrocopus major, Alcedo, Pica, and 
Cinches], N.
H. J., Feb. 15th, 1890, p.
15.
T. H.
Nelson.
' York N.E.
Great Skua [Stercorarius catarr hades] on the Yorkshire Coast [off Redcar 
known as * Morrel Hen,' .V. crepidatus and S.
parasiticus as * Allans,' and 
S. pomatorhinus as ' Big Allan'].
Zool., March 1890, p.
100.
Thomas H.
Nelson.
York N.E., Durham.
Bird-Notes from Redcar and Tees Mouth for 1889-1890 [being notes on 
migratory movements, etc., from 1889, Jan. 3rd, to 1890, Feb. 28th; anent 
Cygnus, Phalacrocorax graculus, Podiceps grisei na, Squat arola helvetica, 
Coccothr ausles vulgaris (nesting), Tringa mi nut a, T.
subarquata, T.
canutus, 
Strepsilas, Sterna cantiaca, Triuga alpina, Slercorarius parasiticus, 
S. crepidatus, S.
pomatorhinus, Anas boschas, Mareca, Xema sabinii, Corvus 
comix.
Scolopax rusticola, Porzana maruetta, Alauda arvensis, Fulmarus 
glacialis, Falco peregrinus (Ingleby in Cleveland), Pastor roseus, Otocorys, 
Mergulus alle, Fratercula, Lomvia troile, and Dendrocopus major, nearly all 
at Redcar and Tees Mouth].
Nat., April 1890, pp.
99-100; Zool., April 
1890.
pp.
136- 138.
T. H.
Nklson.
York N.E.
Arrival of the Wheatear [{Saxicola cenanthe) on sand-hills, Coatham and 
Redcar, 23rd March, 1890].
Field, April 5th, 1890, p.
500.
T. H.
Nelson.
York N.E.
Ornithological Notes from Redcar [correcting an error of Stercorarius 
parasiticus which should be S.
crepidatus, and giving omitted date for 
Mergulus alle\ Zool., May 1890, p.
187.
T. H.
Nelson.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Kildale-in-Cleveland [12th July, 
1890 ; Tnrdus musicus, T.
viscivorus, T.
merula, T.
torquatus, Ruticilla 
phanicums, Erit hocus, Sylvia cinerea, Phyllo: pus ruftts, Ph. trochilus.
Accentor, Passer domesticus, Troglodytes, Motacilla lugubris, Anthus 
pratensis, Hirundo, Chelidon, Cot He, Cypselus, Lijurinus, Frmg la Calebs, 
Pyrrhula vulgaris, Sturmts, Corvus frugilegus, Columba palumbus, Alcedo, 
and Gecinus noted as seen during the day ; notes also given on the occurrence 
at Easby of Dendrocopus major, D.
minor, Gecinus, lynx, Certhia, Parus 
flatus, A rdea cinerea, Tnngoides, Porzana maru fa, and Gallinago major ; 
the occurrence several times at Ingleby Greenhow of A hibuteo, Bui , and 
Palco peregrinus; and a record on good authority (E.
B. Emerson) of 
Daulias m the grounds of Tolle .y Hall near Middle rough].
Nat., 
s ep.
1S90, pp.
270-271.
***y 1893.
132 bibliography: birds, 1890.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire.
The Heron \Ardea cinerea\ and Heronries of Cheshire and North Wales 
[stating two in Cheshire on which information is desired].
Research, March 
1890, p.
203.
DlGBY S.
W. NlCHOLL.
Notts.
Reported occurrence of the Black-winged Stilt [ffima?itopns Candidas] 
near Nottingham an error [the specimen being a foreign skin].
Zool., 
Jan. 1890, p.
25.
Chas.
Oi.dham.
Cheshire.
Bank Vole and Short-tailed Vole in North Cheshire [on the increase, 
natural consequence of decrease of Falco tinmtnculas^ etc.].
Zool., March 
1890, p.
99.
Charles Oldham.
Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
Hawfinches \Coccotkratistes vulgaris] and Green Peas [in Cheshire and 
South Lancashire, discussed in detail].
Zool., Dec. 1890, p.
465.
R. E.
Paton.
Cumberland.
Owl Nesting in a Rookery [at Southwaite Hill, Carlisle; species not 
stated, but editorial note states it was in all probability Asio otus, which nests 
upon a platform of sticks].
Field, June 28th, 1890, p.
979.
Jno. Philipson.
Northumberland S., Cheviotland.
Address to the .
. .
Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club, read .
. .
May 15th, 1889 [with notes anent the colony of Lams ridUmndtis at 
Hallington Reservoir, 21st May, 1888; also at Harbottle Tarn, 21st June; 
Tringdides in the Coquet near Harbottle : Tringa canutus on the coast near 
Dunstanborough, 1 2th Sep.].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and 
Newc, vol.
10, part 2, 1890, pp.
395 and 405.
Jno. Philipson.
Northumberland S.
Matters of Interest to the Naturalist [being records of the occurrence 
of Loxia curvirostra in some numbers ; Colttmba furfur at Seaton Burn ; 
Machetes at Newbiggin-by-the-Sea, June 8th ; curious var.
of Gallinago 
ccelestis near Morpeth; several Archibuteo in Northumberland and one on 
Newcastle Town Moor ; and a curious brown Perdix cinerea near Morpeth].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part 2, 1890, 
p. 410.
Jno. Philipson.
Cheviotland, Northumb.
S., Durham, Yorkshire, Lines.
Pallas' s Sand Grouse [(Syrrhaptes paradoxus) in Northumberland and 
Durham ; a detailed account of occurrences in 1888].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, part 2, 1890, pp.
411 -414.
Jno. Philipson.
Northumberland S., Cheviotland, Lane S.
A Raid on Rooks [( Ccrvus frugUcgus) ; discussing their habits and value 
or obnoxiousness to farmers ; with notes on occurrences of Rookeries in 
Newcastle, on Holy Island, etc.; Corvus monedula also at Holy Island; 
notes also from Rossendale, Lanes.
(H.
Kerr)].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Newc, vol.
10, pt.
2, 1890, pp.
414-419.
Jno. H.
Phillips.
York N.E.
Wax wing [A m pelts garru/us] and Dotterel \_Eudromias morinellus] in Central 
Ryedale [particulars of former occurrences given], Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
15- 
G. Pullen.
Derbyshire.
White Variety of the Blackbird [( Tardus merttla) near Derby ; pure white].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
199.
G. Pullen.
Derbyshire.
Manx Shearwater {Puffinm angiorum] near Derby [picked up exhausted 
at Brailsford, end of August 1890].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
199.
G. Pullen 
Derbyshire 
Podiceps minor at Derby [seen on the Derwent.
within a minute"^ walk 
of Derby Market-place].
Young Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
232.
Natural^* 
bibliography: birds, 1890.
133 
\V.
Pyman.
York N.E.
Six Partridges [Perdix cinerea] at a shot [near Whitby].
Field, Nov. 1st, 
1890, p.
645.
P. Ralfe.
Isle of Man.
Bird-life at Douglas Bay, Isle of Man [being notes on the occurrence 
of ^Egialitis hiaticula, Tringa striata, Larus argentatus, L, ridibundus, 
L. fusctts, L.
marinus, Ardea cinerea, Coruus comix, Vanellus, and Phala- 
crocorax graculus], Zool., Sept.
1890, pp.
355~357» 
A. R[awson].
Westmorland and Furness.
Date of Arrival of the Cuckoo [(Cuculus canon ts) in the Keswick valley, 
2nd April, doubted].
Field, May 24th, 1890, p.
772.
A. Rawson.
Westmorland and Furness.
Blackbird {Turdus mentions Nest in Rhubarb [in the centre of a plant, 
at Windermere].
Field, May 24th, 1890, p.
772.
Robert H.
Read.
Northumberland.
Clydesdale Naturalists' Society [notes on the habits of Cuculus canorus, 
which in Northumberland uses the nests of Pratincola rubetra, Accentor 
/nodularis, and Motacilla rait].
Research, Feb. 1890, p.
187.
G. Richardson.
York N.E.
Rooks [Corvus frugilegus] and Spring Gales [at Skelton ; effects of latter 
destructive].
N. H.J., March 15th, 1890, p.
36.
Charles Robson.
Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Late Appearance of the Swift (Cypselus apus) [at Killingworth, near 
Newcastle-on-Tyne, 24th Sep., 1890].
Sci. Goss., Nov. 1890, p.
262.
J. S.
Rowntree.
Cheshire, 
House Martins [Chelidon urbicd] preparing to leave [and gathering together 
in large numbers between Peel Causeway and Ashley, etc.].
Manchester 
Guardian, 9th Sep., 1889; N.
H. J., Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
120.
J. H.
Salter.
York N.E.
With Gun and Field-glass on Yorkshire Coast [noting Anas hoschas, 
Mareca, Tringa striata, Plectrophanes, Numenius arquata, Charadrius 
pluvialis, Alauda arvensis, Gallinago easiest is, St it r nits, Turdus pilaris, 
Tadorna cornuta, Corvus monedula, Larus argentatus, Harelda, Columba 
livia, C.
anas, Tinnunculus, Saxicola tenant he, and Colymhus, all at Filey, 
Jan. ist, 1887].
N. H.
J., April 15th, 1890, xiv.
40-43.
J. II.
Salter.
Lane.
S., Cheshire, 
Manchester Notes [anent Hirundo, Cypselus, Cottle, Phylloscopus trochilus, 
Sylvia currnca, Cuculus, Regulus cristatus, Acredula caudata, Pyrrhula, 
Locustella, Alcedo, and Phasianus], N.
H. J., June 15th, 1890, p.
96.
J. H.
Salter and N.
Neave.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Manchester Notes [anent Tinnunculus, Hirundo, Turdus pilaris, T.
iliacus, 
Pyrrhula, Paries palustris, Turdus musicus, T.
viscivorus, Emberiza 
miliaria, Pants major, Perdix cinerea, Certhta, Fringilla Calebs, Motacilla, 
Turdus merula, Vanellus, Alauda arvensis, Gallinula chloropus, Emberiza 
citrinella, Pants major, P.
ocruleus, P.
ater, Podiceps cristatus, Tachybaptes, 
Fuligiila cristata, Fulica, Regulus cristatus, Emb. schoeniclus, Anthus 
prate nsis, Ligurinus, Accentor, Pica, and Erithacus\ N.
II.
]., April 15th, 
1890, xiv.
56.
J- H.
Salter, Newman Neave.
Cheshire, Lane.
S, 
Manchester Bird-Notes [anent Phasianus, Anas boschas, Phylloscopus 
rufus, Motacilla raii, Ph. trochilus, Larus argentatus, Hirundo, Acredula 
caudata, Turdus musicus, and Tringoides].
N. H.
J., May 15th, 1890, p.
80.
J- H.
Salter, N.
Neave.
Derbyshire, Cheshire.
On the Derbyshire Border [of Cheshire, near Macclesfield; Vattellus, 
Pi<a, Gallinago calestis, Turdus torquatus, Lino/a jlavirostns, Cinclus, 
May t8c^.
134 BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
Motacilla melanope, Alcedo, Ardea cinerea^ Tinnunculus, Colu/uba anas, 
Numenius arquata, Lagopus scoticas % Anthus pratensis, Ckaradrius phivialis, 
Tetrao tetrix, Accipiter uisus, and Spatula, treated of in chatty style].
N. H.
J., Sep. 15th, 1890, pp.
99-102.
W. Sampey.
Notts.
Arrival of Fieldfares [Turdus pilaris seen at Bleasby near Southwell, 
19th Oct. 1890, a large flock; earliest date for twenty years of careful 
observation ; Corvus comix not arrived yet].
Field, Oct. 25th, 1890, p.
616.
HuCxH Scott.
* Dogger Bank.' 
Water Rail [Rallus aquaticus\ at Sea [one came aboard a vessel hove to on 
Dogger Bank, 19th Oct. 1890, during a gale].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
746.
Henry Seebohm.
York N.E.
[Exhibition of Turtur orientalis, shot 23rd Oct. 1889 at N a t> Gutter, a small 
stream running from Oliver's Mount, Scarborough, down to the sea ; particulars 
given and shooting of Muscicapa parva in same locality on same day noted].
P.Z.S., 6th May, 1890, Part 25, pub.
1890, p.
361 ; Field, May 17th, 1890, 
p. 708 ; Zool., June 1890, p.
226.
H. H.
Slatee.
Cumberland.
Crossbills [Loxia cwvirostra] in Cumberland [a large flock on Nov. 30th].
Nat., Jan. 1889, p.
24.
H. H.
Slater.
York Mid W.
The Yorkshire Records for the Great Black Woodpecker {{Picus 
martins) ; the Ripley record of 1846 again condemned].
Nat., Feb. 1S90, 
p. 38.
Henry H.
Slater.
York.
Loxia bifasciata in Yorkshire [repetition of record published in the 
Naturalist, for Oct. 1889].
Zool., March 1890, p.
105.
C. E.
Smith.
York N.E. and Mid W.
[Bird-notes for York district ; Sylvia rttfa, Alcedo, Phylloscopus trochilus, 
and Sylvia curruca at Askham, 17th Sept.
; Tringoides at Clifton Ings 
20th Sept.
; Fitlica and Larus argentatus at Hob Moor, 5th Oct.
; last 
Hi/undo seen 9th Oct.
; last Chelidon, 13th Oct.
; Turdus pilaris seen 
1st Nov.].
N. H.
J., Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
167.
Jos. E.
Smith.
Cheshire, Derbyshire, 
Lane 
Manchester Notes [anent nest of Gallimda chloropus at Gatley].
N. H.
J., 
May 15th, 1890, p.
79.
[Nest of Tringoides half-way up Kinderscout, of 
Anthus pratensis on Cobden Edge, above Strines, Alcedo near Chorlton ; 
dates and details given].
N. H.
J., Dec. 15th, 1890, pp.
171-172.
Jos. Smith.
A Walk to Birkdale [Nest of Columba anas found in a rah 
N. H.
J., Nov. 15th, 1890, xiv.
p. 147.
C. E.
Stott.
Lane 
Cheshire.
Jackdaw \Corvus /uonedula] killing Rats [at Northwich, Cheshire], Zool..
Nov. 1890, p.
437.
Thos.
Thompson.
Willow Wren [ 
Durham.
m Phylloscopus trochi/us] in January [one shot 16th Jan., 1890, 
between Blaydon and Scotswood].
Field, Jan. 25th, 1890, p.
138.
Thomas Thompson.
York N.W.
Unspotted Eggs of the Spotted Flycatcher [(Muscicapa grisda) at Croi 
Spa].
Field, Aug. 30th, 1890, p.
346, 
Thos.
Thompson.
Cheviotland.
Arrival of Fieldfares [{Turdus pilaris); several seen on Holy bked, Oct. 7th: 
also a flock of 7\ Moots], Field, Oct. 25th, 1890, p.
616.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
135 
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1889 [for Burton-on-Trent district : dates given 
for Alaitda arvensis at Ashby Road, and for Hirundo rustica, Phylloscopus 
trochilus, Cuculus, Crex, and Acrocephalus phragmitis\ Ann. Rep.
Burton- 
on-Trent N.
H. S., for year ending 30th Sep., 1890, p.
21.
Julian G.
Tuck.
York N.E. and S.E* 
Seafowl at Scarborough [being" notes on Lomvia troile, A lea torda, Rissa, 
Lams argentatus, Falco peregrinus, Phalacrocorax carbo, CEdemia nigra, 
Lants fuscus, and Fratercula, at Flamborough Cliffs and Filey Brigg, June 
1890].
Zool., Oct. 1890, pp.
385-386.
J. R.
TUTIN.
York N.E 
Wordsworth in Yorkshire [an extract from Dorothy Wordsworth's 
journal : Thrushes ( Tardus musicus) noted singing at Rievaulx Abbey, 
13th July, 1802].
Yorksh.
Notes and Queries, Part 19, April 1890, p.
259.
J. T.
Tristram Valentine.
Derbyshire.
Little Bittern [Ardetta minuta] in Derbyshire [a male shot at Langwith, 
spring of 1889].
Zool., Sept.
1890, p.
357.
Edgar R.
Waite.
Line.
N. 
Red-throated Diver [Colymbus septentr ion alls'] at Alford, Lines, [a female 
taken alive, 27th Dec. 1889 ; sent by J.
E. Mason].
Nat., March 1890, p.
94.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York S.W.
Great Grey Shrike [Lanius excubitor] at Middleton, Leeds [on the 
17th Jan., 1890 ; is var.
L. major], Nat., March 1890, p.
94.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Lowthorpe near Driffield [26th May, 
1890; 42 birds, 27 resident and 15 migrant, observed, viz., Turdus viscivorus, 
T musicus, T merula, Pi-atincola rubetra, Erithacus, Sylvia ciirruca, 
S. atricapilla, S.
hortensis, Regulus er 1st at us, Phylloscopus troc kilns, P.
rufus, 
Acrocephalus phragmitis, Locuslella, Accentor /nodularis, Acredula rosea, 
Parus cceruleus, Troglodytes, Anthus (two species), Muscicapa grisola, 
Hirundo, Chelidon, Cotile, Ligurinus, Passer domesticus, Fringilla Calebs, 
Linota cannabina, Emberiza miliaria, E.
citrinella, E, schceniclus, Sturnus, 
Corvus monedula, C.
frugilegus, Alauda arvensis, Cypselus, Cuculus, Columba 
palumbus, Phasianus, Perdix, Gallinula, Fulica, and Vanellus], Nat., 
July 1890, pp.
205-206.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Black-headed Gull [Lanes ridibundus] at Walton, near Thorp Arch [a 
young bird in first plumage, with some down, 24th June, 1890].
Nat., 
July 1890, p.
210.
Edgar R.
Waite.
York S.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Bretton Park [14th June, 1890 ; 
26 resident and 17 migrant birds noted, viz.
: Turdus viscivorus, T.
musicus, 
T. merula, Pratincola rubetra, Kuticilla p/uenicurus, Erithacus, Sylvia 
cinerea> S.
hortensis, Phylloscopus rufus, P.
trochilus, Acrocephalus 
phragmitis, Accentor, Parus major, P.
casruleus, Troglodytes, Motacilla 
lugubris, M.
rail, Anthus (both), Muscicapa grisola, Hirundo, Chelidon, 
Cotile, Ligurinus, Passer domesticus, Fringilla ccelebs, Emberiza citrinella, 
Stianus, Garrulus, Pica, Corvus monedula, C.
frugilegus, Alauda arvensis, 
Cypselus, Cuculus, Tinnunculus, Columba palumbus, Phasianus, Crex, 
Gallinula, Fulica, Vanellus, and Tringoides noted, with particulars as to 
nesting of eight of them].
Nat., July and Aug. 1890, pp.
221-225.
El ar R.
Waite.
York Mid W.
Remarkable Swallow[ #»////</<?
rusticals' Nests at Wilstrop, near York 
[built with and like those of Martins {Chelidon urbica) under eaves] Nat., 
^Sejx 1890, p.
258.
May i8 93 .
136 BIBLIOGRAPHY: BIRDS, 1890.
John Ward.
York S.W. and N.W.
Nesting of the Cirl Bunting [Emberiza cirlus] in Yorkshire [at Lofthouse 
in 1882 and in 1889 near Flushdyke, Ossett ; detailed particulars and 
editorial note given].
Nat., May 1890, p.
148.
John Ward.
W 
Nesting of the Cirl Bunting [Emberiza cirlus'] at Lofthouse, near 
Wakefield [re-affirmed in answer to editorial criticism of former note].
Nat., 
Oct. 1890, p.
320.
John Ward.
York S.W.
Turtle Dove \_Turtur commutes] at Lofthouse near Wakefield [a fine 
male 2lst May, 1890; details given].
Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
335.
York S.E., N.E., S.W., Mid W., and N.W., Derbyshire, 
Line.
N., Cumb., Lane.
S. and W., Westmld., 
John Watson.
Furness, Northumb.
S., Cheviotland, Durham.
The Northern Distribution of the Dotterel \(Eudrotnias morinelhts\ 
discussed, and numerous records quoted from the various northern counties 
of England ; also some most interesting original notes by various persons].
Westm.
Note-Book and Nat. Record, Sep. and Dec. 1889, pp.
162-164, 
and 176-179.
J. Spence Watson.
Lane.
S. 
The Cuckoo [{Cuculus canorits) at Heaton Mersey near Manchester].
N. H.
J., Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
117.
S. C.
Way.
Durham.
Cat Catching Wildfowl [one at Durham described as adept at catching 
Gallimila chloropits and Anas boschas on the ice].
Field, Dec. 27th, 1890, p.
948.
E. W.
West.
W 
Singular Fatality to a Rook [[Corvus frugilegus) near Rotherham ; 
entangled in a forked branch].
Field, March 8th, 1890, p.
361.
Leonard H.
West.
York N.E.
Alpine Swift \Cypselus me/da] at Scarborough [repetition of record of the 
one he saw near Oliver's Mount in 1880].
Field, Nov. 1st, 1890, p.
668.
J. A.
Wheldon.
York S.E.
Colouring of Eggs [discussed ; Lams argent at us y Lomvia troile, Alca 
torda, all on Yorkshire Cliffs, cited].
Sci. Goss., Feb. 1890, p.
45.
I. A.
Wheldon.
York S.E.
Colour of Eggs [a certain Guillemot {Lomvia troile) near Flamborough 
invariably lays white eggs].
Sci. Goss., May 1890, p.
117.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Osprey [Pandion haliaetus\ in Notts [one shot in mid-November at Shire 
Oaks].
Zool., Jan. 1890, p.
19.
J. Whitaker.
. Notts.
Variety of Great Tit [(Parus major); near Nottingham].
Z00L, March 1890, 
p. 107.
J. Whitaker.
Varieties in Wild Pigeons [including a pied one of Colm 
in North Notts].
Zool., Oct. 1890, p.
389.
J. Whitaker.
York N 
Notts.
W 
Arrival of Fieldfares [{Turdus pilaris^ Sept.
27th, 1890, near Northallerton, 
when grouse-driving; Corvus comix also; earliest dates for Notts, are 
Sept.
12th, 1874, and Sept.
21st, 1877, both near Rainworth].
Field, 
Oct. 25th, 1890, p.
616.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: birds, 1890.
137 
J. Whitakf.r. Notts.
Date of Arrival of Jack Snipe [{Limnocryptes gallinula) at Rainworth, 
Notts., Sept.
1st, 1867].
Field, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
740.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Pine Grosbeak [Pinicola enuc/eator] in Nottinghamshire [shot near 
Watnall, 30th Oct., 1890; new for Notts., and the sixth authenticated British 
example].
Zool., Dec. 1890, p.
464.
J. Whitaker.
Notts.
Pine Grosbeak [Pinicola enucleator\ in Notts [one, a male, shot near 
Watnall, date not given ; stated to be the sixth British occurrence].
Field, 
Dec. 6th, 1890, p.
850.
F. B.
Whitlock.
Notts.
Notes on the Tree Sparrow [(Passer montanus) as observed in South Notts ; 
and compared with P.
domesticus\ Nat., Feb. 1890, pp.
43-44.
F. B.
Whitlock.
Notts.
Dunlins [Tringm alpind\ and Ringed Plovers [Mgialitis kiaticuld\ in Notts 
[their habits and time of appearance].
Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
46.
F. B.
Whitlock.
Notts.
Autumn Bird-Notes from Notts [in 1889 ; notes anent Pa?
us caruleus, 
P. major, P % ater, P.
caudatus, Dendrocopus major, Porzana maruetta, 
Linota rufescens, L.
linaria, Fringilla montifringilla, Sterna nigra, 
S\ hirundo, Falco peregrinus, Botaurus stellar is, Pandion, in South Notts ; 
also some Norfolk notes], Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
47.
F. B.
Whitlock.
Notts.
Some further Notes on the Tree Sparrow [{Passer montanus), its habits 
and nidification as observed in Notts ; reference also to Ligurinus, Passer 
domesticits, and Sylvia hortensis].
Nat., May 1890, pp.
155-156.
F. B.
Whitlock.
Durham 
Notes on the Tree Sparrow [{Passer montanus); comparison of writer's 
own Notts observations with J.
W. Fawcett's Durham ones ; interpairing 
w 
with P.
domesticus discussed].
Nat., Oct. 1890, pp.
319-3 20 
C. H.
B. Woodd.
Vertebrate Fauna of Langstrothdale, Mid-West Yorkshire [enumerating, 
with remarks, 66 species of birds].
Nat., May 1 891, pp.
135-136- 
T. D.
Wright, Lane.
S. and W.
Bird- Egg Curiosities [discussed ; reference made to Ember iza citrinella, 
Passer domesticus, Tardus menda (Bacup), Crex, T.
musicus, Linota 
cannabina (Lancaster), Pica caudaia (do.), Fulica, Gallinula chloropus, 
Chrysomitris, and Perdix ciuerea, presumably near Lancaster], Sci. Goss., 
Jan. 1890, pp.
7-9.
John Wrigley.
Lane.
S. 
A Curious Site for a [Blue] Tit[Parus caruieus^s Nest [at Formby, in 
a disused iron pump ; details].
Field, June 21st, 1890, p.
906.
>hn Wriotfv.
Lane.
S. 
John Wrigley.
Lancash 
ERRATUM.
Mr. Cordeaux calls our attention to an error in the present instalment of 
Bibliography, at p.
122, wherein the tens of thousands of Shore-larks are 
represented as being on the Humber coast, whereas they were at \ leligoland.
May ,8q^.
138 
MASSEE'S BRITISH FUNGUS-FLORA.
British Fungus-Flora : A Classified Text-book of Mycology- By George 
Massee: in three volumes.
Vol. II.
Price ys.
6d.
Geo. Bell and Sons, 
London, 1893.
The author of this important work is evidently desirous that the 
three volumes shall be in the hands of mycological students in 
readiness for the coming season.
No time has been lost in bringing 
out Vol. IL, which, like its predecessor, shows that no efforts have 
been spared in its production.
The excellent manner in which the 
descriptions of species have been drawn up leaves nothing to 
be desired, and the small drawings of thirty-nine species will 
doubtless prove useful to the student.
The groups dealt with 
are Ochrosporae — in which the puzzling genus Cortinarius covers 
100 pages, — Rhodosporae, and a portion of the Leucosporas.
In the 
latter is included the genus Laccaria, which was originally proposed 
by Berkeley, and is readily distinguished from Gitocybe by its rough 
globose spores and mealy gills.
Few changes are perceptible in this 
volume, but it is sufficient to know that the work is up to date and 
reliable.
H.T.S 
NO TE— COLE OPTERA .
Soronia punctatissima near Leeds.
— Under the bark of a birch-tree in 
a wood between Chapel-Allerton and Roundhay I lately came across the very 
rare Soronia punctatissima.
Its colour was almost identical with that of the 
decaying bark, and it was only by chance that in the dim light I first noticed one.
A closer search produced four more.
Fowler's record in his British Coleoptera is 
as follows : —   Very local, Shirley and Esher in birch (Power), Darenth, 
Chatham, Combewood, Addington, Norwood, Belvedere, Shiere, Hastings, Isle 
of Wight, Dean Forest, Repton, Scarborough, Liverpool district, Dunham Park, 
Stretford, Northumberland district ; Scotland, local, Tweed, Tay, and Moray 
districts.*— W.
F. Baker, Leeds, April 25th, 1893.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Our colleague, Mr. W.
Barwell Turner, F.R.M.S., is having his important 
work on the Freshwater Algse of East India (especially Desmids) published by the 
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences as part of their publications, but to cover 
part of the great cost of its production he has issued proposals for the issue of 
a limited number oi copies to subscribers at £1 10s.
od.
each.
The work will be 
worthy of its author's reputation, both as an artist and an algologist, and we trust 
that any of our readers who wish to be among the subscribers will at once address 
themselves to Mr. James Miles, bookseller, Bond Street, Leeds.
A specimen number of 'Science and Art and Technical Education', which is 
edited by Mr. John Mills, F.R.A.S., which with its April number reached its 
seventh volume and 73rd number, has reached us.
It consists of a series of 
popular and gossippy articles on subjects more or less scientific, freely illustrated.
We notice that there are numerous portraits of science teachers and of eminent 
scientific luminaries, and we regret also to notice that the number before us is the 
first of a 'new ser s\ a complication which is always better avoided.
Naturalist 
l 39 
A FEW 
PLANTS OF SOUTH-WEST CUMBERLAND 
LISTER PETTY, 
Ulverston.
These notes from the Duddon area of South-West Cumberland 
were made some years ago, and, except where otherwise stated, the 
plants are still in the localities where then noticed.
Although no 
species here recorded is new to the county, amongst the aliens will 
be found some which are at least uncommon.
To my friends, 
especially the Rev. F.
A. Malleson, of Broughton-in-Furness, I am 
indebted for plants which they allow me to include, and for this 
permission my thanks are due.
Mr. William Hodgson, A.L.S., very 
kindly read my list for me, and to him it owes something, as will be 
seen.
A. = Alien ; N.
A. = Naturalised Alien ; D.
= Denizen ; N.
= Native.
Helleborus viridis L.
(N.) Near Lady Hall ; Rev. F.
A. Malleson.
In a field, close to the hedge, outside the Duddon Woods ; 
Miss M.
Whineray.
From the latter station I saw a specimen just after it was 
gathered.
The locality seems to represent Dickinson's in the 
1 Phytologist,' 1861, pp.
222 and 286.
I can gain no informa- 
tion of the plants ' in the Duddon Woods/ as recorded by 
Mr. Tweddle in Miss Martineau's ' Guide to the Lakes,' ed.
of 
1861, repeated in Linton's 'Lake Country,' 1864, and quoted 
by Mr. Baker in his 'Flora of English Lake District,' 1885.
Mr. Hodgson tells me he has 'seen lists in Mr. Tweddle's hand- 
writing in which the green hellebore is mentioned as " growing 
in the Duddon Woods — scarce/" This I suppose must settle 
the matter, though the plants have not recently been seen.
Aquilegia vulgaris L.
(N.) Duddon Woods; Rev. F.
A. Malleson.
'Probably quite indigenous there;' Mr. W.
Hodgson.
Delphinium Ajacis Reichb.
(N.A.) Duddon Woods ; Rev. F.
A. 
Malleson.
' Quite naturalised now.' The only other record for 
the county known to me is in Baker's * Flora.' 'A weed in a corn 
field at Dean, 1874,' found by Mr. W.
B. Waterfall; in which 
position it w r as undoubtedly an alien, and is marked as such.
Meconopsis cambrica Vig.
(A.) Beck-foot near a house ; i.e., 
the foot of Logan Beck.
Corydalis claviculata DC.
(N.) Clearings in the woods near 
Buckman Brow; Rev. F.
A. Malleson and others.
fay 18Q3.
I40 PETTY : PLANTS OF SOUTH-WEST CUMBERLAND.
Cardamine amara L.
(N.) Duddon Woods, near Beck-foot; 
Rev. F.
A. Malleson.
Malva moschata L.
(N.) On rubbish heaps about the old 
furnace near Duddon Bridge.
Tilia parvifolia Ehrh.
(D.) Duddon Woods; Rev. F.
A. Malleson.
Impatiens noli-metangere L.
(D.) Duddon Bridge, as recorded 
by Joseph Robson*in ' Phytologist,' 1854, p.
2. In the stream 
near the old furnace near Duddon Bridge.
Euonymus europaeus L.
(N.) Duddon Woods and the hedges 
about them.
Crataegus laciniata Wallr.
(N.) Probably this, but not seen in 
flower.
A tree in the Duddon Woods.
Ribes rubrum L.
(D.) High up in the Duddon Woods, above 
High Duddon.
Sedum album L.
(A.) Thwaites Bridge.
Drosera anglica Huds.
(N.) On Stonstir or Stoneshead Fell, 
with D.
rotundifolia (specimen seen by Mr. J.
G. Baker).
Myrrhis odorata Scop.
(D.) Road-side and ground about the 
Saw-mills, near Duddon Bridge.
(Formerly there was a garden 
here; the remains of a few old-fashioned perennials still survive.) 
Mr. Hodgson writes : — ' I have seen old women rub the inside 
of bee-hives with the leaves ; the idea being that the fragrance 
thereby attaching to the "skep" had a sedative influence on 
the insects newly transferred to a fresh home.' In one part of 
Lancashire (i.e., Leek), I am told that the old oak furniture 
used to be rubbed with the seed-vessels before the seeds were 
quite ripe.
The oily nature of the juice thus expressed, and 
the roughness of the seed-vessels giving a most beautiful polish.
This rubbing was hard work and the plant disliked in con- 
sequence by the young women.
Linaria Cymbalaria Mill.
(A.) At Thwaites, on a wall.
Mimulus luteus L.
(A.) Thoroughly naturalised on the side of 
the Duddon near Duddon Bridge.
Not so abundant now as 
on the Lancashire side.
Narcissus pseudo-narcissus L.
(N.) Duddon Woods, as 
recorded by Dickinson in Miss Martineau's ' Guide,' ed.
of 1861.
Convallaria majalis L.
(N.) In the woods at Beck-foot.
Locally 
abundant.
Lilium Martagon L.
(A.) Naturalised on the banks of the 
Duddon ; Mr. J.
W. Fawcitt.
Paris quadrifolia L.
(N.) In the woods about the old furnace 
near Duddon Bridge ; Rev. F.
A. Malleson.
Naturalist.
ZOOPHYTES AND POLYZOA ON THE LINCOLNSHIRE COAST.
141 
Hymenophyllum unilaterale Bory.
(N.) On rocks in the 
Duddon : Rev. F.
A. Malleson.
Lomaria 
Beck-foot.
(N.) Wood 
Asplenium marinum L.
(N.) On the rocks, not far from 
Millom ; Messrs.
R. Nelson and Edwards.
This, by the way, is not the locality given to me, but it is 
quite near enough.
Seemingly it is neither of Mr. Edwin 
Green's localities in ' Phytologist/ 1861, p.
68 ('Plants of 
Holborn Hill ').
Ceterach officinarum Willd.
(N.) On a wall near Thwaites.
Cystopteris fragilis Bernk.
(N.) Formerly rather abundant on 
the walls along the road between Duddon Bridge and the old 
Furnace.
Almost extinct there now.
Phegopteris Dryopteris Fee.
(N.) Duddon Woods.
Woods 
at Beck-foot, near Ulpha, as recorded by Dickinson in Miss 
Martineau's 'Guide/ ed.
1861.
Phegopteris polypodioides Fee.
(N.) Duddon Woods.
Woods 
at Beck-foot.
Var. multifida.
In the ditches at Beck-foot — 
sparingly.
Osmunda regalis L.
(N.) In the woods and some of the damp 
pastures in this district.
Not particularly localised for obvious 
reasons.
Not uncommon.
It may interest Mr. P.
H. Grimshaw to know that in 1887 I saw 
the plants given below.
They are included because not many people 
besides ourselves have seen them, and they confirm his records.
Cheiranthus cheiri L.
(N.
? here) At Calder Abbey.
Mimulus moschatus.
(Garden Alien.) Amongst stones on the 
Calder, near Sellafield.
Convallaria majalis L.
(N.) At Stock Gill.
First recorded 
by Joseph Robson in   Phytologist,' 1854 ('Plants of Gosforth 
and District ').
Robson's Dale-Garth is only another name for 
Stanley Gill.
NOTE— ZOOPHYTES AND POLYZOA.
Zoophytes and Polyzoa on the Lincolnshire Coast.
— On February 
10th, 1892, Mr.
\V.
Bellamy obtained for me at Skegness some c sea- weed,' con- 
sisting principally of Zoophytes and Polyzoa, since named for me with great 
kindness by Mr. R.
Kirkpatrick of the British Museum (Natural History), as 
follows :— Hydroida : Sea-fir Zoophyte {Sertularia abidina) ; Sickle Coralline 
(Hydrallmania falcata).
POLYZOA : Sea-mat [Flustra foliacea) ; Silk Coralline 
(Vesicularia spinosa).
— J.
Burti-Davy, Department of Botany, University of 
California, Berkeley, Cal., U.S.A., April 6th, 1893.
May 1893.
142 
EROSION OF THE YORKSHIRE COAST 
Being the Report of the Coast Erosion Committee of the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union for 1892.
Rev. E.
MAULE COLE, M.A , F.G.S., 
Vicar of I Ve twang, East \ 'orkshire ; Hon, Sec. to the Yorkshire Naturalists Union Coast 
Erosion Committee.
Coast Erosion Committee.
— It sounds brawly — one can almost 
fancy the very waves trembling in their shoes when they heard that 
a band of picked men were about to record their misdeeds, and tell 
them, like Smellfungus, to the world.
' This Committee,' says the 
official document, 'proposes to observe the present changes and past 
condition of the sea-coast in order to determine the rate of erosion, 
and the influence of the artificial abstraction of shingle or other 
material in that action.' 
* This committee/ It reminds one of the story of the cheeky 
boy, who, when asked how many they were in family, replied, ; Well, 
if you count the girls, we are seven ; but I'm one.' In fact I am 
the committee and have been so all along, and therefore beg to 
make my report in my own way, no man forbidding me.
Last year I furnished t Notes of certain Measurements made by 
the Secretary for future reference/ published in the ' Naturalist,' 
April 1892.
This year I visited some of the stations with the 
following results ; —   
SEWERBY.
1. — Original measurement, Jan. nth, 1889 
New ,, June 9th, 1892 
Loss in 3 years 5 months ...
2. — Original measurement, Jan. nth, 1889 ...
New ,, June 9th, 1892 ...
Loss in 3 years 5 months ...
* • • 
• • • 
•   
SANDS COTTAGE, BRIDLINGTON BAY 
r. — Original measurement, Aug. 2nd, 1889 
New „ June 9th, 1892 
Loss in 2 years 10 months 
2. — Original measurement, Aug. 2nd, 1889 
New „ June 9th, 1892 
Loss in 2 years 10 months 
HILDERTHORPE.
Original measurement, Feb, 13th, 1891 
Ne w ,, Aug. 23rd, 1892 
Loss in 1 year 6 months 
yds.
ft.
70 I 
68 
ins.
7 
8i 
2 O 
io£ 
8l 2 
10 
80 I 
3 
I I 
7 
ft.
ins.
44 
4 
.. 33 
7 
10 
9 
76 
- 7i 
7 
4 
J_ 
yds.
ft.
6l 2 
ins.
O 
58 O 
3 | 
6 
6 
Naturalist.
COL*:: EROSION OF THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
143 
The above measurements refer to three classes of rocks : 
(a) Those at Sewerby to a chalk cliff capped with gravel.
(b) Those at Sands Cottage to Boulder Clay overlaid with gravel 
and lacustrine marl.
(c) That at Hilderthorpe to cross-bedded 
sands and laminated clay.
The rate of denudation naturally 
increases from (a) to (c).
At (a) Sewerby the result gives a loss of 
about 2 ft.
and x\ ft.
per annum at the two stations respectively.
At (b) Sands Cottage, of about 3^ ft.
and iA ft.
per annum, or 
a mean of 2\ ft.
per annum.
At (c) Hilderthorpe, a loss of 7 ft.
per annum.
Hence the cliffs immediately to the south of 
Bridlington Flarbour are wearing away some three times faster than 
those to the north.
June 9TH, 1892.
— Sewerby.
A new station has been selected at Sewerby.
Length of hedge, 
from hedge of ring plantation to the cliff top, at the east side of the 
first field east of Sands Road, 511 ft.
5 in.
August 51H, 1892.
— Easington.
At Easington, near Spurn Point, a road runs to the coast ; 
a wooden boat-shed has been erected, which, however, is not 
destined to remain many years.
Distance from S.E. corner of boat- 
shed (parallel to south side), to edge of cliff, 101 feet 3 inches.
August 5TH, 1892.
— Kilnsea.
At Kilnsea there are fortunately some former measurements, 
independently of the well-known data concerning Kilnsea church, 
the chancel of which went in 1826, and the nave in 1833, and the 
remains of whose tower are still visible, at the lowest spring ebbs, 
at a distance of some 240 yards from the present cliff of boulder 
clay.
On a stone inserted in the wall of the Blue Bell Inn, it is 
recorded that the distance from the sea, i.e., the cliff top, was 
ln l8 47, 534 yards.
On the above date (1892), the distance was found to be 341 yards, 
showing an average loss of over four yards per annum, which has 
been apparently the average loss for the last sixty years.
There are some cottages near the Blue Bell Inn, on one of 
which is a similar stone recording a distance of 476 yards from the 
cliff top in 1858.
In 1892 the distance was found to be 343!
yards, 
which also gives an average of about four yards per annum.
Hence 
the coast of Holderness at its southern extremity is being eroded 
faster than anywhere else.
The foregoing remarks refer solely to the rate of erosion which 
the Committee has to determine.
As to the 'artificial abstraction of 
144 NOTES AND NEWS.
shingle ' and the construction of groins, I can offer my individual 
opinion only, but I do it the more readily as it may call forth some 
expression of support or the contrary.
As a rule gravel on all coasts is always travelling, and never 
remains long in a place unless stopped artificially.
Hence groins 
are most useful, but they must be continuous, and not too far apart.
- 
If groins cease, the shore to the south of them (on the coast of 
Holderness) suffers more than ever, because the ordinary supply of 
gravel is cut off.
The artificial abstraction of gravel is scarcely 
worth naming.
A single on-shore gale will remove as much in a day 
as all the carts in six months.
The main difficulty is to prevent the 
destruction of the boulder clay cliffs from the percolation of rain- 
water and from frost.
Unless this can be done the groins will find 
themselves some day out at sea.
Erratum.
— It has been pointed out to me by Mr. G.
Silabon, 
of Hull, that in my last report I imply that Poison himself measured 
the distance of certain churches in Holderness from the edge of the 
cliff.
This is partly an error of punctuation.
The passage referred 
to ('Naturalist/ p.
104, 1892) should read, ' Poison, when writing 
his valuable history of Holderness, recorded the distance of certain 
churches from the edge of the cliff in 1786.
It is to be presumed 
that the measurements were made, etc/ 
NOTES AND NEWS.
Messrs.
L. Reeve & Co. have in preparation a new work on the British 
Aculeate Hymenoptera, from the pen of Mr. Edward Saunders, F.L.S., uniform 
with the same author's work on the Hemiptera Heteroptera, just completed.
The energetic Berwick algologist, Mr. E.
A. L.
Batters, B.A., LL.B., F.L.S., 
has in the 'Journal of Botany* for June 1892 a paper entitled "Additional Notes 
on the Marine Alga?
of the Clyde Sea-area,' extending to eight pages, and 
including notices of numerous species.
Mr. J.
Cosmo Melvill, whose scientific activity and critical acumen are by 
no means confined to any single branch of natural history, has a paper on 
1 Strathearn Hieracia' in the August 1892 'Journal of Botany,' giving stations for 
very numerous forms of this difficult genus.
The 'Annotated List of British Tachinidae,' another of the useful papers on 
Diptera which have occupied the attention of Mr. R.
H. Meade, of Bradford, has 
now been finished, the last instalment (published in the ' Entomologist's Monthly 
Magazine ' for October 1892) including (at p.
262) a corrected analytical table of 
the last fourteen genera.
We have received Part VII.
of the Transactions of the Leeds Geologica 
Association for the Session 1891-92.
The volume gives evidence of a good year's 
work, and contains abstracts of several valuable and interesting papers.
A new 
feature, and one which will be appreciated by the members, is the List oi Books 
in the Association's library, given on pp.
73 and 74.
There is a singularly 
beautiful frontispiece in the shape of a photographic reprint of a Sigillana found 
recently in a Canister quarry at Meanwood, near Leeds.
Naturalist, 
*45 
THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN 
GASTROPODS.
H. WALLIS KEW, 
London, 
Slugs, snails, whelks, etc., as is well known, possess a wonderful 
food-finding faculty.
By some means or other they are certainly 
able to detect the presence of substances of which they are fond at 
some little distance.
So remarkable indeed is this faculty that the 
creatures have even been credited, on that account, with the 
probable possession of some mysterious special sense in no way 
analogous to any of our senses.
Thus Knapp, in 1829, wrote in 
his celebrated ' Tournal of a Naturalist ' : 
No creature seems less qualified to commit the depredations which it does 
than the garden snail.
We grieve to see our fruit mangled and disfigured by 
these creatures, but cannot readily comprehend by what means they obtain the 
knowledge that its maturity is approaching ; though we find that they must be 
endued with some faculty capable of accomplishing the purpose ; for no sooner 
does a plum, a fig, a nectarine, or other fruit begin to ripen on the wall, and long 
before any sensible odour can be diffused from it, even before an experienced eye 
can detect the approach to maturity, than those creatures, the slug and the snail, 
will advance from their asylums, though remotely situate, and proceed by very 
direct paths to the object.
This cannot probably be by the guidance of any 
known faculty.
...
If they possess the faculty of smelling, in them it must 
be a very exquisite sense, beyond any delicacy we can comprehend.
Thus, 
excluding human means of comprehension, which appear inadequate, we more 
reasonably conclude them to be endowed with intelligences for effecting intentions, 
of which we have no perception, and which we have no capacity for defining.
1 
The Rev. J.
G. Wood, in 1S64, was inclined to agree in this 
v »ew, thinking it probable that the creatures were able to direct 
their course by means of 'some perceptive power of which we 
ourselves have no consciousness.' 2 This, of course, is quite 
possible; for among the lower animals, as Sir J.
Lubbock has 
observed, there may be many senses quite different from ours ; 
a nd, consequently, the familiar world which surrounds us may be 
& totally different place to such animals, and may be full of 
sensations which we are unable to conceive.
3 Very little 
I suppose is really known about the senses of gastropods, so 
that we cannot speak with any degree of certainty as to the manner 
J n which the creatures are affected by external influences.
What is 
known of their food-finding faculty, however, hardly justifies us, 
[J.
I>.
Knapp], Journal of a Naturalist,' 1829, PP- 327-8.
2 J.
< * Wood, l Our Garden Friends and Foes, 1864, p.
122.
Slr j- Lubbock, " Senses, Instincts, and Intelligence of Animals,* 1888, p.
192.
Kay 1893.
K 
146 KEVV: THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
I think, in assuming that they possess an additional sense for this 
purpose.
The powers of sight with which they are usually accredited, 
it is true, cannot avail them much ; for, though doubtless able to 
distinguish different degrees of light, 1 it is doubtful whether they 
possess the power of vision as we understand it, and almost certainly 
they are incapable of distinguishing objects at a distance.
But 
in all probability, as most will agree, the creatures find their food by 
means of the sense of smell, or by a distinctly analogous sense.
Knapp, we have just seen, excluded this sense on the ground 
that in order to explain observed facts it would have to be 'a very 
exquisite sense, beyond any delicacy we can comprehend ; 7 but as 
Dr. Sochaczewer has observed, we must not compare the senses of 
invertebrates too critically with those of vertebrates ; 2 we, Darwin 
held, inherit the power of smell in an enfeebled condition, 3 and 
consequently find a difficulty in comprehending its great delicacy 
in many other vertebrates, and it is scarcely surprising, therefore, 
that difficulties should arise when we come to consider the sense 
in animals as far removed as the gastropoda.
Unfortunately, 
however, as far as I am aware, no organ can be pointed out as the 
undoubted seat of the sense in these animals.
Generally speaking, 
the osphradium (Spengel's olfactory organ) is said to be persistent 
in position and nerve-supply throughout the mollusca ; but it does 
not appear to have been described in Helix and Limax* In those 
molluscs, the sense has been variously thought to reside in the 
tentacles, the organ of Semper, and the pedal gland.
Cuvier, from 
the nature of the skin, thought that a special organ might not be 
necessary ; and Simroth, more recently, has concluded that the 
olfactory sense is distributed over the whole skin, but more 
specialized in the tentacles, and especially in the orifice of the 
pulmonary organ.
5 The possession of the sense by gastropods, wherever 
it may reside, can hardly be doubted.
Facts of the kind given 
below have generally been regarded by authors as evidence of its 
existence ; and it is perhaps worth mentioning, as showing 
apparently that the creatures are able to perceive odoriferous 
substances at a distance, that, according to a writer in the 
'Gardeners' Chronicle' in 1872, carbolic acid, diluted with water 
and sprinkled on the ground, will attract and kill lar^e numbers of 
1 Sir J.
Lubbock, loc.
cit., p.
140.
8 D.
Sochaczewer, quoted in J.
R. Micr.
Soc., (2), i., 24-5.
Descent of Man, ed.
2, p.
18.
* E.
R. Lankester, Art. 4 Mollusca,' Kncyc.
Brit., ed.
9, xvi.
(1883), 636, 660.
^Cuvier quoted in Loudon's 4 Mag.
\.u. Hist./ iv.
(1831), 5>o ; Simroth, quoted W 
' Zoological Record, 1876, Moll., p.
6 ; 1881, MolL, p.
14 ; 1882, Moll., p.
16 ; 1883, Moll., p.
™- 
Naturalist.
KEW : THK FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
147 
slugs j 1 and further, that M.
Commandeur, who had been experiment- 
ing with starch and iodine, and had left a jar containing the mixture 
in his garden, found, after three weeks, that dozens of slugs and 
snails had congregated in the jar from all parts of the garden ; 
and, attracted it is supposed by the smell of the iodine, the creatures 
continued to travel to it all the summer long.
2 
As Woodward remarked in 1851, slugs are 'attracted by fungi or 
any odorous substances.' s Mr. Edward Step tells me that he once 
saw, on a hedge-bank bordering Epsom Common, four great grey 
slugs {Li max maximus) bearing down, full-sail, from as many direc- 
tions, upon a red amanita, Agaricus {Amanita) rubes cms.
Many 
fungi, it has recently been remarked, possess an indescribable damp 
cellar or fungus smell ' such as slugs delight in.
7 4 
Slugs sometimes, perhaps rarely, enter bee-hives, apparently for 
the sake of the honey.
5 They constantly seek out the ' sugar ' 
(generally a mixture of treacle and rum) which is commonly spread 
on tree-trunks for the purpose of attracting nocturnal Lepidoptera.
Most Lepidopterists, I suppose, are familiar with the visits of the 
animals ; sometimes they assemble even plentifully, and Mr. Porritt, 
who has been good enough to watch them carefully, tells me that 
they sip the bait with great relish.
No doubt, like the Lepidoptera, 
they are attracted to it by scent.
The Rev. J.
G. Wood, in 1863, 
mentioned that when engaged in l sugaring ' he had often been 
surprised at the number of great grey slugs which came crawling 
down the trunks of the trees; and not having yet assented to 
Knapp's belief in a special sense, he added that they were k attracted 
apparently by the scent of the sweet mixture, and induced by its odour 
to leave the hiding-places in which they had been cunningly ensconced 
during the day-time.' 7 In Churchyard-bottom Wood, Highgate, 
I have often seen an unusual number of slime-trails about sugar- 
»; 
stains on the bark of the trees.
1 J.
M. Hayward, * Gardener- Chronicle,' 1872, p.
1327.
, Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1861, p.
216, quoting a communication published in the ' Revue 
Horticoie ; and see also 'Gardeners' Magazine, v.
(1863), 389.
1 ought to mention, perhaps, 
that some starch and iodine, which I once exposed in a wood at Highgate, where slugs and snails 
are plentiful, was not visited by many.
n 
. P.
Woodward, ' Manual,* 1851.
p. 12.
4 C.
K. raton, ' Nature,' xliii.
(1850), 9.
4 , ° fi ^ ee l lote - signed E.
H. K., referring no doubt to the great grey slug {Lima a- maximus)— 
t * .
nrst t,r ne I saw one entering one of my hives 1 mistook it for the tail end of an adder' — in 
Science Gossip,' 1882, pp.
237, 262.
for instance, 'Wood's Field Naturalists Handbook,' pp.
20-21; J, E.
Hartmg(on the 
great grey slug (Limmx m*ximus\ k Zooloj.
t,' (3), n, (1878), 87, ;uu\ H.
H. Higgins (on the 
tree-slug, Limav marginatus\ Address to Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club, Jan. 30th, 1891, 
p. 23 
J. G Wood, "Illustrated Natural History,' u.
(1863), 407 
May 18^.
148 KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
In the same wood, also, I have repeatedly seen slugs about 
excrement, which they doubtless find in a similar manner; and on 
which some kinds, especially the variously coloured ' black slug ; 
(Arion ater) and the great grey slug (Limax maximus), are very fond 
of feeding.
On one occasion six individuals of Arion ater were 
seen feeding together at the same spot.
According to Major Becher, 
slugs are always to be seen, in damp weather, at excrement on the 
road-sides in the Maltese Islands.
l 
The yellow slug {Limax J7avus), Mr. W.
A. Gain has shown, is 
very fond of cream, and readily finds it out ; so that milk standing 
for cream in cellars or dairies frequented by the slug has to be well 
protected.
2 As noted by Dr. Binney, this slug makes its presence 
disagreeable in cellars also ' by insinuating itself into vessels con- 
taining meal and flour.' 3 An observer who on one occasion put 
down some oatmeal and mashed potatoes, with which strychnine 
was mixed, for the purpose of poisoning mice, states that every time 
he looked at the mixture after the first morning 'it was covered with 
slugs, 7 which, in three days, ate every vestige of it.
4 A remarkable 
assemblage of slugs and snails about some hen-coops, the food-pans 
of which contained barley-meal, was described in 'Science Gossip' 
in 1867.
The exceptionally favourable state of the weather on the 
evening in question, which had followed an unfavourable period, 
probably helps to account for the very large numbers stated to have 
been seen ; but that the animals were attracted by the barley-meal, 
as suggested by the observer, can hardly be doubted : — 
On the nth of May of the present year [1867], I was witness, with seven 
other members of my family, to an extraordinary concourse of snails.
. .
• 
A light accidentally held down to some hencoops in a yard adjoining the house, 
about ten o'clock on Saturday, the nth of May, revealed a most extraordinary 
and disgusting sight.
Snails, with and without shells, — chiefly the long black snail 
were climbing up the bars of the coops, filling the food-pans and blackening the 
ground.
The whole family was called out to witness it, and it was soon found 
that an army of these slimy creatures was advancing from the kitchen garden, the 
entrance to which was about ten yards distant from the coops.
A further search 
showed that some other hen-coops at the top of the flower garden were similarly 
but not quite so abundantly infested.
The day had been showery, and it followed 
one of frequent thunderstorms and great rain and hail.
These storms followed, 
as your readers may remember, on some excessively hot weather quite unusual at 
that time of the year.
I cannot well give an idea of the number of slugs and snails : 
some of those who saw them said there must have been thousands.
Salt was 
profusely applied, and the dead bodies were shovelled up next morning.
Were these 
creatures attracted by the barley-meal ?
What sense led them to the coops ?
5 .
. - 
1 K.
F. Becher, ' Journ.
of Conch., iv.
(1884), 232.
'-• W.
A. Cain.
4 Naturalist,' 1889, p.
55.
• A.
Binney, 'Terrestrial Air-breathing Mollusks of the United States, ii, (1851), 36.
4 J.
S., 'Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1874, p.
343.
• L., An Invading Army of Snails, ' Science G< vp,' 1867, p.
215.
Naturalisr.
J 
KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS, 149 
Fresh-water snails, also, sometimes congregate in good numbers 
round substances of which they are particularly fond.
I remember 
having seen common pond-snails (Limncea peregra) clustering upon 
fish-heads, etc., which had been thrown into a dirty little stream near 
Louth J 1 and a large gathering of Limncea stagnates which had come 
together to feed on an old newspaper in a pond on Chislehurst 
Common, < so that for the space of about a square foot nothing else 
could be seen,' was described a few years ago in ' Science Gossip/ s 
That slugs — those which feed much upon phsenogamous plants at 
least 3 — are able in a surprising manner to seek out the particular 
plants of which they are specially fond is but too welt known, and 
the same remark applies, though perhaps in a less degree, to many 
snails.
4 While some plants remain quite untouched, it is often found 
to be nearly impossible to grow others unless the strictest precautions 
are taken.
Thus, a writer in the ' Garden' in 1884, dealing with 
the cultivation of alpine plants, remarks that while he had never 
seen a slug eating or even on a plant of Ramondia pyrenaica and 
gentians were never much attacked, the creatures on the other 
hand were always ' voraciously set ' on Aster alpinus, about the 
most vigorous of all the plants of a genuine alpine character.
The 
next most difficult plant in his collection to keep from slugs was 
Phlox divaricata \ and some of the delicate Campanulas, he added 
such as Campanula zoysi, it was next to impossible to keep.
5 The 
foreman of the Herbaceous Ground in the Royal Gardens, Kew, as 
Mr. J.
Burtt Davy informed me in 1891, found it almost impossible 
to grow Mutisia decurrens (a Chilian composite which climbs by 
means of tendrils) because it was so eagerly devoured by the slugs, 
which do not as a rule give much trouble in the gardens.
One 
plant had been grown by the wall of Museum No. 1, and had 
flowered well, but it had been protected by a thick layer of cinders 
all round the roots.
Farfugium grande is another food-plant which 
' ' Naturalists' World,' iii.
(1886), 62.
* T.
D. A.
Cockerell, 'Science Go-ip/ xxi.
(1885), 211.
Bivalves, which have been known 
to assemble in a similar manner, have been credited with the power of detecting food at 
distance.
The skull of a fox, placed in a ditch to <ak (the observer intended to clean it), was 
found, after four days, to be literally covered with little pea-shells {Pisidiu?h 1 pttsillnm) ; upwards 
of forty were counted, and the number on the whole skull ' could not have been far short of two 
hundred.' Unless the creatures were absolutely swarming in the ditch, the observer remarked, 
some must have come from a distance to enjoy the treat.' (R.
L. King, ' Pisidium pustllum 
attracted by the ^kull of a fox,'   Zoologist,' iv.
(1846), T266.) 
Ml the slugs of this country belonging to the genera Arion, Amelia, and Agriolimax^ 
1 beheve, feed largely on the leaves of ph.xnogams, and are to a great extent omnivorous ; those 
f ih(t remaining genus (Limax), however, sub^i-t more generally on lichens, fungi, etc.
The 
tree-slug {Limax tuarginatus), as shown by experiments carried out by Mr.
(iain, is the most 
dainty of our slugs, and probably never touches leaves.
4 v ee <i.
Jlohnston], Loudon's ' Mag. Xit.
Hist.,' iv.
(1831), 530.
J. C.
T.., 'Gardei vw.
(1884), »6, 
May j8q 3# 
150 KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
apparently possesses great attractive powers.
Some years ago in 
greenhouses in Germany, Mr. G.
K. Gude observed that it was 
constantly attacked, the young leaves and shoots being always 
eaten in preference to all other plants growing in the houses, 
which latter, consequently, escaped undamaged.
In other houses, how- 
ever, where no Farfugiums were kept, the slugs nibbled indiscriminately 
at many kinds.
Beds of crisp lettuce and cabbage and rows of 
winter celery are resorted to by great numbers of slugs, 1 and dahlias 
when first planted out are notoriously liable to their attacks, being 
often pounced upon, if left unprotected, and completely destroyed 
during the first night.- Slugs are very fond, also, of the flowers of 
orchids, so that certain kinds have always to be carefully safe- 
guarded against their attacks, and from observations made by 
Mr. T.
Baines, a well known and experienced gardener," it certainly 
seems clear that the creatures are able to detect the presence of 
the flowers at some little distance : — 
I have often observed that a slug will travel over the surface of a pot in 
which is growing a Dendrobhun nobile^ a Cattleya, Vanda^ or similar upright plant, 
for a score of times without ever attempting to ascend into the head of the plant 
unless it is in bloom, in which case they are certain to find their way straight to 
the flowers; after which they will descend, and return to some favourite hiding- 
place, often at the opposite end of the house, returning regularly every night to 
feed on the dainty dish, unless measures are taken to cut short their career.
4 
Observations of a surprising character have been made also by 
Mr. Robert Warner, F.L.S. When no other way to the orchids is 
open to the creatures, as he stated in 1880, 'they crawl up some 
plant or rafter, and by means of a glutinous matter which they 
exude from their tails they let themselves down to the spikes.
7 B 
In 1889 the observer assured me that he had actually seen many 
little slugs suspending themselves by slime-threads from the rafters, 
and ' descending on the spikes' of the beautiful Odontoglossum 
alexandra ; and thus many spikes, thickly wadded round with 
cotton-wool (which the slugs could not travel over) and growing 
in pots surrounded with water, had been lost.
It can hardly be 
supposed, I think, that the slugs, having tried to approach the 
flowers in the ordinary manner by crawling over the pots and stems 
and finding themselves intercepted by moats of water or collars of 
cotton-wool, would deliberately ascend the rafters for the purpose 
of lowering themselves to the spikes.
This would certainly require 
1 T.
Baines, ; Garden,' v.
(1874).
201-2.
3 Shirley Hibberd, 'The Amateur's Flower-garden,' 1884, p 285.
» For memoir and portrait of Baines, see * Gardeners' Chronicle,' (n >, iii.
(1S73), 180.
* T.
Baines, 'Garden,' v.
(1874), 201-2.
R. Warner, 'Gardeners' Chronicle,' (n.s.), xiv.
(1880), 405 ; (n.s.), xvi.
(i83i), 722.
Natural 
KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
15 I 
greater mental activity than can be reasonably looked for in the 
Gastropoda.
We can well imagine, however, that, having once 
detected the presence of the flowers, the creatures would instinctively 
endeavour to reach them, and observers familiar with the use of 
slime-threads by slugs will understand that individuals happening to 
crawl along the rafters until immediately above the spikes would be 
likely, in reaching out towards them, to relinquish their hold 
and become suspended upon threads which would be gradually 
lengthened until the spikes were reached.
Some of the plants thus specially liable to be sought out and 
eaten are effectually protected, it is significant to note, by the 
presence of other plants or substances the attractive powers of 
which are still greater.
This fact is well known to gardeners, etc., 
who commonly practise a system of 'counter-feeding/ Thus, 
Mr. Gude observed that plants of Farfngium grande escaped when 
small heaps of buckwheat-meal were placed near them.
Crops of 
young carrots in frames and rows of dahlias in the open, it is stated, 
escape when young and tender lettuce-plants are thrown down near : 
for when slugs can get lettuces ' they invariably leave everything else/ 1 
So great is the benefit derived in this way that it is even found 
worth while to plant lettuces amongst ' choice things' which 1 
usually much attacked.
2 When about to plant out a bed of dahlias, 
as a well-known gardening author states, it is advisable to plant the 
whole piece with lettuces first; and, he adds, 'as long as the 
lettuce lasts the snails and slugs will not touch a dahlia.
73 A writer 
in the ' Gardeners' Chronicle,' many years ago, stated that in a very 
bad slug season he once covered a fifteen-acre wheat field thickly 
with turnip leaves in order to protect the crop, and found after 
a fortnight the slugs had eaten up all the leaves without having 
touched the wheat.
4 If this precaution had not been taken much 
damage would almost certainly have been done.
As stated in 1846, 
many fields of oats, etc., were completely destroyed by slugs in that 
year and had to be ploughed down and re-sown with tares or barley.
5 
A farmer at Harmonds worth, in 1842, is said to have had cart-loads 
of turnip-leaves scattered over his wheat land, and forty women 
employed to shake the slugs from the leaves in the mornings took 
no less than twenty bushels of them upon forty-two acres in three 
weeks.
1 
J. C.
C, 'Garden,' xxv.
(1884), 327.
. 2 'Gardeners' Magazine,' xvii.
(1874), 35 ; and iee also xxix.
(18S6), 297, and 'Garden, vii, 
< l8 75), 464.
1 Shirley Hibberd, 'The Amateurs Flower Garden/ 1884, p.
285.
4 J.
Trimmer, ' Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1844, p.
44.
5 T.
J. Bold, ' Zoologi iv.
(1846), 1503-4.
* 'G ardeners' Chronicle/ 1842, p.
56, quoting the 4 Merthyr Guardian.' 
May 1 
152 KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
It is interesting to notice, also, that gardeners, who are generally 
much better acquainted with the wonderful food-finding faculty 
possessed by slugs and snails than are most malacologists, regularly 
put down favourite food-substances in order to cause the creatures 
to assemble in given spots so that they may be readily collected and 
destroyed.
Cabbage- lettuce- and turnip-leaves, pea-haulm, orange- 
peel, sliced apples, beet-root, potatoes, carrots, turnips, swedes, or 
wurtzels, brewers' grains, bran, bran soaked in greasy pot-liquor, 
stale bread or bran soaked in beer, oat- barley- and buckwheat-meal, 
dead slugs, bits of fat meat, milk, strong smelling stale beer, or beer 
mixed with vinegar, beer or porter sweetened with sugar, lard or 
rank butter spread over pieces of board or tile, etc., are among the 
various 'baits 7 recommended by gardeners.
Cabbage leaves thus 
used are sometimes warmed and greased, 1 or, as stated by Loudon, 
they may be rubbed over with the bruised bodies of recently killed 
slugs.
2 The creatures are found to assemble, often in large numbers, 
round some or all of these substances, so that in the opinion of many 
gardeners or gardening authors the putting down of such baits and the 
collection of the 'vermin' therefrom by lantern-light at night-time is 
one of the best ways of keeping the numbers of the animals within 
bounds.
In Nicholson's 'Dictionary of Gardening,' for instance, we 
find the use of baits recommended as one of the most effectual 
remedies which can be directed against the ravages of these pests.
:! 
This could hardly be the case, I think, unless the creatures were 
able to detect the presence of their food at least at some little 
distance.
The promptitude with which the crushed body of a slug 
is generally found and preyed upon by two or three of its fellows 
has often been remarked upon.
4 Pea-haulm, as Loudon remarked, 
' forms a powerful attraction ' ; B and the strong smelling rind of an 
orange, according to another writer, is a great temptation ; as many 
as six slugs having been caught on one piece at a time.
6 One 
gardener, who used slices of swede turnip as a bait, stated in 1850 that 
he had thus secured no less than 9,096 slugs and snails, in ten days.
on about a quarter of an acre of garden ground ; the second 
morning's collection alone yielding 2 5 o56.
r By baiting with cabbage 
1 See for instance Tate's ' Land and Freshwater Mollusks,' 1866, p.
76.
- J.
C. Loudon, ' Suburban Horticulturist,' 1845, p.
98.
9 ' Dictionary of Gardening,' edited by G.
Nicholson, A.L.S., iii.
(1887), 142.
4 And see for instance, 'Garden,' xxix.
(1886), 593.
5 * Suburban Horticulturist,' p.
86 ; and see also, as'to the use of this bait, J.
Wilmot, Tran- 
Hort.
Soc., ii.
(1822), 22-4 ; and R.
Gilbert, 4 Garden,' xvi.
(1879), 445.
* F.
Dobner, 'Gardeners' Chronicle,' 2nd April, 1887; and see also, as to the attractive 
powers of orange-peel, 'Garden,' xvii.
(1880), 498, and xxiii.
(1883), 214.
7 T.
Colley.
' Gardeners' Chronicle.
7 1850, p.
261.
Naturalist, 
KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
1 53 
leaves 1,700 slugs are said to have been taken in two days.
1 One 
writer who had these leaves strewed over a crop of young parsnips, 
about twenty-five poles, stated in 1846 that upwards of 4,000 slugs 
were picked from the leaves in three mornings ;^ and another who 
used a similar bait (savoy leaves) says that he destroyed 36,423 slugs 
at the leaves (besides 2,000 more killed incidentally) between 
7th October, 1841, and 20th May, 1842.
3 Bran is much in favour 
as a bait.
As an observer remarked in 1880, slugs seem to 'scent 
it from afar and troop to it'; he had seen from twenty to thirty 
assembled round quite a small heap; 4 and previously another 
observer had remarked that it seemed to attract the creatures from 
all quarters, so that small quantities put down as baits became 
covered with them, ; often a complete mass.' 5 Brewers' grains, 
perhaps, are even more attractive.
As stated in 1878, slugs will 
come to a handful of grains ' from all directions/ fifteen or twenty 
individuals being sometimes seen together at a small bait of it.
6 
Subsequently, another writer remarked that a small quantity under 
a bit of slate or board 'is an irresistible attraction,' and the slugs he 
thought i must smell it from a considerable distance, for I have 
sometimes caught nearly a hundred in one place.' His gardener 
had kept an account of the number thus trapped during the season, 
which, in May, had amounted to about i3,ooo.
7 In 1889, the 
creatures' liking for grains, and in fact for anything soaked in beer, 
was again remarked upon j and, as is added, they ' will travel 
a considerable distance to get it.' 8 Beer or porter sweetened with 
moist sugar is said to be 'an effectual trap;' and when exposed in 
gardens in small vessels about two inches deep, many slugs and 
snails, it is stated, drown themselves in it.
9 A six-inch flower 
saucer, half-filled with skim-milk and filled up with water when the 
milk turned sour, left on the ground on one occasion for four days, 
was found to contain more than 250 slugs, from a quarter of an inch 
to two inches in length, all dead.
10 It has been suggested, among 
others by Mr. C.
T. Musson, that collectors might resort to similar 
1 Daniel Harris, * Garden,' xxii.
(1882), 410.
2 J.
R., * Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1846, p.
45T.
8 Estus, ' Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1842, p.
653.
4 E.
Jackson, ' Garden ' (1880), xvii, 34-5.
3 I.
Huie, * Garden,' iv.
{1873), 244.
* J.
Garland, * Garden,* xiii.
(1878), 304.
7 G.
H. W„ 'Gardeners' Chronicle,' xiii.
(1880), 598 ; and see also xv.
(1881), 339 
J., ' Journ.
of Hort.,' (3), xviii.
(1889), 459.
; ' J.
S. Kenway, 'Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1847, P- 2 $9- 
T. C.
Roath, I xarden,' xxii.
(1828), 27S.
May i8 93 .
154 KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
means for taking shells, using meat, greased sheets of paper, boards, 
etc., as baits.
Dr. Sterki has suggested that those who collect small 
shells (the small Hyalinias, Pupas, etc.) might usefully expose heads of 
sheep or other bones with open cavities as baits.
1 Mr. Drummond, 
who was the first or one of the first to find Stenogyra goodallii in 
this country, used to obtain supplies of it from its original habitat 
by placing a few dead worms under a board on the surface of the 
tan of a pine-bed, and in this way numbers were induced to come 
together.
2 
Marine gastropods, too, whelks, etc., often assemble in numbers 
round favourite food.
As with slugs and snails the extreme delicacy 
of their sense of smell apparently enables them to proceed towards 
it from all directions.
As stated in Tryon's Manual, the dog-whelks 
(Nassa) and sea-snails {Naticci) are able to perceive the presence of 
a decaying animal in the water from a great distance.
3 This faculty 
in the common whelk (Buccinum nndatum) is taken advantage of 
by fishermen who commonly take vast quantities, both for the 
cod-fisheries and for human food, at baits or in baited traps.
4 
According to (Ersted, great numbers of this mollusc and of the almond- 
whelk (Fusus antiqims) are taken in the Kattegat in wicker baskets 
baited with dead cod-fish.
The baskets are let down on a muddy 
bottom and are soon taken up half-filled with whelks.
5 On our own 
coasts various kinds of baited nets and baskets are similarly employed.
The Grimsby whelk-fishermen, for instance, sink shallow hoop-nets 
baited with fish-offal, in which, as Mr. Holdsworth states, ' the 
whelks collect in large numbers, and are caught without any 
difficulty.' Another mode is to sink baskets, baited with pieces 
of fish, having a net stretched over the end with an opening in the 
centre for the admission of the whelks.
H Horse-flesh, also, is often 
used as a bait.
7 About Harwich trots or long-lines are employed, 
and when hauled up the snoods which are baited with shore-crabs, 
about twenty on each, are found covered with whelks.
8 These and 
other carnivorous molluscs are often taken in good numbers on 
long-lines baited for catching fish.
Such lines, according to 
1 V.
Sterki, 'Conchologists' Exchange/ i.
(1887), 67.
2 See Fleming's ' British Animals,' 1828, p.
266.
••» G.
W. Tryon, jun., 4 Manual of Conchology,' ii.
(1880), 118.
* A good many whelks obtained for these purposes are dredged.
5 (Ersted, quoted by Jeffreys, k British Conchology,' iv.
(1867), 289-290.
•' K.
W. H.
Holdsworth, 'Deep-Sea Fishing,' 1874, p.
143.
J. C.
Wilcocks, 'The Sea-fisherman, ' ed.
*}.
1875, p.
215.
H E.
W. H.
Holdsworth, loc.
cit., p.
142.
Naturalist 
KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
155 
Woodward, are laid out at night near the coast and taken up 
next morning, or when used out at sea boats lay by for a few hours, 
and then take them up.
Sometimes a bushel of whelks are found 
adhering to the baits of a single line.
Some of the scarce Fust, etc., 
have been obtained in this way.
1 Jeffreys mentions having received 
much assistance in the Shetlands from the long-line fishermen, who 
regularly brought to him all the whelks (or 'buckies') which were 
caught sticking to the bait on the deep-sea (or 'haaf') fishing- 
banks.
2 It is interesting to note also that these creatures, Buccinwn, 
Nassa, Natica, etc., often find their way into lobster-pots which are 
baited with fish or other animal matter.
3 No doubt they are 
attracted, as Tryon states (of Nassa\ by the smell of the bait.
4 At 
Bognor, Sussex, as Mr. D'Urban informed Woodward, Natica aider i 
and Natica catena are frequently found in the lobster-pots, i which 
they enter to feed upon the bait/ 5 At St. Margaret's-at-Cliffe, 
on the Kentish coast, as mentioned in Lovell's   Edible Mollusca/ 
many of the lobster-pots when drawn up are found to be baitless 
and full of whelks.
6 Many other marine gastropods, doubtless, are 
taken at baits in various parts of the world.
The ' purple-fish ' of 
the ancients, as mentioned by Aristotle, was allured by putrid 
substances, and approached a bait of that kind 'as having a sensible 
perception of it at a distance.' 7 In Mauritius ground-lines baited 
with pieces of the arms of cuttle-fish are, or were at one time, 
laid down in deep water for the purpose of attracting olives, etc.
As Mr. Broderip wrote in 1825, * it is the amusement of the place to 
watch over the trim apparatus of lines hung over some sand-bank 
to tempt the various brilliant species of Oliva which there abound, 
or to wait for the more rare approach of the harp-shell, till the rich 
hues of its inhabitant are seen glowing through the clear blue 
waters in the rays of a tropical rising sun.' 8 
The results in many of the above cases, some will perhaps be 
inclined to argue, are likely to be largely accidental.
Many 
individuals, of course, both of terrestrial and aquatic gastropods, even 
supposing them to be quite incapable of scenting or detecting their 
1 Woodward's ' Manual/ ed.
4, rep.
1S90, p.
140, and see W.
C. Hey, ' Naturalist,' x.
(1885), 
P- 132-3.
« 
.'5 
British Conchology,' i.
{1062), Ixxv., and see also p xxxi 
. ., V G - J Johnston], Loudon's 'Mag. Nat.
Hist.,' vii.
(1834'.
40S ; 'British Conchology,' i 
V*te), hx.
; Wilcocks' ' >ea-fisherman,' ed.
3f 1875, p.
21s.
4 Tryon's ' Manual,' iv.
(i332>, 18.
' Woodward's ' Manual, ed.
4, rep.
1890, p.
140.
' M.
S. Lovell, 4 Edible Mollus .* ed.
2, 1884, p.
193.
7 Taylor's ' Aristotle,' \ i.
p. 135.
W^J- I-roderip Zo »gical Journal, ' it.
(1825), 199.
May 1803, 
156 KEW : THE FACULTY OF F00D-F1NDIXG IN (GASTROPODS.
food at a distance, would be certain in many cases to find baits, and 
other favourite food-substances, during their wanderings by mere 
accident ; for in gardens and elsewhere slugs and snails often exist 
in immense numbers, and on favourable nights we see them crawling 
about in all directions ; whelks, etc., in like manner are probably 
very numerous on certain parts of the sea-bottom.
Moreover, as 
Mr. Gain suggests, slugs and snails on going out to feed are often 
likely to devour the first suitable food they find, and to retire in the 
morning to the nearest refuge ; from which, in such case, they would 
again start for a foray on the following night.
Thus they would 
remain in the vicinity of food when once found ; and individuals 
from various starting-points, of course, would be likely to come 
across the same food; so that we can readily understand that a bait, 
for instance, exposed during several days in the same place, might 
become surrounded by quite a number of molluscs, all of which 
might have found it accidentally in the first instance.
A similar con- 
sideration applies, probably, in the case of marine gastropods.
Slugs, 
it might be remarked, congregate for shelter, often in considerable 
numbers, under pieces of board or tile placed on the ground as traps 
in gardens, 1 and, similarly, snails collect in numbers in empty flower- 
pots.
These traps, certainly, are accidentally found.
It is worth 
mentioning, however, in this connection, that when Mr. Gain placed 
side by side, on bare ground in his garden, a tile affording shelter 
only, and another with orange-peel beneath it as a bait, only seven 
slugs (six garden-slugs, Avion hortensis, and one Arion circumscriptus) 
were taken under the former in three days, while the latter, during 
the same period, yielded seventeen (fourteen garden-slugs, one Anon 
circumscriptus \ and two field-slugs, Agriolimax agrestis).
This experi- 
ment, as far as it goes, seems to show that the bait was scented, and 
it cannot reasonably be doubted, I think, but that gastropods are able to 
scent or in some way perceive their food at least at a little distance.
Otherwise, as it seems to me, and as already indicated, some of the 
facts above alluded to would have to be regarded as well-nigh 
inexplicable.
It would be difficult, for instance, to account for the 
fact recorded by Mr. Baines ; and his observations were made, it 
will be remembered, in orchid-houses where slugs do not commonly 
exist in vast numbers.
Bee-hives, I suppose, are hardly likely to be 
entered by slugs accidentally.
As Mr. Nunneley remarked in 1834?
slugs are soon attracted in numbers to favourite food ' even when 
placed at some distance from their accustomed haunts;' 2 and 
1 See 'Garden, (1874), 201-2; viii.
(1875), 306 ; an d 'Gardeners' Magazine, xviii.
(1875).
114.
2 T.
Nunneley.
Trans.
Leeds Philos.
and Lit. Soc, i., p.
74.
Naturalist, 
KEW: THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
157 
Mr. Baines found that the creatures seldom allowed many nights to 
pass before discovering tallow which he put down in places 
'where they were least likely to find it.' 1 A fact recorded by Jeffreys 
of Fusus antiquus seems to afford conclusive proof that that animal 
possesses the faculty of perceiving its food at a distance, for it is said 
to assemble in large numbers around a bait which is completely 
hidden and inaccessible : 
Quantities of the common 'almond-whelk' of dealers in shell-fish [Fusus 
antiquus) are procured on the Cheshire coast by the fishermen placing a dead 
dog on the sands at low-water mark during spring tides.
The bait is then com- 
pletely covered with stones, which are piled up like a cairn, partly to prevent the 
carcase being carried away by the tide, and also because the fishermen have 
a scruple about eating shell -fish which have been fed on much carrion.
On the 
next turn of the tide the heap of stones is visited and the whelks are found on the 
surface in great numbers, having been apparently attracted by the smell of the 
bait, but unable to get at it.
- 
Observations which have been made on various gastropods in 
captivity are sufficient alone, I think, to establish the fact that 
a faculty of the kind indicated is possessed by them.
Swammerdam, 
in moving a little fresh food towards the snails which he kept for 
a considerable time in his chamber, found that they ' immediately 
perceived it by the scent, and crept out of their little shells and 
came to it.' 3 Mr. James Hardy, in 1845, mentioned having seen 
a black slug, which he had placed in a jug, crawl forward 'in a direct 
line to some raw beef; 74 and I have seen various kinds of slugs — 
kept from time to time in glass-jars — approach their food in this 
manner.
It is even said to have been shown, I believe by Moquin- 
Tandon, that slugs and snails — frequently seen to • proceed in a 
direct line towards substances of which they are fond ' — will stop or 
change their direction if the substances are removed or put in 
a different place.
a That the creatures often find food in captivity 
almost immediately after it is placed in the vessel in which they are 
kept, and much more quickly than could be the case if they found it 
accidentally, has several times been remarked upon.
I have often 
noticed this in slugs.* Miss Hele, who has kept many kinds of 
1 I.
Bainc-, 'Garden, 1 v.
(1874), 201-2.
' ' British Conchology,' i.
(1862), xxviii-xxix 
! Swammerdam, ' Book of Nature," FHoyd's transl., p.
49.
4 James Hardy, 'Zoologist/ 111.(1845), 1036.
See   Ann. and Mag. Nat.
Hist.' (2), ix.
(1852).
155.
ri A small piece of bread placed at the bottom of a glass-jar, five inches deep, in which were 
marsh-slugs {Agriolimax lavish a young .Irion aUr, and a young Limax muurimuf, w 
und in less than ten minutes by four of the marsh-slugs.
The others did not come to it in the 
alf hour during which 1 kept them under observation.
The Avion had been disturbed and 
w uJky. When the bread was put in, one of the marsh-slug!!
was in the bottom of the jar, 
an other on the side about half-way uj tnd the rest ne the lop 
fa V 1893.
158 KEW : THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
snails, has mentioned that as soon as raw beef or mutton is put into 
the house in which a colony of Hyalinia drapamaldi is living 
1 a little crowd crawls forth from the moss, etc./ and, in the course 
of a few hours, demolishes the supply.
1 And when lettuce is put 
into the pans in which snails which feed more generally on plants 
are kept, she tells me, the creatures will always ' forsake cabbage or 
wild herbage at once and crowd to the lettuce/ Dr. Baudon, who 
placed a piece of raw mutton of the size of a hazel-nut under a bell- 
glass in which he kept a large number of glass-shells ( Vitrina 
pellucida\ observed that in less than five minutes those in the 
immediate vicinity quitted the leaves on which they were then 
feeding, and from all quarters they were seen marching on, so that 
the mutton became a general rendezvous.
One which was feeding 
upon the remains of a cellar-snail (Hyalinia cellaria), it is said, 
8 abandoned its victim to satisfy the craving of a newly acquired taste.' 
Mr. W.
A. Lloyd, in 1865, mentioned that netted dog-whelks 
(JVdssa reticulata) which he kept in a shallow tank usually remained 
buried in the sand quite out of sight ; but if a piece of oyster, 
mussel, or meat were drawn over the sand, or even if it were 
touched ever so lightly with the feeding forceps, the points of which 
smelt of food, the creatures would appear above the surface in a few 
moments.
Sometimes half picked mutton or beef bones were 
placed in the tanks, and these in a few minutes became completely 
covered with the molluscs.
It was impossible, in fact, to introduce 
any animal substance, living or dead, into the tank * without these 
whelks smelling it, and coming up to see what is to be got.' 3 
Slugs, etc., it is well known, when they discover favourite food 
will often return to it many times.
The regular return of slugs at 
night from their hiding-places, ' often at the opposite end of the 
house/ to feed upon the flowers of orchids has already been referred 
to.
Mr. Sherriff Tye, as he informs me, has observed that in green- 
houses slugs will return to the same place to feed night after night ; 
a slug or slugs, for instance, which he was never able to catch, and 
which probably retired to a safe hiding-place behind the greenhouse 
flue (only used in winter), * nightly ravaged about the fronds of 
maiden-hair ferns (Adiantum cuneatum), five pots, for four months/ 
The return of slugs many times to feed on the colouring matter on 
some book-covers in a London publishing house is clearly indicated 
1 F.
M. Hele, 'Science >ip,' xx.
1884.
115.
2 Baudon, 'Cat. des Moll, rie TOise,' 1862, quoted by Tate, 'Land and Freshwater 
Mollusks 1866, iqi-2.
••» W.
A. Lloyd, 'Science Gossip,' 1865, 259-50.
Naturalist, 
KEW: THE FACULTY OF FOOD-FINDING IN GASTROPODS.
159 
by observations recorded by Mr. E.
Step, in 1883.
The books were 
damaged, almost nightly, during a considerable period, and the slugs 
appear to have proceeded from time to time from secure hiding- 
places, for, though their slime-trails were often observed over the 
books and shelves, the animals themselves, which were carefully 
looked for, were not seen for about twelve months.
1 Mr. Gain has 
informed me that a yellow slug (Limax flavus\ as shown by its slime- 
trails, came nightly at one time to feed upon cream in his cellar, and it 
must have come upon each occasion from a safe and more or less 
distant retreat, for most diligent search was made for it without 
success.
2 As recently recorded by Mr. Musson, also, a slug of 
the same kind ' came regularly to a flour bag in which there 
happened to be a rent/ and, as he added, 'it was only on my 
going to the bag one night that I found the slug gorging itself on the 
flour, although its slime-track had been observed fresh at intervals 
for upwards of a fortnight.' 3 No doubt in cases of this kind the 
creatures are often largely guided by the scent of their food ; but the 
regular return of a slug to food which might possibly have been dis- 
covered accidentally, it must be noted, does not in itself necessarily 
imply that the food is scented ; for the creature may possibly rely 
upon its own trail or scent, or perhaps, wholly or in part, upon 
memory of direction and locality.
4 The yellow slug which came 
nightly to feed upon cream certainly seems to have directed its 
course more by means of its former trails or by memory than by the 
scent of the food, for when the basins w r ere removed to a distant 
part of the cellar it was found in the morning   wandering discon- 
solately 9 in the place where they had formerly stood.
The snail-slugs (TestacelUc), which feed chiefly on earthworms, 
and are said to hunt them underground, are presumably largely 
guided by scent.
1 E.
Step, ' Science Gossip,' xix.
(1883), 163-164.
these cases have already been quoted, in part, in this Journal ; see p.
312 of the volume for 
1890.
Mr. Step mentions that fresh leaves (those of cabbage and lettuce, as he informs me), laid 
down from time to time in the hope that the slugs might be attracted to them and caught, 
remained untouched.
It is hardly surprising, however, that such baits should have been ineffectual, 
for neither the great grey stag {Limax maximus) nor the yellow slug {Limax jtaims\ the kjpds 
most likely to occur in a London publishing-house, have much liking for fresh lea^ .
• C T.
Musson, Proc.
Lin. Soc.
N \V\.
for 1890, (2), v.
(1891).
893.
Mr. Go** has men- 
Honed that a Nudibranchiau -a-slug (Eeiis papitlosa\ which he kept in a large pan of water 
!ong with many kinds of narine anim and which had attacked a sea-anemone {Anthea cereus\ 
soon returned to it on being removed, and on being again removed it ' again 1 though 
from a considerable distance; (P.
H.G Naturaii 1 Rambles on the \ vonshire Coast,' 
r 853, pp.
15-6).
* See as to the probable exercise of memory by g.
>pods, ' Naturalist,' 1890, pp.
3 7"3 28 - 
M *y 1893.
i6o 
NOTES AND NEWS.
Mr. E.
A. L.
Batters, B.A., LL.B., F.L.S., of Berwick-on -Tweed, describes 
in the 'Journal of Botany' for March last year, a new marine Alga, to which he 
gives the name of Gonimophyllum bttffhaiiii, figuring the details on a plate.
The decease of the Rev. F.
0. Morris, B.A., the Rector of Nunburnholme 
on the loth of February last, at the ripe age of 83, removed from our midst 
a noteworthy figure.
He was a prolific author on various natural history subjects, 
and his popular treatises on British Birds, their Nests and Eggs, Butterflies and 
Moths, ran through numerous editions.
At one time he was editor of 'The 
Naturalist, ' the present journal being a lineal successor and retaining the title.
His writings in his later lifetime were confined to vigorous attacks upon Darwin 
and his theory and to various theological and controversial pamphlets.
Portraits 
of him appeared in the % Graphic ' and ' Illustrated London News ' soon after 
the news of his death.
By the death of Dr. B.
Carrington, which took place at Brighton, on the 18th 
January last, British Hepaticology has lost one of its most accomplished authorities.
At one time resident at Yeadon, near Leeds, he was joint-author with Prof.
Miall 
of ' A Flora of the West Riding of Yorkshire,' published about 1862, of which he 
wrote the cryptogamic portion.
For many years he had been resident at Eccles, 
near Manchester, and was president of the Manchester Cryptogamic Society, a 
body which we fear is now defunct, although it was one of the most useful 
societies Manchester ever had.
Dr. Carrington's great work on British Hepatica?
was still unfinished at the time of his death, but it is hoped that our students of 
this group will take up and carry on the work in some form or other, as indeed 
we believe Mr. W.
H. Pearson will do.
The Barnsley Naturalists' Society have lost a warm friend and ever faithful 
supporter by the death of Mr. W.
J. Lancaster, on the 6th of February last, at the 
early age of 55.
Although the heavy claims of a busy practice as the leading 
medical practitioner of the town prevented his devoting time to the active personal 
investigation of any special branch of Natural History, his interest in botanical and 
microscopical studies was great and his knowledge considerable, while his 
unassuming and kindly manner and amiable disposition secured him hosts of 
friends.
He invariably made a point of attending the Barnsley Naturalists' 
Society's meetings whenever possible, and in 1882 and again in 1884 he was its 
President.
His interest in the Society can be said to have scarcely ceased with 
life, for under his will the Society received a bequest of ^100, together with 
a valuable microscope and numerous objects.
We have received the 3rd volume of the ' Transactions of the Rochdale 
Literary and Scientific Society,' for 1891-92.
From a typographical point of 
view the past reflects great credit on the town, as does also the literary and 
scientific matter it contains.
The first paper is by Mr. T.
S. Smithson, who 
treats of Batrachospermum and its life-history under the title of * Bead Moss.' 
'Coal Smoke' is discoursed upon by Mr. T.
Stenhouse, F.C.S., 'Rochdale 
Surnames' by Mr. Henry Fishwick, F.S.A., 'The New Star in Auriga' by 
Archdeacon Wilson, and 'Magic Knots' by Dr. H.
C. March, while 'Evolution 
in the Ornamental Art of Savage People ' is the subject of a translation from the 
Swedish of Dr. Hjalmar Stolpe, which is profusely illustrated.
There are 
a couple of articles in the volume which more directly come under our cognisance, 
as being more distinctly local scientific research.
Mr. J.
R. Ashworth treats in 
ietail on the * Seasonal Variations of Temperature at Spring Mill Reservoir' and 
Mr. S.
S. Piatt gives an account of 4 Some of the Recent Results of the 
Investigations into Local Erratic Blocks,' illustrating them by a map showing the 
position of Local Erratic Blocks.
The proceedings and reports, which bring up 
the rear, show that the Society is in a healthy, active and flourishing condition.
Long may it continue so !
Naturalist.
i6i 
n ^cmoriam.
WILLIAM COLLINGS LUKIS, M.A., F.S.A.
The death of the Rev. W.
C. Lukis, which occurred at his residence, 
Wath Rectory, near Ripon, on the 7th of December, 1892, removes 
a familiar name from the ranks of Yorkshire archaeologists, and one 
who will long be remembered with feelings of deep respect and 
esteem, not only in the county of York, where he lived and worked 
so long, but also by archaeologists throughout the whole of Western 
Europe.
His tall, erect, manly form, and genial countenance were 
well known for many miles around the ancient city of Ripon, and 
he was certainly one whose friendship it was a pleasure and a delight 
to claim.
Mr. Lukis was not only an archaeologist of great eminence,, 
but he also possessed considerable knowledge of geology, botany, 
and other branches of natural history.
He had long been an 
observant traveller in various parts of Europe, Africa, etc., more 
especially in the Netherlands, Denmark, France, Italy, and Algeria ; 
and his writings and researches show that accurate and intimate 
knowledge of those countries, which he acquired from careful 
personal investigations.
The deceased gentleman was also an artist 
of considerable power and merit, as many of his works, illustrated 
by his own hand, sufficiently testify.
He was born on April 8th, 181 7, in the Island of Guernsey, and 
was the third son of Colonel Frederick Corben Lukis, by Elizabeth, 
youngest daughter of Mr. John Collings, of Guernsey.
From his 
father, who was also an archaeologist of some distinction, Mr. Lukis 
inherited a taste for natural science, which he pursued at Cambridge, 
under Professors Henslow and Sedgwick, and the writer has frequently 
heard him dilate on the benefits he derived from his connection 
with those far-famed scientists.
He received his early education in 
Guernsey, afterwards in France, and at Blackheath, under the 
mastership of the Rev. Sanderson Tennant, whilst in January 1840, 
he graduated in honours at Trinity College, Cambridge.
Twelve 
months later he was ordained at Salisbury, by Bishop Denison, and 
licensed to the curacy of Bradford-on-Avon (of which parish the 
late Canon Harvey, formerly private tutor to Prince George, now 
Duke of Cambridge, was then vicar.) In the year 1845 he 
was appointed chaplain to the Marquis of Ailesbury, who also 
successively presented to him the livings of Great Bedwyn, Wilts, 
in 1850; Collingbourne Ducis, Wilts, in 1855; and Wath, near 
Ripon, in 1 86 1, which latter he held up to the time of his 
death.
At Wath, Mr. Lukis was instrumental in restoring the 
June 1893.
l62 IN MEMORIAM — WILLIAM COLLINGS LUKIS.
old parish church, repairing the rectory, and enlarging the schools.
He also filled the office of Rural Dean for eleven years in Wiltshire 
and six in Yorkshire.
Whilst resident at Cambri< _ 
the earliest members of and contributors to the Camden Society, 
then newly formed ; and when * living at Bradford-on-Avon, he 
published a quarto volume on l Ancient Church Plate/ and a few 
years later, two pamphlets on the necessity of looking into the 
condition of Church Bells, with a view to their preservation, and 
also the security of Church Towers.
In 1855, the deceased gentle- 
man read a paper before the members of the Wilts Archaeological 
Society, which was subsequently published under the title of 'An 
Account of Church Bells, etc.
5 He was a frequent contributor 
to the journals of the Archaeological Institute, of the British 
Archaeological Association, and of other kindred societies.
In 1847, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of 
Northern Antiquaries, Copenhagen; in 1853, a Fellow of the 
Society of Antiquaries, London; and in 1867, a member of the 
Societe Archeologique de Nantes, at whose meetings he read papers 
which were printed in the Society's Bulletin.
In 1872, he was elected 
a corresponding member of the Societe de Climatologie Algerienne.
In 1875, he published a guide to the barrows and other prehistoric 
monuments of South Brittany, and contributed numerous reviews of 
archaeological works to the columns of the ' Athenaeum/ whilst from 
time to time he was a practical barrow digger in Wiltshire and 
Yorkshire.
His first diggings were in the Guernsey Cromlechs, 
afterwards in Brittany, the Netherlands, and elsewhere.
The Society of Antiquaries, London, published his scale plans 
of rude stone monuments, with descriptive text.
In 187 1, he read 
a paper before the members of the Ripon Scientific Society, of 
which he was long an active member, on the Maison de Dieu 
Hospital, at Ripon.
He also contributed to the Yorkshire 
Archaeological and Topographical Journal a paper on Anglo-Saxon 
graves on Howe Hill, in the parish of Burneston (North Yorkshire).
In July 1874, the Royal Archaeological Institute, in conjunction 
with the Yorkshire Archaeological and Topographical Society, held 
meetings at Ripon, and visited amongst other places, Castle Dykes, 
near North Stainley, where Mr. Lukis read a paper, giving an 
account of the excavations and the relics which he, in conjunction 
with Messrs.
Heslington, Sharpin, and Hebden, of Ripon, had 
found there.
Mr. Lukis also edited for the Surtees Society, Dr. William 
Stukeley's Diaries and Letters, published in three volumes; and 
when the Ripon Millenary Festival was celebrated, in 1886, he was 
Naturalist 
IN MEMORIAM — WILLIAM COLLINGS LUKIS.
1 63 
an active member of the committee which was formed to carry out 
the arrangements, and wrote an interesting paper entitled, ' Ancient 
Ripon,' since included in Mr. W.
Harrison's ' Millenary Record/ 
a beautifully illustrated volume, published in 1892.
Amongst other 
works, the deceased gentleman was the author of ' Danish 
Cromlechs and Burial Customs,' ' Certain Peculiarities in the Con- 
struction of Chambered Tumuli,' ' On Flint Implements found in 
Tumuli in the parish of Wath/ etc., etc.
Mr. Lukis, who was a prominent Freemason, and a Justice of 
the Peace for Wiltshire, married Lucy Adelaide, daughter of 
Admiral Sir Thomas Fellovves, who survives her husband, and by 
whom he had issue, nine children, two sons and four daughters only 
surviving, the second daughter being the wife of Mr. H.
C. Bickersteth, 
J. P., of Ripon (a son of the late Bishop of Ripon).
One son 
is in Australia, and the other in Ceylon.
For a portion of the above 
particulars the writer is indebted to the ' Biograph and Review ' for 
July 1881.
That gifted authoress, Katherine S.
Macquoid, in her interesting 
volume, 4 About Yorkshire,' thus describes her visit to Wath a few 
years ago : — 
We drove back to Wath and spent a pleasant evening with our hospitable 
friends (Mr. and Mrs. Lukis), who showed us the carefully restored Church.
There is some curious Saxon sculptured work, there are also fragments of stone 
coffin lids with early thirteenth century floriated crosses carved thereon.
There 
is also a very old vestry or sacristy on the north side of the chancel which 
Mr. Lukis thinks was occupied by a sacristan in charge of the vessels and 
treasures of the Church ; there is a slit in the wall through which he could see the 
high altar and watch the light burning before it.
The church doors were barred 
within by means of a wooden beam which, when not in use, slid into a hole in 
the door jamb ; it is therefore evident that whoever secured the door must have 
dwelt within the building.
This view was not originated by Mr. Lukis, but he 
considers that it solves the puzzle of the cell at Tanfield (three miles from Wath), 
and that the method of securing church doors from within the building is a strong 
argument in its favour.
There is also a curious double piscina in Wath church.
It is to be regretted that Tanfield was not restored with the learning and reverence 
that have been shown at Wath.
A committee has recently been formed, under the chairmanship 
of Sir Reginald Graham, Bart, of Norton Conyers (which is close 
to Wath, and where the talented authoress of 4 Jane Eyre' at one 
time resided), for the purpose of placing in Wath Church a stained- 
glass window, or some other lasting memorial of the late much 
esteemed rector.
The remains of Mr. Lukis were interred on Saturday, Dec. 10th, 
,n the ancient graveyard at Wath (where he had laboured so long 
a nd faithfully), in the presence of a large gathering of parishioners 
J *93- 
164 .
. MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
and others from a distance, whilst letters expressive of deep 
sympathy were received from the Bishops of Richmond and Ripon, 
the Marquis of Rrpon, and numerous other friends who were 
unable to take part in paying their last tribute of respect to the 
memory of one who was so ripe a scholar, so kind a friend, and of 
whom it may be truly recorded — 
He seemed the thing he was, and joined 
Each office of the social hour 
To noble manners, as the flower 
And native growth of noble mind.
Baldersby, S.O., Yorkshire.
W. Gregson.
NOTE— MOSSES.
Uncommon Moss near Market Weighton.
— Nearly a hundred years 
ago Mr. R.
Teesdale recorded in the Transactions of the Linnean Society the 
occurrence of Systeghim crispum (Hedw.) at Beverley; last month I found a patch 
of it growing on the banks of our waterworks reservoir, thus giving it an additional 
locality as an East Riding moss.
— J.
J. Marshall, Market Weighton, 
April 4th, 1893.
NOTE— BOTANY.
1 
Early and Late.
— An instance of the freaks occasioned by the extraordinary 
spell of hot spring weather was one noticed near Settle on the 12th April.
My sister 
(Miss Thompson, of Settle) and I inspected a bed of wild Lilies of the Valley 
(Convallaria majalis L.), and discovered one flower open.
An hour or two 
later we found a fine Snowdrop (Galanthns nivalis L.) in a sheltered nook on the 
crags.
— F.
P. Loosmore, Eastwood, Notts, April 21st, 1893.
About London this year many plants are flowering three weeks earlier than 
usual.
Plenty of Hawthorn was in flower the last week in April.
It was 
Chestnut Sunday in Bushey Park on April 30th, a thing which has not happened 
for thirty years.
— J.
G. B.
NOTES— MAMMALIA.
Badger near Market Weighton.— On March 21st, Mr. Dunhill and some 
friends were turning over an old stick hill at Arras, near Market Weighton, when 
they unearthed a fine old dog Badger (Meles taxus), which, after a very fierce 
resistance, they succeeded in capturing.
The Badger weighed 22 lbs.
— J.
J- 
Marshall, Market Weighton, March 28th, 1893.
Badger in East Yorkshire.
— One day in the last week of March, as- 
Mr. Marshall, of Cottam, on the high Wolds in the neighbourhood of Driffield, 
was riding over his farm, three or four dogs which were following him, startled 
something and gave chase.
Thinking the animal was a fox he tried to call the 
dogs off: but being unable to do so, he followed the chase, the animal, the species 
of which Mr. Marshall did not recognise, leading the dogs a brisk pace in the 
direction of Sir Tatton Sykes' monument, near Sledmere.
Other farmers seeing 
the chase, joined in, and eventually there was a field of seven or eight.
When 
near the monument the strange animal turned and headed back to Cottam, where 
it fell a prey to the dogs after a run of eight miles.
The dogs were beaten off, 
when the animal was found to be a badger {Meles taxus).
It was put into a sack, 
but died before Mr. Marshall got it home.
How the badger came to be at Cottam 
is a mystery, for it is generally understood that for years the animal has been 
extinct in that part of the country.
Thjs rare trophy of the chase has been sent 
to a Driffield taxidermist to be stuffed.— J.
J. Marshall, Market Weighton, 
April 1st, 1893.
Naturalist 
1*5 
ADDITIONS TO THE LICHEN FLORA OF THE 
WEST RIDING OF YORKSHIRE.
ABRAHAM SHACKLETON, and THOMAS HEBDEN, 
Braithwaiie ', Keighky.
Cullingwortk.
In the ' Flora of West Yorkshire ' by Mr. F.
Arnold Lees it is stated 
that the sum total of West Yorkshire Lichens amounts to 258 
species, and, £ compared with the known British species, the 
percentage of the whole is still far below that which the Mosses, 
Hepatics— and even the Fungi — show us,' and that ' West Yorkshire 
should, surely, nourish three hundred forms/ 
Since the publication of that work we have conjointly worked at 
infrequent intervals, during short holiday excursions, a few of the 
more accessible districts of North West Yorkshire, chiefly in the 
upper watersheds of the rivers Ribble, Aire, and Wharfe.
We now offer this additional list, not as an exhaustive one, but 
as a contribution towards the whole.
Those species found in a different drainage area to that 
mentioned in   The Flora,' appear for the sake of their geographical 
distribution, or if occurring upon a different substratum are also 
named.
Doubtful species have been referred to Dr. Nylander, of Paris, 
to whom we tender our sincere thanks for his kindness in examining 
such 
species.
Forms new to West Yorkshire have an asterisk prefixed.
Earn.
L—COLLEMACEL 
I. COLLEMEI.
Collema cheileum Ach. A.
Cononley.
Harden.
Collema granuliferum Nyl. W.
Bolton Abbey.
Collema polycarpon Schser.
L. Clapham.
A. Malham.
W. Grassington.
Collema multipartitum Sm. L.
Clapham.
A. Malham, in 
fruit.
m sinuatum Huds.
W. Draughton ; the Strid.
ium schraderi Bernh.
A. Malham ; Gordale ; Malham 
Tarn, on decaying limestone scars.
June 1893.
1 66 SHACKLETON AND HEBDEN I ADDITIONS TO LICHEN FLORA.
Fam. IL—LICHENACEL 
II.
CALICIEI.
*Stenocybe euspora Nyl.
(=Calicium septatum Leight).
W. Bolton Woods, on thallus of Stigmatidium crassum.
III.
SPH^EROPHOREI.
Sphaerophoron fragile Pers.
W. Grassington.
IV.
B/EOMYCEI.
Icmadophila aeruginosus Scop.
( = Bceomyees icmadophilus 
Ehrh.).
W. Strid.
V. CLADONIEI.
Cladonia pyxidata form, chlorophora Flk. A.
Culling- 
worth, on turf.
Cladonia macilenta form, polydactyla Flk. A.
Sandy Lane, 
Allerton.
VIII.
RAMALINEI.
W 
*Ramalina fraxinea form, ampliata Ach.
.. _ __ 
*Rarnalina subfarinacea Nyl. L.
Clapham.
X. PELTIGEREI.
Peltigera rufescens Hoffm.
L. Clapham.
XL PARMELIEI.
Parmelia borreri Turn.
R. Stackhouse, Settle.
W. Grass 
Wood.
A. Malham.
Parmelia conspersa Ehrh.
A. Howden Rough, near Keighley.
Parmelia mougeotti Sch. A.
Riveoak Edge, near Keighley ; 
Harden Moor, near Keighley.
Parmelia subaurifera Nyl. A.
Gordale.
Parmelia fuliginosa Fr. L.
Clapham, in fruit.
A. Malham ; 
Skipton ; Kildwick.
*Physcia venusta Ach. R.
Giggleswick Scar.
Physcia caesia Hofifm.
R. Settle.
A. Malham.
Physcia obscura var.
virella Ach. A.
Draughton Road.
Skipton, fruit ; Halifax Road, Flappit, Keighley ; on stone 
walls.
Physcia pityrea Ach. R.
Stackhouse, Settle.
Physcia melops Duf. A.
Broughton to Skipton, on stone walls 
Vide 'Addenda Nova ad Lichenographiam Europaeam,' Dr.
Nylander, No. 374.
Natural 
SHACKLETON AND HEBDEN : ADDITIONS TO LICHEN FLORA- 1 67 
XII.
GYROPHOREI.
*Umbilicaria cylindrica Ach. L.
Whernside.
Umbilicaria erosa Ach. L.
Whernside.
Umbilicaria polyrhiza L.
A. Riveoak Edge, near Keighley; 
Harden Moor, near Keighley.
XIII.
LECANOREI.
Pannaria triptophylla Nyl. A.
Malham.
Leproloma lanuginosum Ach. A.
Harden to Bingley, common.
Placodium murorum Hoff.
L. Clapham.
Placodium dissidens Nyl. L.
Clapham.
Placodium sympagea Ach.
(Nyl.).
L. Clapham.
Placodium cirrochorea Nyl. L.
Clapham.
Placodium lobulatum Smf. L.
Clapham.
Lecanora citrina Ach. A.
Malham.
Lecanora crenulatella Nyl. L.
Clapham Railway Station.
(See 'Naturalist/ 1886, page 374.) 
Lecanora ochracea Sch. L.
Clapham.
Lecanora cerina Ehrh.
A. Malham.
Lecanora cerina var.
fusca Mass.
A. Malham.
Lecanora pyracea Ach. L.
Whernside, on stone.
Lecanora candicans Dicks.
W. Bolton Woods.
Lecanora chalybea Duf. A.
Malham Tarn.
Lecanora galactina Ach. A.
Cullingworth.
R. Settle.
Lecanora dispersa Pers.
A. Cullingworth.
Lecanora livida Ach. A.
Malham Tarn.
Lecanora aghardiana Ach. L.
Clapham.
R.[] Settle 
A. .Malham.
Wh 
rysibe Ach. A.
Malham.
Lecanora badia Ach. A.
Harden Moor; Riveoak Edge.
*Lecanora picea Dicks.
A. Morton ; Riveoak Edge.
*Lecanora atriseda Fr. A.
Harden Moor.
Lecanora ventosa L.
A. Riveoak Edge.
Lecanora tartarea.
L. Near Wharf, on trees.
Lecanora cinerea L.
L. Clapham.
* Lecanora calcarea var.
contorta Hffm.
A. Gordale.
verrucosa Ach. W.
Grass Wood.
June 1893.
* 
* 
* 
* 
1 68 SHACKLETON AND HEBDEN : ADDITIONS TO LICHEN FLORA.
*Lecanora pruinosa Sm. A.
Braithwaite; Cullingworth, common 
on mortar on wall tops.
*Lecanora privigna Ach. W.
Bolton Woods.
*Lecanora squamulosa Sch. A.
Braithwaite; Cullingworth.
*Lecanora smaragdula Whlnb.
A. Braithwaite.
*Lecanora discreta Ach. A.
Harden Moor.
Pertusaria communis var.
rupestris DC.
L. Whernside.
Pertusaria amara Ach. W.
Grass Wood.
Pertusaria pustulata Ach. W.
Bolton Woods.
Pertusaria leioplaca Ach. W.
Bolton Woods.
A. Collected 
near Keighley in three localities, in year 1817 ; now extinct.
XIV.
LECIDEINEI.
*Lecidea atro-rufa Dicks.
A. Flappit, near Keighley, on mud 
in niches of walls.
Lecidea lurida Ach. L.
Norber; Clapham.
Lecidea fuliginosa Tay. L.
Clapham.
*Lecidea subfurva Nyl. A.
Malham.
Lecidea periplaca Nyl. A.
Broughton; Skipton.
Lecidea ochracea Hepp.
A. Malham.
*Lecidea enteroleuca Ach. A.
Malham.
R. Settle.
Lecidea uliginosa var.
humosa Leight.
A. Keighley Moor.
*Lecidea mesotropiza Nyl. L.
Clapham.
* Lecidea aglaea Smmrf.
L. Whernside.
*Lecidea mollis Whlnb.
L. Whernside.
*Lecidea tenebrica Nyl. A.
Malham.
Lecidea coarctata Sm. A.
Cullingworth.
Lecidea mesotropoides Nyl. L.
Clapham.
Lecidea kochiana Sch. L.
Whernside.
Lecidea lapicida Fr. A.
Malham.
L. Clapham.
Lecidea lithophila Ach. A.
Riveoak Edge ; Cullingworth.
*Lecidea plana Lahm.
L. Whernside.
A. Riveoak Edge; 
Cullingworth.
Lecidea rivulosa Ach. L.
Whernside.
*Lecidea coriacella Nyl L.
Whernside; Clapham.
"'Lecidea lithophiliza Nyl. A.
Riveoak Edge.
L. Whernside.
*Lecidea interludens Nyl. A.
Collected at Kildwick in 
year 1818.
* Lecidea luteo-atra Nyl. A.
Malham.
Lecidea lactea Flk. L.
Clapham.
Naturalist, 
SHACKLETON AND HEBDEN \ ADDITIONS TO LICHEN FLORA.
169 
•Sh 
* 
Lecidea rubidula Nyl A.
Malham.
Lecidea confluens Web. L.
Clapham.
Lecidea confluens form, laevigata Leigh t.
A. Malham.
*Lecidea sorediza Nyl. L.
Clapham.
*Lecidea contigua form, pustulata Leight.
A- Harden Moor.
*Lecidea cyaniza Nyl. A.
Harden Moor.
See Nyl., Addenda, 
No. 1 196.
•'Lecidea gelatinosa Flk. A.
Harden Moor.
^Lecidea metzleri Korb.
A. Malham.
Lecidea calcivora Ehrh.
A. Malham.
Lecidea taylori Salw.
L. Clapham.
Lecidea verruculosa Borr.
A. Malham.
Lecidea disciformis Fr. A.
Malham.
Collected at Keighley, 
year 1811 ; now extinct.
Lecidea myriocarpa form, quercicola Rabh.
A. Broughton, 
near Skipton.
Lecidea myriocarpa form, areolata Leight.
A. Malham, on 
sandstone.
Lecidea interpolata Stirt.
R. Giggleswick.
Lecidea Candida Web. L.
Clapham.
Lecidea subnigrata Nyl. A.
Malham.
Lecidea lenticularis Ach. R.
Stackhouse, near Settle.
Lecidea tricolor With.
W. Bolton Woods.
Lecidea prasiniza Nyl. W.
Grass Wood.
Lecidea lutosa Mont.
A. Cullingworth; Riveoak Edge.
Lecidea cyrtella Ach. A.
Malham, on limestone.
Lecidea ehrhartiana Ach. W.
Grass Wood.
*Lecidea carbonacea Asm. R.
Ribblehead ; Horton.
A. Malham.
Lecidea aromatica Sm. A.
Skipton to Embsay.
Lecidea melcena Nyl. R.
Ribblehead.
Lecidea sphaeroides Dicks.
R. Lynn Gill.
*Lecidea sabuletorum Flk. A.
Common on dead mosses on 
walls.
W. Strid, on living Tham?iiu?n alopocurum.
*Lecidea dufourii Ach. W.
Bolton Woods.
R. Ribble Head.
Lecidea muscorum Sw. L.
Clapham.
Lecidea geographica form, atro-virens L.
A. Harden Moor.
Lecidea obscurata Ach. R.
Horton.
L. Clapham.
Lecidea lavata Fr. L.
Clapham.
June 1893 
-V- 
170 SHACKLETON AND HEBDEN : ADDITIONS TO LICHEN FLORA.
Lecidea parapetraea Nyl. A.
Harden Moor ; Malham.
*Lecidea excentrica Ach. A.
Malham.
L. Clapham.
*Lecidea flotovii Korb.
W. Bolton Woods.
XV.
GRAPHIDEI.
Graphis scripta var.
varia Ach. A.
Malham.
Opegrapha lyncea Sm. W.
Bolton Woods.
*Opegrapha atra var.
arthonoidea Leight.
R. Giggleswick Scar.
Opegrapha amphotera Nyl. W.
Bolton Woods j Grass Wood.
A. Malham.
Opegrapha vulgata var.
stenocarpa Ach. R.
Giggleswick.
Stigmatidium crassum Dub. W.
Bolton Woods.
*Arthonia lurida Ach. W.
Bolton Woods.
*Arthonia punctiformis Ach. A.
Broughton, near Skipton.
*Arthonia astroidea Ach. A.
Malham.
R. Settle.
XVI.
PYRENOCARPI.
Normandina laetevirens T.
& B.
L. Whernside.
Endocarpon rufescens Ach. A.
Gordale Scar.
*Endocarpon lachneum Ach. R.
Giggleswick Scar.
Verrucaria mauroides Schser.
R. Giggleswick.
A. Malham.
L. Clapham.
Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
*Verrucar 
Verrucar 
Verrucar 
a viridula Ach. L.
Clapham.
a plumbea Ach. A.
Malham.
a microsporoides Nyl A.
Malham.
a glaucina Ach. W.
Grassington.
a canella Nyl. A.
Malham.
a aethibola Whlnb.
A. Malham.
a hydrela Ach. A.
Braithwaite, Keighley.
a cataleptoides Nyl. form, ferruginosa.
A. Malham.
a mutabilis Borr.
A. Malham.
a muralis Ach. A.
Common on mortar on old walls.
a peloclita Nyl. A.
Malham.
a peloclita form, continuella Nyl. A.
Malham.
a macrostoma form, aphanostoma Duf. A.
Culling- 
Malsis ; Crosshills.
a myriocarpa Hepp.
A. Malham.
a limitata Kphb.
A. Malham.
Verrucaria malhamensis Nyl. A.
Malham (See 'Naturalist/ 
January 
Naturalist, 
NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
1 7 I 
*Verrucaria pyrenophora Ach. L.
Clapham.
A. Malham.
*Verrucaria saxicola Mass.
L. Clapham.
* Verrucaria calcivora Nyl. A.
Skipton to Draughton.
*Verrucaria albida Arn. A.
Braithwaite ; Cullingworth.
*Verrucaria intercedens Nyl. A.
Cullingworth.
*Verrucaria spurcella Nyl. A.
Malham; Gordale (See 
'Naturalist/ January 1892).
Verrucaria deminuta Am. A.
Malham.
*Verrucaria chlorotica Ach. A.
Malham.
*Verrucaria codonoidea Leight.
L. Clapham.
Verrucaria cinerea Pers.
W. Bolton Woods.
Verrucaria analepta Ach. W.
Giggles wick.
^Verrucaria erratica Mass.
A. Parasitic on Parmelia saxatilis.
/errucaria thelostoma Harr.
A. Malham.
Verrucaria analeptiza Nyl. A.
Collected near Keighley in 
year 181 7.
Verrucaria rugulosa Borr.
A. Malham.
Verrucaria fusco-agrillacea Anzi.
A. Malham.
NOTES-ORNITHOLOG Y.
Craven Bird-Notes.
— Several Whooper Swans ( Cygnus musicus) have been 
shot near Long Preston ; two out of a ' herd ' of ten or more on the Ribble, 
about January 24th, and another a few days later at Bookilber Rabbit Warren.
The others, I hope, escaped — at any rate from this neighbourhood.
I saw the 
last one I mentioned — a fine adult bird, 17 lbs.
weight.
A Green Sandpiper 
[Helodromas ochropus) was seen on the Ribble below Settle on the following dates 
in 1892— March 19th and 26th, April 14th, October 30th, and December 13th.
It has also been seen on January 9th, February 1st, and February 4th, 1893, so that it 
may be presumed it is the same bird, which has wintered here.
— Edward Peake, 
Giggles wick School, Settle, February 12th, 1893.
Flamboroug-h Bird-Notes.
— This season has brought some very rare species 
that seldom make their appearance in this part.
One of these occurrences is the 
arrival this early spring of the Avocet {Recurvirostra avocetta), of which a pair 
were seen for several days, one of them, the female, coming into my possession 
for preservation.
On April 8th the Blackstart {Ruticilla tithys) was seen ; on 
April 15th the Redstart (JR.
phcetiicurus) ; and on April 28th quite a rush of 
}Mutethroats {Sylvia cinerea) arrived on the Headland.
Mr. D.
Atkinson 
informs me that he saw twenty Dotterels (Eudromias morinelhis) on May 8th at 
Maiden's Grave ; and on May 9th two Hoopoes ( Upupa epops) near Buckton 
Hall.-- Matthew Bailey, Flamborou^h, May 18th, 1893.
Starlings Hawking for Flies.— On Sunday, May 14th, near Plompton, 
J observed a Starling {Sturnus vulgaris) fly from an old barn where it had been 
feeding its young.
Directly it left the nest it commenced flying to and fro, 
catching flies, exactly in the manner of the swallow, and when it had obtained 
efficient it flew back to the nest with them.
I have previously seen starlings 
catch flies in a desultory manner, at odd times, but never before saw one go about 
it in such a deliberate fashion.
I can only account for it by the fact that the long 
continued drought has caused a scarcity in the usual food-supply of these birds, thu 
compelling them to seek an addition from other sources.— Rii.ey Fortune, 
Harrogate, May 17th, 1893.
June 1803.
1-2 
NOTES AND NEWS.
\ 
The * Synopsis of Genera and Species of Malveee ' oil which Mr. Edmund G.
Baker, F.L.S., has so long been engaged, still continues to appear at intervals in 
the Journal of Botany, the latest instalment being in the number for March 1893.
^ A couple of Burton-on-Trent botanists, Messrs.
J. E.
Nowers and James G.
Wells, have been paying attention to the Plants of the Aran Islands in Galway 
Bay in 1890, and have published an interesting list and notes concerning them, 
in the June 1892 number of the 'Journal of Botany.' 
Geologists will welcome the beginning of the publication by the Geological 
Survey of the long-expected   index-map ' on a scale of four miles to the inch.
Among the sheets now ready for issue is that of East Yorkshire (No. 6).
While 
incorporating much detail, these maps are singularly clear, and the complete 
series will constitute by far the best geological map of England yet available.
In 'Notes and Queries' for May 13th, 1893, Dr. J.
A. H.
Murray, of Oxford, 
the Editor of the new standard English Dictionary, has a note as to the use of the 
words ' crow ' and ' rook ' for Ccrvus frugilegus.
He wishes to ascertain how far 
north in England the word ' rook ' is used as a true vernacular (not merely book) 
name for that species, mentioning that ' crow ' is the word used in Lancashire, 
Yorkshire, and North Lincolnshire.
Will our readers give the benefit of their 
knowledge on this point ?
An address delivered at the Anniversary Meeting of the Hertfordshire Natural 
History Society, by John Hopkinson, F.L.S., F.G.S., etc., the president, has 
been reprinted from the transactions and issued in pamphlet form.
Mr. Hopkinson, 
who is well known in Yorkshire, especially in Leeds, was the founder of this 
Society, and to him it owes much of its success.
The address, which is a com- 
prehensive sketch of Darwin, his life and work, is couched in clear language, 
and being interspersed with anecdote will be of interest to the general reader.
At a meeting of the Entomological Society of London which was held on the 
10th May, 1893, Professor L.
C. Miall, F.R.S., communicated a paper entitled 
'Dicranota: a Carnivorous Tipulid Larva'; and the President announced that 
the new Library Catalogue, which had been edited by Mr. Champion, with the 
assistance of Mr. McLachlan and Dr. Sharp, was now ready for sale to the 
public at 9s., and to the Fellows of the Society at 6s.
a copy.
The Naturalists of Lincolnshire are to have an excursion at Mablethorpe on 
Monday, June 12th, for the purpose of investigating its natural history capabilities.
The place is one that will probably well repay careful search.
There is, perhaps, 
a certain sameness in the flora, due to the iteration and abundance of individuals 
of a few species, but these are of a kind quite rare elsewhere.
The drains and 
ponds afford many species of Mollusca and Coleoptera, while the Trichoptera are 
specially abundant.
The sand-hills yield some of our best Coleoptera and 
Chelifer degeerii and the Natterjack Toad are also found here.
The main party 
will leave Mablethorpe Station at 11 a.m., and proceed along the sand-hills to 
East Theddlethorpe, then turning southwards and crossing the lines return to 
Mablethorpe to the Book-in-Hand Hotel, where refreshments will be provided, 
fter which there will be a general meeting.
The names of many of the most 
prominent naturalists of Lincolnshire and of some in Yorkshire are connected 
with this excursion, which has been organised by Mr. Walter F.
Baker, who may- 
be addressed at 18, Hyde Terrace, Leeds, by any one desirous of joining the party.
There is every appearance of this meeting being a great success, and it is sincerely 
to be hoped that it will be the precursor of a regular series of meetings for 
considering the great natural advantages that Lincolnshire possesses, and 
concerning which it is surprising that so little appears to have hitherto beenjfone^ 
Naturalist, 
i73 
THE BIRDS OF LANCASHIRE AND OF ESSEX.
The Birds of Lancashire.
By F.
S. Mitchell, M.B.O.U. Second Edition, 
revised and annotated by Howard Saunders, F.L.S., F.Z.S., etc., with 
additions by R.
J. Howard, M.B.O.U., and other local authorities.
Illustrated.
265 pp.
and map.
London : Gurney and Jackson.
1892.
The Birds of Essex.
A contribution to the Natural History of the County.
London : Simpkin, Marshall & Co. Limited.
1890.
It speaks well for the popularity of Mr. F.
S. Mitchell's ' Birds 
of Lancashire ' that a second issue should be called for after a lapse 
of only seven years.
In the absence of the author from the country 
the task of editing the new edition has devolved upon Mr. Howard 
Saunders, who, we need hardly say, has made the best use of the 
new material placed at his disposal 
As Mr. Saunders does not claim any special knowledge of 
Lancashire birds, he has naturally availed himself of the assistance 
of several well-known local ornithologists, his principal helper being 
Mr. R.
J. Howard, of Blackburn, whose name appears on the title 
page.
We have much pleasure in noticing the work in the current 
number of the 'Naturalist,' but as many of our readers will be 
already familiar with the details contained in the first edition, we 
propose therefore to confine our remarks mainly to the new informa- 
tion now presented.
In the original edition Mr. Mitchell enumerated 259 species as 
comprising the Lancashire avi-fauna.
Owing to a curious mistake 
one species — the Cream-coloured Courser — has now been eliminated.
On the other hand, five new species — Purple Heron, Sociable Plover, 
Wilson's and the White-faced or Frigate Petrel, and Black-necked 
Grebe — have been added.
Unfortunately the first-named has still 
no valid claim to be included in the county list, as the example 
noticed was obtained at Alderley Edge, a locality some distance 
within the Cheshire borders.
The Sociable Plover and the Frigate 
Petrel are both additions to the Lancashire and also to the British 
lists.
The Plover has a curious history.
It appears to have formed 
one of a group of stuffed birds in a case examined by Mr. Mitchell, 
and identified by him as a Cream-coloured Courser, as recorded in 
his original volume.
Subsequent examination under more favourable 
circumstances revealed the fact of its being a no less distinguished 
stranger than the Sociable Plover, a species inhabiting the south- 
eastern portions of Europe.
The Frigate and Wilson's Petrels were 
curiously enough both found dead, with many other birds, on the 
shores of Walney Island, within a few days of one another.
Some 
ornithologists may perhaps question the wisdom of including 
a species in a county list on the strength of a single example cast up 
e^sea, but in our opinion no harm can be done so long as full 
1893.
174 REVIEW THE BIRDS OF LANCASHIRE AND OF ESSEX.
particulars relating to the circumstances are given, as in the present 
case.
We owe the addition of the Frigate Petrel to the British list 
to the indefatigable researches of Rev. H.
A. Macpherson, who has 
included a beautifully-executed figure of the species in his recently 
published   Vertebrate Fauna of Lakeland.' 
Amongst other new notes we welcome the additional information 
relating to the various species of grey geese frequenting the 
Lancashire marshes, and also interesting items referring to the inter- 
breeding of the Pochard and Tufted Duck, and pinioned with wild 
Wigeon.
On the other hand, further research is required into the 
distribution during the breeding season of the Chiff-Chaff, Reed 
Warbler, and White Wagtail, none of them rare species, but still 
worthy of the attention of Lancashire ornithologists, who we hope 
are not sitting down under the impression that, locally, nothing more 
remains to be done.
It may be remarked that the Mealy Redpoll is 
still an absentee from the county list ; though it is suggested that 
some larger and greyer Redpolls, previously referred to the com- 
moner species, may have been examples of the Mealy Redpoll.
With regard to the general details of the book, beautifully 
executed illustrations of the Black-throated Wheatear, Wall-Creeper, 
and Sociable Plover replace the coloured plates of the first edition.
All of them are good, but the Wheatear is perhaps hardly sprightly 
enough for a Chat.
The remaining wood-cuts are unchanged, and 
we think it rather a pity, in view of the recent improvements in 
mechanical photo-printing, that they were not discarded in favour of 
others more attractive.
The book as a whole is very satisfactory, 
the binding good, and the type, except in the case of the map, clear.
Ornithologists, especially those who require local information up to 
date, will find it a valuable addition to their book-shelves.
Whilst writing on the subject of county faunas, it will perhaps 
not be out of place to call the attention of North of England 
naturalists to Mr. Miller Christy's   Birds of Essex/ a profusely 
illustrated volume published under the auspices of the Essex Field 
Club.
This work, published more than two years ago, has been 
waiting our attention for some little time.
The author, from his 
former connection with the county, will be well known to the 
majority of Yorkshire naturalists as an excellent observer.
As the 
book treats of a district lying at some distance from our own area?
we can only remark that Mr. Miller Christy has accomplished his 
task in a most complete and satisfactory manner ; the biographies 
of Essex ornithologists and the information relating to wild fowl 
decoys being especially interesting.
For these chapters alone the 
work is well worth reading.
— F.
B. W.
Natural 
175 
FORGE VALLEY IN WINTER.
Rev. W.
C. HEY } M.A., M.C.S..
Vice-President of the York Philosophical Society, West Ay ton, near Scarborough 
As I enter the portals of this deep canon this December afternoon, 
I feel like one who steps at midnight into the silent aisles of some 
cathedral, which hitherto he had only visited when the sunshine was 
bringing out the rich colours of its stained windows, and the voices 
of the choristers, and the pealing of the organ, flooding its long vistas 
with harmony.
For the silence of the winter woods is their most 
impressive feature.
Summer is full of sound, — chirpings of birds, 
hummings of insects, swish-swish of the leafy boughs, while an 
indescribable delicious murmur, like the sound of fairy kisses, fills the 
warm quick air.
Now all is so still that I can plainly hear each single drip of a half- 
frozen rill, as it falls upon the surface of the river, and the faint 
creaking of a breaking larch-bough a hundred yards away, appears 
loud.
The snow covers the sides of the ravine, steep though they be, 
and every tree-trunk, every branch, every twig, is brought out into 
dark relief.
The woods are seen to be not half so unfathomable as 
they appeared in summer, when layer upon layer of broad foliage 
extended between the top surface and the floor of the great green 
sea.
I feel surprised at their shallowness, as one who, sailing upon 
a still sea, is startled to perceive through the pellucid water, the rocks 
and seaweed at the bottom.
Here and there, under the trees, are 
seen little patches of dark green, plants of the spurge-laurel, tall 
enough to rise above the snow.
These, and a few withered oak 
leaves, alone vary the great study in black and white, which the dull, 
silent, winter's day presents.
A week or two ago, many a wild rose 
bush was tipped with coral ; spindle trees glowed with such pink and 
orange tints (their splendid arillodes), that one might fancy the dyes 
of an autumn sunset had been spilt among them.
But, either the 
wild weather, or the fieldfares, have stripped the woods of all their 
jewellery, and they stand forlorn and desolate as a church which 
puritanical zeal has dismantled and white-washed.
Yet this deep silence, this weird monotony, by its very vacancy 
tempts the imagination to people these solitary glades with their 
ancient inhabitants, and create sounds for the vacant ear.
And 
thought can often prove herself richer than reality, for all the past of 
both fact and fancy is at her disposal.
On yonder snowy ridge 
Ij^em^ to behold a herd of reindeer standing, their forked antlers 
June 1893.
176 
NOTES LEPIDOPTERA AND MOLLUSCA 
sharply defined against the ashy sky, and a troop of wild hunters 
appear, armed with stone hatchets and flint barbs.
Presently they 
are gone, both the hunters and their quarry, and the giant form of 
a mammoth, with curving tusks and shaggy mane, grows into their 
place.
As the short afternoon turns duskier, I listen to the muffled 
footfalls of a pack of wolves, their dismal howlings re-echo from the 
rocky sides of the valley.
Deeper and deeper falls the twilight ; 
a shivering breath of cold air passes by me and rustles the withered 
oak leaves.
Is it really only a passing breeze and not some phantom 
of Death sweeping by on its awful errand?
Yonder dark, ill-defined 
object might be only a stump bearded with lichens, or some mis- 
shapen dwarf of Scandinavian mythology, revealing himself thus late 
to the eye of a posthumous faith.
Wandering on thus, lost in fancy, I am suddenly recalled to 
myself, startled for an instant into believing the creatures of my 
imagination have actually become corporeal and animated.
For 
surely there is a real sound of rushing feet in the wood, this is a real 
wild cry ringing from the rock above.
A rabbit, pursued by two dogs, 
rushes close by my feet, and explains the first sound ; the unearthly 
cry proceeds from a couple of jackdaws, returning to their night- 
roost in the ice-draped crags on high.
NO TE—LEPID OPTERA .
Melanippe hastata near Sheffield.
— On the 15th inst.
I came across 
several examples of this moth when walking through the Wharncliffe woods, 
between Deepcar and Oughty Bridge.
I do not know whether the species is 
widely distributed in Yorkshire or not, but a note of its occurrence here may 
possibly be of interest to local entomologists.
Two days before, I saw a female 
Orange Tip (Euchloe cardamines) fluttering round a head of charlock in the same 
locality.
— Chas.
Oldham, Ashton-on-Mersey, May 18th, 1893.
We took Melanippa hastata freely in the Wharncliffe wood years ago, and the 
locality has long been known as one of the best West Yorkshire habitats of the 
species, which, moreover, is widely distributed throughout the county.
— G.
T. P« 
NOTE— MOLL USCA.
Six-banded Helix nemoralis at Adel near Leeds.
I am indebted to my 
friend 
Messrs 
Mr. W.
Howard, who is at the head of the composing department at 
. McCorquodale & Co. Limited, for a number of examples of Helix netnorahs 
collected by him yesterday at Adel near Leeds, where there were scores crawling 
about the grass and on walls.
There were examples of the vars.
libellula and 
rubella^ of various band -formulas, the most interesting being the seldom-met-with 
six-banded form caused by the splitting of the third band.
The specimen is 
nearly full-grown although without lip, and its colour and band-formula rank it as 
var.
libellula 123345.
The bands coalesce towards the mouth but are perfectly 
distinct and unmistakable on the greater portion of the shell.
— W.
Denison 
Roebuck, Sunny Bank, Leeds, May 29th, 1893.
Naturalist, 
i77 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
The present instalment has been compiled and edited by 
WM.
DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
The previous instalments of the Bibliography of Lepidoptera 
have appeared as follows: — 
For 1884, in 'Naturalist,' July and Aug., 1885, pp.
285-292.
J %&5, 6, 7, „ Feb. and March, 1888, pp.
58-78.
„ 1888, ,, Sept.
and Oct., 1890, pp.
279-299.
,, 1889, „ May and June, 1891, pp.
157-165.
The counties and vice-counties of which cognizance is taken are 
the following, as named and numbered in the Watsonian scheme : — 
53, Lincoln S.
; 54, Lincoln N.
; 56, Notts.; 57, Derby; 58, 
Cheshire; 59, Lancashire S.
; 60, Lancashire W.
; 61, York S.E.
; 
62, York N.E.; 6 3 , York S.W.; 64, York Mid W.; 65, York N.W.; 
66, Durham ; 67, Northumberland S.
; 68, Cheviotland ; 69, West- 
morland with Furness ; 70, Cumberland ; and 71, Isle of Man.
Anon [various observers].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1879 [near Burton-on-Trent : Vanessa urtiea % 
Hybernia ntpieapraria, H.
leneopJnearia, Phigalia, H.
progetnmaria, Tanio- 
cam pa got hie a, T.
stabilis, T.
hist abi lis, 71 ritbrieosa.
Pier is brass ieee, P.
rapa, 
Se tenia iliunaria, Antic tea badiata, Anthoeharis.
Spilosoma lubricipeda, 
Dieranura v inula, Plusia gamma, Rumia, Cynthia* Hepialus humuli, 
Polyommatus phi teas, Melanthia albieillata, Abraxas rossulariata, Adela 
a eerella, Camptogramma bilineata, Tkyatira bat is (Hretby), Cidaria aotata, 
Abraxus ulmata, noted, with dates, but without localities except where 
specified].
4th.
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent Nat. Hist.
& Arch.
So ., 1880, 
pp.
67-70.
Anon, [various ob>ervers].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature for 1882 [near Burton-on-Trent, giving- dates for 
Vanessa urttt (Ticknall), Aretia eaja, and Gonoptera libatrix\ 7th Ann.
Hep. Burton-on-Trent N.
fl.,etc.,Soc, for year ending 31st March, 1883, T- !
4 
Anon.
[not signed].
Derbyshire.
The Lepidoptera of Burton-on-Trent and Neighbourhood [a valuable 
list, founded on that published in the 'Entomologist' in 1885 ; the district 
is somewhat indefinite, being from 15 to 20 miles round Burton in every 
direction ; a geological notice by Frank E.
Lott is given in the introduction ; 
the list includes 40 Rhopalocera, 20 Sphinges, 60 Bombyces, 171 Noctu , 
166 Geometry, 32 Pyralides, and 12 Pterophori, in the acceptation of South's 
4 Entomologist ' List, which is the standard adopted for arrangement and 
nomenclature; 17 names of contributors of information are given].
Trans.
Burton-on-Trent Nat. Hist, and Arch.
Soc, vol.
i., 1889, pp.
114-138.
June 1893 
M 
178 bibliography: lepidoptkra, 1890.
Anon, [not signed].
Westmorland.
Royal Oak Day [29th May ; The Author of ' Troutbeck : its Scenery 
. .
. and Folk-lore' (Kendal, 1876), says : ' The day is also a fatal one 
for white butterflies [genus Pieris], which the lads term " papishes," and hunt 
to the death ; while variegated ones [genus Vanessa] continue to be styled 
King George* s, and loyally admired '].
Westm.
Note- Book and Nat. Hist.
Record, vol.
i., part 6, June 1889, P- 2 55- 
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man, 
Poplar Hawk-Moth {{Smerinthus popidi) at Ramsey, June 28th, and at 
Glencrutchery, Onchan, June 19th].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 3, July 
1889, i.
90.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [in the Isle of Man ; dates given for Puns 
rap(E y Poly om matus alexis, and Vanessa cardui], Yn Lioar Manninagh, 
No. 5, April 1890, pp.
161-162.
Anon, [not signed].
Derbyshire.
Penketh [excursion, 23rd May, to Monsall Dale ; Anthocharis common].
N. H.
J., June 15th, 1890, p.
92.
Anon, [not signed].
Yorkshire, Lane, and Cheshire.
Review.
The Lepidoptera of Lancashire and Cheshire, by Dr. J.
W. 
Ellis [in which the records for Lancashire and Cheshire are compared with 
those for Yorkshire in detail for the genus Acidalia], Young Nat., Aug.
1890, pp.
157-158.
J. E.
R. Allen.
Lane.
S. 
The Sallow Season of 1890 [at Bolton, Lanes.
; Tieniocampa rubricosa and 
T. gothica taken].
Ent., June 1890, p.
202.
F. W.
A[n drews].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1884 [at Burton-on-Trent ; date given for Rumia\ 
9th Ann. Rep.
B.-on-Trent N.
H. and Arch.
Soc for 1884, pub.
1885, pp.
23-25.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Gas-Lamp Entomology [at Chester ; detailed notes, followed by list 
of numerous lepidoptera captured].
Ent., Feb. 1890, p.
61-65.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Gas-Lamp Entomology .
. additions to my list [Tortricodes hyemana 
and Lemnatophila p/iryganelta, at Chester].
Ent., March 1890, p.
100.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
The Sallow Season of 1890.
. .
Chester [disappointing ; Tienio- 
campa gothica, T.
stabilis, T.
incerta, T.
cmda, T.
gracilis (not seen', 
Triphosa dubitata, Ant iclea badiata, Cidaria suffumata y larvae of Xanthid 
fulvago (cerago i\ Ent.
, June 1890, p.
201.
J. Akkle 
Cheshire.
Crocallis elinguaria var.
trapezaria (?) [taken 20th August, 1890, from 
a Chester gas-lamp].
Eat., Sep. 1890, p.
291.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
The Cheshire Plague of Caterpillars : a Myth [larvae being really very 
scarce ; Amphidasys Miliaria, Hylophila bicolorana, Cabera pusaria, all 
scarce as larvae at Delamere Forest in August].
Ent., Sep. 1890, p.
293.
J. ARK LI 
Cheshire.
Notes on Tseniocampa opima [at Wallasey ; life-history and habits 
described ; Nyssia zonar/a, Mesotype virgata (liueolata) also mentioned].
Ent., Oct. 1890, p.
307-309.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
179 
J, Arkle.
Cheshire* 
Captures from Gas-Lamps [at Chester, September 5th, 1890 : Phibalapteryx 
lignata, Coremia propugnata, Cidaria testata, C.
immanata, Melanippe 
fluctuatdy Halia wavaria, Ennomos tiliaria, Paraponyx stratiotalis, Noctna 
glareosa (new record for Chester), Luperina testacea, L.
cespitis, Neuronia 
populaj'is, Anchocelis lunosa, Cos mi a trapezina, Noctna xantkograp/ia, 
Hydracia micacea, Porihesia auriflua^ and Hepialus kumult], Ent., Dec.
1890, p.
385.
Eustace R.
Bankes.
York S.W.
Scoparia angustea [and its dates of emergence at Portland and Hudders- 
neld].
E. M.
M., Jan. 1890, p.
8. 
W. B.
Barber.
York S.W.
[Female Mottled Umber (Hybemia defoliaria) near Sheffield, 20th Dec.].
N. H.
J., March 15th, 1890, p.
30.
W. B.
Barber.
York S.W., Cumberland.
York, Bootham, Natural History, &c, Club [Abraxas ulmata at Abbeydale, 
Sheffield ; at Seascale, Satyr us semele, Argynnis aglaia, S.
tithonus\ N.
H. J., 
Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
11 
Charles G.
Barrett.
Isle of Man.
[Phycis subornatella Dup. from Isle of Man, exhibited].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Feb. 5th, 1890, p.
ii.; Ent., March 1890, p.
102; E.
M. M., March 
1890, p.
92.
C. G.
Barrett.
Lane.
S. 
[Exhibition of the widely distributed Asiatic and African Botys mutualis 
Zell.
taken by C.
S. Gregson near Bolton, Lanes.].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 
March 5th, 1890, p.
vii.; Young Nat., April 1890, p.
67; Zool., April 1890, 
p. 149 ; Ent., April 1890, p.
141 ; E.
M. M., April 1890, p.
120.
C. G.
Barrett.
Durham or York N.W., Furness or Westmorland.
Bryotropha obscurella, Hein., a British species [from Darlington district 
(Sang) and Windermere district (Hodgkinson)].
E. M.
M., April 1890, 
p. 112; Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., April 2nd, 1890, p.
xi.
C. G.
Barrett.
Lane.
S. and W., Cheshire, Furness.
Deilephila galii in Lancashire and Cheshire [discussed in respect of the 
causes which bring about periodical abundance ; and stating that the larva is 
to be found somewhere on the sandy coast from Llandudno to Grange every 
year].
E. M.
M., Nov. 1890, p.
300.
C. G.
Barrett.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Lepidoptera upon Coast Sandhills [scarce this season ; notes as to 
A grot is cursoria, A.
pr&cox, A.
vallzgera y A.
tritici^ Triphama pronuba^ 
T. orboua, Xylophasia polyodon y Caradrina cubicularis, Melanippe galiata, 
Eubolia lineolata, Peronea permutana, P.
aspersana, Spilonota incarnatana 
(amosnaua), Lasiocampa trifolii noted as captured or observed on the 
Lancashire or Cheshire coast].
E. M.
M., Nov. 1890, p.
301.
J. Batty.
York S.W. or Derbyshire.
Spring Notes [from the Moors near Sheffield : Lithocolletis vacciniella 
and Nepticula weaveri taken].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
63.
J. Batty.
York S.W.
Varieties of Arctia caia [bred from larvae from Loxley Moor edge, 
near Sheffield; variety described].
Ent., Nov. 1890, p.
344.
J. Batty.
York S.W.
Autumn Notes.— Sheffield [Eupithecia nanata, E.
minutata, E.
assimilata, 
E. /ariciata, Phoxopteryx ramana (/actana), Colcophora lanpennella, 
C. virgaurella, Lithocolletis roboris^ Z.
salicicolella, L.
faginella, L.
pomifolielta^ L.
embenz.rpenfulla, Cemiostoma scitella, Nepticula aucuparie/la, 
N. a yrop /, and N.
myrtillella in the larva state, and good plants noted].
Prn. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
251.
June i8q 3 .
180 bibliography: lepidoptera, 189c.
H. Baxter.
Lane.
W. 
Notes of the Season.
— Lepidoptera [at St. Anne's-on-Sea ; Orgyia 
fascelina, Elachista argentella, Chorentis scintillulana, and Leitcama 
littoralis\ Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, p.
103.
Holmes Baxter.
Lane.
W. 
Notes of the Season .
. .
St. Anne's-on-Sea [Lithocolletis messaniella 
(Lytham), A grot is cursoria, A.
precox, Dictyopteryx holmiana, A.
nigricans 
(not yet seen), Peronea aspersana, sEdematophorus lithodactylus, Depressana 
nanatella, and Choreutes scintillulana noted].
Ent. Record, Sep. I5 tn > 
1890, p.
155.
T. Baxter.
Lane.
W. 
Spring Notes [from St. Anne's-on-Sea, Lancashire ; Notodonta ziczac and 
Dicrantira viniila\ Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
63.
- 
Lane.
W. 
T. Baxter.
Black var.
of Zygaena filipendulae [at Fleetwood; two reared from pupae in 
1888; description given].
Ent. Record, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
240.
T. Baxter.
Lane.
W. 
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera), .
. St. Anne's-on-Sea [sugar 
a failure, attracting only Triphcena pronuba and Amphipyra tragopogoms ; 
T. orbona and Xylophasia monoglypha on the sandhills, Smerinthus ocellatus 
larvae commoner, S, populi scarcer than usual, Dicramtra vinirfa and 
Agrotis citrsoria plentiful, Satytus semele and Argynnis aglaia scarcer, 
Bombyx quercus and Orgyia fascelina larvae commoner, larvce of B.
rubi in 
quantity, Li pat is salicis fairly common, Notodonta dieted and JV.
ziczac very 
scarce, Leiicania littoral is abundant at Lytham, L.
pallens and L.
impura 
plentiful, Miana strigilis, M.
fasciiincida, M.
literosa and I\L bicoloria scarce, 
C. cubicularis common, Agrotis, all scarce except A.
cursoria, A.
nigricans 
not seen, A.
prcecox, A.
valligera, A.
tritici, A.
aquilina, and A.
exclama- 
tionis all very scarce, A.
segetum, A.
suffusa, and A.
corticea not seen, a few 
Lnperi7ia testacea and L.
cespitis at lamps, Noctua xanthographa common, the 
others scarce, Tceniocampa gracilis  , 7\ opima, T.
incerta, T.
stabilis, Orthosia 
lota, Epunda lichenea, Cucullia umbratica, all scarce, Hadena dentina not 
seen for two years, Plusia gamma scarce, Phytometra cenea taken, Cidaria 
testata and Ennomos tiliaria plentiful, Ephippiphora populana, Choreutes 
scintillulana, Peronea aspersana, P.
hastiana, Eupcecilia veclisana, Sencoris 
liter an a, Plerophorus lithodactylus, Anerastia loteila, Hypermecia critciana, 
Tortrixforsterana, T.podana, T.heparana, Peronea sponsana, P.
schalleriana, 
P. comparana, Teras caudana, Grapholitha trimaculana, Ephippiphora 
scutulana, Aspis udmanniana, Sericoris cespitana, S.
rivulana, S.
urticaria, 
S. lacunana, Sciaphila sitbjectana, Grapholitha nigromaculana, Euptcct/ia 
dubitana, E.
atricapitana, Pyrausta purpuralis, Pyralisfarinalis, Harpiptetyx 
xylostella, H.
nemorella, Depressaria nanatella, D.
arendla, D.
propinquella, 
Z>.
subpropinquella, D.
rhodochrella, D.
liturella, D.
conterminella, fl- 
ange I ice I /a, I).
ccellana, D.
yeatiella, D.
applana, Z>.
ciliella, D.
bad i el la, 
D. heracleana, Gelechia marmorea, G.
umbroselta, G.
populella, G.
sororculella, 
G. temerella, G.
terelta, Coleophora genista* Batrachedra prceangusta, Litho- 
colletis alnifoliella, and Cemiostoma laburnella taken almost all on the sand- 
hills].
Ent. Rec., Dec. 15th, 1890, pp.
247-248.
[T.
R.] Billups 
Isle of Man 
[Exhibition of Parasites bred from Manx Peronia hastiana].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, 9th Oct. 1890 ; Young Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
209.
E. Birchall.
Isle of Man.
CEgoeria philanthiformis.— Abstract [of paper; the Isle of Man is the 
only locality where it is abundant ; details entered into].
Tran<.
Isle of M»n 
N. H.
S., vol.
i., 1879-1884 (publ.
18S8), pp.
n-U.
Naturalist 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
181 
Edwin Birchall.
Isle of Man.
Peculiarities of the Isle of Man Lepidoptera [of which Vanessa urticce, 
Agrotis litcernea, Cirrhcedia xerampelina, Diantlnrcia capsophila, D.
ccesia, 
and Tephrosia biundularia are cited as offering peculiar variations].
Wallace's 
Island Life, ii.
332 ; reprinted, Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 3, July 1889, Back 
Transactions, i.
51-52.
W. G.
Blatch.
Westmorland.
[Phibalapteryx lapidata taken at Shap Fell, Sep. 1889 ; first recorded 
capture in England].
E. M.
M., April 1890, p.
118; Ent., April 1890, p.
144.
G. A.
Booth.
Furness.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera) .
. .
Grange-over-Sands [Epnnda 
nigra fairly common, Plusia iota, PL pulchrina, Ciicullia lunbratica attracted 
by Scotch lilac, larva 1 of Dicranura furcula^ Sine ri tit hus popiili^ S.
ocet/atus, 
and D.
vinula plentiful, Erebia vicdea abundant].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 
1S90, p.
247.
Geo. A.
Booth.
Isle of Man.
Dianthaecia caesia and Polia nigrocincta in the Isle of Man [a nice 
series of the former, which is becoming scarce, and larvae of the latter].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
260.
Geo. A.
Booth.
Furness.
Celaena haworthii [on ragwort-flowers in the day-time, at Grange-over- 
Sands].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
261.
[B.
A.] Bower.
Durham.
[Exhibition of Scardia picarella, bred from fungus collected in Durham 
in May 1870].
Proc Ent. Soc Lond., July 2nd, 1890, p.
xxi.
; E.
M. M., 
Aug. 1890, p.
225 ; Ent., Aug. 1890, p.
265 ; Zool., Aug. 1890, p.
320.
Cumberland, Durham, York N.
E. and Mid W., 
C. A.
Briggs.
Derbyshire, Lane.
W. and S., Cheshire.
The Blown-over Theory [of the occurrence of Deilephila galii in Britain, 
discussed, with references to Wallasey, Hartlepool, Scarborough, Manchester, 
Carlisle, Derbyshire, Rossall, Harrogate, and Preston occurrences in 1888].
Young Nat., Jan. 1890, pp.
2-4.
C. II.
Briggs.
Cheshire.
On the Probable Origin of Deilephila galii [argued at length ; Wallasey 
records used].
Young Nat., April 1890, pp.
73-74.
. Bright [of Bournemouth].
York S.W.
[Exhibition of splendidly suffused varieties of Venusia cambricaria from 
Sheffield].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, Sep. 25th, 1890 ; Ent. Record, No. 7, 
Oct. 15th, 1890, i.
191.
E. J.
Buckell.
Notts.
[Exhibition of five Selenia Innaria (bred from Nottingham pupae) some 
of which appeared intermediate between this and S.
illustraria, and a male 
with normal coloration of female].
City of Lond.
Ent. Soc, 20th Nov., 1890; 
Young Nat., Dec 1890, p.
224.
York N.E.
A. H.
Burtt.
Colias edusa near Scarborough [one at Westwood, 15th Sep., 1889].
Nat..
Nov. 1889, p.
352.
Q- T.] Carringtox.
York.
[Spilosoma lubricipeda var.
radiata and its increase in the York district].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, April 24th, 1890; E.
M. M., June 1890, p.
165; 
Ent., June 1890, p.
207; Young Nat., June 1890, p.
109.
T. A.
Chapman.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Moors.
The Genus Acronycta and its Allies [A.
( Vtmtma) menydnthidis occurs on 
the moors of Lancashire and Yorkshire].
Ent. Record, Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
145 
June i8q 3 .
l82 BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1890 
H. S.
Clarke.
Isle of Man.
Dianthaecia capsophila [in the Isle of Man, at Port Jack ; particulars 
of quick emergence].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, Oct. 1889, p.
109.
Henry Shortridge Clarke.
Isle of Man.
Report of the Entomological Section [of the Isle of Man N.
H. S.
; 
noting Manx captures of Pieris brassicc?, P.
rapce, P.
napi, Lycccna phhms, 
PolyofTimatus alexis, Chortobius pamphilus, Pararge megrcra, Vanessa urticcc, 
V. carditis V.
atalanta, V.
io, Colias edusa (one at Laxey, 18th Sep., 1889), 
Dianthcecia ccEsia, D.
capsophila, Cirrcedia xerampelina var.
unicolor, 
Xylophasia polyodon, Triphcena prontdm, Mania maura, Amphipyra 
tragopogonis, Sphinx ligustri, S.
convolvuli, Dicranura vinula, Smerintkus 
populi, and S.
oallatus ; localities, dates, and details given].
Yn Lioar 
Manninagh, Jan.
-April 1890, pp.
158-160.
H. Shortridge Clarke.
Isle of Man.
The Larvae of the Eyed Hawk Moth [(Smerintkus ocellatus) taken near 
Cranstal Lock, Kirk Bride, Isle of Man ; particulars given ; Acherontia, 
Sphinx convolvuli ^ S.
ligustri, Macroglossa sic Hat arum, Smerintkus populi, 
Chosrocampa porcellus, and Deilephila galii also enumerated as seen or taken 
in the Island by the writer].
Back Trans.
I. of Man N.
H. S., i.
92-93 ; 
published with Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 6, July 1890.
H. Shortridge Clarke.
Isle of Man.
Dianthaecia Capsophila emerging in Autumn [giving Manx experience].
Young Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
213.
H. Shortridge Clarke.
Isle of Man.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera) .
. Isle of Man [anent Triphcena 
pronuba and A grot is exclamationis being the only results of June sugaring at 
Tromode; season good for Dianthacia c&sia and D.
capsopkila, poor for 
Cirrhtzdia xerampelina].
Ent. Rec, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
209.
Isle of Man.
ianthaecia capsophila [in the Isle of Man ; notes on pupation].
Ent.
Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
262.
H. Shortridge Clarke.
J. Collins.
Cheshire.
Hydraecia petasitis at Warrington [locality particularised].
Young Nat., 
June 1890, p.
116.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S 
Spring Notes [for 1890, at Rixton Moss, near Warrington ; Asphalia 
jlavicornis not seen ; Ttvniocampa incerta, T.
stabilis, T.
gotkica, and 
Cerastis vaccinii noted].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
62.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Notes on Xanthia cerago and X.
silago [as observed near Warrington ; 
Leucania litkargyria, L.
pallens, L.
impura, Apamea fibrosa, Noctua baja, 
A r .
augur, Triplncna comes, Apamea didyma (oculea), and N.
xanthograpka 
also occur].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
68.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Apamea gemina var.
remissa [captured near Warrington (county not 
indicated), three in 1888, two in 1890].
Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, 
p. 128.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera) .
. .
Warrington [larva of 
Agrotis agathina taken in plenty].
Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
128.
J. Collins.
Lanes.
S. or Cheshire.
Variety of Arctia caia [bred near Warrington ; description given].
Ent 
Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
128.
Naturals*** 
J. Collins.
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
183 
Lane.
S.i Cheshire.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera) • .
• Warrington [Hadeiia adusta, 
H.siiasa, Apamea imam '//it's, Leucania comma, Mamestra anceps, Canonympha 
davits, Aspilates strigillaria, Hyria auroraria, Lithosia mesomella, Vuninia 
menyanthidis, Euthemonia rttssttla, Cuspidia leporina, Nenteophila russula, 
Cynatophora dupiaris, and at Rixton Moss Bombyx callunce\ Ent. Record, 
Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
130.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Time of Appearance of Plusia festucae [near Warrington ; odd 
specimens in June], Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
138.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. 
Capture of Lithosia molybdeola [some miles from Manchester ; par- 
ticulars given].
Ent. Recoid, Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
154.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Notes of the Season .
. .
Warrington \_Orthosia suspecta sugared for 
in vain at Rixton Moss; Agrotis agathina bred].
Ent. Rec., 15th Sep., 
1890, p.
161.
Jos. Collins.
Lane.
S. 
Lithosia sericea [at a place near Manchester ; a ' nice series ' obtained], 
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
199.
Jos. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Agrotis agathina [near Warrington ; details of breeding].
Young Nat., 
Oct. 1890, p.
200.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Local Forms of Coenonympha davus [from the Manchester mosses, 
Hartford, and Kirkby].
Ent. Record, Oct. 15th, 1890, p.
176.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Larvae beating near Warrington [produced Acronycta leporina, Notodonta 
dromedarius, JV.
cameli/ia, Hadena pisi ; and netting produced Celana 
haworthii: number of specimens stated].
Young Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
212.
J. Collins.
Cheshire.
Black Variety of Aplecta nebulosa [bred from a larva picked up in 
Delamere district].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
241.
J. Collins.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Viminia rumicis var.
salicis [six captured at sugar, June 1890, presumably 
near Warrington].
Ent. Rec, Dec 15th, 1890, p.
242.
J. Collins.
Cheshire.
Variety of Leucania lithargyria [from Delamere ; described].
Ent. Rec.
, 
Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
242.
Walter Copley.
York Mid W.
[Lepidoptera observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at 
Harrogate [13th July, 1889 ; Satyrus /antra, Camptooram?na bilineata, Cidaria 
fulvata, Eubolia ynensuraria, Tanagra cfuzrophyllata, Hydracia nictitans, 
Xylophasia subltistris, Triphana pronuba, Hydrocampa nymp/nmiis, and 
Scopula hitealis noted].
Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
237.
Walter Copley.
York S.W.
Deilephila galii at Sowerby Bridge [a fine male, 12th Aug. 1889].
Nat., 
Sep. 1889, p.
278.
B. H.
Crabtrf.f. Lane.
S., Cheshire, Northd.
S., Durham.
Deilephila livornica near Manchester [one taken by Herbert Massey at 
Burnage, June 15th, 1878; editor cites records for specimens same year at 
Knutsford, Morpeth, Hartlepool, etc.].
Ent., June 1890, p.
203.
June 1893.
184 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
C. G.
Crellin.
Isle of Man.
"Privet Hawk Moth" [(Sphinx ligustri) and the Elephant Hawk Moth 
(Chcerocatnpa elpenor) have occurred as larvae at Orrysdale, and have been 
reared], Yn Lioar Manninagh, Oct. 1889, p.
in.
C. W.
Dalf.
Yorksh're.
British Butterflies [Papilio machaon in Yorkshire previous to 1 8 19].
Supple- 
ment to Young Nat., Jan. 1890, p.
xxxvi.
Durham, York.
C. W.
Dale.
The History of our British Hawk-Moths [/no geryon given as occurring 
as far N.
as co.
Durham].
Young Nat., June 1890, Appendix, p.
4- 
[Zygcetta lonicerce var.
eboraci Prest, near York, its relationship discussed].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, Appendix, p.
11.
Joseph Burtt Davy.
Line.
N. 
Entomological Exhibition at Alford, Lines, [with mention of Lincoln- 
shire examples of Catocala fraxini, Col/as edttsa, Mel item artemis, Melanagna 
ga/athea, Vanessa polychloros, V.
antiopa, Acherontia, Sphinx ccnvolvnli, 
Deilephila galii, Dasychira fascelina, with localities and dates].
Nat., 
May 1890, p.
15c.
W. Daws.
Notts.
Tephrosia biundularia var.
delamerensis in Nottinghamfshire, near 
Mansfield, one locality ; details given].
Ent. Record, May 15th, 1890, p.
34- 
\Y.
Daws.
Notts.
Euchloe cardamines var.
[near Mansfield, May 28th, a male ; description 
given].
Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, p.
98.
\V.
Daws.
Notts.
Var. of Smerinthus ocellatus [at Mansfield, June 21st, 1890; male; 
described].
Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, p.
98.
\V.
Daws.
Notts.
Retarded Emergences [of Bombyx querent, Eupithecia togata, and Pygcera 
bu phala near Mansfield], Ent. Record, July 15th, 1S90, p.
109.
James Dixon.
Durham.
Pieris brassicae pupae lying* over [presumably at West Hartlepool].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
199.
R. Dutton.
York Mid W.
Notes of the Season.
— Lepidoptera [at Bishop's Wood; Asthena luUaia t 
A. candidata, Eupisteria heparata, Cidaria silaceata, Abraxas u/wata, 
Platyptcryx Jalcula, A1 nnis eup/irosvne, TiVtiiocampa popitleti, and Tethea 
subtusa noted], Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, p.
100.
John W.
Ellis.
Cheshire, Lane.
S. and W., Furness.
The Lepidopterous Fauna of Lancashire and Cheshire [a full and 
detailed series of papers, in which are enumerated 48 butterflies, 25 sphinges, 
66 bombyces (inch cuspidates and a few nocture)].
Nat., Feb. and March 
1885, pp.
163-173, March, p.
183, Feb. 1886, pp.
50-54, April, pp.
103-UI.
[The concluding instalment includes 465 Tineina, 11 Micropterygina and 
20 Pterophorina and Alucitina].
Nat., Feb. and March 1890, pp.
49-86.
[Middle instalments already bibliographed].
Cheshire.
C. Fenn.
Gas-Lamp Entomology [criticising- J.
Arkle's Chester experience as 
to Diurnea fagella, Lemnatophila phryganella and Tortricodes hyemana\ 
Ent., April 1890, p.
135.
[C] Fenn.
Durham.
[Exhibit of Scoparia ambigualis, including- one var.
curzoni, from Dar- 
lington].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, St nth, 1890 ; F.nt.
Rec, Sep. 15th, 
1890, p.
166.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
1 85 
C Fenn.
Durham.
[Exhibition of Darlington Specimens of Eupithecia satyrata, Eitdorea 
ambignalis and Tortrix viburnanaX Proc.
Ent. Soc., London., Sep. 3rd, 
1890; Ent. Rec, Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
168; Z00L, Oct. 1890, p.
396; 
E. M.
M., Oct. 1890, p.
276 ; Ent., Oct. 1890, p.
325.
C. Fenn, 
York.
[Exhibition of Dark Varieties of Cidaria immanata from York].
South 
Lond.
Ent. Soc, Sep. 25th, 1890; E.
M. M., Nov. 1890, p.
306; Ent., 
Nov. 1890, p.
351 ; Young Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
208.
Hilderic Friend.
Cumberland.
The Hornet Clear-wing- [{Sesia apiformis) near Carlisle ; detailed account 
of its being reared].
Young Nat., July 1890, pp.
133-134.
W. A.
Gain.
Notts.
Acherontia atropos in Notts, [larvae unusually abundant this year about 
Tuxford].
Nat., Nov. 1889, p.
352.
W. A.
Gain.
Notts.
Notes on Acherontia atropos [and its life history, as observed at Tuxford, 
near Newark, where the lame were abundant in 1889].
Sci. Goss., 
Jan. 1890, p.
15.
John Gardner.
Durham.
Deferred Emergence [of A crony eta leporina ; one emerged 4th June, 1890, 
from two larvae found in 1888 at Cole Hill near Hutton Henry].
Young 
Nat., July 1890, p.
134.
John Gardner.
York N.E.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists* Union at Kildale- 
in-Cleveland [12th July, 1890 ; Satynts /antra, Coenonympha pamphilus, 
Eitpisteria heparata, Asthena luteata, A.
can did at a, Emmelesia alehemillata, 
Larentia didymata, L.
pectin it aria, Lomaspilis marginata, Acidalia ai^ersata, 
Tanagra chmrophyllata, Hypena proboscidalis, Eudorea conspicualis, 
E, ambigualis, (Ecophora stipella, Graciiaria syringella, Argyresthia 
g larlella, A.
sorbiella, A.
nitidella, Pepilla cur/isella, Bactra lanceolana, 
Tortrix viridana, T.
heparana, Coleophora cespititiella, and Dasycera 
oliviella noted, the last being stated to be new to the Yorkshire list, but see 
erratum in Nat. for April 1891, p.
118, where Mr. Gardner says the specimen 
turnnd out to be Adda degeerella female ; reference is also made to the 
richness of the district, and to T.
Meldrum's captures oi Centra bicuspis, 
Trichittra cratccgi, and Cleora lichenaria between Ayton and Stokesley].
Nat., Sept.
1890, p.
272.
Derbyshire, Notts.
T. Gibbs, Jun.
Calendar of Nature for 1882 [at Bretby, near Burton-on-Trent; dates 
given for Hybemia rupicapratia, H.
leucopJuearia (Repton Shrubs), Ph ilia 
(Repton Shrubs), Vanessa uriiea, five Taniocampce, Scopelosoma satcllitia, 
Brephos parthenias (Repton Shrubs), Anticlca derivata, A.
hadiata, 
Melanippe fluctuata, Cidaria suffumata, Cilix spinula, Coremia propu note 
C unidentata, Pieris napi, Melanippe subtristata, Tephrosia crepuscularia 
(the three in Bretby Park).
Asthena blomeraria (Hoofies Wood), Pieris napi, 
Anthocharis, Lyccena argiolus, Panagra petraria (the four in Parson's Brake), 
Melanippe montanata, Abraxas u Im at 'a (H '00 lie's Wood), Amphidasis bettdaria 
(Repton Shrubs), Emmelesia affinitata, Pyg&ru t Enchelia jaeolh , Eupithecia 
lariciata (Bretby Park), Emmelesia alehemillata, Centra bifida, Apamea 
basilinea { the three in Houfie's Wood), Aronyeta psi, Eu vuiga , Xylophasia 
rurea, H alus velleia, Plitsia gamma, Noctua pleeta, Emmelesia decolorata.
Hep, hamuli, Chesias spartiata, Diloba aeruleocephala, Liparis attriflita, 
Cheimatobia bruwata.
Cabera pusa a, Larentia pectin it ar, Campt, na 
bilineata.Himerapennaria, Apameagemina, Mianastn lis, Mame rassica .
Euplexia lucipara, Agrctis exctamatimu iplecta her, la, Miana fascium ula, 
Tortrix liridana, TripJuena pronuba, Pieris brassi .
Abraxas >ossulariata, 
June 189^ 
i86 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
Chelonia caja, Cidaria dotata, Acronycta megacepkala, Urapteryx sambucata, 
Larentia didymata, Cidaria pyraliat a, Acidalia aver sat a, A.
bisetata, Cosmia 
trapezina, A, scutulata, Boarmia rhom bo/dan 'a , Noctua augur, N.
brunnea, 
Ypsipetes elutata, Plusia iota, Scopula lutealis, Leucania pallens, Mania typica, 
Halia tvavaria, Miana arcuosa, Cidaria fulvata, C.
immanata, Apamea 
oculea, Bryophila perla, Argynnis aglaia, C&nonympha pamphilus, Scotosia 
dub it at a, Caradrina cubicularis,Xanthia citrago (Clumber larvae), Amphipyra 
tragopogonis, Phlogophora meticulosa, Hadena protea, Anchocelis litura, 
A. pistacina, Miselia oxyacantlue, hybernia defoliaria, Oporabia dilutata 
(Bretby Park), Calocampa vetusta and C.
exoleta\ 7th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on- 
Trent Nat. Hist, and Arch.
Soc. for year ending 31st March, 1883, pp.
16-17.
T. Girbs, Junr.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1883 [at Bretby near Burton-on-Trent ; dates given 
for Hybernia rupicapraria, H.
progemmaria, Phigalia (Repton Shrubs), 
Hyb. leucoph&aria (Repton Shrubs), Vanessa uriicce, Pieris rapie (Repton 
Shrubs), Tceniocampa stabilis, T.
i?istabilis> T.
goihica, Anisopteryx cescularia, 
Anticlea badiata, Arctia lubricipeda, Pieris brassiae, Abraxas ul/uaia (Hoo6e's 
Wood), Emmelesia affinitata, Eup. vulgata, Phlogophora meticulosa, A/elanippc 
montanata, Acronycta psi, Asthena blomeraria, Cidaria silaceata, Veniha 
maculata (Miller's Dale), Melanippe subtristata (Miller's Dale), Hadena 
dentina (Miller's Dale), Hepialus veileda (Decoy), H.
hamuli (Decoy), Pup.
lariciata (Decoy), Polyommatus phlceas (Repton Rocks), Eupisteria heparata 
(Repton Rocks), Emmelesia albulata (Repton Rocks), Ypsipetes impluviata 
(Repton Rocks), Melanthia albicillata (Decoy), Scotosia dubitata, Vanessa 
atalanta, Plusia gamma, and Cheimatobia brumata\ 8th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
H. & Arch.
Soc, year ending 31st Dec. 1883, pub.
1884, pp.
22-23.
T. Gibbs, Jun. Derbyshire, Furness, 'York., 
Report of the Entomological Section [of Burton-on-Trent N.
H. and 
Arch.
Soc, mentions the capture of Scoparia (Eudorea) conspicualis in Seal 
Wood, 1883, and Repton Shrubs, 1884; also known for near Windermere 
(J.
B. Hodgkinson), and near York (W.
Prest)].
9th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on- 
Trent N.
H. & Arch.
Soc. for 1884, publ.
1885, p.
10.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1884 [at Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for Hybernia 
leucoph&aria(Repton Shrubs), Vanessa urtica, Tceniocampa sta bills, T.instabilis, 
T. gothica, T.
populeti, Scopelosoma satellitia, Pieris napi (Bretby), Cidaria 
fulvata (Bretby), C.
immanata (Bretby), Leucania lithargyria (Bretby), 
Scopula lutealis (Bretby), Noctua xanthographa (Bretby), N.
rubi, Prip/uena 
orbona, Hydrcecia nictitans, Amphipyra tragopogonis, Scotosia dubitata, 
A grot is nigricans, Noctua baja, Vanessa atalanta, Agrotis suffusa, Tripluena 
fimbria, Phlogophora meticulosa, Heliophobus popularis (Bretby), Agrotis 
aquilina, Noctua c-nigrum, Mamestra brassiere, Xanthia ferruginea, X.
silago, 
Hadena protea, Anchocelis litura, Hydrcecia micacea, Miselia exyancantlne, 
Orthosia lota (Bretby), Cheimatobia brumaia (Bretby), Oporabia dilutata 
(Bretby), Agriopis aprilina (Bretby), Hybernia defoliaria (Repton Shrubs).
H. aurantiaria (Repton Shrubs), and Cheimatobia boreata (kepton Shrubs)].
9th Ann. Rep.
B.-on-Trent N.
H. & Arch.
Soc, for 1884, publ.
1885, pp.23-25.
T. G[ibbs].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1885 [near Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for 
Hybernia leucophaaria, H.
progemmaria, H % rupicapraria, Anisopteryx 
cescularia (Repton Shrubs), Scopelosoma satellitia, Taniocampa stabilis* 
T. cruda, T.
populeti, Cerastis vaccinii, T.
ins t obi lis, T.
rubricosa, Vanessa 
urticce, Pieris rapce, Melanippe fluctuata, Lomaspilis marginata, Abraxas 
ulmata, Cheimatobia boreata, Melanippe sociata, Coremia propugnata, Asthena 
blomeri, Tephrosia biundularia, Eup. lariaata, Pieris brassica, Coremia 
unidentaria, Emmelesia affinitata, Eup. castigata, Rumia, Pieris napi, 
Anthocharis, Melanippe montanata, Apamea basilinea, Cabera pusaria, 
Tanagra atrata, Metrocampa, Aplecta nebulosa, Nola cucullatella, Hydrocampa 
stagnata (Drakelow), Boarmia repandata, Cidaria associata, Arctia caja, 
Naturalist, 
T. G[ibbs, Jun.].
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
187 
Noctua augur, Leucania fallens, Apamea didyma, Boarmia gemmaria, 
Larentia didvmata, Cidaria dotata^ Abraxas grossulariata, Ypsipetes 
elutata, Xanthia citrago, Crocallis.
Cidaria fidvata, Scoparia ambigualis, 
Hepialus velleda, Odontopei-a, Emmelesia decolorata, Hepialus hectus, 
Melanthia albicillata, Hep. lupulinus, Noctua plecta, Agrotis exclamationis, 
k Lithostegegrisealis, Cidaria silaceata, C.
russata, Ephyrapunctaria, Spilosoma 
menthastri, Apamea gemina, Grammesia trilinea, Xylophasia polyodon, 
Miana strigilis, Camptogramma bilineata, Scotosia dubitata, Urapteryx 
sambucaria, TripJucna ianthina, Triphosa dubitata, Vanessa io, Plusia 
gamma, TripJucua comes, Cilix glaitcata, Selenia bilunaria, Noctua xantho- 
grapha, Scopula luteal is, Hydracia nictitans, Amphipyra tragopogonis, Vanessa 
cardui, Nonagria fulva, Oporabia di hit at a, Hybernia aurantiaria, Acherontia 
atropos].
10th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
H. S.
and Arch.
Soc. for 
1885, publ.
1886, pp.
21-24.
T. Gibbs.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1887 [at Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for Phigalia 
(Repton Shrubs), Hybernia leucophcaria (Repton Shrubs), H.
rupicapraria 
(Bretby), Tcniocampa gothica (Bretby), T.
stabilis (Bretby), T.
incerta 
(Bretby), T.
populeti (Bretby), T.
cruda (Bretby), Melanippe fluctitata 
(Bretby), Hemeropkila abruptaria (Bretby), Rumia (Bretby), Cabera pusana 
(Bretby), Pygara (Ashby Road), Melanippe sociata (Bretby), Emmelesia 
affinitata (Bretby), E.
decolorata (Bretby), Lomaspilis margiuata (Bretby), 
Melanippe montanata (H oofie 1 s Wood), Ant hocharis{Hoo fie s Wood), Asthena 
blomeri (Hoofie's Wood), Abraxas ulmata (Hoofie's Wood), Hep. velleda 
(Bretby), Hadena thalassina (Bretby), Melanthia albicillata (Bretby), A plecta 
nebnlosa (Repton Shrubs), Acidalia bisetata (Repton Shrubs), Cidaria 
immanata ( Repton Shrubs), Triphosa dubitata (Bretby), Melanthia rubiginata 
(Bretby), Abraxas grossulariata (Bretby), Cidaria fidvata (Bretby), Calymma 
trapezina (Repton Shrubs), Eugonia quercinaria (Repton Shrubs), Noctua 
xanthographa (Bretby), Mania typica (Bretby), Hepialus sylvinus (Bretby 
Park), Noctua baja (Bretby), Selenia bilunaria (Bretby), Noctua umbrosa, 
Apamea oculea, Hydr&cia nictitans, Xanthia fulvago, Tfiphana fimbria 
(Bretby), T.
interjecta (Bretby), Noctuarubi (Bretby), Miana literosa (Bretby), 
Vanessa io (Bretby), Mania maura, Calymnia affinis, Vanessa atalanta 
(Repton Shrubs), and Folia chi (Bretby)].
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent 
N. A.
& Arch.
Soc. for 1887-88, publ.
1888, pp.
31-32.
Thomas Gibbs.
Derbyshire.
The Influence of Temperature on the Progress of Vegetation in the 
early months of the year [discussed, and table given which includes the 
average, earliest and latest dates on which Hybernia rupicapraria, Vanessa 
urticce, Pieris rapcv, Anthocharis, and Rumia, were seen in the Burton-on- 
Trent district].
Trans.
B.-on-Trent Nat. Hist.
& Arch.
Soc, vol.
i, 1889, p.8l.
W. Howard Goulty, Westmorland and Furness.
Notes from Lancashire [i.e., Furness and Westmorland; Xcmeobius 
lucina, Leucophasia sinapis, Lycuvia argiotus, Anarta myrtilli, and Saturnsa 
carpi m, at Grange-over-Sands].
Ent., Dec. 1890, p.
385.
C. S.
Gregson.
Derby, Durham, Chesh., Lane.
S., Cumb., York S.W.
Deilephila galii [giving results of personal experience, and mentioning 
Derby, Wolsingham, Staley Bridge, Bolton, Warrington, Wallasey as localities, 
also Maryport, Cumberland, and Potter Hill near WharnchrTe, \ orkshire, as 
places where it was obtained every year in years gone by].
\ oung Nat., 
Dec. 1890, pp.
229-231.
C. S.
Gregson.
Nyssia Zonaria at Wallasey [only found by one person 
writer quite unsuccessful].
Young Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
235.
J. Grime.
Lane.
S. 
last spring ; 
Lane.
S. 
Plusia festuc«E near Bolton [formerly in great numbers, but now rare, 
from attacks by collectors ; Cehcna haworthii plentiful this September], 
En t.
Rec, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
214.
June 18Q3.
l88 BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 189O.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W., Notts.
Euperia fulvago at Sheffield [close to town, darker than either Doncaster 
or Sherwood examples].
Ent. Record, April 15th, 1890, p.
20.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W.
Notes on the Early Season [of 1890 near Sheffield ; anent Phigalia, 
Anisopteryx, 2jy hernia progemmaria, Cymatophora Jiazicornis, Pieris rape?, 
Nyssia hispidaria, Tephrosia ci'epuscnlaria, Tceniocampa rubricosa, and 
Tortricodes hye/nana 9 with their dates of appearance].
Ent. Record, April 
15th, 1890, p.
22.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W.
Hypsipetes sordidata [its variation and food-plants near Sheffield].
Ent., June 1890, p.
203.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W. or Derbyshire.
Spring Notes [near Sheffield : Brephos parthenias fairly common ; time of 
flight described].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
64.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W.
Habits of Tortrix forsterana (adjunctana) [plentiful in Sheffield garden].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
65.
A. i:.
Hall.
York S.W.
Small Specimen of A[nthocharis].
cardamines [near Sheffield, 24th May, 
I \ inch from tip to tip].
Young Nat., July 1890, p.
133.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W.
Small Variety of Euchloe cardamines [near Doncaster, 24th May; 
1 \ inch from tip to tip].
Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, p.
98.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W.
* 
Small Example of Tephrosia biundularia [taken by Geo. Rose near 
Barnsley, June 1887, measured only half an inch from tip to tip ; see Young 
Nat., viii.
181].
Ent., Aug. 1890, p.
261.
A. E.
Hall.
Notts, York S.W.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera).— .
. .
. Worksop [Eupkhecia 
larieiata common near Worksop, June 7th, 1890 ; Asphalia fiueiuosa scarce].
Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
129.
A. E.
Hall 
Notts.
A Week at Sherwood Forest [in August ; Noctua dahlii, Euperia fttlvago, 
Amphipyra pyramidea (absent), Noctua glareosa, Tripfacna fimbria, Agrotis 
tritici, //yanecia nictitans, Cidaria testata, Luperina cespitis, Char is 
grauiinis, Ephyra punctaria, E.
pendularia, Tephrosia punctulata, 
Cymatophora duplaris, Eupithecia absiuthiata, and E.
centaureata noted].
Ent., Oct. 1890, pp.
321-322.
A. E.
Hall.
Notts.
Noctua Dahlii [at Sherwood Forest, where everything was scarce but this].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
200.
A. E.
Hall.
? York S.W.
Variety of Rumia Cratsegata [with a rich brown suffusion on the right 
wing.
bred].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
200.
A. E.
Hall.
York S.W.
Notes on some Macro-Lepidoptera, usually of common occurrence, but 
rare in the neighbourhood of Sheffield [viz.
three of Pieris, Anthochans, 
Vanessa urtiac, V.
atalanta, V.
cardui, Satyrus j'anira, S.
hyperanthus, 
Cainonympha pamphiius, Lycana alcxis y Hesperia sylvanus, Vanessa to, 
Satyr us egeria, S.
meg&ra y S.
tithonus, Polyommatus phheas, Euchelia jacobao 
Cheionia caja, A tia fuliginosa, A, mendica, Liparis aurifiua, Orgyta 
antiqua, Bombyx neustria, Dicranura vinula, Py ra bucephala, Diloba 
aeruleocephala^ Bryophila perla, Leucania conigera, L.
iuipura, Hydrucia 
nictitans, IL mieacea, Xylophasia lithoxylea, A", hepatica, Aparnea basiliuea , 
Naturalist, 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
189 
Miana strigilis and vars.
cethiops and prceduncula, A/, fasciuncula, 
M. literosa, M.
furuncula, Grammesia trilinea, Triphcena or bona, Anchocelis 
pistacina, Agriopis aprilina, Phlogophora meticulosa, Euplexia lucipara, 
Hadena chenopodii, H.
adusta, H.
pro tea, H.
pi si, Plttsia chrysitis, 
Urapteryx sambucata, Selenia illunaria^ Boarmia rhotnboidaria, Acidalia 
scutulata, A.
bisetata, A.
incanaria, A.
aversata, Abraxas grossu lariat 'a 9 
Hybernia lencopkaaria, Camptogranuna bilineata, Eubolia cervinaria, 
E. palumbaria, Tanagra chcerophyllata, all described as more or less scarce, 
and some as nearly extinct ; attributed to prevalence of manufactures and 
noxious vapours, but no allusion is made as to the unfavourable lithological 
character of such a district].
Ent. Rec , Dec. 15th, 1890, pp.
256-258.
James Hardy.
Cheviotland.
Report of the Meetings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club for the 
year 1889 (with note of Euchelia jacob&ce on Bamburgh sand-hills].
Proc.
Berw.
Nat. Club for 1889, vol.
12, No. 3 (pub.
1890), p.
498.
G. A.
Harker.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Hybernia marginaria (progemmaria) var.
fuscata [common near Liverpool 
and emerges a little later than the type].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
59.
G. Harker.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera).— .
. .
Liverpool [AfeJanippe 
galiata and Botnbyx tnfolii at Crosby ; Mamestta albicolon plentiful, Rhodaria 
sanguinalis just appearing].
Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
130.
J. Harrison.
York S.W.
Autumn Notes .
. .
Barnsley [Pen thin a sauciana and Hypsipetes elutata 
in profusion on the moors, Cloantha soiidaginis and Oporabia filigrammaria 
taken].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
252.
Northumberland S.
R. C.
Hedley.
[Puss Moth Caterpillars (Dicranura vinula) occur at Hallington Reservoir].
Nat. Hist.
Trans.
Northumb.
Durh.
and Nevvc, vol.
10, part 2, 1890, p.
399.
William Hewett.
York N.E.
Epione parallelaria [vespertaria] var.
[dark uniform brick red, with 
usual border ; taken near York along with type ; editor adds that it is more 
commonly bred].
Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
19.
W. Hewett.
York District ?
Variation in Zygaena lonicerae [as observed presumably near York; 
15 varieties noted, three of which are named — vars.
sefnihttescens, lutescens, 
and eboractc Prest.].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, pp.
59-60.
W. Hewett.
| York N.E.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera).
— .
. .
Kildale [Larentia aesiata 
and Mdanippe tristata abundant].
Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
132.
W. H&wrrr.
* York/ 
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera).
— .
. .
York [CuspuHa teporuia* 
Agrotis exclamationis, Miana st> His, A pa mm didy/na.
Xylophasia fo'yodon, 
Tripkicna promtba.
three Plusiu .
Col/ix, Chortodes arcuosa, Geometm papiiio- 
naria and Epione vespertaria], Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
132.
John F.
Hills, Secretary.
Lane.
S. 
Penketh School Field Club [several Smerinthus jo;uli captured on the 
premises].
N. H.
J., June 15th, 1890, p.
91.
J. B.
Hodgkinsox.
Lane.
W. and Westmorland or Furness.
Two Species of Micro-Lepidoptera new to the British List \Retinia 
margarotana II.
-S., one, in tine condition, taken off Scotch firs on the moors 
above Stoneyhurst in June 1879; and Bryotropha {Gehchia) obn'urella Ilein., 
two fine examples taken July 5th, 1887, near Windermere College].
Knt.> 
Apr il 1890, p.
119.
June 1893.
190 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
J. B.
Hodgkinson.
Westmorland, Furness, Lane.
W. & S.
Notes on the Season 1889 [at Windermere, Stoneyhurst, Arnside, and 
Ashton-on-Ribble ; Laverna lacteella* L.
paludicolella, Nepticula gei, N splen* 
dissimelta, N.
aucuparice, N.
tityrella, N.
contifiuella, N.
Mice, N.
desperatella, 
N. minusculella, Lithocolletis kleemannella, L.
stettinensis, L.
bisfentella, 
Cabera rotundaria, Penthina capneana, Nepticula intimella, Hadena glauca 9 
Acronvcta menyanthidis, Netnophora pilella, Gelechia longicornis, Thecla rubi, 
Ccenonympha typhon, Hyria ?niwicata, Acidalia fumata, Lyccena astrarche 
var.
sal 'mac is , Cidaria reticulata, Penthina postremana, Coleophora Jusco- 
cuprella, Eupithecia satyrata, Penth.
sauciana, Grapholitha geminana, Nep.
cryptella^N.
serella, Coleophora fusco-cuprella, and Ephestia semirufa\ Ent., 
April 1890, pp.
138-139.
J, B.
Hodgkinson.
Lane.
W. 
Notes of the Season .
. .
Dutton [Petiuia margarotana, Amphisa 
gerningana, Penthina sauciana, Poedisca occultana, Peronea caledoniana, 
Plusia interrogation is, Trifurcula pallidella, Phygas bisontella, Grapholitha 
geminana, Crambus margaritellus, Carsia i/ubutata, Gelechia similella, noted].
Ent Rec, Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
160.
J. B.
Hodgkinson.
Westmd., Furness, and Lane.
W, 
Notes on the Season [at Ashton-on-Ribble and Windermere ; Nepticula 
s or in ell a, N hodgkinsonii, Trifurcula pulverosella, N.Jloslactella, N.
aucuparice, 
N ignobilella^ N lapponica, N.
splendidissimella, iV.
gei, N.
malella, N.
des- 
peratella, N.
tilue, />'.
hippocastanella, N ruficapilella, N.
salicis, N.
poterzi, 
N. argent ipedella, N.
betulicola, N plagicolella, N.
angulifasciella, N.
serella, 
N. luteella, Coccyx scopariana, Penthina postremana, Coccyx vacciniana, all 
bred ; Micropteryx salopiella, M.
sparmannella, Catoptria aspidiscana, 
Pancalia leioenhoekella, Nept.
woolhopiella, A\ argent ipedella, Trycheris 
aurana, Euplexia lucipara, CEcophora jlavitnaculella, Ornix anglicella, 
Lithocolletis cavella, and at Windermere the following : — Cidaria corylata, 
Melanthia albicillata, Eupithecia plumbeolata, Hylophila prasinana, Microp- 
teryx mansuetella, and Cidaria reticulata].
Ent., Oct. 1 890, pp.
323-325.
York S.
E. 
Peter Inchbald.
Acherontia atropos in 1889 [a batch of larva?
at Hornsea ; their rearing 
described in detail].
Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
16.
J.] Jagkr.
Isle of Man, Cumberland.
[Exhibition of Manx Dianthcccia capsophila and a very dark D.
ccesia].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, July 10th, 1890; Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, 
p. 120; E.
M. M., Aug. 1890, p.
224 ; Ent., Aug. 1890, p.
266.
J. Jager.
Isle of Man, Cumberland.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera) ....
Isle of Man [anent 
PoLyommatus phlceas, Lyccena icarus, Satyrus semele, Pararge tnegiera, 
Vanessa urtii , Pun's (3 species), Larentia salicata, Melanippe fluctuata, 
Euboha cervinaria, Scotosia dubitata, Boarmia repandata, Eup. constrictata, 
Cidaria russata, C.
immanata, Luperina testacea, L.
cespitis, Anchocelis Iwwsa, 
Xyl hasia polyodon, Epunda lichenea, Noctua xanthographa, N.
glareosa, 
Amphipyra tri fonis, Caradrina cubicularis, Agrotis tritici.
A. valligera, 
Miami lilerosa, Iryphicna orbona, T.
interjecta, Hydracia micacea, 
i'hlogophora meticulosa, Agrotis pnecox, A.
pyrophila, Stilbia anomala^ 
Cirrhcedia xerampelina, nil near Ramsey, Cidaria populata and Chaneas 
gramtnis at top of Snaefell, 2,000 feet alt., Abraxas ul/nata in Glen Helen, 
Sm inthus populi, Arctia fuliginosa and Agrotis r?p<e, but the last not so 
common as last year on the coast of Cumberland].
Ent. Record, Oct. 15th, 
1890, pp.
181-182.
[J.] Jagkr.
Isle of Man.
Exhibition of Manx Examples of Epunda nigra, Stilbia ano/uala, Agrotis 
tritici, A.
, rophila and Cirrhtcdii xerampelina ; a few details given].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, 25th Sep., 1S90; Young Nat., Nov. 1890, p.
208; 
E. ML M., Nov. 1890, p.
306; Ent., Nov. 1890, p.
351.
Naturali.s 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
191 
William Johnson.
Lane.
S. 
Arctia caja [account of a breeding of varieties at Aspull near Wigan].
Ent., April 1890, p.
134.
. Joy. Lane.
S. 
[Plusia festucse had a June brood at Manchester].
South Lond.
Ent.
Sac., 28th Aug. 1890 ; Young Nat., Sep. 1890, p.
178.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Manks Butterflies, with some notes by the late E.
Birchall, F.L.S., 
and Remarks [enumerating 22 species, with remarks].
Back Transactions of 
I. of M.
N. H.
S., i.
49-51 ; publ.
with Yn Lioar Manninagh, July 1889.
P. M.
C. K[ermode].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [made in the Isle of Man, giving date for 
Arctia caja], Yn Lioar Manninagh, July 1889, p.
85.
P. M.
C. Kermode.
Isle of Man.
Address by the Retiring President .
. Delivered .
. March 11, 
1886 [gives titles of papers dealing with the Manx Fauna].
Back Trans.
I. of Man N.H.S., i.
72 ; publ.
with Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 4, Oct. 1889.
P. M.
C. Kermode [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Elephant Hawk Moth [{Ck&rocampa elpenor) ; records of two near Ramsey, 
at intervals of ten years ; details given].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, July 1890, 
p. 180.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Kirkham Abbey and Acklam 
Brow [4th Sep. 1889; Pelyommatus alexis noted].
Nat., Nov. 1889, p.
342.
W. Laidlaw.
Cheshire.
[Large Sphinx convolvuli captured at Oxton in autumn 1889, exhibited].
Lane.
& Chesh.
Ent. Soc, March 10th, 1890; Young Nat., April 1890, p.
70.
E. P.
K[nubley, Secretary].
J. H.
Leech.
Cheviotland.
Collecting on the Northumberland Coast [at Alnmouth ; Lyeana icams, 
Cidaria immanata, Eubolia mensuraria, Melcuiippe wontauata, Larentia 
dulymata, Leucania pattern ', L.
impura, L.
stra/ninea, L.
lithargyria, Apamea 
fibrosa, Miana furuncula, Cerigo cvtkerea, Agrotis valtigera, A.
tritici, 
Triptucna orbona, 7\ subsequa, T.
prouuba, Noctua baja\ N.
umbrosa, 
A 7 ", xanthographa, Cleoceris vimitialis, and Xylophasia polyoaon, mostly in 
interesting varieties captured in four days], Ent., -ep.,1890, p.
292.
Machin.
York S.W.
[Exhibition of Arctia mendica from Huddersfield].
City of Lond.
Ent.
Soc, 16th Oct. 1890; Young Nat., Nov. 1S90, p.
208.
T. Maddison.
Durham.
Lycaena medon var.
salmacis [at Castle Eden].
Ent. Record, July 15th, 
1890, p.
97.
T. Maddison.
Durham.
Notes of the Season .
. .
Durham [anent Lyarna salmacis, Z.
alexis, 
Procris geryon, Arctia caja, A.
vitlica\ Ent. Rec, Oct. 15th, 1800, p.
179.
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Acherontia atropos Larvae at Alford, Lines, [several during Aug. 1889].
Nat., Sep. 1889, p.
278.
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Apatura iris L [found at Welton Wood in the parish of Welton-le-Marsh, 
near Alford, by E.
Wootlthorpe].
Nat., Sep. 1890, p.
267.
Jas. Eardley Mason.
Line.
N. 
Apatura Iris, L.
[one taken and three more 'seen at Welton Wood near 
Al ord, 25th July, 1890, by Edwd.
Woodthorpe].
l..M.M.,Oct. 1890, p.
256.
June 1893.
192 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
[P.
B.] Mason.
Durham.
[Noctua conflua from Iceland exhibited, whereupon Dr. Mason said 
the only British specimens he had seen resembling the Icelandic form were 
four taken at Wokingham, Durham].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., 5th Nov., 
1890; Ent. Rec, Nov. 15th, 1890, p.
219 ; Ent., Dec. 1890^.386; 
E. M.
M., Dec. 1890, p.
332; Young Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
228.
W. Milburn.
York N.W., Durham?
Notes on the Season (Lepidoptera).
— .
. .
Darlington \_Caradrina 
cubiatlaris and Bombyx cailunce, and at Richmond Sesia culicifor?tiis\.
Ent.
Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
133.
S. L.
Mosley.
v York S 
York S.W.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at 
Holmfirth [loth June, 1889 ; Pieris rapce^ Fidonia atomaria, Ennnelesia 
albulata, Gelechia ericetella^ Phoxopteryx myrtillana, larvoe of Hybernia 
progemmaria, Cheimatobia brumata^ C.
boreata, Oporabia fi/igrammaria, 
Larentia didy/nala, Cidaria populata, and Notodonta ca/ne/ina], Nat., July 
1889, p.
203.
S. L.
Mosley.
York S.W.
Observations at Anston Stones, May 1889 [Anthocharis, Tephrosia 
biundidaria (or crepuscular 'id) , Abraxas ul/nata, and Ast/iena sylvata noted].
Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
225.
S. L.
Mosley.
York S.W.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Bretton 
Park, 1 4th June, 1890; Eup. pygmaata^Meianippe hastata, Hybernia defoliaria, 
Pcccilocampa populi^ and Abraxas ulmata ; remarks].
Nat., Aug. 1890, 
pp.
225-226.
W. Newman.
York N.W.
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera).
— .
. Richmond [27th May, 1890 : 
Hadena glauca> Cidaria silaceata, and Pyrausta taken].
Ent. Record, Aug.
15th, 1890, p.
130.
W. Newman.
Durham or York N.W.
Distribution of Cidaria suffumata var.
piceata [abundant in proportion to 
type near Darlington].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1S90, p.
239.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire.
Acherontia atropos in 1889.— .
. .
Cheshire [larvae near Frod^ham 
and at Manley].
Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
17.
R. Newstead.
Cheshire ?
Metrocampa margaritaria var.
[bred at Chester, July 29th, 18S9; all the 
cilia pale red].
Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
19.
J. E.
Nowers [Sec.].
Derbyshire.
Comparative Calendar of Nature [for 1877, 1878, and 1879, around 
Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for Vanessa urtiae, Pieris rape, Hybcrnux 
progem/naria, H.
leucophcearia* H.
rupricaprai ia, Anthocharis, Hepialiis 
humidi, Tutiiocampa gothica, 7\ stabi/is, T.
instabilis, Rutnia, Chesias 
spartiata, Abraxas ulntata, Acronycta psi, Mamestra brassiac, and P/nsia 
gamma].
4th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent Nat. Hist., etc., Soc, 1880, p.
7 l - 
J. E.
Nowers.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1887 [for Burton-on-Trent; dates given for 
Tu-niocampa rubrjeosa (Repton Shrubs), Cilix spinula (Drakelow), and 
Larentia didymata (Drakelow)].
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent X.
H. & Arch.
Soc. for 1887-88, publ.
1888, pp.
31-32.
Douglas H.
Pearson.
Notts.
Amphidasys betularia var.
doubledayaria in Notts, [at Chilwell, rare ; 
two this year].
Ent., Oct. 1890, p.
319.
Naturalist, 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1S90.
193 
A. Pickard.
York N.W.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Upper 
Teesdale [in Aug. 1889 J Smerirttkus popnli, Dicramira vinula, Notodonta 
diclaa, N.
ziczac, Hadena pzs?\ and A crony da mentkanyidis captured on the 
Yorkshire side of the Tees].
Nat., Sep. 1889, p.
283.
A. E.
Pike.
Cheshire.
Notes of the Season .
. , Wallasey [Nyssia zonaria, Eubolia Hiieolata, 
Mamestra albicolon, Rhodaria sanguinalis, Lencania littoralis, and Agrotis 
pnecox captured ; notes of dates and weather].
Ent. Record, Sep. 15th, 
1890, p.
162.
G. Podmore.
Furness.
Colias edusa in 1889 [a good many near Grange in Aug. and Sept.].
Ent., 
Jan. 1890, p.
16.
G. Podmore.
Furness.
Sphinx convolvuli in 1889.
— .
. Lancashire [i.e., Furness; four taken 
at Grange, Aug. 24th, 29th, Sep. 8th, 13th].
Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
iS.
George T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
[Exhibition of a long" series of Hybemia progemmaria to show the increase of 
melanism at Huddersfield].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., April 6th, 1887, p.
xiii.
[G.
T.] Porritt.
York S.W.
[Exhibition of a series of Melanic Varieties of Diurnea fagella from 
Huddersfield, from which neighbourhood the typical pale form had almost 
disappeared].
Proc.
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Oct. 5th, 1887, p.
xlv.
G. T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
Melanism in Boarmia repandata [from Huddersfield ; specimens shown].
Ent. Soc.
Lond., Feb. 1889 ; Nat., April 1889, p.
100.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
< York,' and York S.W.
The 'Radiated* Varieties in the Genus Arctia, etc.
[Arctia lubricipeda 
var.
radiata not uncommon about York; A.
menthastri v.
walker i occurs in 
\ orkshire ; and the corresponding variety of A.
mendica occurs freely at 
Grimescar near Huddersfield].
Nat., Aug. 1889, p.
233.
G. T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
Variation in Arctia mendica at Huddersfield [at Grimescar; specimens 
bred by G.
T. Porritt exhibited to Ent. Soc.
Lond., July 3rd, 1889].
Nat, 
Nov. 1889, P- 352.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
York S.W. and Mid W.
Scoparia basistrigalis as distinct from S.
ambigualis [with references to 
the abundance of the former at Edlington Wood near Doncaster, 4th Aug.
1879 ; and to its being not uncommon one season in Bishop's Wood (Prest)].
L. M.
M., March 1890, p.
88.
Geo. T.
Porritt, York Mid W.
and N.E.
Pterophorus zophodactylus [corrective of note by J.
W. Ellis, and 
mentioning Bramham (J.
Smith) and Sandburn (W.
Prest) as localities], 
Nat., April 1890, p.
116.
Geo. T.
Porritt, York Mid W.
Larvae of Tethea subtusa and Taeniocampa populeti [and their habits : 
at Bishop's Wood the latter is the commoner of the two species].
Ent.
Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
137.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
York Mid W.
Phoxopteryx siculana in Yorkshire [at Askham Bogs, 31st May, 1890, 
new to the county list J Nat., Sep. 1890, p.
267.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
York S.W, 
Is Miana fasciuncula a var.
of M.
strigilis?
[question discussed and 
answered in the negative, the two being regarded as perfectly distinct ; both 
occur in abundance near Huddersfield ; interesting notes given on habitat, 
date, and diagnosis].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
243.
J"ly 1893.
N 
194 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
G. Pullen.
Derbyshire.
Insects at Sugar at Derby [in September 1889 ; Xanthia giivago, 
X. ferruginea, X.
cerago, Orthosia lota, Hadena protens, Miselia oxyacantkie].
Young Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
36.
G. Pcllex.
Derbyshire.
Nonagria Typhae [occurs in great plenty near Derby, at the unction of 
the Midland and North Staffordshire Railways, in the stems of lypha 
latifolia\ Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
199.
Nelson M.
Richardson.
Isle of Man.
Variation of Phycis dilutella, Hiib.
[discussed on specimens from Isle of 
Man and elsewhere].
E. M.
M., May 1890, p.
139.
Durham.
John E.
Robson.
Collecting at Campion Flowers [which attract Plusia festuca>> Cucullia 
chamomilL?, He Hot his margin at a, H.
pel tiger a, Mamestra albicolon, 
M. abjecta, Agrotis valligera, A.
tritici, and A.
nigricans, some of them near 
Hartlepool, if not all].
Young Nat., June 1890, p.
117.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Numeria pulveraria at Hartlepool [one 26th May and one 27th, at 
Hezleden Dene].
Young Nat., June 1890, p.
117.
John E.
Robson.
Northumberland S.
Ccenonympha davus [an account of a visit to its locality at Greenleighton 
Moors, Northumberland, not far from the Simonside hills, 16th July, 1890; 
Tortrix vilnimana, Anarta myrtilli, Mixodia schnlziana, and Eupithecia 
nanata^ also taken].
Young Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
154.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Hepialus humuli [the flight and habits described of the males, presumably 
at Hartlepool].
Young Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
154.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Sphinx convolvuli [at Hartlepool, 23rd August, 1890, large male].
Young 
Nat., Sep. 1890, p.
171.
John E.
Robson.
Durham.
Hybernia brumata [on oil lamps at South Hetton Station, 23rd Nov., 1890].
Young Nat., Dec. 1890, p.
235.
G. Ross.
Durham.
The Swifts at Bishop Auckland [where all five species of Hepialus occur ; 
relative rarity stated].
Young Nat., Aug. 1890, p.
155.
J. H.
Rowntree.
York N.E.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Robin 
Hood's Bay [21st June, 1889; / uessa cardtti in numbers, Pieris brassica, 
Argynnis selene, Ckortobius pamphihis , Thanaos tages> Strenia clathrata^ 
Coremia propngnata, Lomaspilis marginata % Emmelesia albulata, Ruf#*&% 
Cabera pusaria, Melanippe montanata, and Botys fuscalis noted].
Nat., 
Aug. 1889, p.
230.
James H.
Rowntree.
York N.W., Durham.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in Upper 
Tcesdaie [in Aug. 1889 ; Pieris napi, Vanessa urtiae, Latent i a didymata, 
L. casiata, Tkera variata, Cidaria n/ssata, C.
i/n/nanata, C.
populata, 
C. pyraliata, Enbolia mensuraria, Charteas graminis, Scopula lutealis, 
Xylophasia polyodon, Xotodonta ziczac, Acronycta menyanthidis \ and Hadena 
pisi noted, some in co.
Durham], Nat., Sep. 1S89, p.
283.
J. H.
Rowntree.
York S-E.
[Lepidoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Low- 
thorpe, near Driffield [26th May, 1890 ; Pieris, 3 spp., Anthocharis, Vanessa 
urtiae, V.
carditis Ca-nonympha pamphihts, Arctia hthrictpeda, and 
Natural 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
195 
Melanippe rival a observed, and of larvae Vanessa urtiae, Arctia eaj'a, 
Odonestis, Rumia % Odontopera, Hybernia progemmaria, Cheimatobia brumata % 
Melanippe montanata, Diloba aeruleocephala, and Miselia oxyacanthce\ 
Nat., July 1890, p.
207.
J. H.
Salter, N.
Neave.
Derbyshire or Cheshire.
On the Derbyshire Border [of Cheshire, near Macclesfield ; Satumia 
carpini noted].
N. H.
J., Sep. 15th, 1890, p.
102.
W. E.
Sharp.
Lane.
S. and Cheshire.
Insect Migration and D[eilephila].
galii [argued, in criticism of Tutt's 
papers ; and reference made to Lancashire and Cheshire evidence].
Young 
Nat., Sept.
1890, pp.
161- 164.
W. G.
Sheldon.
Notts, Derbyshire.
Agrotis agathina [and its occurrence in Sherwood Forest and at 
Breadsall near Derby], Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 1890, p.
139.
G. W.
Slater.
York N.E.
Colias edusa at Malton [one, 30th Aug. 1889].
Nat., Oct. 1889, p.
291.
Charles Smethurst.
York Mid W.
Colias edusa near Arthington, etc.
[22nd Sep. 1889, very pale female ; 
record of very hue Vanessa ztrlicce at Burley, Leeds, 2nd June, 1888; and 
breeding of Abraxas grossulariata in 1889 at Burley].
Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
44.
W. Hawker Smith.
Line.
N. or S.
Colias edusa near Lincoln [a male Aug. 29th, and another next day].
Nat., Nov. 1889, P- 35 2 - 
Richard South.
Lane.
W. 
Variation of Agrotis tritici and A.
cursoria from Lancashire [dealt with 
in a detailed manner and illustrated by woodcuts of the upper and under 
sides of the two species ; inquiry based on 34 A.
tritici and 45 A.
cursoria 
sent by Baxter from St. Anne's-on-the-Sea].
Ent., May 1890, pp.
145-148.
R. S[outh].
York S.E.
Plusia iota Larva [fifty from East Yorkshire] feeding on Hawthorn.
Ent., 
June 1890, p.
204.
[Richard] South.
Durham.
[Exhibition of unusually Dark Form of Lareniia didymata L.
from Durham, 
exceedingly common].
South London Ent. Soc, Aug. 14th, 1890 ; Ent., 
Sept.
1890, p.
295 ; E.M.M., Sept.
1890, p.
249.
Richard South.
York S.W.
Additions to the British List of Deltoids, Pyralides, and Crambi, since 
1859 [including Scoparia basistriga/is, Edlington Wood, Doncaster, Aug. 4th, 
1879 (Porritt) ; and S.
uhnella Dale, North of England (Hodgkinson)].
Ent., 
Sep. 1890, pp.
272 and 274.
[Including Crambus salinellus Tutt, Preston, 
Eroviene ocellea, Cheshire, Homceoioma nimbella Zell.
var.
saxicola Vaugh., 
Isle of Man, Sept.
1866, larva on flower heads of chamomile ; Ephestia 
desnetella Wlk., Liverpool, and E.
cahiritella Zell., Preston, feeding on oil- 
cake].
Ent., Oct. 1890, pp.
299-305.
[Including Ephestia roxburghii 
Gregs., Liverpool, and Meiissoblapies cephalonit a, York ; refer for details].
Ent., Nov. 1890, pp.
331 and 337.
Richard South.
Durham.
Collecting in Durham [about Bishop Auckland, at Wolsingham, Castle 
Eden, and High Force ; Cuiaria iw/uanata, Hypsipetes sordidata, Lareniia 
didymata, Cerostoma sequel Va, Notodonta chaonia, Pccdisca so/andriana t 
Argynms aglaia, Eubotia mensitraria, Plusia interrogationis, Lareniia 
rta, L.
saiicata, Emnielesia ericetata, Lycana as tr arc he var.
salmacis, 
Metrocampa margaritaria, Amphisa j ningana, Parup/usa mercuriana, 
Noctua xanthographa, N.
umbrosa.
Triphmna prouuba, Polia chi, with var.
oiivacea, and Lareniia olivata noted].
Ent., Dec. 1890, p.
38 1.
July x g 9 
196 bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
C. E.
Stott.
Isle of Man.
Dianthaecia caesia [and Polia xanthomista (nigrocinda) not likely to 
become extinct on the Manx coast].
Ent. Record, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
260.
J. H.
Stott.
Lane.
S. 
Celaena haworthii [its habits near Bolton].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
261.
Ben. Blaydes Thompson.
York Mid W.
Colias edusa near Harrogate [on the 5th and 9th Sep., two males and 
a female].
Nat., Oct. 1S89, p.
291.
Ben. Blaydes Thompson.
' York Mid W.
Colias Edusa at Harrogate [on Sep. 5th, 1889, two males, and a female 
four days later].
Young Nat., Feb. 1890.
p. 36.
B. Blaydes Thompson.
York Mid W.
Varieties of Phigalia pilosaria [among 16 examples captured Jan. 31st, 
1890, presumably near Harrogate, were one olive, and one nearly black].
Ent. Record, April 15th, 1890, p.
n. 
B. Blaydes Thompson.
York Mid W.
Early Spring Moths [near Harrogate ; Hybemia progentmarza, Phigalia, 
H. rupicapraria, Cheimatobia bruwata, and Depressarice, all on 31st Jan.].
Ent. Record, April 15th, 1890, p.
II.
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
[Captures of Lepidoptera near Burton-on-Trent in April and May 1877 ; 
dates given for 7 ccniocampa stabilise T.
gothua, T.
gracilis, 71 popideti, 
Hybemia progemmaria, Gonepteryx rhamni, Selenia illunaria^ Cuiaria 
suffumata, Antidea derivata, and A.
badiata].
2nd Ann. Rep.
Burton-on- 
Trent N.
H. S., March 26th, 1878, p.
18.
Chas.
F. Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature for 1882 [near Burton-on-Trent ; giving dates for 
Hybemia rupicapraria, Phigalia , Antidea badiata, Tamiocampa (five species), 
Cirrhedia* lodis lad ear ia, Cilix spiuula, Caen Ilia verbasci, Nodua pleda, 
Diant India cucubali, Amphidasys betularia, Halias prasinana, Fidonia 
piniaria, Notodonta camelina, Melanippe montanata, Rumia, Hepialus 
lupulinus, E?nmelesia, offinitata (at Repton Shrubs), Smerinthus popuh, 
Acronvcta megacephala, Xylophasia rurea, Ac. psi, Enpithecia absynthiata, 
Ac. tridens, Ebulea sambucalis, Larentia didymata, Hydrocaiupa stagnalts % 
Pionea forficalis, Nola cucullatella, Plusia c/irysilis> Agrotis excla?natwnis, 
Caradrina cubictilarisy Acidalia incanaria, Pyralis farinalis, Eupithecia 
absynthiata (Willington), Hydrcecia viicacea, Nodua rubi 9 Anchocelis litura, 
and Phlogophora nieticulosa], 7th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
H. and 
Arch.
Soc. for year ending 31st March, 1883, p.
15.
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1883 [at Burton-on-Trent : dates given for 7\nuo- 
campa gothica, T.
instabilis, Pier is, T.
populeti, T.
stabilis, 7\ cruda (these 
three at Bretby), Cirrhccdia xerampelina, Trachea piniperda, Eup lanciata, 
Anthocharis, Lycama argioltts, Panagra pet r aria (the three at Parson's Brake), 
Nodua plecta, Melanippe Jluduat a, Halia 7vavaria, T/iera variata, A crony da 
psi, Hepialus lupulinus, Rumia, Plusia gamma, Caradrina cubicularis, 
Melanippe montanata, lodis lactearia, Eup. exiguata, Asthena blomeraria, 
Abraxas ul/uata, Hypsipetes ruberata, Emmelesia ajfinitata.
Cidaria corylata, 
Tethea subtusa (Bretby), Smerinthus populi, S.
ligustri, Eup. absynthiata, 
Sesia tipuliformis, Acidalia incanaria, Nola cucullatella, Mania typwa, 
A crony da megacephala, Triphcena pronuba, Xylophasia polyodou, Hydrocampa 
stagualis, Mania maura, Cynthia cardui, Anchocelis litura, Acidalia 
inornata, and Cheimatobia brumata].
8th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent 
N. H.
& Arch.
Soc, year ending 31st Dec. 1883, pub.
1884, PP- 20-21.
Naturali 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
I97 
C. F T[hornewill] 
Derbyshire, Notts.
Calendar of Nature, 1884 [at Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for Hybemia 
rupicapraria (Winshill), Phigalia, Tu-niocampa insta'nlis, Hadena oieracea, 
Pieris rapic, Eup. abbreviata < Repton Shrubs), Antkocharis cardamines, 
Pier is bratsicce, Hybemia defoliaria (Repton Shrubs), Cheimatobia boreata 
(Repton Shrubs), Eup. castigata, Acidalia remutata (Repton Shrubs), Iodis 
lactearia (Repton Shrubs), Apamea basilinea, Halia wavaria, Cidaria dotata 9 
Eup. vulgata, Cabera pusaria (Repton Shrubs), Emmelesia affinitata (Repton 
Shrubs), Melanippe montanata (Repton Shrubs), A crony eta psi, Pionea 
forficalis, Smerinthus ligustri, Sesia tipidiformis, Emmelesia decolor at a (Repton 
Shrubs), Melanthia albicillata (Repton Shrubs), Acidalia incanaria, Mamestra 
brassier, Miana fasciuncula, Hepialus humuli, Arctia lubricipeda, Caradrina 
cubicularis, Plusia chrysitis, Botys urticalis, Ebulea sambucalis, Miana strigilis, 
Diloba deruleocephala, Not a cucidlatella, Ant idea bad lata, Pyg&ra bucephala, 
Cucullia umbratica, Plusia iota, P.
pulchrina, Agrotis segetum.
Dianthcecia 
cucubali, Caradrina morpheus, Axylia putris, DiantJuecia carpophaga, Agrotis 
exclamationis, Xylophasia polyodon, Triphccna pronuba, Xanthia silago, 
Orgyia antiqua, Nonagria typhce (Wellington), Noctua umbrosa, Paraponyx 
stratiotalis, Eubolia mensuraria (Cresswell, Notts), Dianthcecia capsincola 
(Cresswell, Notts), Eup. nanata (Eyam), and Anarta myrtilli (Eyam)].
9th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
H. & Arch.
Soc. for 1884, publ.
1885, 
pp.
23-25.
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1885 [near Burton-on-Trent; dates given for 
Phigalia, Selenia illunaria, Tuuiocampa gothica, Arnphidasis prodromaria, 
Cidaria suffumata, Selenia illunaria, Ant idea derivata, A.
badiata, Hybemia 
progemmaria, Scotosia certata, Halia ivavaria, Cidaria dotata, Acronyda psi, 
Eucheliajacolhcee, Eup. isogrammata, Eup. vulgata, Hadena oieracea, Euplexia 
lucipara, Miselia oxyacantlue, Caradrina cubicularis, Acidalia aversata, 
Hepialus lupulinus, Arctia lubricipeda, Acronyda tridens (Repton Shrubs), 
Eupisteria heparata (Repton Shrubs), Acidalia remutata (Repton Shrubs), 
A. candidata (Repton Shrubs), Cabera exanthemaria (Repton Shrubs), 
Hybemia defoliaria (Repton Shrubs), Himtra pennaria (Repton Shrubs), 
Meirocampa (Repton Shrubs), Pericallia syringaria, Ebulea sambucalis, Botys 
verticalis, Pionea forficalis, Agrotis segetum, Smerinthus populi, Eup.
fraxinata, Eup. debiliata, Hepialus humuli, Diantlurcia cucubali, Eup.
nanata, Coremia propugnata, Acidalia incanaria, Porthesia similis.
Cosmia 
trapezina, Eucosmia certata, Nolodonta dictcea, Xanthia fulvago, X.
silago, 
Dianthcecia capsincola (Willington), Nonagria typha (Wellington), Vanessa 
urtic(c, Smerinthus populi (Repton Shrubs), 7'wniocampa stabilts (Repton 
Shrubs), Eup. abbreviata (Repton Shrubs), Acherontia atropos, DiantJuecia 
cucubali, Hepialus humuli.
Hadena pisi, Luperina testacea, Melanippe 
Jluctuata, Mania maura, M.
typica, Acronyda megacephala, A.
psi, Sphinx 
convolvtili, Hydracia micacea, Dianthacia carpophaga, Vanessa atalanta, 
Smerinthus populi, Hadena protea (Bretby Park), Eup. castigata (Repton 
Shrubs), Macroglossa stellatarum, Phlogophora meticulosa, Cheimatobia 
brumata, Hyb. aurantiaria, and Himera pennaria].
loth Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.
A. & Arch.
Soc. for 1885, pub.
1886, pp.
21-24.
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1886 [for Burton-on-Trent; dates given for 
Hybemia progemmaria, Alucita polydadyla, Hyb. rupicapraria (Bretby 
Lane), Arnphidasis prodromaria, Hyb. leucophaaria, Cucullia verbasci, 
Tuniocampa stabilis (Bretby), T.
instabilis (Bretby), T.
rubricosa (Bretby), 
T. poptdeti (Bretby), T.
gothica (Bretby), T.
cruda (Bretby), Vanessa urttca, 
Pieris rapie, Dicranura vinida, Cirrhicdia xerampelina, Scotosia certata, 
Mania typica, Eup. isogrammata, Smerinthus populi, Eup. venosata, Xanthia 
/erruginea, Notodonta dicUca, Noctua augur (Willington), Xanthia gilvagv 
(Willington), Eup. cast xta, Scotosia certata, Apamea basilinea, Melanippe 
fluctuata, Eup. vulgata, Caradrina cubicularis, Hadena oieracea, Gonoptera 
July 1893.
198 bibliography: lepidoptkra, 1890.
libatrix, Kumia, Mamestra brass ica, Hepialus lupulinus, Smerinthus populi^ 
Agrotissuffusa, Acronycta psi, Saturnia carpmi, Hepialus humuli, Hadena pisi, 
Scotosia certata, Arctia fuliginosa, Diantluecia carpophaga, Arctia mcnthastri, 
A. lubricipeda, Eup. lariciata (Decoy Wood, Bret by), Asthena blomeri 
(Hoofie's Wood, Bretby), Abraxas ulmata (Hoofie's Wood, Bretby), Thecla 
TV-album (Hoofie's Wood, Bretby), Acronycta megacephala, Emmelesia 
affinitata (Bretby), E.
decolorata (Bretby), Hepialus velleda (Bretby), Hadena 
oleracea, Acronycta megacephala, Xylophasia rurea, Apamea unanimis, 
A grot is exclamationis, Lomaspilis marginata (Bretby), Eup. absynthiata, 
Agrotis segetiun, Ebulea sambucalis, Hep. hectus (Bretby), Melanikia albicillata 
(Bretby), Eubolia palumbaria (Bretby), Scotosia cei'tata (Appleby), Coremia 
propugnata, Mania typica, Triphama pronuba, Mamestra anceps, Pionea 
forficalis, Xylophasia polyodon, Noctua augur, Cidaria populata, Thecla 
TV-album, Xanthia cerago (Willington), Cirrhcedia xerampelina, Nonagna 
typhce (Willington), Diantluecia capsincola (Willington), Acronycta 
megacephala, Amphipyra t ragopogon i s , Acidalia incanaria, Acr. psi, Xanthia 
gilvago, Paraponyx stratiotalis (Willington), Epione apiciaria, Phibalapteryx 
lignata, Acidalia incanaria, Apamea unanimis, Smerinthus populi, Hadena 
protea (Bretby), Acronycta tridens (Bretby), Eubolia cervinaria, Vanessa to, 
Scopelosoma satellitia, Xanthia ferrnginea, Euplexia lucipara, Eup. castigata 
(Repton Shrubs), Eup. albipunctata (Repton Shrubs), Eup. trisignata ( Repton 
Shrubs), Oporabia dilutata (Repton Shrubs), Chei?uatobia brumata (Repton 
Shrubs), and Hybemia defoliaria (Repton Shrubs)], nth Ann. Rep.
Burton- 
on-Trent N.
H. and Arch.
Soc, for 1886, pub.
1887, pp.
2026.
C. F.
Thorn e\v ill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1887 [at Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for Phigalia, 
Tizniocampa gothica, Cossus, Anisopteryx aiscularia, Tan. instabilis, Scotosia 
certata, Pieris rapce, Cirrhcedia, Noctua augur (Newton Solney), Eup- 
vulgata, Dicranura vinula, Odonestis, Anthocharis, Smerinthus ptpuli, 
Fidonia piniaria (do.), Panagra petraria (do.), Tephrosia biundulana (do.), 
Ypsipetes impluviata (do.), Coremia propugnata (do.), Eupithecia nanata 
(do.), Eup. indigata (do.), Melanthia ocellata (do.), Eupisteria heparata (do.), 
Thera jirmata (do.), T.
variata (do.), Cheimatobia boreata (do.).
Arctia 
fuliginosa, Notodonta cameluia (Bretby), Platypteryx lacertula, Acronycta 
alni, Diantluecia capsincola.
Agrotis segetum.
Caradrina cubicularis, Hadena 
oleracea, Pionea forficalis, Eup. castigata, Eup. pulchellata, Diantluecia 
carpophaga, Platypteryx falcula, Abrostola triplasia, Apamea unanimis, 
Axylia putris, Euplexia lucipara, Acidalia incanaria, Plusia chrysitis, 
Amphidasis betularia, Anarta myrtilli, Plusia festucce (Burton), Cidaria 
dotata, Ellopia fasciaria, Plusia iota, PL pulchrina, Hydrocampa stagnates, 
Diantluecia cucubali, Odonestis, Halia wavaria, Cucullia umbrattca, 
Xylophasia polyodon, Eup. subnotata, Vanessa urtiae, A T octua jestiva, 
Diantluecia capsincola, Crocallis, Pyralis farinalis, Smerinthus ocellatus, 
Scotosia dubitata, Charceas gra minis (Ash by Road), Melanippe fluctuate 
(Ashby Road), Triphcena orbona (Ashby Road), T.
ianthina (Ashby 
Ro-id), Coremia unidentaria (Ashby Road), Ypsipetes elutata (Ashby 
Road), Eudorea cembra (Ashby Road), Hydracia micacea, En nomas til '1 aria, 
Eup. absynthiata (Willington), Agriopis aprilina, Pelurga comitata 
(Stapenhill), Eup. subnotata (Stapenhill), Hadena oleracea (Stapenhill), 
Mamestra persicarnc, Plusia chrysitis, Orgyia antiqua (Repton Shrubs), 
Hadena protea (Repton Shrubs), Eup. castigata (Repton Shrubs), Eup- 
trisignata (Repton Shrubs), Eup. albipunctata\Repton Shrubs), Cheimatobia 
boreata, C.
brumata, and Parilocampa populi], Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent 
N. H.
& Arch.
Soc. for 1887-88, pub.
1888, pp.
29-30.
Chas.
F. Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Report of the Entomological Section [of the Burton-on-Trent N.H.S.
for year 1889 ; phonological notes on Thecla w-album in Repton Shrubs, 
Thera variata and Macaria lit u rata in Hoofie's Wood, Acherontia at t>os 
near Burton, and absence of Sphinx convolvuli].
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-'l rent 
N.H.S. for 1889, p.
11.
Natur.
l - 
bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
199 
C. F.
Thornevvill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1888 [near Burton-on-Trent ; dates given for 
Hybemia progemmaria, Amphidasis prodromaria, Taniocampa stabilis, 
T. instability T.
got hie a, Trachea piniperda, Paciloca?)ipa populi, Tephrosia 
punctulata, Eup. albipunctata, E.
indigata, Arctia mend tea, Pi ens brassicat, 
Anthocharis cardamines, Tephrosia biuuudularia, Lobophora hexapterata at 
Repton Shrubs, Od ont opera bid ent ata, Lomaspilis marginata, Eup. centaureata, 
Acronycta alni 9 Orgyia pudibunda, Cidaria corylata, Fidonia piuiaria, 
Hadena thalassina, Platypteryx lacertula, Nolacucullatella,Nemeophila planta- 
ginis, Arctia lubricipeda, Hepialus lupuliuus, Rurnia, Smerinthus populi, 
Diauthcecia cucubali, Botys urticalis, Caber a pus aria , Amphidasis betularia, 
Eup. pidchellata, E?nmelesia albulata, Eup. valerianata, Mamestra persicaria, 
Dianthacia capsincola, Axylia putris, A gratis segetum, Hadena oleracea^ 
Plusia gamma, P.
pulchrina, Caradrina morphetts, Agroiis exclamationis, 
Eup. absynthiata, Mamestra anceps, Cucullia umbratica, Abrostola triplasia y 
Triphcena pronuba, Hadena dentina, Ebulea sambuca/is, Eup. subnofata, 
Eup. venosata, Apamea basi tinea, Xy /aphasia polyodon, Plusia c/vysttis, Eup.
decolorata, Plusia festucce, Camptogramma bilmeata, Cha?rocampa porcellus, 
Acronycta leporina, Miana strigilis, Leucania comma, Acronycta megacep/iala, 
Acidalia incanaria, Noctua augur ; Hydrocampa stagnalis, Notodonta camelina, 
Ennomos angularia, Pelurga c omit at a, Leucania pallens, Notodonta dicta a, 
Apamea oculea, Axylia putris, Orthosia upsilon, Nola cucullatella, Cosmia 
trapezina, J^ethea subtusa, Liparis chrysorrhaa, Thera firmata, Arctia 
lubricipeda, Xanthia gilvago, Hydr&cia petasilis, Eunomos tiliaria, Diloba 
ccertdeocephala, Hydnzcia micacea, all near Burton ; Eup. absynthiata and 
Hadena adusta at Cloud Lime Quarries ; Fidonia piniaria, Abraxas ulmata, 
A st hen a blomeri, Herminia grisealis, Thecla watbum, Petasia cassinea, 
Xanthia ferrugiuea, Metrocampa margaritata, at HoohVs Wood ; Scopelosoma 
sate/iitia, Xanthia ferruginea, X.
gilvago at Knightley Park ; Trichiura 
crattegi, Diloba c&ruleocepha/a, Orthosia upsilon at Wellington ; Melanthia 
albi'dllata, Cabera exanthemaria, and Thecla w- album at Repton Shrubs : 
Satyrus hyperanthus, Cidaria pyraliata, Noctua brunnea, Hadena dentina, 
Hypena proboscidalis, and Anthocharis <ardai?iines at S tret ton -en -le- Field].
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.H.S. for 1889, pp.
22-24.
C. F.
Thorn e\v ill.
Derbyshire.
[Two apparently Distinct Forms of Phigalia pilosaria round Burton-on- 
Trent, one in the open country, one in the woods], Birm.
Ent. Soc, March 3rd, 
1890; E.M.M., April 1890, p.
118 ; Ent., April 1890, p.
144.
Chas.
F. Thornewili .
Derbyshire.
Report of the Entomological Section [of the Burton-on-Trent N.H.S.; 
larvreof Dianthceeia cucubali numerous in the writer's garden, Burton-on-Treht].
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.H.S. for year ended Sep. 30th, 1890, p.
11.
C. F.
Thornewill.
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1889 [for Burton-on-Trent district; dates given 
for Tccniocampa gothica, T.
stabilis, T.
instabilis, T.
rubricosa^ T.
populeti, 
T. cruda, Macaria liturata, Coremia propugnata, Asthena blomeri, Hepialus 
velleda, Emmelesia affinitata and 7 hecla iv-album at Bretby, for Lobophora 
hexapterata at Repton Shrubs, and for Pmis rapa, Heme7'ophila abruptaria, 
Scotosia cert at a i Smerinthus populi, Emmelesia decolor ata, Dianthcecia 
cucubali, Abrostola triplasia and Cheimatobia brumata, in addition to numerous 
others * emerged from pupa'].
Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent N.H.S., for year 
ending 30th Sept.
1890, p.
21.
T. Ttr NSTALL 
Cheshire.
Spring Notes [from Cheshire sandhills ; EuboLa lineolata {virgata) on 
I2th April, early].
Ent. Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
63.
Thos.
Tunstau,.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire?
Notes of the Season .
. • Warrington [Heliothis armiger the only 
good thing taken].
Ent. Rec, Sept.
15th, 1890, p.
158.
July 1893.
2oo bibliography: lepidoptera, 1890.
J. W.
TUTT.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire.
Contributions towards a List of the Varieties of Noctuae occurring- in 
the British Islands [Apamea leitcostigma Hb. var.
albipwicta mihi, occurs 
a few miles from Warrington together with type and var.
intermedia mihi].
Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
13.
York Mid W., N.E. and S.W., Durham?
Northumb.
S., Derbyshire, 
J. W.
Tutt.
Cheshire, Lane.
S., Lake District, and Isle of Man.
The Pterophorina of Britain [monographed ; with particulars of Porritt and 
Dennis's Saltburn capture of P.
ockrodactyla Hb.
= P.
dickrodactylus Muhl., 
and its presence at Huddersfield and Darlington ; and P.
bertrami Rossi, at 
Askham Bog in abundance].
Young Nat., Jan. and Feb. 1890, pp.
18-26.
[Pterophorus gonodactylus Schiff.
, at Burton-on-Trent ; one of the commonest 
plumes in Yorkshire (Porritt) ; Birkenhead, Darlington, Lake District, Man- 
chester, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Scarborough and York (Stainton's Manual)].
Young Nat., July 1890, pp.
131-132.
[Recommendation that the Isle of 
Man be examined for Pteropkorus zetterstedtii^ though it has not yet occurred 
there].
Young Nat., Oct. 1890, p.
182.
J. W.
Tutt.
Westmorland 
Notes on Lita (Gelechia) junctella [argumentation based in part on "Withers- 
lack examples].
Ent. Record, April 15th, 1890, pp.
7-9.
J. W.
Tutt.
York S.W.
Acronycta ligustri var.
nigra [taken by A.
E. Hall, June nth, 1888, in 
Wadworth Wood, near Doncaster].
Ent. Record, May 15th, 1890, p.
34.
J. \V.
Tutt.
? Notts.
Theristis mucronella (caudella, Sta.) var.
striata [sent by W.
Daws of 
Mansfield ; described].
Ent. Record, May 15th, 1890, p.
35.
J. W.
[Tutt].
York S.W.
[Hydraecia petasitis at Sheffield taken in the factory yards on the plants 
growing among the refuse, but very rarely among the larger plants of Petasites 
vulgaris growing on the river banks].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, April 24th, 
1890 ; E.
M.M., June 1890, p.
165; Ent., June 1890, p.
207; Young Nat., 
June 1890, p.
109.
Isle of Man, Durham, Lane.
S., Cheshire, Notts., 
J. W.
Tutt.
York S.W. and Mid W., Derbyshire.
Melanism and Melanochroism in British Lepidoptera [discussed in 
detail, and the climatic peculiarities of Lancashire and West Yorkshire con- 
sidered; Amphidasts betularia/Pephrosia biundularia, Boarmia r/wmboidaria, 
B. repandata, Diumea fagella, and Hybernia progemmaria instanced].
Ent.
Record, June 15th, 1890, pp.
49-5 6 - [Full account by Mr. Sheldon of the 
increase of melanism in Tepkrosia biundularia near Derby, oi Boarmia 
repandata near Huddersfield, T.
biundularia and its total change of colour in 
Delamere Forest, the same in Amphidasis betularia in South Lancashire, al>o 
at Derby and at Mansfield ; B.
rhomboidaria^ Diumea fagella, Hybernia 
progemmaria, Cidaria russata and Arctia mendiea near Huddersfield and 
Sheffield].
Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, pp.
84-90.
[References made to 
Durham and Yorkshire variation in Polia chi\ Ent. Record, Oct. 15th, 
1S90, p.
171.
[J.
W.] Tutt.
Lane.
S. or Cheshire, 
ta from Warrington].
• *3 S 
J. \Y.
T[utt].
and T.
D. A.
C[ockerei.l].
York S.W.
Additions to the British List and Changes in Nomenclature {Acrmyd 
ligustri var.
nov.
n ra Tutt, near Doncaster, Apamea leu stigma var.
nov.
intermedia Tutt, near Warrington].
Eat Record, Sept.
15th, 1890, p.
15 1 • 
Natum t, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: LEPIDOPTERA, 1890.
201 
J. W.
TUTT.
Notts.
Zygasna lonicerae imago with head of larva [bred from Mansfield pupae 
by Mr. Daws ; two imagines emerged with the heads of the larva still 
unchanged].
Ent. Record, Oct. 15th, 1890, p.
174.
J. W.
TOTT [signed ' Ed.'].
Durham.
[Footnote to note on] Local Form of Abraxas ulmata [with respect to 
large and small forms being in abundance together in Durham].
Ent. Record, 
Oct. 15th, 1890, p.
177.
J. W.
Tutt.
Lane.
S. or W.
Crambus salinellus near Preston [correcting an error of nomenclature, 
the species having been erroneously reported as C.
contaminellus\.
Nat., 
Nov. 1890, p.
334.
Lane.
W. 
J. W.
Tutt.
Time of Appearance of Peronea hastiana [as observed in examples from 
St. Anne's-on-Sea].
Ent. Rec, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
263.
F. A.
Walker.
York.
Note on Cidaria immanata from Iceland [also that var.
thingvallata Staud.
exactly corresponds to a specimen in R.
South's collection, taken at York].
Ent., Feb. 1890, p.
66.
Samuel Walker 
York Mid W.
Colias edusa in 1889; Additional Record — Yorkshire [fine male on Sel by 
and York Road, near Bishop Wood, Sept.
5th, 1889].
Ent., Feb. 1890, p.
69.
S. Walker.
York N.E.
Epione parallelaria [ = vespertaria] var.
[criticising adversely the editor's 
note to Mr. Hewett's record ; and account given of other specimens].
Ent., 
March 1890, p.
100.
S. Walker.
York?
Spring Notes [presumably near York ; Lobophora lobulata taken].
Ent.
Record, June 15th, 1890, p.
63.
S. Walker.
4 York.' 
Notes of the Season (Lepidoptera) .
. .
York [Tu-m'oca^papopti/^i, 
Tethea subtusa, and Hybemia defoliaria common].
Ent. Record, Aug. 15th, 
1890, p.
128.
S. Walker.
York Mid W.
and ?
N.E.
Notes of the Season ....
York [Leucam'a pudorina, Acronycta 
{Cuspidia) leporina, and, at Askham Bog Hydrelia unca, noted].
Ent. Rec, 
Sept.
15th, 1890, p.
156.
S« Walklr.
'York.' 
Distribution of Cidaria surTumata var.
piceata [and of type; both occur 
about York].
Ent. Rec, Dec 15th, 1S90, p.
240.
S. Walker.
York N.E.
Chrysophanus phlaeas var.
schmidtii [two captured at Strensall Common].
Ent. Record, Dec. 15th, 1890, p.
242.
[]• R.
Wellman.
Yorkshire.
— - — » _ m » w — — 
[Exhibition of Nemeophila plantaginis var.
hospita, taken in Yorkshire, 
i860].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc.
Nov. 14th, 1889; Young Nat., Jan. 1890, 
Isle of Man.
P. 11 ; Ent., Jan. 1890, p.
23 ; E.
M. M., Feb. 1890, p.
54.
IT- R.]Wellmax.
[Exhibition of Manx Eupithecia venosata which had been two years in 
pupa].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, Tune 12th, 1890; Young Nat., July 1890, 
P- 139; Ent., July 1S90, p.
237 ;' E.
M. M., Aug. 1S90, p.
223.
Jttty : ,3.
202 NOTE : LEPIDOPTERA NEAR LINCOLN.
[J.
R.] Wellman.
Isle of Man.
[Exhibition of Manx Eupithecia rectangulata var.
nigrosericeata and 
Enp. venosata\ South Lond.
Ent, Soc, June 12th, 1890; Ent. Record, 
July 15th, 1890, p.
119.
J. Wellman.
Isle of Man.
Retarded Emergences [of Manx Eupithecia venosata, two years in pupal 
stage].
Ent. Record, July 15th, 1890, p.
109.
J. R.] Wellman.
* Isle of Man, Lane.
S. 
Exhibition of Dianthaecia cucubali, Liverpool, and D.
carpophaga 
var.
capsophila Dup., Isle of Man].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, 10th July, 1890; 
E.M.M., Aug. 1890, p.
224; Ent., Aug. 1890, p.
266; Young Nat., Aug.
1890, p.
152.
W. West.
Derbyshire.
[Exhibition of Celcena haworthii from Derbyshire].
South Lond.
Ent. Soc, 
Oct. 9th, 1890; Ent. Rec, Oct. 15th, 1890, p.
192.
Edward Woodthorpe.
Line.
N. 
Colias edusa, Vanessa cardui, and other Butterflies near Alford, Lines.
[particulars given of these and Alelanargia galathea, and 16 otner species 
enumerated as taken during the season of 1889].
Nat., Feb. 1890, p.
44- 
John N.
Young.
York S.W.
Lepidoptera in 1889 .
♦ .
Rotherham [detailed notes on Triphirna 
Ji??ibria, four Tceniocampa, Scopelosoma satetlitia, Cerastis vaccinii, Ihecla 
w-album, Cymatophoraflavicornis, Brephos parthenias, Geometra papilionaria, 
Pcecilocampa, Nyssia hispidaria, Ettpe* ia fulvago, Dicranura bifida, Noto- 
donta dictira, N.
dictaoides, N.
ziczac and Lobophora halterata], Ent.
, Feb.
• 1890, p.
68.
J. N.
Young.
York S.W.
The Sallow Season of 1890 .
. .
Rotherham [Scopelosoma sateliitia, 
Cerastis vaccinii, Ttzniocampa cruda, 7\ gothica, 7\ iustabilis, T* stalnlis, 
T. rubricosa, T.
munda, T.
populeti, Pachnobia leucographa ; the sallows are 
ten miles or more away from Rotherham].
Ent., June 1890, p.
202.
J. N.
Young.
York S.W.
Note on the Life-History of Bombyx quercus v.
callunae [as studied 
near Rotherham].
Ent., Aug. 1890, p.
259.
John M.
Young.
York S.W.
Larvae of Triphasna fimbria [near Rotherham ; infested by Campoplex 
mixtus Grav.].
Ent , Aug. 1890, p.
263.
NO TE—L EPID OP TEE A .
Lepidoptera near Lincoln.— During a walk through one of the woods near 
Saxilby, six miles north-west of Lincoln, on May 21st, the following butterflies 
were seen : — Pieris brassier, P.
rapa\ P.
napi, Anthocharis cardammes, all 
common ; Argynnis selene, A.
euphrosync, abundant ; Vanessa atalanta, one 
specimen ; Chortobius pamphihts, abundant ; Polommatus phlosas, one ; Lyc&M 
alexis, common ; Thanaos tages, Hesperia sylvanus, common ; H.
paniscus, 
abundant ; a total of thirteen species within a very small area.
Many species of 
moths were also noticed, among which may be mentioned : — Macroglossa fif**' 
formis, fairly common ; Heliodes arbttti, several ; Euclidia m£ t E.
glyphica : 
Melanippe Ziastata, several, etc., etc.
On the following day, near Langworth, 
most of the above butterflies were again seen, and, in addition, Satymus ?negara.
The same moths were also noticed, with the exception of E.
glyphica, but in 
addition the following species w T ere taken : — Lithosia rubricoUis, Halias prasiftana% 
Thyatira datis, Cymatophora or (the two latter at sugar), with many other species.
A few days later my brother took, near Lincoln, a number of larvx- and pupie of 
Theclaw-album.—).
\V.
Carr, Universit College, Nottingham, June 1st, 1S93- 
Naturalist 
203 
SOME STRAY NOTES FROM THE 
YORKSHIRE COAST IN THE SPRING OF 1893 
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Eaton Halt, Retford.
In 'The Naturalist' for April 1893, p.
105, in my notes on the 
migratory flocks of purple-headed Starlings, seen near the coast in 
Holderness in February, I omitted to state that the eight shot on 
February 25th from one flock were all males, and that six shot from 
another flock on March 19th were females.
This is suggestive of 
the separation of the sexes at the period of migration.
In the first week in March I was shown two Ruffs {Machetes 
pugnax) taken in a plover-net near Tetney, which had already partly 
got the nuptial plumage.
When at Flamborough in May, I saw at 
the house of a fisherman a Crane (Grus communis) shot by Mr. John 
Huddleston, farmer, of that place, from a field near his house in the 
last week in February 1892.
This had been skinned and set up by 
the late Mr. Jones, of Bridlington.
It is, I think, a young bird of 
the previous year, and has feathers, and no red patch on the crown, 
and the hind plumes are short.
Two Avocets {Recurvirostra avocetta) were seen some days to 
haunt a pond near the lighthouse at Flamborough during the last 
week of April.
It appears from a paragraph, by Mr. Boyes, which 
appeared in 'The Field' of May 27th, that one of these, a female, 
was shot — a most regrettable circumstance, as it is not improbable 
the birds would have remained in the district.
One Black Redstart and two Pied Flycatchers {Muscicapa atri- 
capula) had been seen early in May. I saw two adult males of 
R- titys which had been captured in gardens at Flamborough in the 
spring of 1891.
It is not generally known that this species is 
almost a regular immigrant to the Headland in the spring and 
autumn, appearing earlier than the common species, and about 
a month later in the autumn.
In the spring of 1891, as Mr. Bailey 
told me, many were seen ; first, scores on April 6th, and again 
a great rush on May 10th and nth.
These seem to have been 
spread over a considerable district in hedge-row and garden, along 
with Pied Flycatchers, Common Redstarts, and other small species.
All the Black Redstarts observed were adult males; I do not think, 
however, that local observers would be able to distinguish between 
the females of the two species.
On May nth, Mr. Bailey and I, when at the Bempton Cliffs, 
aw an adult male Lapland Bunting {Plectrophanes lappo?iicus) in 
July 1803.
204 CORDEAUX: STRAY NOTES FROM THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
summer plumage, sitting in the short herbage at the very edge of 
the cliff; we both observed it through binoculars for some little time, 
till it flew down the face of the cliff amongst the Guillemot and other 
rock birds, and did not appear again.
The intense velvety black of 
the dark parts particularly struck the eye as contrasting with the 
yellow bill, broad white streak above the eye, and chestnut collar.
The ordinary rock birds on the cliffs are in great force, and now 
occupy places on the lower cliffs south of the north landing, which 
were not tenanted some years since.
When I first knew Flamborough, 
only a few pair of Stock-Doves {Columba cenas) bred there — now there 
are hundreds.
In the spring of 1892, a pair of Green Cormorant 
(Phalacrocorax gracithis) were often seen about the cliffs, and showed 
every disposition to remain and nest ; I fear, however, from what 
I heard, those were shot by the fishermen, who are not proof against 
the bribes offered by greedy collectors and mercenary dealers, who 
more than any others are mainly responsible for the continued 
destruction and extermination of our rarer bird visitors.
The egg-climbers do not commence work before May 13 th.
The rock birds, I could see on the nth, had some eggs on the 
'.edges.
Several broken egg-shells were also found by us in the 
fields along the summit of the higher cliffs, carried there by daws.
Mr. Bailey and I saw a Daw flying up from below carrying 
a Guillemot's egg on his beak.
The amount of eggs destroyed in 
one season by these most persistent and cunning pilferers must be 
very great indeed, and they abound in every part of the cliffs.
Fishermen say that the Daws do not always plunder with impunity, 
for the outraged Guillemot has been seen to seize the thief by the 
neck and carry him down to the water, thus miserably to perish.
As far as I can judge, this species seems everywhere to be decidedly 
on the increase, accommodating themselves to any holes they can 
appropriate, whether it be the cliffs of Flamborough, the ancient 
oaks of Sherwood and Birklands, a church tower or unused 
chimney ; and are equally at home amongst the burrows of a rabbit- 
warren.
Rock Pipits seem very numerous along the cliff, and in one 
place I saw half-a-dozen Tree Sparrows {Passer montanns) on the 
guard-fence, and from their actions concluded that they were probably 
nesting somewhere just below the summit.
The grassy slopes along 
the crest of the Flamborough cliffs, having a northern aspect, are 
now thickly sprinkled with pale primroses, which I always think are 
the smallest blooms and latest in flowering I ever see in England.
The Golden-crested Wren, so abundant on migration in the 
autumn, is known at Flamborough as the ' woodcock pilot ' ; but at 
Filey the fishermen call it the ' herring-spink.' This name is, I also 
Naturalist.
CORDEAUX : STRAY NOTES FROM THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
205 
find, common amongst the fishermen in East Suffolk, from the fact 
that these little wanderers are accustomed to alight on the boats 
when at sea in the herring season, and they are then considered to 
indicate good luck and a heavy catch.
When I was at Flamborough a large but somewhat lean cod was 
brought in by one of the boats, and on opening and cleaning this 
fifty-nine hooks were found in the stomach.
These were white- 
tinned hooks, medium size, about two inches long, and still had 
pieces of whelk-bait adhering.
These were not Flamborough hooks, 
for the whipping extended further down the shanks than in those 
in use on the headland.
I can only conjecture that some fisherman 
at sea had been renewing his hooks on the long-line, and had 
thrown the discarded blunt ones overboard in a lump.
I have 
heard of a Woodcock, and in another case of a Dutch cheese, 
taken from the inside of a cod, but fifty-nine hooks is a thing 
unique of its kind.
Strange and unlooked for substances do 
occasionally turn up from the stomachs of animals.
For instance, 
I have seen a handful of nails — double-tens — taken from an ox, 
slaughtered because it was 'doing badly/ And I have now on the 
table a fence iron spike, 7^ inches long, and weighing 2 J oz., which 
was taken from the inside of a Christmas goose in 1891, reared, 
fed, and dressed on the premises.
Near Kilnsea, on the 13th, I saw two Cormorants (Phalacrocorax 
carbd) flying north.
A pair are reported as having nested and got off 
their young from a wreck on the coast north of this place, but 
I cannot ascertain if this is the fact.
Two Dotterel (Eudromias 
morineUus) were seen in a field near the beacon in the second week 
in May, but up to the end of the month I have not heard of am 
having been observed in their old quarters in Lincolnshire.
In the middle of May I watched some very beautiful Turnstones 
(Strepsi/as interferes), in adult plumage, foraging amongst the tide- 
wrack ; also some Whimbrel.
Several Red Godwit (Limosa lapponica) 
were also seen early in May, and on the 14th I saw a single 
Grey Crow (Corvus comix)* 
I notice that the Snipe which nest in the meadows near the 
River Idle, in Notts, not unfrequently perch on cattle rails, and 
I recently saw one on the summit of an old thorn which did not fly 
before I had got close to it.
The Redshank here also frequently 
alights on gates and rails.
Have any of the readers of ' The Naturalist ' remarked the very 
small size this year of the orange-tip butterfly (Ant/iocharis 
cardamines)?
I have seen several so small that I could scarcely 
imagine they could belong to the same species.
2o6 
THE BIRDS OF DERBYSHIRE.
The | Birds of Derbyshire, | with Map and Six Illustrations, | by 
F. B.
Whitlock.
I Annotated, with Numerous Additions, | by | A.
S. 
Hutchinson, | Taxidermist to the Derby, Sheffield, &c, Museums.
London : | Bern rose & Sons Limited .
. .
| 1893 
8vo., 239 pp., with Map and Six Illustrations.
The faunal area included within the political boundaries of 
Derbyshire is a comparatively limited one, not exceeding 1.030 
square miles.
This may be divided into three parts having very 
distinct features : the southern plains, central hill district, and the 
mountainous north, where bleak treeless uplands, on the borders 
of Yorkshire and Cheshire, rise to an elevation of over 2,000 feet, 
and form the well-known Peak district, intersected, however, with 
well sheltered and lovely dales.
From this it may be understood 
that the scenery is widely contrasting, and that this diversity of 
surface naturally favours a great variety of animal life.
The county 
also owes much of the richness of its avi-fauna to the river valleys 
of the Derwent and the noble Trent, which in spring and autumn 
are highways of migration leading far inland.
This is especially the 
case with the Trent valley, where much the greater number of rare 
and occasional inland stragglers from the coast have from time to 
time been seen or obtained.
The total number of species of birds occurring or reputed to 
have occurred is 241 ; 84 being residents, 72 migrants, and the 
large number of 85 are casual visitors.
Of those classed by the 
author as regular migrants, he thinks that the Pied Flycatcher, 
Blue-headed Wagtail, and Stone Curlew must now be considered to 
hold a very doubtful position in the county list.
The characteristic birds of the High Peak district are the 
Ring Ouzel, Dipper, Grey Wagtail, Twite, Merlin, Common Sand- 
piper, Curlew, Golden Plover, and probably the Dunlin, but the 
Dipper appears to be less common than formerly.
The Black 
Redstart has been observed in Derbyshire but once and has 
probably been overlooked, the frequency of its occurrence in 
Nottinghamshire pointing to this conclusion.
The Dartford Warbler 
has also been once obtained — a pair on Melbourne Common in the 
winter of 1840.
The Fire-crested Wren, although recorded but twice, is probably 
more frequent than is generally supposed, so also the Pied Flycatcher 
as a summer resident or on migration.
The Red-backed Shrike is 
local, and the Woodchat Shrike has occurred only in a single 
instance.
The Goldfinch, Stonechat, and Woodlark are declining.
The information referring to the Cirl Bunting is meagre and 
Naturalist, 
WHITLOCK : THE BIRDS OF DERBYSHIRE.
20J 
unsatisfactory.
The Raven is extinct as a breeder, and praiseworthy 
attempts to reinstate him in his ancient haunts have failed.
Grey 
Crows follow the Trent from the east coast, and are common in the 
south-east of the county.
The Bee-eater, Roller, and Hoopoe have 
all been obtained, the latter frequently, so also the Golden Oriole.
Attractive in plumage, and strangers, they are invariably hunted 
down and slain.
A few pairs of Short-eared Owls breed annually on the moors of 
the Peak, and there is good evidence that the Snowy Owl has been 
seen twice, and the Eagle Owl once.
The Hen Harrier has probably 
not nested anywhere in the county during the last quarter of 
a century, and the Common Buzzard is practically extinct.
In 1668, 
according to Willughby, a pair of Golden Eagles had a nest in 
a hamlet called 6 Woodlands,' in the High Peak, but we have no 
record when they ceased to breed in the county.
Glover, in his 
' History of the County of Derby,' 1829, records the Goshawk in his 
list of birds, and Pilkington, writing in 1789, includes the Kite as 
one of the common birds of prey.
There is good evidence that the 
Hobby nested as recently as 1891, and a few pairs of Merlin still 
continue to breed in the High Peak.
Reference has already been made to the numerous additions, from 
time to time, made to the county list of birds, from the valley of the 
Trent ; these include such rarities as the Purple Heron, Squacco 
Heron, and Glossy Ibis.
The Common Bittern, too, is most often 
observed in the Trent valley.
Five species of Geese, two of Swan, 
and twelve of Duck, have been obtained from the same waters ; the 
Goosander is common in winter, the Merganser rare, and the Smew 
an occasional visitor.
The Turtle Dove is a decidedly increasing 
species ; the Black Grouse has become a comparatively local bird ; 
Dotterel are annual spring visitors to the Peak.
The Golden Plover 
breeds not uncommonly on the high moors, so probably the Dunlin, 
although the nest has not yet been found.
The Grey Plover, Oyster- 
catcher, Avocet, Grey Phalarope, Knot, Sanderling, Ruff, Green 
Sandpiper, Greenshank, Bar-tailed Godwit, and Whimbrel have all 
been got from Trent side.
The Ringed Plover passes up this river 
v alley, in April and May, with great regularity, returning again in 
August ; these appear to belong to a small race which, probably, 
comes to us from the south in the spring, and may be distinguished 
by their smaller size, darker mantle, and more sharply defined and 
brighter colouration.
It is satisfactory to learn that during the last 
twenty years, the Redshank has established itself as a breeding 
species and appears to be annually increasing ; the same may be 
said_of the neighbouring county o( Nottingham.
Mr. Whitlock 
July 1893.
208 NOTES AND NEWS.
records eight Terns, seven Gulls, and three Skuas, but the evidence, 
as the author admits, in connection with the occurrences of the 
Roseate Tern, the Pomatorhine and Buffon's Skuas, is anything but 
satisfactory.
The Great Northern and the Red-throated Divers have both been 
seen or obtained on several occasions, and all the five Grebes are 
included in Mr. Whitlock's list from the Trent.
There is one 
example of the Fulmar recorded, and several storm-driven Fork-tailed 
Petrels and Stormy Petrels have been obtained.
The Manx Shear- 
water has so frequently occurred, both in Derbyshire and Nottingham- 
shire, that its presence is suggestive of an overland route of migration 
followed by this species along the course of the river.
The volume contains an excellent map and the illustrations 
of Derbyshire scenery add much to the interest of the work.
Mr. Whitlock, with the assistance of his colleague, Mr. A.
S. 
Hutchinson, whose notes are incorporated with the text, has 
succeeded in collecting and recording a great amount of local 
information on birds, with the result that the material has been 
dealt with thoroughly well and in a most conscientious and 
painstaking manner.
The volume is, we consider, a valuable 
addition to the growing list of county faunas, which will be referred 
to for many years as a text book of its special subject.
The 
author himself admits it is by no means exhaustive, and that 
the only thoroughly worked districts in the county are the Trent 
valley and High Peak, leaving much yet to be done.
It is a 
beginning, however, and the readers of the book will admit a 
very good one.
J 
NOTES AND NEWS.
We see that our old friend Mr. George Massee, the author of the ' British 
Fungus Flora,' has received the appointment at the Royal Herbarium at Kew 
which Dr. Cooke vacated some time ago.
The recently issued ' one-inch ' maps of the Geological Survey include quarter- 
sheet ioi N.E., embodying much intricate work in the northern part of the 
Skiddaw Slates and the succeeding Volcanic Series between Carrock Fell and 
Cockermouth, with the Carboniferous, Permian, and Trias farther north.
We are indebted to the President of the Geological Society (Mr. W.
II.
Iludleston, F.R.S., a former president of the Y.X.U.) for a copy of his anni- 
versary address.
It is a review of work in British stratigraphical geology brought 
before the Society during the last seven years.
Among other north-country 
papers, appreciative notice is given to those of Mr. Lamplugh on the Drifts of 
Flamborough Head and the Clays of Speeton, Mr.
\Y.
Hill on the Cretaceous of 
Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, Mr. T.
Robertson the Upper Jurassic of Lincolnshire 
and Messrs.
Wilson and Tate on the Durham salt district.
The Palaeozoic rocks 
are reserved for future notice.
Naturalist 
209 
THE HEMIPTERA HETEROPTERA OF THE 
BRITISH ISLANDS.
The Hemiptera Heteroptera of the British Islands.
Edward Saunders, 
F.L.S. L.
Reeve & Co., London.
14s.
This is another of the admirable series of works on Entomology 
now being published by Messrs.
Reeve ; and the name of its author 
is at once a sufficient guarantee that the book throughout is excellent.
It commences with a plate showing the structure of hemiptera, and 
a table fully describing it.
Then follows a lengthy ' Introduction,' 
in which the anatomy of these creatures is clearly put before the 
student, concluding with an account of the methods of collecting 
and mounting Hemiptera or 'Bugs' as they are more familiarly 
known.
The book proper consists of concise but clear descriptions 
of all the species known to occur in Britain up to date ; together 
with localities of all species which are not common almost every- 
where.
As such it is of course invaluable to every student of this 
most interesting order of insects.
We think an improvement would 
have been to have added a classified synonymic list of the species ; 
and the study of the order has advanced so much of late years, 
that a statement of the progress made since the publication of 
Messrs.
Douglas and Scott's work would also have added to its 
interest.
These, however, are comparatively small matters, and do 
not detract from the great value of the work.
It is printed in a good, clear type, on excellent paper, and nicely 
got up.
There is also a larger edition, containing 31 coloured 
plates, published at 48s.— G.T.P.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Mr. R.
y. Harvey Gibson, M.A., F.L.S.
, of the Liverpool University College, 
began in the 'Journal of Botany' for April 1892 a series of 'Observations on 
British Marine Algae,' the first instalment treating of the Antheridia of Polysipho^iia 
clongella, the Escape and Conjugation of Zoogametes in Enteromorpha compressa 
and the Development of Spores of British Marine species of Chantransia.
"The Life of a Foxhound/ by Jno. Mills (3rd edition: Simpkin, Marshall, 
Hamilton, Kent & Co., 1892), of which a copy lies before us, is decidedly a clever 
book, which it is pleasing to note has reached a third edition.
The idea of an 
animal telling its own biography is not by any means a new one, and * Ringwood,' 
the foxhound in question, gives us his story in an entertaining manner.
The book 
is well illustrated, and is worthy of attention when the mind requires rest from 
a more serious subject.
Vet another of the valuable papers in which Mr. William West, F.L.S., with 
toe able assistance, both literary and artistic, of his son, Mr. G.
S. West, is 
working out the geographical range of our freshwater algae, appears in the April 
number of the Journal of Botany, under the unassuming title of   Notes on Scotch 
*resh-water Algae/ illustrated by a plate drawn by Mr. G.
S. West.
Some of 
the material was contributed by Mr. E.
Naylor, of Bradford, in the form of a 
gathering in the Orkneys, but most of it is the result of Mr. Weft's own 
indefatigable research among the Scottish mountains.
July 189 
o 
2IO 
NO TE— FISHES.
Codfish and its Appetite.
— On May 9th a large Codfish (Gadus morrhua) 
was caught at Flamborough by Benjamin Cross, fisherman, with 59 fish-hooks in 
its stomach ; when taken it was only in poor condition ; the hooks were middle 
size, and what are called tinned hooks.
They are now in the possession of 
Mr. John Duke.
— Matthew Bailey, Flamborough, May 19th, 1893.
NOTE— MAMMALIA.
Badger near Nottingham.— As this animal {Meles taxus) is now becoming 
scarce, it may be worth while to record its occurrence near this town.
An adult 
male was trapped by the Trent side at Clifton on May 18th, and is now in the 
Nottingham Museum.
A second specimen, presumably a female, was seen in 
the same locality.
— J.
W. Carr, University College, Nottingham, June 1st, 1 893.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOG Y.
Turtle Dove and Nightingale near Goole.
— Mr. Thomas Bunker has 
kindly sent me a very fine specimen of the Turtle Dove (Turtur communis) which 
was obtained at Rawcliffe on May nth.
Mr. Bunker states that he has once 
before had a Turtle Dove sent from the same locality.
A pair of Nightingales (Dau/ias luscinia) have this year taken up their abode 
within two miles of Goole.
I trust they will be left in peace.
— Riley Fortune, 
Harrogate, May 17th, 1893.
Lesser Whitethroat at Bakewell.— In 'Birds of Derbyshire,' Mr. Whitlock 
states, with regard to the Lesser Whitethroat (Sylvia curruca) that i Mr. Storrs 
Fox has not recognised it near Bakewell.' On Whit Friday, May 29th, 1885, 
I found two nests with eggs, not a mile from Bakewell Church.
In each case the 
nest was in a wild rose bush.
One nest had five eggs and the other, I think, had 
four.
I write this from memory, as I have no note of the circumstance by me.
— 
F. Brownsword, Heaton Moor, Stockport, June 4th, 1893.
Lesser Tern in Lancashire.
— Mr. Mitchell, in his ' Birds of Lancashire,' 
states that the Lesser Tern (Sterna minuta) used to breed between Lvtham and 
Blackpool, but   the increase of population is sufficient to account for its dis- 
appearance.' In 1 89 1 I found from fifteen to twenty nests of this bird on the 
beach between Lytham and St. Anne's-on-the-Sea. I am sorry to add that, as 
far as I could see, not a single clutch was hatched off.
The boys in the neigh- 
bourhood got to hear of the nests, and searched the beach systematically every 
evening for a fortnight.
Jn 1892 I did not see a single bird.
— F.
Brownsword, 
Heaton Moor, Stockport, June 4th, 1893.
The ChifTchafF in the Lake District.
— During a recent visit to the 
Lake District I was rather surprised to find so many ChirTchaffs (Phylloscopus 
collybita) breeding in the woods.
At Grange-over-Sands, my first stopping-place, 
there were quite a dozen pairs in the spinneys on the hill side at the back of the 
town.
In the immediate neighbourhood I met with pairs at Levens Hall, and 
also many others in the plantations at Witherslack.
After leaving Grange 
I explored the country lying between Seascale and the adjacent fells.
ChifT- 
chaffs were not so plentiful as at the former place, but I met with pairs at 
Muncaster, Gosforth, Strands, and also in a wood at the outlet of Wast water.
I spent several days about Keswick, but was not there long enough to make 
a thorough search, confining my rambles for the most part to the woods near 
Portinscale.
Here I only met with a single pair.
In view of my friend the 
Rev. H.
A. Macpherson's remarks on the ChifTchafT in his recently published 
* Vertebrate Fauna of Lakeland,' my observations either point to the fact 01 
1893 being an exceptional year for this species, or to a further extension north of 
its range.
The Willow Wren (Phylloscopus t roc lulus) and the Wood Warbler 
(Phylloscopus sibilatrixs I met with in varying abundance.
Mr. Macpherson s 
remark that the latter species is sufficiently scarce to make it interesting is a very 
happy one.
I noticed in nearly every locality that where a Chiffchaff was 
singing a Blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla) also haunted the wood.
— F.
]>.
WniTLOCK, 
Beeston, Notts, June 15th, 1893.
Naturalist, 
211 
NOTES ON THE FRESH-WATER ALG JE OF 
THE EAST RIDING OF YORKSHIRE* 
WILLIAM WEST, F.L.S., 
Assisted by G.
S. WEST (National Scholar in Biology) 
In 1878 and 1879, I made some small gatherings of Algae on Riccall 
Common, which were not exhaustively examined until recently.
They have proved to be rich in Desmids but poor in Diatoms.
In 
1892, my sons and I made a fair number of gatherings in a walk 
from Beverley, through Tickton and Routh, past Meaux Abbey to 
Waghen and Sutton : these would have proved richer had they been 
collected later in the season, but as it is, they are fairly rich in 
Diatoms.
Mr. W.
H. Youdale, F.R.M.S., of Cockermouth, kindly 
made a good gathering for me at Hornsea Mere, and I have also 
to thank Mr. J.
Beanland, of Bradford, who collected for me at 
Loftsome Bridge near Wressle and at Newsholme near Hovvden.
The genera Epithemia and Eunotia are poorly represented, though 
the scarcity of species of the latter genus is not to be wondered at 
from such a flat district.
ALGiE.
Class CONFERVOIDE.E HETEROGAMY.
Order (EDOGONIACE.E.
CEdogonium platygynum Wittr.
Riccall Common, 
Crass, cell.
veg.
9*6 — 11^; altit.
3 — 4 plo major; 
„ oogon.
26/x; „ 20/A; 
„ oospor.
21/x; „ 16'3/x, 
Class CONFERVOIDE.^ ISOGAM.^E.
Order CONFERVACE.E.
Conferva bombycina Ag. forma genuina Wille.
Waghen ; 
near Meaux Abbey ; Newsholme.
Conferva bombycina forma minor Wille.
Beverley; Riccall 
Common ; Routh ; near Meaux Abbey ; Waghen.
Conferva 
Waghen.
Rhizoclonium flavicans Jurg.
Newsholme.
Chaetophora pisiformis (Roth.) Ag. Beverley.
July 1893.
umosa Ag. Beverley, 
WEST: NOTES JON THE FRESH-WATER ALGiE.
213 
Penium cucurbitinum Biss.
Riccall Common.
Penium minutum (Ralfs) Cleve.
Riccall Common.
Cylindrocystis Brebissonii Menegh.
Riccall Common.
Cylindrocystis crassa D.By. EastofSelby.
morus 
East of Selby.
Mesotasnium micrococcum (Kutz.) Kirchn.
EastofSelby.
Euastrum ansatum Ehrnb.
Riccall Common.
Euastrum pectinatum Breb.
Riccall Common.
_ 
Euastrum rostratum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Euastrum elegans (Breb.) Kiitz.
Riccall Common.
Euastrum erosum Lund.
var.
notabile West.
Riccall Common, 
Euastrum binale (Turp.) Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Euastrum binale var.
elobatum Lund.
Riccall Common.
Euastrum denticulatum (Kirchn.) Gay. Riccall Common.
Cosmarium quadratum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium Hammeri Reinsch.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium granatum Breb.
Hornsea Mere ; Riccall Common.
Cosmarium granatum var.
subgranatum Nord.
Hornsea Mere.
Long.
26*5 — 27*5 /x; lat.
19*8 — 21-3/1; lat.
isthm.
6*6 — 8*3/1.
Cosmarium pyramidatum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium pseudopyramidatum Lund.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium galeritum Nord.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium Phaseolus Breb.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium bioculatum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium tinctum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium succisum West.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium impressulum Elfv.
Hornsea Mere.
Cosmarium venustum (Breb.) Arch.
Riccall Common ; Horn- 
sea Mere.
Cosmarium Meneghinii Breb.
Riccall Common ; Hornsea 
Mere ; Newsholme.
Cosmarium Meneghinii Br£b.
forma octangularis Wille.
Riccall Common ; Hornsea Mere.
Cosmarium Meneghinii Breb.
var.
Wollei Lagerh.
Riccall 
Common.
Cosmarium Regnesii Reinsch.
Riccall Common, abundant.
Long.
8.5 — x2-i p; lat.
9*3— 13*5/*; lat isthm.
4*4— 5* 8 /*- 
Cosmarium substriatum Nord.
Riccall Common ; Hornsea 
Mere.
July 1893.
214 WEST I NOTES ON THE FRESH-WATER ALG^E.
* 
Cosmarium undulatum Corda.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium tetraophthalmum (Kiitz.) Breb.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium tetraophthalmum van Lundellii Wittr.
Hornsea 
Mere.
Cosmarium margaritiferum (Turp.) Menegh.
Riccall Common; 
Hornsea Mere.
Cosmarium Portianum Arch.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium reniforme (Ralfs.) Arch.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium punctulatum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium subpunctulatum Nord.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium subpunctulatum Nord.
forma cum apicibus minus 
late truncatis.
Hornsea Mere.
Cosmarium Botrytis (Bory) Menegh.
Hornsea Mere; Riccall 
i 
Common ; Newsholme ; Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Cosmarium formosulum Hoff.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium praemorsum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium Broomei Thw. Riccall Common, 
Cosmarium confusum Cooke var.
regularius Nord.
Riccall 
Common.
Cosmarium ornatum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium moniliforme (Turp.) Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Cosmarium moniliforme forma panduriformis Heimerl.
Riccall Common.
Long.
17*7 /x; lat.
10/1; lat.
isthm.
7*4 /*• 
Xanthidium aculeatum Ehrnb.
Riccall Common.
Xanthidium cristatum Bn§b.
Riccall Common.
Arthrodesmus octocornis Ehrnb.
Riccall Common.
Arthrodesrnus Ralfsii West.
Riccall Common.
Arthrodesmus convergens Ehrnb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum dejectum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum connatum (Lund.) Roy. et Biss.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum apiculatum Br£b.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum Dickiei Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum brevispinum Br£b.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum cuspidatum Br£b.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum megacanthum Lund.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum lunatum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum avicula Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum teliferum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum asperum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Naturalist, 
west: notes on the fresh- water alg^e.
215 
Staurastrum muticum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum orbiculare (Ehrnb.) Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum orbiculare van depressum Roy. et Biss.
Riccall 
Common.
Staurastrum alternans Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum dilatatum Ehrnb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum brachiatum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum tricorne (Breb.) Menegh.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum cyrtocerum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum polymorphum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum gracile Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum paradoxum Meyen.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum controversum Breb.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum vestitum Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum oxyacanthum Arch.
Riccall Common.
Staurastrum tetracerum (Kiitz.) Ralfs.
Riccall Common.
Class MULTINUCLEATE.
Order SIPHONE.E.
Vaucheria sericea Lyngb.
Beverley.
Vaucheria sessilis (Vauch.) DC.
Newsholme; near Sutton; 
near Meaux Abbey.
Class CCENOBIE/E.
Order PANDORINE.E.
Pandorina morum Miill.
Hornsea Mere.
Chlamydococcus pluvialis A.Br. Beverley.
Order PEDIASTRE.E.
Pediastrum Boryanum (Turp.) Menegh.
Hornsea Mere.
Pediastrum gracile A.Br. Riccall Common.
* 
Pediastrum tetras (Ehrnb.) Ralfs.
Dispositio cellularum 4 
Riccall Common.
Order SORASTRE.K.
Staurogenia rectangularis (Nag.) A.Br. Hornsea Mere.
Ccelastrum sphaericum Nag. Riccall Common.
Ccelastrum microporum Nag. Riccall Common.
July 1893.
2l6 WEST : NOTES ON THE FRESH-WATER ALGiE.
PROTOPHYTA.
Group SCHIZOPHYCE.E.
Class PROTOCOCCOIDE.E.
Order EREMOBIE.E.
Ophiocytium cochleare (Eich.) A.Br. Near Meaux Abbey; 
Riccall Common ; Waghen ; Routh ; Newsholme.
Dictyosphaerium Ehrenbergianum Nag. Hornsea Mere ; 
Newsholme.
Hydrianum heteromorphum Reinsch.
Newsholme.
Nephrocytium Agardhianum Nag. Riccall Common.
Nephrocytium Nagelii Grun.
Newsholme.
Oocystis solitaria Wittr.
Hornsea Mere.
Order PROTOCOCCACE/E (incl.
Palmellacea).
Pleurococcus vulgaris Menegh.
Common.
Chlorococcum gigas (Kiitz.) Grun.
Near Meaux Abbey.
Gloeocystis ampla (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Riccall Common; Newsholme.
Gloeocystis vesiculosa Nag. Riccall Common ; Routh ; News- 
holme.
Schizochlamys gelatinosa A.
Br. Near Meaux Abbey.
Botryococcus Braunii Kiitz.
Hornsea Mere.
Urococcus insignis (Hass.) Kiitz.
Near Sutton.
Rhaphidium polymorphum Fres.
var.
falcatum (Corda) Rabh.
Riccall Common.
Scenedesmus quadricauda (Turp.) Breb.
Hornsea Mere; 
Loftsome Bridge, near Wressle.
Scenedesmus acutus Meyen.
Riccall Common ; Hornsea 
Mere.
Tetraedron regulare Kiitz.
Riccall Common.
Class PHYCOCHROMOPHYCE.E.
Sub-Class NOSTOCHINE/E.
Order NOSTOCACE^E.
Nostoc microscopicum Carm.
Riccall Common.
Anabsna Flos-aquae Breb.
Hornsea Mere.
Crass, cell.
5/*; crass, heterocyst.
5*5 — 77/*; long, spor 
21 — 25/x; lat.
spor.
11 — 12/t.
STatnrattst, 
west: notes on the fresh-water algjE.
217 
Anabaena oscillarioides Bory.
(Born, et Flah., Revis.
des 
Nostoc.
Heterocyst., quatr.
et.
dernier fragm., p.
233 J A.
Ralfsii 
Cooke, Brit.
Fresh \v.
Alg., p.
237, tab.
94, fig.
1.) Newsholme.
A slightly smaller form.
Crass, cell.
3*5 — 4/x.
; crass, heterocyst.
6 — 6'5/x; long.
heterocyst.
6*5 — 77/*; long.
spor.
17-3 — 34*5/* ; lat.
spor.
9-5— io/a.
Aphanizomenon Flos-aquae (L.) Ralfs.
forma paullo minor.
Riccall Common.
Crass, trichom.
4/x ; crass, spor.
5 — 8/x.
; long.
spor.
30 — 50/x.
Order SCYTOXEMACE.E.
Tolypothrix lanata (Desv.) Wartm.
Riccall Common.
Crass, fil.
= 13*5- i6/jl; crass, trichom.
8*6 — 96/x; long, 
heterocyst.
9 — 12/x; lat.
heterocyst.
11*5 — 15/x.
Tolypothrix tenuis Kiitz.
Riccall Common.
Order OSCILLARIACE.E.
Oscillaria Frolichii Kiitz.
Beverley ; Routh ; Loftsome Bridge 
near Wressle.
Oscillaria limosa (Roths.) Ag. Waghen.
Sub-Class CHROOCOCCACE^.
Order CHROOCOCCACE.-E.
Chroococcus turgidus (Kiitz.) Nag. Riccall Common ; Hornsea 
Mere.
Microcystis protogenita (Bias.) Rabh.
Routh.
Clathrocystis aeruginosa (Kiitz.) Henfr.
Hornsea Mere.
Merismopedia glauca (Ehrnb.) Nag. Riccall Common.
Merismopedia punctata Meyen.
Riccall Common.
Tetrapedia Reinschiana Arch.
Riccall Common.
Class DIATOMACE.-E.
Cyclotella operculata (Ag.) Kiitz.
Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle.
Melosira varians Ag. Beverley ; Newsholme.
Surirella panduriformis Sm. Tickton.
Surirella biseriata (Ehrnb.) Breb.
Beverley.
angusta Kiitz.
Near Meaux Abbey.
July 1893.
2l8 WEST : NOTES ON THE FRESH-WATER ALCE.
Surirella splendida (Ehrnb.) Kiitz.
Beverley.
Surirella ovata Kiitz.
Routh ; Beverley ; near Meaux Abbey.
Surirella salina Sm. Waghen.
Surirella minuta Breb.
Routh; Beverley; Newsholme; Tickton; 
near Meaux Abbey; Waghen.
Surirella pinnata Sm. Beverley ; Routh ; Newsholme.
Cymatopleura elliptica (Breb.) Sm. Routh.
Cymatopleura Solea (Breb.) Sm. Beverley; Tickton ; Newsholme ; 
Routh ; Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Epithemia 
Newsholme.
Epithemia Sorex Kiitz.
Hornsea Mere.
Epithemia Argus (Ehrnb.) Kiitz.
Newsholme.
Eunotia incisa Greg.
Riccall Common.
Eunotia bidens (Greg.) Rabh.
Riccall Common.
Cymbella cuspidata Kiitz.
Beverley ; Tickton.
Cymbella ventricosa Ag. Routh ; near Sutton ; Beverley.
Cocconema lanceolatum Ehrnb.
Beverley.
Cocconema cymbiforme (Kiitz.) Ehrnb.
Riccall Common; 
Beverley.
Cocconema Cistula Hempr.
Beverley; Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle.
Encyonema csespitosum Kiitz.
Tickton ; Routh ; Beverley.
Amphora minutissima Sm. Beverley.
Amphora ovalis Kiitz.
Routh ; Beverley ; Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle; Tickton.
Cocconeis Pediculus Ehrnb.
Beverley.
Cocconeis placentula Ehrnb.
Hornsea Mere ; Routh ; News- 
holme ; Beverley ; Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Achnanthidium microcephalum Kiitz.
Tickton; Waghen; 
Routh.
Achnanthidium lanceolatum Breb.
Beverley ; Routh ; near 
Meaux Abbey ; Waghen.
Achnanthes exilis Kiitz.
Near Meaux Abbey; Newsholme; 
Tickton; Beverley.
Rhoicosphenia curvata (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Newsholme.
Odontidium hiemale (Lyngb.) Kiitz.
Beverley.
Odontidium mutabile Sm. Beverley; Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle; Waghen.
Odontidium Tabeilaria Sm. Beverley.
Naturalist, 
WEST : NOTES ON THE FRESH-WATER ALGiE.
219 
Fragilaria capucina Desmaz.
Tickton; near Meaux Abbey; 
Newsholme ; Beverley ; Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Diatoma vulgare Bory.
Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Diatoma elongatum Ag. Beverley ; Newsholme ; Loftsome 
Bridge near Wressle.
Synedra pulchella Kiitz.
Tickton ; Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle ; Beverley ; Riccall Common.
Synedra minutissima Kiitz.
?; Sm. Diat.
I. fig.
87.
Newsholme.
Synedra Vaucheriae Kiitz, Newsholme.
Synedra Ulna Ehrnb.
Loftsome Bridge near Wressle ; Beverley ; 
Waghen.
Synedra splendens Kiitz.
Beverley; Routh.
Synedra splendens Kiitz.
var.
aequalis (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Riccall 
Com 
mon.
Synedra capitata Ehrnb.
Beverley.
Synedra Acus Kiitz.
Loftsome Bridge near Wressle ; News- 
holme ; near Meaux Abbey.
Tryblionella angustata Sm. Newsholme; Beverley.
Nitzschia Amphioxys (Ehrnb.) Sm. Routh ; near Meaux 
Abbey; Waghen.
Nitzschia constricta (Kiitz.) Pritch.
Beverley; Loftsome 
Bridge near Wressle ; Tickton ; Routh : near Meaux Abbey ; 
Waghen.
Nitzschia parvula Sm. Riccall Common; Beverley; Waghen.
Nitzschia sigmoidea (Nitzsch) Sm. Beverley ; Routh.
Nitzschia curvula (Ehrnb.) Sm. Routh ; Beverley ; Waghen.
Nitzschia linearis (Ag.) Sm. Beverley ; Tickton ; Routh ; near 
Meaux Abbey.
Nitzschia tenuis Sm. Beverley ; Newsholme ; Loftsome Bridge 
near Wressle ; Tickton ; Routh.
Nitzschiella Closterium (Ehrnb.) Rabh.
Beverley.
Nitzschiella acicularis (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Routh ; near Sutton ; 
Beverley ; Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Nitzschiella gracilis (Breb.) Rab.
(= Nitzschia Tania Sm.).
Waghen.
Navicula cuspidata Kiitz.
Riccall Common ; Loftsome Bridge 
near Wressle.
Navicula limosa (Kiitz.) Grun.
Beverley.
Navicula inflata Kiitz.
Waghen; Tickton; Beverley.
July 1893.
2 20 WEST : NOTES ON THE FRESH-WATER ALGiE.
Navicula amphisbaena Bory.
Waghen; Beverley; Loftsome 
Bridge near Wressle.
Navicula sphaerophora Kiitz.
Near Meaux Abbey ; Beverley.
Navicula pusilla Sm. Tickton ; Routh ; Beverley ; near Meaux 
Abbey; Waghen.
- avicula anglica Ralfs.
Loftsome Bridge, near Wressle.
Navicula rhynchocephala Kiitz.
Beverley ; Loftsome Bridge, 
Wa 
Navicula 
Near Sutton ; Routh ; Beverley.
Navicula Araphirhynchus Ehrnb.
Beverley.
Navicula producta Sm. Loftsome Bridge, near Wressle.
Navicula 
Nevvsholme.
Navicula exilis (Kiitz.) Grun.
Near Meaux Abbey ; Beverley ; 
Routh ; Waghen j Tickton ; Loftsome Bridge, near Wressle ; 
Newsholme.
Navicula angustata Sm. Near Meaux Abbey; Newsholme; 
Waghen ; Beverley ; Tickton.
Navicula cryptocephala Kiitz.
Tickton ; Waghen.
Navicula veneta Kiitz.
Newsholme.
Navicula dicephala Ehrnb.
Near Meaux Abbey ; Beverley ; 
Routh ; Waghen ; Tickton.
Pinnularia nobilis Ehrnb.
Beverley.
Pinnularia viridis (Ehrnb.) Rabh.
Beverley; Loftsome Bridge, 
near Wressle ; near Meaux Abbey ; Tickton ; near Sutton ; 
Newsholme.
Pinnularia peregrina Ehrnb.
Tickton.
Pinnularia radiosa (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Beverley ; Riccall Common ; 
Tickton ; near Meaux Abbey ; Routh ; Waghen.
Pinnularia radiosa (Kiitz.) Rabh.
var.
silesiaca (Bleisch) Rabh.
Beverley.
Pinnularia viridula (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Tickton.
Pinnularia mesolepta Sm. Tickton ; Beverley ; near Meaux 
Abbey.
Pinnularia Brebissonii (Kiitz.) Rabh.
Tickton; Beverley; 
near Meaux Abbey.
Frustulia saxonica Rabh.
forma aquatka Rabh.
Beverley; 
Waghen.
Pleurosigma attenuatum (Kiitz.) Sm. Beverley.
Pleurosigina lacustre Sm. Hornsea Mere ; Tickton ; Loftsome 
Bridge near Wressle ; Beverley ; Waghen : Newsholme 
Naturalist, 
NOTES AND NEWS.
221 
ma Spencerii (Quekett) Sm. Beveiley; Routh.
Tickton.
Stauroneis Phoenicenteron (Nitzsch) Ehrnb.
Stauroneis anceps Ehrnb.
Routh ; Tickton.
Pleurostaurum Legumen (Ehrnb.) Rabh.
Beverley.
Gomphonema tenellum Kiitz.
Near Meaux Abbey; Routh; 
Waghen ; Beverley ; near Sutton ; Newsholme.
Gomphonema dichotomum Kiitz.
Waghen ; near Sutton ; 
near Meaux Abbey ; Routh ; Tickton.
Gomphonema capitatum Ehrnb.
Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle.
Gomphonema constrictum Ehrnb.
Loftsome Bridge near 
Wressle ; Newsholme.
Gomphonema acuminatum Ehrnb.
Near Sutton; Newsholme; 
Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Gomphonema olivaceum (Lyngb.) Kiitz.
Near Sutton; 
Newsholme ; near Meaux Abbey.
Gomphonema intricatum Kiitz.
Loftsome Bridge near Wressle.
Meridion circulare (Grev.) Ag. Beverley ; Routh ; Loftsome 
Bridge near Wressle ; Tickton ; near Meaux Abbey.
Tabellaria flocculosa (Roth) Kiitz.
Riccall Common.
NOTES AND NEWS.
We are glad to see that Mr. J.
G. Goodchild's engagements at Edinburgh do 
not prevent the continuance of his numerous papers on the geology of the Eden 
valley and neighbouring districts.
Among a number of reprints which he has 
sent us is one of his ' Notes on the Water Supply of Edenside.' from the latest 
number of the Transactions of the Cumberland and Westmorland Association.
Another in the list is entitled * Notes on some of the Limestones of Cumberland 
and Westmorland/ and gives the author's views on the formation of limestone in 
genera], as well as an account of those in the area considered.
As usual, 
Mr. Goodchild employs the stratigraphical materials to reconstruct in imagination 
the physical geography of the past, a fascinating, if rather hazardous branch of 
geology.
The recent appearance of a third edition of Stoddart's * Angler's Companion ' 
(Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co., 1892), which the publishers have sent 
us for notice, is another evidence ot the perennial popularity of the gentle craft.
A sport which has borne the appearance of some seven hundred different works, 
practical and otherwise, would appear to be in some danger of coming to a stop 
through sheer exhaustion of the subject.
But of the making of angling books 
there would appear to be no end, and so keen an enthusiast, and so excellent an 
observer and angler as Stoddart, is in no danger of being forgotten among 
a crowd of friendly rivals.
The present revised edition differs in no material 
respect from the two former, the book having long been a standard work with 
North country anglers for salmon, trout and perch.
Since Stoddart's day, how- 
ever, the more sportsmanlike feeling everywhere apparent which objects to the 
use of bail not only very deadly, but very destructive, in a double sense, has 
Erohibited the use of salmon roe, and other compoun and the portions of the 
00k dealing with these matters have naturally^ been omitted.
The most accom- 
plished angler may still find something new in a perusal of these familiar pages.
July 189 
J* 
222 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION 
AT AYSGARTH.
The first meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union for the 
present year took place on Whit-Monday, May 22nd.
The day 
was gloriously fine, and the rains of the previous week had but 
added to the beauty of the scenery, and caused an exhilarating 
feeling of freshness to pervade everything.
The district planned for investigation comprised the neighbour- 
hood of the villages of Aysgarth and Carperby, the lower slopes of 
Penhill, and the picturesque dales of Bishopdale and Waldendale.
Not content with a single day, many members passed the week- 
end in the district, and certainly a better spot for spending a few days 
could hardly be desired, and these had been able to obtain a fair 
quantity of specimens before the rest of the members arrived on the 
Monday.
Permission 
11, and Mr.
of Bolton 
of their estates, but as it was the nesting season the members 
abstained, at Lord Bolton's request, from visiting the moorlands.
The river banks in the immediate neighbourhood of Aysgarth 
were well investigated, and though not a few of the naturalists 
preferred to take independent routes, many took the route which 
followed the river banks from Yore Mills to the stepping-stones, and 
as far as the stagnant pools in the Strand pasture, then leaving the 
river bank and working back by way of Carperby.
The Freeholders' 
Wood at Carperby was found very productive by a party of botanists 
under the leadership of Miss Bradley, of Carperby, an accomplished 
botanist ; whilst the vertebrate zoologists found a most valuable guide 
in Mr. Edward Chapman, the veteran naturalist of the same village, 
who possesses a most extensive knowledge of the birds and mammals 
of the district, and whose list of Wensleydale birds, published in the 
c Naturalist ' a few years ago, was the standard of reference.
The 
Mr. J 
Goodch 
by whom much of the work of surveying this district for the 
Geological Map had been done.
By five o'clock the majority of the 
embers had 
substantial 
Hotel, where 
After tea, the evening being fine, the general meeting was held 
out on the lawn, Mr. John Gerrard, M.B.O.U., occupying the chair.
The chairman, in his opening remarks, brought forward in a forcible 
Naturalist 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
223 
manner the good the Y.N.U. was doing in systematic researches in 
all the branches of natural history, and the fact that much good and 
useful material was lying unpublished, owing to the lack of funds, 
and urged upon each member individually to increase the number of 
members so that this work could be accomplished.
The minutes having been taken as read, the next duty was the 
election of the following new members : — Mr. Reginald H.
Barker, 
Scarborough; Mr. Eugene Bean, York; Mr. Joseph Coe, Hull; 
Mr. Robert Dutton, York ; Mr. Chas.
E. Elmhirst, York ; Mr. C.
N. 
Goode, Harrogate ; Mr. Arnold Greenwood, Halifax ; Mr. Leonard 
Hawkesworth, Leeds ; Mr. Donald S.
Mackay, York ; Mr. F.
W. 
Mills, F.R.M.S., Huddersfield; Mr. Stephen Parkinson, Leeds; 
Mr. Edward Peake, M.A., Giggleswick; Mr. John Sayner, Harrogate; 
Mr. Tom Stevenson, North Stainley; Mr. Joseph R.
Waldby, 
Harrogate ; Mr. J.
W. Warwick, Harrogate ; Mr. Arthur Wilkinson, 
York ; Mr. H.
J. Wilkinson, York.
The list of societies was then called over, the following 
sixteen being represented : — Wakefield and Bradford Naturalists' 
Societies, Leeds Naturalists' Club, Leeds Geological Association, 
Dewsbury Naturalists' Society, Malton Naturalists' Society, Ripon 
Naturalists' Club, Cleveland Naturalists' Club, Harrogate and 
District Naturalists' and Scientific Society, Thirsk Natural History 
Society, Craven Naturalists' Association, Ellesmere School Natural 
History Society, Hull Scientific Club, Scarborough Field Naturalists' 
Society, Darlington Naturalists' Field Club, and Leeds Co-operative 
Field Club, numbering altogether about seventy members.
A hearty vote of thanks was then passed to Lord Bolton, of 
Bolton Hall, and Mr. Thomas Bradley, of Bear Park, for grantin 
permission to the members to visit their estates, and also to the 
leaders of the various parties, after which the sectional reports were 
then called for.
For the Vertebrate Section, its secretary, Mr. Riley Fortune.
F.Z.S., reported that among the members present were Messrs.
J. 
Gerrard, M.B.O.U.
(President), W.
D. Roebuck, F.L.S., J.
Green- 
wood, J.
Farrah, and R.
Fortune, F.Z.S.
(Hon. Secretary).
No systematic route was followed by this section, the members 
dispersing over a wide area— a method which is certainly deserving 
of encouragement, as the district visited is by this means more 
thoroughly worked.
During the day Mr, Chapman, of Carperby, 
accompanied some of the members and gave them the benefit of his 
unique experience.
The pleasure of inspecting his local collection 
of stuffed birds was ont of the features of the day.
Among his 
birds were noticed a Raven, Common Buzzard, Golden-eye, etc.
juiTTi^r 
224 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
Mr. Chapman has had many local rarities through his hands at 
various times, as for instance, specimens of the Little Auk, Storm 
Petrel, Bittern, Peregrine, etc.
During the day he pointed out 
a place near the falls, occupied by a Dipper's nest, which to his 
knowledge had been thus occupied every year, without a single 
intermission, for fifty years.
A specially noticeable feature observed 
during the excursion was the great number of Starlings to be seen 
on all sides, intent only upon one thing, viz., procuring food for 
their numerous offspring.
Every hole, nook, or cranny seemed to 
be tenanted by a squirming family of these birds.
The large number 
inhabiting the district must certainly be appreciated by the farmers, 
as the benefit derived by them from the birds is incalculable.
It is 
interesting to note that the Swift and Mole were observed at the 
height of 1,100 feet on Pennel, and that a pair of Buzzards nested 
on the moors last season ; the young ones, we regret to say, were 
taken.
The following is a complete list of the vertebrates.
An 
asterisk (*) indicates that the eggs of this species were found, and 
a dagger (t) that young birds were seen : 
Mammals, 10.
Great Tit.
Tawny Owl.
Mole.
tCoal Tit.
Sparrow Hawk.
Common Shrew.
Blue Tit.
Ring Dove.
Stoat.
•Wren.
Pheasant.
Long-tailed Field Mouse, 
, Pied Wagtail.
Partridge.
House Mouse.
•fGrey Wagtail.
tRed Grouse.
Brown Rat.
Yellow Wagtail.
Land Rail.
Water Vole.
•Meadow Pipit.
Coot.
Red Field Vole.
*Tree Pipit.
*Waterhen.
Hare.
*Spotted Flycatcher.
Golden Plover.
Rabbit.
* Swallow.
Lapwing.
*Martin.
Common Snipe.
Birds, 61.
*Sand Martin.
* Common Sandpiper.
*t Missel Thrush.
Greenfinch.
Redshank.
*tSong Thrush.
Sparrow.
Curlew.
*tBIackhird.
*Chaffinch.
♦Black-headed Gull.
Ring Ouzel.
*Lesser Redpole.
Dipper.
Yellow Bunting.
Reptile, i.
Wheatear.
Common Bunting.
Common Lizard.
Whinchat.
Skylark.
*Redstart.
•tStarling.
Amphibians, 3.
* Robin.
Magpie.
Smooth Newt.
Whitethroat.
Jackdaw.
Common Toad.
Garden Warbler.
Crow.
Frog.
Chiffchaff.
tRook.
*J 
nVIIIow Wren.
S wif t.
Fishes, 3.
•Wood Wren.
Kingfisher.
Minnow.
Sedge Warbler.
Cuckoo.
Trout.
Hedge Sparrow.
tBarn Owl.
Graviine.
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
225 
In the absence of the officers of the Conchological Section, the 
report on the day's proceedings was given by Mr. T.
A. Lofthouse, 
of Middlesbrough, by whom and Messrs.
W. Denison Roebuck, 
F.L.S., and Edward Chapman, assisted by members of the other 
sections, who brought shells for identification, most of the work had 
been done.
The section was not, however, by any means sufficiently 
represented to admit of the thorough examination of a district of 
such a varied character as Aysgarth presents, and the dryness of the 
weather further militated against conchological work.
The total 
number of mollusca obtained was 31, comprising six slugs, three 
freshwater and 22 land shells.
Of these no less than 10 were 
additional records to the published lists for the district.
One of the 
additions was Planorbis albus } found in the stagnant pools or old 
river-channels in the Strands pasture, near Carperby.
Other four 
were slugs, viz., Arion subfuscus and Limax marginatus ( == arborutn) 
from Strands pasture, and A.
minimus and A.
circumscriptus from 
Carperby.
The remaining five were land shells, viz., Hyalinia pura 
(with var.
margaritacea), H fulva, Cochlicopa lubrica, and Carychium 
minimum, all found in the vicinity of Aysgarth Falls, and Helix 
nemoralis found on the hills above Hawbank Woods.
In addition 
to these Helix cricetorum was found in several fresh localities near 
Carperby.
The other species observed were Arion ater, Helix 
hortensis, and Balea perversa at Carperby, Vitrina pellucida and 
Clausilia rugosa at Aysgarth Falls, Helix lapicida common near 
Redmire, Hyalinia celloria and Pupa eylindracea at Aysgarth, Helix 
rupestris common on limestone walls throughout the district, 
H arbustorum and var.
flavescms, H rufescens and H hispida about 
Carperby and Aysgarth, H sericea common on nettles near Carperby 
and also at the Falls, Agriolimax agrestis, Hyalinia alliaria, 
H nitidula, Helix rotundata, and Succinea puiris throughout, and 
Limn&a peregra and Ancylus fluviatilis in the river.
The Entomological Sectional report was given by the President, 
Mr. James H.
Rowntree, who writes that the following members 
of the section were also present :— Mr. Walter F.
Baker (Secretary), 
Mr. M.
L. Thompson, Mr. W.
Hewett, and Mr. E.
G. Potter.
The luxuriantly wooded district and the remarkably diversified 
character of the dale gave promise of great possibilities, which were 
hardly realised during the necessarily limited time available for 
investigation.
Mr. W.
Hewett and Mr. E.
G. Potter, both of York, 
who had been staying some days in the district, sugared about sixty 
trees near Redmire on the 20th, but owing to the rain which fell 
unceasingly, both whilst sugaring and when visiting them after dark, 
the results were nil.
Despite these unfavourable circumstances, 
August 1893 
p 
226 THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
however, by their combined efforts the lepidopterists are able to 
record the following: — 
Imagines.
Pieris brassicse.
Rumia crataegata.
Emmelesia albulata.
Pieris rapoc.
Selenia lunaria.
Coremia munitata.
Pieris napi.
Acronycta psi.
Coremia ferrugata.
Anthocaris cardamines- Odontopera bidentata.
*Coremia propugnata.
Chortobius pamphilus.
Iodis lactearia.
Melanippe subtristata.
Lycoena agestis.
Strenia clathrata.
Melanippe montanata.
Lycoena alexis.
Asthena candidata.
Anticlea derivata.
Procris globularise.
Cabera pusaria.
Camptogramma bilineata.
Procris statices.
Fidonia atomaria.
(* Coremia propugnat a was fairly common, both at Redmire and CarperbT.) 
Vanessa urtica*.
Cleora lichenaria.
Cheimatobia brumata.
Vanessa atalanta.
Abraxas grossulariata.
For the Coleoptera, Mr. Walter F.
Baker reports that in the 
morning the vegetation was so very wet that it rendered • sweeping/ 
which should have been the coleopterists' best aid, of but little 
use ; but by noon the heat of the sun began to improve the state of 
things, and captures became more numerous, the large growth of 
nettles on the road leading up to the hotel receiving a fair share 
of attention and producing a good quantity of phytophagous beetles, 
including the various species of Phyllobius, Otiorhynchns, and Apion 
in the greatest abundance, whilst Ceuthorrhynchus asstmilis and 
C. contractus (two species which, from their peculiar little habits, 
have well earned the name of * Happy Jack/ by which they are 
commonly known in some parts of the county) were, as usual, 
common.
Returning through the village and going along by the 
side of the river, we came across the traces of some herbivorous 
animals, and soon several species of Aphodius and Cercyon were 
added to the list, and a fine specimen of Geotrupes vernalis, one of 
the 'shard-borne beetles/ The very peculiar-looking larva of 
Spharidium scarabceoides was also obtained here.
Passing up the 
slope in front of Mr. Thomas Bradley's house, the steep bank-sides, 
well-wooded and covered with long vegetation as they were, looked 
a likely place for the sweeping-net, and a very satisfactory quarter of 
an hour was spent there, the captures including Corymbites pectini- 
cornis, C.
aipreits, Athens hemorrhoidalis, Phadon cochlearm, and 
» 
Phyllobius oblongus.
Passing further on, the loose stones by the river side next 
engaged attention, and here Leistus fulvibarbis^ Calathus melano- 
cephalusy Nebria brevicollls, and Amara familiaris entered the 
collecting-bottle, whilst the obtrusive little Tachyporus chrysomelinas 
was everywhere abundant.
Then for some distance th ere w as 
Naturalist 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
227 
nothing special to attract the coleopterist, though a little belt of 
trees on the river-bank well repaid the trouble of beating and 
sweeping; but a little further on, a large willow tree which had 
fallen into the river, though still tethered to the bank by its roots, 
fi 
Melandry 
moist situation by the excessive drought of the previous few weeks- 
Near here, the coleopterists were induced to stay some little 
time, owing to the alluring fascinations of a dead dog, but this did 
not provide the rich harvest they expected.
Turning off into the 
Strands Pasture they came upon a series of pools, formed in an old 
river-bed, and these, surrounded as they were by reeds, and 
displaying a fair amount of pond vegetation (including Potamogeton 
nutans, always a promising sign for the coleopterist) looked like 
producing some 'good things/ but here they were signally disap- 
pointed.
Elaphrus cupreus, shining like burnished copper, darted 
about over the green weed at the edge of the pool, and was a very 
pretty sight, and numbers of them could have been obtained ; but 
with regard to aquatic coleoptera, for some time not a trace could 
be found, though the larva of one of the caddis-worms (Limnophilus 
rhombicus) was very abundant, and the leaves of the Potamogeton were 
scored by the larvse of one of the leaf-miners, but after about half 
an hour's diligent search a single specimen of Helophoms aquaticus 
was obtained, and shortly afterwards the larva of Dytiscus and 
a pupa of one of the large dragon-flies.
From here the members made their way back to the hotel at 
Aysgarth, having spent a pleasant if not remarkably successful day.
The total number of species obtained on that day by Mr. M.
Lawson 
Thompson and the writer was seventy-two, a list of which is 
given below: 
Notiophilus biguttatus.
Sphceridium scaraboeoides.
Elaphrus cupreus.
Cercyon melanocephalus.
Leistus f til vi bar bis.
Cercyon uni-punctatus.
Nebria brevicollis.
Cercyon hemorrhoidalis.
Nebria gyllenhalii.
Aleochara lanuginosa.
Clivina fossor.
Tachinus marginelius.
Pterostichus madidus.
Ocypus brunnipes.
Pterostichus vulgaris.
Tachyporus solutus.
Pterostichus niger.
Tachyporus chrysomelinus 
Bembidium littorale.
Tachyporus hypnorum.
Bembidium tibiale.
Philonthus decorus.
Anchomenus albipes.
Philonthus varius.
Calathus melanocephalus.
Stenus speculator.
Patrobus excavatus.
Stenus similis.
Helophorus aquaticus.
Oxytelus tetracarinatus.
August 1S93.
228 THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION AT AYSGARTH.
Oxytelus laqueatus.
Phsedon tumidulus.
Aphodius fossor.
Phytodecta olivacea.
Aphodius depressus.
Phyllodecta vitelline.
Aphodius contaminatus.
Apion violaceum.
Aphodius fimetarius.
Apion trifolii.
Aphodius ater.
Apion apricans.
Geotrupes stercorarius.
Otiorhynchus picipes.
Geotrupes vernalis.
Tropiphorus tomentosus.
Athoiis hemorrhoidalis.
Polydrusus micans.
Athoiis vittatus.
Polydrusus pterisgomalis.
' Dolopius marginatus.
Phyllobius oblongus.
Melandrya canaliculata.
Phyllobius urticoe.
Corymbites quercus.
Phyllobius pyri.
Corymbites pectinicornis.
Phyllobius argentatus.
Corymbites cupreus.
Phyllobius viridiceris.
Cyphon coarctatus.
Sitones lineatus.
Telephorus bicolor.
Cceliodes quadrimaculatus.
Telephorus nigricans v.
discoideus.
Ceuthorrhynchus assimilis.
Telephorus hemorrhoidalis.
Ceuthorrhynchus contractus.
Rhagonycha limbata.
Liosoma ovatulum.
Phsedon cochlear^.
Rhinonchus subfasciatus.
The Botanical Section was very strongly represented, those 
present including Mr. P.
F. Lee (President), Mr. Albert H.
Pawson 
(Secretary); Mr. W.
Foggitt, of Thirsk ; Mr. J.
B. Foggitt, of 
Southport; Mr. R.
Barnes, of Saltburn; and Mr. J.
J. Marshall, ot 
Market Weighton.
The report was given by Mr. Albert H.
Pawson, who also supplies the following account : 
The fine development of the Yoredale rocks, which are so inter- 
esting to the geologists in this part of the dale, is observed with great 
pleasure by the botanist also, for he knows that each zone of the 
series will yield him a new list of plants.
On the grit which caps the 
summits are the heaths and the moor berries — bilberry, crowberry, 
cowberry, cloudberry, and cranberry ; the cotton grasses, and many 
rushes and sedges, all the plants which seek a high exposure, peaty 
soil, and stagnant moisture.
The limestone scar lower down, and 
the short, sweet turf of its talus will have none of these burly 
citizens, but keeps choice company in its delicate spleenworts and 
saxifrages, drabas, geraniums, and rock-roses.
The beds of shale 
which overlie it redeem it from the great dryness of the mountain 
limestone of Craven, and provide trickling ledges for the butterwort 
_damp patches, such as the bird's eye primrose loves, and moist nooks 
out of which the columbine may rear her lovely head ; and again the 
rich mixture formed by the decomposition of these various rocks, 
peat, sandstone, limestone, and shale, gives the woods and meadows 
and pastures of the lowest slopes of the dale a deep soil of incom 
parable fertility.
In this happy valley the long-continued drought 
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
229 
has had no power to harm, and one is inclined to believe that this 
is greatly owing to the continual recurrence of these impervious beds 
which crop out at successive levels down the sides of the slopes, and 
provide a natural system of surface irrigation.
Everywhere the 
sweetest spring verdure prevailed, and the flowers sparkled in the 
lush grass— summer flowers many of them were, owing to the great 
forwardness of the season.
On the floor of the valley are several 
swamps and marshy tracts which were hailed with great delight by the 
party, and they were not disappointed, for they afforded many good 
plants, and most of this varied ground was worked by one or other 
of them, for several had been on the spot since Saturday, and 
others had walked over from Wharfedale on the Sunday, finding 
Rubus chamcemorus flowering as freely as the wood anemone about 
the water-parting, and accompanied by Saxifraga granulata in great 
abundance, from the ridge almost as far as Aysgarth, where it seems 
to be less frequent.
Jack Wood was searched on Sunday, and also 
lower Waldendale.
On Monday two or more parties worked the 
river-banks on both sides from the lower Force almost to the stepping- 
stones, under the skilled guidance of Miss Bradley, of Carperby, who 
led them to the home of several rare plants, including Allium vineale 
and A.
scorodoprasum.
Here Actcea spicata was found in tolerable 
plenty j also Paris quadrifolia of unusual size, in a bog of limestone 
niud, kept wet by its floor of shale ; also Primula farinosa, Pingui- 
cula vulgaris.
Orchis ustulata, Stellaria nemorum of a very luxuriant 
form, and Polygonum viviparum.
The side valley of Ellerbeck, and 
its swamp, were also visited, and the refuse-heaps of the old lead- 
mines at this spot.
Here, as always, like groundsel in a garden, w r ere 
found on this debris of the mineral vein, Arenaria verna, with its 
crony, Thlaspi occitanum, and, what is not so usual, beds of thrift, 
covering a rood of ground, in perfect bloom — a marvel of beauty, 
with large flowers of every shade from palest pink to deepest rose.
Others of us accompanied the geologists to the summit of Penhill, 
gathering the tiny Hutchinsia, not yet out of flower, and observing 
the Parsley, Hard and Holly Ferns.
The more uncommon of the 
plants noted on this delightful excursion were, in addition to 
some already mentioned : — Aquilegia vulgaris, Trollius europceus, 
Draba incana, Saxifraga hypnoides, Menyanthes trifoliata, Hippo- 
crepis comosa, Rubus saxatilis, Rosa spinosissima, Rosa mollissima, 
Geum intermedium, Lithospermum officinale, Euonymus europceus, 
Lathrcza squamaria, Asplenium trichomanes, A.
ruta-muraria, 
A. viride, Allosorus crispus, Polystichum aatleatum, Selaginella 
selaginoides, Sesleria ccerulea, Melica nutans, M.
uniflora, B ramus 
erect us, Eriophorum vaginatum, E.
latifolium, Carex dioica, C muri- 
August 1893.
230 THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
cata, C.
prcecox, C.
panicea, C paludosa, C.
ampullacea, C* acuta, 
John 
JL 
Dear in Mr. John Percival's list : — Ranunculus hederaceus, 
JDoronicum pardalianches^ Humulus lupulus, Salix helix, and 
Bromus erectus.
Geranium phceum was reported as a well-established 
garden-escape at Carperby, by Miss Bradley.
For the Geological Section, in the absence of all its officers, 
Mr. J.
G. Goodchild, F.G.S., gave the report, and 
account is supplied by him : — 
the following 
The principal object of the Section on the occasion of this visit 
to Aysgarth, was to compare the development of the Lower Car- 
boniferous Rocks of Wensleydale with their equivalent strata in the 
dales to the north.
Without entering into details, for which 
reference should be made to the maps and memoirs published by 
the Geological Survey, the nature of the differences between the 
"rypes of rock prevailing in each of these areas may be gathered 
from the following outline of the geology of the district.
Wensleydale proper consists mainly of Lower Carboniferous 
rocks, which lie almost horizontally over the greater part of the area.
What inclination the strata may have over any part of the district is 
generally very small in amount (neglecting the areas around Carperby 
Scars) ; and may be said to be, in a general way, towards the North 
around Hawes, and towards the North-east in the district around 
Aysgarth.
The fall of the bed of the Yore from Hawes to Aysgarth 
keeps almost exact pace with the dip of the rocks ; so that nearly 
the same strata form the river-bed all the way from the village of 
Hardra to a mile or so below Redmire.
To the east of that point 
the rocks dip faster than the fall of the river-bed, so that successively 
higher strata descend to the Yore as it is followed towards the lower 
end of the dale.
The dale may be said to be carried mainly out of a great pile 
some fifteen hundred feet in thickness — of alternations of limestones, 
sandstones, and shales, together with chert beds and coal seams.
All these are of marine origin, and form the Yoredale Rocks of 
Professor Phillips.
This member of the Carboniferous Series can 
be traced without any important break, from Craven, through the 
north of England, into the basins of the Clyde and the Forth- 
Below the Yoredale Rocks, whose lowest limestone is that o( 
Hardra Fors, comes the Mountain Limestone, which is so well dis- 
played around Ingleborough.
In Wensleydale its uppermost beds 
and 
Here 
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AYSGARTH.
23 1 
some thin bands of shale, and with, at least, one band of sandstone.
This latter is seen north of Hawes, at West Burton below the Fors, 
and again at Redmire Fors.
It is the lowest stratum exposed any- 
where in the dale.
The shaly bands referred to as occurring in the 
overlying limestone give rise, by their unequal rate of weathering, 
compared with that of the limestone, to some of the more interesting 
waterfalls of the dale — Gale Fors, all three of the waterfalls at 
Aysgarth,* Abbey Fors at Askrigg, and West Burton Fors.
Above the Yoredale Rocks at one time occurred the whole of the 
Millstone Grit and the Coal Measures, amounting in the aggregate to 
many thousands of feet.
At the present day nearly all this vast pile 
has been carried away by denudation (acting at various periods in 
the past) ; so that now only fragments of the lowest members of the 
Millstone Grit survive, and occur as outliers capping the highest 
fells of the district.
A fine display of these Upper Carboniferous 
rocks is exposed on the summit of Pennel (or * Pen Hill ').
The chief lithological changes traceable amongst the Yoredale 
Rocks were studied in some detail on the ground.
Stated in general 
terms they may be said to be closely connected with the condition 
under which the rocks themselves were formed.
All through the 
Yoredale period (most especially during the formation of the lime- 
stones and cherts, less so through that of the coals and shales, and 
least through that of the sandstones), deep-water conditions prevailed 
over the area where Wensleydale now stands, while to the north-west 
of that part rivers, flowing south-eastward, were advancing their 
deltas towards the open sea.
Intermittent subsidences during the 
growth of the deltas periodically carried their newly-formed slopes 
of mud and sand north-westward as the sea-bottom sank, and in 
that way periodically superinduced deep-water conditions over areas 
that would otherwise have shallowed through the seaward advance 
of the deltas.
Thus towards the north-west of any given point in the dale delta 
materials, i.e., sandstones, shales, and coals, tend to come on in 
greater force ; while in the opposite direction, or towards the south- 
east, where deep-sea conditions predominated, such terrigenous 
deposits tend to thin away, while the orgamco-chemical deposits 
proper to clear water, that is to say, the calcareous and the siliceous 
strata, tend concurrently to maintain their thickness or even to 
increase.
As a necessary consequence the sandstones lessen in 
importance as they are followed towards the south-east, passing first 
local name of the chief fall is Esta 
ed* form of this older name.— J.
G.G.
Augug 
232 NOTES AND NEWS.
into shales, and these, by slow degrees, into shales more and more 
calcareous until, eventually, they pass into pure limestones.
This will serve to explain the predominance of deep-sea limestones 
over deposits of terrigenous origin as the Yoredale Rocks are 
followed from the north-west south-eastward.
It would also lead us 
to expect that, as these rocks tend south-eastward they would 
gradually 
Such appears 
to be the case, and, in this state, they have often been mistaken for 
the Mountain Limestone proper.
In the course of the excursion special attention was given to the 
demonstration of the foregoing principles by reference to facts visible 
in the field.
Amongst other geological phenomena noticed was the 
origin of secondary silica, of which several excellent examples were 
met with.
A demonstration upon this subject was ably given by 
Professor Percy F.
Kendall.
Another subject discussed in the 
presence of the facts was the evidence for the former existence of 
a rock-basin extending up the Yore from the upper falls at Aysgarth.
It was pointed out that the river has only within recent times, 
geologically speaking, cut its way through this rock -barrier at 
Aysgarth and thus drained the above-lying lake.
The subject of the 
:ars and terraces of limestone was also discussed in 
the field at some length, and it was shown that their present con- 
formation can only be explained on the view that they are due to 
glacial erosion.
Wensleydale 
formed the subject of an interesting discussion.
It was pointed out 
that all the drifts in this part of Wensleydale are of local origin ; that 
none of them are marine; and that the till, and the sand-and-gravel 
deposits, as well as the moraine-like deposits on the water-shed 
between the Yore and the Swale, are all of them mererly different 
forms of sediment left behind by the melting of the stony and muddy 
ice of the great ice-sheet.
A hearty vote of thanks to the Chairman then concluded the 
meeting.
— W.F.B.
^^^^^ 
NOTES AND NEWS.
On June 8th, a Cuckoo flew^ into the boiler works of Messrs.
Hawksley, 
Wild & Co., of Sheffield, where its strange surroundings and the unusual din so 
far upset its customary instinct of self-preservation that it would doubtless soon 
have paid, with its life, for its acquaintance with the industries of Sheffield, had 
it not been secured by one of the workmen.
Instead of putting it to flight again 
the workman was so pleased with his capture that he took it home.
The result 
was that the ubiquitous and wise police of the new city heard of it, and the 
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals summoned him before the 
magistrates for having in his possession a wild bird recentlv cauuht.
It would 
be 
ird to say which displayed the least sense— the Cuckoo for getting into its 
dangerous position or the Society for the Prevention of Crueltv to Animals for 
prosecuting 
Naturalist, 
2 33 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
ANNUAL MEETING AT HUDDERSFIELD.
The 31st Annual Meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, held 
at Huddersfield, on the 15th of November, was a most successful 
and interesting gathering, no pains having been spared by the 
Huddersfield Naturalists' Society and its members in their endeavours 
to promote the success of the meeting and the comfort and enjoy- 
ment of their fellow-members from other towns.
To this end they 
organised an extensive Exhibition of Natural History and Scientific 
Objects, in the Town Hall, which was open to members and visitors 
from 2 o'clock in the afternoon.
The occasion being that of the 
100th meeting of the Union since its re-organisation under the name 
it now bears, special attention was given to the illustration of York- 
shire natural history.
In Geology and Paleontology, Messrs.
Joseph Field and C H.
Bould had brought together a fine series of Collections of Fossils 
and Minerals typical of the Geology of the county, including 
a number of palaeolithic and neolithic flint implements.
Mr. S.
Learoyd, F.G.S., exhibited a beautiful collection of agates and other 
stones to illustrate 'Silica and Flint in Nature and Art;' and 
Mr. James Spencer, of Halifax, showed a large series of sections 
of Coal Plants and other geological slides, chiefly from the Car- 
boniferous formations.
The Botanical exhibits included a collection of rare Yorkshire 
plants, which Mr. T.
W. Woodhead had brought together with 
the assistance of Mr. P.
F. Lee, of Dewsbury, and Mr. Charles 
Crossland, of Halifax.
By the kindness of Mr. H.
T. Mennell, of 
Croydon, he was able to include the original record-specimens of 
some of the plants which were discovered in Upper Teesdale by 
Mr. James Backhouse and Mr. G.
S. Gibson.
A feature of great 
interest in this department was a series of memorial plants which 
had been named in honour of Yorkshire botanists, which Mr. Wood- 
head had been at some pains to bring together — accompanied by 
brief biographical notes, and by the portraits of the various 
botanists in whose honour the plants had been named.
There was a large and most interesting series of exhibits in 
Entomology.
Mr. Geo.
T. Porritt, F.L.S., showed the matchless 
series of Arctia mendica from Grimescar near Huddersfield, which 
^ere described and figured in the Entomological Society's Transac- 
tions for 1889; a ^ so some fine varieties of Arctia lubricipeda from 
August 1893.
234 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
York, and the very rare olive-banded form of Bombyx quercus from 
Crosland Moor, Huddersfield; fine melanic forms of Boarmia repan- 
data from Netherton Wood, Huddersfield, as well as fine Yorkshire 
series of Ypsipetes elutata, Cidaria russata, Hybernia progemmaria, 
etc., and an almost complete collection of the British 'Plume' Moths 
(Pterophori).
Mr. George Jackson, of York, showed some extra- 
ordinary varieties of Chelonia caja^ Arctia lubricipeda, and Abraxas 
grossulariata.
Mr. S.
L. Mosley, F.E.S., had numerous objects on 
view, including a selection of drawings of varieties of the species 
just referred to, a museum collection of British Butterflies, arranged 
on an entirely new plan and one calculated to be of the greatest 
scientific service to students, cases showing life-histories of insects in 
all orders, and his collection of British Galls and Gall Insects, the 
Yorkshire examples being specially indicated.
He also exhibited 
a complete collection of British Injurious Insects, prepared 
for the Museum of Economic Entomology at Melbourne; and 
numerous cases prepared for educational purposes.
In Conchology, Mr. Joseph Whitwham's remarkably extensive 
collection of British land and freshwater shells, in which the York- 
shire examples were specially marked, made a brave show, his varied 
and extensive series of Anodontce and Uniones being particularly fine- 
j 
j 
j 
bringing together a remarkably interesting series of cases of British 
birds, their nests and eggs, special care being taken to represent 
them as far as possible by Yorkshire examples.
A large number of microscopes, objects, and accessory apparatus 
W 
J 
Messrs.
W. H.
Charlesworth, W.
F. Piggott, H.
G. Brierley, and 
others contributed stereoscopes and a number of interesting slides 
relating to the geology of Yorkshire, Old and New Huddersfield, 
and other subjects.
Demonstrations with the oxy-hydrogen microscope were given by 
Mr. W.
Tunstall 
Mr. A.
Clarke, the energetic Secretary of the Huddersfield 
Naturalists' Society, was in charge of a powerful oxy-hydrogen lime- 
lantern, 
number 
Dr. H.
C. Sorby, F.R.S., as well as a series of portraits of all the 
Presidents of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, and other distin- 
guished Yorkshire naturalists referred to in the Presidential adc 
Naturalist* 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
235 
The exhibition remained open throughout the afternoon and 
evening, and was a source of interest and gratification to large num- 
bers of members and visitors.
The business meetings began at 3 p.m., when the Sections met 
and elected their officers for 1893.
At 3.30 the General Committee met for the despatch of business.
There was a large attendance of members and delegates, and the 
chair was occupied by Dr. H.
C. Sorby, F.R.S., an ex-President.
The annual report was then read by Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., 
one of the Honorary Secretaries.
At the outset it referred to the 
year having been one of the most successful the Union has ever had, 
but pointed out that ampler funds and a considerably enlarged 
membership were needed to enable the Union to expedite the 
publication of MS.
in hand.
The meetings were then referred to in 
detail, after which it was mentioned that the number of Societies in 
the Union remained the same as in the previous year, that the 
number of members was also unchanged, remaining at 462, and that 
the total number of members and associates was 2,518, an increase 
of 30.
The financial position of the Union and the various publica- 
tions it has issued during the year were then treated of.
Reference 
was next made to the Library, the Sections, the Committees of 
Research, and the British Association.
The report concluded with 
a suitable reference to the services which Mr. Charles P.
Hobkirk, 
F.L.S., the retiring President, had rendered the Union, of which he 
was one of the oldest members, and mentioned that he was to be 
succeeded in that office by so distinguished an ornithologist and 
traveller as Mr. Henry Seebohm, a native of Sheffield.
The reports 
having been discussed and unanimously adopted, the excursion 
programme for 1893 was agreed upon, as follows : 
May 22nd, Whit Monday — Aysgarth.
June 15th, Thursday — Askern.
July 10th, Monday — Kirkby Moorside.
Aug. 7th, Bank Holiday Monday— Sawley Abbey.
Sep. 6th and 7th, Wednesday and Thursday— Howden (Fungus Foray and 
Excursion).
It was decided to hold the next Annual Meeting at Skipton, on 
Tuesday, November 14th, 1893, in response to a cordial invitation 
from the Craven Naturalists' Association, presented by Messrs.
R. H.
Tidderaan, M.A., F.G.S., and J, J.
Wilkinson.
The election of officers was then proceeded with.
The retiring 
honorary secretaries, honorary librarian, and executive were all 
re-elected.
The Committees of Research were also re-elected, with 
J. W.
Stather and F.
F. Walton 
August 1893.
236 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION — ANNUAL MEETING.
added to the Boulder Committee ; Mr. Tom Petch, B.A., to the 
Marine Zoology Committee ; and Mr. J.
F. Robinson to the 
Disappearance of Plants Committee.
The Hon. Local Treasurers 
were re-elected with various additions and substitutions.
Mr. Edwin 
Hawkesworth was elected auditor ; and Messrs.
H. H.
Corbett, 
R. Paver Crow, J.P., John Gardner, F.E.S., George Jackson, 
Henry Johnson, R.
E. Leach, M.A., F.G.S., Rev. H.
E. Maddock, 
M.A., F.G.S., Thomas Mitchelson, W.
Y. Veitch, M.D., and 
Charles Waterfall were added to the list of permanent members of 
the General Committee.
The following were elected new members of the Union : — Messrs.
John Hill, Morley ; Edward Peake, M.A., Settle; Tom Petch, B.A., 
Hedon ; E.
G. Potter, York ; Albert Rothery, Liversedge.
Discussion then took place as to the inadequacy of funds for the 
publication of the matter which the Union has in hand for publica- 
tion, and a resolution agreed to on the motion of Mr. J.
W. Addyman, 
B.A.
(on behalf of Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S.), seconded by 
Mr. S.
Chadwick, F.G.S., in favour of a very large addition to the 
membership being secured, and requesting the Executive to devise 
measures to that end.
The question of the desirability of the establishment by Govern- 
ment of Fish Hatcheries was introduced by Mr. E.
Howarth, F.R.A.S., 
on whose motion, seconded by Mr. A.
T. Watson, it was unanimously 
resolved that ' in the opinion of this meeting, the establishment by 
Government of Marine Laboratories and Fish Hatcheries would be 
advantageous to the Fisheries of the United Kingdom.
The Sections then by their spokesmen announced the names of 
the officers they had elected, after which the proceedings terminated.
A substantial tea was partaken of in the Mayor's Reception 
Rooms, Mr. A.
W. Sykes being the caterer.
In the evening the members assembled in the large hall of the 
Town Hall for the delivery of the Annual Presidential Address.
The chair was occupied by Mr. George T.
Porritt, F.L.S., in the 
absence of Mr. S.
Learoyd, F.G.S., who had been announced to pre- 
side.
The Presidential Address, written by Mr. Charles P.
Hobkirk.
F.L.S., whose unavoidable absence was a great disappointment to the 
members, was then read by Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, F.L.S., one of the 
Secretaries.
The address dealt with the history and methods of work 
of the Union, on the occasion of its completing a series of one hun- 
dred meetings since its re-organisation.
At the conclusion a cordial 
vote of thanks to the President for his address and to Mr. Waite for 
reading it, was adopted on the motion of Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A., 
seconded by Mr. Benjamin Holgate, F.G.S. A similar vote of thanks 
Naturalist, 
NOTES AND NEWS.
237 
to the Huddersfield Naturalists' Society for their most hospitable 
reception of the Union was proposed in a humorous speech by Rev.
E. Maule Cole, M.A., F.G.S., seconded by Mr. John Gerrard, and 
having been enthusiastically received, acknowledged by Mr. T.
W. 
Woodhead, the President of the Huddersfield Society.
A vote of 
thanks to Mr. Porritt for presiding was adopted on the motion of 
Dr. H.
C. Sorby, F.R.S., seconded by Mr. J.
W. Robson, Chairman 
of the Huddersfield School Board, and concluded a series of meetings 
which for their success and interest have been unsurpassed in the 
Union's history.
— W.D.R.
NOTES AND NEWS.
We take the opportunity of renewing our friendly protest against a common 
practice of some local societies, that of altering the pagination of 'author's 
copies,' and frequently omitting the actual date of publication.
This often 
renders the separate copies useless for reference or for bibliographical purposes.
A notable feature of the Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club is the giving of 
prizes for excellency in the various departments.
It appears, upon looking 
through the proceedings for 1892, that at each excursion a description of some 
chosen plant is given to the members, for which plant they are expected to search ; 
having found it, it must be named and handed to the botanical referee.
The 
most successful competitors during the season are awarded prizes of various value 
in books.
These ' Botanical Enigmas ' are apparently quite a feature of the 
society.
This is doubtless a good way of teaching botany, but the principle is not 
one which will, in our opinion, be imitated by many naturalists' clubs.
For the 
first time in their history our Liverpool friends publish an entomological record of 
the district.
We welcome this, as we also should any further development ; for 
the society at present seems to be little more than botanical.
We are indebted to Mr. Herbert Spencer for a reprint of his essay upon ' The 
Inadequacy of Natural Selection,' which appeared in the 'Contemporary Review* 
for February and March last ; as this essay has, as might be expected, roused 
some opposition, a few words with regard to it will be of interest.
At the outset 
Mr. Spencer chooses to bring forward some of Weber's experiments on the sense of 
touch, and asks the meaning of the varying powers of tactual discriminativeness 
in the human body, and what is the cause which has established these differences.
Taking the view as implied by the title, our veteran biologist endeavours at 
great length to prove that natural selection is not and could not be the cause.
If 
we were to assert a frank denial of this it would be necessary to go far into 
detail ; but whilst we will not do so, we must take some objection to the using of 
the experiments in question as being unsatisfactory.
Mr. Spencer admits that the 
superior perceptiveness of the fore-finger tip may be accounted for by the survival 
of the fittest, and after an unprejudiced perusal of his article we fail to see why 
this admission may not be extended to other surfaces.
We have much sympathy 
with an article by Mr. W.
P. Ball in the May number of 'Natural Science," in 
which, under the heading of Natural Selection and Lamarckism, he challenges 
many of Mr. Spencer's suppositions.
We have not space to enter into the details 
of this conflict, but can assure those of our readers who have not already 
acquainted themselves with Spencer's latest, that they have something to ain by 
so doing.
Perhaps (for the sake of those who would be misled by the title) we 
should note that Mr. Spencer states that the essay, rather than being directed 
against the views of Darwin, is in fact quite the reverse.
This may be so.
Darwin has been very much misunderstood in time past, and we doubt not that 
many of his seeming dissenters are in reality not so far removed in opinion as 
they would appear to be.
August 1803.
2 3 8 
THE PROTECTION OF WILD BIRDS 1 EGGS 
Rev. E.
P. KNUBLEY, M.A., M.B.O.U., 
Rector of Stave ley, Chairman and Convener of the Yorkshire Naturalists Unions Wild 
Birds' Eggs Committee.
In presenting the report of the Committee appointed to discuss the 
advisability or not of providing protection for the eggs of wild birds 
by legislative enactment, it may be well to state at the outset that 
at present certain birds are protected by a close time in the nesting 
season, during which it is illegal to kill them, but that this protection 
does not extend to their eggs.
The eggs, in fact, of every kind of 
wild bird, whether common or uncommon, useful or otherwise, are 
liable to be destroyed through thoughtless carelessness, wanton 
mischief or sordid greed.
At present there is nothing to prevent whole areas from being 
systematically plundered of every egg of every bird — and it is done.
Again, certain of our British birds nest in colonies in a few known 
localities; and as the law now stands there is nothing to hinder the 
taking of the eggs of these birds to such an extent as to prevent the 
hatching of a single young bird.
It requires no prophet to foretell 
what will be the result of this system of pillage if it is allowed to 
proceed unchecked.
The question has been asked — Has the time come when legis- 
lative protection is required for wild birds' eggs?
A committee of the 
British Association was appointed at its Cardiff meeting, with 
a view to inquiring into this subject; but it has not yet felt itself in 
a position to make any recommendations.
The committee, which 
includes the names of Professor Newton and Canon Tristram, was 
re-appointed at the Edinburgh Meeting ; and it is hoped that next 
year it may feel in a position to offer suggestions on this extremely 
difficult subject.
A committee of the Yorkshire Naturalists 5 Union with similar 
objects was appointed at the annual meeting last year.
No meetings 
have been held, but the Chairman addressed a letter to each member 
of the committee, and from the replies received from these and 
other members of the Union, he obtained much valuable information, 
and many useful suggestions.
Fortified with the matter thus placed 
at his disposal, he, as delegate of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 
was able to bring this important subject before the Edinburgh 
meeting of the British Association at the conference of the delegates 
of the corresponding societies, and, after a most interesting discussion, 
the following resolution, proposed by Mr. Knubley, seconded by 
Mr. E.
B. Poulton, and supported by Canon Tristram, was carried 
unanimously : 
Naturalist 
THE PROTECTION OF WILD BIRDS' EGGS.
239 
The Conference of Delegates, having heard of the threatened extermination of 
certain birds, as British breeding species, through the destruction of their eggs, 
deprecates the encouragement given to dealers by collectors through their demands 
for British-taken eggs, and trusts that the corresponding societies will do all that 
lies in their power to interest and influence naturalists, landowners and others in 
the preservation of such birds and their eggs.
All will agree that if legislative protection for wild birds' eggs is 
asked for at all, it is not required for all species.
Indeed, sweeping 
legislation would do more harm than good.
There are certain groups, 
such for instance, as the Passeres, that are very well able to take care 
of themselves, and need no protection.
Again, all will agree that it 
would be a mistake to pass laws which could not be enforced.
Any 
general law against egg-collecting would be easily evaded, and every 
one knows the demoralising effect of an unenforced rule.
Setting aside, then, all idea of a general prohibition of egg- 
collecting as impracticable, if not mischievous, there are still cases in 
which the maintenance of the present freedom from restraint appears 
to be open to doubt ; as we have already stated, there are certain 
species which will shortly become extinct as breeders in the British 
Isles if steps are not taken by legislation or otherwise to protect 
them.
What can be done for these ?
Here the difficulties begin.
What form of protection is the bestl 
and to what species should such protection be extended ?
If it is 
eventually found necessary to have recourse to legislation, the most 
practical plan would probably be for the Imperial Legislature to 
grant powers to the County Councils from time to time, and as the 
necessity arose, to place certain portions of a district, such as 
mountains, commons, waste places, lakes, and meres, or portions of 
cliffs or foreshores, under an Act for certain specified months in the 
year, say from April 1st to June 30th.
Such a plan would be simple 
and might be effective.
But very much more than any legislative protection, we want the 
sympathy and co-operation of landowners and occupiers in order to 
get them to protect the birds breeding on their property or occupa- 
tion.
The whole matter of the preservation both of birds and their 
e ggs ought to be better managed by those on whose property the 
various species nest than by any legislative restrictions.
If land- 
owners and occupiers, game-preservers and gamekeepers, would 
only use whatever brains and common sense Providence may have 
endowed them with, and learn to discriminate between friends and 
foes, we lovers of birds for their own sake should not have much to 
complain of.
Farmers are beginning to know at last that all birds 
are not their enemies, and ideas of the same sort are working slowly 
into the brains of some few gamekeepers, and into those of a good 
Augtist 1893.
240 REVIEW — UNITED STATES HAWKS AND OWLS.
number of their masters, so that the aspect of affairs is becoming 
more hopeful.
The question is too delicate and difficult a one to be 
lightly thrown into the arena of party politics, and it is earnestly to 
be hoped that means may be found for the protection and preserva- 
tion, when necessary, of our wild birds and their eggs without 
having recourse to further legislation.
UNITED STATES HAWKS AND OWLS.
The Hawks and Owls of the United States in their Relation to 
Agriculture.
A. K.
Fisher, M.D., U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Bulletin No. 3.
1893.
To publish a lengthy article on the misunderstood habits of 
rapacious birds would, if it were likely to come under the observa- 
tion of farmers and gamekeepers, give us an immense amount of 
satisfaction ; we hail therefore with pleasure the appearance of this 
excellent monograph, and cannot do more than hope that it will 
have a large distribution throughout the area of which it treats ; if 
so, something at least will be done towards checking the wholesale 
slaughter of these beautiful birds.
The work which we now notice was compiled several years 
ago, but has been withheld from publication until provision could 
be made for suitable reproduction of the coloured plates, which, 
we may add, are a feature of the book, and without them its 
usefulness would have been much impaired.
We find there are so many as 73 species and sub-species of 
Hawks and Owls (many of which are solely American) recorded for 
the district.
Some few, however, are identical with species in our own 
and adjoining countries.
The Osprey (Pandion haliaetus), which we 
learn has quite recently been seen in co.
Cork, appears to resemble 
very closely the American Osprey, of which an illustrations given.
It is clearly stated that out of this large number, only six may be 
classed as being positively harmful to the farmer, and of these three 
are so extremely rare that they need not be considered ; whilst one 
(the Fish Hawk) is only indirectly injurious; so that only two 
species need be taken into account as enemies to agriculture.
Tables 
are given showing the result of critical examination by scientific 
experts of several hundreds of stomachs, and the author concludes 
that these birds, commonly looked upon by farmers as enemies, are 
in fact the reverse.
Dr. Fisher says : ' Owls are the most beneficial 
of all birds, and Hawks, with one or two exceptions, are to some 
extent beneficial.' The work is a valuable addition to ornithological 
literature, and we consider it almost impossible to over-estimate the 
ood it must do.
— L.
H. 
Naturalist* 
24 1 
YORKSHIRE GALLS: 
ADDITIONAL SPECIES AND NEW LOCALITIES 
S. L.
MOSLEY, F.E.S., 
Eg&s.
Since my last list ('Naturalist/ 1892, p.
337), the long-expected 
fourth volume of Cameron's 'Phytophagous Hymenoptera' has 
appeared, and though certainly a very welcome volume, I must own 
to just a little disappointment- Still, it will be very useful as bringing 
up to date what the author has been able to gather on the subject.
From my own observations, and material forwarded to me by 
correspondents in various parts of Yorkshire, I am able to give 
a few more species, and some additional localities for some of those 
already recorded.
As before, I take them under the plants in 
alphabetical order.
On Acer campestre.
Maple.
Small scarlet pimples on upper-side of leaf.
Caused by a mite 
(Phytoptus myriadeum).
For a long time I have been on 
the look-out for this gall in Yorkshire, feeling sure it should 
occur.
I have never found it, however, until June 15th, 
when I found it abundantly in a lane not far from Askern.
Messrs* Parkin, Gerrard, and Greenwood were with me at 
the time.
Some of the leaves were quite covered with galls- 
ptarmica* Sneezewort 
vague 
Mr 
ptarmica in the Huddersfield district.
I found a number of 
galled plants at Farnley Hey, and Mr. Parkin gave me 
a quantity found by him in Ryhill Pits near Wakefield, from 
a 
The flower- 
head is galled into a solid pinkish hairy knob, with a flattish 
top ; almost unrecognisable as the flower-head of Achillea 
ptarmica* 
Alnus glutinosa.
Alder.
Bladder-like swellings, standing up 1-4 lines from the upper 
surface of the leaf.
These are caused by a mite ; I believe 
Cephaloneon pustulatum Bremi.
I found it in great abund- 
Owston Wood during the Askern excursion ; and 
I have since met with it freely in Anston Stones.
Mr. J.
W. 
Carter, of Bradford, had previously given me specimens, 
ance in 
from Seven Arches, I think !
August 1893.
Q 
242 NOTES AND NEWS.
On Hieracium boreale.
Large swelling on flower-stalk, caused by a hymenopteron (Aulax 
hieracii).
The Rev. John Haweli sent me this gall from 
Little Broughton, near Middlesbrough.
On Quercus robur.
Oak.
Small pea gall on under-side of leaf, attached to side ribs, hard, 
with two cavities, caused by a hymenopteron (Dryophanta 
disticha).
Cameron gives no localities for this gall, and states 
that it is 'rare,' but it is now in great abundance in Butternab 
Wood, near Huddersfield.
I should state, however, that 
I have never met with it there before this season.
On Rosa canina.
Dog Rose.
I believe the galls referred to in my last paper as being found at 
Shepley were not those of Rhodites rosarum as stated.
According to Cameron's figure the spines in my specimens 
were not long enough for that species, and were, more 
probably, merely the spined form of JR.
eglanterzce.
On Potentilla tormentilla.
Tormentil.
Small pea-like galls on stems, singly or in clusters.
Caused by 
a hymenopteron (Xestophanes brevitarszs).
I have found 
what is probably this species at Lepton, near Huddersfield, 
but as I have not reared the flies I cannot be absolutely 
certain .
I will again take the liberty of reminding readers of the 
1 Naturalist ' that I shall be pleased to receive any excrescences on 
plants, especially if they do not seem to agree with the descriptions 
given in the three papers I have written on ' Yorkshire Galls/ 
Botanists are always examining plants, and must frequently come 
across galls, and could add very much to our knowledge if they 
would kindly pick them up when found.
NOTES AND NEWS.
We have received the Report and Transactions of the Manchester Microscopical 
Society, and cannot refrain from making special mention of this successful 
institution.
During the thirteen years it has been established valuable work has 
been done, and each succeeding year marks a step in the right direction.
The 
value of the Transactions for 1892 cannot, we consider, be over-estimated.
Two 
addresses have been given by the President (Professor Milnes Marshall), which 
speak much for his interest in the Society.
Amongst other papers we take 
special interest in the resume of the Biological Course, and as the issue contains 
a photo of the worthy President, a catalogue of books in the library, and several 
plates illustrative of the text, it cannot but be of exceeding value, especially to the 
250 members of which the Society is composed.
Naturalist.
243 
SPECIMEN DAYS ON THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
Rev. W.
C. HEY, M.A., M.C.S.
Vice-President of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, West Ay ton, near Scarborough 
Scarborough, Oct 29th, 1891.
On the Castle Hill— The 
wind is east; a little blue sky appears in rifts among woolly grey 
clouds, which are silvered in the neighbourhood of the sun.
The 
clearness is extraordinary.
Flamborough Head appears, not in 
misty outline, but as a long, sharp range of grey precipices.
The 
Lighthouse and Speeton Mill stand up in clear definition.
Filey 
Bay seems narrowed to a mere creek.
Sunshine falling on fields far 
away reveals them in the most vivid yellow greens.
The distant 
moors appear, not, as commonly, blue, but red -brown, and all the 
nabs are clear-cut against the sky.
The slopes of the Castle Hill 
are green with young leaves of Alexanders {Smyrnium olusatrum).
No British plant shows fresher verdure in winter.
This fine weather 
has wooed many daisies into bloom.
An hour has passed and I have reached the topmost stile on the 
way to Ayton.
From here I look into the water in Filey Bay, and 
have a glorious view of the whole headland in the hard clear air.
Sunshine lies on the faded stubbles near Filey Cliffs ; the healthy 
scent of burning weeds sifts by, and the drowsy hum of a thresher 
comes from the hollow below.
Under the withered larches a woman 
is gathering blackberries.
Scarborough, July 9th, 1891.
— I am sitting on the low stone 
wall near the Cliff Bridge.
Grey clouds have overspread all the 
sky, and given their sombre colours to the sea and to the sands and 
the cliffs.
Even the green slopes of the Castle Hill and the red 
roofs below are almost merged in one general tint.
A strong north- 
east wind drives the breakers in many orders against the cliffs ; and 
now and then sends a puff of dust along the road, and flaps the 
flags on the boat-masts in the harbour.
Under the lighthouse are 
steam-traw 
marked 
quickly away.
sands, smoothing out footprints and cart-ruts and hoof-dints.
Oh, 
that the marks of sin and care could thus be smoothed out of 
human souls !
As I write, I am startled by a passing figure, going by absolutely 
noiselessly, because bare-footed.
I am struck by the thought that 
the footfall is quite a modern sound.
We often read of the Indian's 
stealthy tread.
Thoreau compares it to the flow of a still river- 
August 1893.
244 HEY: SPECIMEN DAYS ON THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
But every unbooted foot is necessarily stealthy, because soundless.
How strangely silent the communities of primitive people must have 
been — no meaning there for the line in Tennyson's elegy for 
Wellington 
Let the feet of those he fought for 
Echo round his bones for evermore.
Filey, Sep. 8th, 1891.
— The day rose with gloom and drizzle, 
but it has now established itself as warm and still, with a sky whose 
blue ground colour is figured and strewn thickly with white and 
grey clouds 
The sky is a gossamer web 
Of sapphire and pearl and grey.
Here, by Filey caves, a faint breeze blows from the water, and the 
horizon of the blue sea is merged in vapour with the sky.
An idle 
swell rises upon the rock-ledges, and the wave runs back in white 
waterfalls which have caused a little white foam to float on the 
and outline the contour of the cliffs.
These cliffs rise in 
surface 
rph 
wards, bare layers of grey and white rock.
On these lie coarse 
gravels, and above steep slopes of boulder -clay crowned with 
verdant turf.
In the echoing basin below me the rising tide is 
gradually making a louder and louder sound of rushing.
The sun 
is growing brighter, and a fresher wind is carrying a brown-sailed 
yawl beyond the Naze.
Behind me the sea is noisy about a piece 
of cliff, which the rummaging waves have perforated.
A larger 
wave has just smitten the rock with a great boom, and the scattered 
spray fallen back with a loud splash.
Sep. 1 2th, 1891.
— Waiting at Filey Station for the evening tram 
to Scarborough.
The sun, a glowing, red 
a purple-copper haze.
Some trees, still in full foliage, stand out 
black against the brightness beyond.
The half-moon hangs above 
The 
growm 
their pallor contrasts 
strongly with the dark hedges, and the brown and 
rounded 
Muston 
dark against the sky.
A cool south-easterly breeze blows refresh- 
ment in my face.
Redcar, Feb. 20th, 1889.
— A strong north-west wind is blowing, 
but here, under the wall at the east end of Redcar, it is warm and 
delightful; for a bright sun bathes me, body and spirit, and the 
wind gives but gentle puffs in ray face now and then.
I am sitting 
Natun t 
HEY : SPECIMEN DAYS ON THE YORKSHIRE COAST.
245 
upon one of those planks on feet, made to assist people to get into 
boats, and about me lie half-a-dozen big cobbles, bearing their 
numbers and the letters M.H.
(Middlesborough Harbour) — there on 
my right, and on my left two worn-out boats, turned bottom upwards, 
waiting decay and death ; like poor old folks, who, being no longer 
able to work, are pushed on one side to die.
Between the stern of the upturned boat and the curving prow of 
another, spread undulations of grass-grown sand ; sun here, and shade 
there ; beyond them the smooth beach, crossed by a pearly thread, 
the course of a streamlet to the sea, then a long white fringe of foam 
and breaking waves, and pale blue sea above them.
In the distance 
rises Huntcliff, and the gigantic spectre of RockclifT, with the mere 
wraith of Staithes Point beyond.
The sky is a very light blue, 
with soft white stratus clouds, tinged with pale dove grey.
A skylark 
is pouring out its flood of song as though it were singing against 
time, and many other birds are twittering.
The sea is failing fast, 
and at my left its surface is streaked with two long ribs of snow- 
white foam, where East Scar and Salt Scar project.
On my right 
I see Upleatham Hill, palely grey, with the white smoke-puff of 
a passing train in front 
Flamborough Head, Sept 16th, 1890.
— I have walked along 
the cliffs from the North Sea Landing, over dewy sheep pastures, 
and descended to the shore at Selwicks.
The sun is bright, but 
a soft haze broods upon the far-off sea, and hangs like a veil before 
the face of the great white cliffs.
The wind blows from the south- 
east, and there is a noisy turbid sea.
I have reached a dark gullet 
full of thick water, smacking its lips under the shelving rocks.
But 
a dim light falls on the water from within, for this gullet is the 
entrance to a great roofless cave or creux — the ' Pigeon Hole * 
a gruesome pit to look into from above when the waves are seething 
and raging in its dark hollow — a veritable devil's caldron.
Flamborough, Sept 19th, 1890,— I am resting on the top of 
the slope that rises between the Thornwick Bays — resting in the 
setting sun.
I have come over the downy fields, where the sheep 
were busily feeding, their grey fleeces blown back in the evening 
wind, and past the sighing soughing beds of reeds, and have sat 
down to listen to the quiet blue sea whispering his low tale to the 
white cliffs.
But they distrust him, and abate not a whit of their 
niggedness for all the smooth fondness of the caressing wavelets.
Their shattered rocks and pierced sides tell what the sea hath done 
to them, and these two will never be friends again.
Upon the 
August 1893.
246 NOTES — ORNITHOLOGY.
opposite cliff, two pink blooms of thrift have opened, like some 
sweet memory of earlier and happier days.
Burlington, Sept 21st, 1889.
— I am sitting on a chalky hedge- 
bank on the road-side from Burlington to Speeton, in a hot 
sunshine, with a tall hedge between me and the singing north-west 
wind.
I look on two old friends, the six-sailed windmill and the 
Priory Church, dark against the sun-gilt sea.
All about me is life ; 
many flies of many kinds, beetles running in the sunshine, Ancho- 
menus prasinus in his green coat, faced with orange, and shining 
black Pterostichi, bright as polished jet.
Euphrasia opens a hundred 
pale violet eyes to the sun, harebells depend their blue cups, and 
a thousand dried stalks of Gcntiana amarella tell of former beauty, 
just a scattering of amethystine blooms remaining, the wrecks of 
a great flower-feast.
A long-legged spider scuds over the path ; an 
empty corn wagon goes by, carrying a crowd of singing urchins.
Well may they sing in the glorious sunshine, which makes this old 
world new, and sheds heaven upon earth.
NOTES— ORNITHOLOGY.
Birds added to Sheffield Museum.— We have just added to the Sheffield 
Museum the following birds found in the area included in the cognisance of * The 
Naturalist' : — Two Red-throated Divers {Colymbus septentrionalis) shot at Flam- 
borough, 1890 ; one Crested Grebe (Podkeps cristatus) shot at Flamborough, 
1892; one Crested Grebe shot at Torksey, Lincolnshire, 1892 ; one Little Grebe 
or Dabchick (Podiceps minor) shot at Norton Hammer Dam, Derbyshire, 1892.
E. Howarth, Curator, Public Museum, Weston Park, Sheffield, July nth, 1893.
Nesting of the Hawfinch in Notts,— The Hawfinch (Coccoihraustes 
vulgaris) is fairly common in this district, and in the last spring I have been 
looking far and wide for its nest, but unsuccessfully ; and now I find all this time 
there has been one within almost a stone's-cast of the room in which I am now 
writing.
The young, four in number, got off the last week in June, a rather 
late date, and since this, along with the parents, have been particularly attentive 
to our pea rows.
From closely watching them, however, I can testify that the 
injury they have done the crop is trifling as compared with that inflicted by the 
common Sparrow.
The character of the Hawfinch may be summed up in three 
words— shy, sly, and silent.— John Cordeaux, Eaton Hall, Retford, 3rd July, 
1893.
Fertility of the Meadow Pipit in the North.
—Having lately found 
17 nests of Anthus pratensis on the Norwegian fells, I give the number of eggs 
found in them, showing an average of 5*53 eggs per nest.
Three nests with seven eggs each.
Seven „ six „ 
Four ,, five „ 
Two ,, four „ 
One „ three eggs.
In every case the bird was flushed from the nest, which indeed led to their being 
found.
In the last case the bird would doubtless have laid more than three eggs.
All the eggs were found in June.
In Norway the Meadow Pipit as a rule nests 
only on the fells, not on low grounds as in England, though on one occasion 
I found a nest near Stavanger less than 200 feet above the sea.
— John r.
Thomasson, Woodside, Bolton, July 3rd, 1893.
Natural^' 
247 
LAKE COUNTRY ROCKS: MICROSCOPICALLY 
DESCRIBED.
THOMAS TATE, F.G.S., 
Leeds : Hon, Sec. to the Yorkshire Boulder Cotnmittee.
The identification of the crystalline constituents of Eruptive Rocks 
by their optical behaviour when in thin sections under the microscope, 
is extremely simple.
Each mineral, in virtue of its structure and 
composition, possesses characteristic optical properties by which it 
may be recognised 
By transmitted light they appear either colourless, coloured or 
opaque.
The coloured minerals may next be examined with the 
polariser only, when some will pass from light to dark tints as the 
prism is rotated (pleochroic), while others will remain unaffected 
(non-dichroic).
If the analyser be now added, those minerals which 
depolarise will give more or less brilliant chromatic effects as the 
polariser is rotated (anisotropic), while others will show no colour 
changes, merely remaining dark between crossed Nicols (isotropic).
The commonest colourless sections are those of quartz, felspars, 
leucite, nepheline, enstatite, olivine, apatite; and these are all 
anisotropic save leucite, which is dark between crossed prisms, and 
apatite, which usually continues bright.
Muscovite, biotite, horn- 
blende and ferruginous enstatite are dichroic and anisotropic, while 
augite and diallage are non-dichroic but anisotropic, and all are 
coloured by transmitted light.
Magnetite and pyrites are both 
opaque, but, viewed by reflected light, the former is of a leaden and 
the latter of a brassy hue.
The most abundant alteration products are chlorites, serpentines, 
calcite and opaque iron ores.
The two former are green, only the 
first is pleochroic ; calcite is colourless, traversed by fine cleavage 
lines intersecting at an acute angle, and giving iridescent polarisation.
The following descriptions, the result of the examination of over 
one hundred and twenty specially prepared slides, were drawn up 
primarily for those members of the Yorkshire Boulder Committee who 
possessed slides of such Lake District Rocks as are most commonly 
dispersed in the Northern Drift.
They have also, it is said, been of 
some service to the members of the writer's penological class.
In 
response to the wishes of both they are now willingly placed, in a 
ore accessible form, at the service of other petrographical students.
[40]* Biotite granite; Shap.
Quartz in round or irregular 
grains, idiomorphic towards the felspars.
Plagioclase and orthoaase 
* The number of each slide given in brackets refers to the rock specimen in 
the collection of the Boulder Committee, from which it was cut, for which see 
' Naturalist/ August 1892.
August 1893.
tut 
248 TATE: LAKE COUNTRY ROCKS.
It 
act as a matrix for the quartz, strings of felspars lying between the 
quartz grains.
Mica, dark brown in hexagonal basal plates : light 
brown tints where the cleavage traces are nearly at right angles to 
the short axis of the polariser.
In sections making a smaller angle 
with the polariser the tint will be darker.
Green mica (pleochroic) 
alternating with the above occasionally.
Apatite : hexagonal prisms 
abundant, the clear, bright crystals in the biotite are cross-sections 
1 
which rotated between crossed Nicols remain dark ; also in stumpy 
and a few fine prisms with parallel extinction.
Zircon, a few small 
prisms with obtuse pyramids.
Sphene, cuneate brown-olive (pleo- 
chroic), also in granular patches.
Granules of magnetite accompany 
the green mica.
[7] White prophyritic granite : Skiddaw.
Felspars white, turbid 
(examine by reflected light).
Orthoclase : note c schiller ' fibrillation.
Oligoclase giving Carlsbad and albite twining.
Mica red-brown to 
pale honey yellow, with some green and even colourless from loss of 
iron, now gathered up, forming secondary magnetite grains.
Quartz 
(with numerous moving bubbles), in clear tints, rainbow margins, 
allotriomorphic, filling the interstices between the above constituents.
* 
Apatite as small square or rod-like prisms : highly refractive but 
colourless; first evolved and therefore present in all the other 
components.
Epidote after felspar and biotite where these are in 
contact : colourless, with brilliant polar tints.
Chlorite (green) after 
biotite here and there.
[29] Biotite granite : Eskdale.
Quartz in irregular grains 
enclosed by the felspar which sometimes penetrates them : multitude 
of minute cavities arranged in linear symmetry : note 'strain-shadows/ 
between crossed Nicols.
Felspars kaolinised (giving   aggregate 
polarisation '), and a chloritoid substance, feebly pleochroic along 
cracks.
Orthoclase, Carlsbad, and olegoclase with albite twinnin 
Biotite dark brown to honey-yellow and green to colourless 
(pleochroic) : basal sections hexagonal, isotropic : prisms across 
cleavage traces much bent Apatite in six-sided cross-sections, clear, 
colourless and highly refractive (pitted).
Epidote is a secondary 
constituent where biotite and felspar lie in contact : it is colourless 
by ordinary light but polarises in brilliant tints.
Magnetite in 
scattered grains.
[33] Aplite : a fine-grained vein intrusive in Eskdale granite 
at Waberthwaite.
Micropegmatitic : the felspars are chiefly 
orthoclase with oligoclase in part, and microcline.
Quartz in clear 
granules (save for the very minute pores) precedes the felspars by 
which it is surrounded.
A little green biotite ; and a few ^ rnets 
(anisotropic).
Naturalist, 
TATE : LAKE COUNTRY ROCKS.
249 
[2 2aJ Quartz-Felsite (grey): Threlkeld Quarry.
Porphyritic 
crystals of quartz and felspar in a microcrystalline intergrowth of 
the same minerals.
The large quartz crystals have been fractured, 
and have had their edges fused, this zoning extinguishing uniformly 
with the body of the crystal They contain enclosures in linear 
symmetry.
Mica brown, strongly pleochroic : or in patches of 
chloritoid substance with feeble pleochroism.
The felspathic com- 
ponents are kaolinised giving feeble aggregate polarisation.
[22^] Quartz-Felsite (red) : Low Rigg, St. John's Vale.
A microcrystalline ground-mass, consisting of rectangular grains of 
clear quartz with felspars ; mostly of prismatic habit, moulded thereon.
The porphyritic elements in this slide are all felspars, being chiefly 
orthoclase with a few oligoclase crystals often zoned.
Microperthite 
structure shown here : many are fractured, the fragments lying in 
juxtaposition indicating movement during recurrent phase prior to 
final consolidation.
[20] Augite granophyre : Carrock Fell.
A granophyric ground- 
mass moulded upon microporphyritic crystals of felspar mostly 
plagioclase in square sections.
The orthoclase crystals extinguish 
simultaneously with the surrounding micropegmatite.
Quartz in 
small allotriomorphic grains.
Brown augite at one time figured as an 
important constituent ; it is now represented chiefly by iron-oxide 
blotches with here and there a patch or small crystal zoned by iron- 
oxide.
Epidote in pale green patches feebly pleochroic, but double 
refraction stronger than the pyroxenes.
Note the pseudosphaerulitic 
structure giving black cross when rotated between crossed Nicols.
[8] Quartz Felsite : Armboth Dyke.
A granophyric structure 
an intimate mixture of quartz and felspar — the ground-mass pseudo- 
sphserulitic, giving a black cross between crossed Nicols.
This 
encloses a few crystals of felspar and quartz.
Mica in brown flakes 
and green (pleochroic) or colourless (bleached).
Garnets minute, 
bright with strong outlines (isotropic).
The section is plentifully 
besprinkled with slender spindles of a pale green non-pleochroic 
substance which remains dark between crossed Nicols.
Sphene 
brown, feebly dichroic, enclosed in the quartz.
Kaolin after felspar.
Compare with slide 34.
[34] Quartz Felsite : Helvellvn Dyke.
Porphyritic crystals of 
quartz, felspar, and biatite in a microfelsitic matrix, here and there 
feebly pseudosphserulitic.
Quartz, clear ; numerous minute cavities 
with moving bubbles; also enclosing portions of the matrix.
Felspars both orthoclase and plagioclase in large crystals, one showing 
microperthite structure.
Biotite mostly green, a little brown.
Apatite a very little, and a few minute garnets (isotropic).
By 
August 1893.
I 1 
25O TATE: LAKE COUNTRY ROCKS.
reflected light, note that the red colour of the hand specimen is due 
to the action of the iron-oxides upon the kaolinised felspars.
Compare with slide 8.
[4] Buttermere ' syenite': Scale Force.
Cut from a flesh- 
coloured specimen of medium granitic texture.
A granular intergrowth 
of quartz and felspar, the latter predominating as matrix and often 
penetrating the former.
Quartz with sharp rectangular outlines 
impressed on the interstitial pellucid crystals, the latter extinguishing 
uniformly in patches over wide areas.
Microperthite structure of 
felspar predominating.
' Large patches have more or less the aspect 
of porphyritic constituents as if a considerable amount of felspar 
substance had first separated as distinct crystals and then the 
remainder of the felspar substance had intercrystallised with quartz 
to form the matrix' (Teall).
Ferromagnesian component after 
hornblende plates is now in a chloritoid state giving feeble pleochroic 
effects.
Iron oxides (haematite, magnetite, limonite) accompany 
the above secondary products.
Examine by reflected light and 
compare with slide 4a.
[40] Granophyre (Rosenbusch) : Ennerdale.
Slide cut from 
a sombre fine-grained specimen.
A granophyric intergrowth of 
quartz and felspar is here beautifully exhibited, the two minerals 
polarising in uniform tints over a greater part of the slide.
A radial 
grouping is common with occasionally central strongly polarising 
grains.
The ferromagnesian component is scattered uniformly 
throughout the slide in small crystals of green hornblende, a few of 
which are still fresh and strongly pleochroic, but for the most part 
represented by a chloritoid substance with but feeble action on 
polarised light; associated with this are a few specks of reddish- 
brown somewhat translucent ilmenite, powdered over with silvery 
leucoxene (best observed by reflected light), and also by a few 
grains of magnetite.
Apatite is plentiful, enclosed in the hornblende, 
but elsewhere it is a little difficult of identification and needs to be 
carefully sought for.
Compare slide 4.
[16].
Porphyritic diabase: Eycott Hill.
Plagiodase crystals 
(labradorite) in large tabular plates, showing Carlsbad and also 
albite twinning, frequently encroaching upon each other, but never 
interfered with by the remaining components; are porphyritically 
developed in a vesicular ground-mass, consisting mainly of iron 
oxides with numerous small lath-shaped twinned felspars and a sap- 
green dichroic ferriferous fibrous mineral replacing a rhombic pyroxene.
[19].
Quartz Gabbro : CarrockFell.
Plagiodase in rectangular 
plates (some very clear, others kaolinised), with quartz filling up all 
the interstices.
Diallage of a pale reddish-brown tint, ophiticjn 
Naturalist, 
NOTES: COLEOPTERA AND MOLLUSCA.
25 1 
relation to the smaller prisms of felspar.
Magnetite and chlorite 
after diallage.
Apatite doubtfully present.
[18].
Gabbro : Carrock Fell.
These plutonic representatives 
of the Andesitic lavas show considerable variation in texture- The 
plagiodase is much more kaolinised, and the slide generally less 
fresh than the preceding slide 19, with which it must be compared.
The specimen was obtained nearer to Clifton Ward's 'Trap' than 
No. 19.
The diallage is replaced to some extent by a green rhombic 
pyroxene, and magnetite plates are very abundant.
Quartz is less 
plentiful in this slide, micro-pegmatite here and there taking its 
place.
Apatite, as small hexagonal sections, is present in the 
magnetite and elsewhere.
[3a].
Diabase (altered Dolerite) : Castle Head, Keswick.
An 
example of a much-altered fine-grained dolerite.
The plagiodase is 
very turbid ; augite often plentifully twinned ; biotite brown ; iron- 
oxides in brown cubes.
Quartz, chlorites serpentinous pseudomorphs 
as secondary products.
[5].
Chiastolite slate ; Sinen Gill, Skiddaw.
This slide con- 
tains numerous transverse and longitudinal sections of chiastolite 
prisms embedded in a fossiliferous slate, consisting of black and 
white mica flakes, grains of quartz and iron-oxides, arranged in the 
parallelism characteristic of cleaved slate.
The opaque matter 
occupying the centre of the chiastolite prisms is carbonaceous.
NOTE— COLEOPTERA.
Lathrobium rufipenne in Lincolnshire.— Last Whit Monday, May 22nd, 
while working for Coleoptera, in the neighbourhood of Brigg, on the banks of 
the Ancholme, early in the afternoon, I found a couple of specimens of the very 
rare Lathrobium rufipenne GylL, on the mud, sheltering from the rays of the 
then very powerful sun.
This beetle does not appear to have been taken in this 
district before, the records given for it by Rev. Canon Fowler in his c Coleoptera 
of the British Islands * being as follows :— * Very rare ; Homing Fen and other 
kn localities ; Coleshill, Sutton Park, Knowle, Bewdley Forest, and Cannock 
Chase ; Barton Moss, Manchester, in sphagnum ; Stretford and Staiy Brushes, 
Cheshire.'— Joseph Coe, Hull, July 24th, 1893.
NOTE— MOLLUSCA.
A variety of Limnaa palustris.— On the 15th of June, Mr. J.
E. Crowther, 
of Eliand, whilst searching for shells at Shirley Pool, the home of the large 
Spearwort (Ranunculus lingua)^ found a specimen of Limnaa palustris, with 
markings resembling the vzr.piaa of Limmea peregra.
The bands are seven in 
number, but only commence on reaching the body whorl, and would convey the 
idea that the mantle of the animal had suffered some injury.
The shell is only 
a small one, but looks very pretty with its unusual markings.
— Wm. Nelson, 
Crossgates , July 5th, 1893.
August 1893.
252 
NEWTON'S DICTIONARY OF BIRDS.
A | Dictionary of Birds | by | Alfred Newton | assisted by | Hans 
Gadow I with contributions from | Richard Lydekker, B.A., F.G.S., 
Charles S.
Roy, M.A., F.R.S.
| and | Robert W.
Shufeldt, M.D.
| 
(late United States Army).
| Part I.
| (A.-GA.) | London : | Adam and 
Charles Black.
| 1893.
The   Dictionary of Birds ' has long been looked for by 
ornithologists, and we think Professor Newton has exercised a 
wise discretion in deciding to commence issuing it at once and 
in four parts, the first of which (A.-GA.) has already appeared, 
and the second is to appear in October.
The work is mainly based on articles contributed by the 
author to the Ninth Edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica, but 
with large additions by himself and the other scientists named on 
the title page.
Of these additions the most important are the 
anatomical papers by Dr. Gadow, which now supply a source of 
information which has long been greatly needed, and, so far, has 
not been made available in a handy form for students and others 
who wish to study ornithology scientifically.
Of not less value, 
too, in their respective lines are the articles contributed by 
Mr. Lydekker, Professor Roy, and Dr. Shufeldt.
Of Professor Newton's own contributions it would be impossible 
to speak too highly.
There are occasions when all praise may be 
considered superfluous, and this is one of them.
Where all is good 
it seems needless to draw attention to special portions.
The notices 
of the   Bustard,' < Capercally,' < Cuckow/ ' Dodo,' 'Eagle/ and the 
chapters headed   Eggs,'   Extermination,' will each be found to 
contain much which is of practical value and interest, including in a 
condensed form all the information up to date required by the 
student ; each subject being dealt with in a masterly and most 
scholarly manner, and on strictly scientific lines.
The usefulness and beauty of the work are much enhanced by 
electrotypes taken from the woodcuts which illustrate Swainson's 
1 Classification of Birds,' also from other sources which have been 
duly acknowledged by the author.
Taken as a whole we consider that no such excellent and useful 
work, on its special subject, has appeared in this century, and we 
are sure that the possession of the first part must create a strong 
desire to see the remainder.
When completed it will be found a 
most welcome and indispensable addition to the working library of 
the scientific ornithologist as well as a book of reference giving 
equal facilities to those who have hitherto had little acquaintance 
with the subject.
— J.
C. 
Naturalist, 
253 
FORMATION OF A 
LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
A meeting of Lincolnshire naturalists was held at Mablethorpe on 
June 1 2th for the double purpose of investigating the natural history 
capabilities of the district and of forming a Lincolnshire Naturalists > 
Union similar to the one in Yorkshire.
Several naturalists, anxious not only to be on the spot early on the 
Monday morning, but also desirous of instituting a more thorough 
search than could be done in the short space of time at disposal on 
the actual day of the excursion, arrived on Saturday, and were well 
accommodated at the ' Book-in-Hand ' Hotel.
The weather was certainly not all that could be desired, for the 
sun persistently refused to show its face, and a cold wind blew in 
from the sea, rendering 'great catches/ for entomologists at any 
rate, out of the question, while at times a few drops of rain fell; yet, 
despite this forbidding aspect of the weather, by eleven o'clock about 
thirty naturalists from all parts of Lincolnshire, and a few from 
Yorkshire, had assembled at the station and proceeded by rail to 
Theddlethorpe, then working along by the drain-sides to the coast, 
where they spread over the sand-hills and beach, some very 
interesting captures being soon reported.
The Rev, C W.
Whistler 
found a Natterjack Toad nestling in its burrow, and w r hen it was 
1 unearthed/ its peculiar gait, so different from that of the common 
toad, excited considerable attention, and shortly afterwards Mr. Mason 
found another one.
On the Samphire beds, just north of Theddle- 
thorpe, the burrows of two species of Bledius were very conspicuous^ 
and there must have been many millions of these beetles there, for as 
far as the eye could see their ' casts ?
were plainly visible.
In 
addition to the pefect insect, both eggs and larvse were also obtained* 
The ornithologists had been particularly energetic and had 
extended their investigations as far as Saltfleetby, and were perhaps 
more successful than any other section.
The time at disposal was, however, very short, and by three 
o'clock most of the excursionists had found their way back to 
Mablethorpe to the ' Book-in-Hand/ where they did ample justice to 
a most liberally provided luncheon, after which a general meeting 
was held, at which Professor L.
C. Miall, F.R.S., presided.
Letters 
were received from Rev. G.
D. Ash, Rev. W.
Fowler, M.A.
{Liver- 
sedge), Rev. H.
A. Barker, Mr. Wm.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., and 
others regretting their inability to be present.
The chairman, in his 
opening speech, remarked that their little ramble that morning had 
shown them how great were the facilities in Lincolnshire for the study 
August 1893.
254 FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
of natural history, and what a fair prospect was opened out for the 
formation of a Lincolnshire Naturalists' Union, for the county of 
Lincoln had peculiar features of its own which could not be excelled, 
if equalled, by any other county.
Mr. F.
M. Burton, F.L.S., F.G.S., then formally proposed that 
a Lincolnshire Naturalists' Union be formed, and Rev. Canon W.
W. 
Fowler, M.A., seconded, and Rev. E.
A. W.
Peacock supported, the 
proposition.
This was unanimously carried, and Mr. John Cordeaux, 
M.B.O.U., then proposed that the Lincolnshire members present 
form a provisional committee with Mr. Walter F.
Baker as secretary.
Mr. F.
Arnold Lees seconded, and the motion was carried.
The Rev. Canon W.
W. Fowler, M.A., F.L.S., then proposed that 
a hearty vote of thanks be accorded to the originators of this excursion, 
Mr. Walter F.
Baker, Mr. Joseph Coe, and Mr. J.
Larder, and this 
was duly seconded and carried.
A vote of thanks to the chairman 
concluded the meeting.
It had been intended to hold sectional meetings, but time bein 
so short it was decided to have the reports sent in in writing, and the 
following have been received : 
For the geologists, Mr. F.
M. Burton, F.L.S., F.G.S., reports as 
follows :— Although, in the way of investigation, the locality chosen 
for the excursion could not, from its very nature, be favourable to 
Geology — the whole of the land for miles round being covered by 
peat and silt — yet a flat sandy shore, like that at Mablethorpe, has 
many points of interest for the geological student, as well as for 
the biologist and botanist.
The boulder clay of the great glacial 
age lies under these alluvial deposits, and, in a disused brick-pit at 
Theddlethorpe St. Helens, where this clay until lately was worked 
and in which a good sized boulder was lying — part of an old 
Roman Bank is exposed.
[See note appended to this report kindly 
communicated by the Rev. C.
W. Whistler, the Vicar of West 
Theddlethorpe.] The chief interest attaching to this district, so far 
as geology is concerned, lies in the question — What comes under 
the boulder clay?
— and good work may be done by any geologist, 
or naturalist, who will take the trouble to investigate any wells, or 
borings, with a view to its discovery.
Only recently, at a meeting of the Geological Society of London, 
on the 24th May last, in a paper on some recent borings at Alford, 
Willoughby, and Skegness, Mr. Jukes Browne disclosed the existence 
of an unsuspected anticlinal axis, bringing up Lower Cretaceous 
rocks beneath the drift ; and a good field for discovery, by similar 
investigations, lies open to those on the spot, who are willing to 
undertake them.
Naturalist 
FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
255 
A low flat sea-shore like that of Mablethorpe, with its unrivalled 
stretch of sands, is always a matter of interest to the geologist, as, 
from it can be traced the origin of many similar strata in past ages.
The ripple marks and water runnels in the sands have their counter- 
parts in the Yorkshire flagstones, the thin shales of the Keuper, and 
other deposits of a like nature; and the way in which these are 
produced can only be arrived at, and verified, by the study of 
similar actions at the present time.
In some places, particularly near the mud-flats of Saltfleet, on 
turning up the soil, numerous well-defined laminations of alternate 
sand and mud were met with.
These are caused by the occasional 
overflowing of the sea, charged with mud and silt, forming a layer, 
which is again covered over by the blown up sand ; while, in other 
places, the difficulties in pronouncing strata to be of marine or 
terrestrial origin, were well exemplified in the fact of finding some 
Three-spined Sticklebacks (Gasterosteus spinulosus\ which are fond of 
brackish water, lying dead in the dried-up channels and mud-holes, 
mixed up with crabs, zoophytes, ray's egg-cases, land, freshwater, 
and marine shells, and countless thousands of the little shore-loving 
mollusc (Assiminea grayana), which abounds on the fitties at Clee- 
thorpes, and is met with generally in the salt-marshes of our eastern 
coasts.
And now a word about the high banks of sand running 
all along the coast, and the mode of their formation.
These 
banks, begun by the hand of man and increased by the action 
of the wind, present a feature which adds much to the quiet 
gray beauty of the scenery.
The w r ay in which this increase is 
effected may be seen any day when a strong wind is blowing towards 
the land.
At such times the dry sand is in motion, and rushes in 
clouds, with a stinging effect, towards the barrier, helping to pile it 
^p, and covering in its course every pebble, waif, and shell ; each 
obstacle with its long drawn talus of sand away from the wind's 
direction 
As 
can 
no hand in this.
The sea is always a leveller, and if the tides were 
high enough, and strong enough, it would sweep away the refuge of 
undermining its base 
become 
Thorn {Hippoph 
Maram 
foliage, Elymits arenarius — the Icelanders' substitute for corn — and 
other 
drifting uo of the sand 
become 
so 
August 1893.
256 FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
far, at all events, as any force is concerned which so narrow and 
shallow a sea as the German Ocean can bring against it.
These 
are some of the geological lessons to be learned from a walk 
along a shore like that of Mablethorpe ; and a study of the different 
sand-marks, tracks, and worm-casts ; the thrown-up fragments of 
wood, shells, and other waifs of the sea, will go far to the 
correct reading and mode of deposit of similar ancient tidal shores, 
long done in stone — whether, for instance, they have been deposited 
on a quiet or rough coast ; whether any rivers or streams flowed 
through them, bringing the products of the land to mingle with those 
of the sea ; or whether the region has been influenced by ice, in 
which case, as at Mablethorpe, stones and shells from higher latitudes 
will be met with ; and in solving many a questionable appearance 
which the student without such knowledge is very apt to mistake.
Mr. Whistler's note is as follows : 
The Roman bank is part of the great earthwork which runs the whole length 
of the Lindsey Marsh from Boston to Saltfleet, and I think still north again.
A long stretch from Boston to Wainfleet is used as roadway, and, I am told, 
was metalled by the Romans themselves.
It is so used again for about a mile at 
Saltfleet.
A great deal of the bank has been carted on to the fields about here to 
improve sandy land.
My Churchwarden, a farmer of 72, remembers well when 
there were no sand-hills over, or on this side of, the Roman bank {it is under 
the sand at Mablethorpe and below the Mablethorpe brick-field), and the sea line 
at that date was much nearer the Roman bank.
He worked all one Sunday, 
with every available cart and man, at repairing a gap made in the bank by a 
heavy gale, some 60 years ago.
This gives the date of the present sand-hills as 
not more than 50 years ago.
They have increased rapidly seawards during my 
five years here.
The botanists were well represented, the following gentlemen 
being present :— Dr. Thrimbleby, Rev. E.
A. Woodruffe-Peacock, 
F. Arnold Lees, Messrs.
J. Larder, B.
Crow, and A.
R. Yeoman.
The Rev. E.
A. W.
Peacock writes that the following flowering 
plants were observed on the sand-hills in the three parishes of 
Theddlethorpe All Saints', St. Helen, and Mablethorpe.
Ranunculus circinatus Sibth.
Ranunculus sceleratus L.
Ranunculus trichophyllus Chair.
Both the large and small 
flowered type.
Aquilegia vulgaris L.
An escape, without doubt.
Nuphar luteum Sm. In Theddlethorpe All Saints' ditches, perhaps 
var.
minor Syme.
Papaver Rhoeas L.
P. dubium L.
P. argemone L.
Curiously enough P.
somniferum L., both vars.
of which grow 
here, was not observed on this occasion.
Naturalist, 
FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION.
257 
Lychnis vespertina Sibth.
Cerastium arvense L.
Arenaria serpyllifolia L.
Arenaria peploides L 
Geranium pratense L.
In railway ballast at Theddlethorpe 
Station.
Malva rotundifolia L.
Erodium cicutarium LHerit., var.
triviale Jord.
and also Bab.
First record for county of Lincoln (F.A.L.).
Trifolium scabrum.
Potentilla reptans L.
Rosa rubiginosa L.
Myriophyllum spicatum L.
About Theddlethorpe All Saints.
Conium maculatum L.
Aoii 
m 
um 
verum 
Valeriana dioica L Erigeron acre L.
Matricaria parthenium L.
Doubtfully wild ?
Carduus nutans L.
Crepis virens L.
Lactuca virosa L.
Sonchus asper Hoffm.
Tragopogon minor Fries.
(The only var, found in Lincolnshire 
I believe.— E.A.W.-P.) 
Armeria maritima Willd.
Lysimachia nummularia L 
Glaux maritima L.
At Theddlethorpe All Saints.
Samolus valerandi L.
Cynoglossum officinale L.
Lycopsis arvensis L.
Myosotis versicolor Reich.
Echium vulgare L.
Solanum dulcamara L.
Veronica anagallis L Rhinanthus minor Ehrh.
Plantago maritima L Plantago coronopus L.
e portulacoides L Hippophae rhamnoides 
viridis Fries.
(F.A.L).
Salix viminalis L (F.< 
Salix 
Orchis incarnata L.
At Theddlethorpe All Saints.
A very fine and 
luxuriant specimen, almost thirty inches high, with three large 
flowers.
Allium compactum Thuill.
at Theddlethorpe St. Helens, and at 
Mablethorpe.
First record for var.
for county of Lincoln.
Triglochin palustre L.
At Theddlethorpe All Saints.
Triglochin maritimum L 
Zannichellia pedicellata Fries.
Firstrecord for North Lincolnshire.
Carex arenaria L.
Phleum arenarium L.
Psamma arenaria R.
& S.
Sept.
1893.
258 FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
Festuca rubra L.
So Mr. Arthur Barnett named a specimen from 
Skegness for me, but I cannot help thinking that it is the 
F. rubra L., i.e., F arenaria Osb.
; but it was not creeping 
as far as I observed.
This is a first record for county of Lincoln 
in any case.
Unfortunately I lost my specimens.
— -E.A.W.-P.
Elymus arenarius L.
The plants which I find, from theevidence of my 'Locality Register/ 
to be common to all parts of the county I have not noticed in this 
list.
Specimens of most of the rarer ones were taken from the County 
Herbarium, which, along with the thousands of notes in my i Locality 
Register/ are always at the service of working naturalists.
This 
list, considering the short time at the disposal of the botanists, is 
a very creditable one j for they were deprived for two-thirds of their 
walk of the great knowledge of Mr. F.
A. Lees, who arrived by 
a later train.
The following entomologists were present : — Professor L.
C. Miall, 
F.R.S., Rev. W.
W. Fowler, M.
A., F.E.S., and Messrs.
T. Gelsthorpe, 
W. F.
Baker, J.
Coe, and E.
J. Slater.
For the Lepidoptera, the only thing worthy of note was the 
enormous quantity of the larvae of the Cinnabar Moth (Euchelta 
jacobcece), all the shrubs and plants on the sand-hills literally swarming 
with them.
For the Coleoptera, the Rev. Canon W.
W. Fowler reports that 
the weather was extremely unfavourable, as a strong and cold 
east wind was blowing, and very few therefore were observed, 
the best being Bledius bicorm's, which, to judge by the casts 
thrown up considerably below high-water mark, was very abundant ; 
Bledius arenarius was also found and a single specimen of 
Dyschirius thoracicus ; Anomala frischii also occurred on the sand- 
hills, with a few ordinary Dromii, Homalotm, etc.
; these with Stenus 
guttula, Hydroporus assimilis, and H.
depressus^ and a few common 
Bembidia made up the list of captures.
Cynoglossum officinale (the 
Common Hound's Tongue) was in bloom, and very plentiful, but did 
not yield a single beetle, although one certainly might have expected 
to get a few Centhorhynchus asperifoliarum.
For Conchology, Mr. F.
W. Fierke, M.C.S., the Rev. C W.
Whistler, M.R.C.S., and Mr. F.
M. Burton collected, the first-named 
giving the following report : — 
The investigation of a new district has invariably a healthful 
influence over the mind of a naturalist, inasmuch as it provides him 
with material for useful comparative work.
It must be confessed 
it was owing to such selfish motive, as well as a desire to do anything 
Naturalist* 
FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION.
259 
in our power in promoting the furtherance of the natural history- 
activities of the county of Lincoln, that we were induced to leave the 
Yorkshire side of the ' muddy ' Humber, and to attend the meeting of 
Lincolnshire naturalists at Mablethorpe.
The time at our disposal 
was short, for we only reached Mablethorpe about 1 1 a.m., and, by the 
time we had arrived at Saltfleetby, the place at which operations 
practically commenced, it was nearly noon.
Taking a rough bird's-eye view, the district presented a striking 
resemblance to many parts of Holderness, a flat-lying country, with 
numerous dykes and drains intersecting each other.
Such at any 
rate, were the distinguishing features of our route between Saltfleetby 
Station and the sand-dunes of the coast.
It was, however, soon 
made plain that the drainage system of the district was not designed 
to serve agricultural interests to such an extent as appears to be the 
case in Holderness.
The frequent cleansing of the drains seriously 
interferes with the development of the mollusca inhabiting them.
At Saltfleetby there were manifest indications of the dykes having 
been left undisturbed for some time past, which had favoured the 
growth of Physa fontinalis to the average length of half-an-inch, and 
to an unusual development of that elegantly formed shell Bythinia 
leachii, which in some few instances had been such as almost to 
rival in size its clumsy-looking relative, B.
tentaculata.
Both species 
were exceedingly abundant; in fact, the pectinibranchiate mollusca 
were uncommonly well represented in the dykes of the route.
A short distance from the coast we halted by the bank-side of a wide 
drain which had an average depth of about eighteen inches of water, 
a light sandy bottom, and contained very little vegetation.
It was 
not difficult soon to distinguish grovelling at the bottom, the heavy 
form of Viviparus contectus.
On the other side of the road one 
more gill-breathing mollusc occurred plentifully on a species of 
Enteromorpha which covers the surface of the water.
This was 
Valvata crista fa.
With the exception of the locality where Viviparus was taken 
there was, everywhere over the route, a luxuriant growth of aquatic 
vegetation ; in places the surface was covered with Lemna trisu/ai, 
the less generally distributed Z.
gibba, and here and there the unmis- 
takeable reniform-shaped leaves of the frogbit {Hydrocharis morsus- 
rance).
The uppermost whorls of the shell of Limmea stagnates 
were occasionally to be observed as the animal would be struggling 
in the mass of weeds from which it seemed to be endeavouring to 
extricate itself, and some well-developed specimens of Limncza 
peregra were dotted over the surface of the vegetation, a by no 
means uncommon habit of this ubiquitous species.
Sept.
1893.
260 FORMATION OF A LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS 7 UNION.
An examination of the water-weeds and caddis-cases requires 
time and patience, but the trouble so expended has often its reward.
The caddis-cases particularly form a very profitable study; the 
curious animal which you will invariably find in them is a veritable 
conchologist, for it collects the shells of the pond or dyke and glues 
them together, forming for itself an almost invulnerable stronghold 
in which it resides.
It was to one of these cases we were unquestion- 
ably indebted for directing our attention to a more careful sorting of 
the water-weeds for that rare freshwater mollusc Segmentina nitida 
(Mull.), of which we afterwards obtained several living specimens.
Lastly, in regard to the aquatic molluscs, we observed several 
instances of abnormal development.
Planorbis umbilicatus, which is 
particularly common near Saltfleetby, appears to affect in many 
specimens a very striking swollen character near the mouth of the 
shell.
One specimen of this species exhibited a very odd shape; 
the shell had apparently received some injury at one time, resulting 
in the interference of the growth of the whorls on the normal plane, 
A specimen of P.
vortex was taken with the whorls very much 
disjointed, giving the shell a distinct conical appearance.
In both 
cases the shells contained the living animal, which remained perfectly 
lively and well in the jars of water in which they were placed for 
subsequent observation.
The 
Pisidium 
pusillum, Sphcerium corneum, Valvata cristata, Bythinia leachii T 
B. tentaculata, Viviparus contectus, Limmea palustris, Z.
stagnalis f 
Z. peregra* Physa fontinalis, Planorbis conlortus, P.
comeus, P- 
umbilicatitSj P.
carinatus, P.
vortex, and Segmentina nitida.
The weather had been much too dry to have made search for 
terrestrial mollusca successful, even had we had time on our hands 
to have done so.
The Rev. C.
W. Whistler had succeeded in obtaining 
a specimen of Hyalinia fulva, and on the previous day Mr. J.
Coe 
(Hull) collected on the coast near Mablethorpe the shells of Helix 
aspersa var.
exalbida.
H. caperata was noticed on the coast, 
broken shells of Helix nemoralis were fairly abundant on the sand- 
dunes, where they appear to have met their unhappy fate through 
The 
tribe 
John 
J 
following as a list 
ing days, with special notes on some of the species : — 
Thrush.
Corn Bunting.
Red-legged Pai 
Blackbird.
Yellow Hammer.
Stockdove.
Wheatear.
Reed Bunting.
Corncrake.
Whinchat.
Meadow Pipit.
Ringed Plover.
Naturali 
-MIGRATORY BIRDS IN THE TRENT VALLEY.
261 
Stonechat.
Lark.
Sanderling.
Whitethroat.
Cuckoo.
Dunlin.
Sedgewarbler.
Kestrel.
Redshank.
Linnet.
Wild Duck (Anas boschas).
Notes on the above : — 
Thrush.
Numbers frequent the sand-hills for the snails, which 
supply a source of food both in the summer and winter.
Wheatear.
Several seen, and two broods along with the old birds, 
the one north and the other immediately south of Saltfleet 
Haven.
Stonechat.
Several pairs, also young, but chiefly confined to the 
land side of sand-hills — both this and the Whinchat frequent 
the sands, searching for small flies in the ridge of seaweed 
brought in with the tide.
Lark.
An extremely pale sand-coloured variety seen in one of the 
warrens.
Stockdove.
Several pairs, and nesting in the rabbit-burrows or the 
warrens.
Ringed Plover.
Both the greater and the smaller race were seen, 
the former evidently nesting on the coast.
Sanderling".
Two seen in company with one of the smaller race of 
Dunlin, in summer plumage, and one of the small Ringed Plover.
June 1 2th is a late date for the Sanderling, a species which ought 
at this time to be at its nesting quarters within the Arctic Circle.
I drove close past these little birds and observed that the neck 
and upper breast were closely spotted with brown, as in summer, 
but the upper parts were mainly ash-grey, as in winter.
Redshank.
About five pair near Saltfleet, where they were 
evidently nesting.
With regard to the other branches of natural history only casual 
notes were made.
A small Pike was obtained in one of the drains, 
also two species of Newts, the Frog, the Common Toad, the 
Natterjack Toad, and one of the false scorpions, Chelifer degeeriu 
The Polecat appears to be common in the district.
— W« F.
Baker.
NOTE— ORNITHOLOGY.
Migratory Birds in the Trent Valley.— Wednesday, 9th August, was 
a hot day with a strong wind from the east and north-east.
At nine o'clock in 
the evening the wind dropped and lightning commenced.
A few hours later 
a thunderstorm was raging, which lasted with short intervals till 8 a.m. Several 
times during the night and notably at about 3 a.m. I heard large flocks of waders 
passing overhead to the south-west.
Though we were only on the verge of the 
storm the lightning was something terrific, flashes occurring every few seconds.
The travelling birds seemed to be much alarmed, continually crying out as they 
passed overhead.
As far as I could make out the docks consisted of Whimhrels 
(Numenius ph<?c is) and Knots ( Tringa canutus)^ but probably other species were 
present.— F.
B. Whitlock, Beeston,' Notts, Augu nth, 1893.
Sept.
1893.
262 
THE STUDY OF DIATOMS.
An Introduction | to the Study of the | Diatomaceae, | By j Frederick Wm.
Mills, F.R.M.S., | .
. | .
. | with a | Bibliography, | by Julien Deby, 
F.R.M.S. I — I London: | Iliffe & Son, .
. | .
. | .
. | 1893.
8vo.
xii + 243 pages.
This little work is modestly styled an ' Introduction p by its author, 
and it is truly such, being very elementary in nature.
Of the 240 pp.
comprising the text, the work proper only occupies 77 pp., the 
remainder, pp.
78-240, being the Bibliography of Mr. Julien Deby.
With limited space at our disposal, we can but glance at the salient 
points of the work.
On p.
3 we are informed that Diatoms c have 
been known to survive nearly a quarter of a century in their natural 
element,* etc.
; this quoted instance of c longevity ' omits the 
important fact that in that long period there must have been many 
cycles of generations — each of comparatively brief existence.
In 
chapter ii.
the structure, internal and external, of these lovely little 
organisms is but cursorily treated ; and, in lieu of information on 
the chemistry of the endochrome, references only are given, and 
those to authors inaccessible to ordinary British readers.
The third 
chapter, on the movements of Diatoms, is very fairly rendered, and 
the quotations well chosen.
The fourth chapter gives a classification, 
based upon that of Prof.
H. L.
Smith (one of the few American 
authors whom it is safe to follow !), which will be found very useful 
for reference by any student.
With respect to the modes of repro- 
duction, it 'goes without saying' that the dicta of the illustrious 
DeBary represent practically all that is known.
Many diatomists 
will, however, not accept the new-fangled term Zygosperm as a sub- 
stitute for the older word Zygospore — and the mass of practical 
workers will object to the conclusions quoted from Dr. Dallinger.
These are so important that we cite them.
He says, pp.
39-4°?
1 binary sub-division cannot take place in genera with unequal valves, 
as it is universally acknowledged that the two new valves which are 
formed in the process of binary sub-division must stereotype them- 
selves on the old valves ?
— this is exactly what does not take place !
A very distinguished observer writes to us, * the young valves never 
stereotype themselves on the parent valves ....
they are 
unquestionably developed within the parent valves.' The use of the 
word i stereotype* by Dr. Dallinger appears to be a lapsus calami, 
as, if anything approaching a stereotyping occurred in vegetative 
self-division, the markings would also ' stereotype ' themselves.
On 
this our friend writes, ' both the markings and the external forms do 
not acquire their perfect structure until each has emerged from its 
parent valve, .
* .
and why each young valve then, and not 
before, completes its structural adornments, is more than 
Naturalist, 
THE STUDY OF DIATOMS.
263 
I shall ever know ' !
Again, Dr. Dallinger says (respecting 
binary sub-division), 'this process cannot take place in those 
genera in which axes cross one another like Campylodiscus, 
or in those in which the two valves, although equal, yet constantly 
unite in such a way that the similar parts alternate with one another, 
as may be seen in Asierolampra?
Once more ' a slip of the pen ' !
1 the valves of no diatom-frustules, except those developed from the 
sporangial brood, have equal valves, i.e., valves of exactly the same 
dimensions — and every diatom subdivides in the usual fashion, 
whether its axes do or do not cross each other/ With the remarks 
of the veteran observer, whom we quote, we can but entirely agree; 
and would refer any one who was curious on these points to such 
memoirs as O.
Muller, on Melosira (Orthosia) armaria] or Wallich, 
on the relation between the development, reproduction, and markings 
of the JDiatomacece.
On page 41 the word 'thallus' is correctly 
used in its pristine sense, but it is worthy of remark that the term 
'stipes' is more usually employed to denote the long or short, 
granular or hyaline, pedicels or branchlets, on which are borne the 
stipitate (not stipate) species : in English books the word thallus 
is usually taken to denote the irregular fibro-mucous masses, 
or branching quasi-fronds, in which many of these forms live em- 
bedded.
The notes upon mounting, especially 'in situ,' are hardly 
satisfactory.
No varnished cells (asphalt, ' coachmaker's-black', or 
1 black-japan,') should be used unless they have been gently baked, 
to harden them.
To mix benzol with gold-size is superfluous ; but, 
when closing the cell, in wet mounts, both the top of the ring and 
the edge of the cover-glass should be lightly touched with the gold- 
size; this makes the 'joint' doubly secure.
An excellent medium 
for fluid mounts is distilled water impregnated with a little camphor, 
creosote, or carbolic acid — we agree with Mr. Mills that in water alone 
these objects will soon decompose.
No mention is made of the 
methods of mounting the frustules in Canada-balsam, mono- 
bromide of naphthaline, etc., while the wonderfully concocted 
* nostrum ' devised by Mr. E.
M. Nelson is given in extenso \ Among 
matters connected with apparatus it seems an oversight that the name 
of Ross & Co. should be omitted ; and among lamps the ' Bockett- 
lamp' of Collins surely might have found a place?
On objectives 
one remark is noteworthy, viz., that it is not advisable to use 
a higher power than a -^ in.
; this is sound sense, and we advise its 
consideration by the followers of 'twenty-fifths and fiftieths' — as all 
the best work has been performed with comparatively low powers.
The chapter on Photography will repay perusal by the dilettante 
care 
Sept.
1893.
264 NOTES *.
BOTANY.
process and accessories — but no micro-photograph has yet equalled 
the splendid handiwork of first rate draughtsmen, such as the late 
Tuffen West, Dr. Greville, and Huth.
Without being hypercritical 
upon so modest a compilation as that of Mr. Mills, we must confess 
ourselves somewhat disappointed.
The major part of the volume is devoted to the Bibliography of 
Mr. Deby (assisted, we believe, by that excellent authority, Mr. F.
Kitton), and this is simply splendid — beyond all praise.
It is, in fact, 
worth all the cost of the book — and no student of the Diatoms will, 
in the future, be able to dispense with the references it affords.
The type and   get up ' of the work are very good, but revision 
has been sadly needed, as evinced by the number of typographical 
errors, and words and proper names mis-spelt.
W. B.
T. 
NOTES— BOTANY.
spinosissima in Lincolnshire.
— This rose has at length been 
recorded well within the county, by my brother, who gathered it in Raithby 
Parish, near Louth, in June.
The specimen has been kindly identified for me by 
Mr. F.
Arnold Lees, F.L.S.
— J.
Larder, Louth, August 4th, 1893.
Rosa villosa sub-sp.
mollis (Sm.) in North Lines., etc— This variety has 
been found on the chalk in Welton Parish, near Louth, and identified by 
Mr. F.
A. Lees, who writes that this montane rose, growing in low east England, 
makes an interesting record.
Among other plants submitted to and kindly 
identified by Mr. Lees were /uncus obtusifolius (Saltfleetby) and Arahis hirsuta, 
the latter gathered by Mr. A.
R. Yeoman, near Goukeby.— J.
Larder, Louth, 
August 4th, 1893.
Ash Trees in Bloom.
— Three male Ash trees {Fraxinus excelsior) growing 
near Penrith have this year been covered with bloom whilst in full leaf.
So 
singular and beautiful did they appear as to become unrecognisable to many.
It is no doubt due to the remarkably warm and dry spring that we have had.
This tree is rarely seen blooming in such perfection whilst in leaf, the flower 
coming earlier.
I should like to know if this has been noticed in other places - 
J. Charles Smith, Nandana, Penrith, 13th July, 1893.
Mud Carex {Carex limosa).— I have found this Carex growing at Woodside 
Moss in North Westmorland.
It may, I think, be considered rare in England, 
especially in the South, but common in Scotland.
— J.
Charles Smith, Nandana, 
Penrith, 13th July, 1893.
Mr. J.
C. Smith sent me a specimen of Carex limosa from Woodside Moss, so 
that I can confirm the correctness of the name.
I have only seen it from one other 
station in Westmorland, at 1,000 feet over Kentmere, where it was found by 
Mr. J.
C. Martindale.
It would be interesting to know what is the altitude of 
the Woodside station.
I should certainly not say that genuine C limosa was 
common in Scotland.
— J.
G. Baker.
Paris quadrifolia with seven leaves.
— After examining a number of 
specimens of Herb Paris {Paris quadrifolia), growing luxuriantly in a damp 
shady situation at Woodside Moss in North Westmorland, I found that 
plants with five leaves were very common, whilst those with six were almost as 
plentiful as those with five.
I obtained nineteen specimens with seven leaves, six 
gathered within a space of six square yards.
On further examination I found one 
out of the nineteen plants had rive outer segments of the perianth instead of four, 
and nine anthers instead of eight.
Another seven-leaved specimen had also five 
outer segments of the perianth.— J.
Charles Smith, Nandana, Penrith, July 
I3th, 1893.
Naturalist, 
265 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
and 
Physical Features of the North of England.
GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1892.
The present instalment has been compiled and edited by 
ALFRED HARKER, M.A., F.G.S.
Previous instalments of the Bibliography of Geology and 
Palaeontology have appeared as follows ; 
For 1884, in 'Naturalist/ Dec. 1885, pp.
394-406.
5 » *885, „ Nov. 1886, pp.
349-362.
,» 1886, „ June 1888, pp.
178-188.
n 1887, „ Feb. 1889, pp.
61-77.
» 1888, „ April-May 1890, pp.
1 21-138.
17 
>> 
M 
1889, n N ° v - 1890, pp.
339-35°- 
1890, „ Oct.-Nov. 189 1, pp.
313-33°- 
1891, „ July-Aug. 1892, pp.
219-234.
The following list includes a few entries omitted in former 
instalments.
The chief abbreviations employed are : — 
Q. J.G.S.
= Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society, vol.
xlviii.
G.M.
-Geological Magazine, decade 3, vol.
ix.
Rep.B. A.
= Report of British Association Meeting for 1891 (at 
Cardiff).
Nat.
= Naturalist.
Res.
« Research.
Tr. Leeds G.A.
= Transactions of Leeds Geological Association, 
Part vii.
Tr. Manch.
G.S.
^Transactions of Manchester Geological 
Society, vols.
xxi.
xxii.
Mem. Pr.
Manch.
L.P.S = Memoirs and Proceedings of Man- 
chester Literary and Philosophical Society, ser.
4, vol.
v. 
Pr. Liv.
G.S.
= Proceedings of Liverpool Geological Society, 
vol.
vi., part 4.
Pr. Yorks.
G.P.S.
= Proceedings of Yorkshire Geological and 
Polytechnic Society (N.3.) vol.
xii., parts I.
and II.
N.H.J.
= Natural History Society.
Anon, [not signed].
Lane S.
Ancient Red-deer Horns [found in the old bed of the Irwell during the 
Manchester Ship Canal excavation].
Land and Water, Oct. 26th, 1889, 
_ p.
544.
Sept.
1893.
266 bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1892.
Anon, [not signed].
York S.E, 
Ancient Relics: British and Roman [at Skipsea, in the cliff; remains of 
Red and Fallow Deer found], Yorks.
Notes and Queries, part 19, April 
1890, p.
270.
Anon, [not signed].
Northern Counties.
The Coal-fields of the United Kingdom [a series of articles on the various 
coal-fields with numerous tables giving the position and mutual relations of 
the seams].
Coll iery Guardian, vol.
lxii.
-lxiv., 1891, 1892.
Anon, [not signed].
W 
Craven Naturalists 1 Annual Conversazione [with some account of the 
exploration of the Elbolton Cave near Skipton], Craven Herald, Jan. 29th.
Anon, [not signed].
W. of England 
he first annual meeting of the North West of England Boulder 
Committee [reported in abstract].
Nature, March 24th, vol.
45, p.
495.
>n.
[not signed].
Isle of 
Jeological notes made on an] Excursion to Michael, Septemb 
1891.
Yn Lioar Manninagh, April, pp.
307-308.
Man 
Anon, [signed   M.
H. M.'].
Submerged Forest [at Mablethorpe].
Nature, June 9th, p.
128.
Anon, [not signed].
Line.
N. 
Lanes.
S. 
eep Mining at Manchester [with an account of the shaft and boring at 
Audenshaw, reaching a depth of 1,018 yards; the superficial deposits are 60 
yards thick, and no coal was struck until a depth of 900 yards was reached].
Chambers' Journal, and Yorks.
Weekly Post, Aug. 27th.
Anon, [not signed].
Derbyshire.
Peak District of Derbyshire and Neighbouring Counties ( Bad 
borough Guides'); 5th ed.
[the scenery discussed from a geological 
point, pp.
ix.-xiv.].
Lo 
Anon, [not signed].
and 
[urray's Handbook for Travellers in Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, 
Leicestershire, and Staffordshire, 3rd ed.
[Physical History and Geology, 
pp.
(i)-(i6)], London.
Cheshire.
Cornhill 
Anon, [not signed].
Among the * Witches ' [describing the Cheshire salt-district].
Sept., pp.
256-265.
Anon, [not signed].
Our Photograph : a fine Carboniferous Tree [describing a Sigillaria found 
in the Canister Quarry of Messrs.
Rowland in the Meanwood Valley].
Tr.
Leeds G.A..
dd.
Kt. K2* and plate.
W, 
J. C.
Atkinson.
York N.E.
Forty Years in a Moorland Parish [Danby-in-CIeveland :   Descriptive 
and Geological' chapters, pp.
181-201 ; also i Appendix B.
Geological 
Considerations,' pp.
395-400].
8vo., pp.
xi.
-f 457, London, 1S91.
H. C Beasley and J.
Lomas.
Cheshire.
a some East and West Faults at Caldy Grange [in a quarry near the 
Grammar School, with plan and section].
Pr. Liv.
G.S., pp.
4l3-4*5> 
plate ii.
Fames E.
Bedford.
W, 
Evidences of Glacial Action near Leeds [describing some good sections 
recently exposed in the valley below Meanwood].
Pr. Yorks.
G.P.S., pt- *•, 
pp.
69-71.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1892.
267 
James E.
Bedford.
York N.W» 
Evidences of Glacial Action in the Leeds District [noting the occurrence 
of numerous limestone boulders at Guiseley and Menstone, and describing, 
with section, some good exposures in the Mean wood Valley ; conclusions are 
drawn as to the directions of ice-movement].
Tr. Leeds G.
A., pp.
29-34, 
with plate.
H. Arnold Bemrose.
Derbyshire* 
Notes on the Geology of Derbyshire [a paper read before the Derby 
Archaeological and Natural History Society, giving a summary of knowledge 
on the subject, with suggestions for work to be done].
Separately printed, 
Derby, 1891.
James Bennie and Robert Kidston.
On the Occurrence of Spores in the Carboniferous Formation of 
Scotland [with a discussion of those from Halifax described by W.
C. 
Williamson].
Proc.
Roy. Phys.
Soc. Edinb., vol.
9, part I., 1885-6 (publ.
1886), pp.
85-86.
Herbert Bolton.
Lane.
S. 
On the Finding of Marine Shells in the Boulder Clay of Bacup [at 
Meadow's Hill ; fragments of shells of Cardhtm, Mactra, and MytUus, and 
of test of an echinoid ; obtained by washing and sifting].
Tr. Manch.
G. S., xxi , part 18, pp.
574-576, and discussion, pp.
576-578.
T. G.
Bon key.
Cumberland.
Note on some Specimens of Rock which have been exposed to High 
Temperatures [containing microscopical descriptions of the so-called quartz- 
felsite of Threikeld quarries and the product obtained by artificially 
vitrifying the rock], Proc.
Roy. Soc, March, pp.
395 -403.
T. G.
Bonney.
Derbyshire.
Permian Breccia of Leicestershire, collected 
W. S.
Gresley, Esq., F.G.S.
. .
. V.
— Rocks probably of Carboniferous 
Age. Sandstones, Mudstones, etc.
Midi Nat., March 1891, xv., 49-57, 
and plates 2 and 3.
William Brockbank.
Westmorlan 
►n the Permians of the N.W. of England.
Discovery of two Plant 
Beds in the St. Bees Sandstone, at Hilton, Westmorland [these plant- 
remains in the sandstones above the Magnesian Limestone having the same 
fades as the well-known ones below, and strengthening the argument for the 
Permian age of the whole].
Mem. Pr.
Manch.
L.P.S., No. 1, pp.
66-76, 
plates ii.-iv.
C. B[rown ridge] 
W 
t Brimham Rocks [with an account of these crags carved from the Millstone 
Grit, as visited by the Leeds Geological Association].
Yorks.
Weekly Post, 
Aug. 27th.
C. B[rown ridge].
York N.E.
Excursion to Hayburn Wyke [see Nat., Oct. 1891, pp.
291-294].
Tr.
Leeds G.A., pp.
55-58.
C. B[rownridge].
York N.W.
Excursion to Horton-in-Ribblesdale [see Nat., June, pp.
183-185]* Tr.
Leeds G.A., pp.
67-70.
Chari ms Brownridge.
Y ° rk N.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Horton-in-Ribblesdale [Geology], 
Nat., June, pp.
133-135* 
G. W.
Bulmax.
Northumberland, York Mid W.
Drift Coal in Sandstone [contending for the origin of certain coals from 
drifted vegetation].
G.M., April, pp.
I5**54- 
Sept.
1S93.
268 BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1 892.
A. C.
G. Cameron.
York S.E.
On the Continuity of the Kellaways Beds over extended Areas near 
Bedford, .
. .
etc.
. .
. [giving some particulars of the Kellaways 
rock as cut by the Hull and Barnsley Railway at Drewton].
G.M., Feb., 
pp.
66-71.
George W.
Card.
Durham.
On the Flexibility of Rocks ; with Special Reference to the Flexible 
Limestone of Durham [occurring at Marsden and near Sunderland ; 
a magnesian limestone with a high degree of flexibility].
G.M., March, 
pp.
1 17-124.
George W.
Card.
Durham* 
On the Flexibility of Rocks [referring to the limestones of Marsden and 
Sunderland].
G. M., Nov., p.
525.
[W.
Lower Carter, Secretary.] York Mid W.
Excursion to Hardcastle Crag [composed of Kinderscout Grit isolated by 
a land-slip : the glacial phenomena of the district are also noted].
Tr. Leeds 
G. A., pp.
59, 60.
£W.
Lower Carter, Secretary.] York S.W.
Excursion to C onisborough [see Nat., Nov. 1891, pp.
335, 336].
Tr. Leeds 
G. A., pp.
60, 61.
[W.
Lower Carter, Secretary.] York Mid W.
Excursion to Micklefield [to examine coal-mine and also quarries in the 
Magnesian Limestone : the latter rock contains 56*73 per cent, of carbonate 
of lime and 40*07 per cent, of carbonate of magnesia], Tr. Leeds G.
A., 
pp.
62, 63.
[W.
Lower Carter, Secretary.] York N.E.
Excursion to Rokeby and the Greta [see Nat., July, pp.
214, 215].
Tr. Leeds G.
A., pp.
70-72.
Samuel Chadwick [Secretary].
York N.E., S.E.
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee and its Fourth Year's Work.
Nat., 
May, pp.
155-158.
York Mid W.
W. Qhretham].
Excursion to the Yeadon and Guiseley Railway Cutting [giving the 
general character of the exposures in the ten sections seen].
Tr. Leeds 
G. A., pp.
65-67.
Thos.
Child.
York Mid W.
[Fossils found at Yeadon ; Calamites, Fern Spores, Stigmaria, Phacops 
brongniartu Encrinites, and Belemnites (sic)].
N. H.
J., May 15th, 1892, p.
58.
E. Maule Cole.
York S.E., N.E.
The Erosion of the Yorkshire Coast.
Nat., April, pp.
103-107.
[E.
Maule Cole.] York S.E.
Excursion to York Dale and Sledmere [see also Nat., Oct. 189 1, pp- 
305-306].
Tr. Leeds G.
A., pp.
58, 59.
Grenville A.
J. Cole.
Westmorland.
Note on Mr. Hutchings' Paper on some Lake District Rocks [a letter 
referring to the Thornthwaite Crag rock, considered to be an andesite].
G. M., Jan., pp.
43, 44.
Grenville A.
J. Cole.
Isle of Mail.
On Occurrences of Riebeckite in Britain [including a pebble from the 
Isle of Man], Mineral.
Mag., March 1891, ix., 222-6.
Lane.
S., Chesh., Derbysh., 
H. W.
Crosskey, secretary.
York S.E., N.E., Isle of Man.
Nineteenth Report of the Committee, consisting of ...
[9 names] .
. - 
appointed for the purpose of recording .
. , Erratic Blocks [giving 
many records of localities, dimensions, and lithological character, with in 
some cases the source of the boulders].
Rep. B.A. for 1891, pp.
276-209.
X aralist, 
bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1892.
269- 
J. R.
Dakyxs.
York N.W.
The Geology of the Country between Grassington and Wensleydale 
[with detailed sections, showing that the Yoredale type is not recognisable 
south of Kettlewell ; in the south the Main Limestone is directly overlain by 
the Millstone Grit, but northward a cherty series intervenes ; the top of the 
Little Limestone is suggested as a convenient base for the Millstone Grit in 
the country northward ; it is noticed that ganister occurs in the Millstone 
Grit above the Kinderscout Grit, and becomes more pronounced to the 
north].
Pr. Yorks.
G. P.
S., pt.
ii., pp.
133-144.
James W.
Davis.
York S.E., Lane.
S. 
English Lake Dwellings [with a short account of that at Ulrome and 
reference to another locality near Preston].
Nat. Sci.
, March, vol.
i., pp.
40-43.
James W.
Davis.
York Mid W., Lane, Northumb.
On the Fossil Fish Remains of the Coal Measures of the British Isles ; 
Part I., Pleuracanthido* [describing and figuring species of Pleuracanthus y 
including three new forms, P.
howsei from Newsham near Newcastle, P.
obtusus 
from Clifton, and P.
serratus from Newsham].
Sci. Trans.
Roy. Dublin 
Soc, (2) vol.
iv., pp.
703-748, pi.
lxv.-lxxiii.
R. M.
Deeley.
Derbyshire and Notts.
Glacial Geology [claiming that the Glacial deposits of the Trent valley offer 
great difficulties to those who deny any considerable inter-glacial submergence].
G. l|.- f Dec, pp.
573, 574.
M. Demain.
York S.WV 
The Flora of the Banks [near Clitheroe ; quoting an account of the 
Carboniferous Limestone of the district, and figuring some of its fossils].
Science Gossip, July, pp.
152, 153.
C. E.
De Range.
Lane.
S., Cheshire.
Notes on the Geology of the Manchester Canal [a general account of 
the rocks, mostly drift, exposed in the cuttings ; erratics from the Lake 
District and Criffel are found].
Trans, and Proc.
Chesterfield and Midi.
Inst.
En^in., vol.
xviii., p.i et seq.
; 1891.
C. E.
DeRance.
Lincolnshire.
On the Underground Waters of Lincolnshire [giving particulars, with 
measurements, of numerous shafts, borings, and other sections, and of the 
capabilities of the several formations as sources of water supply], Pr. Yorks.
G. P.
S., pt.
i., pp.
22-51.
C. E.
DeRance.
York Mid W., Line S., Notts, Lane.
S., and Chesh.
Seventeenth Report of the Committee consisting of .
. • [20 names] 
. • .
appointed for the purpose of investigating the Circulation of 
Underground Waters .
. .
[etc., giving particulars of borings near 
Skipton, Bracebridge, Horncastie, Owthorpe, Widnes, Macclesfield, and 
other places].
Rep. B.
A. for 1891, pp.
300-312.
C. E.
DeRaxce.
Cheshire.
Note on the Discovery of Estheria minuta (var.
Brodieana) in the New 
Red Sandstone [of Broadhurst's quarry, Alderiey Edge, at a much lower 
horizon than any other English examples of the species].
Rep. B.
A., p.
644.
[C.
E.] DeRance.
Lane 
The Glacial Drift [citing evidence in favour of the land -ice theory].
Tr. Manch.
G. S., xxii., pt.
ii., pp.
49-52.
E. Dickson.
Lane S.
Problems in the Geology of the Neighbourhood of Southport 1st Rep~ 
of Southport Soc. Nat.
Sci. for 1890-91.
Sept.
1893.
2JO BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1 892.
Miss Jane Donald.
York N.W., S.W., Cheviotland.
Notes on some New and Little-known Species of Carboniferous 
Murchisonia (describing Af. tatei.
n. sp.
from Howick, M.
quadricarinata 
from Settle, M.
conula var.
convexa from Askrigg and Widdale Fell, 
and M.
telescopium from Bolland].
Q.J.G.S., Nov., pp.
562-574, and 
pi.
xvi., xvii.
Joseph Field.
York S.W.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Penistone and Dunford Bridge 
[Geology], Nat., Sep., pp.
258, 259.
J. J.
Fitzpatrick.
Derbyshire.
Further Notes on the Deep Dale Bone Cave, near Buxton [recording 
various remains from the midden at the entrance and from beneath the floor 
of the cave itself, the latter including a human jawbone].
Pr. Liv.
G.S., 
pp.
447-452.
E. J.
Garwood.
Durham.
Concretions in Mag*nesian Limestone [a brief letter answering Mr. Jukes- 
Browne].
G. M., Jan., p.
44.
E. J.
Garwood.
Westmorland, Northumb., Durham.
Cone-in-Cone Structure [in the pencil-slates of Swindale near Shap, the 
Carboniferous shales of Northumberland, and the coal of Durham].
G. M., 
July, pp.
334, 335- 
J. G.
Goodchild.
• 
York N.W.
Notes on the Glacial Phenomena of Upper Ribblesdale.
Nat., Aug., 
pp.
241-246.
J. G.
Goodchild.
Westmorland, York N.W.
Notes on the Coniston Limestone Series [criticising Mr. Marr's paper on 
this subject.
For the Cross Fell district the author gives the following 
downward succession : — Coniston Limestone series 900 feet, Dufton and 
Yarlside rhyolitic rocks 1, 100, break in succession (not great), Hilton Moor 
volcanic series 1,000, Hilton Moor Shales (= corona-beds of Marr and 
Nicholson) 500, break and probable unconformity, Milburn rocks (equivalents 
of the Borrowdales) 6, 500 + , Skiddaw Slates 8000 4- .
In the Craven area the 
author considers the Coniston Limestone to pass down into the Ingleton 
Green Slates].
G. M., July, pp.
295-299.
J. G.
Goodchild.
Westmorland, York N.W.
The Coniston Limestone Series [in reply to Mr. Marr ; maintaining that 
the Hilton Moor volcanic rocks are a distinct group below the Coniston 
Limestone volcanics, and that Trematis corona occurs on at least two distinct 
horizons in the Cross Fell area ; also that the Ordovician tuffs of Craven are 
the equivalents of those of Hilton Moor and Dufton].
G. M., Nov., 
pp.
526, 527.
J. G.
Goodchild.
Cumberland and Westmorland.
Observations on the New Red Series of Cumberland and Westmorland, 
with especial reference to classification [emphasising the unity of the whole 
series and the great unconformity beneath it ; if a division into Permian and 
Trias be made, the line must be drawn just above the Magnesian Limestone; 
the St. Bees sandstone is included in the Bunter Sandstone group, with 
a thickness of 2,000 ft.].
Trans.
Cumb.
Westm.
Ass., No. xvii.
plates i., ii- 
J. G.
Goodchild.
Cumberland and Westmorland.
The St. Bees Sandstone and its Associated Rocks [abstract of views 
stated m preceding paper].
G. M., Dec, pp.
564, 565 : Rep. B.
A. 
J. G.
Goo- liiLD.
Cumberland and Westmorland.
Notes on some of the Limestones of Cumberland and Westmorland 
[remarks on the formation of limestones in general and an account of those 
of the counties named, with conclusions as to the former physical geology of 
the area].
Trans.
Cumb.
Westm.
Assoc, part xvi., pp.
125-148.
Naturalist* 
, BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1 892.
27 1 
Leo H.
Grin don.
Lane.
W., Cheshire, Durham.
Lancashire [;] Brief Historical and Descriptive Notes[.] .
. .
1892 
[8vo.
cloth, xii.
+355 pages and numerous illustrations: brief references to 
geology at p.
17 ; to rock-salt at Fleetwood, also in Cheshire and at Port 
Clarence, at p.
231 ; to Mellard Reade's views as to the antiquity of the 
sandhills, at p.
232 ; and at pp.
350-355 ' the fossils ' are treated of, the 
various fossiliferous localities mentioned, although the fossils themselves are 
spoken of only in general terms, save Platycrinus triacontadactylos at 
Clitheroe].
Alfred Harker.
Forest-bed at Hull Nat., Jan., p.
22.
Alfred Harker.
York S.E.
Westmd., Durham, etc.
Some North Country Quartzites.
Nat., Mar., pp.
73-75.
Alfred Harker.
Westmorland, York Mid W., N.W.
The Lamprophyres of the North of England [with some account of their 
penological characters, their relation to the Shap granite, and speculations on 
the origin of the rocks ; also a special note on the dykes at Cronkley in 
Teesdale], G.
M., May, pp.
199-206.
Alfred Harker.
Westmorland, Cumberland, York N.W., Durham.
On Porphyrinic Quartz in Basic Igneous Rocks [suggesting a theory of 
its origin, with special reference to the quartz-grains in the lamprophyre 
dykes of the North of England].
G. M., Nov., pp.
485-488.
Alfred Harker.
Westmorland.
New Plant-Beds at Hilton.
Nat., June, p.
170.
Alfred Harker.
York S.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Withernsea [Geology].
Nat., Oct., 
pp.
298, 299.
See also * Yorkshire Post ' and ' Leeds Mercury, 1 for Aug. 2nd.
G. Henslow.
York S.E.
Phosphate Nodules [with a very brief reference to the remains of a beach 
called the Black-rock, near Flamborough Head, in the Gault (Speeton Clay)] 
Medit.
Nat., Sept.
1892, p.
238.
Thomas Hick.
York W.
On the present state of our knowledge of the Yorkshire Calamitae 
[a resume of modern research and opinion concerning those plants].
Pr.
Yorks.
G. P.
S., pt.
i., pp.
1-8.
Bernard Hobson.
Isle of Man.
On the Igneous Rocks of the South of the Island, and Sections 
through Scarlet Point, with Plans [compare Bibliography for 1891].
Yn Lioar 
Manninagh, April, vol.
i., pp.
337-34$ and plate.
B. J.
Holdsworth.
York N.E.
Holiday Finds [at Whitby ; Beleninites hastata (sic)].
N. H.
J., Oct. 15th, 1892 
p. 108.
» 
Be^j.
Holgate.
York Mid W.
The Mode of Deposition and Properties of the Carboniferous Strata of 
Leeds and its immediate suburbs [local details followed by tabular sections 
showing the succession and thickness of the beds, their probable mode of 
formation, their properties and uses, etc.].
Pr. Yorks.
G.P.S., pt.
i, 
pp.
o-2t.
Benj.
Holgate.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Rokeby [Geology].
Nat., July, 
pp.
214-215 
B. Holgate.
York N.
E. 
[Glacial Deposits in the Teesdale District described].
Tr. Leeds G.A., 
PP- 2 3-25.
ept.
1 8 93.
272 BIBLIOGRAPHY S GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1 892.
B. HI.OLGATE].
York N.W.
Excursion to Grassington [see Nat, Sept.
1891, pp.
266-268].
Tr. Leeds 
G.A., pp.
53-55.
[Sir] Henry H.
Howorth.
York S.E., N.E., N.W.
Did the Mammoth live before, during, or after the deposition of the 
Drift?
[arguing for the pre-Glacial age of the Mammoth in Britain: evidence 
is drawn from the Hessle gravels, the Kirkdale and Victoria caves, etc.].
G. M., June, pp.
250-258.
Sir Henry H.
Howorth.
Line.
S. 
The Mammoth and the Glacial Drift.
A reply to Mr. A.
J. Jukes-Browne 
[with especial reference to the mammoth remains at Burgh].
G. M., Nov., 
pp.
502-505.
Wilfrid H.
Hudleston.
York N.E., Lincolnshire.
A Monograph of the British Jurassic Gasteropoda: Part i., No. 5, 
Gasteropoda of the Inferior Oolite, pp.
225-272, pi.
xvii.-xx.
[describing 
many species and varieties, some new, belonging to the families Turritellida<, 
Fseitdomelanida  , Naticida:, and Rissoidce ; many from the Lincolnshire lime- 
stone of Ponton and Weldon, the Dogger of Blue Wyke, and the Scarborough 
Limestone of Cloughton].
Palceontographical Soc, vol.
for 1891.
Wilfrid H.
Hudleston.
Lincoln, York N.E.
A Monograph of the British Jurassic Gasteropoda; part L, No. 6, pp.
273-324, pi.
xxi-xxvi.
[describing Amberleya cf.
meriani and Littorina 
phillipsii from Weldon and Ponton, A .
cygnea^ sp.
nov.
, and Z.
polytimeta, 
sp.
nov.
from Lincoln ; A.
biserta from Blue Wyke ; A.
cf.
meriani and 
Z. phillipsii from Cloughton Wyke ; Z.
weldonis, sp.
nov.
and Z.
cedilis (?) 
from the Lincolnshire limestone], Palceontographical Soc, vol.
xlvi.
W. H.
Hudleston and Edward Wilson.
YorkN.E., Lincolnshire.
A Catalogue of British Jurassic Gasteropoda [giving geological horizon, 
locality, and bibliographical references for more than a thousand species, 
including many from East Yorkshire and Lincolnshire].
8vo., pp.
xxxiii.
+ 
147, London.
W. Maynard Hutch ings.
Cumberland, Westmorland.
Notes on the Ash-Slates and other Rocks of the Lake District 
[describing the microscopic structure and constitution of these rocks, and 
especially the occurrence of minute sericite, garnet, and anatase, and the 
formation of secondary felspars, in part orthoclase].
G. M., April and May, 
pp.
154-161, 218-228.
Cheshire, CurntkL, Derbysh., 
Osmund W.
Jeffs [Secretary].
I. of Man, Lane, York.
Second Report of the Committee consisting of .
. .
[14 names] .
• - 
to arrange for the collection, preservation, and systematic registration of 
Photographs of Geological Interest in the United Kingdom [with second list 
of photographs].
Rep. B.A. for 1 891, pp.
321-333.
E. Jones.
York Mid W.
Exploration of the Elbolton Cave [see 1891 list].
Pr. Yorks.
G.P.S., pt.
t 
pp.
105-107.
Durham and 4 North of England/ 
T. Rupert Jones and James W.
Kirkby.
Notes on the Palaeozoic Bivalved Entomostraca.— XXX.
On Carbon- 
iferous Ostracoda from Mongolia [with references to Bythocypris cun^ola 
J.&K., as common in the North of England, Bairdia subelongata \& K., 
well-known from the North of England, B.
amptitata Kirkby, in the Carbon- 
iferons of the North of England and the Permian rocks of Durham, and 
B. grandis J.&K., in the North of England].
Ann.
& Mag. Nat.
Hist., 
April 1892, pp.
302-307.
Naturalist 
bibliography: geology and paleontology, 1892.
273 
Cumberland, Westmorland, Furness.
T. Rupert Jones and Henry Woodward.
A Monograph of the British Palaeozoic Phyllopoda: Part II, pp.
73-124, 
pi.
xiii.-xvi.
[describing Lingiilocaris salteriana and Peltocaris anatina from 
Long Sieddale, Caryocaris marrii from Keswick, Aptychopsis cordiformis 
(sp.
nov.), from Rebecca Hill, Uiverston ; A.
lapnuorthi, Peltocaris patula 
(sp.
nov.), Discinocaris browniana and D> gigas from Skelgiil, and 
A. angulata from Troutbeck].
Palaeontograph.
Soc, vol.
xlvi.
A. J.
Jukes-Browne.
Line.
S. 
The Mammoth and the Glacial Drift [combating Sir H.
Howorth's assertion 
that the mammoth fauna is never underlain by Glacial Drift, and referring to 
the section near Burgh], G.M., Oct., pp.
477-478.
Percy F.
Kendall.
Lane S.
Notes of a Section of Drift at Levenshulme, Manchester [the agreement 
between the directions of transport of boulders, intrusions of boulder-clay, 
orientation of large boulders, and scratches on rock-surfaces point to the 
action of land- ice].
Rep. B.A. for 1891, pp.
650-651.
P. F.
Kendall.
Isle of Man.
On the Source of some Remarkable Boulders in the Isle of Man [see 
full Review in Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 9, Apl.-Oct. 1891, pp.
300-1].
P. F.
Kendall.
Isle of Man.
[Important Discovery with respect to Manks Boulders, being a Granite 
containing blue hornblende, traceable from Ailsa Craig, etc.], Proc.
Isle of 
Man Nat. Hist.
& Ant. Soc, Feb. 10, 1891 ; Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 9, 
April-Oct. 189 1, p.
236.
Percy F.
Kendall.
York S.E.
Note on the Mode of Preservation of the Bones [of Fallow Deer from 
Goole Moor : appendix to Mr. Waite's paper].
Nat., June, pp.
169, 170.
Percy F.
Kendall.
Northern Counties.
The supposed Glacial Submergence [presenting the evidence against any 
considerable submergence in Glacial times].
Tr. Leeds G.
A., pp.
43-47.
Percy F.
Kendall.
Lane* S.
and Cheshire.
Glacial Geology, Old and New [a reply to Mr. Reade, advocating the 
land-ice as against the submergence theory : the author states that in this 
area the transport of boulders is always from N.W. to S.E., and discusses 
the alleged exceptions ; he also maintains that the evidence of the shell- 
fragments in the drift is wholly opposed to the submergence hypothesis], 
G. M., Nov., pp.
491-500.
Percy F.
Kendall.
Northern Counties.
Ancient Glaciers in the British Isles ; describing the glacial phenomena of 
these islands, and especially of the North of England, as bearing out the 
land-ice theory.
The author gives an account of the several local centres of 
glaciation and then of the complex conditions when the glaciers became 
confluent, while the Irish Sea was blocked with ice and the Norwegian 
glacier extended to our east coast.
He finds no evidence of submergence].
PP- 137-181 of G.
F. Wright's book (vid.
sub.) with wood-cats and map.
A. H.
Kenny.
York S.E.
Erosion of Coast of Yorkshire.
Distances in September, 1889, from 
objects inland to the coast [given in tabular form].
Nat., April 1892, p.
105.
Robert Kidston.
Lane.
S. 
Notes on some Fossil Plants from the Lancashire Coal Measures 
[with catalogues of several collections and a complete list up to date].
Tr.
Manch.
G. S., xxi.
part xii.
pp.
401-423, and discussion pp.
423-428.
R- Kidston.
York Mid W.
On the Occurrence of the Genus Equisetum (E.
Hemingwayi, Kidston) 
in the Yorkshire Coal-measures [in the Barnsley district].
Ann. Mag.
Nat.
Hist.
(6), vol.
ix.
p. 138 et seq.
Sept.
1S93.
s 
274 BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1892.
R. KlDSTON.
York Mid W.
On the Fructification of Sphenophyllum trichomatosum, Stur, from the 
Yorkshire Coal Field [from Cooper's Pit, Worsborough Dale, Barnsley].
Pr. Roy.
Phys.
Soc. Edin., vol.
xi., part 1, pp.
56-62, and plate 1.
G. W.
Lamplugh.
York S.E.
The Flamborough Drainage Sections [showing how they confirm the 
rapid westerly attenuation of the drift, the extension of the Basement Clay 
over part of Flamborough Head, the overlap of the Basement Clay by the 
Intermediate Stratified Series, and the close connection between this latter 
and the Upper Boulder Clay], Pr. Yorks.
G. P.
S., part I, pp.
145-148, pi.
v. 
B. B.
LeTall.
York N.E.
[Large Millstone-grit Glacier Boulder (4 ft.
X2jxi^) found at Clifton, 
York].
N. H.
J., June 15th, 1892, p.
76.
G. Lewis.
Nottinghamshire.
A Geological Sketch of the Town and District of Nottingham [with 
account of the Coal Measures, etc., and geological map].
Trans, and Proc.
Chesterfield and Midi.
Inst.
Engin., vol.
xviii.
p. 58 et seq., pi.
ix.
x. ; 1891.
Joseph Lomas.
Lane.
S. 
Report on the Glacial Deposits between Dingle Point, Liverpool, and 
Hale Head [describing the sections along the coast, and indicating the 
sources of many of the boulders found on the shore : particulars are given of 
136 large boulders].
Pr. Liv.
G. S., pp.
396-406.
J. Lomas.
Lane.
S. 
On some Potholes on the Shore near Dingle Point [pointing out their 
variety of form — circular, oval, annular, or slipper-shaped, the last probably 
due to the union of two adjacent holes].
Pr. Liv.
G. S., pp.
416-418.
Joseph Lomas.
Cheshire.
On some Faults exposed in a Quarry near Thingwall Mill [in the 
Lower Keuper sandstones : details of 17 faults are given and a plan of the 
quarry].
Pr. Liv.
G. S., pp.
441-446, with folding plate.
J. Lomas.
Cheshire.
On a Fault without a Throw [describing a remarkable fault near Caldy 
Grange Grammar School, West Kirby].
G. M., April, pp.
191-192.
J. Lomas.
Lane.
S. and Cheshire.
Shapes of Sand Grains [objecting to Mr. Reade's conclusions drawn from 
the rounded sand-grains of the drift, compared with those of the Mersey 
district which have probably been derived from the New Red Sandstone].
G. M., Nov., p.
527.
J. Lovel.
York S.E.
Waterspouts in East Yorkshire [at Langtoft near Driffield on the evening 
of July 3rd].
Nature, July 4th, vol.
xlvi.
p. 246.
[For description see Hull 
and Leeds newspapers of J uly 5th and 6th].
J. Lovel.
York S.E.
The Cloud-burst at Round Hill, Langtoft [described with map and two 
views].
Nat. Hist.
Journ., Oct., pp.
104-107.
H. A.
Macphersox.
Lake District.
A Vertebrate Fauna of Lakeland [including the cave-deposits and other 
Pleistocene remains].
Edinburgh.
John Marley.
York N.E. and Durham.
On the Cleveland and South Durham Salt Industry [a short geological 
sketch follow d by details of thirty-five borings].
Trans.
N. Engl.
Inst.
Min.
and Mech.
Engin., vol.
xxxix.
pt.
hi.
Sept., pp.
91-125, pi.
liv.
Iv.
J. E.
Mark.
Westmorland and York W.
Lecture to the Craven Naturalists [on * Greenland's Icy Mountains': 
pointing out the light thrown by explorations in Greenland on ihe conditions 
of northern England during the Glacial Period].
« Craven Herald,' Jan. 22nd.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1892.
275 
J. E ; Marr.
Lake District 
Life-Zones in Lower Palaeozoic Rocks [illustrated by the distribution of 
graptolites in the rocks of the Lake District], Nat. Sci., April, vol.
i., 
pp.
124-131.
J. E.
Marr.
Westmorland, Furness, York N.W.
The Coniston Limestone Series [tracing the following divisions :— Roman 
Fell Group {Corona beds, 100 ft.) ; Sleddale Group (Stile End beds, 50 ft., 
Yarlside Rhyolites, Conglomerate, 10 ft., Applethwaite beds, 100 ft.); Ash- 
gill Group (Staurocephalus Limestone, 5 ft., Ashgill Shales, 50 ft.) : fossil lists 
are given for these three groups, which have quite distinct faunas].
G. M., 
March, pp.
97-IIO, pi.
iii.
J. E.
Marr.
Westmorland, York N.W.
Further Remarks on the Coniston Limestone [in reply to Mr. Goodchild ; 
upholding the author's division of the group into pala^ontological zones], 
G. M., Oct., pp.
443-447.
J. E.
Marr.
Lake District and York N.W.
On the Wenlock and Ludlow Strata of the Lake District [The Wenlock 
is represented by the Brathay Flags, the lower part of the ' Coniston Flags' 
only.
The rest of the Coniston Flags may be divided into Lower, Middle, 
and Upper Coldwell Beds, and these with the Coniston Grits and Bannisdale 
Slates represent the Lower Ludlow.
The calcareous strata which follow, 
with the ' Star-fish Bed, 5 form a transition to the Upper Ludlow, represented 
by the Kirkby Moor Flags.
Fossil lists are given, and special attention 
directed to the graptolites which characterise particular zones].
G. M., 
Dec > PP- 534-S4L 
J. M.
Mello.
Derbyshire.
Handbook to the Geology of Derbyshire, 2nd ed.
[giving a general 
description of the local Geology: the Carboniferous is fully described, with 
fossil lists, vertical sections of the Coal Measures, and other details ; the 
material of the Bunter Pebble-beds is supposed to be derived from an old 
ridge to the south; the drift is treated according to Mr. Deeley's views; the 
Cresswell Caves are described, with a list of 23 mammalia and figures of 
many], i2mo., 89 pp., with map and 5 plates ; London, 1891.
W. D.
M[etcalf].
York Mid W.
Excursion to Oulton [to inspect a recent boring near the Oulton Brewery : 
the geology of the district briefly described].
Tr. Leeds G.
A., pp.
63-65.
L- C.
Miall.
York Mid W.
and S.W.
Airedale ; Its Scenery, Historic Sites, Geology, and Natural History 
[described in popular style, with chapters headed 4 The Foundations of York- 
shire,' * Geology of Skipton,' 'Geology of the Country between Skipton and 
Shipley,' • The Lower Coal Measures in Airedale,' ' Geology of the Country 
to the North of Leeds,' and * Extinct Quadrupeds of Airedale'].
Hand- 
book for Leeds and Airedale.
Prepared for the use of the British Association, 
Leeds, 1890, pp.
1-42.
W. H.
Miles.
Cheshire.
Notes on Supposed ' Footprints * found at Runcorn [in the Keuper ; their 
peculiarities pointed out].
Journ.
Liverp.
Geol.
Assoc, vol.
xh.
pp.
43-45.
G. H.
Morton, Cheshire.
Subterranean Erosion of the Glacial Drift, a probable cause of 
Submerged Peat and Forest-beds [combating Mr. Shone's application of thi 
theory to the case of Ince].
G. M., Sep., pp.
43°"43 2 - 
Charles J.
Murton.
Northumberland and Durham.
Geology of the Coal Field of Northumberland and Durham [giving 
numerous sections with a synopsis of the coal-seams of the Upper Car- 
boniferous as given by fourteen collieries, and a correlation of the coal-seams 
in the Lower Carboniferous in six districts].
Trans.
N. Eog- Inst.
Min. and 
Mech.
Engin., vol.
xlii.
pt.
iv.
Aug., pp.
236-247, pi.
xlii.-xlv.
Sept.
1893.
276 BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PA I ,/EONTOLOGY, 1892.
R. Nasse.
Durham, Northumberland.
Economic and Comparative Notices on the Coal Working- in Durham 
and Northumberland [a general account of the Durham coal-field, noting 
succession of strata, thicknesses, qualities of coal, etc.].
Zeits.
Berg.
Hiit ten u.
Sal. Wesen.
in Preuss., vol.
xxxix.
p. 282 et seq.
; 1 891.
A. G.
Xathors'j .
York S.E.
Fresh Evidence concerning the Distribution of Arctic Plants during the 
Glacial Epoch [with mention of the finding of leaves of Betula nana in peat- 
moss at Bridlington, and by Mr. Reid at Holmpton ; woodcut map given].
Nature, Jan. 21st, 1892, vol.
45, p.
275.
W. Hum Painter.
Derbyshire, 
Derbyshire Fossils.
Nat., Jan., p.
22.
A. Pavlow and G.
W. Lamplugh.
York S.E., Lincoln N.
Argiles de Speeton et leurs equivalents [Part I, by Mr. Lamplugh, gives a 
full account of the Speeton Clay, its exact succession, detailed measurements, 
and the characteristic fossils of the several marked horizons ; also a comparison 
with the Lincolnshire series.
Part 2, by Prof.
Pavlow, gives precise 
descriptions of the belemnites and ammonites of Speeton, and compares them 
with the corresponding forms in Russia and other countries.
Part 3 is 
devoted to correlation of the British with the foreign succession].
Bull.
Soc.
Imp. des Naturalistes de Moscou for 1891, Nos. 2, 3, 4, pp.
181 -213, 
455-570; pi.
iv-viii.
xiii-xviii.
Abstr.
in G.M., Sep., pp.
422-426, and Nature, 
July 14, p.
257.
S. S.
Platt.
Lane.
S. 
Some of the Recent Results of the Investigations into Local Erratic 
Blocks.
Trans.
Rochdale Lit. Sci.
Soc, vol.
iii.
with map.
J. Postlrthwaite.
. Lake District.
* The Cleaved Ashes and Breccias of the Volcanic Series of Borrowdale 
[with some general account of the series, but in particular describing the 
distribution of slaty cleavage ; also a note by Prof.
Bonney on the microscopic 
structure of some specimens which are figured].
Trans.
Cumb.
Westm.
Assoc, No. xvi.
pp.
41-54, plate and map.
J. Postlethwaitr.
Cumberland.
The Dioritic Picrite of White Hause and Great Cockup [two small 
exposures of hornblendic rock like that of Little Knott], Q.
J. G.
S., Nov., 
pp.
508-513, with map.
J. R.
Pritchard.
Lane.
S. 
The Boulder Clay of the North End of Liverpool [noting especially 
certain boulders at Linacre, a Liassic ammonite supposed to be from Antrim, 
from Bootle Docks, a tooth of Acrodus in the boulder-clay at Moor Hey, 
with shell -fragments, blocks of wilheimite, hemimorphite, haematite, etc., 
a limestone block with serpulse, and another with molluscan borings].
Journ.
Liverp.
Geol.
Ass., vol.
xi.
pp.
52-58; 1891.
T. Meu.ard Readf 
Lane.
S 
Sand-Sculpture [at Crosby].
Nat., May, p.
149.
T. Mellard Reade.
Lancashire and Cheshire.
* Glacial Geology : Old and New [dealing especially with the basin of the 
Irish Sea ; describing the glacial accumulations there, and arguing in favour 
of the submergence as against the * land-ice ' theory].
G. M.July, pp.
3 10-32 1- 
T. Mellard Reade.
Cheshire, Lane.
S. 
The Rounding of Sandstone Grains of the Trias as bearing" on the 
Divisions of the Bunter [with descriptions of numerous samples : the author 
concludes that neither the crystallisation of the grains nor the presence of 
pebbles can be considered characteristic of particular horizons in the Bunter : 
crystalline sandstones are commoner in the Keuper, the material being purer].
Pr. Liv.
G. S., pp.
374-386, 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY, 1892.
2" 
T. Mellard Reade.
Lancashire S.
Shapes of Sand Grains [referring to those in the dunes between Crosby and 
Southport].
G. M..
Oct., pp.
478, 479.
T. Mellard Reade.
Cumberland.
Faulting in Drift [seen in a section on the shore near St. Bees, south of Nether- 
town Station].
G. M., Nov., pp.
490, 491.
F. R.
Cooper Reed.
York Mid W.
Woodwardian Museum Notes [describing an abnormally formed crinoid 
(Platycrinus pileatits Goldf.), from the Carboniferous Limestone of Bolland].
G. M., Dec, pp.
548, 549.
Charles Ricketts.
Durham.
'Concretions' in Magnesian Limestone [suggesting that these may have 
originated from actual cavities formerly distended by gases].
G. M., Tan., 
p. 46.
C. Ricketts.
York N.W.
Report of the Field Meeting [of the Liverpool Geological Society] at 
Settle, May 1 89 1 [noticing the coal in the basal Carboniferous Limestone at 
Beecroft near Horton, the Coniston Limestone at Brackenbottom and Norber, 
and the perched blocks on Norber Brow].
Pr. Li v.
G. S., pp.
453-45 5.
R. W.
B. Roberts.
YorkS.E., N.E.
The Cliff Sections of the Yorkshire Coast [describing generally the strata 
exposed from Flam borough to Whitby], Journ.
Liverp.
GeoK Ass., vol.
xi.
p. 59 et seq., 1891.
Thomas Roberts.
York N.E., S.E., Lincolnshire.
The Jurassic Rocks of the Neighbourhood of Cambridge .
. .
. 
[including their correlation with the corresponding strata in the northern 
counties].
8vo, pp.
vii.-f- 96 [77-80]; Cambridge.
[G.
£.] Rogers.
Isle of Man.
[A curious formation from Cronk Sumark, Sulby], Vn Lioar Manninagh, 
April 1892, p.
308.
H. Rosen busch [translated from], Cumberland.
Note on the Metamorphosed Skiddaw Slates.
Nat., April, pp.
119, 120.
G. Sharman and E.
T. Newton.
Cumberland.
On a new Form of Ag*elacrinites {Lepidodiscus Milleri, n.
sp.) from the 
Lower Carboniferous Limestone of Cumberland [from Waterhead on the 
river Irthing : character of species described].
Q. J.
G. S., May, pp.
150-152, 
plate ii.
Abstract in Ann. and Mag. N.
H., Feb. 1S92, p.
180.
James Leslie Shaw.
Cumberland and Furness.
The Haematite Ores of Cumberland [describing the mode of occurrence of 
these rich deposits, which occur in the Carboniferous Limestone and the older 
rocks, and speculating on their derivation : a map is given and a section of 
Gilfoot Park Mines].
Trans.
N. Engl.
Inst.
Min. and Mech.
Engin., 
vol.
xli.
pt.
iv.
Aug., pp.
196-219, pi.
xxxvi.
W. Shone.
Cheshire.
The Subterranean Erosion of the Glacial Drift, a probable cause of 
submerged Peat and Forest-beds [illustrated by a section at Upton, Chester].
Q. J.
G. S., Feb., pp.
96-103.
Theodore Sington, 
Notes on the Geology of the Isle of Man. Rep.
and Proc.
Manch.
ScL 
Stud.
Ass. for 1888 (publ.
March 1889).
pp.
20-23.
[Theodore] Sington.
Derbyshire.
[Paper on the Mountain Limestone of Derbyshire].
Rep. and Trans, 
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Ass. for 1888 (publ.
March 1889), pp.
34-40.
Sept.
1893.
278 BIBLIOGRAPHY : GEOLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY, 1 89 2.
F. Sissons.
Notts, Derbyshire.
Cresswell Crags [and their bone-caves, with remains of pleistocene mam 
mals].
Sissons 7 ' Beauties of Sherwood Forest': a Guide to the 'Dukeries 
and Worksop, 2nd ed., 1888, pp.
107- ill.
Warington W.
Smyth.
Man 
List of [51] Minerals found in the Isle of Man. Trans.
Isle of Man 
N.H.S., vol.
i. 1879-84 (pub).
1888), p.
143-7.
H. Speight.
York Mid W.
The Craven and North-West Yorkshire Highlands [with numerous notes 
on the physical features and geology of the district].
8vo, pp.
470, London.
J. W.
Stather.
York N.E.
The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Cox-wold and Byland [Geology].
Nat., Dec, pp.
353, 354.
Mark Stirrup.
Lane.
S. 
Discovery of a large Boulder at Ardwick [a striated boulder 7 ft.
5 in.
long, probably a diabase].
Tr. Manch.
G. S., xxii.
pt.
ii.
pp.
53"SS* 
M. Tait.
York N.E., S.E., S.W., Mid W., and N.W.
Yorkshire : its Scenes, Lore, and Legends .
. • with Contour 
Maps of River Valleys, Geological Map, large folding Map of the whole 
County [etc.] ...
by F.
D. King [with frequent though slight geological 
references throughout], Leeds : E.
J. Arnold, Printer and Publisher, 3, 
-Bnggate.
1888 [cloth, 100 pages with 10 coloured maps and numerous 
views of scenery].
Thomas Tate [Secretary].
York N.E., S.E.
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee and its Fifth Year's Work.
Nat, 
May, pp.
159-^5.
Thomas Tate.
Lake Country Rocks.
Nat., Aug., pp.
237-240.
Thos.
Tate.
Lake District.
Lake District 
How to Recognise Lake Country Rocks [abstract only, enumerating the 
more important types].
Tr. Leeds G.
A., pp.
18, 19.
Thomas Tate.
Durham.
Notes on Recent Borings for Salt and Coal in the Tees District [a boring 
1,079^ ft.
deep, situated 3 m.
W. of Stone Marsh, shows the Upper Keuper 
Red Marls to be absent as usual, the Salt-rock also absent ; the Magnesian 
Limestone only 299 ft.
thick, and apparently resting directly on Yoredale 
strata].
Q.J.G.S., Aug., pp.
488-495.
J. E.
Taylor [not signed].
Derbyshire.
[Colour-bands on Fossil Shells : We have frequently found near Castleton, 
Derbyshire, specimens of Terebratula hastata retaining their original colour- 
bands].
Sci. Goss., Jan. 1892, p.
19.
R. H.
Tiddem ax.
York Mid W.
& S.W.
Carboniferous Rocks in the Upper Aire Valley, and their Physical History 
[described].
Handbook for Leeds and Airedale.
Prepared for the use of the 
British Association, Leeds, 1890, pp.
43-54.
R. H.
Tiddeman.
York Mid W.
[Presidential Address to the Craven Naturalists, treating of the conditions 
of the Craven district in Carboniferous times, and especially describing the 
speaker's views as to the part played by coral-reefs" ('knoll -reefs') in the 
formation of the Mountain Limestone].
* Craven Herald/ Jan. 29th.
C. Tomlinsox.
York S.E, 
Aerolites: Bolides [one in Yorkshire, 56 lbs., 1796].
Notes and Queries, 
Oct. 22nd, 1892, p.
321.
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: GEOLOGY AND PAL/EONTOLOGY, 1892.
279 
Qames Toxge.] 
Lane.
S. 
[Exhibition of specimens of 'Peacock Coal,' and note on its occurrence 
at Plodder Mine near Hulton].
Tr. Manch.
G. S., xxi.
part xiii.
pp.
321, 362.
R. H.
Traquair.
York S.W. and N.W., Derbyshire.
Further Notes on Carboniferous Selachii [partly based on Yorkshire and 
Derbyshire material, and criticising Davis's work].
G. M., March 
1888; Proc.
Roy. Phys.
Soc. Edinb., vol.
9, part 3, 1887-1888 (publ.
1888), 
pp.
421-6.
J. Stanley Tute.
York Mid W.
A Permian Conglomerate Bed at Markington [consisting of worn pebbles 
of Carboniferous Limestone and angular fragments of Magnesian Limestone 
in a limestone matrix : the section (70 feet exposed) is given], Pr. Yorks.
G.P.S., pt.
i. pp.
72, 73.
Edgar R.
VVaite.
York S.E.
Remains of Fallow Deer from Goole Moor.
Nat., June, pp.
167-169.
John Francis Walker.
York N.E.
On Yorkshire Thecidea [recording the T.
ornaium of Moore as plentiful in 
the Coral Rag of Ay ton near Scarborough].
G. M., Dec, p.
548.
George Wild.
Lane.
S. 
On the Lower Coal Measures of Lancashire : Organic Remains, Sections 
of Seams, and probable Mode of Formation [with numerous local details, 
including section at Townhouse Colliery, general section of the Lower Coal 
Measures, and catalogue of fossils].
Tr. Manch.
G. S., xxi.
pt.
xiii.
PP- 364-400, with sections and plates i.-iii.
[fossils].
G. Wild, [M.] Stirrup, and [R.] Clay.
Lancashire S.
Globular Concretions from the Coal Measures of Lancashire [at Ashton- 
under-Lyne, Diggle, and Dukinfield].
Tr. Manch.
G. S.
r xxii.
pt.
ii.
pp.
66-61.
W. C.
Williamson.
York S.W., N.E.
[Slab of Carboniferous Limestone from Holland, illustrating the passage of 
aforaminiferaioozeinto crystalline calcite, and Astrqpecten Orion, Forbes, 
from the Kelloways Rock, near Pickeringj.
Q. J.
G. S.
Proc., 
pp.
184, 185.
Nature, May 19, vol.
xlvi.
p. 70.
W. C.
Williamson.
Lane.
S., York S.W.
On the Organisation of the Fossil Plants of the Coal-Measures— 
Part xviii.
[describing Bowmanites dawsoni from Footmine.
near Oldham, 
and Cinder Hills, near Halifax ; and Rachiopteris ramosa from the ' Hard 
Bed,' Halifax].
Phil.
Trans.
Roy. Soc, vol.
182 B, pp.
255-265, plates 
xxv.-xxvii.
Wm. Crawford Williamson.
Lane* S.
The Genus Sphenophyllum [discussed].
Nature, Nov. 3rd, 1892, pp.
II-13.
W. c.
Williamson.
Lane.
S. 
[The Boulder found in Oxford Road, Manchester ; its origin stated].
Rep. and Proc.
Manch.
Sci. Stud.
Ass. for 1888 (publ.
March 18S9), p.
98.
G. Frederick Wright.
Northern Counties.
Theory of an Interglacial Submergence in England [rejected- the author 
endorses the theory that the masses containing shells at MacelesfieKi, etc., 
have been thrust up from the sea-bottom ; there is no evidence of more than 
a local recession of the ice-front in the so-called interglacial period].
Amer.
Journ.
Sci., Jan.
(3}.
vol.
xliii.
pp.
1-8.
G. Frederick Wright.
Northern Counties* 
Man and the Glacial Period [for section dealing specially with the British 
Isles see entry under Kendall ; there are many other reference to the British 
Glacial phenomena, and the evidence of the Cresswell and Victoria caves is 
used to support the high antiquity of man].
8vo., pp.
xiv.
+385, with maps 
and woodcuts ; London.
Sept.
1S93.
28o 
NOTE— BO TAN I 
r 
Convallaria majalis in Cumberland : a correction.
— In my paper on the 
* Plants of S.W. Cumberland, 5 at p.
141 of this volume, please read 'at Stanley 
Gill' instead of 'at Stock Gill.
5 — Lister Petty, Ulverston, May 19th, 1893.
NOTE— MOLL USCA.
Limax cinereo-niger in Bilsdale, Yorkshire.
— On the 20th inst., while out 
with some friends on the northern slope of Roppa Plantation, and not far from 
Rosy Dyke Farm, Bilsdale, at an elevation of about 900 feet, a small example of 
this rarity, quite black and without stripes or markings, was brought to me by 
Miss Annie Baker, a little friend of six years of age, who had found it amongst the 
bilberries and cranberries.
— W.
Denison Roebuck, Leeds, Aug. 26th, 1S93.
NO TE— ORNITHOL OGY.
Redwings killed by the frost.
— During the month of severe weather 
between Dec. ioth, 1892, and Jan. 10th, 1893, ,ne on ty birds found killed by the 
frost in the grounds here were two Redwings {Turdus Hiaciis 'L.) apparently 
both males.
One found dead on Jan. 6th, and the other dying; I failed to 
resuscitate it, and it died in the evening of the same day.
I know what White 
says about their susceptibility to cold (Selborne Letter, Aug. 1st, 1771), but never 
saw it exemplified before.
Late in December a couple of these birds were seen 
on the * rough pastures ' above us, whether a pair or the same two of course cannot 
say.
— Lister Petty, Ulverston, N.
Lanes., May 19th, 1893.
NOTE— MAMMALIA.
Water Shrew at Louth, Lincolnshire.
— I captured a Water Shrew 
{Crossopits fodiens), in Monk's Dyke, Louth, on the 16th July.
It swam as if to 
the manner born, and not after the mode of the Common Shrew.
I was of 
opinion that it was what the fen men call the 'blind mouse/ and the specimen 
on being submitted to competent authority was pronounced to be the Water Shrew.
The old book which enables me to identify the Sorex fodiens thus describes it : — 
*It has a long slender nose, very small eyes hid in the fur, colour of the head and 
upper parts of the body, black; throat, breast and belly of a light ash colour; 
beneath the tail a triangular dusky spot; much larger than Sorex araneus ; length 
from nose to tail 3!
inches, tail two inches.
Long since known in England, but 
lost till May 1768, when it was discovered in the fens near Revesley Abbey, 
Lincolnshire ; burrows in the banks near water; is called by the fen men the 
blind mouse.'— A.
R. Yeoman, Louth, 24th July, 1893.
NOTE—COLEOPTERA, 
Acanthocinus aedilis at Leeds, Hull, and Newton-le- Willows.— I have this 
season seen two examples of this fine beetle.
The first was found in the spring 
of this year, perched on a lady's bonnet, in one of the streets of Hunsiet, Leeds, 
and brought to my friend Mr. S.
H. Mackie.
The second I saw through the 
instrumentality of my friend Mr. Wm.
Howard, of Messrs.
M c Corquodale & Co.
Limited, Leeds, who had received it from Newton-le-Willows.
It had been found 
pn the 9th August, by bricksetters, who were pointing an old wall, in the wagon- 
works of the L.
& N.W. Ry. Co., at Earlestown, Lancashire.
In picking out 
the old mortar the beetle walked out.
The Company get a quantity of timber 
from Grimsby, and the place where the beetle occurred was only two or three 
hundred yards from the timber sheds.
For these particulars we are indebted to 
Mr. John Owen, of Earlestown.
Mr. Baker informs me that a couple of examples 
have lately occurred at Hull, one of them being in the possession of the Rev. A.
Thornley, M.A., F.E.S., of South Leverton.
— W.
Denison Roebuck, Leeds, 
Aug. ioth, 1893.
Naturalist, 
28l 
GEOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY OF 
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Nottingham Meeting, 1893.
I [Woodcut, arms] | A Contribution | to the | 
Geology and Natural History | of Nottinghamshire.
| Edited by | 
J. W.
Carr, M.A., F.G.S., | [three lines of titles].
| — | Price Two Shillings 
Net. I — J Nottingham : | James Bell, Carlton Street.
| 1893.
In this opportunely published book, which is bound in paper 
boards and extends to about a hundred pages, we have an excellent 
summary, with lists, of the geology and natural history of Nottingham- 
shire, and no more useful handbook could have been prepared for 
such members of the Association as are sufficiently curious as to 
wish to learn what they can of the county which they are visiting.
In the preparation of this book Mr. Carr has been ably assisted by 
other workers.
He is himself responsible for the geological chapter, 
with the assistance of Mr. James Shipman, F.G.S., and the Rev.
J. Magens Mello, M.A., F.G.S., the latter of whom supplies the 
account of the Cresswell Bone-Caves and the remains they have 
yielded.
Mr. Carr is also the writer of such faunal lists as he 
has not placed in the hands of specialists.
His list of mammalia 
includes about 30 species, of one of which (Rhinolophns ferrum- 
equinum) we confess we should like to have confirmatory evidence.
Full particulars are given of the various species of mammals, as well 
as of the reptiles, amphibians and fishes.
Mr. F.
B. Whitlock has 
furnished the admirable list o( birds, for each of which its faunistic 
position and relative commonness or rarity are stated.
In ento- 
mology the only order treated of is Lepidoptera, of which the 
species are enumerated, with a few references and items of informa- 
tion.
The list of mollusca is from the pen of Mr. B.
Sturges Dodd, 
who gives 109 species and numerous varieties, with plentiful indica- 
tions of locality, the group having been well worked by the many 
excellent conchologists on which Nottingham has been able to pride 
itself.
A list of 1 2 earthworms is given on the authority of Rev. Hilderic 
Friend, F.L.S. The flora is not treated in extenso, as could have 
been wished, but is the subject of a summary by Air. H.
Fisher, who 
gives numerous notes on the most interesting species, the additions 
to previously published lists, a long list of aliens, and enumerations 
of the mosses, hepatics, lichens, and fungi known to occur.
A useful 
appendix by Mr. Shipman and Mr, Carr gives a partial bibliography 
of the principal works and papers on the geology of Nottinghamshire.
Altogether the work is well done, well printed, and calculated to 
be of great use, not merely in connection with the immediate occasion 
of its production, but also to all future investigators, and Mr. Carr is 
to be heartily congratulated upon the excellence of his work.
— \V\D.R.
Sept.
1893.
282 
NOTES AND NEWS.
Mr. Lister Petty, Ulverston, Lancashire, would be obliged to those who have 
botanised in North Lancashire, and printed their lists in the Transactions or 
Proceedings of local Natural History Societies, if they would kindly communicate 
the reference to him, or still better a copy of the papers.
So many people have 
botanised between the Winster, the Brathay, and the Duddon, that probably such 
lists are in existence, and are very difficult to trace.
References to newspaper 
articles not desired.
Death has been busy this year among the naturalists of our northern counties, 
and the obituary list is a long one.
Cheshire has also to mourn the loss of Mr. G.
W. Shrubsole, of Chester, one 
of the founders and most valued members of the Chester Society of National 
Science, and a good worker among the mollusca and some lower forms of animal 
life.
Many will learn with regret of the death, in his 8oth year, of the Rev. H.
H. 
Iliggins, M.
A., of Liverpool.
Mr. Higgins was the author of numerous books and 
papers in Natural History.
He founded, in i860, the Liverpool Naturalists' 
Field Club, and has also been President of the Microscopical and the Literary and 
Philosophical Societies of the same city.
We record, with regret, the death of a well-known Yorkshire naturalist and 
geologist, Mr. George Robert Vine, of Sheffield.
Almost entirely self-educated, 
Mr. Vine has long devoted himself to research in the field and with the microscope, 
and, in particular, has become a high authority on recent and fossil Polyzoa.
Readers of ' The Naturalist ' will remember his series of articles some years ago 
on the * Micro-palseontology of the Northern Carboniferous Shales,' and other 
papers in more recent volumes.
By the decease of the Mayor of Halifax (Mr. James Wm. Davis, F.S.A., 
F.L.S., etc.), Yorkshire loses a geologist who has done no small share of 
scientific work in spite of the claims upon his time by commercial and municipal 
engagements.
He will long be remembered by the volume upon 'West Yorkshire/ 
which appeared in 1878 from the pens of himself and Mr. F.
Arnold Lees.
His 
loss will be particularly felt by the Yorkshire Geological and Polytechnic Society, 
to which he became Honorary Secretary at a time of depression in the Society's 
affairs.
The death of Mr. George Brook, F.L.S., which took place at Aliandale, 
Northumberland, on the 12th of August, was very sudden, as he had during the 
day been shooting in his best form, and was particularly well in health.
His age 
was thirty-six, and he was a native of Huddersfield.
He took a leading part in 
the reorganisation of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in 1876, and in its work, 
as one of its honorary secretaries for some years afterwards.
He afterwards 
devoted himself to Embryology, particularly of fishes, and became Lecturer in 
Comparative Embryology at the University of Edinburgh.
Later still, he turned 
his attention to the study of corals, was the author of one of the ' Challenger f 
memoirs, and only this year of a British Museum Catalogue of Madreporarian 
Corals.
As a coming man in this department, science suffers much by his 
untimely decease.
We have to deplore the death of Mr. Robert Holland, of Frodsham, Cheshire, 
which took place last June.
He was consulting botanist and examiner of seeds 
for the Cheshire Agricultural Society.
He was a sound botanist, and an authority 
on the folk-lore of his county.
He will ever be remembered for the c Dictionary 
of English Plant Names,* written in conjunction with Mr. James Britten, and for 
his ' Glossary of Words used in the County of Chester,' a veritable storehouse of 
information 
of Cheshire.
Naturalist, 
283 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT ASKERN.
A departure was made from the usual custom whereby the 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union makes it a rule not to visit the same 
locality twice for an excursion, when Askern was selected for the 
103rd of the series, on Thursday, the 15th of June.
There was, 
however, a sufficient reason in the fact that in 1886 all the low-lying 
country about Askern was flooded for many miles to such an extent 
as to entirely prevent the work in micro-zoology and micro-botany 
which it had been confidently expected to be done.
In this respect 
there could not have been a more complete contrast, for on the 
15th of June this year the country had suffered so long from 
drought that many ponds and water-courses were dried up, so that 
while on the former occasion access could not be had to them by 
reason of the super-abundance of water, on this access was difficult 
by reason of the stretches of soft mud which surrounded the ponds.
The arrangements for investigating the district included three 
main lines of route, and in making them the Secretaries had been 
heartily supported by the members of the neighbouring societies of 
Doncaster, Barnsley, and Ackworth School.
The Doncaster members 
were well to the front in providing leaders for the parties, while the 
Barnsley Society made special driving arrangements for joining in 
the day's work.
It was, moreover, particularly gratifying to have so 
strong a muster of the juvenile naturalists of Ackworth Friends' 
School as made their appearance in charge of two of their masters, 
Mr. Neale and Mr. C.
J. Evans.
Permission had been granted for 
their estates to be visited by Messrs.
F. Bacon Frank, of Campsall ; 
G. B.
C. Yarborough, of Camps Mount ; Percy S.
Neville, of Shel- 
brook Park ; and G.
Charlesworth, of Skellow Grange ; Mr. Frank 
showing further interest by meeting the party which visited Campsall, 
and facilitating their researches in every possible way.
All parties started from Askern Station at 10.30 a.m. A strong 
contingent, led by the Rev. F.
H. Allen, Vicar of the neighbouring 
parish of Moss, and afterwards joined by Mr. M.
H. Stiles, of 
Doncaster, proceeded direct to the prolific brick-pond at Thorpe, 
from which they returned by way of the Shirley pool and jungle, 
the Haywood and Wrang Car drains, and Askern Pool, collecting 
as they returned.
The second party was to have been under the 
guidance of Messrs.
J. M.
Kirk and George Winter, both of 
Doncaster, but these gentlemen having been detained, the party 
moved off in charge of Mr. Claude Leatham, Mr. Kirk catching 
up with it later on.
Its operations were directed to the exploration 
of the woods, ponds, and drains at Campsall, in which Mr. Frank 
Sept.
ig 93 .
284 THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT ASKERN.
gave valuable help.
The members of this party then took up the 
line appointed for a third one, and investigated the woods at 
Burghwallis and Owston, returning thence to Askern.
What 
should have been the third party did not start, as its leader, 
Mr. H.
H. Corbett, of Doncaster, was detained unexpectedly by 
professional duties.
The weather was oppressively sultry and 
trying to most of the members, and had had considerable 
adverse effect on the collecting-grounds, the whole country being 
I 
very dry.
All parties converged on the Swan Hotel at Askern, where tea 
was partaken of.
The sectional meetings were, however, first held, 
tea not being ready at the time appointed, in consequence of a 
misunderstanding as to the hour.
However, the general meeting 
was held at the time appointed, the bowling-green affording a 
suitable place on so fine a day.
The chair was occupied by the 
Rev. William Fowler, M.A., Vicar of Liversedge, an ex-president, 
Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth acting as hon.
secretary, in the unavoid- 
able absence of Mr. Baker.
The Societies represented were those 
at Barnsley, Wakefield, Elland, Bradford (Nat. Soc), Leeds (four 
societies), Goole, Dewsbury, Halifax, Doncaster, Ackworth, Hull 
(two societies), Huddersfield, Scarborough, Sheffield, and Liversedge, 
and the total individual attendance was about 60 or 70.
Three new 
members of the Union were elected, viz., Miss L.
W. Stephenson, 
of Harrogate ; Mr. John Newton Coombe, of Sheffield ; and 
Wentb 
J 
Bedford (Leeds) the best thanks of the Union were voted to the 
gentlemen who had given leave for their estates to be visited, to 
the leaders of parties, and to the contributors to the excursion- 
programme, after which the sectional reports were called for.
For the Conchological Section the report was prepared by its 
Secretaries, Messrs.
Wra. Nelson (Leeds) and F.
W, Fierke (Hull), 
but as they had to leave before the Section was called upon, 
Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., gave a brief resume of the 
observations made.
Mr. Fierke's report is as follows : — The excursion, so far as 
the conchologists were concerned, presented a remarkable con- 
trast to the conditions under which the previous one at Askern 
was held.
In 1887 the country was flooded ; this year the 
drought had nearly dried everything up, and the district, in 
common with other parts of the country, made a poor hunting 
round for conchologists for either land or freshwater mollusca, 
although, as regards the latter, the dykes compared favourably 
with other districts, as some of them are supplied fro m larger 
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION AT ASKERN.
285 
sheets of water.
At Shirley Pool in particular the edge of the 
water was in many places out of reach of collectors, an expanse 
of soft mud intervening between it and terra firma.
On the 
whole it was perfectly evident there was not much to choose 
between the 1887 and 1893 excursions.
On the present occasion 
the Section was fairly well represented, as, in addition to its two 
hon.
secretaries, the party included Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, 
F.L.S., Mr. W.
Rushforth, and Mr. J.
E. Crowther.
Mr. Roebuck 
selected the route to Campsall Woods, and the others proceeded 
along Askern Pool to Shirley Pool and Jungle, under the 
guidance of Mr. W.
Nelson, who had previous knowledge of the 
district.
The dyke running off Askern Pool had been specially 
noticed for its albino varieties, but even with the aid of Mr. Nelson, 
who has collected them in byegone years, not the slightest indication 
was seen to be exhibited in any of the specimens of LimncBa peregra 
or Linmcea pa/ustris, which were all very eagerly examined in hope- 
ful anticipation of meeting with this interesting variety.
At the end 
of the path we turned into the field which had been mentioned as 
containing some important lacustrine remains and an examina- 
tion of the mole-heaps, which are very numerous, resulted in the 
discovery of Viviparus contectus, a species supposed to have become 
extinct in the district.
A few moments' attention was enough to 
convince the party that Viviparus had once been very common and 
that by its numbers and surroundings it might stilt survive in the 
neighbourhood.
Of this, however, we were not able to satisfy our- 
selves.
The drain fronting the field had been cleaned out and its 
rejectamenta did not reveal the remains of this species, although 
many common species were well represented.
It is true an old shell 
was taken out of the drain, but it did not seem to be proof that it 
had not been dropped into the w r ater, as on the ground only a few 
yards off numerous loose specimens were deposited.
There can be 
little doubt that excessive cleaning of the drains and dykes is 
inimical to the well-being and propagation of the species, and that as 
districts in which it is known to occur become more and more 
cultivated the less likelihood will there be of its continuing a member 
of their fauna.
As we were not satisfied that the shell had been 
ejected from the drain we proceeded to carefully examine the soil in 
the field.
These operations soon gave us ample evidence of the 
existence at one time of an extensive marsh or lake, in which a good 
variety of mollusca had lived.
In fact several good sections were 
procured with shells scattered through the peaty clay and marl in 
situ corresponding exactly to the lacustrine deposits exposed in the 
cliffs of the Holderness coast.
One or two sections were exceedingly 
Sept.
1893.
286 THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT ASKERN.
marly in character, and contained numerous opercula of Bythinia 
tentaculata.
Moles were doubtless responsible for the exposure of 
the shells on the surface, as the soil was thrown up during the carry- 
ing on of their subterannean operations.
In order to prove that 
these little mounds were not the only depositories of the shells we 
excavated away from them about a foot deep and again met with 
shell remains.
This seemed conclusive evidence of the lacustrine 
character of the district and that the shells to be found on the 
surface had been really conveyed through the agency of the moles 
from these deposits.
Planorbis vortex, P.
umbilicatus, P.
corneus, 
P. contortus, Limncea peregra, L.
stagnalis, L.
palustris, Bythinia 
tentaculata and Valvata cristata are species of mollusca still common 
all over the district, whilst Viviparus, as far as we know, is not known 
at present to occur anywhere in the district.
At the same time it 
would not be wise to be dogmatic on this point, as from the fact that 
the remains of the shell are so common there is a high degree of 
probability that it may have survived in some of the dykes.
In 
addition to the shells we have named, a specimen of Planorbis 
fontanus (Lightfoot) was obtained, which Mr. Nelson informed the 
party had not been to his knowledge previously recorded from the 
deposit.
The remainder of the time was spent at Shirley Pool and the 
Jungle.
Very little was seen of the terrestrial mollusca, whilst odd 
examples of aquatic species could be seen in the jungle some 
distance from the water, apparently where they had been left as the 
banks became dried up.
Such species as Limncea palustris were 
even taken in the middle of the jungle, which evidently, in rainy 
seasons, must become entirely inundated.
A very interesting 
banded form of the last named species was collected by 
Mr. Crowther.
Six white parallel lines passed most distinctly 
round the body whorl.
The following is a complete list of the 
mollusca noted during the day : 
(W 
Hyalinia alliaria, If. nitidula, H.
nitida, Helix rotundata, H.
aspersa, 
H. nemoralis, H.
cantiana, H.
hispida, Cochlicopa lubrica, Succinea 
putris, Carychium minimum, Planorbis fontanus, Planorbis nautileus 
(pond near Burghwallis, W.
D. R.), P.
vortex, P.
carinatus, 
P. umbilicatus, P.
corneus, P.
contortus, Physa fontinalis, Limncea 
peregra, L.
stagnalis, Z.
palustris, Velletia lacustris (Shirley Pool), 
Bythinia tentaculata, B.
leachii, Valvata piscinalis, V.
cristata, 
Sphcerium corneum, Pisidium fontinale, and P.
pusillitnu 
For the Entomological Section, in the absence of all its officers, 
reports were given by Mr. H.
H. Corbett, M.R.C.S..
of Doncaster, 
Joseph 
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS* UNION AT ASKERN.
287 
Mr. Corbett writes that the Lepidoptera taken were without 
interest, Lyccena a/exis, Anthocharis cardamines, and Eudidia mi 
being the most noteworthy species recorded.
Mr. Joseph Coe writes of the Coleoptera as follows : — On 
alighting from the train at Askern station we were met with a good 
omen for a successful day, by immediately coming across Carabus 
violaceus on the station platform, and notwithstanding the fact that 
June is one of the least exciting months of the year for the 
coleopterist, and also taking into consideration the very dry season, 
the fortune met with was fairly good.
Many of the beetles in the 
appended list, however, were single specimens and there were few 
examples of abundance.
The route taken was the one from Askern Pool to Shirley Pool 
and Jungle.
Askern Pool appeared to be destitute of entomological 
life and did not occupy much time, but the drain leading 
from it yielded well.
Here the gaudily marked 'harlequin' beetle, 
Prasocuris phellandrii was found to be in great numbers upon 
the leaves of the brooklime ( Veronica beccabwiga) ; Ilybius ater^ 
Platambus maciilatas, and Deronectes assimilis were also among 
the captures.
Overturning stones and logs of wood en route, — usually a fruitful 
method of search, — was of little avail, the very beautiful although 
very common Anchomenus dorsalis and Pterostichus niger being the 
only species noted.
Sweeping the very abundant herbage was more 
encouraging, several species of Telephorus^ or 'harvest bugs 7 as 
they are sometimes popularly called, three species of Apion and the 
twenty-two spotted lady-bird, Coccinella 2 2 -punctata, being among 
those taken.
The search for stercoraceous species in the pastures about Shirley 
was, for want of time, much shorter than we should have wished, as 
the ground gave promise of being productive ; Aphodii were turned 
up in fair variety and Geotrupes stercorarius was dug from a depth 
of quite twelve inches.
The first noticeable feature upon arriving at Shirley Pool was the 
abundance of that moisture-loving beetle, Elaphrus cupreus, on the 
banks.
The water-net next became the modus operandi, but the 
results did not nearly come up to the expectations roused by the 
promising aspect of the water.
Work was only possible at the 
'landslip' end, owing to the treacherous nature of the ground at 
the borders in other parts; Agabus nebulosits with its beautifully 
polished tortoiseshell elytra was one of the earlier captures and the 
allied 
afterwar s.
Sept.
1893.
288 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION AT ASKERN.
Investigations in the Jungle were somewhat disappointing, but 
Scaphidium quadrimaculatu?n came as a reward just before 
leaving.
The following list includes the species noted by Mr. Bayford, who 
did not reach Askern till late in the day, and also those by the 
coleopterists among the Ackworth School boys.
Helophorus brevipalpis Bed.
Helophorus nubilus F.
Anaoena globula Payk.
Philhydrus testaceus F.
Sphceridium scarabseoides L.
Cercyon ruemorrhoidalis F.
Cercyon unipunctatus L.
Necrophorus humator F.
Silpha rugosa L.
Colon brunneum Latr.
Stenus pubescens Steph.
Tachyporus obtusus L.
Tachyporos chrysomelinus L.
Tachyporus hypnorum F.
Philonthus seneus Rossi.
Coccinella 22-punctata L.
Scaphidium quadrimaculatum 01.
Aphodius fossor L.
Aphodius haemorrhoidalis L.
Aphodius fimetarius L.
Aphodius ater DeG.
Aphodius rufescens F.
Aphodius contaminatus Herbst.
Aphodius luridus F.
Athous haemorrhoidalis F.
Hydrothassa 
Agriotes sputator L 
Telephorus lividus L.
Carabus violaceus L.
Elaphrus cupreus Duft.
Elaphrus riparius L.
Loricera pilicornis F.
Notiophilus biguttatus F.
Leistus ferrugineus L.
Stomis pumicatus Panz.
Nebria brevicollis F.
Nebria gyllenhalii Sch.
Clivina fossor L.
Bembidium monticoia Sturm 
Benbidium litorale Ol.
Pterostichus niger Sch.
Pterostichus madidus F.
Pterostichus vulgaris L.
Calathus melanocephalus L.
Anchomenus dorsalis Mull.
Anchomenus albipes F.
Anchomenus angusticoilis F.
Anchomenus oblongus F.
Dyschirius globosus Hbst.
Halipius fulvus F.
Haliplus ruficoliis DeG.
Halipius confinis Steph, 
Laccophilus obscurus Pz.
Deronectes 12-pustulatus Ol.
Deronectes assimilis Payk.
Deronectes depressus F.
Hydroporus palustris L.
Ccelambus versicolor Sch.
Coelambus incequalis F.
Colymbetes fuscus L.
Agabus bipustulatus L.
Agabus guttatus Payk.
Agabus nebulosus Forst.
Agabus conspersus Marsh.
Platambus maculatus L, 
Ilybius ater DeG.
Ilybius fuliginosus F.
Gyrinus natator Scop.
Gyrinus minutus F.
Hydrobius fuscipes L.
Helophorus aquaticus L.
Telephorus pellucidus F.
Telephorus lituratus Fall.
Malthodes marginatus Latr.
Malachius bipustulatus L.
Chrysomela distinguenda Steph 
Prasocuris phellandrii L.
Crepidodera ferruginea Scop.
Apion trifoiii L.
Apion violaceum Kirby.
Apion apricans Hbst.
Phyliobius oblongus L.
Phyliobius urtioe DeG.
Otiorrhynchus rugifrons Gyll- 
Sitoncs lineatus L.
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT ASKERX.
289 
For the Botanical Section reports were given by Mr. A.
H. 
Pawson (Leeds), Secretary for Phanerogamic Botany, and by 
Mr. Charles Crossland (Halifax), Secretary for Mycology.
Mr. Pawson remarked that the botanists of the party at once 
turned their eves to the pools and the marshes, for in this low-lying 
land these were to them the region of promise.
They meant no 
disrespect to the dry land in this case.
Magnesian limestone is 
a soil of which the plant-lover never thinks without rapture, but here 
there are no exposures of it in cliffs and crags such as delight his 
eyes about Thorparch and Knaresborough.
The natural rock is 
almost entirely hidden by drift and alluvium which have left a flat 
surface, admirably adapted for agriculture, and so thoroughly is it 
utilised for that purpose that the territories of the wild children of 
the plain have been sadly abridged.
The hedge-banks and an 
occasional bit of tangle alone remain to them.
Their cousins of the 
marshes, however, are happier in having contented themselves with 
land of no economic value, and they are left to possess it in peace.
Nay, the operations of the agriculturist have been even favourable 
to these water-plants.
He must perforce leave to them their 
marshes, and, in draining his other lands, he has provided them with 
numerous ditches of varying depths (which by a periodical cleansing 
he keeps free from the coarser growths which would soon entirely 
choke them) in whose silent and almost stagnant waters the 
Marestail, the Bladderworts, the Batrachian Ranunculi, and the 
Water Violet find exactly the place which suits them best, and 
flourish undisturbed by the too boisterous and jostling company of 
the great Reeds, the Bulrushes, and the giant Sedges which lord it 
over the marsh.
It was by fields and bye-paths that members made their way to 
Shirley Pool and its adjacent marshy jungle, noting on the way 
Hippuris vulgaris in fine flower and Rhamnus catharticus and the 
less frequent R.
frangula, trees usually of different levels, growing 
side by side.
The great dryness of the season gave an unusually 
good opportunity of working the marshes.
Overtopped by the tall 
Reeds, one was able to penetrate into the domain of the fro and 
the fishes with almost dry feet, and to handle and examine growing 
plants which it is usually very difficult to approach.
The time of the 
year was too early for the full glory of the Bulrushes and the great 
Loose-strifes, but the Sedges and Flags were superb, and the rare 
sight of a mass of that splendid Buttercup, Ranunculus lingua, with 
flowers expanded to the utmost in the hot sunshine, like chalices of 
enamelled gold, repaid the botanists for all their journey.
Thalictrum 
A _ 
Oct. 1893.
290 THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT AS KERN.
the Marsh Buckler Fern everywhere drapes the feet of the green 
Flags and tasselled Sedges with the delicate lace-work of its fronds.
It was a ramble to be long remembered.
The more noteworthy 
plants of the day's work were Ranunculus lingua, R.
tricophyllus, 
R. circinatus, Thalicirum flavum, Picris echioides, Hottonia palustris, 
Genista tinctoria, Parnassia palustris, Rhamnus frangula, R.
cath- 
articus, Habenaria chlorantha, Cladium mariscus, Calamagrostis 
lanceolata, Hippuris vulgaris, and Lastrcza thelypteris.
In a bog 
near the village (Enanthe lachenalii was found of so rich a growth 
that it was at first taken for CE.
pimpinelloides.
The only cryptogams reported upon were the Fungi, concerning 
which Mr. Charles Grassland remarked that on account of the dry 
weather fungi were rather scarce, very few — not more than two — 
agarics being seen, viz., Piute us cervinus and Stropharia semiglobatus, 
which, with Poria versicolor, Dcedalea unicolor, and Stercum 
hirsutum included all the Hymenomycetes met with.
Of the 
Gastromycetes, Spharobolus stellatus was noted, while Lycoperdon 
epidendron and Reticularia umbrina were the only Myxomycetes.
The majority of the species collected were microscopic.
Many of 
them could not be named at sight, but had to be stored away for 
future and closer examination.
Though the day was very hot, with 
a tropical sun at full glare, Mr. H.
T. Soppitt was indefatigable in 
his search after these minute species, and with a view of making 
most of the day he and the writer started early and broke the 
journey at Knottingley.
Here was found very sparingly the 
secidiospores of Uromyces polygoni Pers.
on Polygonum aviculare; 
Perisporium vulgare Corda on dead cabbage-stalks ; Peronospora 
affinis Rossm.
on Fumaria officinalis ; and Cladosporium brachomium 
B. & Br. on Fumaria with the preceding species.
In the Askern district attention was mostly devoted to the 
jungle and fields adjoining Shirley Pool.
The jungle will be 
a prolific hunting-ground for fungi later in the season.
Reticularia 
lycoperdon Rost.
was noticed.
Of course the very common Molhsia 
cinerea (Batsch) was there ; also M.
atro-cinerea Cooke, Lachnea 
scutellata (L.), Lachnella apala B.
& Br., Nectria mammoides 
Plowright, Sph&rella rumicis Desm., Peronospora effusa Rabenh.
on 
A triplex patula, Polyactis fascicularis Corda, Penicillium crustaceum 
Fr. var.
coremium on rabbit's dung, and ^Fgerita candias on wood.
Species found belonging to the Uredinese were Uromyces poce Rabn., 
Puccinia coronata Corda, secidiospores on Rhamnus, P- poarutn 
Niel, P.
caricis (Schum.
), secidiospores on Urtica dioica, teleuto- 
spores on Carex 3 P.
phragmites (Schum.), secidiospores on Rumex, 
and [/redo teleutospores on Phragmites communis, and P.
persistens, 
Naturalist, 
,> 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS UNION AT ASKERN.
29 1 
secidiospores on Tkalictrum flavunu The latter is rather a rare 
Puccinia, and was first found in Yorkshire at Goole, by Mr. Birks, in 
June 1884.
Since the meeting, Mr. Bunker, of Goole, has kindly 
forwarded additional specimens from that district, where it appears 
to be plentiful.
There was very little of it at Shirley Pool Jungle, only 
one plant affected by it being seen.
P. snaieolens Pers.
on Carduus 
arvensis, Puccinia bullata Pers.
on Conium maculatum, and Tri- 
phragmium ulmaruz (Schum.) on Spircea ulmaria were also met with.
Ustilago segetum (Bull.) on barley was the only representative of 
the Ustilaginege.
For obvious reasons it was not possible to give a 
list at the meeting.
For the Geological Section the report at the meeting was given 
by Mr. Percy F.
Kendall, F.G.S., and the following account is from 
the pen of Mr. J.
W. Stather, F.G.S., of Hull, one of the Secretaries 
of the Section : 
The geologists first visited the large gravel-pit to the S.W. of the 
village, where the so-called Estuarine Beds are seen.
This series of 
beds had been altered a good deal by the progress of recent 
excavation, and consists now of (i) a bed of soft sandstone with lines 
of marly inclusions, the whole dipping steadily to the eastward.
This 
bed was traversed by several faults which did not, however, affect 
the overlying beds.
(2) A great thickness of coarse gravel with 
intercalations of sand.
The stones in the gravel were exclusively 
Magnesian Limestone, rounded, sub-angular, or quite sharp, and 
ranged in size from small pebbles to blocks three feet in diameter.
This bed rested upon an eroded, stepped surface of No. 1.
No 
false-bedding was observed in the gravels or in the underlying sand- 
stone.
Prof.
P. F.
Kendall, who accompanied the party, expressed 
the opinion that the sandstone was probably of Permian age, and 
that the gravels were produced by the action of streams flowing over 
the Magn 
rocks would be rendered impervious by being permanently frozen at 
a little distance from the surface.
Under such circumstances the 
summer rains, and more especially the melting of snow in the spring, 
would give rise to great rushes of water down the valleys, sweeping 
before them all the fragments of rock lying loose upon the surface.
Along the eastern edge of the Magnesian Limestone, where it falls 
away beneath the Alluvial deposits of the Don valley, such streams 
would probably drop their loads somewhat suddenly when they met 
the large body of relatively still water that seems to have occupied 
the area during Glacial times.
Such an explanation, Mr. Kendall 
said, had been offered of the origin of the Coombe-rock of Sussex, by 
Mr, Clement Reid, of H.M. Geological Survey, 
Oct. tJU-> 
292 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT ASKERN.
The party next proceeded via Sutton, seeing on the way an 
example of false-bedding in the Upper Magnesian Limestone, to 
Campsall, where a gravel and sand pit was visited showing features 
similar to those exhibited at Askern.
The gravels differed, however, 
in containing, besides Magnesian Limestone, pebbles of quartz and 
of a coarse red sandstone.
The sandstone underlying this series 
was found to contain similar quartz pebbles, and in an adjacent 
builders' yard the sandstone was hard and identical in appearance 
with that of the gravels.
The party returned to Askern via a 
limestone quarry to the north of the village, where obscure traces of 
fossils were found.
For obvious reasons no report on the microscopic forms of life 
could be given at the meeting, but afterwards the finds made by the 
microscopists were w r orked up, and Mr. M.
H. Stiles has furnished 
the following report on behalf of the investigators of pond- and ditch- 
J 
The more 
Doadium 
railway pond on the Doncaster Road, and Volvox and Stephanoceros 
at Thorpe brick-pond.
On the Campsall side Mr. Kirk found 
nothing worth recording.
Volvox globator (Thorpe).
Cosmarium botrytis.
Cosmarium margarkiferum 
Closterium acerosum.
Ciosterium costatum, 
Closteritun lineatum.
Closterium lunula.
Closterium striolatum.
Docidium sp.
Pediastrum boryanum.
Scenedesmus quadricauda.
Amphora ovalis.
Asterionella formosa.
Cocconeis placentula.
Cocconema cistula.
Cocconema lanceolatum.
Cyclotella kutzingiana.
Cymbella cuspidata.
Cymbella ehrenbergii.
Cymatopleura elliptica.
Cymatopleura solea.
Diatoroa vulgare.
Diatoma eiongatum, 
Diadesmis confervacea.
Epithemia turgida.
Frustulia saxonica.
Fragilaria capucina.
Gomphonema acuminatum 
Gomphonema capitatum.
Gomphonema constrictum.
Gomphonema olivaceum.
Meridion circulare.
Melosira varians.
Navicula affinis (?>.
Navicula amphisboena.
Navicula anmistata.
Navicula gibberula.
Navicula inflata.
Nitzschia sigmoidea.
Pleurosigma attenuatura.
Pleurosigma spencerii.
Pinnularia gracilis.
Pinnularia radiosa.
Pinnularia viridis 
Pinnularia viridula.
Synedra radians.
Synedra ulna* 
Stauroneis phtenicenteron.
Surirelia minuta.
Actinophrys sol.
Arcella vulgaris.
Vorticella nebuiifera.
Diieptus folium.
Stentor raullerL 
Naturalist, 
THE YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS' UNION AT ASKERN.
293 
Rotifer vulgaris.
Stephanoceros eichornii (Thorpe).
Monostyla quadridentata.
Hydra viridis.
Hydra vulgaris.
Canthocamptus minutus.
Cyclops quadricornis.
Daphnia pulex.
The Vertebrate Section was fairly well represented.
Among the 
members present being the President, Mr. J.
Gerrard, one of the 
Hon. Sees., Mr. R.
Fortune, by whom this report is presented, 
Mr. T, Bunker, and others.
The party was considerably strengthened 
by a detachment of boys from Ackworth School.
Owing to some unfortunate circumstance the guides allotted to 
this section were conspicuous only by their absence, the result being 
that the party, without a leader, wandered over the country side, 
getting to every place but the one they endeavoured to reach ; the 
natives evidently not knowing the places mentioned in the circular.
In spite of the misfortunes which dogged the steps of the 
members all day, a fairly good list was forthcoming at the end.
The 
find of the day was a nest and eggs of the Reed Warbler, discovered 
by one of the members of the entomological section.
It was also 
gratifying to see Goldfinches in the district.
The total number of 
species noted was 59, made up as follows: Mammals, 7; Birds, 46; 
Fishes, 4; Reptile, 1 ; Amphibian, 1.
Following is a detailed list, an 
asterisk denoting that eggs, and a dagger that young birds were found.
Mammals.
Mole.
Common Shrew.
Squirrel.
Common Field Vole.
Red Field Vole.
Hare.
Rabbit.
Birds.
Thrush.
Blackbird.
Whinchat.
Whitethroat.t 
Lesser Whitethroat.
Garden Warbler.
Willow Warbler.
Wood Warbler.
Reed Warbler.
* 
Sedge Warbler.
Hedge Sparrow.
Great Tit.
Cole Tit. t 
Marsh Tit.
Blue Tit.
Wren.
Pied Wagtail.
Tree Pipit.
Spotted Flycatcher.
Swallow, t 
Martin.
Sand Martin.* 
Creeper.
Goldfinch.
Greenfinch.
Sparrow.
Chaffinch.
Linnet.
Bullfinch, t 
Common Bunting.
Yellow-hammer, f 
Reed Bunting.* 
kylark.
Starling.t 
Jackdaw.
Rook.
Swift.
Cuckoo.
Mute Swan.* 
Ring Dove.
Stock Dove.
Pheasant, t 
Partridge, t 
Waterhen.
f 
Lapwing.
Snipe.
Fishes.
Roach.
Perch.
Pike.
Reptile.
Smooth Newt.
Amphibian.
Frog.
At the close of the meeting a cordial vote of thanks to the 
Chairman was passed, on the motion of Mr. E.
W. Thirkell, of 
^^oot, near Barnsley.— \A D.R.
Oct. 1893.
294 
BRITISH JURASSIC GASTEROPODS.
A Catalogue of the British Jurassic Gasteropoda, comprising the Genera 
and Species hitherto described, with references to their Geological Distribu- 
tion and to the Localities in which they have been found.
By W.
H. 
Hudleston, M.A., F.R.S., P.G.S., and Edward Wilson, F.G.S. Svo, 
pp.
xxxiii.
-f- 147 ; London, 1892.
The scope of this work is sufficiently described by the full title 
quoted, with the further remark that the catalogue is a critical one 
and compiled by two of the foremost living authorities.
Mr. Hudleston, 
an ex-President of the Yorkshire Naturalists 7 Union, is already well 
known to our readers.
Some of his best known work has been 
done among the Oolites of Yorkshire and other parts of England, 
and his monograph on the Gasteropoda in course of publication by 
the Palaeontographical Society is sufficient to establish his lasting 
authority on this branch of Palaeontology.
His coadjutor, Mr. Wilson, 
has long been known for his work among the Liassic mollusca.
The work now under notice includes in all a thousand species, 
besides fifteen from the Rhaetic, given in an appendix.
The rapid 
progress of British palaeontology may be gauged by comparing this 
book with Morris's 'Catalogue of British Fossils' (1854), dealing 
with the whole fossil fauna of our islands.
The work of recording 
and critically valuing the many species constituted in modern memoirs 
has become a task not for one man, however able, but for specialists 
in the several groups, and the present instalment is a worthy contri- 
bution to the work.
The practical value of such a catalogue to the working geologist 
depends upon its completeness, and here there seems to be nothing 
left to desire.
The Yorkshire collector, for example, will find here 
every species as yet recorded from the Lias of the coast, from the 
well-known fossiliferous beds of Blea Wyke, Cloughton Wyke, and 
Scarborough, the various horizons in the Corallian, etc., with 
references to the original descriptions and figures.
If he desires 
to follow out the history of a species, he will find all the requisite 
bibliographical particulars — original authorities, synonyms, etc., in- 
cluding references to foreign authors.
The work as a whole is one 
of which British geologists may be proud, and our thanks are due to 
the authors for the unsparing labour which they have bestowed to 
render it perfect.
— A.
H. 
NOTE—DIPTERA.
Diptera at Aysgarth.
— Mr. Roebuck collected several specimens of a fly i& 
Bear Park West Plantatio a May 22nd last, which I am able to identify as 
Rhingia rostrata L., which is not an uncommon species, being easily recognised 
by the conspicuoi   beak ' in front of the head.
I should be very pleased if my 
friends could send me any Yorkshire flies they may happen to come across.
— 
Percy PL Grimshaw, Museum of Science and Art, Edinburgh, June 26th, 1893.
Naturalist 
295 
A NEW SPECIES OF LUMBRICUS.
Rev. HILDERIC FRIEND, F.L.S., 
Author of l Flowers and Floiuer-Lore,' Cockermotith, 
On the ioth June, last year, I received a series of earthworms from 
Dr. Scharff which contained a fine specimen of Lumbricus whose 
characters appeared to me to be striking.
It was collected in 
Dublin, and I was puzzled at the time to decide whether it was 
simply an abnormal form of the common earthworm {Lumbricus 
terrestris L.), or whether it belonged to a distinct species.
I there- 
fore made a note of its peculiarities, and awaited an opportunity for 
coming to a decision on sufficient evidence.
In due course the much 
wished for data were at hand, for on November 16th I received from 
Mr. Redding, L.R.C.S., a second specimen, taken at Glasnevin, 
exactly corresponding in ever}' detail to the one already observed.
Careful and repeated examination of these specimens, both internally 
and externally, and detailed comparison with the type of the genus, 
have enabled me to decide that we have here an earthworm which is 
new to Great Britain, and, at the same time, new.
to science 
as well 
I may, in the first place, give a plain account of the w r orm in 
English, following it with a brief diagnosis, corresponding with that 
supplied of the Ruddy Worm {Lumbricus rubescens Friend), as 
described by me last year in a communication to the Linnean 
Society (Journal of Linn.
Soc, Zoology, Vol. xxiv, p.
305).
The adult worm is 4 inches or 10 cm.
in length when w r ell 
preserved in alcohol.
It is 8 mm.
across the girdle and sexual 
organs, while the tail is spathulate or flattened so as to measure nearly 
a centimetre in diameter.
In colour it is ruddy brown, but lighter 
than the common earthworm usually is, though in size and other 
particulars it closely resembles that species (Z.
terrestris L.), which 
we may regard as the type of the genus.
The lip or prostomium 
forms with the peristomium or first ring, a perfect mortise and tenon, 
while the under side of the lip is marked by a forked groove.
This 
is undoubtedly of service to those species which possess it, as it 
enables the worm to grasp its food more firmly than it could other- 
wise do.
The under surface of the peristomium is deeply ribbed or 
indented- On the fifteenth segment we find a pair of prominent 
pale papillae on which the male pores are situated.
In front of these 
on the preceding segment the female apertures can be clearly discerned 
Oct. i8o 3 r * 
296 
FRIEND : A NEW SPECIES OF LUMBRICUS.
while running backwards, and closely connecting the male pores 
with the girdle, we find a band or ridge similar to that 
which is often seen very distinctly in the Red Worm (Z.
rubellus 
Hoffm.).
The girdle occupies five segments only (33-37).
Every 
species of Lumbricus previously found in Great Britain possessed six 
girdle segments, but we find an analogous instance on the continent 
where one species (Z.
melibceus Rosa) is described as having a girdle 
of five segments.
Along these segments there runs on either side 
a prominent band {tubercula pubertals), which appears to cover and 
connect the whole girdle.
In reality, however, the band occupies 
segments 34-37.
The most remarkable feature about the girdle is 
the large clitellar papillae on the 34th and 36th segments.
We 
have no other species of Lumbricus which regularly exhibits these 
In the allied genus Allolobophora they are frequent.
I once observed them in a specimen of the Red Worm 
(Z.
rubellus Hoffm.) received from Dublin, but no other example has 
hitherto come under my notice.
The position of the band {tubercula pubertatis) is of extreme 
interest, as we are able, by the discovery of this species, to fill 
a curious gap.
Dr. Rosa, some years ago, drew up a chart in which 
he displays the arrangement to the clitellar band in the different 
species of Lumbricus.
We are now able to modify and improve the 
table.
organs.
L. rubellus Hoffm.
...
» • • 
L. purpureus Eisen 
L melibceus Rosa 
* + 
L* tyrtaeus Savigny 1 
L. forma No. 5, Rosa' 2 
L. terrestris Linn 
L. papillosus Friend .
. 
Z. rubescens Friend 3 
* - * 
• « fr 
28 
* • • 
29 
29 
30 
31 
31 
32 
• •» • 
* % \ 
SO 
3 1 
32 
33 
*•*• • .
. 
» • * • • • 
...
; 31 
* ft m # • • 
32 
32 
33 
33 
34 
35 i 
•*  ••- • .
• ••• 
• * • 
33 
34 
35 
36 
• • • » ..* * • • ••  
• * • 
» • • 
34 
1 1 
[35 
36 
36 
37 
37 
» • • »•» ••* *•   •• 
• • • 
35 
38 
.- 1 
A similar chart might be prepared to enable us to see at a glance 
the position of the first dorsal pore.
I give the Irish forms herewith 
in order that it may be perfected as our knowledge grows.
1 I strongly suspect this is the same as Alio, profuga Rosa.
• A form described by Rosa in   I Lumb.
del Piemonte/ p.
3 Rosa places here Z, festivits Savigny, but the descript 
enable us to decide whether or not they are synonymous.
too brief to 
Naturalist 
FRIEND : A NEW SPECIES OF LUMBRICUS 
Z. rzibescens Fr 
297 
Z. purpureas Eisen 
Z. rubellus Hofifm.
• • • 
Z. terrestris Leim.
Z .
papillosus Friend 
• • « 
* * 
1 5 
6 
• * 
• • • 
* • • 
- • • 
6 
7 
• • 
• • • 
* » • 
,\s 
* » 
*   * 
8 
9 
•• 
• • ft 
• • • 
9 
10 | 
How far this character is constant remains vet to be demon- 
strated, though Ude has made elaborate investigations which seem 
to indicate that its value is not to be despised in diagnosis.
It will 
be seen, if the foregoing chart is reliable, that there is at present no 
apparent relationship between the position of the first dorsal pore 
and the first clitellar papilla.
The setae are in four couples on each segment, and are slightly 
wider apart than in the other species.
On account of the presence 
of clitellar papillae in this species and no other, I have named it 
L. papillosus, a designation which I think well calculated to express 
the principal feature.
Rosa has recently pointed out the fact that 
Miiller has already adopted the term papillosus for another species 
of annelid.
Following the diagnosis of the Ruddy Worm (Z.
rubescens Fr.), 
and that of the other species found in Eisen's memoir, I now give 
a brief description of the new species.
Lumbricus papillosus, sp.
nov.
Corpus elongatum aut crassum, antice cylindricum, postice spatulatum.
Lotus cephalicus (sive prostomium) magnus, antice rotundatus, 
postice segmentum buccale (id est peristomium) in duas partes 
dividens ; infra pallidus, sulco longitudinali furcato.
Tubercula ventralia plerumque conspicua in segmento 15.
Cingulum e quinque segmentis (33-37) confectum ; infra duobtis 
parallelis tuberculis in segm.
34, 35, 36, 37, cum duabus 
papillis in utroque latere infra segmenta 34 et 36.
Seta ubique binae approximate.
Segmenta circa 130.
Longitudinf.
circa 10 cm., max.
diam.
8-ro mm.
Prima foramen dorsi inter segmenta 8-9.
Internally the Papillose Worm has the typical number and 
arrangement of essential organs — the gizzard in segments 17-1S, two 
pairs of spermathecas in 9 and io, and three pairs of sperm-sacs.
At the present moment the species of Lumbriais known to occur in 
Britain are five in number.
A brief accountof the four remain- 
Great 
ing species I submit herewith.
I have carefullv studied specimens of 
* 
Oct. 1893.
298 FRIEND : A NEW SPECIES OF LUMBRICUS.
each, which have been received from different parts of the kingdom, 
and find that they are typical in character, and widely distributed.
The Common Earthworm (Z.
terrestris Linn.), though formerly 
very vaguely defined, and constantly confused with a number of 
other species, especially the Long Worm (A.
longa Ude), is now 
ily recognised by the constancy of its girdle and band.
It is the 
largest of our native terrestrial annelids, often reaching a length of six 
or eight inches, when living undisturbed in rich vegetable mould.
It 
is of a warm brown colour, usually iridescent on the back and flesh- 
coloured beneath.
On the fifteenth segment it carries pale coloured 
papillae, on which are situated the male pores.
These papillse are 
a good starting-point when the segments have to be counted back- 
wards to ascertain the position of the girdle.
I have examined 
many hundreds of specimens at all seasons of the year, and have, 
without a single exception, found the girdle in the mature worm 
covering the 32nd to the 37th segments, the four innermost of which 
have the tubercula pubertatis on the ventral surface.
The setae are 
arranged on the under-side of the body in four double rows, whereas 
in the tree-worms they form eight single rows nearly equi-distant all 
over the body.
When irritated, the worm exudes a clear, colourless 
slime, but we never find a liquid substance poured from the dorsal 
pores.
In the case of the Tree Worm, and several species of 
Allolobophora, this is the case, while a few instances occur in which 
a smell of garlic, or some other vegetable, is emitted.
The Ruddy Worm (Z.
rubescens Friend) is identical in point of 
size and colour with the new species described above.
It was first 
discovered by me in Yorkshire a couple of years ago, and described 
in detail in the Linnean Society's Journal, Zoology, vol.
xxiv, p.
305 
et seq.
The Irish specimens which I have examined in no way 
differ from the type, which is about four inches in length, and has 
an average number of 120 segments.
It has probably been mis- 
taken by earlier investigators for one or other of the worms which 
it closely resembles, though Savigny may have intended this species 
when he wrote his brief account of Z.
festivus.
The curious point 
about the matter is that no one on the Continent has ever found 
a worm answering to the description of tvigny, though he wrote 
more than half a century ago.
In the Ruddy Worm we have the 
male pores again conspicuously situated on papillae, while in the two 
remaining species they are wanting altogether.
The girdle extends 
from the 34th to the 39th segment, and, as usual, the band stretches 
across the four innermost.
The discovery of the new worm bridges 
over the gap between the Common Earthworm and the Ruddy 
Worm, and they begin their girdle respectively on segments 32, 53 
Naturalist, 
FRIEND : A NEW SPECIES OF LUMBRICUS.
299 
and 34.
This fact is suggestive.
I have observed spermatophores 
on the ventral surface of the body of this worm, between the male 
pores and the clitellum ; but, hitherto, I have failed to discover 
them on any other species of Lumbricus.
They are minute sacs of 
a delicate structure, balloon-shaped, and filled with germs.
The Red Worm (Z.
rubellus Hoffm.) differs from all the fore- 
going in the forward position of its girdle, and the absence of 
papillae on the 15th segment.
It is therefore impossible, as a rule, 
to know where the male pores are situated in this species and the 
next without counting the segments carefully from the head back- 
wards.
When the worm is adult, however, a band is often to be 
seen running along each side of the body from the girdle forwards 
to the 15th or 14th segment, similar to that found in the Papillose 
Worm.
The girdle commences on the 27th segment and reaches to 
the 32nd, the 28th to 31st carrying the tubercula pubertate.
This 
worm appears to be liable to variation, but what the cause may be is 
not yet known.
I have shown in a paper on Hybridity among 
Worms that the Red Worm may sometimes be found in association 
with other species.
Among the variations which have come under 
my notice the following are the most important.
One specimen 
received from Dublin had two pairs of papillae under the girdle 
exactly after the manner of the Papillose Worm.
What Eisen 
remarked of the species as found in Scandinavia I have found to be 
true here, viz., that the girdle sometimes begins and ends one 
segment in advance of the normal position.
Then in certain 
localities the hinder extremity is found to be curtailed, while one 
specimen received from Bangor recently had the girdle exactly in 
the position which it occupies in the Continental species (Z.
melibceus).
In the latter, however, there are papillae on segment 15, which did 
not occur on this abnormal specimen, or we might at once have 
added another species to our list.
The Purple Worm (Z.
purpureas Eisen) is the smallest indigenous 
species.
When in its finest form one can scarcely distinguish it from 
the last, but the girdle always occurs one segment further back, 
extending from the 28th to the 33rd.
It is specially fond of burrowing 
among droppings in pastures, and usually has a tumid ridge on the 
ventral surface of the 10th segment.
The male pores cannot be 
detected owing to the absence of papillae.
There is good reason to 
believe that this is the species which Savigny named Enterion 
castaneiim in 1829, but the early naturalists had not a sufficient 
knowledge of the most important characters to make their diagnoses 
of permanent value.
The main points may be best presented in the 
form of a chart.
"- fcH - —~ j 
Oct. 1893.
3°° 
NOTES AND NEWS.
A TABULAR VIEW OF THE BRITISH LUMBRICI 
1 
Segments occupied by Avekage.
Papilla.
LUMBR1CUS.
Girdle.
1 I st 
Band.
Dorsal 
Pore.
Length.
No. of 
Segments.
Male 
Pore.
Klse- 
where.
I. terrestris Linn., \ \ 
1757 \ 1 
32-37 
33 37 
33-36 8 /9 
5 inches.
150-200 
»5 
26 
2. papillosum Friend, \\ 
1892 / 
i 
34-37 9/'o 
4 inches.
130-150 
*5 
34,36 
3. rube see 11s Friend, ( 
1892 t 
34-39 
35-38 5/6 
4 inches.
100-130 
15 
j 28 
4. ri thelitis 1 1 off- y 
meister, 1845 ...
\ 
27-32 
28-31 7/8 
3 inches.
100-120 
\ O 
5. pnrptu-eus Eisen, ) 
1870 \ 
2S-33 
29-32 6/7 
! 2 inches.
80-100 
O 
IO 
I beg to point out the great value to the true earth-worms of the 
flattened or spathulate tail-extremity.
So far as I am aware it has 
never been observed by any of my predecessors that the habitat of 
the species and the shape of the posterior part have a direct 
relationship to each other.
It is only among those species which 
expose a portion of their body when in search of food, while the 
other remains in the burrow, that the distinctly flattened tail is 
found in our native species.
Oriental species are, as a rule, as round 
as a straw, while our tree-haunting species are usually octangular.
I shall have some curious facts to present on this point in another 
paper on ' Variation among Annelids/ resulting from my study of 
native earth and tree worms, should such a communication be 
acceptable.
Meanwhile, I am content to observe that the shape of 
the tail in the genus which we have been studying is of immense 
value, since it enables the worm to grip its burrow most tenaciously, 
and so retain its hold if an attempt be made to drag it forth.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The degree of M.Sc. has lately been conferred by the Victoria University upon 
Mr. W.
E. Hoyie, M,A.Oxon, Keeper of the Manchester Museum, and Prof.
A. 
Milnes Marshall, M.
A. ., M.D. Cant., who holds the Owens College chair of Zoology.
The Lincolnshire Naturalists' Union appears to be in a fair way to become a 
flourishing institution.
There certainly was a need for an organisation of this sort 
in the county, and it is to be hoped that other counties will also follow the example 
and possess similar ones of their own.
Most of the prominent naturalists of 
Lincolnshire are already enrolled as members, and amongst the recent additions 
to the list of life men -rs, we note the names of Lord Lilford, of Oundle Hall, 
and Mr. F.
A. Lucas, F.G.S., of Elkington Hall, near Louth.
Naturalist, 
3oi 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Papers and Records published with respect to the Natural History and 
gland 
and 
The present instalment of Bibliography has been compiled and 
edited by 
WM, DEXISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
The only previous instalment of the Bibliography of these orders 
of insects was published in the 'Naturalist' for October 1888, 
pp.
285-286, and dealt with the years 1884 to 1887 inclusive.
Anon, [various observers].
Derbyshire.
Calendar of Nature, 1879 [May-flies, Burton Bridge, S.
R. H[allam]., 
May 12th; Drake-fly, S.
R. 11.
, June 2nd; Dragon-fly, S.
G., Oct. 25].
4th Ann. Rep.
Burton-on-Trent.
Nat. Hist.
& Arch.
Soc.
? 1S80, pp.
67-70.
Anon, [not signed].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [in Isle of Man ; Dragon-fly (Libellula 
[? which]) appears, May 16].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 5, Ap. 1890, p.
162.
Anon, [signed £ Rawdon Lee'].
Westmorland, Yorkshire, Derbyshire.
y -.
•:* 
e of the May-fly [which extends north to Westmorland, where 
the ' drakes ' are common on most waters, including Windermere ; also 
plentiful on Kent and Bela and several Yorkshire streams ; generally, north 
of Derbyshire the *Stone-fly' is called   May-fly], Field, July 4th, 1891, p.
23.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Notes from Cheshire [capture of Agrim pueila and A.
minium at 
Delamere Forest ; of Libellula quadrzmaculata at Oak mere, June 13th, 
1891 ; and Libellula scotica on Hatchmere Moss].
Ent., Dec. 1891, 
pp.
286 and 289.
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
Whit-Monday [June 6th, 1892] in Delamere Forest [yielded hundreds 
of Libellula quadrimaculata and L.
scotica], Ent., July 1892, p.
1 
J. Arkle.
Cheshire.
[-Stschna juncea and Sympetrum scoticum at Delamere Forest, Sep. 17, 
1892, recorded in a note on] Colzas edusa .
. in England in 1892 .
. 
Ent., Nov. 1892, p.
276.
W, Harcourt Bath.
Westmorland and Furness.
Agrion pueila at Windermere [in immense abundance, first -week of 
August, 1887].
Nat. Monthly, Nov. 1887, p.
51.
W. Harcourt Bath.
Westmorland and Furness.
Agrion pueila, &c, at Windermere [in immense abundance on the 
borders of the lake, Aug. 1887].
Ent., Feb. 18S8, p.
62.
V» .
Harcourt Bath [not signed].
Westmorland.
Among- the Dragon-flies [a gossipy paper, with a notice of the 
capture of Enalh ma cyathigerum abundantly at Bowness-onAVindermere, 
Aug. 18S7 j habitat described].
N. H.
J., April 15th, 1892, p.
$>.
YY.
Harcourt Bath [not .signed].
Line.
N. 
Some Famous Collecting-Grounds for Dragon-flies.
By the Author 
of "An Illustrated Handbook of British Dragon- Mies," : .
III.
— The 
Fen District [noting Leuiorrhinia dubia (Glandford Btigg in Lincolnshire, 
very local), and Erythtomma najas (has been taken in Lincolnshire, but very 
rare and local)].
lilust.
Handb.
of British Dragon-flies ; reprinted in Sci.
Goss., May 1892, pp.
97-98.
Oct. 1893.
302 BIBLIOGRAPHY : NEUROPTERA AND TRICHOPTERA.
W. Harcourt Bath [not signed].
Westmorland and Furness.
Some Famous Collecting-Grounds for Dragon-flies.
By the Author 
of "An Illustrated Handbook of British Dragon-flies," .
. V.
— The 
English Lake District [giving a list of 22 species found round Windermere 
and Ambleside].
Sci. Goss., July 1892, p.
154.
H. Shortridge Clarke.
Isle of Man.
Report of the Entomological Section [of Isle of Man N.
H. S.
for 
1888 ; repeats G.
T. Porritt's list of 6 Neuroptera and 16 Trichoptera from 
Naturalist, April 1888].
Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 1S89, p.
62.
A. E.
Eaton.
Cumberland.
A Concise Generical Synopsis, with an Annotated List, of the Species 
of British Ephemeridse [the only northern record is Ephemerella not at a Eat., 
River Eden, Cumberland].
E. M.
ML, June 1888, p.
12.
A. E.
Hall, 
York S.W.
[Trichoptera observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union in 
Edlington and Wad worth Woods [near Doncaster, 16th and 17th Sept.
1891; Stenophylax concentricus\ Nat., Nov. 1891, p.
335.
Matthew Henderson.
Durham.
Drepanopteryx phalaenoides, L., in Durham [two at Gibside ; details 
given, and ed.
note by R.
McLachlan], E.
M. JNL, April 1890, p.
no.
P. M.
C. K[ermode].
Isle of Man.
Phenological Observations [giving Manx dates for ' Dragon-fly 
{libellirtaY\ Yn Lioar Manninagh, No. 2, April 1889, i.
64; and No. 9, 
April -Oct. 1 89 1, p.
293.
James J.
F. X.
King.
York Mid W.
[CEcetis notata Ramb.
occurs in four British localities, one being on 
the River Wharfe near Tadcaster, where a few were taken by F.
G. Binnie].
Proc.
N. H.
S. Glasg., New Series, vol.
iii.
part I, 1888-89 (1889), p.
ix.
R. McLachlan.
York N.W.
Drepanopteryx phalaenoides, L., in Yorkshire [captured 28th Aug.
1886, in Deepdale, Teesdale, by Mrs. Hutchinson].
E. ML M., Feb.
1890, p.
52.
J. Eardley Mason.
York N.E.
[Trichoptera observed by] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at Robin 
Hood's Bay, [21st June, 1889; Limnophilus centralis, named by G.
T, 
Porritt, taken].
Nat., Aug. 1889, P- 230.
Amos Mitchell.
Durham.
iT«:iminri 
George T.
Porritt.
Drepanopteryx phalaenoides, L., in Durham [one Oct. 1885, beat from 
Aider overhanging the Waskerley Burn, near Wokingham].
E. M.M., March 
P- 
I. of Man.
An Entomological Expedition to .
. the Isle of Man [Aug. 1887; 
Isopteryx burmeisteri, Leuctra fusciventriu Hemerobius micans, H.
/tumuli, 
H. subnebulostis, H.
nervosus, Limnophilus centralis, Z.
auricula, L.
sparsus, 
Sericostoma personatum, Lepidostoma kirta, Beraa pultata, Odontocerum 
albiceme, Hydropsyche instabilis, Philopotamus montanus, Wormaldia sub- 
nigra, Plectrocnemia con ersa, P.
genuulaia, Polycentropus Jlavomaculatus, 
Tinodes assimilis, Rkyacophila dor salts, and A gape tits fuse ipes, noted, with 
details of locality and habitat].
Nat., Ap. 1888, p.
106.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
York S.W. and N.E.
Chrysopa tenella, Stc, in West Yorkshire [in Wharncliffe Woods, near 
Sheffield, June 23rd, 1888, and one at Saltburn, Aug. 1S86 ; Micropterna 
sequax, Wormaldia occipitalis, and Beraa pullata common in Pennyspring 
Wood, Huddersfield ; particulars and dates given].
E.M.M., Nov. 1888, 
P- *3* 
Naturalist, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY : NEUROPTERA AND TRICHOPTERA.
303 
G. T.
PORRITT.
York S.W.
[Neuroptera observed with] The Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at 
Holmfirth [roth June, 1889: Sialis f'uliginosa, Nemoura meyeri, N.
variegata, 
and Hemerobius 'humuli taken].
Nat., July 1889, p.
203.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
York Mid W.
Phacopteryx brevipennis, Curt., at York [taken by G.
C. Dennis and 
Geo. Jackson, probably at Askham Bogs ; Leptocerus nigro-nervosus taken 
near the river at York last June by G.
C. Dennis].
E. M.
M., Nov. 1890, 
P- 304.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
W 
• .
Neuroptera, Trichoptera, and Orthoptera, near Thome Waste 
[July 16 th, 189 1 ; Sympetrum scoticum in abundance, Lunnophilus marmo- 
ratus, L.
lunatus, L.
auricula, L.
jlavicomis, and Asynarchus canosus noted], 
Nat., April 1891, p.
118.
G. T.
Porritt, 
W 
neuroptera ana 1 ricnoptera oDservea witnj tne Yoncsnire Naturalists 
Union at Malham and Gordale [on Sept.
Iith, 1890; Leuctra fusciventris, 
Nemoura meyeri (abundant), Stenophylax eoncentricus, Halesus auricoli 
(common), and Agapetus fuscipes\ Nat., June 1891, p.
177.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
W 
Stenophylax alpestris in Yorkshire [taken by John Harrison of 
Barnsley ; locality uncertain, but probably Dunford Bridge].
E. M.
M., 
Sept.
1891, p.
249.
G. T.
Porritt.
York S.E.
[^schna juncea taken in York Dale, 3rd August, by N.
F. Dobree, 
when with] the Yorkshire Naturalists* Union on the Wolds.
Nat., Oct.
1891, p.
303.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
W 
[Neuroptera observed with] the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union at 
Horton-in-Ribbiesdaie [14th May, 1892 ; Nemoura meyeri and Leuctra 
fttsciventris, both common].
Nat., June 1892, p.
181.
G. T.
Porritt.
York S.W.
[Neuroptera and Trichoptera observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union at Penistone and Dunford Bridge [on 9th July, 1892 ; Stenophylax 
alpestris, Sialis fuliginosa, and Pleetrocnemia conspersa ; the first a valuable 
confirmatory record].
Nat., Sep. 1892, p.
257.
G. T.
Porritt [per J.
H. Rowntree].
York Mid W.
[Neuroptera and Trichoptera observed by] the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union at Grassington [on June 20th, 1891 ; Cklot erla g ram m a tica 
(abundant), Isopteryx burmeisteri, L tripunttata, Nemoura meyeri, N.
cinerea, Sialis fuliginosa, Hemerobius orotypus, Stenophylax stellatus, 
Polycentr us fiaiomaculatus, Rhyacophila dorsalis, and (new for Yorkshire) 
Tinodes dives ; the last fairly common].
Nat., Sept.
1891, p.
265.
G. T.
Porritt.
York N.E.
[Neuroptera and Trichoptera observed at Castle Howard on the occasion 
of] the York*hire Naturalists' Unionfs visit to] Cox wold and By land 
[Sept.
1892 ; CArysopa flavifrons^ Hemerobius tnicans, H.
marginal us, 
Leuctra Juscn>e??£ris, Halesus radiatus, Anabolia nervosa, Limnophilus 
lunatics, Micropu 
P- 349.
Geo. T.
Porritt.
Nat., Nov. 1S92, 
W 
^enophylax alpestris at Dunford Bridge, West Yorkshire 
1892 ; several occurrences].
E. M.
M,, Dec. 1892, p.
311.
Oct.
,893.
1 
o 4 
NOTE—COLEOPTERA.
Acanthocinus zedilis at Nottingham.
— In the September issue of the 
* Naturalist ' Mr. Roebuck records the capture of two specimens of this interest- 
ing beetle in Yorkshire.
As I have not seen it recorded for Notts, it may be 
worth while to state that a very fine specimen was captured by the Trent-side at 
Wilford, near Nottingham, on August 26th last, and is now in my possession.
— 
J. W.
Carr, Nottingham, Sept.
2nd, 1893.
NOTES— FISHES.
Opah or King-fish on the Yorkshire Coast.
— A very fine example of this 
Northern fish {Lampris luna Gm.), of the most gorgeous colours, and weighing 
about four stone, was left by the tide, early in August, in a pool on the coast 
opposite Easington Lane-end.
Between 1767 and this date it has been recorded 
upwards of a dozen times on the Yorkshire coast.
It has been taken off the 
Norwegian coast, where it is common, weighing 140 pounds, and the flesh is 
reported as red and of the most excellent quality.
— John Cordeaux, Eaton Hall, 
Retford, Sept.
5th, 1893.
The Lamprey in North Lancashire.
— The following cutting is from the 
1 Ulverston News,' June 24th, 1893 : — 'Extraordinary Catch.
— On Friday 
evening last, while several fishermen of Broughton were up the river Lickle rod- 
fishing, their attention was directed by some youths on the river-bank between 
Low Moss and the Bleansley Bridges to two enormous anguilliform fish, which 
appeared to be engaged in deadly feud ; after several fruitless efforts to tempt 
them to take the bait, one of the young fellows, after taking the precaution to 
protect his hand, got into the river, and eventually succeeded in throwing both 
fish out of the water.
They proved to be of the eel species, called petromyzon 
or lampreys.
Both fish were about two feet long, and weighed about 2 lbs.
each.
The Lickle is a stream in the neighbourhood of Broughton-in-Furness, which 
joins the Duddon below Duddon Bridge.
Can they be Petromyzon man u us L.
? 
For its occurrence in this district see Mr. Macpherson's ' Fauna of Lakeland,' 
1892, pp.
525-6.
— Lister Petty, Ulverston, June 26th, 1893.
NOTES— MOLLUSC A.
Viviparus contectus still living* at Askern.
— On the 15th June, when with 
the Y.N.U* excursion.
Mr. Grabham and I went to Trumfleet Marshes, and in 
one of the dykes we made an interesting find — namely Viviparus contectus, the 
Viviparous Water-snail.
We observed several of them and secured three good- 
sized specimens, which are now living in my aquarium.
I notice by the 
programme that this species is considered extinct in this district, but judging from 
the number we saw during about a quarter of an hour's search, it must be fairly 
abundant, but is very difficult to see, owing to the thick covering of duckweed, 
which chokes up the surface of the water.
— W.
J. Clarke, Huntriss Row, 
Scarborough, June 24th, 1S93.
Viviparus contectus at Askern.— I have had an opportunity of examining 
living specimens of Viviparus contectus taken by Messrs.
W. J.
Clarke and 
Grabham of Scarborough on the 15th June, in Trumfleet Marshes near Askern.
There seems now no doubt that this species still survives in the district, and 
the conjectures so long entertained by conchologists acquainted with the district 
and the lacustrine deposits which there abound, may be definitely set at rest.
Mr. Clarke considers that from the number of specimens he saw in a very short 
time, this interesting mollusc must be fairly abundant.
— Fred.
W. FlERKE, 
52, Francis Street West, Hull, September 16th, 1893.
Naturalist, 
3°5 
n ^emotiam.
J. W.
DAVIS, F.L.S., F.G.S., F.S.A., Etc.
The death of Mr. J.
W. Davis, of Halifax, to which brief reference 
was made in 'The Naturalist 7 for September, has created a wide- 
spread feeling of regret among Yorkshire naturalists of all classes, 
and has left a gap in the ranks of the more earnest workers that will 
not be easily or readily filled up.
His long and official connection 
with the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union and the Yorkshire Geological 
and Polytechnic Society, and other local scientific bodies, made his 
tall and erect figure a familiar one to almost every naturalist in the 
county, and such was the impression made upon those who were 
brought into contact with him, that there are probably few who do not 
feel that in him they have lost an energetic co-worker and a valuable 
and trusty friend.
Already several sketches of his life, his 
characteristics, and his work have appeared in various journals, but 
his close connection with the societies to which many of the readers 
of 'The Naturalist' belong, make it desirable that we should add 
a further tribute to his memory and place on record our appreciation 
of his scientific labours and the impressions his personality made 
upon those who had the privilege of enjoying his most intimate 
friendship.
It is now generally known that, # descended from an old 
Gloucestershire family, he was born in the neighbourhood of Leeds 
on April 15th, 1846, and that from his youth up he manifested 
a strong and intelligent interest in natural history pursuits.
One 
who knew him while still in his teens, and before his removal to 
Halifax, often recalls the fact that even then he displayed great force 
and individuality of character, and had always some clearly-defined 
object in view which he pursued with a will and an energy that 
speedily brought it within his grasp.
At an early period he realised 
the value of the friendship of congenial spirits, and was honorary 
secretary of a small Natural History Society which used to meet in 
the old Assembly Rooms, near Call Lane.
On his removal to 
Halifax in 1864, he became one of a band of thorough workers, 
which included Messrs.
W. P.
Siaden, W.
Cash, and J.
Stubbing but 
he still kept up his connection with scientific friends in Leeds.
Regularly every week he attended the meetings of a private scientific 
association, which included in its membership the late Mr. James 
Vbbott, Messrs.
K A.
Lees, W.
Todd, and T.
Hick, and after its 
amalgamation with the Naturalists' Club, which originated later on, 
Mr. Davis took an active part in promoting the success of the new 
society, which still exists as the Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific 
Oct. 1893.
v 
06 IN MEMORIAM— J.
W. DAVIS.
Association.
In recognition of his services to this society he was 
subsequently elected a life member.
As a member of the executive of the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union, he was drawn into a close connection with some of the 
ablest of his fellow-workers, and for some years he and the late 
Mr. George Brook, with Messrs.
Hobkirk, Cash, Sladen, and others 
met regularly for the study and discussion of biological problems.
Though perhaps of minor importance, these facts seem deserving 
of mention, because there can be little doubt that this close associa- 
tion with others like-minded to himself, had considerable influence 
upon Mr. Davis's subsequent scientific work when he took up his 
special line of research.
A striking feature of that work, both at 
this time and later, was the practical character of his methods.
Whatever subject he took in hand was dealt with in the concrete, 
and was always abundantly illustrated by actual specimens.
His 
habit of mind, indeed, seems to have inclined more to the practical 
and the concrete than the theoretical and abstract, and it was no 
doubt this that made his activity on the School Board and the 
Corporation of Halifax, and in other public matters, so serviceable to 
the best interests of his fellow-townsmen.
At the same time he had 
a ready perception of the acceptability or otherwise of scientific 
theories, and was not unskilful, when he had thoroughly studied his 
facts, in detecting and applying their theoretical teachings.
To this habit of mind we may, perhaps, also attribute his success 
when, in the full maturity of his faculties, he elected to devote him- 
self to the investigation of Fossil Fish.
The measure of that success 
will be fully estimated in due time, and we do not propose to 
anticipate it here.
But any one who has perused the monographs 
which his unflagging industry enabled him to give to the world, will 
have recognised the directness of the treatment and the firm grasp of 
structural details which they exhibit.
The style too bears testimony 
to the same characteristics, for it is clear, simple, and precise, and is 
destitute of those flourishes which are often resorted to by those whose 
knowledge of details is wanting in thoroughness.
In addition to pursuing his own investigations with more than 
usual energy, Mr. Davis was ever ready to stimulate and encourage 
the efforts of others in their scientific pursuits, whether as private 
individuals or as members of scientific societies.
His wide 
knowledge of the geology of his native country made him an 
invaluable leader on a geological excursion, and he was ever ready- 
to act in that capacity to those who wished to visit those parts of the 
county where its geological features can be best studied.
Affable 
and accessible, too, at all times, his private collections were open to 
Naturalist, 
• 
NOTES AND NEWS.
307 
the inspection of all real students, the only passport to his sympathy 
being a genuine appreciation of scientific studies.
Finally, a word may be said of the genial disposition and 
equability of temper that Mr. Davis invariably displayed, and the 
large-hearted hospitality with which he was wont to entertain his 
friends.
On those occasions, the guests at Chevinedge invariably felt 
themselves to be the recipients of a welcome, the cordiality of which 
could scarcely be surpassed, and the memory of which will never be 
obliterated.
Then, too, the shrewdness, the breadth of knowledge, 
and clear perceptions of the host shone conspicuously forth, while 
his light, harmless banter and sparkling humour added to the 
charms of the conversation on lighter topics.
As complete lists of Mr. Davis's scientific publications have 
already appeared and are included in the bibliographies given from 
time to time in 'The Naturalist/ they need not be repeated here.
It may nevertheless be mentioned that the most important are the 
section on Geology in ' West Yorkshire, 7 published by him and 
Mr. F.
A. Lees in 1878, and his three monographs on Fossil Fishes, 
viz., ' On the Fossil Fishes of the Mountain Limestone of Great 
Britain ?
(1883), ' O n the Fossil Fishes of the Chalk of Mount 
Lebanon and Syria' (1887), and 'On the Fossil Fishes of the 
Tertiary and Cretace — Tertiary Formations of New Zealand' (1888).
His death took place on the morning of July 20th, 1893, at 
Bridlington, and he was interred at All Saints, Salterhebble, near 
Halifax, on July 24th.— T.
H. 
NOTES AND NEWS.
Yorkshiremen will be interested to learn that Mr. H.
Speight, author of the 
valuable and recently issued history of Craven, which was reviewed in 'The 
Naturalist' for April last, and the whole edition of which, we understand, is now 
nearly exhausted, is engaged in the preparation of a complete (illustrated) History 
of the Nidd Valley, some part of which adjoins the Craven Deanery, and a large 
proportion also is comprised within the Archdeaconry of Craven.
The book 
will deal in a novel and comprehensive manner both with the history and scientific 
aspects of the interesting dale.
**  * 
Mr, F.
Arnold Lees is preparing for this work one of the Appendices, to deal 
with the Florula of Nidderdale, giving an analysis of its flora as compared with 
the other dales north and south of it : also a list with localities, brought up to 
knowledge in 1893, of its species-items.
The Flowering Plants and Ferns 
number 711, about 27 more than are given for Nidderdale in the Flora of West 
Yorkshire, but the feature of the analysis and enumeration for Mr. Speight's work 
is not to mirror the past-age Flora (the Flora of West Yorkshire does that in 
giving the old records) but to give a full and precise list of what occur now.
Memoranda (with specimens, which will be returned carefully) of gatherings of 
the last seven years, are desired ; especially from the dale-head, above Loft house ; 
and the tract about Nun Monk ton, Wilstrop and Green Hammerton, which has 
not been well worked.
Probably a York botanist or two knows this area.
^ Notes 
sent in response to this may be addressed to Mr. F.
Arnold Lees, at So, Franklin 
Road, Harrogate.
Oct. 1S93.
3 o8 
DISAPPEARANCE OF 
THE GREAT BUSTARD IN LINCOLNSHIRE.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
E a to 71 Hall, Retford.
The very last appearance of this noble bird in Lincolnshire is 
unrecorded ; it probably took place in the early years of the present 
century.
The Rev. Edward Elmhirst in a letter, dated Nov. 29th, 
t886, told me that he quite well recollected his father shooting 
Bustards and Ruffs and Reeves, on Thoresby Common, and his 
sending the former to Sir Joseph Banks, then living, about sixty-eight 
years ago.
This would bring it down to 18 18.
Sir Joseph Banks 
died in 1820.
At the commencement of this century the Lincoln- 
shire wolds had already been partly enclosed and cultivated, turnips 
being regularly grown in rotation.
In the Middle Marsh (in which 
Thoresby is situated), and the coast marshes, the general enclosure 
of commons and open lands, and the consequent change of cultiva- 
tion, took place many years later.
These low-country commons were 
of great extent, and the chief crops were wheat and beans, very little 
else of any sort being grown.
The beans were sown in the spring 
on winter ploughing, broadcast, and never weeded.
It is difficult in 
days of progressive farming and variety of cropping to realise the 
slovenly cultivation of these old times, and the breadth given up to 
bean growing ; those who take an interest in the subject should read 
the 'Agricultural Survey of Lincolnshire,' published in 1799, as made 
by the celebrated Arthur Young, F.R.S., and secretary to the Board 
of Agriculture of the time.
The large amount of shelter and privacy 
afforded by these wide areas of unweeded beans would be highly 
favourable to the protection of the few remaining Bustards still 
lingering on the coast and middle marshes of Lincolnshire, after 
they had disappeared from the wolds.
'The Naturalist' is now so 
extensively circulated and read that I may remind any who have 
opportunities of inspecting old deeds, letters and family account 
books that they will be doing good service by extracting and 
publishing any small matters which directly or indirectly have 
reference to the former existence of the Great Bustard in the 
county.
September $tk, 1S9 
-> 
v**w 
NOTES AND NEWS.
In connection with the Hull Geological Society a systematic study is being 
made of the erratics and other glacial phenomena of a portion of Holderness.
Naturalist, 
3°9 
LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS AT 
WOODHALL SPA.
The second meeting of the Lincolnshire Naturalists' Union was held 
at Woodhall Spa on Monday, August 7th.
The district for investi- 
gation held out special attractions for almost all classes of naturalists, 
owing to its very diversified nature.
A fertile, agricultural district, 
yet abounding in large woods, waste moorlands, and the drains and 
marshy lands, so typical of Lincolnshire scenery, it well repaid the 
trouble of investigation.
Considering that this was only the second 
meeting of the Union, the attendance was very good, and had it not 
been a Bank Holiday would doubtless have been much larger.
Permission had been kindly granted by Mrs. Hotchkin, of Manor 
House, Kirkstead, and the Rev. J.
Conway Walter, to the members 
of the Union to pass over their estates.
Owing to the Bank Holiday ' tripping element,' most of the 
trains were late, and instead of a start being made at 10.20 a.m., as 
originally arranged, it was nearly n.30 before all got off.
Leaving 
Kirkstead Station, the party, under the leadership of the Rev. J.
Conway Walter, proceeded by a cross-country route to Woodhall 
Spa, then passing through the Spa grounds, along the beck side, past 
Mrs. Hotchkin's wood to 'Tower O' Moor, 7 and the Ostler plantations.
Several of the members, including the conchologists and coleopterists 
(who generally form the rear-guard of a party of naturalists) did not 
go over the whole of the route, but stopped nearer to Woodhall, and 
from their accounts seem to be well satisfied that they did so.
By 4 o'clock most of the members had returned to the 
Eagle Hotel, at Woodhall, where, after doing ample justice to 
meat tea, the sectional meetings were held, followed a substantial at 
5 o'clock by the general meeting, at which Mr. F.
M. Burton presided.
A vote of thanks to the landowners and also to the Rev. J.
C 
Walter for leading the party having been passed, the sectional reports 
were then given.
For the Geological Section, Mr. F.
M. Burton, F.L.S., F.G.S., its 
President, reported as follows : — 
The Kimmeridge Clay, on which Woodhall Spa stands, covers 
a large area of that district of the county of Lincoln.
It is eight to 
nine miles wide in parts, and attains a thickness of about 600 feet.
This bed is the representative of the upper Oolite in the county, 
there being no traces in it of the Portland sand and limestone which 
are so well developed in Dorsetshire and Wiltshire.
It consists 
of a dark slaty clay, abounding in fossils, and having on the top 
of it to the east, where it passes under the Neocomian beds of 
* 1893, 
310 LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS AT WOODHALL SPA.
the Chalk series, a highly bituminous bed of shale resembling 
the coal measures.
In this bed some years ago, in the valley 
of the Bain, borings for coal were made, which, it is needless 
to say, proved abortive, and much money was lost in the 
attempt.
In Dorsetshire — whence, from the village of Kimmeridge, 
the beds derive their name — these shales are so bituminous 
that they are occasionally used for fuel ; and attempts have 
been made to obtain oil and other substances from them.
The thirst after coal in Lincolnshire has not, however, been 
altogether without its results, as, some years ago, a boring for it at 
Woodhall led to the discovery of the valuable saline well there, which 
is now so well known for its curative properties ; a boon of far 
greater and wider worth than the finding of coal would have been, 
had the search for it been successful The Rev. J.
Conway 
Walter, who so kindly and ably conducted the excursion, 
informs us that the properties of the spring were discovered 
when it welled up out of the borehole, and, spreading over the 
adjoining land, affected the cattle which drank of it.
The clay is well exposed in some parts of this district in brick- 
pits and railway cuttings, but, unfortunately, with the exception of 
a disused pit filled with water — where several nodular masses of 
stone were met with, thickly covered with Serpula tetragofia, and one 
of them having on its surface the impress of an ammonite too much 
worn for identification — and of another more ancient pit, said to 
have been excavated in Roman times, no kind of section was met 
with during the excursion.
On crossing the heath and moorland, the burrowing of rabbits 
had occasionally turned up patches of fine pale-coloured sand, in 
parts slightly ferruginous, and having a considerable number of flints 
scattered about them; while, here and there, a few small erratics 
were seen, pointing to the influence of the ice action which has so 
materially altered the surface of this portion of the county.
In connection with the ice drift, I should like to call the 
attention of all interested in geology to the want of any boulder 
records within the county of Lincoln.
The Secretary of the 
Committee on   erratic blocks ' in connection with the British 
Association — Mr. Percy F.
Kendall, of the Yorkshire College, 
Leeds — writing on the subject says : —   Not a single record of 
an erratic boulder has been received by this Committee in 
the 21 years of its existence from your county/* and I can 
* In this connection we may call attention to a paper published in the 
'Naturalist 7 for August 1887, p.
225, by Mr. W.
Hampton and Mr. H.
Walls 
Kew, on 'The "Blue Stone" Boulder, Louth, Lincolnshire.
—Eds. Nat.
Naturalist, 
LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS AT WOODHALL SPA.
3" 
only say I hope, now that the Lincolnshire Naturalists' Union 
is started and is likely to be a success, that this defect may be 
remedied, and I shall be glad to give any information in my power, 
as to the committee's mode of working, to those who will interest 
themselves in the subject.
The Botanical Section was officially represented by the Rev, W.
Fowler, M.A., the President, and Rev. E.
A. Woodruffe-Peacock, 
Secretary of the section, by the latter of whom the following 
account is written : — 
The Woodhall district has been so thoroughly worked, botanically, 
that nothing new is likely to turn up except 'escapes,' as Hypericum 
kircinum L.
and Campanula rapunculoides L.
have done in the 
last few years.
From sixty to seventy good things passed through the hands of 
the verifiers, from which the following list is selected : — 
Lepidium campestre R.Br.
Lepidium smithii Hook.
Viola flavicornis Sm.
Saponaria officinalis L.
Drosera rotund ifolia L.
Drosera intermedia Hayne.
Epilobium macrocarpum Leight.
Epilobium parvirlonim Schreb.
Epilobium pa lustre L.
Ciraea lutetiana L.
Pimpinella magna L.
Valeriana sambucifolia Mikan.
Solidago virgaurea L.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum L.
Senecio sylvaticus L.
Hieracium umbeliatum L.
Hieracium boreale Fr.
Calamintha acinos Clairv.
Galeopsis bifida Boenn.
Polygonum hydropiper L.
AInus glutinosa Gaert.
Xarthecium ossifragum Huds.
Juncus acutiflorus Ehrh.
The following plants, which certainly grow at Woodhall, were not 
taken : — Anagallis pallida Hooker ; Pedicularis sylvatica L., sp.
in 
the County Herb.
; Pinguicula vulgaris L., often confirmed.
After the meeting the Rev. J.
C. Walter, of Woodhall Vicarage, 
presented his specimen of Silene quinquevulnera L.
to the County 
Herbarium.
It 
grew 
in a rough sandy field and has been 
" improved " away in making a lawn for the garden of the Victoria 
Hotel ; but fifty years ago it was not uncommon about Woodhall.' 
Mr. John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U., officially represented the Vertebrate 
section, and the Rev. J.
C. Walter, M.A., reported that the Goatsucker.
Wryneck, Lesser Spotted Woodpecker, wild Turtle Dove, and 
Hawfinch were common in the district, as also Snipe, Dabchicks, 
Moorhens, Coots, and Wild Duck.
The Black Game, which bred 
on the Moor within living memory, is now extinct ; so is the Bittern.
The Buzzard and Hen-harrier are gone, but the Brown Owl and 
Night-jar are still common.
The Woodcock breeds here tn the still 
surviving tract of the wild woodland.
Oct. 1893.
312 LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS AT WOODHALL SPA.
The Conchological section was officially represented by the 
secretary, Mr. F.
W. Fierke, M.C.S., who furnishes the following 
report : — Conchological operations were confined within a small area 
from Woodhall Spa, and a very poor result rewarded our efforts and 
the time spent in the locality.
The dykes were completely dried up 
and a pond which looked very promising had also been considerably 
affected by the drought, thereby preventing its thorough investigation.
In one little patch of water Valletta lacustris was very plentiful, the 
majority of them being found upon the rushes growing in the pond.
Pla?iorbus fontanus, too, occurred here, and a few specimens of 
jP.
carinatus and Valvata cristata were taken in the scoop.
The 
only other aquatic species we have to mention in order to complete 
this very meagre list is our old and familiar friend Limncea peregra, 
whom we seldom fail to meet.
Laying the scoop aside, an examina- 
tion of the water's edge resulted in placing on record a species of 
Succinea, the members of which genus form a kind of link between 
the terrestrial and aquatic mollusca, as they love to mount the 
flags and rushes of the ponds and dykes or to spend their time 
in damp situations on the bank-side.
The specimens we procured 
answered the description of S.
putris.
There has been little to 
report on the water snails, and as regards the terrestrial mollusca 
we find even less.
In addition to the Succinea already mentioned, 
we noticed A Hon minimus, Helix rotundata, B.
hispida, 
Hyalinia cellaria, H.
nitidula, and last, but not by any means 
least, we had the pleasure of finding Hyalinia excavafa.
The 
discovery of the last-named species (taken on dead leaves in a hedge 
bottom) was the redeeming feature of an otherwise disappointing 
day's work.
It was ako a record for the county.
Summing up the 
results, the terrestrial and aquatic mollusca had suffered alike from 
the extreme dryness of the season, and this fact alone accounts for 
the poor list obtained, as the district generally speaking seems to be 
a promising one.
The Entomologists of the party appear to have had a fairly good 
time.
Mr. R.
\Y.
Goukling, who had confined his attention 
principally to the Lepidoptera, noted the Red Admiral the Peacock, 
Common Blue, Wall Brown, Ringlet, and Small Heath butterflies.
Mr. Joseph Coe and Mr. Walter F.
Baker, arriving by an early train, 
alighted at Woodhall Spa and proceeded back along the road-side to 
Kirkstead.
This road, a typical country road, and evidently undis- 
turbed by omnivorous * collectors,' abounded in numerous silken 
tunnels of Agelena labyrinthica and some very fine specimens of the 
spider itself were seen, though owing to the numerous outlets to the 
orse 
Naturalist 
LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS AT WOODHALL SPA.
313 
only a single specimen was obtained.
Butterflies, principally 
Meadow Brown, Small Heath, and Large and Small Whites were in 
great abundance along the road-side, and by sweeping the nettles which 
were abundant there, Coccinella 7 -punctata and Halyzia 22-/7/ aetata 
were found, together with Apion pomonee and Ceuthorrhynchus 
assimilis.
Arriving at Kirkstead Station a dyke near to was 
carefully examined, but Hydroporus palustris, Anaemia limbaia, and 
Hydrobius fusripes were all that were obtained.
At 11.30, a second start was made from Woodhall Station, the 
number of Coleopterists having increased to three owing to the 
arrival of Mr. E.
J. Slater.
This time the wav taken was through 
the Spa grounds and by the beck-side, intending to proceed to the 
Tower on the Moor, but the district proving to be remarkably good, 
not more than half the distance was passed over.
Crossing the 
beck, just through the Spa grounds, into a small wood, some 
decaying fungi produced Leistotrophns murinus and Nitidula 
bipustu/ata, whilst by sweeping here Phezdon cochlearia and Halyzia 
conglobata were added to the captures.
A closely grazed grass field 
was then the scene of investigations.
At this time the sun was very 
powerful, and the perfect grasshoppers were flying about in all 
directions, though their flight never appeared to be sustained for 
a greater distance than about ten yards, while the larvae, unprovided 
with wings, were trying to rival their elder brethren by their gigantic 
leaps.
Whilst turning over some stercoraceous matter, a fine 
specimen of Leistotrophns nebulosus, evidently enjoying the bright 
sunshine and drawn by the (at any rate to him) attractive 
smell, came flying up, and seemed to resent most fiercely being 
confined in a small glass test-tube when secured.
The species 
of Aphodius were here very common, A.
rufipes^ A.
fimetarius, 
A. f&tens, A.
fossor, A, merdarins, A.
ater, and A.
subter- 
raneous being all found in this one field, and also Onthophagus 
fracticornis in abundance, being the first time that any of the 
coleopterists present had seen this beetle alive.
Instead of being 
distributed indiscriminately throughout the dung it was always in the 
same position, immediately under the upper caked surface, and one 
specimen was on the outside, as though it had just flown on, making 
it appear as though diurnal in its habits, like Aphodius fimetarius, 
and not nocturnal, as A.
rufipes and most others.
Phihnthus mneus 
was remarkably common in similar situations, and also several 
P proximus and Hister unicolor.
Sweeping the long herbage on 
the side of Mrs. Hotcbkin's wood only produced Apion cruentatum.
Longitarsus jacobcea, and Agriotes sputa tor.
Sphteridium scaraba> aides 
and S* bipustuiatum, Cercyon heemorr/wida/is, C.
melanoa halus, and 
u ..
18.
314 LINCOLNSHIRE NATURALISTS AT WOODHALL SPA.
C, pygmaus were also found, together with the variety semistriatum 
of Sphceridium bipiistulatum with distinctly punctured striae on the 
elytra.
Geotrupes spiniger was found here at an average depth of 
about four inches, owing to the hard nature of the ground.
Under 
the loose bark on the fallen trunk of an ash-tree lying across the 
dyke Mycetophagus piceus was very abundant indeed.
In colour it 
exactly matched the decaying wood, and the beetles seemed to be 
fully aware of the fact, and remained perfectly still until just as you 
were going to pick them up, and then livelier specimens could hardly 
be imagined, and if two commenced to run at the same time one of 
them was almost sure to escape.
Proceeding along the wood side 
and crossing a small dyke in which Velia currens was about the only 
visible sign of animal life, we came to a couple of ponds in a semi- 
dried up state.
Loricera pilicornis was abundant round the edges, 
and Elaphrus aiprens was seen, though not captured owing to its 
great speed and the boggy state of the pond edge.
Here the soil 
became much looser, and several Geotrupes stercorarius were dug up 
from a depth of about twelve inches.
A nest of ants with the winged 
males and females clustering round the outside was here seen, and 
then the time for tea arrived and a hurried return had to be made 
for the Eagle Hotel.
Needless to say, the Swallow-tail Butterfly, 
once common in the swamps and by the river-side, was not obtained.
Owing to the very dry state of everything, ' stone-turning ' had been 
of very little use, the only captures being Xantholinus fulgidusy 
Harpalus ee/teus, Pterostichus madidus and P.
niger, Calathus melano- 
cephalus, and under some stones in a dried up pond Agalms guttatus 
and A.
bipitstulatus.
The section for Micro-Zoology and Botany was officially repre- 
sented by Mr. J.
Larder, who supplies the following report: 
Owing to the small attendance of workers in Micro-Zoology and 
Botany, the records were not numerous, but the following freshwater 
algae, kindly identified by Mr. T.
S. Smithson of Rochdale, 
were obtained at Jordan's Ponds, near Woodhall.
The first three are 
hitherto unpublished records for the county : — Rhaphidium falcatum, 
Ccelesphcvrium kutzwgiarium, Merismopedia glauca^ Scenedesmus 
quadricauda, Pediastrum boryamim, P.
e/ire/ibergii, Pandorina 
morum, and Conferva fontinalis.
After the reports, some private business was transacted, and 
a vote of thanks to the chairman, Mr. F.
M. Burton, concluded the 
proceedings.
— W.
F. B.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The August   Journal of Botany ' has a reproduction of Forster's portrait of 
Mr. John Gilbert Baker, F.R.S., which was shown at this year's Royal Acaderm \ 
Naturalise 
3i5 
THE MOLLUSCA OF 
PENISTONE, SOUTH-WEST YORKSHIRE 
LIONEL E.
ADAMS, B.A., 
KortJiampton \ Hon. Treasurer to the Cenchclogical Society, 
The following is a list of the shells which I have taken within five 
miles of Penistone, during the period of my residence there, from 
j 
The total number of species 
I am able to record is 35, composed of 9 slugs, 19 land and 
7 freshwater mollusca.
Gunthwaite Wood is the only spot in this desolate region of 
millstone grit that is worth a search.
Its chief features are the 
quantity of Hyalinia pura, and the tendency to white varieties of the 
Hyalinia.
In summer the Scout Dam is always to be searched for 
curious forms oi Limruea peregra and scalariform Planorbis a/bus.
The slugs have been identified by Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck.
Arion ater.
Very common.
Var. brunnea.
Gunthwaite.
Arion subfuscus.
Common in the district.
Arion minimus.
Common in the district, especially in Gunthwaite 
Wood.
Arion hortensis.
Common in gardens ; a single specimen of var.
grisea.
Arion circumscriptus.
Very common, and very variable in 
colour.
Limax maximus.
Moderately common in a garden.
Limax arborum.
Cubley Wood ; a specimen of var.
nemorosa 
in my garden at Rose Hill.
Agriolimax agrestis.
Very common.
On one occasion I found 
var.
nigra in copull with a typical specimen.
Agriolimax laevis* Common in Gunthwaite Wood.
Vitrina pellucida.
Common.
Often cloudy.
Hyalinia cellaria.
Moderately common.
Several specimens of 
var.
albina in the district.
Hyalinia glabra.
Two specimens of var.
viridans in Gunthwaite 
Wood.
Hyalinia alliaria.
Common; and the var.
viridula moderately 
rare.
Hyalinia nitidula.
Common in the district.
Oct. 1893.
316 NOTE LEPIDOPTERA AT WINDERMERE.
Hyalinia radiatula.
Moderately rare.
Cubley Wood.
One 
specimen of var.
viridescenti-alha.
Hyalinia pura.
Exceedingly common in Gunthwaite Wood.
The 
number of var.
margaritacea is nearly equal to that of the type.
Hyalinia crystallina.
Very common in the district 
Hyalinia fulva.
Very common in Gunthwaite Wood, and 
moderately rare elsewhere.
Helix rotundata.
Very common.
Three or four white examples 
(var.
alba).
Helix aculeata.
Moderately common in Gunthwaite and Cubley 
Woods.
Helix nemoralis.
Of the form libellula 12345 (chiefly) ; only 
known from the Huddersfield Railway Embankment.
Helix hortensis.
Cawthorne ; very local.
Helix hispida.
Rare.
Vertigo substriata.
One specimen in Gunthwaite Wood.
Vertigo edentula.
One specimen in Gunthwaite Wood.
Clausilia rugosa.
Common in Gunthwaite Wood.
Cochlicopa lubrica.
Moderately common.
One specimen of 
var.
hyalina in Gunthwaite Wood.
Carychium minimum.
Common in Gunthwaite Wood.
Moderately so in Cubley Wood.
Pisidiurn pusillum.
Common in the district.
Sphaerium lacustre.
In a pond at Thurgoland.
Planorbis albus.
Common in Scout Dam, in which, in 1891, 
I found several monst.
scalariforme.
Limnaea peregra.
Common in the district ; especially curious 
in Scout Dam, where most interesting forms exist, principally 
labose monstrosities ; also banded forms, caused by breakages 
of the shell when young.
Limnaea glabra.
In a pond at Thurgoland, with S.
lacustre.
Limnaea truncatula.
Common in the district Var. major in 
a drain.
Ancylus fluviatilis.
Cubley Brook, and stream feeding Scout 
Dam.
-----    * - 
* * "fY'fc«** 
NO TE— L EPID OPTERA .
Lobophora polycommata and Nemeobius lucina at Windermere 
The capture of Lobophora polycon ita this spring at Windermere may be of 
interest.
Also Nemeobhts lucina^ a species which I took commonly many years 
ago in this neighbourhood, but have not seen for some time.— Geo. Crewdson, 
S. Mary's Vicarage, Windermere, 3rd Tune, 1S93.
Naturalist, 
317 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT 
KIRKBY MOORSIDE.
The 104th meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union was held on 
Monday, July 10th, at Kirk by Moorside, for the investigation of those 
three very pretty dales, Douthwaite-dale, Sleightholme-dale, and 
Kirkdale.
Many of the members, tempted by the very promising nature of 
the district, or perhaps by the splendid scenery in the immediate 
neighbourhood, stayed the week-end at Kirkby, and some very good 
work was done before the majority of the members arrived on the 
Monday morning.
The weather was not very encouraging, and 
about half-past eight when the party from Maiton and Scarborough 
arrived, a few drops of rain fell, but by the time the actual start was 
made from Kirkby Moorside Station at ten o'clock, the sun shone 
brightly, and everything seemed to promise a fine day, expectations 
which were realised with the exception of a heavy thunderstorm 
which passed over about one o'clock, and damped the garments, if 
not the ardour, of many of the party.
Three routes had been arranged, but only two were followed.
One party under the guidance of Mr. W.
B. Havelock, head forester 
to the Earl of Feversham, proceeded by Kirkdale, up Skiplam, to 
Sleightholme-dale, returning by Fadmoor and Robin Hood Howl.
This was a very numerous party, consisting probably of about forty 
members.
The other party, consisting principally of geologists, and under 
the leadership of Mr. W.
Lower Carter, M.A., F.G.S., left Kirkby 
on the north side and proceeded by Manor Vale, then crossing over 
the country by the Gillamoor Road and passing the Hagg Farm to 
Kirkdale Valley, and finally returned by Kirkdale Church and Cave 
to Kirkby.
At four o'clock the calls of nature were satisfied, and then sectional 
meetings were held, followed at five o'clock by the general meeting.
Arrangements had been made to hold this out in the open air, but 
the weather again caused an alteration in the plans, and it had to be 
held in the long room of the King's Head Hotel.
Mr, J.
H. 
Rowntree.
of Scarborough, presided.
As usual, 'the minutes having 
been taken as read/ the following new members were elected : 
Mr. H.
J. Johnston Lavis, M.D., Harrogate ; Mrs. Fawkes, Farnley 
Hall; Mr. H.
Darley, Pickering; Mr. William White, F.E.3., Sheffield 
Mr. W.
Wallby, Harrogate.
The list of societies being called over, 
the following were represented : — Barnsley, Wakefield, Liversedge, 
Oct. tg 93 .
3i» 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT KIRKBY MOORSIDE.
Bradford Naturalists', Leeds Naturalists', Goole Scientific, Concho- 
logical Society, Leeds Geological, Hull Field Naturalists, Harrogate 
and District, Ackworth School, Scarborough Philosophical, Hull 
Scientific, Hull Geological, Huddersfield Naturalists 7 , Scarborough 
Field Naturalists', Leeds Co-operative Field Club.
The total 
attendance was between sixty and seventy.
The sectional reports were then presented.
For the Vertebrate Section, in the absence of all its officers, 
Mr. J.
Farrah reported as follows : — 
Mammals, 4.
Fox.
Hare.
Rabbit.
Squirrel.
Birds, 26.
Blue Tit.
Tawny Owl.
Partridge.
Starling.
Sparrow.
Nuthatch.
Chiffchaff.
Tree Creeper.
Jay.
Carrion Crow.
Cuckoo.
Common Wren.
Yellow-hammer.
Skylark.
Tree Pipit.
Lapwing.
Hedge Sparrow.
Whinchat.
Pied Wagtail.
Sandpiper.
Willow Wren.
Song Thrush.
Blackbird.
Swift (feeding young).
Swallow.
House Martin.
Reptiles, 3 
Frog.
Toad.
Smooth Newt.
Mr. W.
B. Havelock, of Helmsley, says that he found a nest of 
the Woodcock containing four eggs in the spring of 1892, and he 
has observed the Kingfisher breeding here.
The same gentleman 
reports that the Badger and the Otter both have their homes in the 
dense woods and streams that are so characteristic of this delightful 
country.
On behalf of the Conchological Section, in the absence of all 
its officers, Mr. W.
Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., reported that very 
little had been done during the day.
Turning over stones for a few 
minutes in Sleightholme Dale had produced examples of Clausilta 
laminata, CL rugosa, Cochlicopa lubrica, Helix hortensis, H.
rotundata, 
H. hispida, Hyalinia cellaria, H.
erystallina, Arion ater, A.
minimus, 
and Agriolimax agrestis, but the time available was very limited.
Mr. Water F.
Baker brought fine examples of Limax maximus and 
Z. marginatum {-arbontm) found close to Kirkby Moorside, and 
Mr. John Braim brought Helix itala ( = erketorum), also from the 
neighbourhood of Kirkby Moorside, which may be looked upon as 
decidedly the best record in this department during the day— -out of 
the meagre list of five slugs, and nine land shells, no water shells 
whatever having been observed.
For the Entomological Section, Mr. Jas.
H. Rowntree states 
that the following lepidopterists were present : — Messrs.
J. Braim, 
J. W.
Warwick, J.
H. Rowntree, and J.
Grabham.
Naturalist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT KIRKBY MOORSIDE.
319 
The following imagines were observed : — Pieris brassicce, 
P. rapce, P.
napi y Vanessa urticce, V.
atalanta, Argynnis ag/aia, 
Chortobius pamphilus, Satyrus janira^ S.
hyperanthus (some extreme 
varieties of the latter with ringlets scarcely discernible), S.
semele 
(the last named species in considerable abundance on the slopes of 
Douthwaite Dale), Lyccena icarus, Larentia didymata, Ypsipetes 
elutata, Eubolia mensuraria (?), Tanagra chcerophyllata, Xylophasia 
polyodon, Apamea oculea, Agrotis (?), Triphcena pronuba, and 
Pterophoras bipunctidactyhis.
The showery weather interfered with 
the success of the day, from an entomological standpoint, and sugaring 
in the evening proved a failure.
The coleopterists present were the Rev. W.
C. Hey, Mr. Walter 
F. Baker, and Mr. Frank Colby.
The captures were neither 
numerous nor good, in fact it may safely be said that it was 
the worst day we have had this season.
Adalia obliterata 
was fairly common in a wood about three miles north of 
Kirkby, and was apparently feeding on the wild straw- 
berries.
Oxytelus rugosus, Ocypus morio r and the strong-smelling 
O. brunnipes were fairly abundant.
Silpha atrata was found beneath 
a stone in the valley of the river by Mr. Colby, and Chrysomela 
varia/is, Philonthus atratus, and Dianoiis c&rakscens were also 
obtained, the last-named being under a stone in what had once 
doubtless been a little watercourse, but the extremely dry weather 
had made it quite hard and dry.
Stercoraceous beetles were fairly 
common, but nothing worth mentioning was obtained.
Apfwdius 
rufipes was almost as common here as in the Hull district, whilst 
A. JimetariuSj so common round Leeds, was only represented by 
isolated specimens.
Geotrtipes spintger was the only Geotrapes 
obtained.
Whether it was the unfavourable weather on the actual 
day, or the extremely dry weather we have hitherto had this year, 
the three coleopterists were only able to obtain some thirty odd 
species between them, a most unusually meagre lot even for July, 
when so many beetles are in the larval state.
For the Botanical Section, Mr. Albert H.
Pawson, its Secretary, 
gives the following report : 
The streams which flow southward into the Rye about Kirkby 
Moorside and Helmsley have cut their way through the Oolitic Hills 
in a most singular series of valleys, famed for rare plants.
The 
waters for the most part take their rise on the Lias formation to the 
north, which, in spite of its lower elevation, its water-lo^^ed shales 
render moorland and waste, while 200 feet above on the limestone 
cornfields and rich pastures are smiling.
Through this Oolitic 
Oct. 1 ^ 
JL 
320 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT KIRKBY MOORSIDE.
plateau each streamlet, neither hasting nor resting, has gnawed its 
way, and now flows in an almost level course in a flat valley, not 
much above the mean of the Derwent plain, hemmed in on either 
side by steep banks which may almost be called cliffs.
These 
sloping sides are much covered with w r ood, and give delightful 
occupation to the botanist.
In the Ouldray Valley, near Helmsley, the 
xaxeActcea and the green Hellebore almost engross one of these steeps, 
yet making room for their cousin Columbine on account of the kinship, 
and we found it very fitting that these three choice Ranunculids 
should grow together.
Again, where the rock is exposed in crags, 
or strewn in fragments on the slope, herbs impatient of moisture find 
their home.
Here it was in Douthwaite that the Hound's Tongue was 
flourishing, and here the Deadly Nightshade assumed the proportions 
of a bush, while the Ploughman's Spikenard grew at its feet.
The 
flat bottoms of these valleys, floored with the insoluble particles of 
the rocks above, are often retentive of water, and form swamps which 
yield sedges and rushes and other water-loving plants.
The lovely 
Grass of Parnassus was here and the tender Bog Pimpernel, and in 
one marshy spot far from any homestead the Yellow Mimulus was 
luxuriating as though it had never known the shelter of a cottage 
garden.
Other noteworthy plants which were observed were — Vicia 
sylvatica, Paris quadrifolia, Convallaria majalis, Rubus saxatilis } 
Scutellaria galericulata, Epilobiwn angustifolium, Myrrhis odorata, 
Epipactis palustris, Crepis paludosa, Scabiosa columbaria, Cerastium 
trinerve, Pinguicula vulgaris, Geutn intermedium, Festuca gigantea, 
Hordeum syh'aticum, Triodia decumbens, Triglochin palustre, Blysmus 
compressus, Scirpus sylvaticus, Carex flava, C.
pulicaria, C.paliescens, 
C. remota, C.
panicea, C.
paniculata, Polystichum aculeatum.
On the previous day some of our party gathered Conium 
maculatum and Echium vulgare at Helmsley Castle and at 
Kievaulx Abbey, and Daphne la areola and Ribes alpinus near 
the latter place.
The geological report was presented by Mr. W.
Lower Carter, 
M.A., F.G.S., and the following account is written by the Secretaries 
of the Geological Section, Messrs.
W. Lower Carter, M.A., F.G.&, 
and John W.
Slather, F.G.S.
: 
Kirkby Moorside lies on the northern edge of the great 
flattened hollow known as the Vale of Pickering.
This roughly 
oval area is elongated in an east and west direction, and is bounded 
on the north, west, and south-west by Oolitic hills, and on the 
south-east by the Chalk Wolds.
It is almost entirely covered by 
alluvial deposits and post-glacial sands and gravels.
% 
Natural ist, 
YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT KIRKBY MOORSIDE.
321 
The remarkable course of the Dervvent — which, rising near the 
coast, flows westward instead of taking the valleys to the east — is 
a well-known instance of erratic river-flow, and points to an exten- 
sion of high land much further to the eastward in the early period of 
the formation of this vale.
The whole of the drainage of this oval 
area is carried away by the Derwent through the gorge at Malton, 
and in the opinion of many observers this basin was once a lake or 
great sea-loch.
On either side of Kirkby Moorside a long sinuous valley 
runs northwards, cutting deep grooves into the table-like hills 
and exposing interesting sections of the Middle and Lower Oolitic 
beds, which dip gently to the south and are exposed in order as we 
pass northwards.
The Lower Oolites, which in this area consist of 
a great series of estuarine, marine, and freshwater beds, are divided 
into three series, ' each of which is capped by a thin but well-marked 
band full of marine fossils ' (Fox-Strangwayes), are exposed at the 
northern extremities of these valleys, but in their lower reaches the 
beds seen are confined to the Middle Oolites.
It is to these that 
the attention of the Geological Section was principally directed.
Immediately above the dark shales of the Cornbrash (the topmost 
bed of the Lower Oolites) comes the Kellaways rock, which in this 
area has a thickness of about 70 feet, and * is a tolerably massive 
sandstone which is ferruginous and fossiliferous in the upper part/ 
Above this comes the Oxford Clay, which in this area is a grey, 
sandy shale, * lithologically very unlike its equivalent in the South 
of England/ Its fossils are few in number and badly preserved.
The Lower Calcareous Grit, about 150 feet in thickness, in this 
area consists of a massive sandstone which passes gradually into the 
Oxford Clay beneath, and becomes 'more calcareous in its upper 
part until it passes into the true limestone above/ Above this come 
the Passage Beds, which in this area lose much of the distinctness 
which characterises them more to the east, and are ' less ferruginous 
and rather more massive in character/ The capping rock of a great 
part of the tabular hill above Kirkby is the Coralline Oolite, a massive 
thick-bedded limestone 'composed of minute oolitic grains with 
a great number of fossils/ This limestone is divided into two 
principal beds, separated by a set of sandstones known as the Middle 
Calcareous Grit Kirkby Moorside itself stands on the Upper 
Calcareous Grit, whilst the rising ground immediately above the 
town, to east, west, and south, is capped by blue Kimeridge Clay.
This clay is supposed to underly the greater part of the alluvial and 
lacustrine beds that cover the Vale of Pickering, but is only revealed in 
occasional isolated hills which rise above the general level of the plain.
N'ov.
1893.
w 
322 YORKSHIRE NATURALISTS AT KIRKBY MOORSIDE.
The Boulder Clay in the neighbourhood of Kirkby is not more 
than a few feet thick.
It is exposed in the railway cuttings, and 
consists of stiff clay with erratic boulders.
In the Coralline Oolite of this area there are many caves, one 
of which — the Cave of Kirkdale — is celebrated by the researches of 
Buckland.
This cave, which is situated at the entrance to Kirkdale, 
contained an extensive accumulation of bony remains covered by 
a deposit of mud, the whole overlaid by stalagmite.
* It is situated 
about half-way up the face of the quarry along an irregular line formed 
at the junction of the Chemnitzia limestones with the more earthy 
limestones above.
...
It is probable that at this horizon in the 
limestone are formed the numerous ' swallows' or underground 
channels, in which most of the streams in the neighbourhood lose 
a part or all of their water, and if the denudation of these valleys 
was carried ioo feet lower, it is probable that a fine series of caves 
would be exposed in this region' (Fox-Strangwayes).
No human 
remains or traces of human workmanship have been found in this 
cave, nor is there evidence of more than one period of occupation by 
predacious beasts (Phillips).
It would appear to have been a hyaena 
den, most of the bones being well gnawed, and the proportion of 
hyaena remains being exceptionally large.
Twenty-seven species of 
mammalia and birds were found.' 
The Geological Section left Kirkby Moorside by the Manor Vale, 
then crossed to Kirkdale by way of the Gillamoor Road and Hagg 
Farm, worked down Kirkdale from the Hold Chaldron Mill to the 
Cave, and then back to Kirkby by the low road.
The divisions of 
the Middle Oolite examined during the day were : 
i. — The Upper Calcareous Grit.
2. — The Upper Limestone.
3-— The Middle Calcareous Grit.
4-— -The Lower Limestones.
i. The Upper Calcareous Grit was seen in the Manor Vale, 
capping the cliff opposite the ruined castle.
A peculiar argillo-calcareous stone of very unequal development 
called locally 'The Throstler/ was also noted here, forming 
a narrow band between the Upper Calcareous Grit and the Upper 
Limestones.
In a quarry near Hagg Farm this same rock was 
observed to be at least twelve feet thick.
2. The Upper Limestone was also best seen in the Manor Vale, 
especially in the quarry at the north end of the valley.
Here the 
weathered surfaces showed a mass of fossils, quite easy to determine, 
but, for the most part, defying extraction.
3. The Middle Calcareous Grit.
This was observed in the dry bed 
of the Hodge "Reck, in Kirkdale, opposite the church.
No fossi ls seetn 
Naturalist, 
NOTE ORNITHOLOGY.
323 
4. The Lower Limestones.
The best sections of this division 
were also seen in the Hodge Beck, between the Hold Chaldron 
Mill and the Kirkdale Church.
Many of the streams in this district flow underground for some 
distance, leaving their courses above-ground quite dry, excepting in 
wet seasons.
This was observed to be the case with the Hodge 
Beck, for, just below the Hold Chaldron Mill, it disappears bodily 
into a swallow-hole.
Perhaps, in some respects, the most interesting item in the day's 
proceedings was the visit to the celebrated Kirkdale Cave.
Since 
the time of Buckland about thirty feet of it have been quarried away, 
and it is now of little interest, excepting in its associations.
However, several members of the section, armed with candle and 
braving all discomfort, entered, and managed to crawl and wriggle 
a distance of twenty or thirty yards.
The geologists were much indebted to their local guide, 
Mr. Bowes.
Fossils observed or collected :— 
Belemnites abbreviates.
Pecten fibrosus.
Ammonites plicatilis.
Pecten vagans.
Chemnitzia heddingtonensis.
Terebratula sp.
Nerincea sp.
Cidaris florigemma (spikes).
Cerithium muricatum.
Pseudodiadema versipora.
Trochus.
Pygaster umbrella.
Pleurotomaria.
Echinobrissus scutatus.
Exogyra nana.
Stylina tubulifera.
Gervillia aviculoides.
ThecosmiHa annularis 
Avicula ovalis.
Isastrcea explanata.
Lima sp.
Thamnastrea concinna.
Besides others undetermined.
Mr. A.
H. Pawson then proposed a vote of thanks to the land- 
owners and guides, and also to the gentlemen who had contributed 
to the excursion programme.
This was seconded by Mr. Farrah 
and unanimnnqlv mrripH anH trip nrnr.p.edin^s concluded with a vote 
Rev 
W. R B.
NOTE— ORNITHOLOGY.
* • Flamborough Bird-Notes.— The fishermen inform me that large quantities 
of Sea Swallows {Sterna) are frequenting our coast this season, more than they 
have seen for years; also several Shearwaters, both Manx and Cinereous Shear- 
waters (Puffimis anglorum and P.
major).
Not unfrequently the Sabine's Gulls 
iXena sabinii) make their appearance on the coast.
Some of the fishermen are 
great observers of birds.
Mr. George Emmerson, fisherman, shot a Sabine's Gull 
off the Headland to-day.
The Rock Doves {Columba tivia) are also very 
Plentiful this season ; thousands are to be seen flying along the cliffs every day.
Matthe w Bailey, Flamborough, September 20th, 1893.
3 2 4 
NEWTON'S DICTIONARY OF BIRDS 
A | Dictionary of Birds | by | Alfred Newton | assisted by | Hans 
Gadow I with contributions from | Richard Lydekker, B.A., F.G.S., 
Charles S.
Roy, M.A., F.R.S., j and | Robert W.
Shufeldt, M.D.
| 
(late United States Army), | Part II.
| (GA— MOA.) | London: | Adam and 
Charles Black.
| 1893.
Since the notice of Part I- of this important book in the present 
volume (p.
252) of 'The Naturalist/ Part II.
(GA — MOA) has been 
issued.
It is scarcely necessary to say that the high standard of 
Professor Newton's work has been more than maintained, for it is 
impossible for even a careless or casual reader to turn over these 
leaves without being struck with the vast amount of accumulated 
erudition now for the first time brought together under one cover, 
combining all the oldest and all the latest information in connection 
with practical and scientific ornithology.
Part II.
of 'A Dictionary of Birds' contains two papers of 
special interest and importance — Professor Newton's learned and 
exhaustive article of over 53 pages on ' Geographical Distribution, 
and the equally capable and scholarly treatise under the head of 
1 Migration,' which latter, in our opinion, is the clearest and most 
satisfactory explanation (as far as the matter is capable of being 
explained) which has so far appeared in connection with the greatest 
mystery of the animal kingdom.
Amongst the numerous shorter notices in Part II.
it is difficult to 
make a distinction, but we would particularly call the attention of 
the reader to excellent articles having reference to the family groups 
of 'Goose,' 'Grebe/ 'Grouse/ 'Heron/ 'Hornbill/ 'Humming 
Bird/ ' Jay ' ; that remarkable creature the ' Kiwi/ the ' Lammer- 
geyer/ 'Lark/ the Australian 'Lyre-bird/ and the 'Megapodes'; 
also the concluding portion of the ' Gare-fowi' commenced in Part L 
A third and fourth part will complete the work, which is intended 
to form one handy demy octavo volume of about 1,000 pages.
In conclusion, we can only repeat, after seeing Part II., that 
when completed it must prove an indispensable handbook for the 
student and country gentleman, and should certainly not be allowed 
to pass unread by anyone who pretends to care for ornithology, and 
is desirous of obtaining correct and reliable information.
— J.
C 
NOTES AND NEWS, 
have 
to rank as a scientific journal.
There are one or two readable articles, and whi 
wishing the venture every success, we would suggest that the merely sentimen 
portion could be well dispensed with.
'Naturalist 
3^5 
AN ACCOUNT OF SOME OF THE 
RARER PLANTS FOUND IN AND AROUND 
SPILSBY, NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE.
J. T.
BURGESS, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S., 
Spilsby.
The work of a busy medical man in a country practice offers special 
facilities for the observation of the indigenous flowers abounding 
within his botanical district, which is the ten-mile radius surrounding 
the place where he dwells.
I myself can vouch that many a journey, 
otherwise weary and monotonous, has been made interesting and 
profitable by allowing the thoughts to be attracted to these beautiful 
wildings of nature.
For the past fifteen years I have, in a quiet sort 
of way, been observing and recording the various natural phenomena 
of the district, such as the arrival and departure of the migratory 
birds, the advent of insects, the first opening of flowers, and all the 
peculiar freaks of nature in the floral and animal world.
What is more to the point in the present paper, I have ever been 
on the look-out for our less common plants and unrecorded varieties.
Altogether I have observed nearly 450 species and varieties, and 
these I have carefully painted in water-colours from living specimens.
The collection formed in this manner has received very flattering 
notice from the many naturalists who have inspected it, and this has 
prompted me to publish the following list.
It consists of a selected 
hundred of the rarer plants, most of which are found in the Spilsby 
district, but in order to include specimens from the shore and 
estuaries, the area has been extended another five or six miles in 
a direction chiefly N.E., E., and S.E. In choosing this number 
I was pleased to find that some of them are still ' first records,' which 
seems remarkable, considering the many years I have delayed in 
publishing and the late date of Mr. Lees' ' Outline Flora/ which is 
surprisingly full of 'new records,' 
The Spilsby district, I ought to say, offers special facilities to the 
naturalist and botanist, on account of its diversity of configuration 
and soil.
It is made up of wold, with both sand and chalk founda- 
tion ; of fen — peat — with its artificial drains ; of marsh— silt — with 
its innumerable watercourses and, allowing for an extended area 
eastward, of shore, with its boundary of sand and shingle ; and lastly, 
°f estuary, with its stretch of muddy flats ; all these replete with 
a varied life, more or less peculiar, of their own.
I do not claim to have actually discovered every specimen 
figured in my collection, as I have been much assisted by the efforts 
^26 BURGESS : RARER PLANTS OF SPILSBY.
O 
of kind friends.
I take this opportunity, therefore, of acknow- 
ledging the valuable aid I have received from everyone, and, more 
especially, from Mr. J.
Jarvis Rainey, of Spilsby, whose untiring 
researches during the last two or three seasons have been rewarded 
by some specially good finds.
The order in which my list is arranged and named is practically 
that of the Eighth Edition of the London Catalogue.
Where this 
has not been followed, the authors whose names have been used are 
given, and, where circumstances justify, special remarks added.
Thalictrum minus var.
maritimum.
Lesser Meadow Rue.
1882.
A few scattered plants were found on the sea bank 
at Croft.
Thalictrum flavum.
Yellow Meadow Rue. 188 1.
Two 
plants were gathered on the border of a plantation at East Keal 
Carse.
Helleborus viridis.
Green Hellebore.
A solitary specimen 
of this somewhat rare plant was discovered in a plantation at 
Hundleby, by Mrs. Burgess, in 1882, and has been under 
observation ever since.
It also grows freely on a bank at 
Gunby, but here is probably a garden escape.
Delphinium Ajacis.
Field Larkspur.
In 1880 one plant 
was found on some waste ground near the wind-mill at Hundleby.
Seed probably blown out whilst dressing corn.
Papaver dubium.
Long; Smooth-headed Poppy.
* n 
1880 a few straggling specimens were gathered from an old 
garden wall at Eresby.
Corydalis bulbosa.
Solid Bulbous Fumitory.
Appeared 
in 1880 in two places near Spilsby.
Probably garden escapes.
Corydalis claviculata.
Climbing Corydalis.
1880.
Seen 
for several years in a hedge-row at West Keal.
but has now 
disappeared.
A first record.
Sisymbrium Thaliana.
Thale Cress.
1882.
On a dry 
sandy bank at Toynton All Saints.
Cochlearia Anglica.
English Scurvy Grass.
1892.
On 
the banks of the tidal portion of the Witham, Boston.
Thlaspi arvense.
Penny Cress.
1891.
A few specimens 
were found in a fen drove at Thorpe.
Senebiera Coronopus.
Wart Cress.
1879.
Grew as a weed 
on some waste ground in Spilsby.
Helianthemum chamaecistus.
Rock Rose.
1892.
In a wood 
at Well near Alford.
Naturalist, 
burgess: rarer plants of spilsby.
327 
Cerastium arvense.
Field Mouse-ear Chickweed.
1886.
On the sand-banks south of Skegness.
Arenaria peploides Smith.
Sea Purslane.
1886.
Between 
high-water mark and the sand-banks at Skegness.
Arenaria rubra Smith.
Purple Sandwort.
1879.
In a field 
near the sand-pits off Partney Road, Spilsby.
Observed three 
or four seasons.
Arenaria marina Roth.
Sea Sandwort, 1888.
On the mud 
flat near Gibraltar Point, at the north corner of the Wash.
Common.
Claytonia perfoliata.
1892.
Extends the whole length ot 
a hedge-row in the parish of Hundleby.
This rare plant has 
been under observation at least fifteen years, and was probably 
introduced in foreign corn.
It now grows extensively and seems 
quite naturalised.
A first record for North Lincolnshire.
Hypericum humifusum.
Trailing- St John's Wort.
1880.
On a bank at Hundleby.
Observed three or four seasons, but 
now extinct.
Malva moschata.
Musk Mallow.
1886.
Grows freely in 
a small plantation near the river at Sausthorpe.
Geranium lucidum.
Shining" Crane's-bill.
1886.
At the 
root of an old tree in Mavis Enderby Churchyard.
Erodium cicutarium.
Hemlock Stork's Bill.
1892.
On 
a bank on the Hundleby Road, Spilsby, and apparently like 
specimens on the sand-hills near Gibraltar Point.
Observed 
twelve or fifteen years.
Oxalis Acetosella.
Wood Sorrel.
1882.
On a bank at 
Hundleby.
Seen several years.
Impatiens parviflora.
Balsam.
1889.
A rare plant, with 
small yellow flowers, growing on some waste land at East Keal.
Possibly an escape from cultivation.
A first record.
Medicago sativa.
Lucerne.
1889.
On the border of a field 
at Old Bolingbroke.
Most probably an escape.
Trifolium arvense.
Hare's-foot Trefoil.
1890.
On a bank 
at West Keal ; also in a field at Hundleby.
Vicia lathyroides.
Spring Vetch.
1879.
This rare little 
plant cropped up for a few seasons in two or three parts of the 
district, but soon disappeared, so that a special journey of 
thirty miles to the sea-bank at Winthorpe had to be undertaken 
to procure a specimen for painting.
Nov. 1893.
328 burgess: rarer plants of spilsby.
Prunus avium.
Wild Cherry.
1879.
In a wood at Well, 
near Alford.
Poterium sanguisorba.
Burnet.
1890.
On the borders of 
a small plantation at Firsby, and in a field at Ashby.
Observed 
many years.
Potentilla fragariastrum.
Strawberry-leaved Cinquefoil.
1891.
On a bank at East Keal.
Still growing there.
Potentilla argentea.
Hoary Cinquefoil.
1892.
At Halton 
Holegate.
Fragaria vesca.
Wood Strawberry.
1879.
In Well Woods, 
near Alford.
Geum rivale.
Water Ave ns.
1891.
On a bank at Hundleby.
Observed 12 or 15 years.
CEnothera biennis.
Evening Primrose.
1886.
Waste 
ground in Spilsby.
A garden escape.
Circaea lutetiana.
Enchanter's Nightshade.
1888.
For 
two or three seasons flourished as a weed in a garden at 
Hundleby.
Myriophyllum spicatum.
Spiked Water Milfoil.
1891.
The drains about Skegness.
Bryonia dioica.
White Bryony.
1879.
Observed a few 
seasons growing in a hedge-row on Bolingbroke Hill.
Sedum acre.
Biting Stone-crop.
1890.
On the sea-bank 
near the junction of Skegness and Croft parishes.
Saxifraga tridactylites.
Rue-leaved Saxifrage.
1881.
Observed two seasons in Spilsby Churchyard.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris.
Marsh Penny-wort.
1880.
In a 
drain at Toynton St. Peter's (Fen-side).
Eryngium maritimum.
Sea Holly.
1889.
Grows sparingly 
on the sea-bank, Chapel St. Leonard's.
Apium nodiflorum, Procumbent Marsh-wort 1890.
In 
small streams at Halton Holegate and other parts of the district 
The leaves are sometimes unfortunately mistaken for those of 
the Water Cress.
Valeriana dioica.
Small Marsh Valerian.
1880.
Seen 
several years in a small stream at Hundleby.
Silybum Marianum.
Milk Thistle.
1880.
At Mavis 
Enderby and Bolingbroke.
Most likely garden escapes.
Cnicus eriophorus.
Woolly Headed Thistle.
1892.
At 
Well near Alford 
Naturalist 
burgess: rarer plants of spilsby.
329 
Centaurea Calcitrapa.
Star Thistle.
1890.
Observed two 
seasons in a meadow at Low Toynton.
Absent in 1892.
A first 
record.
Achillea Ptarmica.
Sneeze-wort.
1886.
In a disused garden 
at Hundleby.
Senecio sylvaticus van auriculatus.
Viscid Groundsel.
1890.
Large quantities in Halton Fen. First record.
Aster tripolium.
Sea Starwort.
1888.
On the sea bank at 
Addlethorpe, also at Gibraltar Point.
Common.
Petasites fragrans.
Fragrant Butter-bur.
1879.
Growing 
quite wild in Spilsby churchyard.
Observed at least twelve 
years.
Cichorium intybus.
Chicory.
1890.
In Thorpe Fen.
Picris echioides.
Bristly Ox-tongue.
1890.
Two or three 
places in Hundleby.
Campanula rapunculoides.
Creeping Bell Flower.
1890.
Spilsby.
Garden escape.
Campanula Rapunculus.
1881.
Several plants cropped up 
for one season in a field of clover at Spilsby.
A first record.
Campanula patula.
Spreading Bell Flower.
1880.
A single 
specimen was found on Blue Hill Side, Spilsby.
A first record.
Vinca major.
Greater Periwinkle.
18S1.
In a hedge -row 
at Ash by.
Most probably a garden escape.
Vinca minor.
Lesser Periwinkle.
1880.
This little plant 
grows wild in a plantation bordering on the moat which formerly 
surrounded the old castle at Eresby, Spilsby.
Blackstonia perfoliate Perfoliate Yellow-wort.
1S86.
Two 
plants were found growing on the chalk near the Mavis Enderby 
Cross Roads, but only appeared one season.
Gentiana amarella.
Autumnal Gentian.
1890.
Found in 
abundance on the sides of the high road leading from Brinkhill 
to Dexthorpe.
Menyanthes trifoliata.
Buck Bean, or Marsh Trefoil.
1889.
Grows freely in some boggy ground on a hill-side at 
Langton.
Polemonium caeruleum.
Greek Valerian.
18S0.
A few 
plants gr^w for two seasons m a green lane at Spilsby.
Probably 
garden escapes.
Calystegia soldanella.
Sea Bindweed.
1890.
This elegant 
plant still grows wild on a limit 1 portion of the sea-bank at 
330 burgess: rarer plants of spilsbv.
Skegness, but, owing to the bank being let off for building 
purposes, is threatened with obliteration.
Solanum nigrum.
Garden Nightshade.
1886.
A few 
specimens were found on the sea-bank at Skegness, and more 
recently at Gibraltar Point 
Lycium barbarum.
Tea Tree ?
1890.
There are a few 
bushes growing apparently quite wild on the sea-bank at Mable- 
thorpe, and at Sausthorpe, which is probably a garden escape.
Datura stramonium.
Thorn Apple.
1887.
An isolated 
plant grew quite wild amongst the grass in Spilsby churchyard.
Other specimens have since cropped up as weeds in various 
. gardens about Spilsby.
Hyoscyamus nigen Henbane.
1883.
This medicinal plant 
was at one time quite common on the land side of the sea-bank 
in the parish of Skegness, but owing to the search after it by 
herbalists it has become almost extinct.
It may, however, still 
be found at Gibraltar Point.
Verbascum thapsus.
Mullein.
1879.
A sporadic plant on 
some waste ground near Spilsby.
It frequently springs up as 
a weed in gardens, on old walls, etc., but can scarcely be 
considered as a native here.
Verbascum blattaria.
Moth Mullein.
1879.
An odd 
specimen was found in a shrubbery at West Keal, having 
probably been introduced amongst other seeds.
Antirrhinum majus.
Snapdragon.
189 1.
Although fre- 
quently found growing on the tops of old walls, etc., it is 
probably only an escape from cultivation and cannot be claimed 
as a native.
Pedicularis sylvatica.
Lousewort 1890.
In a damp field 
at Hundleby, near the river ; also in the parish of Raithby, 
near Hasrs Beck.
Melampyrum pratense.
Yellow Cow-wheat.
1892.
In 
the parish of Aby, near Alford.
Calamintha Clinopodium.
Wild Basil.
1880.
In the 
green lane leading south from Raithby Hill side.
Still under 
observation.
Thymus Chamsedrys.
Wild Thyme.
1879.
On a chalky 
bank at South Ormsby.
Rare.
Calamintha officinalis.
Calamint.
1889.
On a bank at 
Lusby, and more recently at Halton Holegate.
Salvia Verbenaca.
Wild Sage.
1889.
On the road side at 
Halton.
One plant was under observation for several years, but 
has now died out.
A first record.
MM 
Naturalist, 
burgess: rarer plants of spilsbv.
331 
Salvia pratensis.
Meadow Clary.
1888.
On a bank at 
Partney.
Garden escape.
Scutellaria galericulata.
Skull-cap.
1879.
On the bank of 
a small stream in Peasgood Lane, Halton ; also one specimen 
in Toynton Fen, a few years later.
Marrubium vulgare.
White Horehound.
1891.
Occa- 
sionally found on the road-side leading from Skegness to 
Gibraltar Point.
Leonurus cardiaca.
Mother-wort.
1890.
On the sea-bank 
at Chapel St. Leonard's.
Lamium purpureum var.
alba.
White variety of the Red 
Dead Nettle.
1880.
This rare little plant grew for many 
years on a bank on the Hundleby Road, Spilsby, but is, I fear, 
dying out.
Lamium maculatum.
Spotted Dead Nettle.
1886.
On a 
bank at Claxby.
Apparently wild.
Galeopsis speciosa.
Yellow Dead Nettle.
1892.
In Welton 
Wood.
Teucrium scorodonia.
Wood Sage.
1891.
On a bank at 
Hagworthingham.
Echium vulgare.
Viper's Bugloss.
1879.
This showy plant 
appeared several seasons on the borders of a chalk-pit at 
Langton.
Lithospermum arvense.
Gromwell.
1880.
In a corn-field 
at East Keal.
Appeared two or three seasons.
Myosotis versicolor.
Parti-coloured Scorpion Grass.
1879.
On the border of a corn-field at Hundleby, and 
occasionally in other parts of the district.
Primula caulescens Bab. Oxlip.
1890.
In the fields and 
woodlandj glades about Gunby.
Rare.
Armeria maritima.
Thrift.
1888.
On the sand-banks at 
Sutton-on-Sea.
Statice genuina Syme.
Sea Lavender.
1SS4.
On the 
muddy flats at the estuary of the Witham, Frieston.
Plantago , maritima.
Seaside Plantain.
1892.
On the 
banks^of the tidal portion of the Witham, Boston.
Utricularia vulgaris.
Bladderwort 1888.
In a drain at 
Skegness.
Daphne laureola.
Spurge Laurel.
1890.
Several shrubs 
were growing quite wild in the woods about Gunby ?
and were 
un der observation several seasons.
Nov. 1893.
332 NOTES LEPIDOPTERA.
Aristolochia clematitis.
Birthwort 1892.
Found in a hedge- 
row at West Keal.
First record.
Ceratophyllum submersum.
Hornwort.
1888.
In a pond 
at Skegness.
Orchis latifolia.
Marsh Orchis.
1889.
Tn some moist 
ground amongst sedge and reed at Little Steeping.
Listera ovata.
Tway-blade.
1886.
In a small plantation at 
Enderby Cross Roads, also in Well Wood.
Somewhat rare.
Epipactis latifolia.
Broad -leaved Helleborine.
1890.
Welton Wood.
Ornithogalum nutans.
Drooping Star of Bethlehem.
1892.
On a bank at East Keal, also at Hal ton Holegate.
Most likely garden escapes.
Scilla verna.
Vernal Squill.
1879.
A few bulbs were found 
growing together in a small plantation at Eresby, Spilsby, and 
were brought home and kept under cultivation.
None have 
since been found wild.
Eriophorum angustifolium.
Cotton Grass.
1891.
This 
peculiar little plant flourished for several seasons in a boggy 
piece of ground near the springs at Hundleby, but is now 
becoming scarce.
NOTES— LEPIDOPTERA.
Sphinx convolvuli in Yorkshire, 1893.
— I have heard of three captures of 
this very fine and exceedingly large moth recently in Yorkshire — viz., two at York 
and one at Beverley.
— W.
Hewett, 12, Howard Street, York, Oct. 23rd, 1893.
Acherontia atropos at Goole.
— It has probably been noticed by the 
entomologists that the caterpillars of the Death's Head Moth are this year very 
plentiful.
Four farmers have brought me specimens.
— T.
Bunker.
Death's Head Hawk Moth in Yorkshire, 1893.
— Specimens of this moth 
{Acherontia atropos) have been recently taken in the larval, pupal, and imago states 
at York, Beverley, and Driffield.
— William Hewett, 12, Howard Street, York, 
October 23rd, 1893.
Varieties of Argynnis euphrosyne and Triphaena pronuba.— At the 
October meeting of the Entomological Society of London, Mr. R.
South exhibited 
a curious variety of Argynnis euphrosyne, taken in Lancashire, in May 1893, by 
Mr. T.
Baylies ; and a Triphana pronuha y the right wings of which were typical, 
and the left, wings resembled the variety inn far, caught at sugar in Dovedale, 
Derbyshire, by Mr. Blagg, in July 1893.
— H.
Goss, hon.
sec.
Deiopeia pulchella at Beverley.— Whilst looking over the collection of 
Mr. Bishoprig at Beverley a short time ago, I noticed a very fine specimen of this 
beautiful moth, which Mr. Bishoprig assured me was taken some 20 years ago in 
Grave Hill Lane, Beverley, by a youth, and brought alive, and not in the least 
damaged, to him.
Mr. Bishoprig has very obligingly let me have the specimen, 
which now adorn- my collection.
— William Hewett, 12, Howard Street, York, 
Octobe 
Naturalist, 
333 
n ^icmortam.
GEORGE ROBERT VINE.
Microscopic Geology has just recently lost one of its most 
enthusiastic and ardent supporters — one well known to all readers of 
'The Naturalist/ and as well appreciated for his valuable and 
extensive original contributions to the ' Proceedings of the Yorkshire 
Geological and Polytechnic Society 5 ; we refer to Mr. G.
R. Vine, of 
Sheffield.
A brief notice of his death appeared in our September 
number, p.
282, but since then we have been enabled to secure 
the following summary of his life and labours.
Mr. Vine was born in Portsmouth, Oct. 20th, 1825.
His 
parents were poor, but brought up their children in strict 
conformity with their religious beliefs, and with such a sense 
of honour and honesty that their son George never wavered 
from the paths of upright dealing with his fellow men.
He 
found in the National School in Portsmouth a place where the 
rudiments of education could be obtained for a few pence per week, 
and for a short time he was a diligent pupil at that institution.
Like 
all school boys, he got into numerous and frequent scrapes, but took 
full benefit of the advantages there offered, which, at the best, were 
far inferior to those of the present day.
Soon, however, he had to 
bid i good-bye' to school and commence daily work, but his desire for 
knowledge was not to be allayed, and, procuring a Latin and a Greek 
grammar, he became familiar with the elements of these languages.
Poetry and history were his favourite subjects, and his memory for 
what he had read was truly marvellous; he would often recite 
iengthy passages from a poet without having seen the book for ten 
or more years.
Mathematics w r ere never attractive to him, but into 
almost every other branch of learning he dipped more or less 
extensively.
No particular subject, however, had as yet seized upon 
his mind, though his reading became more and more general, and 
the consequent breadth of thought and sympathies brought him into 
contact with many men of ability.
With W.
J. Linton he was very 
intimate, and many others well known in the i forties and fifties ' 
were his almost constant companions.
He was connected with the 
movement for the abolition of the tax on knowledge, with the 
Chartist cause, with noted foreigners — Kossuth, Mazzini, and others.
But, at last, becoming tired of generalities and of the many vagaries 
so freely discussed at the time, he began to 'settle down.' His 
business led him about the country considerably until he arrived in 
Ireland about 1853, as the manager of a corset manufactory in 
Athlone.
Here he was located in the midst of a fine limestone 
1 —    WW , , , 
Nor. 1893, 
334 IN MEMORIAM — GEORGE ROBERT VINE.
region and was naturally attracted by the number of fossils obtainable 
from the neighbouring quarries.
Thirty-five or forty years ago, then 
he commenced that work in Geology which only terminated with his 
life last month.
His collection of Mollusca from Central Ireland is 
almost unique, and of these specimens he was always very proud.
Twenty years ago his attention was directed from general to 
microscopic Geology.
In exchange for a number of theological 
magazines, he received, from the Rev. W.
Howchin, of Morpeth, a 
series of samples of washings from Carboniferous Limestone quarries in 
South Scotland and Northumberland.
With characteristic enthusiasm 
he exclaimed, after glancing at the material through a little pocket 
glass, ' Here is a new world to me !
' In an incredibly short time he 
had become familiar with the commoner forms of Foraminifera, 
under the generous guidance of Mr. Howchin.
The Polyzoa 
puzzled him, and, upon making a few enquiries, he was told that 
little was known about this branch of work and that he had better 
commence investigations for himself.
Phillips 7 Geology of Yorkshire, 
McCoy's Carboniferous Fossils, and other works were all consulted, 
but with little success, and so, at last, he commenced in 'Science 
Gossip,' for 1 87 7, a few papers summarising the state of knowledge 
on Fossil Polyzoa, and offering a few of his own observations on the 
matter.
Naturally, these were not very exhaustive, but they brought 
him into correspondence with Mr. John Young, of Glasgow, who 
helped him with a vast amount of information and an almost 
exhaustless supply of Polyzoal material.
About this time, he became 
acquainted with Mr. Geo.
Shrubsole, of Chester, whose death was 
also announced in the September 'Naturalist' An exhaustive study of 
the Fenestellidce and Palceocoryne was carried on between them, a study 
to which the late Dr. Duncan contributed in no small degree.
Mr. Vine was now fairly established in the study of Fossil Polyzoa, 
and, as the years went by, he was in constant correspondence with 
such authorities as the Rev. T.
Hincks, the late Mr. G.
Busk, 
Dr. Lindstrom, Dr. Pergens, Mr. E.
O. Ulrich, Miss E.
C. Jelly, 
Mr. A.
W. Waters, and many others, some of whom are still left to 
mourn the taking of such an one from their intimate circle.
His 
British Association Reports are too well known to need comment, 
for such work lives to help future students in the intricate path- 
way.
Papers in the Proceedings of the Yorkshire Geological and 
Polytechnic Society, the Annals and Magazine of Natural 
History, the Transactions of the Geological Society — in all 
numbering fifty or sixty — all go to increase that once slender 
list of works on the Polyzoa.
It was not in investigations in 
the class Polyzoa that Mr. Vine was exclusively engaged.
In 1876 
t: 
Naturalist, 
NOTES AND NEWS.
335 
he made an important discovery of Macrospores in a coaly seam 
between vast beds of sandstone in a Sheffield quarry.
This drew 
his attention to the coal plants, and, in a few months, hundreds of 
coal sections were in his cabinet — slides from Mr. Butterworth, of 
Oldham, Mr. Spencer, of Halifax, and others ; sections prepared by 
himself and his son, who, at this time, was actively engaged with him 
at home and in the field.
There are few societies of a scientific turn 
in Sheffield and its neighbourhood that are unable to boast of having 
had ' Mr. Vine, the Geologist/ to give them a lecture on Coal and 
Coal Plants.
The Sheffield Literary and Philosophical Society 
considered it an honour to have him give them an evening with his 
slides.
Yet another branch occupied the mind of this truly wonder- 
ful working man (for such he loved to be styled).
Postage stamps, 
post cards, and its accompanying features fascinated him, and his 
collection — though, from a monetary point of view, probably not 
valuable — exhibits that peculiar feature of its author which enabled 
him to seize on the salient points of a subject almost at a glance.
Sea-weeds, zoophytes, and a dozen other things all came in for 
a share of attention.
But it is with pardonable pride that the writer 
can testify to Mr. Vine's undying enthusiasm for Sunday School 
work.
Truly he was the man for the little ones, and few families 
live in Attercliffe to-day that have not, directly or indirectly, been 
influenced by his humble Christian disposition.
So he lived, and so 
he died, giving directions to his son about his polyzoa two days 
before he passed away, mentioning Sunday School work the day 
before he went home, and, wishing his family good-night five minutes 
before, Mr. Vine passed from the service of earth to the higher 
service of heaven on Tuesday, August 8th, beloved, honoured, 
respected, and leaving behind him a name which will surely be found 
in the long list of ardent, self-taught, and ' ever-onward ?
naturalists.
G.R.V.
NOTES AND NEWS 
We regret to learn that the issue of ' Iiardwick's Science Gossip ?
has been 
ran 
Mr. F.
W. Fierke, 52, Francis Street West, Hull, Hon. Secretary of the 
Conchological Section of the Y.
N. U., desires us to state that he will be pleased 
to receive any local reports of conchological operations for the current year from 
the recorders or secretaries of affiliated societies and conchologists of the county.
He would also like to draw particular attention to the subject of the investigation 
of the Yorkshire coast for its mollusca and other marine fauna.
The study of the 
marine zoology of the coast appears to have been much neglected and the means 
for obtaining information very unsatisfactory.
He will be glad to hear from any 
naturalists who are interested and willing to render assistance in extending the 
activities of the Union in this direction.
^*ov.
1S93 
33 6 
n ^emortam.
GEORGE WILLIAM SHRUBSOLE, F.G.S.
The late Mr. George William Shrubsole, was born at Faversham, 
and 
Q 
July 
He received 
* 
r   
i ?:,* 
-'  
-** 
fS* 
^lX£- 
makin 
On leaving school 
gam 
Royal Humane Society's medal for saving the life of a boy who had 
fallen into deep water 
seventeen 
Naturalist, 
IN MEMORIAM — GEORGE WILLIAM SHRUBSOLE.
337 
the minor examination of the Pharmaceutical Society, being the 
twenty-fourth to do so.
Afterwards he attended the lectures given 
by the Society about 1846-7, and gained prizes in materia medica 
and pharmacy, and a certificate in chemistry.
He appears to have 
forsaken the profession of a surgeon for that of a chemist.
He was 
engaged in some of the best West End chemists' establishments, 
until his health failing through over-study, he accepted an engagement 
near Dorking, Surrey.
It was there that he took up the science 
of geology, nor can we be surprised, for a more convenient situation 
to examine the Eocene, Chalk, Upper and Lower Greensand, and 
the Weald Clay, could scarcely be selected.
The fossils of the 
chalk attracted his principal attention, and of these he made 
a valuable collection.
The care and delicate touch with which he 
removed the chalk from specimens of Plagiostoma spinosum, or 
worked out the attached spines of a Cidaris, well illustrated that 
power of taking infinite pains which characterised every labour of 
his life.
In 1853 he removed to Chester, and ultimately succeeded 
to the old-established business of Messrs.
John Hope & Sons, 
Chemists, Market Square.
His place of business soon became the 
recognised centre to which to take all 'finds/ whether archaeological 
or otherwise, in order to obtain his opinion as to their value.
In the 
course of years he was thereby enabled to form a very select collection 
of Roman and other antiquities, found in Chester and the surrounding 
neighbourhood.
In 1858, the late Mr. Henry J.
Bellars, 'honorary 
secretary and curator of the Chester Natural History Society/ 
published an c Illustrated Catalogue of British Land and Freshwater 
Shells.' In this little work we find frequent references to Mr. G.
W. 
Shrubsole.
For instance, at page 15, we read under the heading 
Helix aspersa, ' See also title page, where is represented an unusually 
elegant specimen, kindly brought with many others from Faversham, 
Kent, by Mr. G.
W. Shrubsole, expressly for this work/ When 
studying Natural History or Geology he would rise at daybreak in 
the summer months, to dredge pit, lake, or river for shells, or to 
visit a quarry for fossils.
- The Chester Natural History Society/ of 
which Mr. Bellars was honorary secretary and curator in 1858, must 
have become defunct some time before 1868, as the writer discovered 
in that year, in a lumber room in the Chester Mechanics' Institute, 
now the Free Library, a hamper containing an 'omnium gatherum' 
of fc >ils, which proved on inquiry to be the residuary estate of that 
society, and to which he elected himself residuary legatee.
The 
appointment of the Rev. Charles Kingsley, in 1869, to a canonry of 
Chester, marks an epoch in the intellectual life of the ancient city.
On coming into residence in May 1870, the Canon taught most 
Nov. 1893.
x 
33& IN MEMORIAM GEORGE WILLIAM SHRUBSOLE.
successfully a botanical class in the Mechanics' Institute, and in 187 1, 
gave in the 'Old King's School' a series of lectures, which were 
published afterwards under the title of 'Town Geology.' Mr. Shrubsole 
was at this time brought into very close contact with Canon Kingsley, 
as he possessed the only collection of fossils in the city.
These he 
placed unreservedly at the Canon's disposal, for the purpose of 
illustrating his lectures.
Canon Kingsley's discourses were received 
with enthusiasm, and there gathered around him the whole intel- 
lectual life of Chester.
We must, also, not omit to mention that the 
late Mr. Daniel Mackintosh, F.G.S., was then residing in Chester, 
and followed up Canon Kingsley's labours with a systematic course 
of lectures upon Geology.
In 1871, the Chester Society of Natural 
Science was founded by Canon Kingsley, and Mr. Shrubsole was 
elected chairman of the Geological Section.
He worthily filled the 
position for nearly twenty years, and during that period delivered 
many addresses of great local interest.
In 1873, on the proposition of Canon Kingsley, Mr. Shrubsole 
was elected a Fellow of the Geological Society.
In 1879, Mr.
O. A.
Shrubsole, and in 1885, Mr. W.
H. Shrubsole, the two 
younger brothers of the deceased, became Fellows of the Geological 
Society, and, more remarkable still, they have all contributed papers 
'which have appeared in the Society's Publications' — an achieve- 
ment by three brothers, so far as I am aware of, quite unique in the 
annals of the Geological Society of London.
Between 1879 and 
1884 Mr. Shrubsole published six papers in the ' Quarterly Journal 
of the Geological Society,' upon the Palaeozoic Polyzoa, of which he 
had a splendid collection.
The late Mr. Vine, with whom he 
worked out the fossil Polyzoa, only survived him a fortnight.
In 
1883 Mr. Shrubsole was presented with the Kingsley Memorial 
Medal of the Chester Natural Science Society, 'for having con- 
tributed materially to the promotion and advancement of some 
branch or department of natural science.' In 1886 he contributed 
a paper to the Conchological Society, 'On the Erosion of Certain 
Freshwater Shells.' In October, 1884, Mr. Shrubsole gathered 
from the Trent Canal at Stone, Staffordshire, twenty specimens of 
Planorbis corneus, a species not known in Cheshire, Stoke being the 
nearest habitat.
These he transferred to his aquarium, supplied 
with Dee water.
The shells of the Planorbes/ he observes, ' when 
I gathered them, were intact and well developed.
After some time 
I noticed that, from some cause or other, they, without exception, 
developed on their outer surface a series of circular pits or holes, 
which continued to enlarge till several coalesced, usually along the 
lines of growth, and often extending across the shell, forming a deep 
Naturalist, 
IN MEMORIAM GEORGE WILLIAM SHRUBSOLE.
339 
groove, which penetrated to the lowest shell layer, and continued to 
widen and spread as time went on.
During the time the Planorbes 
were living in the Trent Canal the shell was entire, while three 
months' existence in water taken from the River Dee produced the 
appearance I have described.' He analysed both waters, and in that 
from the Trent Canal there was a great quantity of lime, while in 
that from the Dee there was very little, from which he concluded 
that the carbonic acid in the Dee water dissolved the calcic 
carbonate of • which the shelly structure of the mollusca is mainly 
built up.' He pointed out, however, that shells with a thick 
epidermis escape this fate.
In 1884, he published a complete list 
of the land and freshwater shells of Chester and District, which 
appeared in part 3 of the ' Proceedings of the Chester Society of 
Natural Science.' On antiquarian subjects, he published papers in 
the proceedings of the ' Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire' 
and in * Archseologia Cambrensis' from 1890 to 1892.
In 1886, 
Mr. Shrubsole wrote a paper which was published in the Journal of 
the Archaeological Society : 'On the Age of the City Walls of Chester.' 
This was, doubtless, the outcome of a paper read before the ' Chester 
Archaeological and Historic Society,' entitled 'The City Walls of 
Chester; is any portion of them Roman?' He contended that no 
part of the walls was Roman masonry in situ, basing his arguments 
upon the absence of structural evidence, that the present 'walls' 
were built by the Romans, also that the perishable nature of the local 
stone used for that purpose (the Bunter Pebble Beds, sandstone) 
made it very improbable that the walls of Chester were of Roman 
construction.
The paper was read on December 3rd, 1883, and it 
is recorded in the Society's Journal that the discussion was adjourned 
to the 4th of February, 1884, nor did this suffice, for it was again 
adjourned to February 18th, 1884.
The discussion became very 
animated and soon spread far and wide among Antiquarians, and 
great interest was aroused in the matter in dispute.
A fund was 
raised to defray the expense of a thorough examination of the 
structure of the North Wall of the City, which resulted in finding 
a number of very perfectly preserved inscribed Roman memorial 
stones which had been built into it.
Opinions may vary as to the 
merits or demerits of the controversy, but not as to the practical 
results of the investigation of the structure of the North Wall.
The 
1 finds   are now exhibited in the Grosvenor Museum, Chester, and 
are without doubt the finest collection of inscribed Roman Memorial 
Stones in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Shrubsole was for a number 
of years honorary curator to the Chester Archaeological and Historic 
Society, and honorary curator to the Chester Society of Natural 
\ 
ov 
1893.
340 NOTES AND NEWS.
Science.
In both capacities he greatly enriched the local collections 
of antiquities and fossils.
He also formed a valuable collection of 
recent local land, freshwater, and marine mollusca, and marine 
polyzoa.
His natural reticence renders it difficult, even to an 
intimate friend, to do his memory justice, or to record even briefly 
what he accomplished in a lifetime devoted l to the search for truth f 
over so wide and varied fields of observation.
Diligent in business 
as in research, his leisure was but change to occupations in which 
pleasures never pall.
There was no room for ennui where from 
youth to age each day opened out an ever-widening vista of the 
arcana of nature which might be won.
He was interred in Chester Cemetery, and gathered round his 
open grave were many men who had laboured in those researches 
in which he so much delighted.
The results of the scientific work of his life will be his most 
enduring monument ; let posterity write his epitaph.
William Shone, F.G.S.
Upton Park, Chester, 
September 21st , 1893.
NO TES AND NE WS.
We are indebted to the Rev. J.
Magens Mello for a copy of his ' Geology of 
Derbyshire/ which we are pleased to see ha reached a second edition.
A general 
description of the local geology is given ; the Carboniferous is fully described, with 
fossil lists, vertical section of the coal measures, andiother details.
The Creswell 
Caves are also described, and a plate of typical specimens found there, along with 
an explanatory list, is added.
The subject is dealt with in a pleasant conversational 
manner, and anyone possessing only a rudimentary knowledge of geology would 
soon become familiar with the district by perusal of this excellent hand-book.
A great service is conferred upon naturalists — more particularly in Scotland 
by the publication of a « Naturalists' Map of Scotland,* the joint production of 
Mr. J.
A. Harvie-Brown and Mr. J.
G. Bartholomew.
We suppose the latter is 
responsible for the cartographical execution of the work, and Mr. Harvie-Brown 
for the features which make it distinctively a 'naturalist's' map.
The features 
shown are the cultivated lands (pale green), the patches of woodland (darker 
green), the moorland, hill-pastures and other uncultivated tracts (purplish-pink or 
heather-colour) and the deer forests (bluish on the heather-colour).
Shading in 
black shows the land above 1,000, and cross-shading that above 2,000 feet in 
elevation.
The depths of the sea are shown by successively darker shades of 
blue at intervals of every ten fathoms, and the space between high and low tide 
is coloured yellow.
The portions of freshwater lochs and rivers up which 
migratory Salmonia are able to proceed without physical obstruction, are coloured 
deep blue, and a blue dotted line shows the coast limit within which beam-trawl 
fishing is prohibited.
Red stars indicate the principal lighthouses, and red lines 
the principal watersheds or * sky-lines/ showing Dr. Buchanan White's faunal 
divisions; and a small I r page insert, written by Mr. Harvie-Brown, sets forth 
the guiding principles and gives note- which the map could not show.
# The 
map is very clearly printed, and in spite of all the wealth of detail mentioned 
above, there is nowhere any difficulty in reading the place-names or making out 
the topographical features.
The authors are to be heartily congratulated on the 
excellence of their production, and naturalists generally on having such a map 
to refer to.
Naturalist, 
34* 
A NEW LIST OF BRITISH BEETLES 
Catalogue | of | British Coleoptera | by | D.
Sharp, M.A., F.R.S., &c, | 
and | W.
W. Fowler, M.A., &c | London : | L.
Reeve & Co.
| 1893.
Every Coleopterist will welcome this catalogue, for it supplies 
a long felt want, and the names on the title-page are a sufficient 
guarantee that it is   up-to-date.
7 
It has long been felt by most, if not all Coleopterists, that a new 
catalogue was urgently required, for this study has made such 
enormous advances since the catalogue issued by Fowler and 
Matthews in 1883, that the latter was comparatively useless.
In the new catalogue no numbers are affixed to the genera, so 
that should it be found necessary to alter the position of any of them 
(as, despite the great care which has been used in the present 
classification, is very probable, owing to the nascent state of this 
science) it can easily be done.
The alterations, though many, are not only permissible but 
actually necessary with our improved knowledge.
For instance, 
Notiophilus has been raised to the rank of an independent tribe, 
instead of, as in the old system, forming part of the Nebriina ; 
similarly Oodes, formerly included under the Chl&niina, now is 
Oodma ; also Amaru, hitherto under Pterostichina^ has, with even 
more justice, been formed into a tribe, Amur in a.
The way by which the Geodephaga and the Hydradephaga are 
connected is much superior to the older way, which was very abrupt.
Now it leads by gentle gradations through the Haliplidiz, Brachinin^ 
Dryptina, and Lebiina.
Although a perfect classification has not been arrived at (this 
indeed is impossible, many of the tribes being closely connected in 
some directions, yet widely apart in others), yet the system adopted 
in the book before us shows many advantages over the former ones, 
and we can but welcome it as more rational than any we have 
hitherto had.
Several species, the records for which are doubtful (e.g., Cy bister 
roeseli, Hister sinuatus r etc.), have been removed from the place 
they have hitherto occupied in our lists, and have been placed at the 
end under the heading of ' Doubtful Species,' whilst such species as 
Carabus aura/us are also collected under the heading of   Introduced 
Species/ and the Stylopidse are removed to the end under the title 
of 'Abnormal Coleoptera.
Many beetles (perhaps too many?) formerly reckoned as varieties, 
have been raised to the dignity of species, whilst, in a few cases, the 
reverse has taken place.
*> 
42 NOTES AND NEWS.
Great care is shown in its compilation, and we can safely say that 
it is bound to supersede all other catalogues now in use, and the time 
is far distant when it will be, in its turn, superseded by another.
The classification is, in a great measure, identical with that 
followed in 'The CoJeoptera of the British Islands/ by the 
Rev. Canon W.
W. Fowler, the last two volumes of which we have 
just received.
There is no doubt that these five volumes have done, 
and are still doing, much to foster the study of Coleoptera, and to 
draw Entomologists from the well-trodden paths of Lepidoptera to 
these, comparatively speaking, neglected ones.
— W.
F. B.
NOTES AND NEWS.
The Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club announce a new edition of the * Flora 
of the Liverpool District/ which is to appear under the able editorship of 
Mr. Robert Brown, if sufficient encouragement be offered, the cost not to exceed 
five shillings.
A promising feature in English geology is the wide interest taken, during 
recent years, in the phenomena of glaciation, leading to the undertaking of joint 
researches by bodies of local geologists.
The latest outcome of this enthusiasm is 
1 The Glacialist's Magazine/ The first number, issued for August, contains the 
Proceedings of the Glacialists' Association, founded in 1891, an original paper 
by Mr. A.
R. Dwerry house, and some useful reviews of recent glacial literature.
Under the editorship of Mr. P.
F. Kendall, F.G.S., of the Yorkshire College, the 
magazine may be expected to have a prosperous career before it.
We have received from our friend Mr. Edward E.
Prince, B.A., F.L.S., 
who has now taken up his duties as Commissioner of Fisheries for the Dominion 
of Canada, a copy of his Presidential Address to the Andersonian Naturalists' 
Society of Glasgow.
Under the title of   A Great Scottish Naturalist/ he gives 
a sketch of the scientific life and career of Prof.
W. C.
Mcintosh, F.R.S., the 
distinguished occupant of the chair of Natural History at St. Andrews.
We are indebted to Mr. William Moss, of Ashton-under-Lyne, who is doing 
useful work in microscopical photography, more especially of malacological 
subjects, for a copy of a paper on the ' Reproductive Organs of Bnlimus acuttts, 
reprinted from the Manchester Microscopical Society's Annual Report for 1892, 
and illustrated by a plate of exceptionally clearly printed figures by Mr. Moss s 
co-author, Mr. F.
Paulden.
We regret, however, to see that the original 
pagination is not preserved in the reprint.
We are pleased to note the annoi 
4 Littonclale: Past and Present,' from .
r „ M ..
. .
. 
still more so to learn from the prospectus that its natural history is to receive 
attention.
The 1 6th chapter is to deal with the   Flora of Littondale,' written by 
a valued contributor to the ' Naturalist,' the Rev. W.
A. ShufTrey, M.A., who is 
now Vicar of Arncliffe.
A woodcut is to be given of Cypripedium cakeohts* the 
plant which Archdeacon Boyd was for a long time so indefatigable and successful 
in protecting in one of its very few Yorkshire habitats.
We notice in the September number of the ' Midland Naturalist,' at p.
205, 
that Mr. P.
F< Lee, this year's President of the Botanical Section of the 
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, has recently spent a holiday at Long Itchington, m 
Warwickshire, to good purpose.
He has collected a number of most interesting 
plants there, some quite new to   The Flora of Warwickshire,' others from new 
localities, and others again are interesting confirmations of old records.
They are 
published over the signature of Mr. J.
E. Bagnall.
Nature- 
343 
DESMID NOTES 
W. HARWELL TURNER, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., 
Leeds.
The forms of which I append brief descriptions are all British, and 
as such may be found to possess some interest for our micro- 
botanical friends.
They are mostly from collections made by my 
friend Mr. J.
Harbord Lewis, F.L.S., whose gatherings contain other 
apparently novel Desmidiese.
The collections were made 1885-8, 
and the little plants mentioned would have been, but for continued 
illness, long ago described by me.
Purely scientific description is 
deferred.
All the figures, except otherwise stated, are x 500.
1. Euastrum cambrense n.
sp.
A form apparently between 
JE.
erosum Lund, and E.
binale (Turp.) Ralfs, from which it 
differs in the markings, and in the peculiar horn-like upper 
lateral processes, in front view; the side view also differs.
Long.
32, lat.
20, lat isth.
5, cr.
9-5 /x.
Dolbadarn, J.H.L.
2. Euastrum snowdoniense n.
sp.
Form with rotundo- 
truncate angles ; 3 small ventral inflations ; membrane thick.
Long.
31, lat.
20, lat isth.
6*5 /*.
Snowdon, J.H.L.
3- Euastrum binale (Turp.) Ralfs.
A tiny form of this species, 
from the last habitat.
Long.
12, lat.
10, isth.
3-5 \i.
4- Eaustrum webbianum f.
major Turn.
(Fr. Alg.
Ind.
t. xxii., f.
4).
This, the larger form, is in an old slide, 
mounted about 1851 by the late Henry Webb.
The basal 
angles and incurved sides render this very distinct.
Long.
58-66; lat.
max.
28-32; isth.
9-1 r /x.
Sutton Park, 
Birmingham, H.W. Fig. x 400.
5- Euastrum crassicolle ?
Lund., forma.
The smaller one 
seems certainly to appertain to this species, but the apical 
incision of the larger one differs; the markings, however, and 
the lateral sinuations, correspond.
Long.
18, lat n, isth.
3*5 /x, and long.
22, lat.
13-5, isth.
5 fi respectively.
Llyn 
Padarn, J.H.L.
6. Euastrum anglicanum n.
sp.
? A very puzzling form, 
apparently close to several species, yet agreeing with none.
The lateral view is lanceolate, with subtruncate ends, each 
semi-cell having a central protuberance.
Long.
36, lat 22, 
lat isth.
6 p.
Trelleck Common, Monmouth, comm.
J.H.L.
Nov. 1893.
344 
TURNER: DESMID NOTES.
1 
.Ultimo: 
iutuuim 
t » 
w 8 
\\.
lo 
w\ 
La. f X^AjO.
Xx JCO 
»9 
20 
/J 
-» 
V 
W 
J 
15 
7 
^frr^^^m, 
16 
1&MJ?
«<Z n-£ 4Wfe 
£ - .J 
u 
«^%.
1 1 
18 
.. 
14- 
SE5SS 
ta 
"aturaiist, 
TURNER : DESMID NOTES.
345 
7- Cosmarium gotlandicum Wittr.
v. cambrense n.
var.
Fairly similar to the type, except that it is proportionally 
much narrower.
Long.
35, lat.
22, isth.
6 /x.
Near Dolbadarn, 
J.H.L.
8. Staurastrum lewisianum n.
sp.
This beautiful species 
is related to S.
capitulum Breb.
and S.
amcenum Hilse.
It 
differs from the former in being doubly sinuate at the sides, 
and from the latter in having two rows of verrucas.
In this 
form the lower verrucse are plain, the upper series being 
minutely dentate or serrate.
In vertical view the sides are 
gently incaved, the apices (3-4) being rounded.
Long.
37-42; lat.
18-21, isth.
13-16 /x.
Near Llanberis, J.
H. Lewis, 
to whom I dedicate it.
9- Staurastrum westii n.
sp.
A very interesting form, 
seemingly between S.
griffithsiamim Nag. and S.
di~ 
placanthnm DeNot. Each angle possesses 3 or 4 spines 
at the upper margin, with 5 short, toothed, thick processes, 
arranged in quincunx.
Long.
c. sp.
28-^2^ s.
sp.
25-28; lat.
c. sp.
23-26, s.
s.p. 18-21 ; isth.
8-10 /*.
This little plant 
I dedicate to my friend Mr. W.
West, F.L.S. Llyn Padarn, 
J.H.L.
IO - Staurastrum diplacanthum r« anglicum n.
v. This var.
differs from the Italian type of De Notaris (which I have 
from Strensall) in having the apices more convex, and 
crowned with little verrucas ; it has a number of aculei 
wanting in the type.
Long.
c. sp.
37-4** s.
sp.
27-32 ; lat* 
c. sp.
34, s.
sp.
28; isth.
9-1 1 /*.
Trelleck, comm.
J.H.L.
**• Staurastrum eboracense n.
sp.
Small, with 4 incurved 
arms, rounded at the ends ; each arm with 3 or 4 rows of 
conical granules ; sides sinuate ; sinus rounded.
It has an 
apical corona of little verrucae ; remainder, except arms, 
smooth.
Long.
25, lat.
27 ; lat.
isth.
7 /x.
Nearest to 
S. cerastes Lund.
Strensall Common, W.B.T.
12.
Staurastrum trelleckense n.
sp.
Small, semi cells oval, 
covered with a few rows of short stout aculei, each spine very 
dilate at base ; angles rounded, each with 6 or 7 short plain 
aculei.
Sinus narrow.
Long.
c. sp.
5$, s.
sp.
30 ; lat.
c. sp.
32, s.
sp.
28: isth.
14 /x.
Trelleck, comm.
J.H.L.
*3* Micrasterias papillifera var.
varvicensis n.
v. A peculiar 
variety, having the side lobes and lobules incised almost as 
in M.
crux-melitensis Ehr. Sutton Park, legit T.
Bolton.
Fig. x 250.
^ov.
1893.
346 * TURNER : DESMID NOTES.
i4- Micrasterias truncata (Corda) Breb.
The peculiar 
pseudo-spinous form, described in 1840 by Corda as 
Cosmartum quadragies-cuspidata^ has turned up from the last 
habitat, in an old slide of Webb's mounting.
The apparent 
spines are probably only altered mucus.
Fig. x 250.
15.
Penium lewisii n.
sp.
This little form is a near congener 
of P.
cylindrus (Ehr.) Breb., but differs in its fine granulations, 
its dilated ends, and its colourless membrane.
Long, and 
lat.
46, 11, and 62, io/a.
Snowdon, J.H.L.
16.
Docidium hutchinsonii n.
sp.
Straight; semi-cells faintly 
sinuate, ends truncate with broadly rounded angles, basal 
portion gently dilated, suture not prosilient.
Surface covered 
with small papillae, 2-5-3 /* l° n g-> those at ends 17-2 /x long.
Frond long.
245-280 ; lat.
bas.
21-26, apic.
17-19*5 /*.
Strensall 
Common, W.B.T. Fig. x 400.
Named in honour of the 
Rev. T.
N. Hutchinson, a brilliant scientist and right worthy 
English gentleman.
17- Closterium intermedium var.
sculptum Racib.
forma 
eboracense n.
f. A very fine form, with dilated apices, from 
Strensall.
This may prove to be a distinct species.
Fig.
x 200.
18.
Cylindrocystis roseola n.
sp.
This name I have bestowed 
upon a little form with a membrane yellowish-pink or bright 
pink in colour ; the sides are gently incurved ; membrane 
thickened at apices.
Long, and lat.
46x19; 48x20; 
52x21 /x.
Near Dolbadarn, J.H.L.
19.
Spondylosium monile n.
sp.
A tiny form, in front view 
biglobate, in side view gently contracted in the middle.
Measure (about) long.
7, lat.
4, cr.
3 /x.
20.
Spondylosium armillatum n.
sp.
A still smaller plant, 
biscoctiform, centre gently incavate in front view ; side view 
compressed.
Measure (about) long.
6, lat.
37, cr.
2*5 p~ 
This and No. 19 are from Trelleck, comm.
J.H.L.
21.
Euastrum exile n.
sp.
Minute, with incurved sides, 
expanded and rounded basal angles, and rounded apices, 
incisions curvato-cuneate.
Sinus narrow.
Side view lance- 
olate, apices rounded.
Long.
15, lat.
8, isth.
3, cr.
4 V- 
Snowdon.
J.H.L.
The following are noteworthy.
From Llyn Padarn I have 
a var.
(v.
cambricum nobis) of Closterium abruptum 
West (Alg. Lake Distr.); this differs from the type in being 
regularly curved, and in being proportionally shorter and 
thicker.
Long.
1 14-130, lat.
14-17 /*.
North Wales, J^}z 
Natura E, 
NOTES AND NEWS.
347 
Closterium SCOticum n.
sp.
Frond long and narrow, for 
about -|ths of the length of nearly the same diameter, tapering 
a little at the ends, which are expanded into rounded or 
rotundo-truncate 'knobs.' Suture i, rarely 2, not central, 
and often complex, of 4-7 transverse striae.
Membrane 
smooth, variable, either colourless, or from pale yellow to 
red-brown in tint.
The frond is straight or but slightly 
curved ; very variable in size.
Endochrome axillary, with 
a central line of corpuscles.
Long.
260-489, lat.
10-13, lat.
apic.
8*5-12-5 /x.
Var. ft fusiforme.
Almost straight, frond not so even in 
diameter, decidedly fusiform.
Long.
295-415, lat.
12-5-15 ; 
lat.
apic.
9-1 1*5 /*.
(This sp.
seems nearest to CI.
bidavatum Boerg.) 
Closterium balmacarense n.
sp.
Of medium size, slightly 
and regularly curved, gently attenuate, ends expanded and 
rotundo-truncate.
Suture not central.
Membrane smooth 
and colourless.
Endochrome in indistinct fillets, vesicles 
scattered.
Long.
315-322, lat.
20-21, lat.
apic.
16 /x.
fl minor, Long.
260, lat.
16, lat.
apic.
12 /*♦ 
Both these Closteria are from Balmacara, Scotland, legit 
A. W.
Wills, 1881.
Figures will no doubt be published by 
Messrs.
Roy and Bisset, in the 'Scottish Desmidiese/ as 
I have sent them my drawings.
I have also to report the very rare Penium pandurans 
DeNot. from Brant Fell, Bowness.
Of this I have previously 
seen but one specimen, from America, sent to me by my late 
kindly correspondent, the Rev. Fr.
Wolle.
As I find that my friend Mr. West has named an Irish 
form Staurastrum curvatum, I must alter the name of my 
Indian plant (Ind. Alg.
? p.
128), which will now bear the 
name of Staurastrum involutum.
NOTES AND NEWS.
Mycologists will be pleased to see a paper from the pen of Mr. Henry T.
Soppitt, of Bradford, which appears in the Journal of Botany for September.
In 
it he deals with the life history of .licidium hucosperrnitm DC.
as observed by 
him at Steeton and Bolton, in Yorkshire : he finds that this plant is quite distinct 
from Puiiinia fusca* which is prevalent in both localities.
We have received from Mr. G.
H. Bryan, M.A., a copy of 4 The University 
Correspondent* for Sept.
30th, 1893, containing an interesting paper on 'The 
Oxen-born Bees of the Ancients,' whereby it appears that from the researches of 
Baron Osten-Sacken the Common Drone-fly (Eristaih tmax) is the animal 
intended.
Nov. 1893.
348 NOTES AND NEWS.
THE 
LEPIDOPTERA OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS.
The Lepidoptera of the British Islands.
Chas.
G. Barrett, F.E.S.
Vol. I.
L. Reeve & Co., London.
This volume, which includes the whole of the British Butterflies, 
is composed of the first ten parts of the great work which 
Mr. Barrett has undertaken.
As twenty-two years have elapsed 
since the appearance of Newman's 'British Butterflies and Moths/ 
it goes without saying that such a work as this was absolutely 
needed ; indeed, considering the unparalleled advance which has 
been made in our favourite science during that time, it ought to have 
been commenced long ago.
The volume completed is eminently 
satisfactory in most respects, and augurs w T ell for future volumes on 
the Sphingidae, Bombyces, Noctuae, Geometrse, Tortrices, and Tineas, 
orders in which the author will be not less at home than he has 
been among the Rhopalocera.
The history of each butterfly, 
including its local and casual variation, is given in clear and full 
detail, and represented by coloured plates ; but there is an entire 
and commendable absence of that stiff over-scientific method of 
dealing with the subject, so dear to many of our entomologists who 
owe their knowledge more to dry museum specimens and books, 
than to field work.
We are glad too that the author sticks so 
closely to the old nomenclature, and has not been tempted to adopt 
the new fangled but altogether unnecessary names now so largely 
adopted by the younger school of British lepidopterists.
As may 
be taken for granted with one of Messrs.
Reeve's publications, the 
paper is good, and the letterpress large, clear, and neat.
The only 
adverse criticism we feel disposed to indulge in, is on account of 
the coloured plates : these are in some cases not so good as we 
should have liked to have seen them, and as we think, such a work 
warranted us to expect.
Somehow, whilst everything else connected 
with publishing has made rapid advances, the colouring of plates 
has appeared for many years to be at a standstill.
There is the old 
hard 'printed' appearance, indeed, our artists generally seem no 
more able now to appreciate the delicate blending and shading of 
colours which is absolutely necessary to do justice to natural 
history subjects, than they were twenty years ago.
Every lepidop- 
terist who can afford the book, ought certainly to be a subscriber 
to it.— G.
T P.
NOTES AND NEWS.
A paper by our contributor, the Rev. Hilderic Friend, M.A., F.L.S., entitled 
1 Studies of British Tree- and Earth -Worms,' which appears in the Linnean 
Society's Journal, Zoology, No. 153, published on the 15th October, is illustrated 
by a plate* 
Naturalist, 
349 
ROSA ON THE REVISION OF THE LUMBRICIDI.
Rev. HILDERIC FRIEND, F.L.S., 
luthor of 'Flowers and Flower- Lore J Cockermoutk.
It is now exactly a decade since Dr. Daniel Rosa, of Turin, first 
appeared as the champion of the despised earthworm.
Four years 
after the publication of Darwin's memorable volume on   Vegetable 
Mould/ Rosa gave a description of two new species of Lumbricus 
in the pages of 'Atti Acad.
Sc. Torino,' vol.
xviii.
(1882).
This 
was followed two years later (1884) by his pamphlet entitled, 
* I Lumbricidi del Piemonte' — a work which at once marked out its 
author as a most accurate, painstaking, and reliable authority on this 
hitherto neglected subject.
Since then not a year has passed but 
some further original communication from his pen has enriched the 
annals of science.
This decade of persistent and wide-reaching 
investigation has at last yielded its ripe fruit, and we now have 
before us a handsome monograph of upwards of 80 pages folio, 
devoted to a 'Revisione dei Lumbricidi.' (Torino.
Carlo Clausen; 
Libraio della R.
Academia della Scienze.) 
Dr. Rosa, like all the Continental scientists with whom we have 
had occasion to correspond, is genial and courteous in his bearing, 
and loses no opportunity to give the credit due to others for the 
work they have done.
His newest work contains a most valuable 
and elaborate Bibliography, in which we find the names of English, 
French, German, American, Swedish, Italian, Russian, Australian, 
and other authors faithfully chronicled in connection with upwards 
of one hundred articles and monographs, ranging from the days of 
Linnaeus (1767) to the present time.
The plan is to give the 
authors' names alphabetically, with the date of their writings prefixed.
Two charts at the end present, in a new and striking form, the 
relative positions of the girdle and clitellar papillae {tubercula 
pubertatis) of the genus Allolohophora.
Under the title Lumbricidi Rosa groups the following genera : 
(1) Lumbricus, 6 species ; (2) Allolobophora (including Dendrobama), 
49 species; (3) Allurus, 6 species; (4) Criodrilus, 1 species, or 
a total of 62 species, besides a few which still remain doubtful.
With 
regard to these latter, one or two suggestions may perhaps be 
permitted.
I believe that Savigny's worm (E.
carneum, p.
75) is to 
be referred to the Turgid worm {Alio, turgida Eisen), with which it 
corresponds most accurately.
Then we must surely place Lumbricus 
teres Duges, (p.
76) under Allolobophora longa Ude (p.
48).
This 
Nov. 1893.
35° FRIEND : ROSA ON THE REVISION OF THE LUMBRICIDI.
r 
is a most variable species, and capable of including some very- 
diverse forms.
Hoffmeister was probably correct when he relegated 
Z. mollis Duges, also to this species.
Specimens of the Long Worm 
found in clayey soil in England have exactly the colour and 
appearance ascribed by Duges to this species.
The Putrid worm 
(A.
putris Vej.,) again, includes so wide a range of varieties that 
there can be no difficulty in placing Savigny's Rubid worm 
(£.
rubidiim, p.
76) among its forms.
It is almost absolutely 
identical with the sub-species arborea Eisen.
Here, too, Duges' 
worm (Z.
dubius, p.
77) will probably find repose at last.
With regard to the difference in size of the seminal vesicles 
(p.
78) it may be stated that this depends upon the condition of the 
worm at the time.
I have dissected a typical species at different 
periods of the year and find that though one pair of vesicles may 
greatly exceed another pair at one time, they will be equal in size, or 
reversed at another time.
I much regret that the account which I submitted to the Royal 
Irish Academy many months ago of a new Irish worm (Z.
papillosus^ 
Friend) was not published in time for Dr. Rosa's perusal.
He 
alludes to it on p.
27, on the strength of a letter of mine announcing 
the discovery, but is unable to place it among the other clearly- 
defined species.
Incidentally, Dr. Rosa points out that the name 
which I have adopted for this well-marked species has already been 
appropriated by Dr. F.
Mullen I have now examined large numbers 
of specimens, and find that the Papillose worm is perfectly distinct 
from every other genuine species of Liimbricus.
It is greatly to be regretted that the author of this invaluable 
memoir was not able to include an index among the contents.
The 
synonyms are now so numerous and perplexing, and the tastes and 
usages of authors so diverse, that we find it exceedingly difficult to 
turn to the particular species which we may desire to investigate.
If 
this omission could be remedied by the publication of a folio fly- 
sheet it would be an immense boon.
I confess to a little surprise as I examine some of the authors 
latest groupings.
In an earlier publication Dr. Rosa gave a most 
lucid account of the different species of worms which Hoffmeister 
and others had included under one common name.
Now (p.
4°) he 
returns to their earlier position and gives up his own arrangement- 
an indication of the tendency among all original workers to magnify 
minute differences when their knowledge is limited, and become 
conservative with increasing wisdom.
It is well, nevertheless, that 
the variations should be chronicled and emphasised, as they have 
a most important bearing on the question of specific evolution.
N'aturalist, 
FRIEND : ROSA ON THE REVISION OF THE LUMBRICIDL 35 1 
Students will be grateful to the author for his clear and suggestive 
introduction to the study of species, and we note with pleasure that, 
out of three systems of notation employed by various writers, he has 
adhered to that which is in vogue in this country — that, viz., of 
regarding the peristomium, which is without bristles, as the first body- 
segment.
A brief but ample account is given of all the most 
important features, both external (as bristles, pores, girdle, peristo- 
mium, clitellar papillae, and colour) and internal (as nephridia, 
organs of reproduction, circulatory system, etc.) ; while an interesting 
paragraph is devoted to the classification of anomalous or abnormal 
forms — bifurcated tails and heads, dissymmetry of organs, curtailing 
of segments, transposition of parts, and the like.
As the genus Criodrilus is so far unrepresented in our native 
worm-fauna, we may omit it from present consideration.
Under 
Allurus (pp.
69-74) mention should have been made of the well- 
marked varieties recorded by Eisen and myself.
I may also remark 
that a most interesting species {Allurus macrurus Friend) reached 
me from Ireland last year, which had the girdle apparently on 
segments 15-22, with papilke on 20-21 (Nat, January 1893, p.
20).
Unfortunately I have never been able to obtain duplicates.
It comes 
near to A.
tetragonurus Friend (Rosa, p.
74), but is distinguished 
from that species by the great length of the tail, the shape, and the 
position of the girdle.
Rosa keeps the last-named species for the 
present distinct from Eisen's tetragonurus, though he thinks they 
may probably be two forms of the same species.
I had gone 
further and treated them as, in all likelihood, identical ('Science 
Gossip,' 1892).
The fauna of Great Britain now includes five species of Lumbricus.
There are only seven species at present known to science.
Three of 
these are widely distributed (rubellus^ castaneus> and hcrcukus, follow- 
ing Rosa's order and nomenclature).
One is peculiar to Ireland 
{L.papillosus Friend) ; one to the Alps (Z.
melibceus Rosa) ; one to 
Austria {L.
polyphemos Fitz.); and one is of uncertain distribution.
In 1 89 1 I described this species from specimens taken in Yorkshire 
(not Essex as stated by Rosa, p.
26), and named it Z.
rubescens.
Rosa has suggested its identity with Savigny's Enterion festivum.
If 
this be so, it has been found in France, but not recorded since 1826, 
so that practically its present known distribution is purely British.
I have received it along with the four other species from Ireland* 
Rosa has not omitted to record the observations made in recent 
years on Hybridity among Worms (p.
27).
The genus Allolobophara, as already stated, contains by far the 
largest number of species.
We have upwards of a dozen in Great 
Nov. 1893.
35 2 NOTES AND NEWS.
Britain (including the Dendrob<znas), but not one of them appears 
to be peculiar to these islands.
They are exceedingly varied in 
character, and all future students will owe our author a debt of 
gratitude for his careful and lucid presentation of facts and details.
Dr. Rosa does not err on the side of excessive sub-division.
If 
anything, we might characterise him as cautious without narrowness 
tending to a healthful conservatism.
We might be disposed to 
quarrel with him over one or two of the resuscitated names, and the 
abolishing of certain others which long use had enabled us to roll 
glibly off our tongues, but there is evidence that the aim of the 
author has been to do justice to the earliest investigators.
We 
should agree with Michaelsen (p.
39) in making A.
constricta Rosa, 
a sul>species of A.
putris.
To avoid confusion, we should prefer 
to retain Ude's name, A.
longa y in the place of reviving Savigny's 
term, terrestre (p.
48).
It seems very desirable to fix upon names 
which are expressive of some peculiarity in the animal, and anyone 
who is familiar with the Long Worm will at once admit the 
appositeness of Ude's name.
Rosa suggests that A.
cambrua Friend, may belong to one of 
the various forms of A.
chtorotica Savigny.
This is probable, but 
Rosa's lengthy account of the latter species, and my own researches, 
indicate that much remains to be done in the way of working out 
the causes and extent of variation in this and some other species.
We are glad to see that Levinsen's Lumbricus eisenij which we long 
ago showed was no true Lumbricus > is placed with Allolobophora 
(p.
67).
No genuine Litmbriats emits a yellow fluid from its dorsal 
pores as this does.
The bulk of the species included in this genus are not indigenous 
with us, and, therefore, do not demand fuller notice in these pages.
It may be stated that the volume is printed in Italian, in a style 
which is precise without being too technical, and so arranged that 
(with the addition of an index) it may be consulted with the greatest 
ease and readiness.
NOTES AND NE 
Lancashire 
notice — a work on the British Hepatics, and is in ws 
;e Dublished in the London C!n triform** of 1881.
We 
additional to those p „ .„ ™ fe 
our readers as have it in their power to assist him w 
Invaluable to the general student of nature visiting the valley of Wytbbura is 
Mr. Samuel Barber's work, ' Beneath Helvellyn's Shade* (London : Elliot Stock), 
a copy of which is to hand.
The book has no serious scientific pretensions, but 
we cannot pass it unnoticed, amongst a quantity of kindred literature.
J The 
geology and ornithology of the district are shortly dealt with, whilst the book 
abounds with anecdote and folk-lore, which will not only be of interest but 
practical value to the lake-land tourist.
___ _ - 
Naturalist, 
353 
n ISlemoriam.
GEORGE BROOK, F.L.S.
* In illo viro tantum robur et corporis et anima 
fuit ut, quocunque loco natus esset, fortunam sibi 
facturus videretur.
p — Livy.
How appropriate these burning words of the historian Livy, 
originally written of Cato (the greater) are to the subject of this 
short memoir will be apparent to all who knew him ; but to 
those who knew him intimately and rejoiced in his friendship they 
commend themselves with much greater force.
Whilst deeply 
regretting his early death in the very prime and vigour of his 
manhood, we can only reap the barren comfort that much as he 
had already accomplished, his strength both of mind and body 
were such as would have carried him forward to even more brilliant 
conquests in the future.
A careful and conscientious observer, 
an i 
enabled 
to overcome difficulties and to obtain a clear view of any subject 
upon which his energies were concentrated, he was bound to attain 
to a higher position in the scientific world, even than that he had 
reached ; and he was endeared to his many friends by his genial 
disposition, his kindly good nature, and his readiness to communicate 
the knowledge he possessed to those who consulted him.
Born on the 18th March, 1857, at Huddersfield, George Brook 
was only thirty-six years of age at the time of his death on the 
1 2th August, 1893.
He received his earlier education at Mr. Wood's 
school at Lindow Grove, Alderley Edge, in Cheshire, and afterwards 
at Owens College, Manchester, where he studied chemistry under 
Prof.
Henry) 
etc., under 
Prof.
W. C.
Williamson, F.R.S., and others.
After completing his 
education, he joined his father in the prosperous business which he 
carried on as a worsted coating manufacturer; in this he was 
engaged for many years, but his natural bent seemed to be more 
and more towards biological science, which he followed during his 
leisure hours at this period with no inconsiderable success.
On the 19th June, 1875, he was elected Hon. Sec.
of the 
Huddersfield Naturalists' Society, which post he held until the end 
of 1876, and during this period he contributed two exceedingly 
interesting papers to the society on ' The Optical Principles of the 
Microscope/ He was also Hon. Sec.
and afterwards President 
of the Huddersfield Literary and Scientific Society.
In 1876, at the 
annual meeting on December 2nd, he was elected joint Hon. Sec.
&ec.
1893.
354 IN MEMORIAM — GEORGE BROOK.
with Mr.W. Denison Roebuck, of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, on 
the occasion of the conversion of the old West Riding Consolidated 
Naturalists' Society into the wider < Union/ a post which he held 
continuously until the end of 1881- 
Somewhere about the year 1878 or 1879 ^e late Mr. Jas.
W. 
Davis, F.L.S., whose lamented death during the third year of his 
Mayoralty of Halifax occurred only a few weeks before that of 
Mr. Brook, invited a few scientific friends to his house, and then 
and there Messrs.
Davis, Wm. Cash, F.G.S., George Brook, F.L.S., 
W. Percy Sladen, F.L.S., C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., and John Stubbins 
formed themselves into a ' close club/ calling themselves the 4 Bios/ 
for the more careful study of biological science and the problems 
connected with the life of both animals and plants, the meetings 
being held monthly at each other's houses — a union which was 
always pleasant, agreeable and instructive, and was only broken up 
about 1886, owing to several of the members having left the vicinity.
In the early part of 1878 a disease appeared on the Salmon in 
the rivers Eden, Esk, and others, and Mr. Brook having received 
a diseased fish, sent for the writer of this memoir to assist him in 
the investigation of the disease, which was found to be caused by 
a micro-fungus, Achlya (Sapro/egnia).
Mr. Brook read a paper 
on the subject before the Huddersfield Scientific Club, which was 
afterwards published in ' The Naturalist/ and a second paper on the 
same subject he published in the ' Journal of the Royal Society ot 
Edinburgh/ 12th June, 1879, in reply to one published in the same 
journal by Mr. A.
B. Stirling.
About Christmas, 1884, Mr. Brook, having retired from his 
father's business, received a scientific appointment under the Scottish 
Fishery Board, where he worked hard upon many subjects con- 
nected with it, but chiefly on the development, etc., of food fishes, 
particularly the herring, on which he published an elaborate paper in 
the Reports ; but owing to disagreements with one of the professors 
he retired from this post in 1887.
During this period (1885) he 
also received the appointment of Lecturer on Embryology in the 
Edinburgh University, which he held until his death.
Amongst many 
other papers published by him in various scientific journals special 
mention must be made of his paper published in the Journal of the 
Linnean Society of London ('Zoology/ vol.
16, p.
541, 1883), on 
a new genus {Sinel/a) of Collembola^ with drawings of the species.
His most important works, however, were his memoir in the Reports 
of the 'Challenger' Expedition on the Antipatharian Corals, Sep- 
tember 1879 ; and the first results of his appointment at the British 
Museum in the investigation and cataloguing of the corals in that 
Naturalist, 
UNRECORDED ALIENS FOR NORTH LANCASHIRE.
355 
institution.
The first and only volume he lived to complete, a fine 
quarto illustrated from photographs taken by himself, was on the 
large genus of the Madrepora, which has only just been issued, and 
will be a lasting memorial of his labours — labours which another hand 
must now complete.
Of his private, well-arranged aquarium, built in 
his father's grounds for the purpose of fish-culture and the study of 
the development of the Crustacea, space will not permit of more 
than this passing mention.
In Mr. Brook science mourns a master 
and we a friend.— C.
P. H.
NOTE— BOTANY.
Unrecorded Aliens for North Lancashire.
— Daring the summer the 
undermentioned plants were found at Grange-over-Sands.
In no case can I find 
that they have yet been recorded for this district.
The value of   mustard and 
cress 5 is necessarily small, but mustard is on record for Westmorland and 
Cumberland.
Why not cress?
They are all of garden origin.
Corvdalis lutea (DC).
On a wall, outside a garden, Grange.
Brassica alba (Boiss.).
On shore bank.
Shore end of Crown Pier, Grange.
Lepidium sativum (L.).
Shore end of Crown Pier, Grange.
Both garden 
outcasts.
Carum petroselinum (Benth.).
Garden Parsley.
Shore bank near Grange, of 
course escaped ; also shore bank near Barrow (1888).
A garden outcast.
Waste 
ground, Barrow (188S).
CEnothera biennis (L.).
Waste ground in Cart Lane, near Kents Bank.
A garden escape.
— L.
Petty, Bortree Stile, Ulverston, 13th November, 1893.
r a t* 
NOTES AND NEWS.
The obituary list of geologists is this year a long one.
To the names already 
recorded, we must add that of Mr. Edward Charles worth, F.G.S., whose death at 
the age of eighty, severs another link with early days.
Mr. Charlesworth, as long 
ago as 1835, published an important memoir on the * Crags : of Suffolk, and 
since that time numerous papers have appeared from his pen.
Hi^ connection 
with the north country dates from 1844, when he succeeded John Phillips as 
Curator of the Museum at York, a post which he held until 1858.
He also had 
much to do with the arrangement of I he museums at Hull and Scarborough, 
where his bold handwriting is still to be seen on the labels of many specimens, 
geological and otherwise.
Sheffield has lost a useful worker in Mr. James Batty, of 65, Fawcett Street, 
Sheffield, who died on October 14th, aged 62 years.
lie was an excellent type of 
the working man lepidopterist, and the last surviving practical worker of the old 
Sheffield Entomologists 5 Club, which comprised many excellent naturalists thirty 
and forty years ago.
Batty had an excellent knowledge of larvge, and was the 
discoverer of the larva of Tapitwstola eiymi and CeLena hawortkii.
He was 
a regular correspondent with the late Mr. Wm.
Buckler and the Rev. Joseph 
Hellins, and used to keep them well supplied with material for description.
He 
was also a good micro- lepidopterist, and has left a fairly typical collection of 
Tortrices behind him.
Apart from these he kept no collection, having sold his 
years ago to {we believe) Mr. J.
B. Hodgkinson.
He then gave up his hobby till 
a few years ago, when he recommenced to exchange for species he either had not 
seen before or was not familiarly acquainted with, but two years ago he started 
his small collection of Tortrices.
He will be much m ed by the writer, as they 
have been hundreds of excursions together.— A.
E. Hall.
Dec 1 
35 6 
NOTES— BIRDS.
Little Gull in Notts.
— An immature example of the Little Gull (Lams 
minutus) was shot on the Trent, between Beeston and Nottingham, on Nov. 8th.
It is worthy of note that a species which is far from common on our coasts 
should occur twice within twelve months so far inland.
Readers of * The 
Naturalist' will remember that a specimen was obtained on the Trent last 
Christmas.
— F.
B. Whitlock, Beeston, Notts, 16th November, 1893.
Flamborough Bird-notes.
— The other day my attention was drawn to 
immense quantities of sea-birds south of the Headland.
Taking my field-glass 
I could see them for miles, just inside the Smithie Buoy, and to all appearance 
they must have been feeding on young fish.
I could distinctly see several Gannets 
(Sula bassand), Gulls (Lams, spp.), and Kittiwakes (Rissa tridactyla).
The 
fishermen inform me they have seen immense flocks of Razorbills (Alca tarda) and 
Guillemots (Lomvia troile) flying along the coast.
We are now having some 
severe weather which has brought several birds from the far north ; one poor little 
bird, the Rotche (Merguhts a//e), being blown so far as the Danes' Dyke.
Mr. D.
Atkinson, coming to Flamborough, found it alive and brought it to me.
Yesterday I observed several flocks of Snow Buntings (Plectrophanes nivalis) ; 
I also noticed some very pretty ones in the flocks.
Numbers of Larks (Alauda 
arvensis), Thrushes (Turdits music us), Blackbirds (T.
merit la), and Woodcocks 
(Scolopax rusticola) have arrived on the Headland.
To my great surprise this 
morning I saw a large flock of Lapland Buntings (Calcarhts lapponicus) in 
a stubble field, near to the Flamborough Head Lighthouse.
- Matthew Bailey, 
Flamborough, Nov. 10th, 1893.
Cormorant at Newark-upon-Trent.
— Considerable interest has been aroused 
at Newark by the appearance of a Cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo) on the lofty 
spire of the parish church.
The bird was first observed resting on the vane on 
Saturday, September 23rd.
At the time of writing (just a month later) the bird 
is still there, enjoying the protection of the townspeople, as every unusual bird- 
visitor should do.
When first observed it was being harassed by the Jackdaws, 
who look upon the spire as their own special domain.
It is said that on its first 
appearance it rested on its lofty perch for a stretch of eighteen hours without 
taking food.
It now regularly flies, at certain times of the day, to the Trent, 
near Averham Weir, where it has often been observed feeding.
Popular belief 
credits the story that it is the mate of a second example which was captured alive 
2 1st August, in the gardens of Belvoir Castle.
This theory will, however, hardly 
hold water, when the facts concerning each bird are examined.
According to an 
observer who has studied the Newark example through a telescope, it is unques- 
tionably a bird of the year, and judging from report the Belvoir bird is the same.
Newark is also a considerable distance to the north of Belvoir, and the wide 
difference in the dates almost precludes the possibility of the birds being mates.
It is far more probable that both are stragglers from a party or parties of 
Cormorants which have migrated across countrv .
as is the custom of so man y 
wild fowl (see Birds of Notts and Birds of Derbyshire).
Curiously enough 
this is not the fust incident of its kind.
Twelve or fourteen years ago a 
Cormorant, or as I hear from another source a pair, were observed in the same 
situation, but these only remained a short time.
It is very satisfactory to note the 
number of indignant letters to the local newspapers on the proposition being 
advanced that the bird should be shot.
As one resident by the Trent^ EJ|* }** 
*The man who shoots that Cormorant dare not show his face in Newark.' VYhiJM 
writing on the subject of birds on church steeples, the following extract may not 
be out of place.
It is taken from the ' Miscellanies of John Aubrey, F.R.S., 2nd 
edition, published 1721, and is as follows: — 'In February, March, and April two 
Ravens built their nest on the weather-cock of the high steeple in BakewelU m 
Derbyshire.' Two Ravens built their nests is curious, and may be a misprint.
The circumstance was considered to be an omen of evil.
— F.
B. WHITLOCK* 
Beeston, Notts, October 23rd, 1 >j.
Natural!* 
357 
BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT, 
SUMMER AND AUTUMN OF 1893.
JOHN CORDEAUX, M.B.O.U., 
Great Ci r, R.S.O,, Lincoln.
The glorious weather of the last summer and autumn, so seldom 
experienced in our country, and specially distinguished by an unusual 
amount of sunshine and absence of moisture, has had a marked 
influence on the movements of migratory birds on the east coast 
of England.
The breeding season in high northern latitudes was 
earlier and most favourable throughout for the rapid growth and 
maturing of the young; the southern movement was accelerated 
and also carried forward under the very best meteorological conditions 
which scarcely varied for weeks and months.
There has been an 
absence altogether of heavy gales and adverse winds ranging from 
N.W. to S.E., and instead, more or less anti-cyclonic periods, or 
gentler breezes have prevailed from southerly or westerly quarters, 
with complete absence of thick heavy weather and rain storms.
In 
fact, a more favourable time for the passage of birds has seldom 
occurred, with the result that the migrants have gone direct to their 
destination, probably moving at a great height, so that the chances 
of observation were much lessened.
Those ornithologists who have 
had the most frequent opportunities of visiting the coast, agree that 
there has been, compared with other seasons, everywhere during the 
autumn, a great dearth of bird life.
Very much the same conditions appear to have prevailed in 
Heligoland.
Mr. Gatke, in a letter dated Sept.
24th, says, 'with 
two exceptions, the season has been a blank.' On August 10th, 
he writes, ' My garden swarmed with Pied Flycatchers {Musckapa 
luctuosd), less Sylvia phcenicurus, and some Sylvia suecica — all young 
birds — but that day the wind was E.
by S., light, clear, and warm/ 
Again, on Sept 17th, 4 There was, early in the morning and 
forenoon great masses of Turd us torquatus, in flights from 100 to 200, 
as seen never before ; T.
musicus less and coming before great many 
Falm nistts, young ; and during the night great many Charadrius, 
Himantopus, Xamenius, and other " long-legs," passing the light- 
house.
The wind was first O.N.O., in the morning some rain, 
evening clear, N.N.W. faint/ 
I am not aware of any corresponding movement on the east 
coast, and it is curious that we have neither seen or heard of a Ring 
Ouzel this autumn, either on the Yorkshire or Lincolnshire side.
358 CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
In compiling the following notes I have frequently been indebted 
to Mr. G.
H. Caton Haigh, of Grainsby Hall, and Mr. H.
B. 
Hewetson, of Leeds, and to both these gentlemen I wish to express 
my best thanks.
Cuculus canorus.
Cuckow.
June 25th and 26th.
On these 
days I saw at least twenty between Easington and Kilnsea, 
evidently on the move south.
All were adults and I think, with 
one exception, males.
At least they all appeared the same size 
except one which was decidedly less.
On August 12th, several 
young Cuckows were seen in the same locality.
Numenius phaeopus.
Whimbrel.
July 26th.
First recognised 
on migration by their familiar call passing from N.E. to S.W., 
and at a great height.
On 31st were very numerous on the 
Lincolnshire coast.
Squatarola helvetica.
Grey Plover.
July 31st.
A flock on 
the Lincolnshire coast.
August 31st.
Several on the muds 
near the Spurn with black breasts.
Calidris arenaria.
Sanderling.
August 12th.
Two in partial 
summer plumage shot by Mr. H.
R. Hewetson at the Spurn.
2 1st.
A few seen on the shore near Tetney Haven.
Totanus canescens.
Greenshank.
August 12th.
First seen 
on Yorkshire coast.
October 15th.
I saw a few on the mud-flats 
in Kilnsea Bay, recognised by their flight and cry.
Tringa canutus.
Knot.
August 31st.
Sixteen young birds 
shot from flocks near the Spurn by Mr. H.
R. Hewetson.
On 
September 29th, Mr. H.
B. Hewetson observed an immense flight 
of Knot and Dunlin flying due south and extending like a bent 
bow from Kilnsea Lane to considerably seaward of the sea- 
beacon on the coast, probably a mile from flank to flank, 
followed for an hour by succeeding flocks of many hundreds.
The flight was very low, only just clearing the telegraph-wire.
On October 15th I saw enormous flocks on the muds near 
Kilnsea with Dunlin and other shore-birds.
Eudromias morinellus.
Dotterel.
Sept.
4th.
One in autumn 
plumage shot by Mr. G.
H. Caton Haigh, near Donna Nook.
This is the only example I have seen killed on the coast at this 
season and in the very different plumage which is assumed atter 
the autumn moult.
Puffinus major.
Greater Shearwater.
September 9th.
Mr. Hewetson saw a large Shearwater within thirty yards of the 
shore, when waiting to go on board his boat at the Spurn 
- 
Nature U 
CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
359 
Sterna dougalli.
Roseate Tern.
September 9th.
One was 
seen by Mr. Hewetson and others when boating near the 
Spurn.
Tringa subarquata.
Curlew Sandpiper.
September 9th.
Shot near the Spurn.
Sterna fluviatilis and S.
macrura.
Common and Arctic 
Terns.
In August and September, reported as extraordinarily 
abundant at sea, and also along the coast.
I am told 
a professional tern-slayer shot six hundred near the Spurn ; the 
wings only were taken to sell to the plume dealers.
It was 
a brutal and cruel slaughter of harmless and charming creatures 
to pander to a senseless fashion.
Unfortunately, for the future 
of the Sea-Swallow, all appeals made to the fair sex on the 
subject, although not without effect, have so far been ineffectual 
to prevent this unnecessary cruelty and wrong.
Anthus obscurus.
Rock Pipit.
September 21st.
First seen 
on migration on Lincolnshire coast.
On October 26th, I saw 
a few on the Tetney and North Cotes fit ties ; these appeared to 
be referable to the A.
rupestris of Professor Nilsson, the 
Common Rock Pipit of the Lincolnshire coast in the autumn.
Anthus pratensis.
Meadow Pipit.
September 23rd.
Many 
were noticed by Mr. Haigh along the same coast.
ia sabini.
Sabine's Gull.
September 25th.
Mr. Haigh 
shot a young bird of the year close to the mouth of Saltfleet 
Haven.
It fell into the sea, but shortly reviving, flew out so 
far that it was not recoverable.
Totanus fuscus.
Dusky Redshank.
September 17th.
One 
was shot by Stubbs of Tetney.
This bird was kindly presented 
to me by Mr. Haigh.
It is presumably a bird of the year, and 
much mottled with dusky brown on the under surface of the 
body.
Machetes pugnax.
Reeve.
September 20th.
One which 
I saw was shot near Cleethorpes, about this date.
Charadrius pluvialis.
Golden Plover.
September 20th.
First young birds obtained.
October 26th.
Some larger flights 
about this date.
September 28th.
The first really noticeable 
'rush' of migrants on the East Coast was observed by 
Mr. Haigh on this day.
Wind strong, S., thick and wet.
Lapwings at short intervals ail day very high, direction \\\ 
Larks only in morning flying low to S.W. Blue Tits (Parus 
X 
* ••.
caruleus) in very large numbers, 50 to 100 having been seen 
by him in the great hedge-row in North Cotes hundred-acre.
Dec. 1893.
360 CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
This grand old shelter fence is conspicuous at a great distance, 
and is the first cover that small birds make for when coming to 
land across the North Cotes 'fitties' from the sea.
Both the Blue 
Tit and Great Tit have been very common in our coast districts, 
also a few Coal Tits.
At Kilnsea, on the Yorkshire side, a few ' Pilots ' (Regulus 
cristatus) were seen on the 28th, and the first Woodcock (Scolopax 
rusticula) at the Spurn.
On the 27th Mr. Haigh noticed great 
flights of Greenfinches {Ligurinus chloris) on the stubbles at 
Tetney, and on the 29th the country about Easington and Kilnsea 
swarmed with them.
Mr. Hewetson writes : — ' I never saw such a 
migration of Green Linnets in my life, there were thousands in 
the lanes and in our garden, and during the time I was 
watching them there was an enormous immigration overhead, 
from the sea — countless clouds — one cloud at a great elevation ; 
mere specks — and a lower stratum, quite distinct from the 
others, coming in at the same time, flying S.W. I have only 
seen locusts come in such quantities.
I believe to a bird they 
were all Green Linnets.' On October 14th, when shooting at 
Easington, I found the fields still swarming with Greenfinches.
Passer domesticus and P.
montanus.
House and Tree 
Sparrows.
October 9th.
Mr. Haigh noticed large numbers 
of both on coast, the former much the most numerous.
Corvus corone and C.
frugilegus.
Carrion Crow and Rook.
October 9th.
Mr. Haigh w r rites : — 'These have been coming 
in for some days, but no Grey Crows yet.' I have recently had 
an opportunity of examining a large series of bird skins 
collected during many years by Mr. Haigh from the Lincoln- 
shire coast, and I think there is yet much interesting work to be 
done in determining the races or varieties of some of our 
common birds in respect to their migratory movements and 
geographical distribution.
Thus, for instance, we certainly have 
two Starlings, our common English bird and that purple-headed 
eastern race which comes in October and leaves again in the 
late spring.
Then there are two Rock Pipits, the British and 
the Scandinavian forms.
So also at least two races of Snow- 
Buntings, a larger and a smaller, and apparently a light and 
a dark variety, a colouration which is distinguishable alike in 
old and young.
Larks also vary much in size, and those which 
arrive on the east coast in autumn are uniformly darker on the 
upper parts and less rufous than our local race.
Immigrant 
Rooks also appear to me to have a more purple gloss on their 
plumage than home birds.
Other instances also might be cited 
Naturalist 
CORDEAUX : BIRD-NOTES FROM THE HUMBER DISTRICT.
361 
All these variations, however, require to be carefully worked 
out, and conclusions can only be arrived at after an examination 
of a large series of skins.
Turdus iliacus.
Redwing".
October 9th.
A few have 
come in.
Phalaropus hyperboreus.
Red-necked Phalarope.
Oct. 4th.
One, which I subsequently saw, was shot by stubbs at Tetney.
Scolopax rusticula.
Woodcock.
Oct. 10th.
One seen in 
Grainsby Park.
October 1 8th, Wind N., first flight ; Skeffling, 
Kilnsea, Holmpton were the chief places, but not Spurn.
A few 
also on Lincolnshire coast.
Turdus pilaris.
Fieldfare.
October 15th.
I saw a few on the 
wing between Easington and Kilnsea.
Plectrophanes nivalis.
Snow Bunting.
October 15th.
One 
on the beach near Kilnsea.
On the 16th, Mr. Hewetson 
noticed a flock of ten when crossing the Humber in his boat.
November 1st to 4th, 'rush,' great many flocks.
Corvus cornix.
Grey Crow.
October 1 8th, first seen; several 
near Kilnsea ; great many first week in November.
Emberiza miliaria.
Common Bunting.
October 14th.
When shooting to-day, I put up some large flocks from stubbles 
at Easington.
Sturnus vulgaris.
Starling.
October 26th.
Out of about 
twenty shot from migratory flocks on the coast or in the fields 
near Tetney and North Cotes and Grain thorpe, all except one 
were the purple-headed or eastern form.
Motacilla alba.
White Wagtail.
October 28th.
I saw one 
on a manure-heap near Grimsby, the only one I have ever seen 
so late in the year.
Phalaropus fulicarius.
Grey Phalarope.
October 31st.
One was killed by Stubbs at Tetney.
Tringa striata.
Purple Sandpiper.
October 31st One 
shot at Grainthorpe on the Lincolnshire coast.
Corvus frugilegus.
Rook.
November 2nd.
Mr. Haigh writes 
' There has been the heaviest rush of Rooks I can remember.
This morning on going to the coast I found them coming in 
from the East in large straggling flocks without intermission.
Till about 3 p.m. the flocks were never out of sight, but from 
3 p.m. till dusk they were not so frequent.
Stubbs told me they 
had been coming in the same numbers during the two previous 
days.
Peewits were also travelling in very large numbers.
Dec. 1 .
362 AGROTIS SAUCIA, ETC., AT HUDDERSFIELD.
To-day, November 3rd, the flight was nearly over, but Rooks 
were still arriving in small straggling flocks, or odd birds; of 
Pewits I only saw two or three larger flocks.' I saw immense 
flocks of Rooks here on the stubbles on the evening of 
November 1st.
» Nov. 3rd.
Mr. Haigh saw a flock of about 200 come in 
from the east of Grainthorpe.
November 7th.
At Great 
Cotes, about eighty in flock flying east at daybreak.
Eagle.
A large Eagle has been repeatedly seen near the Coast- 
guard Station at Grainthorpe during the latter part of October 
and early in November ; it is probably a young Sea-Eagle.
Linota linaria.
Mealy Redpoll.
November 6th.
A few at 
Easington.
One shot from a small flock.
Some Woodcock 
same day.
Wind N.
' In a subsequent letter, under date of November 9th, Mr. Gatke 
says, ' Ornithological news there is next to nothing to be told from 
here.
The weather has been too bad, stormy winds from the west 
and north-west, with deluges of rain varied by showers of hail.
But 
all this October through there have been almost daily some Wood- 
cocks and Blackbirds.
These two have an inherent defiance of 
wind and weather, for they turn up under so adverse aspects that 
nobody knowing anything about the ways of birds would fancy 
a feather was stirring.
For instance, on the first of this month, 
when it blew hard from the west and north-west, accompanied by 
rain, two hundred Woodcock and perhaps double that number of 
Blackbirds were captured.
Robins, Leaf-warblers, and Accentors 
and the like, scarcely any during the autumn.
. .
* Alauda 
alpestris scarcely any.
. .
. There remains scarcely any doubt 
that a young bird of Lams rossi was shot and lost in the sea too 
rough to follow in a small boat ; described as like a young 
Kittivvake, but smaller, having a round tail, a very small black bill 
and reddish feet.
It was wounded and staggered away out seaward 
into rough water.
The men in the boat are all intimately acquainted 
with all the gulls visiting our waters ; still the evidence is scarcely 
sufficient.' 
NO TE—L EPID OPTE KA .
Agrotis saucia, etc., at Huddersfield.
— During the present autumn four 
specimens of Agrotis saucia and ome fourteen Agriofis aprilina have been taken 
here at ' sugar ' by Messrs.
S. L.
Mosley, F.
Netherwood, and myself- It must 
be thirty years jiace eitl r of these species was recorded as occurring in this 
district.
We have also taken a few Da potia templi in the stone quarries at 
Denby Dale.— Geo. T.
Porritt, Huddersfield, Nov. 17th, 1893.
Naturali 
t 
1 f\ -* 
THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE 
AND ITS SEVENTH YEAR'S WORK.
THOMAS TATE, F.G.S., 
Leeds', Hon. Sec, to the Yorkshire Boulder Committt 
The special sub-committees organised or projected, as intimated in 
our last report, have prosecuted their labours, in the main, satis- 
factorily during the past year.
The annual meeting of the Yorkshire Naturalists 7 Union being 
held last November at Huddersfield, advantage was taken thereof 
to start a sub-committee for exhaustively exploring the Holme and 
Colne Valleys, two tributaries of the Calder.
After a very careful 
examination of the river-gravels, the Hon. Sec, Mr. Joseph Field, 
reports that they ' have failed to find an Erratic boulder in the whole 
distance from the water-shed of the Pennine to the junction with 
the Calder,' a conclusion entirely in harmony with the observations 
of several members of this Committee.
The investigation of the main valley of the Calder is being 
prosecuted with vigour.
The reports from the river-head and its 
upper waters have not yet come in.
Mr. James Spencer.
Halifax, 
has supplied a valuable series of personally collected specimens 
from Luddendenfoot, Sowerby Bridge, North Dean, Elland and 
Mirfield, for identification by this Committee.
Exceptionally good work 
Joh 
Horbury, who, patiently following the excavations necessary for the 
Horbury new sewage works, has collected several hundreds of 
typical boulders foreign to this water-shed.
A valuable report from Mr. Chas.
W. Fennel], Wakefield, covering 
the valley from Thornes to Stanley, completes our account of the 
Yorkshire Calder, nearly to its junction with the Aire.
The specimens 
accompanying this report are all of small size, having been obtained 
mainly along the banks of the river, no excavations being available.
The distribution of these erratics is probably tolerably regular 
from Elland to V kefield Heath.
Wherever excavations have been 
executed, as at Dewsbury and Horbury, the gravel-bed has been 
found to be continuous.
The drainage and the gas-works, at the 
former place, proved this bed over an area exceeding two square 
miles, and in the more recent work at Horbury it has been followed 
for over half a mile.
At its deepest point the trench passed throu I 
six feet of sub-soil and river sand, resting upon 20 feet of gravel.
Dec. 1893.
364 TATE : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
the bottom not reached.
Its thickness at Savile Town and Heath- 
field varied from 15 to 20 feet without finding a base.
At all these 
stations, towards the bottom of the gravel bed, a fair proportion of 
the Buttermere granophyres ranged up to 18 or 20 inches in length.
About Elland the gravels do not exceed 9 or 10 feet in thickness, 
while local sinkings west of Wakefield Heath, about Thornes, have 
shown the gravel-bed to have a thickness of from 34 to 40 feet.
Excluding local rocks, the Buttermere granophyres are by far the 
most important ; next come the Eskdale granites, after these rank 
the Borrowdale andesitic ashes and lavas, the devitrified phyolites 
associated with the Coniston limestone being also well in evidence.
For the present, we may say, not a single example of any 
Scottish rock, nor of Carrock Fell, Eycott Hill, Skiddaw, Threlkeld, 
Armboth, or Shap rock has been identified in the Calder Valley.
An efficient exploration of Holderness, with especial reference to 
the distribution of Scandinavian erratics, was initiated last February 
under a strong local sub-committee, with Mr. J.
W. Stather, F.G.S., 
Hull, as Honorary Secretary.
The district west of Hull and the 
Chalk area of the East Riding will also receive careful attention 
from this sub-committee.
The work will be systematically carried 
out, and it is not intended that any report should be presented until 
at least some well-defined area is completed.
The work of the Map sub-committee is not so advanced as was 
anticipated.
By the removal of their mapper, Mr. Chas.
Brownridge, 
A.M.Inst.C.E., F.G.S., to Birkenhead, delay became inevitable.
Fortunately the benefit of his experience is retained, as he continues 
his connection with this committee.
However, a section of our 
new Yorkshire Glacial Map, embracing one horizontal strip from 
Todmorden to Spurn Point, was submitted to the glacialists attend- 
ing the Nottingham meeting, showing how we propose to execute 
the mapping of the Yorkshire erratics.
The Committee are now giving their attention to the area around 
Barnsley, upon which they hope to report next year, and they w 
welcome any local help that is available.
During the past year the following erratics have been recorded : 
Reported by the Rev. Wm.
R. Bell.
Laithkirk Vicarage, Middleton-inTeesda 
All in the Parish of Laithkirk.
o /-.
^ Altitude.
Shap Granite Boulders.
Feet.
1. Near Primitive Methodist Chapel, Lunedale ...
1,200 
2. Near Brookscar ?
in the bed of the Lune 800 
3. Near Laithkirk, in the bed of the Lune 7°° 
4. In Vicarage garden, from same place ...
...
7°° 
ill 
ornamental 
700 
TATE : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
365 
6. North side of field near Lunebridge 600 
7- Do. do.
...
...
600 
8. West Pasture Road S., Quarry Hill 900 
Whinstone Boulders.
9. Near Greengates, in Lune , ...
900 
10.
In Middle Park, in Lune 750 
11.
Near East Field, south side of highway 600 
Retnarks : — 
No. 1.
By highway, north side, embedded in the ground; of 
considerable size ; smooth ; no striae.
No. 2.
In the middle of Lune, large cubical block two or three 
tons weight probably ; corners worn off; no stride.
No. 3.
In the Lune below the church, 3 ft.
6 in.
x 1 ft.
7 in.
x 
2 ft.
6 in., smooth ; corners worn off.
No. 4.
Formerly near No. 3, good size, cubical, corners worn off.
No. 5.
Formerly near No. 3, fragments still existing.
No. 6.
In Hind's field near Lunebridge, north side, embedded 
in ground, now in the Park, Middleton-in-Teesdale ; nearly 
two tons on weighing machine.
No, 7.
Close to No. 6, larger, blasted by the farmer, fragments 
still to be seen.
No. 8.
Very similar to No. 2; blasted a short time ago and 
fragments now used as copings of the ' Rose and Crown ' 
garden wall.
Nos. 9 and 10 are very large blocks embedded in the soil, and 
No. 11 is a cubical mass with angles rounded off.
A few small Shap boulders may be seen in private grounds.
P.S.
— It is a very curious fact that all the Shap Granite boulders 
found in this district occur only in the valley of the Lune.
In the adjoining valley of the Tees none is to be seen.
Supposing the boulders to have been borne in on ice from Shap 
Fell, the mountainous ridge forming the boundary between Yorkshire 
and Westmorland (Lune Street), at least 1,532 feet high, would have 
to be crossed, and as the mountain ridge between Lune Valley and 
Tees Valley, in its eastern part, does not rise near so high, it might 
be supposed that a few boulders would find their way here and there, 
into Teesdale.
Reported by \\x.
W. Gre< >x, F.G.S., Baldersby.
1.— On Stubbing** Farm, Tanfield, three miles from Masham, 
about 
gular 
the river Ure ; striation, top S.E. and N.W.
; about 300 ft.
altitude; resting on Millstone Grit.
189 
^66 TATE: THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
2. — On Lindrick Farm, two miles west of Ripon, a Shap Granite 
boulder, triangular, angles rounded, 18x13x9 in.
; no 
striae ; resting on Lower Yellow Limestone (Permian) ; 
altitude 300.
N.B.
— This boulder has been removed to the Museum 
of the Naturalists' Society, Ripon.
3. — Mortham Tower, Rokeby : altitude 450 feet Basalt, 
20 in.
in diameter, rounded ; resting on Carboniferous 
Limestone.
4. — Egglestone Abbey, Startforth : altitude 500 feet.
Shap 
Granite, 24 x 15 x 15 in.
; subangular; resting on Carbon- 
iferous Limestone.
5. — Startforth, near Barnard Castle, on right bank of Tees.
Shap Granite, 50x36x30 in.; subangular; resting on 
Carboniferous Limestone.
Shap Granite, 48 x 30 x 27 in.
; 
subangular; resting on Carboniferous Limestone.
Shap 
Granite, diameter 12 in.
; rounded ; resting on Carboniferous 
Limestone.
Shap Granite, 32x28x26 in.; subangular; 
resting on Carboniferous Limestone.
Shap Granite, 
30x12x10 in.
; subangular ; resting on Carboniferous 
Limestone.
Grey Granite, 36 x 18 x 12 in.
; subangular ; 
resting on Carboniferous Limestone.
6. — Pickhill, near Thirsk : altitude 100 feet.
Basalt, 18 x 15 x 
14 in.; subangular; resting on drift overlying Keuper 
Sandstone.
7. — Sinderby, near Thirsk: altitude about 90 feet.
Carboniferous 
Limestone, 30 x 20 x 18 in.; subangular; on Keuper Sand- 
stone ; striae, N.E. and S.W., in the direction of its long axis.
Reported by Mr. T.
Carter Mitchell, F.S.A., Topcliffe, ThirsL 
At Topcliffe, near Thirsk, in the bed of the river Swale, close to 
its left bank and about 150 yards above the church, under the 
fc clump/ above water only when the river is very low, a boulder of 
Millstone Grit, 4 ft.
2 in.
x 4 ft.
x 2 ft 2 in.
above the mud, but 
probably deeply embedded ; sub-angular ; no striae ; resting on 
Lower Lias ; altitude 50 feet.
Reportedly Mr. J.
Edmund Clark, B.A., B.Sc, York.
In the bed of the ' Water Lane ' stream, about 100 yards up 
the stream, from the road at Clifton, near York ; a Millstone Grit 
boulder, 4 ft.
1 in.
x 2 ft.
6 in.
x 1 ft.
6 in.
; sub-angular ; long axis 
W.N.W. and E.S.E.
; no stride.
Natura ii>t.
•*" 
TATE : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE 
3 6 7 
Reported by Mr. J.
W. Stather, F.G.S., Hull.
a 
Between Atwick and Skipsea, about one mile south of the latter, 
a Dolerite boulder, 4x3x5 ft, partly embedded in the purple 
boulder clay at the foot of the cliff, at about high water (sprin 
tide) mark ; longest axis E.
and W.
; flat and level at the top, with 
well marked striations in direction of longest axis ; sub -angular, its 
smaller or bluntly pointed end is towards W.S.W.
Reported by Mr. James Spencer, Akroyden, Halifax.
Collected from bed or banks of the Calder ; all small and fairly 
rounded pebbles, under 3 inches.
LUDDENDEXFOOT.
1 Borrowdale porphyrite.
1 Borrowdale andesite.
Sowerby Bridge.
1 Borrowdale andesite 
North Dean.
1 Borrowdale andesite.
1 Borrowdale ash.
2 Ennerdale granophyre 
1 Buttermere granophyre.
i Eskdale granite.
Elland 
Muncaster grey granite.
1 Borrowdale vesicular lava.
3 
granite.
1 Borrowdale ash.
3 Buttermere granophyre.
4 Borrowdale andesites.
4 Ennerdale granophyre.
1 Eskdale eurite.
1 Pink felsite (rhyolite).
1 Borrowdale granitiferous ash.
1 Yewdale volcanic breccia.
1 Mountain limestone.
MlRFIELD : 
Buttermere coai t granophyre.
Reported by Mr. John Burton, Horbury, IVakefi I 
Mr. John Burton, Horbury, submitted for identification the 
following specimens collected during the excavations in carrying 
out the local drainage scheme : 
88 Eskdale granite, from size of walnut to 9 x 6 x 6 
*2 2 Buttermere granophyre 
do.
d( 
24 Borrowdale andesitic lavas and ashes, up to 4".
1 1 Pink felsite (rhyolite), up to 7 ♦ 
4 Yewdale volcanic breccia, up to 8*.
It is well to repeat here that the rock most commonly found wa 
Buttermere granophyre, and not the Eskdale granite, as ought be inferred 
the above analysis.
Dec. 1393.
368 TATE : THE YORKSHIRE BOULDER COMMITTEE.
i Red quartzite (Trias?), 2V.
4 Vein quartz, up to 6".
1 Black chert, 3 x 2 x 2".
Many of the larger stones have merely lost their angles, but the 
smaller ones are fairly well rounded.
Reported by Mr. Charles W.
Fennell, Surveyor, Wakefield.
(Accompanied by a Sketch Plan, to tvkich letters refer.) 
Thornes.— Near junction of canal with river, along the side of 
Miss Jubbs' 32-acre field (a).
1 Buttermere granophyre, 6x5x4" subangular.
5 Eskdale granite, long axes, 2 to 5" rounded.
1 Pink felsite (rhyolite), 2x2x1" subangular.
1 Black felsite do.
1x1*1* triangular.
Thornes.
— Gravel-pit in Miss Jubbs' 32-acre field (b).
13 Eskdale granite, |" to 2 J" rounded.
x j|" subangular.
3 Buttermere granophyre, all under 1" rounded.
1 Grey felsite (rhyolite), 2 J x 2 x i|" triangular.
1 Borrowdale ash, i|xi|xi" triangular.
1 Vein quartz, i| x \\ x 1" rounded.
Wakefield.— East of L.
& Y.R. viaduct to Goole, near old rifle 
range (c).
2 Eskdale granite, 1 x|x \" rounded.
i Borrowdale ash, 4x1 x |" subangular.
Wakefield.
— In bend of river near where canal starts, opposite 
Kirkthorpe (d).
3 Eskdale granite, all under i|" rounded.
1 Grey felsite (rhyolite), 1 x J x |" subangular.
Kirkthorpe.
— In river dredgings near dam (e).
3 Eskdale granite, 2 x i| x ij" rounded.
1 Buttermere granophyre, j| x 3J x 2%" subangular.
2 Do. do.
2 x i| x 1 J" rounded.
1 Pink Felsite (rhyolite), 3x3x2" subangular.
S tanlkv : near damstake at Kirkthorpe : Stanley side of river (E x ).
3 Eskdale granite, 3^, z\ and 1A-" long axes.
1 Borrowdale ash, 1 1* triangular.
1 Yewdale breccia, 2 x \\ x 1 ' subangular.
1 Dark felsite (rhyolite), 3 x 2 x 1 J" rounded.
Smalley Bight (f) 
1 Pink felsite rhyolite), 3h x ol x 3 rounded.
Naturalist, 
369 
FURTHER ADDITIONS TO THE DONCASTER 
LIST OF LEPIDOPTERA.
H, H.
CORBETT, M.R.C.S., 
D&ncaster.
The following list of Lepidoptera comprises such species as I have 
found in the vicinity of Doncaster since 1890, not being recorded 
for Doncaster in 'Yorkshire Lepidoptera ' (Porritt), nor included in my 
'Additions to the Doncaster Lepidoptera/ (vide 'Naturalist/ Jan.
1891).
Four species, all in the genus Lithocolletis, are new to the 
county.
These are indicated by an asterisk (*).
Several others are either very rare or have been overlooked in 
the locality, e.g., Ch&rocatnpa porcellus, Macroglossa fuciformis, 
Zeuzera asaiti, and Xanthia aurago.
Colias edusa.
Common in August 1892.
This species was 
also taken here in 1877, when van Helice was taken here.
Vanessa io.
Edlington Wood, Jan. 10th, 1893.
Satyrus tithonus.
Wheatley Wood, Sept 1891.
Smerinthus ocellatus.
Larva at Doncaster, Sept.
1891.
Chaerocampa porcellus.
Wheatley Wood, at sugar, May 1893.
Macroglossa fuciformis.
Larva at Wheatley Wood, 1893.
Zeuzera aesculi.
Baiby, 1891.
Nudaria senex.
Wheatley Wood, 1892.
Lithosia mesomella- Wheatley Wood, June 1892.
Lithosia complanula.
Common at Wheatley Wood.
Eupisteria heparata.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Cidaria silaceata.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Hydraecia nictitans.
Abundant on Senecio at Edlington Wood, 
Sept.
1892.
Neuria saponariae- Common at sugar in Wheatley Wood, June 
1892.
Miana furuncula- Wheatley Wood, July 1893.
Caradrina aisines.
Wheatley Wood, July 1893.
Agrotis suffusa.
Wheatley Wood, Sept.
1893.
Triphaena interjeeta.
Wheatley Wood, July 1893.
Xanthia aurago.
Wheatley Wood, at sugar, Sept.
1893.
Euperia fulvago.
Common at sugar in Wheatley Wood, 
July 1893.
Abrostoia triplasia, Wheatley Wood, 1892.
Dee. X893.
z 
370 corbett: additions to the doncaster lepidoptera.
Herminia tarsipennalis.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Pyralis glaucinalis.
Wheatley, 1892.
Botys fuscalis.
Dod worth Wood, May 1893.
Scoparia muralis.
Wheatley, 1892.
Scoparia coarctalis.
Abundant at Wheatley.
Ephestia elutella.
Balby, 1892.
Clepsis rusticana.
Wheatley Wood, 
Poedisca ophthalmicana.
Conisborough, 1892.
Semasia woeberana- Common at Doncaster.
Argyrolepia cnicana.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Psyche roboricolella.
Larvae common in Wheatley Wood.
Scardia emortuella.
Wheatley and Edlington Woods.
Tinea fuscipunctella.
Doncaster.
Micropteryx purpurella.
Abundant on birches in Wheatley 
Wood.
Micropteryx semipurpurella.
Abundant on birches in 
Wheatley Wood.
Micropteryx unimaculella.
Abundant on birches in Wheatley 
Wood.
Micropteryx sparmanella.
Wheatley Wood.
Swammerdamia griseo-capitella.
Common among birches 
in Wheatley Wood.
Harpipteryx scabrella* At sugar in Wheatley Wood, Aug. 1893.
Depressaria assimilella.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Depressaria alstraemeriella.
Common among Conium at 
Wheatley.
Depressaria angelicella.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Gelechia populella.
Common in Wheatley Wood.
Gelechia fraternella.
Abundant but very local at Wheatley.
Gelechia obsoletella* Bred from Chenopodium at Doncaster, 
r8 93 .
Gelechia hermannella.
Abundant but very local at Doncaster, 
1893.
Argyresthia ephippella.
Abundant in Wheatley Wood, 1893- 
Ornix guttella.
Common generally.
Coleophora albicostella.
Common about Ulex, at Cantley.
Asychna terminella* Larvaa abundant in Wheatley Wood.
Eiachista luticomella.
Common at Doncaster.
chista cerusseila.
Common, but local about Doncaster.
Nature 
NOTES AND NEWS.
371 
Tischeria angusticolella.
Larvae at Dod worth, 1893.
Lithocolletis lautella.
Armthorpe Shaw, 1892.
Lithocolletis torminella.
Wad worth, 1893.
* Lithocolletis cerasicolella.
Wheatley Wood, 1892.
^Lithocolletis aucupariella.
Wheatley Wood, 1892.
"Lithocolletis cavella, Wheatley Wood, 1893.
Lithocolletis stettinella.
Wheatley Wood, 1893.
Bucculatrix cristatella.
Doncaster, 1893.
Bohemannia quadrimaculella.
Wheatley Wood, July 1893.
NOTES AND NEWS, 
The Journal of Botany for August (pp.
241-243) has an appreciative paper * In 
Memory of Robert Holland ' (who was born on the 2nd August, 1829, and died on 
the 1 6th July, 1893) hom the pen of his co- writer on English plant-names, 
Mr. James Britten.
A prominent feature of the last anniversary meeting of the Linnean Society of 
London was the presentation to the distinguished Tyneside botanist, Dr. Daniel 
Oliver, F.R.S., of the Royal Gardens at Kew, of the Linnean Gold Medal, 
awarded to him in recognition of the sterling character and wide range of his 
botanical work.
of 
of Europe, 7 is announced for speedy publication.
It gives a complete account, 
with 27 hand-coloured plates, of all the known species of these richly- piumaged 
birds.
The size is imperial 4to, uniform in every respect with the 'Monograph 
of the Meropidae.' 
All who remember the record of Scorpmna ductyioptera in our March number 
will learn with interest that an excellent paper on it as a British fish, by 
Mr.
\V.
Eagle Clarke, appears in the Proceedings of the Edinburgh Royal 
Physical Society (1892-3, pp.
94-101), illustrated by a capital plate of the York- 
shire example.
The species had only been figured once before, and not too accurately, 
/}' its original describes F.
E. Delaroche, in the 4 Annales du Musee d'Histoire 
Naturelle ' (1809).
Mr. Clarke has increased the value of his article by appending 
a full bibliography of references to it and its close congeners.
The Yorkshire 
example is now in the Edinburgh Museum, though we must conU i that it seems 
a pity that it is not in some Yorkshire museum.
Leeds geologists have to mourn the decease of Mr. William Cheetham, in 
whom the Leeds Geological Association sustains a great loss.
He was one 
of its founders, its president from 1882 to 1884, and vice-president and member 
of council down to his death last September.
He was also an active member 
of the council of the Yorkshire Geological and Polytechnic Society, and 
a Fellow of the Geological Society of London.
As a geologist he was 
familiar with the best English scenery, and also with the finest parts of 
Norway, the Rhine, the Black Forest, and Switzerland.
He was a native 
of Calverley, near Leeds, and throughout his life resident at Horsforth, where 
for more than forty y< rs he was engaged in the cloth manufacture.
An 
earnest friend of education throughout his life, he was one of the founders 
f the Calverley Mechanics' Institute.
At his death he had reached to more 
nan t he * three score years and ten ?
of human Ik.
372 
MARINE BIOLOGY IN THE ISLE OF MAN.
Sixth Annual Report of the Liverpool Marine Biology Committee and 
their Biological Station at Port Erin, Isle of Man. By W.
A. 
Herdman, D.Sc, F.
R.S.
A very interesting account is given in this report of the opening 
of the new station of this energetic Committee; and the initial 
work that has been there done gives good augury of an enlarged 
sphere of well-applied usefulness.
The station is admirably situated 
for marine biological work, and might be very advantageously 
utilised by the Sea Fisheries Committee for establishing a fish- 
hatchery.
Details of several dredging expeditions are given in the 
report with Very satisfactory results, and there is a long list of 
workers who have used the station during the year.
The Committee 
proposes to establish a marine aquarium, and to engage the services 
of a resident curator to devote some attention to the preservation of 
marine specimens for museum and laboratory purposes.
Many 
museums will no doubt be glad of the opportunity thus offered of 
obtaining desirable objects for their collections, and they would do 
well to make their wants known to Prof.
Herdman.
It is satisfactory 
to know that the Puffin Island Station previously occupied by this 
Committee will still be continued, it having been taken by the 
University College of North Wales.
— E.
Howarth.
1 
NOTES AND NEWS.
In Messrs.
Britten & Boulger's recently-published   Index to British and Irish 
Botanists/ p.
81, Mrs. Hey, of Leeds, is mentioned as the author of ' The 
Moral of Flowers.' She also published in the same format   The Spirit of the 
Woods/ 1837.
In the recently issued list of the Geological Society of London, the number >f 
Fellows resident in the northern counties stand as follow-— Yorkshire 7 2 » 
Lancashire 56, Cheshire 21, Derbyshire 18, Durham 15, Nottinghamshire 12, 
Northuml>erland and Cumberland each 10, Westmorland and Lincolnshire 
each 4, Isle of Man I.
The last published list of members of the British Ornithologists' Union, which 
is appended to the October number of the 'lb / affords an interesting study of 
the distribution of ornithologists in the north of England, which is singularly even.
Out of the small and select total number of 245 \L B.O.U.'s there are 53 resident 
m the northern counties, as foil* s:—One in the Isle of Man, four in Cumber- 
land, two in Westmorland with Furness, one in West Lancashire, two in South 
Lancashire, three in Cheshire, none in Derbyshire, three in Nottinghamshire, 
none in South and two in North Lincolnshire, one in South- East Yorkshire, I 
D South- West Yor' hire, three in Mid-West Yorkshire, one in North-\Vest 
Yorkshire, two in North- East Yorkshire, three in Durham, one in Northumber- 
land, and two in Cheviotland.
In addition to these there are north-countrymen 
resident abroad as follows :— Four in London, four in the rest of England, two m 
Scotland, and one each in Ireland, Canada, and India.
373 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
CONTRIBUTORS.
Adams, Lionel E., b.a., 
315.
Bailey, Matthew, 57, So, 171, 210, 323, 356.
Baker, J.
Gilbert, F.R.s., 164, 264.
Baker, Walter F., 20, 138, 222, 226, 253, 
Baldwin, E.
T., 58.
[309, 312, 317, 341.
Bell, Rev. W.
R., 364.
Brownsword, F., 210, 210.
Bunker, Thomas, 210, 332.
Burgess, J.
T., 325.
Burton, F.
M., f.l.s., f.g.s., 254, 309.
Burton, John, 367.
Buttress, Leonard, 87, 92, 112.
ft 
Can*, J.
W., m.a., f.g.s.
, 202, 210, 304.
Carter, W.
Lower, m.a., f.g.s., 320.
Clark.
J. Edmund, b.a., b.sc, 366.
Clarke.
Wm. Eagle, f.l.s., m.b.o.u., 81.
Clarke, W.
J., 304.
Coe, Joseph.
251, 287.
Cole, Rev. Edw.
Maule, m.a., f.g.s., 142.
Corbett, H.
H., m.r.c.s., 112, 286, 369.
Cordeaux, John, m.b.o.u., 5, 57, 103, 113, 
[203, 206, 246, 252, 260, 304.
30S, 324, 
Crewdson, Rev. George, m.a., 316.
[357.
Crossland, Charles, 58, 290.
Daw, J.
Burtt, 141.
Farrah, John, 318.
Fennel!, Charles \\\, 368.
Fierke.
F. W., m.c.s., 258, 284, 304, 3* 2 - 
Fortune, Riley, F.z.s..
112, 171, 223, 293.
Foster, H.
Moody, 106, ill.
Fowler, Rev.
\V.
W., m.a., f.l.s., 24, 258.
Friend, Rev. Hilderic, f.l.s., 17, 55, 295, 
^oodchild, J.
G., f.g.s., f.z.s., 230.
Goss, H., f.l.>., 24.
332.
Goulding, R.
W., 312.
yregson, Wm., f.g.s., 161, 365.
Grimshaw, Percy HL, 294.
Hall, Albert Edward, F.E.S., 355.
Hanson, C.
C. 57.
Harker, Alfred, m.a., f.
s., I, 265, 294.
Hawkesworth, Leonard, 24a 
Hebden, Thomas.
165.
Hewett, Wm, 79, 79, 33^ 332, 332.
Hey, Rev. W.
C, m.a., 175, 243, 319.
Wick, Thomas, b.a., I c, 305.
Hobkirk, Charles P., 353.
Hodgson, Wm., a.l.s., So.
Howarth.
Elijah, f.r.a.-..
49, 247, 372.
Dec. 1893.
Kew, H.
Wallis, 145.
Knubley, Rev. E.
P., m.a., M.B.O.U., 238 
Larder.
J-, 264, 264, 314.
Larder, R., III.
Lofthouse, T.
A., 225.
Loosmore, F.
P. (Mrs.), 164.
Marshall, J.
J., 109, 164.
Mitchell, T.
Carter, f.s.a., 
Mosley, S.
L., f.e.s., 241.
^66 
Nelson, Thomas H., m.b.o.u., 81.
Nelson, William, M.C.S., 251.
Oldham, Charles, 176.
Pawson, Albert H., 228, 289, 319.
Peacock, Rev. E.
A. W., M.A., 256, 311.
Feake, Edward, M.A., 17 1.
Petty, L., 91, 108, ill, 139, 280, 280, 304.
Phillips, John H., no.
[209,348, 355, 362.
Porritt, Geo. T., F.L.S., 58, 82, 106, 176.
Roebuck, W.
Denison, F.L.S., 4, 21, 
106, 107, 112, 115, 176, 177.
233, 2 
2S0, 281, 283, 301, 318.
Rowntree, James H., 225, 318.
Shackleton, Abraham, 165.
Shone, William, f.g.s., 336.
Smith, J.
Charles, 264, 264, 264.
Soppitt, Henry T., 15, 138.
Spencer, James, 75, 367.
Stather.
J. W., F.G.S., 291, 367.
>tears, John, no.
Stiles, M.
HL, 292.
Tate, Thomas, f.g.s., 109, 247, 363.
Thomasson, John P., 246.
Tuck, Rev. lulian G., m.a., 41.
[343.
Turner, W.
Harwell, F.c.s., f.r.m ,., 262, 
Vine, George Robert, Jun., 333.
Walter, Rev. J ; C, m.a., 311.
West, George S., 211.
West, William, F.L.S., 21 1.
Whistler, Rev. C.
W., m.a., 256.
Whitlock, F.
B., 83, 85, 173,210, 26c, 356, 
Whitweli, William, F.L.S., 25.
[356.
Yeoman, A.
R., M.A., 280.
374 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
BOOK NOTICES.
Atkinson's Guide to Grange and Arnside, 
114.
Barber, Samuel.
— Beneath Helvellyn's 
Shade, 352.
Barrett, C.
G. — The Lepidoptera of the 
British Islands, 348.
Beddard, F.
E. — Animal Coloration, 80.
Blake, J.
F. — Annals of British Geology 
for 1891, 86.
Carr, J.
W. — Geology and Natural History 
of Nottinghamshire, 281.
Christy, Miller.
— The Birds of Essex, 173.
Fisher, A.
K. — The Hawks and Owls of 
the U.S. in their Relation to Agri- 
culture, 240.
Fowler, Rev. W.
W. — Coleoptera of British 
Islands, vol.
4 and 5, 342.
Harvie-Brown, J.
A., and J.
G. Bar- 
tholomew.
— Naturalists' Map of Scot- 
land, 340.
Hudlestone, W.
H. — Anniversary Address 
to Geol.
Soc. London, 208.
Hudleston, W.
H., and E.
Wilson.
— 
Catalogue of British Jurassic Gastropoda.
294.
Leeds Geological Association.
— Trans- 
actions, part 7, 144.
Liverpool Marine Biology Committee 
6th Annual Report, 372.
Manchester Microscopical Society.
— Report 
for 1892, 242.
Massee, Geo.
— British Fungus Flora, vol.
I, 15 ; vol.
2, 138.
Mello, Rev. J.
Magens.
— Geology of 
Derbyshire, ed.
2, 340.
Mills, F.
\V.
— Introduction to Study of 
Diatomaceee, 262.
Mills, John.
- The Life of a Foxhound, 209.
Mills, John.
— Science and Art and 
Technical Education for April, 1893, 138.
Mitchell, F, S.— Birds of Lancashire, 
second edition, 173.
Nature-Lover, The, No. 1, 324.
Newton, Alfred.
— Dictionary of 
part 1, 252 ; part 2, 324.
Birds, 
Painter, W.
H.— Botany of Biddulph, 54- 
Rochdale Lit. and Sci. Society.— Transac- 
tions for 1891-2, 160.
Saunders, Edward.
— The Hemiptera 
Heteroptera of the British Islands, 209.
Sharp, D., and W.
W. Fowler.— Catalogue 
of British Coleoptera, 341.
Speight, H.— The Craven and N.W.
Yorkshire Highlands, 107.
Spencer, Herbert.— The Inadequacy of 
Natural Selection, 237.
Stoddart, Thomas Tod.— Angler's Com- 
panion, 3rd edition, 221.
Tu tt, J.
W. —Melanism and Melanochroism.
82.
Whitelock, F.
B.— The Birds of Derby- 
shire, 206.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Desmids, Figures of, to illustrate paper by 
W. Barwell Turner, 343.
Portrait of T.
T- Moore, 49- 
Portrait of G.
W. Shrnbsole, 336 
CHESHIRE.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 1 16-137: 
Syrrhaptes in Cheshire (T.
J. Moore), 53.
Coleoptera: Soronia punctati irna at 
Dunham Park (W.
\\ .
Fowler), 138 ; 
Lathrobiurn rufipenne in Cheshire locali- 
ties (W.
W. Fowler), 251.
Diptera : Bibliography for 1888-1891, 21- 
24.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblb 
graphy for 1 892, 266-279.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1890, ijS- 
202.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1889- 1891, 
64-74.
Mollusca: Fusus antiquus, how captured 
on the Cheshire coast (H.
W. Kew), 
157- _..,.
Neuroptera and Trichoptera: Biblio- 
graphy for i S8-1S92, 301-303.
Personal Notices: W.
H. Pearson* 
paper on Lejeunere M adagascariense 
114 ; also on a new British hepatic from 
Ben Nevis, 114; deaths of G.
w. 
Shrnbsole and Robert Holland, 252, 
Shrubsole (\V.
Shone), 33 6 '340 
Obituary Memoir and Portrait of G.
W. 
Pearson's projected work on British 
Hepatics, 352; note on memoir 01 
Robeit Holland, 37 * - 
Natural^ 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
375 
CUMBERLAND.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 116- 137 
Great Northern Diver and Purple Heron 
at Workington (W.
Hodgson), 80 ; 
Chiff-chaff, etc., in the Lake District 
(F.
B. Whitlock), 210.
Diptera : Bibliography for 1888-91, 21-24.
Flowering Plants: Botanical 'Waifs' 
in Cumberland (L.
Petty), 108 ; a Few 
Plants of S.W.Cumberland(Id.), 139-141; 
Ash trees in Bloom near Penrith (J.
C. 
Smith), 264 ; Convallaria majalis at 
Stanley Gill, a correction (L.
Petty), 280.
Geology and Palaeontology: Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 267-279 ; Lake District 
rocks in Yorkshire glacial drift (J.
Spencer), 75; recently published Geo- 
logical maps for Cumberland, 20S ; Lake 
Country rocks microscopically described 
(T.
Tate), 247-251.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1890, 
179-202.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 18S9-1891, 
59-74.
Neuroptera and Trichoptera 1 Biblio- 
graphy for 1 888- 1 892, 302-303.
Personal Notices : Wollaston Donation 
Fund to J.
G. Goodchild, 86; his papers 
on Cumbrian Geology, 221 ; Rev.
H. Friend's paper on British Tree- and 
Earth- Worms, 348.
Worms: Check- List of British Earth* 
worms (H.
Friend), 17-20.
DERBYSHIRE.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 116-137; 
Review of Whitlock and Hutchinson's 
* Birds of Derbyshire' (J.
Cordeaux), 
206-208 ; Lesser Whitethroat at Bake- 
well, 210; Little Grebe at Norton 
Hammer Dam (E.
Howarth), 246.
Coleoptera : Bostrichus capucinus in 
Derbyshire (W.
W. Fowler), 20; Soronia 
punctatissima at Repton (Id.), 138.
Diptera: Bibliography ^1888-1891,22-24.
Geology and Palaeontology: Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 266-279; notice of 
J. Magens Mello's Geology of Derby- 
shire, second edition, p.
340.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1890, 1 77- 
202 ; Variety of Triphcena pronuba in 
Dovedale (R.
South), 332.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1889- 1891, 
62-74.
Neuroptera and Trichoptera: Biblio- 
graphy for 1888- 1892, 301-303.
Personal Notices : Death of J.
T. Harris, 
24 : paper by J.
E. Nowers and L G.
Wells on Plants of Irish Aran, 172".
DURHAM.
Birds : Bibliography for 1S90, 1 15-137.
Diptera: Bibliography for 1888-1891, 21- 
24.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 268-279.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1890, 179- 
Mammalia : Bibliography for 1889- 1S91, 
63-74- 
Neuroptera and Trichoptera : Biblio- 
graphy for 188S-1892, 302 303.
LANCASHIRE.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 115-137; 
Local Name for the Rook (J.
A. H.
Murray), 172 ; Review of Saunders' 
Second Edition of Mitchell's   Birds of 
Lancashire' (F.
B. Whitlock), 173-174: 
Lesser Tern in Lancashire (F.
Brown- 
sword), 210 
Coleoptera : Soronia punctatissima at 
Stretford (W.
W. Fowler), 138 ; Lath- 
rohium rufipenne at Barton Moss (Id.), 
251 ; Acanthocinus sedilis at Xewton-le- 
Willow- (W.
Deni<on Roebuck), 2S0.
Crustacea : Various Specks near Liver- 
pool iT.
J. Moore), 53.
Diptera : Bibliography for 1SSS-1891, 22- 
24.
Fishes: Alosa vulgari Lamprisgutt 
Dec. 18 
I < ,.)rthagoriscus mola, and Squalii angelus 
near Liverpool (T.
J. Moore), 53.
Flowering Plants : The Plants of Leek 
and Neighbourhood (L.
Petty), 91-102.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 265-279 : Glaciation 
in Lancashire (J.
Spencer), 75, 
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 1890, 178- 
202 : Dark Acronycta ieporina bred at 
Warrington (J.
Collins), 24 ; Variety of 
Argynnis euphrosyne in Lancashire (R.
South), 332.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1589-159*, 
60-74 ; Megaptera longimana in the 
Mersey (T.
J. Moore), 53.
Moilusca : Attempted Introduction of 
376 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
LANCASHIR E— continued.
Venus mercenaria to the Mersey (E.
Howarth), 52.
Personal Notices : Memoir of T.
J. 
Moore (E.
Howarth), 49-54 (and por- 
trait) ; W.
A. Herdman's proposed 
series of British Marine Faunal Hand- 
hooks, 114; J.
P. Thomasson on the 
Numbers of Eggs laid by Birds in Spain, 
114; J.
Cosmo Melvill's paper on 
Strathearn Hieracia, 144 ; Death of B.
Carrington, 160 ; papers on Algse by 
R. J.
Harvey Gibson, of Liverpool, 
209": Death of H.
H. Higgins, 282; 
W, E.
Hoyle and A.
M. Marshall made 
M.Sc., 300; \V.
Moss on the Repro- 
ductive Organs of Bulimus acutus, 342.
Societies : Transactions of Rochdale 
Literary and Scientific Society, 160; 
Procedure at Excursions of Liverpool 
N.F. Club, 237 ; Notice of Report for 
1892 of Manchester Microscopical Soc, 
242 ; Liverpool Nat. Field Club and a 
new edition of the Flora of Liverpool, 
by Robert Brown, 342.
Worms : Check-List of British Earth- 
worms (H.
Friend), 17-20.
LINCOLNSHIRE.
Algae : Freshwater Algre observed by 
L. N.
U. at Woodhall Spa (J.
Larder), 3 14.
Arachnida : Chelifer degeerii at Mable- 
thorpe (W.
F. Baker), 172, 261 ; 
Agelena labyrinthica at Woodhall (W.
F. 
Baker), 312.
Birds: Bibliography for rS90, 1 17-137; 
Bird-notes from Humber District in 
Autumn of 1892 (J.
Cordeaux), 5-14 ; the 
Ornithology of Tennyson (J.
G. Tuck), 
41-48 ; Bird-notes from Humber District 
in Winter of 1892-3 (J.
Cordeaux), 103- 
106; Waxwingsnear Louth (R.
Larder), 
in ; Local names for Rook (J.
A. H.
Murray), 172; Stray Notes from the 
Coasts of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire in 
the spring of 1893 (J.
Cordeaux), 203- 
205 ; Crested Grebe at Torksey (E.
Howarth 1 , 246; Birds observed by 
L.N.U. at Mablethorpe (J.
Cordeaux), 
260-261 ; Disappearance of the Great 
Bustard in Lincolnshire (J.
Cordeaux), 
308; Birds observed about Woodhall 
Spa (J.
C. Walter), 311; Bird-notes from 
the Humber District, Summer and 
Autumn of 1893 (J.
Cordeaux), 357-362.
Coleoptera : Lathrobium rufipenne in 
Lincolnshire (J.
Coe), 251 ; Beetles 
observed by L.N. U.
at Mablethorpe 
(W.
W. Fowler), 258 ; Beetles observed 
by L.N.U. at Woodhall Spa (W.
F. 
Baker), 1 12-314.
Dipteral Bibliography for 1888- 1891, 21-24.
: Herrings and other fish confined 
in a pond at New Holland (H.
M. 
I iter), 106 ; Three-spined Sticklebacks 
at Mablethorpe {¥.
M. Burton), 253; 
Pike there also (W.
F. Baker), 261.
Flowering- Plants : The Binding Plants 
of the Sandhills of Lincolnshire (F.
M. 
Burton), 255 ; Plant- ol rrved by 
L.N.U. at Mablethorpe (E.
A. W.
Peacock), 2 56-2 5b ; Cynoglossum there 
(W.
W. Fowler), 258 ; Lemna trisulca 
and Hydrocharis morsus-rame there also 
(F.
W. Fierke), 259 ; Rosa spinosissima 
in Lincolnshire (J.
Larder), 264 ; R.
villosa sub-sp.
mollis, etc., in North 
Lincolnshire (Id.), 264 ; Plants observed 
by L.N.U. at Woodhall Spa (E.
A. W* 
Peacock  , 311 ; An Account of some of 
the Rarer Plants of Spilsby (J.
T. 
Burgess), 325-332.
t 
Geology and Palaeontology: Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 266-279; Geological 
Observations made at Mablethorpe by 
L.N.U.
(F.
M. Burton), 254-6 (G W.
Whistler), 256 ; Geological Observations 
made by L.N.U. at Woodhall Spa 
(F.
ML Burton), 309-311.
Hemiptera: Velia currens at Woodhall 
Spa (W.
F. Baker), 314.
Q Q 
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1890.
IB4- 
202 : Hesperia paniscus in Lincolnshire 
( W.
W. Fowler), 24 ; Arctia lubricipeda 
var.
radiata bred from Lincolnshire 
parents (G.
T. Porritt), 58; Lepidoptera 
near Lincoln (J.
W. Carr), 202 ; Eucheha 
jacobceaeat Mablethorpe (W.
I. Baker ) 
25S.
Mammalia: Bibliography for lW»9[i 
59-74; Polecat at Mablethorpe (W.
r. 
Baker), 261 ; Water Shrew at Louth 
(A.
R. Yeoman), 280.
Mollusca: For of Limnaea peregra near 
Louth (H.
W. Kew) t 149; Assimmea 
erayana at Ciccthorpes and Mablethorpe 
CF.
M. Burton), 255 ; Mollusca observed 
by L.
N. U.
at Mablethorpe l*« 7; 
Fierke), 258-260 ; Mollusca observed by 
L. N.
U. at Woodhall Spa(F.
W. r lerke), 
Neuroptera and Trichoptera: Biblio- 
graphy for 18SS-1892, 301-303.
Personal Notices : Death of >• Carring- 
ton, 160 
Natural^.
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
377 
L IX C O L N S H I R E— continued.
Reptiles and Amphibians: Natterjack 
at Mablethorpe (W.
F. Baker), 172, 
253 : Amphibians noted by L.
N. U.
at 
Mablethorpe (\V.
F. Baker), 261.
Societies : Projected Excursion to Mable- 
thorpe, 172; Formation of a Lincoln- 
shire Naturalists' Union (\Y.
F. Baker), 
253-261 ; Line.
X. U., 300 ; Line.
N. U.
atWoodhall Spa(\V.
F. Baker), 309-314.
Zoophytes and Polyzoa ; Zoophytes and 
Polyzoa at Skegness (J.
Burtt Davy), 
141.
ISLE OF MAX.
Birds : Bibliography for 1890, 1 16-137.
Diptera: Bibliography for 1888-91, 21- 
24.
Geology 
and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 266-279.
Lepidoptera : Bibliography for 
1 78-202.
1890, 
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1SS9-1891, 
60-74.
Neuroptera and Trichoptera: Biblio- 
graphy for 18SS-1892, 301-303.
Personal Notices: G.
W. Lamplugh on 
the staff of the Geological Survey in the 
Isle of Man, 114.
NORTHUMBERLAND.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 115-137 ; 
Coquetdale and Harbottle Bird -notes 
(F.
B. Whitlock/, 83-85.
Coleoptera : Soronia punctatissima in 
Northumberland (W.
W. Fowler), 
138.
Diptera: Bibliography for 1888-1891.
24.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 267-279.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1S90, 1^3- 
202.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1SS9-1S91, 
60-74 1 Badger near Nottingham (J.
W. 
Carr), 210.
Personal Notices: E.
A. L.
Batters* 
paper on Alga* of the Clyde area, 144 ; 
and on a new Gonimophyllum, 160; 
Linnean Gold Medal to Daniel Oliver, 
Worms : Check -List of British Earth- 
worms (H.
Friend), 17-20.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 1 16-137 ; 
Bird-notes from Notts, 1892-3 (F.
B. 
Whitlock), 85 ; Bird -notes from North 
Notts for 1891-92 (L.
Buttress), 87- 
n^ .
C«: 1 -ri„J-T i.
+u~ 
Redshank 
near the 
Manx 
92; Snipe and M , 
River Idle (J.
Cordeaux), 205; ^ M « M .
Shearwater in Notts (J.
Cordeaux), 208; 
Nesting of Hawfinch near Retford 
(J.
Cordeaux), 246 ; Migratory Birds in 
the Trent Valley (F.
B. Whitlock), 261: 
Little Gull in Notts.
(Id.), 356 ; Cormo- 
rant at Newark-upon-Trent (Id.), 356.
Coleoptera : Bostrichus capucinus in 
Notts (VV.
\Y.
Fowler), 20; Acanthocinus 
ae&tts at Nottingham (J.
W, Carr), 304.
Flowering Plants : Paris quadri folia 
near Retford (L.
Buttress), 112.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1892, 266-279.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1890, 
iSi-202; Small size in 1893 of Euchloe 
cardamines near Retford (J.
Co* aux , 
205.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1889-1891, 
6o- 74.
Mollusca : Limax flavus and its food at 
Tuxford (H.
W. Kew), 148-159.
Worms: Check-List of British Earth- 
worms (II.
Friend), 17-20.
WESTMORLAND AND FURNESS.
Algae : Desrnid Notes, with page of 
hgures (W.
Barwell Turner), 347.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 116-137: 
Review of Saunders' second edition of 
Mitchell's   Birds of Lancashire ' (F.
R 
Whitlock), 173-174; ChirTchafT in the 
Lake District |F.
B. Whitlock), 210; 
Redwings killed by the frost at I verston 
(Lister Petty), 2S0.
' \tmm 1 mi \m \ ~ t a9im * t ,, , 
Dec. 1893.
Coleoptera: Cychrus rostratu near Ul- 
verston (Lister Petty), ill.
Diptera ; Bibliography for 1SS8-1S91, 
21-24.
Fishes; Lamprey in the Duddon and 
tributaries (Lister Petty), 304.
Flowering Plants : Inula helenium in 
Furness (E T.
Baldwin), 58 ; Notice of 
Petty 's List of Grange and Arnside Plants, 
378 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
WESTMORLAND AND F U R N E S S— continued.
114; Carex limosa in Westmorland (J.
C. 
Smith), 264 ; Paris quad rifolia with seven 
leaves in Westmorland (Id.), 264; 
Unrecorded Aliens for North Lancashire 
(Lister Petty), 3^5.
Geology and Palaeontology : Biblio- 
graphy for 1892,267-279; Lake Country 
Rocks microscopically described (T.
Tate), 247-251.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1890, 178- 
202 ; Lobophora polycommata and 
Nemeobius lucina at Windermere (G.
Crewdson), 316.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1889-1891, 
59-74- 
Neuroptera and Trichoptera : Biblio- 
graphy for 1888-1892, 301-503.
Personal Notices : Lister Petty's List of 
Grange and Arnside Plants, 114; Lister 
Petty and Bibliography of North Lan- 
cashire Botany, 282.
Worms: Check-List of British Earth- 
worms (H.
Friend), 17-20.
YORKSHIRE.
Algae : Notes on the Fresh-water Algae of 
the East Riding (W.
West and G.
S. 
West), 21 1 -221 ; Algae observed by 
Y. N.
U. at Askern (M.
H. Stiles), 292- 
293 ; Desmid Notes, with page of illus- 
trations (W.
Barwell Turner), 343-347.
Arachnida : Yorkshire Galls, Additional 
Species and Fresh Localities (S.
L. 
Mosley), 241-242.
Birds: Bibliography for 1890, 1 15-137; 
Bird-notes from Humber District in 
Autumn of 1892 (J.
Cordeaux), 5-14; 
Manx Shearwater at Sykehouse near 
Halifax (C.
C. Hanson), 57 ; Flam- 
borough Bird -notes (M.
Bailey), 57, 80, 
171, 210, 323, 356; Spotted Crake at 
Otterington and Bittern near Driffield ( W.
Hewett), 79: Bird -notes from Humber 
District in Winter, 1892-3 (J.
Cordeaux), 
102-106; Waxwing near Hull (H.
M. 
Foster), in 5 American White-throated 
Sparrow in Holderness, an Addition to 
the Yorkshire Avifauna (J.
Cordeaux), 
113-114 ; Craven Bird-notes (E.
Peake), 
171 : Starlings hawking for Flies (R.
Fortune), 171; Local names for Rook 
(J.
A. H.
Murray), 172 ; Some Stray 
Notes from the Yorkshire Coast in the 
Spring of 1893 (J- Cordeaux), 203-205 ; 
Turtle Dove and Nightingale near Gooie 
(T.
Bunker), 210; Birds observed by 
Y. N.
U. at Aysgarth (R.
Fortune), 223 ; 
Cuckoo at a Sheffield S el-works, 232 ; 
Yorkshire Birds added to Sheffield 
Museum (E.
Howarth), 246; Birds 
< .erved by Y.
N. U.
at Askern (R.
/' Fortune), 293; Birds observed by 
Y. X.
U. at Kirkby Moors ie(J.
Farrah), 
318 ; Bird -notes from the Humber 
District, Summer and Autumn of 1893 
I j.
Cordeaux), 357-362.
Climatology and Meteorology: The 
Cloud-burst at Langtoft (J.
Love!), 24, 
Coelenterata : Mkrosco] ic Life observed 
by Y.
X. U.
at Askern (M.
H. S ile 292.
Coleoptera : Bostrichus capuchinus in 
Imported Timber at Hull (W.
F. Baker), 
20; Soronia punctatissima near Leeds 
(W.
F. Baker), 138 ; and at Scarborough 
<W.
W. Fowler), 138; Beetles observed 
by Y.
N. U.
at Aysgarth (W.
F. Baker), 
226-228; Anchomenus prasinus at 
Bridlington (W.
C. Hey), 246 ; Acantho- 
cinus cedilis at Leeds and Hull (W.
D. 
Roebuck), 280; Beetles observed by 
Y. N.
U. at Askern (J.
Coe), 287-288 ; 
Beetles observed by Y.
N. U.
at Kirkby 
Moorside (W.
C. Hey), 319- 
Crustacea : Microscopic life observed by 
Y. N.
U. at Askern (M.
H. Stiles), 293- 
Diptera: Bibliography for 1888-1891, 
21-24; Yorkshire Galls, Additional 
Species and New Localities (S.L. Mosley), 
241-242 ; Rhingia rostrata at Aysgarth 
(P.
H. Grimshaw), 294.
Fishes : Scorpcena dactyioptera at 
Coatham, an addition to the Fauna 
of the British North Sea Area (T.
H- 
Nelson and W.
Eagle Clarke), 81; 
Smelts in a Pond at Yarm (W.
Demson 
Roebuck), 106 5 Food of Cod off the 
Yorkshire Coast (J.
Cordeaux), 205; 
Codfish and its appetite at Flamborougn 
(M.
Bailey), 210; Fishes observed by 
Y. N.
U. at Aysgarth (R.
Fortune), 224; 
Fishes observed by Y.
N. U.
at Askern 
< Id. K 293 ; Opah or Kingfish at Easington 
(J.
Cordeaux;, 304.
Fl6wering Plants: West Yorkshire 
Records and Notes from the Herbarium 
Catalogues, etc.
, of the late John Tathano 
of Settle (W.
Whitwejl), 25-40 ; Early 
and Late (Mrs. F.
P. Loosmore ana 
T. G.
Baker), 164; Potamogeton natan 
at Carperby (W.
F. Baker), 227 ; Pw 
observed by Y.N.I*, at Aysgarth A.
n. 
Pawsoo), 228-230, (J.
Farrah), 230, 
Yorkshire Galls, Additional Species and 
Fresh Localities (S.
L. M ley)- 24£ 
242 : Smyraium oh • it rum at Scarj rou^: 
Naturalist, 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
379 
Y O R K S H I R ft— continued.
(W.
C. Hey), 243 ; Gentiana amarella 
and Euphrasia at Bridlington (Id.
), 246 ; 
Ranunculus lingua near Askern (W.
Nelson), 251; Plants observed by Y.N. U.
at Askern (A.
H. Pawson), 289-290; 
Plants noted by Y.N.U. at Kirkby 
Moorside (Id.), 319-320.
Fungi : Castle Howard Fungi, a Cor- 
rection (C.
Crossland), 58; Fungi 
observed by Y.N.U. at Askern (C.
Crossland), 290-291 ; ^Ecidium leuco- 
spermum and Puccinia fusca at Steeton 
and Bolton (H.
T. Soppitt), 347.
Geology : Bibliography for 1892, 266- 
279 ; Norwegian Boulders in Holderness 
(A.
Harker), 1-4; Glacial Boulders in 
Calderdale (J.
Spencer), 75-79 ; York- 
shire Boulder Committee's sixth year's 
work (T.
Tate), 109-111 ; Erosion of 
the Yorkshire Coast (E.
Maule Cole), 
142-144; the 4-mile Geological Map of 
East Yorkshire, 172; Geological obser- 
vations made by Y.N.U. at Aysgarth 
(J.
G. Goodchild), 230-232 ; Geology of 
Y.N.U. excursion to Askern (L W.
Stather), 291-292; Geology of Y.N.U.
* excursion to Kirkby Moorside < W.
Lower 
Carter and J.
\Y.
Stather), 320-323; The 
Yorkshire Boulder Committee and its 
Seventh Year's Work (T.
Tate), 363-368.
Hymenoptera : Yorkshire Galls, addi- 
tional species and new localities (S.
L. 
Mosley), 242.
Infusoria : Microscopic Life as observed 
by Y.N.U. at Askern (M.
H. Stiles), 
292-293.
Lepidoptera: Bibliography for 1890, 178- 
202 ; Arctia lubricipeda var.
radiata at 
Barnsley (J.
Harrison), 24 ; Liparis 
monacha at Scarborough (J.
A. Clark), 
24 ; Melanic Boarmia repandata at 
Sheffield (A.
E. Hall), 24; The sup- 
posed Scarborough specimens of Liparis 
monacha, etc.
(G.
T. Porritt), 58 : 
Variation in Yorkshire Lepidoptera 
(G.
T. Porritt), 106 ; Lithocolletis cerasi- 
colella, a species new to Britain, at 
Doncaster(H.
H. Corbett), 112; Mela- 
nippe hastata and Euchloe cardamines 
near Sheffield (C.
Oldham and G.
T. 
Porritt), 176; Lepidoptera observed by 
Y # N*U.
at Aysgarth (J.
H. Rowntree), 
225-226 ; Varieties of Yorkshire Lepi- 
doptera f G.
T. Porritt and G.
Jackson), 
233234; Lepidoptera observed by 
Y.N.U. at Askern (H.
H. Corbett), 
2S7 ; Lepidoptera observed by V.N.U.
at Kirkby Moorside (J.
H. Rowntree), 
319; Sphinx convolvuii at York and 
Beverley (W.
Hewett), 332 ; Acherontia 
Bee. r8t.
. 
I atropos at Goole (T.
Bunker), and at 
York, Beverley, and Driffield (W.
Hewett), 332 ; Deiopeia pulchella at 
Beverley (W.
Hewett., 332; Agrotis 
saucia, Agriopis aprilina, and Dasypolia 
at Huddersfield (G.
T. Porritt), 362; 
Further Additions to the Doncaster List 
of Lepidoptera (H.
H. Corbett), 369-371.
Lichens : Additions to the West Riding 
Lichen Flora (A.
Shackleton and Thos.
Hebden), 165-171.
Mammalia: Bibliography for 1 889-1 891, 
59-74 ; Otter at the Mouth of the 
Humber (J.
Cordeaux), 57; Badger on 
Towton Battlefield (R.
Fortune), 112; 
Early appearance of Noctule near Ripon 
(W.
D. Roebuck), 112; Badgers near 
Market Weighton and on the Wolds 
(T.
J. Marshall), 164 ; Mammals observed 
by Y.
N. U.
at Aysgarth (R.
Fortune), 
224 ; Mammals observed by Y.
N. U.
at 
Askern (R.
Fortune), 293; Mammals 
observed by Y.
N. U.
at Kirkby Moot- 
side (].
Farrah), 31S.
Mollusca : Six -banded Helix nemorahs 
at Adel near Leeds (W.
D. Roebuck), 
176 5 Mollusca observed by Y.
N. U.
at 
Aysgarth (T.
A. Lofthouse), 225 ; a 
Variety of Limnuea palustris at Askern 
(\V.
Nelson), 251 ; Limax cinereo-niger 
in Bilsdale (W.
D. Roebuck), 280; 
Mollusca observed by Y.
N. U.
at 
Askern (F.
W. Fierke), 2S4-286 ; Vivi- 
parus contectus still Living at Askern 
(W.
I Clarke), 304 ; Viviparus contectu.- 
at Askern (F.
\V.
Fierke), 3°4 ; L*t of 
the Mollusca of Penistone(L.
E. Adams), 
-15.316; Mollusca observed by Y.
N. U.
at Kirkby Moorside (W.
D. Roebuck), 
Mosses: Svstegium crispum at Beverley 
and Market Weighton J.
J. Marshall), 
Neuroptera and Trichoptera: Biblio- 
graphy for 1888-189-.
301-303; Lmino- 
phiius rhombicus at Carperby (W K 
Baker), 227.
^ 
Personal Notices: G.T. Porntt appointed 
Editor of Buckler's Larvae of British 
Lepidoptera, 4; J- Lt >vel on the Cloud- 
burst at Langtoft, 24 ; Brief Memoirs of 
Tohn Tatham and Silvanus Thompson 
(W.
Whitwell), 25-26 : Notices of 
Tames Backhouse, sen.
and jun., G.
h. 
Gibson, I- Gilbert Baker, and Dr.
Silvanus "Phillips Thompson, 26: Geo, 
Massee, paper on West Indian Fungi, 
80 ; Paper hy W.
West on Irish I resfa- 
water Alg:e, 82 : Paper by Thos.
Hick 
nn * n*w fossil Plant, 82; AJgm named 
3 8o 
CLASSIFIED INDEX.
YORKSHIR E— continued.
after \V.
Xuttall and W.
Barwell Turner, 
82; Botanical paper by Philip Sewell, 
86; Carex sewellii named after him, 86; 
W. West and a new British hepatic from 
Ben Nevis, 114; W.
Whitwell elected 
F.L.S., 114; G.
C Dennis and \Y.
Mainsbridge elected F.E.S., 114; W.
Gregson and J.
\Y.
Stather elected F.
G. S.
, 
114; G.
W. Lamplugh's papers on 
Yorkshire Geology and his appointment 
on the Geological Survey, 114; W.
Bar- 
well Turner's East Indian Alga?
published 
in Sweden, 138; R.
H. Meade's paper 
on British Tachinida?, 144; Death of 
F. O.
Morris, 160; Death of Dr. B.
Carrington, 160; Death of \V.
J. 
Lancaster, 160; Obituary memoir of 
W. C.
Lukis (W.
Gregson), 161 -164; 
E. G.
Baker's papers on the Malveas, 
172; John Hopkinson's Presidential 
Address to the Hertfortshire N.
H. 
Society, 172; Prof.
L. C.
Miall's paper 
on Dicranota, 172; Geo. Massee 
appointed to a post at Kew Herbarium, 
208; W.
H. Hudleston's Presidential 
Address to Geological Society, 208; 
Paper on Scottish Alga?
by W.
West, 209 ; 
Deaths of G.
R. Vine, J.
W. Davis and 
Geo. Brook, 282; Memoir of J.
W. 
Davis (T.
Hick), 305-307 ; H.
Speight 
engaged on a new work on Nidderdale, 
F. A.
Lees writing the botany for it, 
307; Forster's Academy Portrait of 
J. Gilbert Baker, 314 • Obituary Memoir 
of George Robert Vine {G.
R. Vine, jun.
), 
333-335 ; F.
W. Fierke and Yorkshire 
Conchoiogy in 1S93, 335 ; E.
E. Prince 
on the Life of Dr. Mcintosh, 342 ; New 
work on Littondale by W.
Boyd with List 
of Plants by W.
A. ShurTrey, 342 ; P.
F. 
Lee and his Discoveries of Warwickshire 
Plants, 342 ; H.
T. Soppitt's paper on 
iEcidium leucospermum, 347 ; Obituary 
notice of George Brook (C.
P. Hobkirk), 
353-355; Death of Edward Charles- 
worth, 355 ; and of James Batty (A.
E. 
Hall), 355 ; H.
E. Dresser's New Mono- 
graph of the Coraciidse, 371 ; Death 
of William Cheetham, 371 ; Botanical 
works by Mrs. Hey, of Leeds, 372.
Physical Geography: Forge Valley in 
Winter (W.
C. Hey), 175-6; Specimen 
Days on the Yorkshire Coast (W.
C. 
Hey), 243.
Reptiles and Amphibians : Reptiles and 
Amphibians observed by Y.N.U. at 
Aysgarth (R.
Fortune), 224 ; Amphibians 
noted by Y.
N. U.
at Askern (R.
Fortune), 
293 ; Amphibians observed at Kirkby 
Moorside (J.
Farrah), 318.
Societies : Transactions of Leeds Geo- 
logical Association, 144; Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union at Aysgarth (W.
F. 
Baker), 224 ; Annual Meeting of Y.
N. U.
at Huddersfield (W.
D. Roebuck), 233- 
237 ; Y.
N. U.
at Askern (Id.), 283-293 ; 
Hull Geological Society and the Study 
of Holderness Glaciation, 308; Y.N.U.
at Kirkby Moorside (W.
F. Baker), 
317-323.
Worms : Check-List of British Earth- 
Worms (H.
Friend), 17-20; Lumbricus 
rubescens in Yorkshire (Id.), 298, 
351.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Birds: The Ornithology of Tennyson 
(J.
G. Tuck), 41-48; the Protection of 
Wild Birds' Eggs (E.
P. Knubleyj, 238- 
240; Fertility of Meadow Pipit in 
Noway (J.
P. Thomasson), 246.
Hemiptera ; New work on Heteroptera 
by E.
S lunders, announced as one of 
Lovell Reeve's series, 144.
Mollusca: The Faculty of Food-finding 
in Gastropods (H.
W. Kew), 145- 
159.
Personal Notices: Death of H.
T. 
Stainton, 4 ; G.
H, Bryan's Paper on the 
Oxen-borne Bees of the Ancients, 
347- .
Societies 
Glaciaiists 
and Journals \ 
Association and its Journal, 342 5 Nor- 
thern F.G.S.'s and their distribution, 
372; Northern M.B.O.U/s and their 
distribution, 372.
Worms: Check-List of British Earth- 
worms (H.
Friend), 17-20 ; New British 
Worms (Id.), 55-57 ; A New Species of 
Lumbricus (Id.), 295-300; Rosa on the 
Revision of the Lumbricidi (Friend), 
349-352.
Printed by MCCorquodale & Co Limited, Leeds.
* 
CO 
m 
- 
L. 
OS 
CD 
x 
4) 
en 
O 
C "D 
O « 
* 
- r : 
Q 
r 
m 
Or 
o 
5 ° 
7 
L 
N 
3 
a 2 
JQ 
m 
8-° 
- « 
i N 
. 
K 
^^m 
vm^^HP^^H 
JANUARY 1893.
THE 
No. 210 
A 
[OIN j - OF 
History for the 
rth f England 
TED 
X\ st Dl NIS< 
T Z" IT T ^ 
L 
: .
: A 
' -.B 
7~ 
& 
I L 
F.  • 
RRITT 
I 
_ 
V 
I 
' v 
T" * m.
I .
. I '- 
v- It-* 5 I 
Norwej.
* Bo?
Holderne 
Bird~Ncr s frorr the Humber District in the Autumn cf 1892- 
t-4 
j _ t 
O * 
~ 
£ sh Fung Re *: A rss ed Text-book of 
* -Y 
- 
. 
b 
A C MJst i S> » Earth-Worms— 
B ogrs 1888, 188f , J 890, and 
West York re Records ar ^otes.
F n the Herbarium.
talog 
of tl*e late Mr- John T.
of S« 
* * 
* *, 
1 .
3 
2 24 
« 
:- 
'**— %jtf 
A f\ m\ L- 
ra 
2 
3 
«s 
i 
C i Q 
OS .
03 "C 
i 
D 
Note--   U j optera 
. 
Motes and Hew 
v 
Im 
j. 
,: 
r 
* - 4 
J 
* *  
' 
— a 
* P 
fc V 
* ^ 
I t ?
4. 
^ 
ft.
ft 
A 
*** 
tMin«^ni«Miji.iiuiJUiMHH 
IT -  
^^ 
V I 
w^ 
r»«E 
H Ba :.
£jUU38» 
HMMMMRMMPI 
f 
5cL   |»& 
A 
' 
:  v*-*-< 
*o&t ft.
|V 
I 
I 
•®m t 
-: .
: ,< 
03 
* 
Mb/ 
i 
,- "♦ 
i- , 
• 
** 
I 
. 
r ; 
« -i-V ..
U - .
1 
1 
rf--*i 
— p^ * 
'J* 
'^# 
^ 
^ 
AT 
j * 
«-- 
i 
JU 
%*j 
a. r 
;.; 
. t 
r 
?V 
,   
Mr^r 
t * 
V 
. 
The NATURALIST 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
It is requested that until further notice all Exchanges and Books sent for Review be 
addressed to * The Editors of The Naturalist, Sunny Bank, Leeds,' as lir.
Percy H- 
Grimshaw, having accepted an appointment In the Edinburgh Museum of Science 
and Art, is leaving Yorkshire.
mund Jeffs— The oology of Win , and other Papers.
[Th.
\uthor.
Hi rsfield Nat. Soc — Monthly C ular, Dec. ib [The Society.
£ ciety for he Pr :tion of Birds— 2nd Ann, Report, Sep. 1S92.
The Socie .
Rev. W.
H. Painter— The Botany of Biddulph, &c [The Author.
.ustralian luseum— Report of Trustees for 1891.
[The Museum.
00 Royal alacologique de Belgique.
— Proces-verbc , Sept.
1890 — June 1891.
[La Soc.
Hertford*' Nat. Hist, oc— Trans., Vol. 6, Parts 8 and 9, and Vol. 7, 1 , 
June to Oct. 1892.
[The Society.
ia Acad, of it.
—Proa, 1892, Pr Z, April -Oct.
[A 
Journal of ;op: NLS , T 'ol 2 No. 16, Oct. 1892.
[Bailliere & Co. pubi ers.
v? risia, 5 Gennaio 1892.
[Dr. G.
B. de mi, re« ttore, Padovajtal 
.ivillea, quarterly record of Crypt.
Bot., No. 98, Dec, 1892.
[Mr, G.
Ma e,ec 
J er eologi oc— Tra: -., vol.
22, ] 1 nd 2, 1892.
[Society* 
The E N'atura , Vol. 6, No. io 5 Oct.
] \z, [The 1 lid Chit 
Manch, Geog.
Journa vol.
7, Nos. 10-12, Oct.-Dec, 1S91.
[Society.
The Cc hologist, Vol. 2, No. 4, Dec.
[W.
E. Collii e ?
ed 
arse No* 1892, N 18-21.
Oct.
-Nov.
[F ander ;,.
>hn, pt 
Y ireCoun Ian,, 1893.
[J.
Horsfall Tu er, edr 
1 Ifa t Nature .
'No-:.
179-180, Nov.
-Dec .
1892.
[Birmingham .H.S 
Hi; Nat. Soc— Mon. C u..
No. 33, No , 1892.
[Soc 
Na S* nc -,-.
' .
1, > .10, Dec. 1892.
[ acmillan & I rs - 
iwalbe hrg.
16 N« i-23, N< -Dec. 1 8c [Qrn.
* n ^ *- 
. 1 >2.
s. ( atto in* 
Brit , Part 24, I :.
1892.
[John I ol **• 
e Zo og   -.
Jr< *•$, L 16, N< .
192, Dec. 1802/ [T.
E. 1 dil r - 
Na Dec.
[The 
T Irish 5s ;t, Vol. 1 .
9 1892, [The EAi ah 
N .
Hist.
Journ, 144, Dec 15, 1892, [] , I -.'..
Clark & others, edi rs, 
The L 6.
N , Dec. 1892.
[H.
A. Pilsbry, etc.
I 
1 7che irn.Qi atom., Vol. 6, No. 200, Dec 1892, [Camb.Ent. CU, 
I iot :.c.
&Jn. of Vans .
12, Dee.
: l% 
F,Z.
— 1 Parks an Paddex i of m >, cfotl 
M Baiiantyne I k Co., pub 
/-iH« 
Micro-Geology,— Transparent Section of various f< 
er rod : 1 at f C d PI (torn the 1 
H IB- Co: from I to 2 o r.
h. Pa ret on .
- 1 
& Aj »iy, JAS.
SPENCER, 8, Salisbury Place, Halifax, 
# j • 
rVar 
1 l v 1 rr, 1 
VOLS.
L & St PRICE SEVEN SHILLINGS PER 
Published by Swan, Sonnenachein & Co., .F&tam .
r Square* B,^ 1 w 
of the Author* W> t-combe Kill, 8.E.
^1 S scribers c?
w] 1 work 5s.
{- :*er vol Ea tj 
R < : y, Sabserii os vc ,, c& y obt;^ id f &* ^ e 
nor <.: ^ 
w.- ~ • 
M 
DAGASCAR!
My Price List of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of all the world, gratis and post-free.
Prices cor derably reduced.
Correspondence in French and German {Engl: h not understood).
JF\ SIKORA 
j 
Naturalist ', tnbr 
l Entam igique de Frai ei de la 
Soa Entomak *H 
de Zurich 
Annanarivo, 
via 
Marseille 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
VERTE 
^N 
IS*** 
:l 
,^v 
AUNA of YORKSH 
Catalogue of British Ma   .Is. I , Reptile mphibians id Fishes, sh 
what sp e or have, wi 5toricaI perio n county.
WM 
F.L.S, 
PRICE 8s.
6d.
MAY BE 1 D OF THE THOR.
OR OF 
LOVELL RI VE & CO., 5 HENRIETTA STRI COVt GARDE .
LONDON, 
EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS, 
"The authors of th >gue ke :i p their w has t.
h 
executed w cor >us car The ve given a >ositu of the 
princir t they have been gt; an exc at br: the p 
V< .
and the suf .
T ?.
t re ..
m Vertebrata.
1 a 
k is a mo jok .
'— *iu.
&* Mag, :' \ h t 
' The work an exc eat one of its kind.
5 — Aikenanim, 
>^&tt*W i* >* J«Tm2 tM^Af^ * "*r*^r^*J 
Entomolo 
azme 
# 
PRICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY 
C. 
t*% *v* 
* *  
»* 
w*m 
* 
I LER, M.Am F.I 
R, Mel .
F.R.
. Saunm-rs, F.L.&* ar : 
PL T.
Si F.R..
F urine, c \ 1 c 
" * 
i\L-Ji£ kx .+ 
A .
M 
; ects car 
; 
E 
e Bi .
1 
m °gy?
aiK ^ es P*   i^ : ' 
m — Six r annv- p 
Ui GTJRB 
8 JACESOS Mr. Van ?©orst'$ 
* 
7 1 
'- 
* .
. S 
- 
1 
i,p 
u 
>r ^ auary I.S90, 
AL 
♦ 
\ 
vf 
• I J+% S.
.   .
-* *** Yl * » YWt 
" 
% : 
- 
>- r * Si 
G. C.
BfGNELL, 
a COVERDALE, Lomfoft.
Or, ELLIS* Liverpool, 
G. EU8HA, London, 
' 
I 
m 
rtj 
> > 
*IOHH GAU Hartiepooi 
a & QRECSON m i po o f.
4. P.
SOU ^ fER, Stsltap Auc- 
SYDNE ¥* 1 
**»*»*wi 
*" 
Price Six Shi i per annum, post free 
» **"«.
.*« .
. - l * * —   Hm< 
'•IP - ™* 
'   .
1 
I 
'.eats * I^H 
' -.948 kb a - 
&fcS, WqqECML ft 
-slices t : 
tWQ is it the ntos 
;•'- :- -h when c<*-rip : krc ?~: 
'  * 
i 
e man; 
if*: g-ve 
:he 
ana 
fed i - -:-CH^ E, ROBaOft. Harttepooi.
THE NATUEALIST 
Du xgtTu ax r eto rr it to 
i f 
%\ 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes.— Hut t D 
Keport on Yorkshire Botany fo 1890.— C.
P. >bj ek, F.I., , and P.
F Le 
List of Birds seen In South Kelsey parish* JLincs.— R E.
C E 
A Few Br -h Worm.— -I- c F 
>- 
. 
Flora of the Neighbourhood of Ii&ke Ulisw.
er.— \S 
uL.v).
The Qrni 10 
r * Jr 
any son— R \ J.
G. T [.A.
Portrait and Memoir of the late T.
J. Moore, C M.Z.8.— E 5.
West 
_ 
Keport on Yorkshire Mosses and H< s for 1892,- 
v» r * 
F 
t V" 
•4%/l<" / 
j 
THE 
GEOLOGY 
OF 
WIRRAL 
* 
AND OTH 
£\ 
PAPERS, 
OS Ml D W.
J EFF 3.
Liver poc 
XX, 12, Pi Rev 
J 
\ .
/ 
r° '• ; • 9& 
v 
HUH **1 
^* 
MA 
to jyrjv ilk-A-Im: 
By JOHN GRAY (H.
Spf wi 
LJi - J W T 
" 
m 
- 
• , 
of 
l -r- 
• : 
n 
- 
L   
| 
r\*i 
De   rip 
: xapk 
\ ~* 
* * 
* ^ 
i« rai ill 
CO) 
I 
- 
I s 
r-s *  
V-.
" 
rv 
GEOLOGY, BOTANY, ORNITHOLOGY, FOLK-LORE, 
and ANGLI 
ft 
H 
~t 
—» * 
in AIREDALE 
SEVENTY NATION 
D M £ * 
* 
i. .- - ^_ »1» 
\D )I 
ft*J * 
**.*«* 
Hmbi 
*  
M 
^ 
< " 
T " 
VHp 
NATURAL 
C I E N C E 
otes.
Ar ^es and Reviews I frbe most em Nafur; 
\r 
- 
*U A *fc.t 
^ 
» A 
I 
MHMWkw 
REl 
. *-*   
;  
, - 
S s fi 
- 
x^~ "* 
* * ".
IT 
m 
&** 
*r r , i 
— 
**t ' 
1 
v 
-• 
Mfilk 
m 
* 
* ^rt^ 5v i* 
r *' 
L .IV 
* 
*H» .
** 
r. -' 
»\ 
i i 
- 
* 
r i * * - 
A. .
\ M 
1 
•? < 
i,.
v. 
-' r 
\t~ f\   
A** **- r - * J 
!^^^£n 
rf» 
X* 
d 
L 
x 
13 tf 
= 
a 
<° 
Ml 
M 
3 2 
g 
w 
e 
EAGLE CLARKE, F.L.S.
D HARKEF.
C P.
HOBKIRK, F.LJ5 
GEO.T.F RRIT F.
W. !
: 
"*fc 
__ ^^ 
J>   
c 
v 
tf enf s : 
X 
^*V\ 
±* 
c 
-I 
t 
*» 
5 
tf 
«. 
->.
**_ 
HI 
g 
q 
* * 
S3 
"i 
p 
*** *• 
w 
* : Yorkshire F cords and Notes : from the Herbarium, C* 0£U6Sr etc., 
of the fate Mr, John Tatham, of £ tie 
^* W T" 
s..
_. 
The Ornithology 
In ftfer riam~T, U, Moore— £ 
Hew British Worms— 
' 
Ml 
4 * 
* w 
» i 
' 
Mammalia 
Otf the 
Ote-s — Qrn -ol 
. :-r; .
n 
V 
P tv 
** *r 
i» 'r 
* » 
**  *h 
** * 
W"* 
» 
7- « 
"' 
; / r 
**mr * 
# T 
,' ; 
r 
| | 
fr * 
«  
L 
- 
% - -> V i * 
. ' 
: 
rf©t<5 — Fung 
v ;' 
* «r- 
..,- 
- •* »~ * 
i » 
- 1 
V c 
M - 
1*.
fc 
i-5 •> 
A ^ 
Note—Botany .
. 
i 
Note— Lej» 
V f* 
^ 
*< #„ 
V T 
^ 
# * 
^ V 
A * 
« * 
* f 
Mta -ft 
i 
.* y 
, : < 
? .
( 
Z'.
, .
n i 
» * 
- 
* -^ 
*  * 
--* 
»»' <S' • 
", t 
** 
, * r 
. L 
:rf** 
"' ' r J r   " 
A .
I .:; 
s* 
1 
;   
r « 
-J « r 
58- 64 
5T 
T 
: 
-w-I 
* 
* 
. 
i 
1 
: 
r, " •^ i - 
/» 
i 
i   
s ^*m-p^*.»*^n*'J***^i> -i * 
r, -,r 
n» 
• — 
._ ...
1-1 ^r 
.»   .
The 
NA TURA LIS T.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
It is requested that until further notice all Exchanges and Books sent for Review 
addressed to * The Editors of The Naturalist, Sunny Bank, Leeds,' as Mr. Percy 
Grimshaw, having accepted an appointment in the Edinburgh Museum of Sciei 
and Art, Is leaving Yorkshire.
East!
Peterborough!
HL, e ioc — aoth Ann. Report.
1892.
le > o Hist.
S .
— Trans.
X. S., Vol. Part 6, 1891-92.
[The Society 
^^B [The iety.
Journ.
of G ology> Vol. 7.
X 4, October, 1892.
[i ncholor I Socict] 
Revue Bryologique.
19 , , 92, Xos. 5-6 [ '.
T. Hi redacteur, Cahan.
The A kot 1 I tural Histor No. 5.
January, 1893.
Editor 
ocie sEnlomologica, Jahi 7, .
S, 15-18, Juli-Dez., 92.
Jr. N.
E Dobrv 
s 
:.- — Joun Vol. 9, No. 1.
Jan., 1893.
[The ociet} 
a, Mno 2, .::.
Ot 
, uino 2, No. 22.
Ott», 1S92 
The .' lediterr ,\ L I, Xo. 19, De.
, I 
1 Xatur , t l L 6, Xo. ri 5 Xov. 1892.
The x ^ 
*** *^* A 
\ r 
W -n^ 1 ** 
[Dr. Da\ Levi -Morenos, Redattore.
[J.
H. Cooke, editor.
[The 1 CI 
rBirmir 
Macmillan & Co., Publ: 
Orn. Vereins in Wien.
Ch 
itM: , s rai Xos. to co pit L 
Natural -« Vol. 2, Xo, 11, Jan. 1 )3- 
I chv lbe,Jah [6.
Xo. 24, Dec 51, 1892.
ice Go , No.
;   o fan.
1893.
: Br: 1 : uralis art 25, Jan. 1 893.
The Zoologi , 3rd .ri ol.
1 >.
193, Jan. 1S93 
.; X 2 .
Vol. 4, Xo. 37, J.
I893.
T Irish X .
, Vol. 1 1, Jan. 1S93.
L 
oura.of entom., L 6 T IS 201, Jan. 18 |* [Camb.Ei CL, I 
Mi  - —The HexnipK- .eroptera of the £ cL S ->, I ^ 
|B Reeve^fc J 
[The iior.
[John E.
Robson.
editor.
[T.
E. Harting, € 
[The g e Society.
r The I ors, Dublin.
The 
oc ir Pr 
. , 4*0, < 1892, 
I 
larin 
' ^UtZVi 
h 
Mi, Rep-":.:;..
! 1 3 p., l£ - S >ciet 
[Le R racteur 
*,^.
'"*• 
* "V - 
.Ui IM 
, .
V 
I 
#.# 
- 
"H «*T* 
.> 
18 
r ?
93.
[Pro 
Birm 
-- 
N 
- r r 
w 
_*L, 
MM 
Micro-Geology..
— Tr 1 
i -I vL 
* : i 
** V* ft** 
p n& 
« 
? 3 kii of ft -s ^ 
f, ioi f Co P m the Hall x 
" i 
u 1 
Apply, JAS, SPENCER 
sei a appro* 
Salisbury Place, Ha 
ate 7 r * * 
; * — ^- ./.
LIST OF 
Ul 
«| 
»  
m 
1 
33T 
OBEBT 3T^.33r3DDE2ST 
=i*- 'l^ 
,-- ..1 
i »o 
-      .
^' 3 * Jr?'!^ 
*T   
" 
/ u rv 
j. .„ j 
& 
/- 
1 
' i J 
? J L : " 
X t - - 
—   ^«^- » 
-« f L 
A. 
. 
1 j< 
:* > o 
** V 
;^f -     
a 
.1 
•R 
'-- ..-*- -->   
...
<. 
- 
I 
te 1 id -ftrmn « F -so- © ' f I st,/ 5 £ - Bank 
m 
H£3£ 
4. 
^. 
1 
* ' 
witi l 
^ .*- 
'w;, 
*fc 
«*w 
^ 
«w 
•0.
1 .
' 
£3 
* £ 
* i> '-* V 
.. .., 
T 
w 1' 
. « 
v 
^   
- ^ 
c_.
1 «i 
-* 
' .
.' ._.
*** w 
f 
'AK 
.-- 
THE ENTOMOLOGIST'S RECORD 
AND JOURNAL OF VARIATION.
Edited by J.
W. Tl f, F.E.S 
an, 
Subscription 6s, post 
in Illustrated M jo of General Entomology, de >ecia 
.othemteres British orkir; -epidopter ists, pub he 15th of each month.
v in.
commenc Jan. 151 :rip > 6s.
pos 1 
the Edit*.
V. E Knig 18 
io T : le e, I , C 
THE CONCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY'S LIST OF 
and Freshwater Mollusc 
1892 
W. W.
DEXI f ROEBUCK, F.L.
. 1 
1 T- ^ TAYLOR.
L 
-— *»- " ^P 
iaw^Hi^HpMII 
Price 2d, each, by post 2ML ; or 1s* Gd. per doz.
post free 
-— *—    "»* 
"*^*fc 
Ti 
15 ' ork R* 
. whn 
1, 
.. 
11 oft Ho el £  V 
ortfc np , f t he He norary S< of 
the 1 ophi !
1 B, Lee 
pnu 
^ 
. 
...:   .
. .
ON 
TURA 
' ' 5- 
r 
j 
'+* ^ 
" 
T 
v * 
very i 
it 
€ 
J 
ir« 
^*); 
1 
A 
\ j 
s 
*-  *  mrf * * 
*-*> 
* r 
1 
I our 
r 
* * 
- 
t j ~» 
, 
t r 
,9* -.-* l -*(tf.
* * 
*  - 
t- * J * - • * ' 
1 .>; .
1 1 
» -*- :•  
: N 
. a 
1 I 
\\ 
r 
^ 1 
A "H-^ 
|A^«^* 
;:jckI si 
:f  : 
*v 
I 
** 
.1 
• 
y 
1 D 
Bri in 
ion* r C .
er 
k. Chi .t ^tt 
,; 'tl 
...
. .
T 
t 
4 A 
i"^ 
^ 
V 1  > 
I '!
L 
« 
.er 
* 
— 
.   .
. 
AT 
• 
s 
London: WEST, IT] "MAN 
'7* 
CO..
54 
* 
I 
at on Gard st 
to 
-  ' 
* *.
- - 
* 
. 
**: 
f 
* 
\i FT PT T 
» '   L 
SECOND EDITIO 
e 
i    It 
- 
I 
J * 
^ 
\ 
•*.
^ 
-   - -- * 
- 
M 
il 
. 
-v.; 
-^, 
»»*-w^?
V ^ 
i. 
, 
-T 
W 
*'• 
a 
A     
?s 
" ^~T" 
H 
V"v: 
^v* 
THE NATURALIST 
D the next 
f 
m 
s i 
^~ ^jf * qp \ 
rt t 
f at 
Ornithological Notes from EForth 3STot for 1891-92.— L 
Glacial Boulders in Colder dale.— J s Sn :.
v 
n 
- 
Forge Va sy in Winter.— Rev. W.
C. I 
The Plants of Iieek and neighbourhood, West ILancs.— I Petty.
Ijist of Birds seen in South Keisey pariah, Iiincs.— Rev. H.
C Bre er 
A Woodland Tragedy.— Re^ C.
He- 
Flora of the Neighbourhood of Ijake IJiis water.
H n, A.JLS.
Tj a   
F.I .
; P.
F. Lei 
The Yorkshire D went and its Fishes.— : 
Bepo on York iixe Botany for 1890.- P.
H 
Beport on Y> kshire Mosses and Hepaties for 1892.— FJ 
Spe nen Di.y3 on the Yorkshire Coast — R He NLA.
^ -^ 
rt 
* 
. f rut : 
LIST of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPT 
9 
By G.
T. PORRITT, F.L.S.
Cent s i of the loc ;, & .
of the 1,340 species of macro- 
a. i ptera known Inhabit .
r f local variation 
lecies ; v i h a 
1 
r necc m n oe .
tbieel 
To be* 
• .
i only !
Hon. Seer ie : " re X ni< 
. 3 RC.
CK, Sunny 
. Lee 
E. 
- 
y Rector; 
- <- 
i 
NT 
W|l^lgiflW>MMTl^MW4lt 
List of Land and r* resh water Mo ;ca of Lancashire, fay 
r 
,ft ;> 1* 
J 
notes from 
for the year 1SS6, 
K 
' 
II.
—E igokuid, ihx { .
: 
r 
3 
r* G 
"5 
4& 
;a!
5 of 
r 
a,* a** 
X H — Vertei ates of the Wei *« Ainsty (Yorkskk 
,4* 
t 
- h 
N EPEC- 
EACH, POST FRE 
F m 
la 
Pub lers T ,e Nature - Leeds.
o 
T   .
: 
-+* *»«* 
i**± ?
--** 
F r JUL!
5, 
^THGIC 1ST!
- 
COXPEKDI 
J' ..
* 
I 
r 
. 
# 
f l 
i aft i » -a 
b -.
*  .
^_- 
PRICE 17s 
»? 
OS 
FBE 
?T*' 
lw« «H» -'« 
e had OF' tke Eorroirs of the ktvbmm 
L r us 
mM M 
L r 
>\ ^* 
: 
>-.
* « 
vi&F .
>*.» 
£ T S .
•& r 
. 
'*•  * 
tf r.
ffr " 
'lT^ 
I 
*** 
M 
bfi 
23 
O 
X 
83 
p 
I 
c 
Q CD 
m 
4 £ 
g 
H 
Q 
2 
Q 2 
N 
J 
9 
I 
S 
.T 
- 
a 
3 
3 
4 
-*mm ****.
5 
L. 
NJB 
h. 
J} 
m 
«*    
6? 
* 
.«* 
- 
MARCH 1893 
THE 
ONTHLV JOT OF 
Hi orv for the North of En 
»1T1 
DEMSON ROEBUCK, F.L..
C 
Stmhy E Leect 
H THF.
ASS" B f^ 
TAT 
¥ * 
i 
^P 
J. GIL 
\\\ B LE CLARK!
F.' •.,'!,!
>.U., 
ALFRED BARF t, f.G ., 
HA HOB .
.'RK.
I 
T PORRITT.FJ F.E .S 
W. !
TURNED F 
^tifeni 
Bibliogrs p: Mammalia, 1889-1891 — Jr»r V* 
Glacial Boulders in Caiderdate if*MC*r 
*** 
65—74 
5c 
>aena daciyfoptera on the Yor Hire Coast 
of the 3r S h North Sea Area—/" 
An Adc ;n to the Fauna 
- pW*V * *~ * 
Melanochroism 
No fiumberiand Bird-Nat 
j  ,**.
n 
-i 
iiP | 
Nottinghamshire, 1692-3— 
/-•'..
Notes from North Notts 
Leek 
Lancashire- 
Notes   iho?o$ry .
. 
Sp I G e at O 
F 
> -+ * -, 
Wo** 
Notes and News 
* r,-i 
** hfa 
^wnf 
Q 
en 
HI 
5; 
.  
j * **  
*Q' r 
o 
z 
L .L KSOI 
The 
NA TURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Editors v< * to remind Subscribers 
late date at which Subscriptions for the 
rate of 5 , post free.
Subscriptions sent Later in the year can only be \ 
accompanied by the Subscription for the folic j r.
In all other cases the Subscription is 6/6, post free.
year are received at the prepaid 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
tt is requested that until further notice ail Exchanges and Books sent for Review toe 
addressed to * The Editors of The Naturalist, Sunny Bank, Leeds,' as Mr. Percy H.
CHmsfcaw, having accepted an appointment in the Edinburgh Museum of Science 
and Art, has left Yorkshire.
her A rzeichni — N 409, Zooiogie : graphia Animalium, n.d.
[ Fried lander & S u 
New Zt and J u of Scien oh I, Nos. 5 <fc 6, Sep.
-Nov. 1S91.
[The I tor.
N :hamptorishire Hist, oe, — Journal, Nos. 49 to 52, for 1892.
[Society 
Hist- ac Gh jow, — Transactions, Vol. 3, pt.
3. 1889-92.
[The etj 
richtiib.
d.Veilagsthatigkeitv.
FriedFander & Sohi Xo.23,iSo2,JiiI.-Sp, [P* 5.
Xuova Not. 1, 2 Gennaio 1893.
C^ r * G.
B. deToni, red at tort- t.
Italia.
tester Ge cal >c.
— Trans.', vol.
22, part 3, 1892-3.
[The 
! H inn., No. 14 Feb. 15.
1893.
Q* E.
Clark & others, editors, ~ork.
The Nautilus, iL t unary 1S93.
[H.
A. Pllsbry, etc iitor 
1 ;is Rec n.
of \ nation, Vo i,Nos, i,2 ?
Jan.-Feb.15 893.
[E dito 
Naturae Novil es, 1892, y 5.
22-24., Sov^Dqc.
[Fried lander & Sohn, 
1 nv Snt. I st.
Soc.
— Trans.
N.S», Vol. 2, Far 5, r8S ...
[The 5 
ourn.ofG eho gf *"VoL J am 1 893.
[< nchological Society.
iditerranean ..Yol.l, 20, 2 1, Jan.
-Feb., 1893.
[J.
H. Coo sditor.
The itura , Vol 6 12, Dec. 1S93.
[The 1 
tS *w be ahrg.
17 .
I, 15,18* )r in en.
ience ; Xo. 338, Feb. 1 [ , Chatto Wii pu* 
sh tui t, Part 26, February 1 ?j.
[John E.
R f« 
The Zool jr.
. 17, No. 194, Feb. 189 '.
E. Ha 
, F« i<- ;.
[ >rne 
[The E to .
I 
j. nt,CL,U : A.
The I "i !
ua oL 2, 
\r 
1 
— « <* 
e 
1 
3- 
o» 
P e: journ.of t »rn.,' i ;•:.:, Feb. 189J.
E noloosts 7 Record,— p< 1 Index .
[, iS :..
•i 
\Y.
fi.
I .— B- 
ti 
ronn print, 5 : 
SQ2.fAti 
LO 
"" 
Micro-Geology 
- ..
Ha:: Bt C« 
per 
Tr en See sus of vario ads .
\>ssil ; e :i 
7 
. 
<h * * ^ -e fr x * § 
, h 
tenons 
f > ».
•- - - 
Apply, JA5, SPENC 
2 .
ea Farce sc n to ; wn 
8. Salisbury Place, Ha ax.
mammmmmm 
^*W?^!*^1* ^tJ>^ "rtrfl 
* 
the 
• 
* 
tie 
i 
:r..
By JT.
\HT.
T^ITT, 3P 
" 
l • V 
^ 
i *.
m 
. -L 
MEL 
L 
i 
-? : 
** -**r 
1 i- 
T 
'- T 
*% * 
IhJ 1 L 
1" 
[ 
. .
nee 
• 
d»*t* 
t 
- *^ 
H 
;tt 
'- A -4.
^ar 
a '  
._ 
•.'*•*.
* 
3T p 
Si 
L" I 
t ' >*_ 
K ^ 
:"; 
fcT 
V 
i *— 
1 
i I   
1 
.   
. ----T » \.
t 
2 l 
a 
. 
^W**#M 
^*i 
. ^* 
9 
- s«.
> 
W^fc 
r ^ 
i 1:?
' 
**- 
i 
s 
1 
- 
W 
M* ..
J,.
V 
M * 
., 
^ "^ 
1 
. r * 
i 
I 
« 
" 
• 
JM 
Foolscap 4to, with 1 'rations.
Price is.
; post free I s.
THE 
GEOLOGY 
OF 
WIR 
n 
AL, 
AND OTHER PAPERS 
By 
OSMUND W.
JEFFS 
Liverf : B.
HARAM & CO., 12, Preeson v.
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDEN TS AND COLLECTORS.
THE JOURNAL OF C0NCH010GY 
Edited by JOHN \ LOI F.L.S.
C ns Descripti and Figures.
of Nt ecies and Varieties, G graphical 
Lists, and Original Articles, -ealing with all departs ats of the sci' y the 
iead; j Conchologists of the d .— V l.
\1.
com I Jai ar iSSo Cols.
I., II..
III., IV.
, and V.
may still be ha* 
. h — r,^ 
1 1 Journal, edited by Mr, J.
W T lor who may be sed do Taylor 
Brothers, the Steam Colour Printi; >vere Strec Leed le organ 
of the Conchologkal !
to whose n *rs it is su i in r rn for the 
sub ptio; >f .per an 
F< s of pror> of new member rn e I 1 fr* t the Secretary, who m 
address I at the Museum.
Lee , 
I - jj^jj^^jU 
v*^«MHMHVi 
-71- 
THE 
To 
fl 
I 
.v<' 
BI 
*£.
OF 
DERBY 
E. 
I 
> WHITLOC1 
price to 
5 J >, to be after   d to io 
To be ~ of the Am Beest* tf, N< 
50 Lr Dek d L 
OSE .
omoloaris 
i 
po*y 
zi 
PRICE StXPENCE.
MONTHLY 
an 6.
C. C 
.  r 
R, 
I 
"^ 1 
I LA e*.
£ 
'   
* -* 
PTC 
r 
.0- J 
.- ; 
* 
B t e 
.   
f 
i ard Art 
ail subjects * i aec 
W* * .- 
X 
It 
I 
I 
S   
— w^ 
4 m 
and v- : peci:illy on tl^e 
I Tee.
1 1 * 
u 
; & JkC 
X, .—A S Series I v r f or J 
;S 
•  ' 
n v ssci L Pater 
Mil IIUMIIII IIMI   — 
*<• 
i 
t 
NATURAL SCIENCE: 
*  • 
IF 
Contains Notes,.
A ind Reviews by the mo - err riefit Nat* ist 
X 
i 
TV' 
» #  
* * 
- 
AMI 
AX- EY 
OF 
Y OESCRfPTiO 
D AT L 
C£S 
H^"^ 
1~- 
I.ll 
* 
4 
JSve^de:!** \4k ( Cr -* stnmajr&y 
* 
THE NATUEALIST.
During c next few months it is hoped to insert the following articles'.— 
Forge Valley in Winter.— Rev.
. C.
Htv, A.
Xiist of Birds Been in South Itelsey parish, limes.
— Rev. H.
C .ewste 
A Woodland Tragedy.
-Rev. W C.
Hi NLA.
Flora of the Neighbourhood of Xiike TTliswater.—WM.
Hod 
vt - 
he Yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes,— Hubert Dac 
Heport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., and P.
F. Lee 
Report on Yorkshire Mosses and Hepatics for 1892.— M.
B 
F.L 
Specimen Days on the Yorkshire Coast —Rev. W.
C. Hew M 
Additions to the Ijichen-Flora of West Yorkshire V.
lkt 
'A 
KffV 
i ^»t ^** n ^ t w* i* " ^^ H 
' 
MHMHVV^PIIPPIPII^H 
' * , j' ^ .
WW 
A , ciotkj with C I Map, price £l is.
Qii.
THE FLORA OF WEST YORKSHIRE 
* 
By FREDERIC ARNOLD LEI vI.R.C , etc.
. 
-V v 
^^^^fc e of the Botanical Series of the i'ransactic rhaps 
fete work of the .
k:L indue etaKed and il 
rt < rrogams and r( pt uns, xi Characeas losses, to8 Hepa 
2' - I id Fres -ate- se T ?akii .
a to'   6o spec 
I >o : LOVELL REEVE & CO., trie i S Covent Gar a 
r the work m?
d from the Hon. Sees, c 
| 
I. XSONBY 1 SUBLEY, Bank ' ^ 
mmmmtmmamam 
nmH 
I frlHi tfP W fft ETWi 
THE 
Tl 
B 
NATURALI 
A ioi 
r 
! r» 
G. C.
BIGNELL Plymouth 
G. COVERDALE, London.
Or. ELU3, Umrpoa t.
G» EL ; 8 HA..
London* 
* 
I 
. 
*_ 
J 
J HX 
r 
. 
= 
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
C 3, GREGSON.
Liverpool.
*JL P.
SOUTTER, Bishop Auckland 
SYDNEY WEBS, Dover.
Price Six Shi igs per anny i, post free.
m 
^ f 
j \ 
fc.
^ » 
$ pplemr are £ -aided t rasp sSe pan l- 
ariousg 30.
, Tha .
>w i tural H ry   .' 8ri 
V V .
Il coma .a accc spct 
ibliagr at" the: w cal works ot t& e 
past two ce$ ies sg * most com e work yet .
tied.
n , > fee add?
JOHN E.
ROS80M, Hmrt.l*$*®^~ 
r*** w 
tfc ^ 
: 
TH 
NT 
ATIONAL 
-fe 
1  >« 
a 
i 
U 
I 
I 
THE I AL MICRO >PI *L 
j v 
-   
iLLEN H P.M.
u arte r if, Price One Sh ' ng an 
• a er -'aluabie 43 cresting art .
* relating t 
eiesc-s- tie jusiraie.
Li gar* Plafr 
T 
i 
?5  w.^.
« * «* 
TINDAIX & COX 
-*U*fc* 
EiagWi 
K 
rand* W*L* 
K 
J 
X 
rZ 
»** 
if 
*~* 
X 
«5 
w 
w 
1W** 
hC 
S3 
£wl 
1 
a 
...
13 
© 
yj 
4 _ 
*% 
- 
a 
2 
"3 
a 
3*T 
£ ~ 
\ 
-2 
c 
3 
a 
'•^ 
M 
08 
* 
9-S 
« 
.2 
=*** 
ft- 
* 
ft* 
t5 
* 
«* 
? 
i 
-pa- 
5 
r*» 
* ^ 
- 
faH 
^^f*- 
APRIL 1893.
THE 
No. 213.
HI rouB 
History for the N* rth f Ei u 
EI' 
W DENIS< 
rCK.
F.I 3 
* j 
-   
net 
* 
CW 1 
C*F 
. gil?
r i k:er ?
f.i 
\ EAGLE CI KK E.F.I 
ALFRI BARKER M.
* * 
CHA HOBKTRK 
. T.
PORR 
> 
a 
a 
C 
J 
< 
a. 
a 
z 
foitfenf 
. 
u* 
*. 
si 
1 
* * 
* 
The Plants of Lack and Neighbourhood, Lancashire 
BfrdNotes from the Humber District in the Winter of 1892 
T *\ 
flfeview: The Craven Highlands- 
The Yorkshire Boulder Committee and EH Sixth Year's Work- 
Uthocoiieti* cerasicoieSIa A ' Species Mew to the Br* ih F* 
Doncast r „ //.
€W 
American W te» throated • f1!
>l    "   " *****«™«*s An Add 
shire Avt~Fattna '# 
_ , .
; Birds, 1890- #**te 
Note — Lepldopter* 
* anatioo 
Note—Fishes 
He- rlfirw : ^™* 
i 
a at 
e York- 
* -r - 
> 
Pi 
% * 
* * 
* » 
V * 
07—102 
03—106 
109- 11 1 
2 
tt4 
-128 
85 
a: 
9RV 
o 
3 
#- * 
Notes— Botany .
*a V 
" * iff* 
:   
we 
*i 
i 
/ a 
-   
7=* ^» - ' 
* -J 
. M 
Notes — t.
lotogv .
? 
tl 
^ 
* 
; €*c.
I 
-   
*tf***,1 ,"' ' _ 
Note — Col eo p tera 
Jotes    Mamfna?la 
^ 
M I 
^ i 
f» *• 
z 
!* - 
L 
^  ♦ 
1 
" 
tf 
2 
\ 
te* — 
and ft«ws 
.^ > < 
-•* 
^ 
^ * 
^ ** 
fT V 
' 
4" 
? r* 
> * 
' 
r. « 
^ 
*"S 
fV ' T^ 
flrf 
^ 
* r 
**rf- 
A 
EKV£ 
*< ^ 
II 
8^, -|- ?
1L 
' ^ 
/' ~'v 
-. - 
^- >»^ 
I 
4* 
7-T" 
" 
L. 
. 
t *♦ 
ab £f^v  ' '« 
1 
^ * 
fiMtf 
The A 4TURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The I iters venture remind Subscribes at the 3tst of March is he 
ate which Subscriptions for the current year could   received 
id rate q( 5 , post free.
ri prions sent now can only be acce] 1 hat rate if ompani 
by the Sal m for the fo big year.
In all other cases :e Sal :rip m is 6/6, post free.
V 
M /"WO 
BOOKS RECEIVED.
ft is requested that until further notice ail Exchanges and Books sent for Review be 
addressed to   The Editors of The Naturalist, Sunny Sank, Leeds,' as Mr. Percy H.
Grimstiaw, having accepted an appointment In the Edinburgh Museum of Science 
and Art* has left Yorkshire.
> oche rLit. Phil.
)C.
— Mem.&Proc.^thSer.
.vol.
-.'.'.
B92 [So< 
eld >c.
— M- tbij Nos. 35-36.
fan Feb., 1893.
r 1, qua yret ofO pt.
Bot.»N< 99, Mch.
? 1893.
[MrJ ed.
[<?
eBr 1893 - l ' 2 - [ -T.
II teur 
jic No. 19.
Jamtar, i8c [Mi Do 
:un nn f.
Ge ai 1S93.
[Dr. Da l.t Moreno-, Red 
it Mid Naturalist, 182-3, Feb rch.
1893.
[Birrai N.H.S- 
;ra -cier e, \ L 2, No. 1 h 189 [Macmitl in & o, .
I \A: 
.d.\ eitv.Fn >h >.
24,1892.
.[Pub 
Eai ieologic L— Trans.
, vol.
2 arts 4 an ".
1 3.
[The :kty.
S lourr:,.
. 14 irch 15, 1893.
U- E- Clar >tber .
- Lkor 
The Nauiii .
>i i,Feb, March, 1 3.
[H.
A. Pilsbry, etc.
Editor 
E iatian, Vol. 4.
%o.
3 h 15, 18913.
ar * 
N ura 1S9: -.
1-4.
J;:-!.
-Feb, .
Frie ander & hn | 
M- iterran Nat : .
22, Mar ..
(J.
H. C -ke,edi r.
>ie *e,Jahi p t N a- ru -March 15, £893.
[Om.Ver nWiei 
;g, rch 1 >3.
»U , Chatto 
tura : >3^ [John E.
Robson, e 
>ologi 1 Eg   J.
E. I , e r.
Nature \o f J ;.
' rch i .
[1 rne !
ty* 
The I s T h 1893, The Editors, D u 
tfe ' .6, irebT j b.Ent.Cl.,U< A.
Hon arch tS^ .
(T : Ed' loi 
2 1893 ~ [Mr.
< e SOa H 
:dianadi en .rail, Anno 15 Fe 189- [ re.
Report' :nd meeting, I gh, 1S92.
Brit* Assa 
iee.
— British .
., 1% 1 & ibl 
-— R« I log; - B; aofth onu; 8c 
( On Po- hfiii B Egne 18 The tme hi 
, &%*.
~ The A *.
G* R.
— 1 :tee o .
Mr. A.
-er.
— W R m mperarui ,i [91 .Harkt 
O '^ Jefi — 3rd I on I phs of Ge- ogi i In - 1S92.
Ar : I m\ aburgfui •-: 1 *Har 
-Tfa- i& [a?
arth M 1892 
t Newton.
— < • rot 
tai 
^. A.
N 
jfc.J» 
** m » *» *^ * r » ' ^ H 
^ r.
- ^ -f" 
2. I _ 
1 
. [ 
"1 
- ' - 2 .
. 
''  a - -*• --*-*^ '-.^ ^V< 
. 
* »fc ^ • v "v- u , / w >-   W * 
fM 
•JAS- SPEf £R r 8, -Sa jry Place, Ha *.
T 
^   : -S«» 
-*.
*   'J 
•> .**+..
- -'V *Tl J_.
-- -* - ..
. * 
* -T 
*?W .
"" «» ' .
- : * r 
* j 
\   ; _' ; ...
.    ?•.',.......
v -.
<H 
>* *H 
WORKS ON NATURAL HISTORY.
THE ZOOLc 1ST: A Month Journal of I story, }.
y 
J Has JLS.
Or: rial arti ell-known IS urali on 
ever branch of no* he habl oc rrences of pe is, 
B R€ tile F [oltuscs, an Ins Price i 
B|IRI Nl n VXD BIRD INNIN A G Descrip?
o^ e 
^* md 1 of Bii whi i Brc Br .* 1 ward 
reservation : and a 
ra, Fp. i is.
D E no -With Directions for < : 
hapter Bin nning.
MtL Cnui 
g< leed, a 
' 
^' 
' ende 
trd-   
ort X 
\ <tcr : 
r 
i ' *  - 
12 
London: WI 
«HM 
□ 
» 
NEWMAN 
Li 
O., 54, Hatton Garden.
MADAGASCA 
NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS 
i 
*> A*S^ 
:f\ 
t » 
v*" 
> 
^ 
3 
ree.
rrespondence in Fre i ai 
_?* 
P a cc er&bly reduc 
let d 
F* SIKO 
A 
* 
Afej 3/   A la S 
-..
- 
- 
/.:.
% * / 
l 
* 
Annanarivo, Madagascar, Marseille 
-M 
% 
AL 
« 
• 
fcljM  !
!   
N I.
List of Land and 
mm v 
; 
of LaaoBsbtre, by l 
F« --Bird-notes 
* * 'j 
'/ 
S 
J «» 
e 
r 
H H * 
i _•* 1 
S HI -HeMgol&ss 
*X*j 
I 
"* 
L 
^ 
* 
Vertebrates of the West Aiasty v 
u 
? \ * 
. , \..
me.
J 
* i" 
** 
NfNEPENCE 
EACH, POST FREE 
From ti s Pu bers 
I 
r 
«e 
^ P 
* 
* 
r 
*r 
-   
- 
i 
i * 
Q -_ 
* 
r 
I 
corruneacsd Fait 
h 
i 
s 
Ww* 
rft 
I 
MM 
.* " 
r 
£ 
< * <, 
- 
*i •*» 
>**» 
1 *  
S3 
HM 
E to* 
* i*.
J* 
. 
?* -** 
lis 
f. 
I 
T 
. 
fr**t 
. 
' ' 
^ +> -f*t- 
*» 
»¥ ~ *» 
s 
*. 
«i 
y #, 
^ 
i^n* 
\ 
i 'fl 
-^l" 
r 
r 
AT UEALIST.
it is hop sert rti 
Iiis* Birds seen in South Keisey paTish, Iiincs.-— R H.
A Woodland Tragedy .—1 W.
C. Hey, I.
A. 
I rra of the NY ^liboiiriiood of Lake Ullswater.- -Wm. b 
The Yorkshire Derwer and its Fishes.— He bei Dacs 
A. 
Li 
F.L.S, 
fieport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— C.
P. H ;, F.] and P.
i 
Report on Yorkshire Mosses and Hepa 88 for 1892.
— UL B.
A 
Lmen Days on the Yorkshire Coast.— R C.
H 
Additions to the liiehen-Fiora of West Yorkshire, 
The Faculty of 1 1 -finding m Gastropod Molluscs.— H.
\\ 
T 3 Erosion of the Yorkshire Coast,— Rev. Cole 
A New Species of Lumbricus* — Rev. Hild d, F.L.
^^^ ^ ^^^H 
Li 
ONCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY'S LIST OF 
British Land and Freshwater Mollusca 
9 
18 
n 
* Jfe* A* 
\V, XELM 
4 \- 
W. DENI N ROEBl'C L 
and .
TAYLOR.
F.L.S 
...
. 
Pries 2<f, eacfc 
• 
ni- 
sei, per doz.
post 
Thi Lis 
— 
j be obta- of the Honorary Tres 
V^ L   
el E.
Ad a.
York Road, Son) m\ | or of the Honorar ^cretary of the C hol& 
who i iY be a I reused at the Phiios* h Hail, Leec!
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
Cata *sh i» Reptiles.
Amphibian 5 - d Fishe ihowiag 
what spec: ar » Iteivs .
periods, been found in e co 
BY 
W 
AGLE CI 
L* A 
KE, F.L 
I, DERISOM ROEBUCK, FX S 
FHIC€ as.
6 c 
AV BE HAD OF THE AUTB RS, OR OF 
LOVELL R C€ ITT A STREET, i VENT GARDEN', TO & 
H 
EXTRACTS FROM R£VI£WS.
*Tke atf may ;,-.ik« a err i r mr^rk, v 
exec rttl 3iti 1 
r £ ; ' 
aa; a resei' 
« «* 
* & 
.4 
«i * 
-" 
. 
, * - ***** 
* 
.de 
Baitk- 
pee?
e 
— 
t='.
** •- 
1 
-   *   
^r 
,:' .'• 
* .V 
' r \ \ r 
: r 
* 
I'2 
I  ; 
I* 
f 
T i 
t 
L 
,-.v 
ECOJSFI> EDITION 
* 
- 
,1 
' "   
9 
* * 
j n j 
9* 
>- 
1 
i 
=r- 
1 * 
it* 
V; 
I 
3 .
\ 
f *v hi 
Tr ' v » 
, ?
^ 
MAY 1893.
THE 
No. 214 
HLY 
T r T2 
f 
. I 
OF 
aturai Hi i 
for the North of Ei 
EI TED I 
If 
r. DEN 
Jt^ » j.
i^-7 • 
^ w 
%b r \ 
% j 
CRT 1 MLS 
W. EA AMLE,FJ 
FREB HARKER.
M. 
CHA HOBK 
r 
. tub v:r.
• - f.R 
dents: 
Bibliography ; Birds, 180 - 
rr 
? 
'* * 
29U-1S 
Review Massee's British Fungus-F 
: 
A Few Plants of 8 .*tfc ''est C *ber*a 
Erosion of the Yorkshire Coast 
, 
r - * 
«l 0> 
t42~~*44 
IV' 
The Faculty of Food ^g §« Gas apods 
;   
Note — Coleoptera 
18 
ic 
,* ; 7 
Mote Zoo 
| t 
ft 
z. 
1 
A v, 
** *- 
rt 
• :, 
*» 
h *t 
I I 
i i*"- i" 
. 
B 
•*- ..'• .
<u.
" 
'X.- 
1 
, 
iU a   ;5^ 
< >* ii • 
^ * 
T 
11-   
f 
' 
r V* 
L 
** *> s^fip' IT^s 
r 
' I* *- 
-\l 
>v.
t J > 
• " 
1 
^t **  
TO|«-W.
. 
The 
NATURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Ed >rs enture to remind Subscriber, that the 31st of March was the 
latest date at which Subsci tions for the current \ ir could be received at th 
prepaid rate of 5/-, post free.
Subscriptions sei now can only be accepted at that rate if accompanied 
by the jription for the following year.
In all other cases the Su?
:ription is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED 
All Exchanges and 
•The Editors of 
Books sent for Review should be addressed : 
the Naturalist, c/o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
49, Fenton Street, Leeds,' as he will assist the Editors in this 
Department.
ibrdshire Nat Hi ^oc.
— Trans., I.
7. pai 3-4 Feb.
-Apl. 1893 -ociety.
R hd a Lit. a, — Trans., vol.
3, 1891-1S \ [Societ} 
istr tn eum.
— Cat. N 16, An alian Mamma [The Tru 
Vu al Sydney.
— Records.
z r N 4.
[The Trustees.
1 e land Natui ).
184, April 1S93.
[Birmingham N.H % 
atur :ience  !.
2, 14, April 1893.
Bac illan & Co..
Pal Her 
Nat. Hist, foarn., No. 1 Vpril 15.
;. [J.
E. '- & other editors, York* 
The N lus, VoL 6, 12, Ap 1893.
[H.
A. Pilsbry, etc.
Editor 
ntom< :c.
& J n.
of Variation, Vol j, No. 4* April 15, 1 £ }.
[E tor.
N irae j ox -, 1893 5-6.
M z, [Friedlandex & put 
The 3 diterranean Na 2, .
23, April 1893.
U- *"*• Cooke, edito 
Die lbe t Jahrg.
xj 5 4, i 1 1893.
[Orn. Vere in Wie.
cience < ' 10, April 1893.
[Mi ha & Win publisher 
T Brit % April 1 893.
[John K.
Rol n, editor.
The )oloi Series/ ~ N 196 *$9J.
Q- E.
Has ng, t or.
Nature ^N , \ I.
4. kpril 1 5, [The Sel me - 
The Irish Natu .
? Vpril 1893.
[Ti- 
ki ,2 I 1893, [Camb.En S A.
ork   LNati .\\ Soctei nnual Re; .
1893.
[T :ie 
ic.
of Lo   Tr 
-i 
I. 
VT 
- 
. 
'#1 
gazuie, v li 
% f 
Vnn. Oct.
2. I 
Tl or, 2.
a 
: 
:h 1893.
[The OCict; 
jica 
The An. fScot 
rii.
:r >1ol 
vf Derb^ 
E, Collins, 
\-\ .
te< .
ttore.
1 
H r§9 J.
Horsfall T er.
itor.
tra Hi Mo. 6, Ap .
(TI tor-.
111893.
[( hoi ^icai Soc 
JS 
v 
\ 
"*»^^w(^ w& * •^ 
Me 
em rose 
V. 
*_ ' 
I 
I 1 
The 
r 
s 
OCIU 
€*% 
their V 
• 
tes 
4 v 
v w 
Oc 
JT* 1RT.
TUTT, FJE.
f 
_5* • 
«r 
V :: 
. 
h ' u 
l ( - , , 
fw 14 
1 
m 
, \ £ 
v 
e 
1 *L 
8 " K 
£ 
T 
I XL.
L* 
D 
4 
valine «f 
. 
^> 
1 m 
& 
m 
./ r- 
«i 
. 
ere 
.1* » » 
' * * 1" v 
- 
V%.i 
„ 
**fc *        ' 
R 
id 
: tip • 
3B'- .
Pi- 
* ,* J 
vv 
LSI 
L« -v- 
ALCHA 
L 
OPT 
v 
A. 
s 
• ; >r.
V- 
*i?&i£*^r 
o 
e 
r .r 
a 
^ « .
**  
S-1 
-I-.
P-** 
r^i jj 
\ i 
-t^ 
Lj 
; 
Apply, J.
A 
-^ 
-^ 
I 
,., r> 
* 
_ ...
i 5 1 1 
*. "»_ 
. .- 
4 W*gr-V i- »^ 
r 
i 
^ 
» Salisbury P ^ Ha Fax.
IX 
1 
Now re mpleie, v, tk 9 \ ap, price £i is.
o 
THE FL 
^ 
OF WEST YORKSHIRE 
By FREDERIC ARNOLD LEE M.R.C.S., etc.
This, w ;h f the im the B f the 
the most complete work of the kind ever for any district, in de led and li 
records of 1,044 ?h irogams id Va ,r C; im arace^e, 34S Mosses, 108 Hep s, 
;8 Lich 1,009 Fungi, and 38a Fresh \g a I f 3,1 species.
Lo.vr- : LOVELL REE CO., Henrietta reef, Coven t irden ; 
r the work may be had the h f the Y 
\VM.
DL ,QEB CJ \ 
E. PO: BY KNUBLEY.
j 
mny Bank, Let 
^ ti \^if\*'^ m> 
rw^HOH^HB-BI^^^KHVS^^^HI^BMMtt^BMMBBB^^B^H^Hn^liMnM^BJ 
CA r i r ^^*W'J*"J V^K^ *Vl*; 
| fl | aa ^ H ^| BHa ^ BHaaan |^^ 
'/ TURAL T RE PA r TS—j 
LIST OF 
ND&F 
ATE 
RE.
IB 
3 
This paper contains not o > own 
Dar!
F, R , W.
H. H c, J.
other 
list ai ...
a; iced for coi 
: "'•!
tves, F, C .
L 
D 
- 
: D 
nsor nd 
: in Hard 
Pr ?e 9d.
(By p si, 9|d.) 
To be had from the Publishers of the 'Naturalist, 1 Sunny Sank, Leeds 
HMnm 
Ml 
MUW> 
w- 
^W>^d*,- 
|H^HM^M^dkAMBWMtaMHi 
" " 
NO 
LAT 
COL 
FOR H£ USE OF NATUfi 
AND ORNITHOLOGIST 
COMP 
^y n.
JhT -A.
5j ROBERT RID 
f 
> 
c/ *ff/flif fm.
. 
PRICE 17s., POST FREE 
MAY 8E HAD OF Tr EDITORS CNF 
; - 
E *Hfi- ±UST.
^ ftl ^HMU tt* !
LI LI 
% *™ 
•* 
. c< 
.._- *.
» 
>' * 
IkJ 
-. 
— 
wkwohw 
»- 
-* - < 
1 
> 
- I 
£ 
j. 
v 
T. PORRITT, F.L.
1 
W* 
I IS 
and n 
i 
M 
* 
v- 
'   - 
' 
! 
. 
»"* 
I. 
..L._- ..
* ,-1.
.1 to.
r 
*er ' 
r 
; -r- 
.--^ 
't 
£** 
' 
t 
1 
**.
1 
r, f 
v   - 
- n 
T be f 
:<  -.
^ 
f 
-# < 
-J 
«j 
&»*%.
i 
H^> •**  '*« 
1 
ft V i 
" *  
. 
THE JfATUEALIST.
*.heni t few zths i i to t rt t lozv f articles 
Woodland 
Rev, W.
C. H \.
Flora of the ISeighboxirhood of Lake TTilswater.- -V u Ti >dgs Al 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes.— 1" .
Dackel 
Report on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— P.
Hob L.S., and P.
F. Lee 
Report on Yorkshire Mosses and Hepaties for 1892.— M.
B. S 
Specimen Days on the Yorkshire Coast.-— Rev. W.
C S V.
Additions to the Lie hen-Flora of West Yorkshire.— A.
ackletc 
T. 
A 3S"e"w Speeies of Ltumbricus.
— F Hjlderic Frie 
No- s on the Fresh-?
r Algae of the East Biding of Yorkshire, 
y 
In One .
8ro, 7 
i .
Price io/6.
BI 
OF 
DERBYSHIRE.
D 
V 
WHITLOC K.
To be had of e Al 
hor, Be on 
-; , BI [ROSE 
O 4 i_.
- 
I 
Di BY 
L v.
ANIMAL EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES 
J 
L. 
* 
* 
DISPENSABLE TO STUDENT 
\I 
COLLECTORS 
JOURNAL OF C0NCH0L0 
Edited 1 )HN .
E R, F.L 
I .
d : iriet l * 
L Or il Artie • .
: -i scu- 
U "S , V 
,. IL.
III ., a 
VI 
- 
J — * ' 3 ii I 1 / 
v tt< 
fhe 
V 
«-^«H-lM 4 I i^ ^Jl" *^^!
. 
J* 
. .1, 
tt.
JL -#i 
n :;Pr :inc Vi reet 
-» + -i *  * _ ^ „ _ 
O 
: 
in r 
r 
fE0 f |" I f I 
- 
V £> 
r 
i 
XI.
,L*€\ 
- .
: > 
- ^ 
rv .
al 
- .
«* 1 
' / 
^ * ' L" A* 
I   
r i 
NT 
- 
•i * 
STATURAL SCIENCE 
* 
A 
or ^s Notes, Articles and Reviews fo; fc& 5 mos nine N.
'Sts 
I. 
*. 
* * *.
rt .4 
• # 
*!  * 
>*- 
* s 
^ -; v 
,_/; X 
jp ^ * 
* 
- 
^ ** ^ t* 
G 
v 
:& 4 
% 
T 
N !
\ 
+• 
* 
m 
X.r* 
V- .- 
^ > 
K* !2, 
• -"  
JUNE 1893 
THE 
No. 215, 
L 
I 
[ONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
Natural History for the North of England 
.* 
EDIT D B 
DENISOX ROEBUCK, F.I S., 
-army Bank, Leec 1 
Til THE AS -TA IN F 
OBPARTMJ 
GILBERT I K£R, F.R.S., FJ .
W.EA LARK!
?.L.S*»M.H.OJ -, 
ALFRED HA1 :.EP M,A* F.( 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, FJ 
PORK ITT 
\V.
F. TURN?.' .F.C - F.K.M.S.
ffionten 
s 
Additions 
": 
lliam Colling* Lukis, M.
A., F.S.A.
^ Greg$m, I S.
the West Rid&wr of YorksH 
hen Flora c 
*g 
161-16* 
166-171 
" 
of Essex.
t 
Review: The Birds of Lancashire and 
Forge Valley in Winter.— Rr &*¥* &•   : 
Bibliography ; Lepidoptera, --' ^ Dmimm xfaf 
- 
.- - 
r 
Mammalia 
uri 
Note — Mosm 
*. * 
WcJ£ 
/ 
*♦ 
% * 
, 
I I 
* * 
175-176 
177-192 
164.
ft i 
Eru* 
164 
* * 
* *  
9 1 
:-    
1 
: c*ss ar art *& ~/»/' Manhai 
164 
^ * 
* A 
No te — Botany 
if** 
« « 
• i 
* - 
•** 
171 
Notes—Om Itbology 
. i 
» » 
* 
* * 
**►  .
7 
; 
W- BJ-W ft^_ 
* Vt» 
L 
IK a 
176 
Not 
dopier* 
f» 
i a 
* * 
*    
e .
: 
/feldr— *- 
"vDC 
r » 
i 
176 
N o t e — Mo ' I use a 
tt ft 
* » 
- 
¥ 
„ I 
* A 
Notes and News 
kd r 
4tfK - 
'Mte> 
« -V 
? 
*f 
a * 
* "* 
-r • 
-v i 
*  
d J 
172 
* 
w ** i j*im, W* j *t* W 
L 
& p 
** 
Lovci 
i 
• - m 
MMW& & G r S?
i&tta St*e«, ; mgirr Gfttff 
, ^ 
L< 
He f , 
r  * 
"   r 
^ 
p 
55 -f 
r 
- 
t 
a 
I^S-ESS: B*Al*G*MS> i &»« 
n^-^r* 
^ ^ '^ ** 
^   
. .<.
kA*Jl 
- 
The NATURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Editors venture to remind Subscribers that the 31st of March was the 
latest date at which Subscriptions for the current year could be received at the 
prepaid rate of 5/-, post free.
Subscriptions sent now can only be accept at that rate if accompanied 
by the Subscription for the following year.
In all other cases the Subscription is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
All Exchanges and Books sent for Review should be addressed : 
* The Editors of the Naturalist, c/o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
49, Fenton Street, Leeds/ as he will assist the Editors in this 
Department.
;e- e Bryologiqut.
. 20?An&e, 1893, No, 3.
[M.
T. Husnot, redacteur, Cahan.
tasl :nologica, jahtg.
7, Nos. 2c -.3, Jan. Mar z 28 ;.
[Mr.
. F.
Dohree.
Socie ?
Entomologic fahrg.
8, N s» 1-2, 1893, [Mr. N.
F. Dobre< 
M ester Geological Soc.
— Trans., vol.
22, part 6 and 7, 1893, [The ociety.
Berwickshire Nat. Club.— Proceedings for 1890-1891.
[The Qui 
Manchester Museum, Owens College, 3 Museum Handbook [Th 
ill jnian In. tut ton.— Report for 1890.
[1 I.
stitu *n.
x>rough College Nat. Hist, S —Report, 1892.
[The Societ" 
1 erpool Nat. Field Club— Proceec i for 1 >2> [The ( 
S lie que de Belgiqn — Pro* erbc .
July 1891 — £ ^9 2 - 
[ )C * 
Philadelphia Acad, of Nat. S —Pi ^92, Pa 3.
Oct.
-Dec.
-den 
1. Geog.
:- .
Jc nal, vol 8, Nos 1.-3, Jan.-} 1892.
rk Mic »co >c— Journ., ^.
L 9.
No. 2, A: 1893.
P e ^ oc l 7* 
J r-Verzeichn: — No, 409 and 411, Zoologiv.
: G-ograp Anima s, 
Fi H ier & *.
The I oL Nc 1*3, Jan.-Mch., 1893, [The Esst- Field C 
ral , Vol. 2, N 15 1893.
fa < ian & C 
; 14S, May 15.
j. [J.
I -;oih >e .
Y 
I Rec. oCVa , Vol 4, No. 5, May 15, 1893* [I >*• 
Ki racNovita , 1 ,.
N di [ I ri fan sr & ohn, - 
Schwalbe.
fa] 5.
ipril jo, 1893.
[Or en.
Xc 1 [ Ti; \\ ins.
ubi *hei 
1 B /Part 29.
57 1893.
I K " *» j 
T e 5 rd Series >L 1 - 197* - * r " 
' es ?
Vol. 4, No. 41.
1&93, [Th* 
1 ish : ura , V   .
2 >.
5, M 1893.
L Ti * J 
ie: ouofc lay 1893.
[Cam h, -A.
The Ii cy 1 * J cii '—Herbert *r, [Th 
Tear I ear: es.
[Cha 
T 1 Geoio_.
il Pamphie"   Goodcl S.
I 
ress- ,vere<.
lefcre LS md.
. H»Htk Lyauth* 
s.— Th .
»S pr t.
The 
Dr. t R i Toni, radii ore, Pa- 
-doc; Marine .
.  u .
rSoz.
[Dr. W, K Herdm 1 
— & ^^ — "^ —   - i .
- -    — s* 
CAR 
? 
. .* ' ».4..
- ' y -,,~*- ^*, * '-- ,---.- ^*_"*^ L-**,_ HMP fc »^ -_.,- — • ' 
NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the sei^ 
Of ; 1$ I -,t> e* i 
is j w"i**-; a a , r 
- 
JP.
SIKORA, 
m&rs tie   £^/*/ i ; 
S 
^ 
! eoi€^jy ., — ; -  -- pa -ie : 1 
esr 1 fe s of C S laats f 1 
Hai 1 i CoaL .
mm..
ar>pi 
n Apply, JAS, SPENCER, % Sa sbc / Pfac n 
* 
THE BRITISH NATURALIST.
A 
Monthly Magazine of Natural History, conducted by John E.
Robson, 
Hartlepool, with the assistance in various department- — 
G. C, BIGNELL, Pfymout* 
a COVERDALE, London.
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
a ELISHA, London.
JOHN GARDNER, Hartlepool.
C. S.
GREGSON, Liverpool.
J. P.
SOUTTER t Bishop Aucfc 
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Shillings per annum, post free 
. M thly Supplement re gi mt to fo ben uplete .separate manuals of tl 
various groups treated upon.
1 t v i g is a Natural History f British Bi erfties, by 
h'kr e ' °^ C*kuivilIes T Wooton.
It contains an account of sputed -pecie-?, ^nd ft 
bibliographical detai of the references to the i spe the 1 )Iogical wt = of the 
past t p cent ies, rendering it the n t complete \ : ye: issued.
All orders and other communications to be addressed to JOHN E.
ROBSON, Hartlepool* 
8w.
C/o, , 297 pqg9S % ith p and 12 1 'rations, 10s.
6d.
THE 
RD 
LANCASHIR 
f 
I F.
& MITCHELL.
SECOND EDITION.
Kt 1 Annotated by Ho T \ri> rs, F.L.S., etc, with addit: 
by R.
How D and other local author 
GURYEV & J AC I O i, PATERNO VI EG1 
U. Van" Voof 
M * ^i 
v 
s.) 
NTO 
OLOGIST' 
AND JOURNAL 
VAR 
Jk ^ • 
Edited f'-L V I r, 
"^ 
VoL III.
commenced 
I5U2, X5C2> 
6s, past free.
Illustrated 
to le tort 
Vol III.
a 
thzE 
M oorxia Gene; I Entoi 3g 
tti« ; Lepidopterists, 
?? 
-OCtLlliY 
*~t 
G 
- .; 
I 
_ i*.
AAA M "Ti "« 
Ml 
' 
* 
or, c/o r.
£. K 
Q 
*k *- / t*V 
'   I I 
T -* 
1 ~ 
I 
* -*   
I 
- 4 
m 
M -, 
TH 
T 
NATIONAL 
T 
II 
V 
«U 
J' -' • M X 
V J 
j 1 
.\ i 
9 ' 
.v 
1 : 
iishe 
eny, Pnc 
One Shtf g and S ^c 
Contains i 
- 
M 1 
J 
..*** 
a 
. **« 
% "« av> r 
> 
:*d W 
1 
A 
1 ', 
•r -pr- 
> 
\t « 
^ l 
'«tai 
A V fe h l-* T 
London: BAXIXZ£S 
X, 2C* JLi^g WMiiMi Si , I mud 
THE NATUEALIST.
During the next few months it is hoped to insert the following articles'.— 
Votes on tlie Fresh-water Algae of Ike East Hiding of Yorkshire 
Wm, West, F.L.S..
assisted by G.
S. West.
A Woodland Tragedy, -Rev. W.
C, Hey, M.A.
Flora of the Neighbourhood of I*ake Ullswater.— Wm. Hodgsi A.L.S.
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes.— Hubert Dacre.
Beport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890,— C.
P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., and P.
F. Lee 
Heport on Yorkshire Mosses and Hepatics for 1892.— M.
B. Slater, 1 
Specimen Days on the Yorkshire Coast.— Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.A.
A Sew Specw of Lnmbrions— Rev. Hu.deric 1 F.L.S.
ON NATURAL HISTORY.
THE ZOOLOGI T A ntfaly Journal of Natural History.
Edited by 
J. E Harting, F.L .
Original articles, by well-known Naturalists, on 
Zoology, notes on the habits and occurrences of Quadrupeds, 
Birds, Reptiles.
3? , Mol :s, and Insects.
Price is, 
BIRD NESTING D BIRD-SKINNING : A Complete Description of the 
Nests and I gs of Birds which Breed in Britain.
By Edward Nf iaw 
SecC d Edition.— With Directions for Collecting and Preservation ; and a 
Chaptt on Bird-skinning.
B Miller Christy.
Cloth extra, Fp. Svo, price is.
* gooc deed, and can be thoroughly recommended.
' — A then&um* s A sterling book for 
the ool ts and bird iners in oi loots.
The arrangement -irfeet." — - it, His?* / "»- 
A wonderful shi >worth.
No wonder a second edition Is called for,' — Grap'r 
London: WEST, 1TEWMAN & CO., 54, Hatton 
THE CONCHOLOGICAL S0CIETY !
S LIST OF 
British Land and Freshwater 
Comi D by W.
NELSON, W.
DENISON ROEBUCK.
F.L- 
a: * ?.
1 TAYLOR, F.L.S.
Frim 2& each, by post 2 ..
d, j or tt.
8d.
per tioz* poet free 
^hBbhiktfl^btA 
1 , list o^ : aed >no:raarjr Treasurer ( E* Adams, B*A.r 
i% York Ro* Northampton', rof the H ; >rary Secteta of the Coi 
Soc wh» may be addressed at Ike P} fopbkal Ha 'Leeds.
e Eatomolosisfs MontMy Magazine 
RICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY.
€- l ajef O.
J. W.
as, W VV, nu*** 3 • •?
. .-u.;i.Ac:t:.iv :-\ P ?
£. Sa ; :>;V:'.;-s F.
L,S.
: and 
.Los FJ 
^ 
T ga*iae* :- &| .
contains sis- A icles and • 
subjects aed I ti I- an ecial e - ^ 
'*»—-:- &*tfi?*g$ per a m, pc ree.
idou: 03008 • JACKSON Qfeitlii Voersi's IBfciMiMW^ !
fift»W^« 
M.B.~Jl #co© -rascoos .ed \* ie N 1 beri anaary 
JULY 1893.
THE 
No, 216.
A 
IONTHLY JOURNAL O 
Histor?
for th : h of En m 
DI ED BY 
DENISOX ROEBUCK, F.L.S 
H THE -CK I 
Alt 
GILBERT BAKER, FJ , F.
CH.
. RHOEKII 
W. EAGLE CLA1 F*US 
ALFRED HARKER , 
A J 
• L.S.,F.I 
B. TURNER.
" 
» 
s 
onienls: 
. 
Bibliography; Lep^dopiera, 1 8' .— 
n 
it 
*"- i j 
: 
Some Stray Note?
from the Yorkshire Coast in the Spring of 1893.--.
C decmjc .
\B*Q 
♦ * 
^ V 
T 
s 
of C -bys- "e- 
% » 
t * 
* I 
* « 
* 4 
Re aw: 9 Hemiptera M aro m of the B h Jsf ds*- 
*G 
V r tr 
: 
Ye •sh 
Fresh-w Alg* Of the East ^d g /©- © 
* 
Note —Lep id opt a .
Note 
I 
r fc L , 
it 
ffotes- — Marnn a - 
I   
1 
I * !
* ' 
Notes— O vfroiogy 
- "-4- i 
1 
V - 
: 
^ ^ 
«  w 
TT- 
i 
* 
££&*.
."'-.
- 
« *a 
v v 
, *   
I | 
* » 
» y* c 
* m> 
i 4 *' 
*. o « 
»*K 
* + 
-*- 
"Vi 
* * 
« * 
ft *- 
.A * 
* **" 
• 
:-r .
'm "4 
' ''"  ; 
* *» 
p* 
*l 
M 0% -> 
.*** 
i02 
210 
2 
2 
>* *= 
. 2CR: 
-. 
J 
-« 
>r 
m 
- * 
- 
LOV.E 
3? 
.±v 
AR 
c 
ft* V- - 
. c 
%* ^i* 
*^ 
E ^ 
» 
: 
" * 
Ca 
.-*.-.*-.
Lb L.
..* 1 
The NATURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Editors venture to remind Subscriber that the 31sf of March was the 
late ate at which Subscriptions for the current year could be received at the 
prepa rate of 5/-, post free.
Subscriptions sent now can only be accepted at that rate if accompanied 
by the Subscription for rhe following year.
In all other cases the 8ubs< ion is 6/6, -t free.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
All Exchanges and Books sent for Review should be addressed : 
*The Editors of the Naturalist, c/o Mr. Leonard Hawkes worth, 
49, Fenton Street, Leeds/ as he will assist the Editors in this 
Department.
Greviliea, quarterly recc of Cry} Bot., No. 100, June 1893.
[Mr.G#Massee»ed.
[Dr. David Levi- Moreno Redattore.
A A |^ J* £+ 
_ ander& Sohn, No. 25, Jan,-Majrx.
[Pubs* 
Nat. Soc.
— Re rt and Trac tons,^ 1.
2 Part 2, 1S91-2.
[The Society.
Nuo , Maggi 1893.
[Dr. G.
B. deToni, redattore, Pad It 1.
The Hand N ur -t, N 1 8 5- 6, l ay and June 1893.
[Birmingham N.
H 
The Na ilus, .
J 3 Nos. 1-2 :>lay and June 1893.
[PL A.
r >ry, etc., 1 
1 choc ural H m >ciety — 59th Ai ep 53.
Tl lety.
The Cob .Vol 2, No. 6, June 24, 159 .
I editor, 
kigicaiSoa — Trans., rt 8, 1893.
[Tl 
T x us 7- 4-5, Apr, y 1893.
[T Field Club.
atura; ien , Vol. 2 16 ae 1893.
'[ lcm: in & Co. Publish i* 
Nat Hi , N 19 , June 15, 1893.
U- E* Clark & others, editor, York?
E Rec.
&Jn.
< ar :ic 7oL 4, No. 6, June 15, 1893.
P * tm 
Naturae !
itates, 1 {, N< .
3-10, I b.
to ar.
[Friedlander & Sob pub& 
enceG Na 342, June 18c [M Indus, publishers.
T Bill -Jist, 1 -rt 30, June 1893.
I °^ r " 
T jr* eri ~oL 17.
N 198, Ji e 1893.
tt&p 
IS re IS ol.
k 42, Ju - 1893.
' [The ell xriety.
The ] ol 2.
IS 6, J 1893.
[The Editors, Dublin 
'sycbe:jo :>torxK/\ .
206, j an 1893.
[ 
Lepid* o Br l,-~C.
\ Barrt [I Ree , f 
lawl id Owls of — K.I D.
[I I Agricu ire.
P — H.
K. 
Die?
Bird !
m. [ C- I 
I- i S-Pl .
S — »rr por [1 
I on , [The 
1 ., Vol.
\ "une J E.
< toke,< 
. 17, 16,1 >3- L 
Lec^ - .nth i t of the ^ End pe A- Cock I 
ie .
tui   •   If 
HH 
A HANDBOOK OF Th 
AofY 
r" " » L 
M»««^3j^ W4*^t* I 
'   
V Ar 
. 
sa .e 
^ 1 ~ 
-rr- 
X   ¥ 
< :, 5., a W8L D£>' iO OEt - F.Li 
PRICE r 6d.
F 
*->.
- 
f v 
: /   
. .
. 
TS FROM REVIE 3.
scdy been 
. .
, .
;..„  
H ,..-?
*. •>.,.
c« .
•: '..
...
-\ .**.p -.-....
•._'.', - j ..
. .'.
,, v«tX   .: • >*-  
H. hf 
1: a>pc 
. 
wicnMLse 
T"^ 
w 
i. ; \Jk 
* 7 
f ' -   * ' "I       *- ' 
^ * 
** » 
A JAS, SPE ER, 8, S P- f », Halifax 
Fools, 4/0, with Illustrations.
Price is, ; ; si jr, is, .
THE 
GEOLOGY 
OF 
WIRRAL 
AND OTHER PAPERS, 
7 
By OSMUND W.
JEFFS.
Liverpool : B.
HARAM & CO., 12, Preeso.n Row.
6 
NATURALIST' REPRINTS.
No. L— List of Land and Freshwater MoJhisca of Lancashire, 1 bert 
St * d f .
No, II, 
iird-notes from Heligoland for the year 1886, by H- srich Gatke, 
No. III.— Heligoland, by Jo Cord* x.
LB.O.U. j\» a: 
views of Mr. Gatke's garden).
No. IV.— Vertebrates of the Western Ainsty (Yorkshire), 
Waite, F.L.S., j4 pp.
NINEPENCE EACH, POST FREE.
From the Publishers of 'The Naturalist/ l^eea 
Now re, .
In One %&&* 
*** 
- 
Pries fc 6, 
THE 
BIR 
n 
OF 
. JL m.
MJ - &.
E. 
>Y 1 
HITLGCK, 
To 1 had of the Ai 
L ;.
. .
EESTON, "OTTS ; 
. 
es.
BEMROSE & SO I no, Derby 
* s .
LONDf 
The Briti 
octuse an 
th 
W 
I 
Vari 
.****.
^ +0 
In 4 \ 
still 
By «T- 1HT.
TUTT, JP 
* 
♦ 
ric^ ~ e * 
^E Vo 
to { Ra 
2 v.
k direct 
-. 
ELAN 
S+t 
u 
LEPIDOPTER/ 
id 
'   jcrs c.
. W 
A-- 
k ^ 
n 
i*Mto* 
\ .-_l.
St' , «"   
enq y as 
1 
r 
C- 
; '.',: 
. .: 
wi.
.h •'.
up If: U:' 
*r 
** 
V 
u 
M   
L 
' 
-^ _ 
CJNI3 
^* 
iSoo.) 
EC 
RY SEXI L 
TRAY 
I 
a 
A 
L 
=.e 
V 
I -.
. 
mMMMMHAWEGSIMi 
ANIMAL EYES 
OF EVERY DESCR HON 
AT LOW 
CES 
-. R 
jr ' 
a "\" V 
X^ X-, 
JD .t**e scl en « 14 { G e.wiuiii y 
tfaattMaHMHMH^H^MMMMHABdMfiHMHHHlfHflMflH 
'  
<T * 
1 1 m^ «m .
*   11 1 r ^ imrtmwMfcWfrWl 
VMM1«^1V«^- 
NATURAL 
CIE 
C 
m 
m 
<-.
^i 
ta 
Cc   Notes, Ar cles a i by the most I N 
j. > 
. t t--^ 'w^^i* 
1 
.***   
* 
IL » 
-i_ 1 
* * 
* * 
^ J* .-, 
I 1 ^ 
* V " -     - 4 
£ 
,-+ 
TELE NATUEALIST.
During the next /ew months it is hoped to insert the following articles : — 
A "Woodland Tragedy.— Rev. WL C.
Hey, M.A.
Flora of tne STeiglibourh.ood of Xiake "LTUa water.— Wm. Hodgson, A.L.S 
The Yorkshire Derwrnt and its Fishes.— Hubert Dacre.
Keport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— C.
P. Ho irk, F.L.S., and P.
F. I 
Heport on Yorksh're Mosses and Hepaties for 1892.— M.
B. Slater, F.L.
Specimen Days on the To -kshire Coast.— Rev W.
C Hey la 
A New Species of L.umbii2as — Rev. Hilderic Friend, F.L.S.
mttrnt^ftammmmmmammmmmm 
WI!VI]BlL,EI>0:Nr 
^-~ — — 1 
TO Collet , Xa ; and others.
A splendid collection of TROPICAL 
BIRDS, compr many rare specimens of Humming Bi B *£ 
t Sea I other b tn t beautifully mounted in valuable Spanish 
maho ny and ie-gfo me ; r o the water-colour iw ig forming he 
key to t : collection.
Cessrs.
I rber, Price F 
very valuable 
b 
toe »ecial a en to the bov 
COLLECTION 
OF 
BIRDS 
which is included i their e '} Vucti t, Re dence known "Raver 
wood,** Worple F id, A Ae&< m Tuesday, July 4ih.
Catal uesatth- on an ate Offi rwick Cc .Gray Inn, V .
^B||riB|^*^|MB|JMHH^Bn|^H| 
f«* 
XTVRALi T' RE PR TS—No. I.
LIST OF 
. ft-- 
I 
;— 
-Tv 
u - 
Dl; 
dier c y-r 
'+.
- 
w 
1 ^ 
T **.
* Mr 
QWfl 
- 
_! * 
*  ' 
^•' .
'. .ire re 
mm * 
- 
- tiona bot those or" Messrs.
R. 
L 
if 
r 
I *3 
i 
Price f : 
. 
% 
* 
' 
_. 1 /" 
To fee had from th* bliahers 
se * Natural i ny Bar Leeds 
dPh 
M 
r. 
FOR THE USE QF N 
AMD 
HITHOLOGIST 
*" 
A 
HDITT 
/ 
f\ i 
r 
^ 
ins 
'' *  .*  r'- r t.-4*W4 
PRiC 
17s., POST FREE 
MAY S£ HAD O j THE EC >R3 OF *6 *»*TU 
: 
r — r - -*4if^M  bK444»t- .
LIT 'LJ 
f* 
?*- 
-- 
'    ' 
3 
» *?
! 
* % 
- ..
- ~ 
AUGUST 1893 
THE 
No. 217.
NTHI JOUR L OF 
Hist for the North f Enel rid 
\\ L DENISON ROEBUCK, FX.S.
H 
S !
I 
J. GILE • RT BAK1 , F.L.S., 
-» - 
. E LE CL 
ALFRED MARKER 
C&A P.
HOBKI 
GEO.
T. FORK) L.S 
\\\ & T £K, 
F 
i-i 
*  * 
fonietif 
*x • 
* 
The Yorkshire Naturalists 
^trT 
on at Aysgarth.
c 
. r.
Yorkshire Naturalists' Union—Annual Meeting at H udders d 
The Protection of Wild Birds' Eggs,- *» 
Review— L ted States Hawks and Ov ;.— 
Yorkshire Galls : Adc ona!
Species and New 
Locs 
>•"»: 
e nen Days on the Yorkshire C at*— ^ 
Lake Country Re s:fr oscopica.
9SCI ed 
Newton's Did na of Birds-— 
^w 
ft 
^ » 
Formats of a Uncoinsf e Naturalists Unio 
'i 
' t 
, 
r ¥ r r- 
Hot 
rnithology 
< f 
-- 
ft 
No 
V W 
L t* r 
Note — Mc sea 
.» « 
_ m^   l > Ji ^*»A ^w 
* *  
* rV 
*, » 
S» * 
.> I 
? 
^ * 
.. 
J 
V ^ 
»»'  ** 
• v..
, 
; » 
;, 
" ft 
13 
!* " 
A*a 
ft * 
*" * 
* 
^ ' 
* ^ 
r 
.-> * 
• « 
* 
% * 
J 
.* *" 
"* I 
.V *-.
T 
* • 
i 
37 
240 
*3 
24' .151 
3-256 
** 
- 
b 
Notes ?ws 
i 
-i * 
£3£ 
r 
LO 
y 
& * 
™ 
- I 
=v.
r™ - 
^1 
Uje & C L 
fr* * r 
El 
r 
1 
E£T f I ; 
-j     -»^ 
. % 
M 
*rv 
Ji * 
J^ttWR^VH 
-».— >-r 
" 
Hl» > M* 
rt^M^ 
^^vtfM-* **V*» 
The 
NA TURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Ed >rs venture to remind bscribers that the 31st of March was the 
latest < te at which Subscriptions for the current year could be received at the 
prepaid rate of 5/-, post free.
Subscription?
sent now can only be accepted it that rate if accom nied 
by the Subsc m for he foil ring year.
In all other cases the Si icription is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED, 
All Exchanges and Books sent 
'The Editors of the Naturalis 
49, Fenton Street, 
Department.
for Review should be addressed : 
t» c/o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
he will assist the Editors in this 
Th Naturalis , YoL 16, >.
187, July 1893.
[Birmingham N.H 
Tl autil oL 7, >.
3, July 1893.
[H.
A. Pilsbry, e 
gical -Tr .
"\ 22   )-io-ii, 1 he 
turai Sc e, Vol. 3 No. 1 July I }$, lacmi!
a^Co, 5 F 
E nolc ec.
cc j n.
oi :on, Vol. 4.
>• 7, July 15, [893.
[Ed 
'nrae i§93 ?
N ^ 11-12 uni.
[Fried]; er & S 
S aceG .
Xo y igg [ rs.
C V us, publishers.
[Jol Rol , e r.
{].
E Hartir ed 
[Tl elborne S : : 
E rs, I 
C >.
Ent.
. : 
1 h > Part uly if 
The Zoo. gi :, $n Sen >I.
17, No. 199, July 1 
^ ' - v -*— "* So. 43, July 1S93.
Nature Notes, *N 
1 • h Natur 1 
x 
7. July 1893 
Ora. Vere 
iei 
F - .
fen torn., Vo".
>. 207 y 1 
iwalb ih; g 17, ul; c6,~ i3f .
CJ -r - >c.
of 5a*— J Repor for 1892- 1 [7 e So 
Penzance N .
H .
— Rep. and Tr tor - on ii 5.
[T S 
Dr. f vi trer •.
Redattore.
F. H urner.
editor.
N 93, 2 .
2 
. e * I 
The an ' Sc ' 
tr.
of * .
V 
, July 1S93.
c 
T 
^..
. 
? eog.
S   
. FM^ 
1 ' 
[1.
-i E ; 
Tl 
1 
. 
- - >, " -.
►| .' 
t 
" Sri t 
[C olo; 
r ~™~ prxl-jur , 1 
Rej : :>j' 
Trans, and Report, 1S92.
1 o:   :r Pa .
. : ,\ .
» 
, 
. 
The   
t 
of Pr 
- 
b- -rt 
f 
>x, 
V ' ' T 
. *  - 
5 if *% 
;• 
.re 
.. 
*  %** 
er 
_ r 
W W.
Fo , [L, I 
.-•» 
. 
4. & » Ju/ JL 
SPE^ 
i 
DDENT 
A 
COLL 
1 
S 
: 
. ...
- ' 
' 
**#•/ I,,., • 
~ t I • - 
"V * 
ft 
• 4 > :   
^r— 
< 
it 
^ '* 
*l .fv -ta   
* t 
- * 
a<- 
; 
;T& 
- 
ft r 
s 
* 
. 
# 
i. it 
V 
»«   
...
J. ( .
rf--?
% - -t* 
» — T 
L , 9 
. 1 i 
.. rf v.
' fc-* 
ft "  
^ 
^ « 
4 - <.
; , ; 
; ; 
- ':    
* 
I 
" "  - 
>* fc 
- "**i 
ift 1 
- 
1 *" 
IP 
► 
e» 
r' 
^ 
i*1 
1 
' 
r 
^ 
" 
-^.
a. .^ 
^^ 
, «.
A A 
"*« 
Lb 
5v 
TO 
* 
»\.
WW -i+&.
^ 
. -I* 
f 
I 
l A 
i A 
- 
PE NGI 
r ., 
^'- 
*• * 
3f 
*- ^ 
j- 
^ * 
-*- "*.
' n.
I 
* 
\ 
1 > 
f 
1 PiaC^ -X 
, 
THE CONCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY'S LIST OF 
British Land and F 
i 
^m _^Mfe& " !
I 
N 
I 
5 
1832 
Compiled by W, XEX V, W.
DEXI 
1 
ROEBUCK, : 
and J.
W. TAYLOR, F.L!
Price 2d.
each, by 
* 
Sd. per doz.
post free 
I JL,.
£-> 3l J 
Thi L o be ed of the H iry 1 I 
xampton) or of 1 iz Honorary Secrt 
le Philosop !
H * 
ad 
Society, \s j m 
i 
tmm 
wmmm 
)W f 
jr 
. 
LIST of YORKSHI 
PIDOPT 
By G.
T, PORRrTT, F.L.S 
• 
F% /VT^ 
. 
and m ro-lep 
in specie i i a 
^ * 
; 5 of t; 
C^j O 
of 
of m 
>c 
V 
n 
n 
c 
I 
T 
': i 
- .» 
*»-*  w 
- > 
ne £ 
* 
l* Z36C 
-A^-, 
r 
' .
e s re 
«r« 
\ 
' 
I 
f 
., ' 
N R [JCK   n 
?~* 
.'* 
nk e 
. 
E. P« O BY SU 
Wm 
>«- mum 
W* *-* #^i-*' 
«•::  
ATURA 
* * .ilb i 
r» 
CE ZUOi 
J .
E. I 
4 
ir 
^W 
* 
^ 
L 
I b 
...
-. I 
t »*  
I I 
.& 
i - 
+ ' 
t A v 
w7* 
T 
•. - ...
l- *  
1 
I 1 
-* 
5 
I   
| J -.
- 
'  
AtM 
* 
1W* 
-> 
J*- 
1 
Vert 
D L ; 
v. 
.-^ 
a * 1 
* * 
>., 
- V 
m 
^ - 
j? i ^ 
* v.
'; 
V 
> 
1 
Li 
rf» 
1 *k* 
*v 
; 
> ""* 
i 
, 
. "' 
» 
- 
. 
T L 
A * ^* * 
--*- w i..
**  " * «&.
' , ' 
a* 
% v   ' .— 
i 
» v 
i 
V-' 
' * 
1 w 
^ 
*r 
r 
* 
^ 
i «   
wpcm 
- 
54, H 
u 
»«* 
i 
? 
AL 
^* ^ Wj f  ^ - 
— **^**-   , .
I L 
\t HM\ n Jllif i*iii I fc i ' h« 
vol I 
l*£, 
mmen c 
J ii* -.- 
>c 
" 
-V 
iSt 
i 
.. 
} » 
t A .-*   
r 
, t 
^ a 
. --.
. 
...
Of 
Vt *^ 
f 
& -   
•pwt^ - 
** 
* tm>- 
L 
* 
I 
?' 
1 
kJtit 
. 
», 
i,^- ir 
% 7 
^r ^ .
K 
- J 
* w* V*   
J^ .
t. A- 
THE KATUEALI 
T. 
Durii 
few mc r it is 
to insert t/ie foilowin articles'.
Flora of the Neighbourhood of ILake XTllswater.— v .
Hod A.L.S 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Pishes.— K 
Dacrf 
Beport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— C P.
H< kirk, F.I. P.
F. Le?
Beport on YoTks Mosses id Hepaties for 1892.- 8.
S tri F.L.S.
A New Species of Ijumbricus.— Rev. Hu 
Frii FJ 
A Woodland Tragedy.— R v C.
Hey, A.
% 
C 297 pa 1 i and 12 icr.
fe 
E 
BIRDS 
OF 
LAN 
T 
ASHIRE 
» 
y F.
S. MITCH ELI 
SECOND EDITION.
Re*, ed and Ai by Ho- 1 .rd ndei F.L.: etc., with addition 
R. J.
H UUD a: other 
GUR & ' ON, i, PATERNOSTER ROW.
ir.
V 
y 
0RS7 Succe CHS.) 
:,clet Colour If a l is.
od.
FLORA 
17 
YORKSHIR 
• 
REDERIC ARNOLD 
* * *, K++ vv 
/ft 
. 
*L kj - 
> " 
- 
. - .
i .
S 
^ 
* * 
-* 
Lie 09 I 
he Ti 
: ;  ;.
.:; del 
er ae ma 
I - ^ ~ .G 
- t 
M 
l : i :ll 
* *r » 
CO 
I 
3 eet i vent Garden : 
:k i   
* 1* 
tc V .': 
v 1 
i_i.
* 
- ^ 4 
^i 
V Jv« 
w *r 
>. 
B BUC 
-  - 
I ^ 
Li:.
. f 
janl 
-  
IT 
it 
3 
A- 
^ 
*.?- 
' 
I 
*  
. 
t_* 
.,':; 
J 
T 
1 r 
.1 
Hf 
JT"" 
I 
w 
T^'f 
1 I t 
T 
TO 
AG 
? 
MM 
vr 
t" 
. ' 
K x 
1 .1 
1 .A 
l 
4 
* 
I 
.: 
// ^ 
i 
f 
;" / ' 
i 
- 
BIBLIOGBAPH 
7 
ULIEN DJ V 
V 
tx 
* *fc 
b. 
L -; 
I 
4^ : 
- :?
n 
/T* 
. .
T 
.*• « 
j^»i «k ^v 
^- ^ 
; C N^'^ 
. *0*~ 
r ..*.- .
EBRBfB^r> 
SEPTEMBER 1893 
THE 
No. 218 
atura 
MONTHLY JOURNAL OF 
History for the North of England 
DITED BY 
WI DENISON ROEBUCK, FX.S., 
Si 
rxK : assis mi i>e^ae rs of 
i 
J. GILBERT I ,KER, F.I F.I 
w. jeclai ;e,f.t 
LFRED HARKER.
C AS P.
HOBKIRK.
GEO.T.PORROXF.L.
W. B.
N ?
ER.
F. 5 F.R 
fonfcnfs 
Formation of a Linco e Naturalists' Union, — ; Bak 
Review—The Study of Dia -tis.— -/-".
5. 3".
and Palaeontology.
1892 
Bibliography- Geology 
Review— Geology and Natural History of Hottln 
gn am shir 
Yorkshire N ra 
"*  * 
t As kern.
tt 
* * 
Notes— Or r ofogy 
* 
# * 
*- • 
re 
*" «  
Not -Bo: any 
» .-» 
J .
- 
- < 
in Cn 
-+ *r 
'* y 
f * 
* 
4' 
A, 
' 
.<  **« 
F - 
HI 
1 
J" * 
- 
¥ .
* 
i^ 
ft** 
w * 
I* * 
I 
<: 
a*) 
^r*Vj J 
-.   - 
25" 26 
262-264 
266-279 
231 
283-288 
284, 280 
Note — Mi sea 
* * 
: _.
...7 
Note— Mamma 
*-.
_,i ei 
B 
* V 
* 
* * 
..>:..
* * 
* * 
J -   
V V 
I 
- 
» * 
i «.
— , 
K • * 
r - 
' 
**.
.-> : .
. 
* ^ 
..: > -A 
» * 
»* 
: >» 
(4 
' 
*   
" 
o 
-«***»# 
4T 
** 
; 
i a s 
V * 
x - 
* IT 
CoooMaicsktttNM to lie adclftswni 
s- 
S<m*nr Ba 
«**#* *— 
f 
" 
,L i-vRBVE 
I 
r * 
H KH -C UfT fAR-3 £ 
A, 
<Hfc J**^i V* ~~* 
Co. L' 
•* 
, 
= 
<  
rat mi r, Js.
; 
^ - 
The 
NATURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Editors venture to remind Subscribers that the 31st of March was the 
it est date at which Subscriptions for the current year could be received at the 
prep i rate of 5 -, pc free.
Subscrip 5 sent now can only be accepted at that rate if accompanied 
by the Subscription for the following year.
In a other cases the Subscrip m is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
AH Exchanges and Books sent for Review should be addressed % 
'The Editors of the Naturalist, c/o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
49, Fenton Street, Leeds, ' as he will assist the Editors in this 
Department.
Na ralists' .vlap of Scotland.
J. Harvie Brown & j.
G. Bartholomew.
Edin- 
burgh, Bartholomew &Co.
[The Publishers.
Nor!
A mean Fauna, N f> 1893.
The De Expeditk 
*SL D< artment of A culture, 
ew \ [icroscopicai Soc.
— Journ., Vol. 9, Xo* 3, July 1S93.
[The Societ} 
The and Na list, Vol. 16 >.
188, Aug. 1893.
[Birmingham NILS, 
I [H.
A. Piisbry, etc., Erilto 
[Macmillan & Co., Publishers.
Th 
* ** 
Natural Sc ace, Vol. 3, No. 18, Aug. 1893.
Entomologists' Rec.
& /n.
of Van ion, ^ t 4, )  .8, Aug. 15, 1893.
[Ec or.
Na rse tiates, 1893, - r 3^ l 4* r 5?
jfaK ^ U S- [Friedlander & Sofia, pubs.
[Messrs.
Chatto V las, pub!
rs.
j. [John E.
Robs editor.
Aug. 1893.
[J- E.
Halting, editor.
[The Selborne Soc f.
Science \ 
The Bri 
The Zoolo; , 3rd Series, Vol. 17, 2' 
Natur* "notes, % [.4, No, 44.
A J 893.
The Iris!
- , Vol..
k !
. 1893 
P>y , oft m**, * I 6, Si , &o8, , 1893.
[C b.
En-.
: -A 
Bri at* Soc.
» A J.
16, I )3 
th -:-9  .
Intro ion to t 5fc the Diatom 
J 1 Deby.
Fredk.
Wm. M .
I. on 3fe «' : - 
)n-.
-n.
[Th 
th a Bib >gt 
L 
T 
omoloffist' 
onthly 
PRICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY 
zine 
t 
.. .A I 
Ul 
: 7T, 
C C L 
LA a 
. F.
X * -W« 
»♦-*.> 
jto 
t a- 
1 r 
-   
J 
* c     
A rf 
A 
*   
VrV 
the E 
1 1 
A. ^ 
scri] :— Six : er ana po 
•e** 
^t 
a: Gil r * JACKSON (Mr. 1m Voor 
H< : was mi icec 
i. 
1 
1 
-•» 
.e I 
.€ 
Di • B *.
-~- A 
e N after for jar; -rf 1890 
_ I — Tn arent : of va: 
*ar rock Sf*l se 
Bet!
Co-aL I H H 
— 
a 
k of (am- itewm an 
nls from 
revai i Is 
OTS.
sent on ap; 
Apply, sJAS.
SPENCER, 8 y Salisbury Place, Ha* "ax.
In Demy & i, pp.
250.
Price 12 /- ( ULS.J. 3-; >• 
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE 
IATOMAGEJE 
7 
By FREDERICK WM.
MILLS, F.R.M.S., 
^4 wM< '" ' P y ..
? the A 
ft 
B01iIOC3-i^^^S:"Y- 
By JULIEN DEBV.
F.R.M.- 
London : Ilzfi 
3 ?
. Bride I dgate CIrc 
Wash ton, D.C.
: The M roscopical I g Cc any.
ANIMAL.
EYES 
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION SUPPLIED AT LOW PRICES.
J. L.
J 
X>:r»*2s3€te:iri* 14 (G<ei*wcxaudLy 
THE BRITIS 
ATU 
AL 
T. 
\ 
lonthly M e of Nat al I d 1 j John E 
Hart ol, v he iepa; €— 
I BS c, 
G. C.
BIGNELL, Plymouth 
G COVERDALE, Londo 
Dr. ELLIS, Liverpool.
G. EL1SHA, London.
UONN GARDNER, Hartlepool 
a S.
GREGSON.
Liverpool, 
d. P.
SGUTTER, Bishop Auef 
SYDNEY WEBS, Dover.
Price S 
tilings per annum, post free.
**t '»*• 
:-i a id to form u be 
atec pen.
w • 2 N"a:: His 
*. 
Woot 
e T 
ring i 
5 i 
: lj 
rk..
0: 
.rs and >tJb 1 31 
<r- * 
...
. 
_ L * 
OHM E.
ROBSON.
HartSepo 
A HANDBOOK OF THE 
Being a 
whit spe< 
* "4 * 
**' 
.   
*1» 
I ** 
r d 
:. Re 
*  - 
X 
- ,* 
«l w 
F 
PR1CH 5, 3d, MAY A' 
AGLE i RKt, F.L.3., 
\ * 
« 
.-i r*- 
be 
: r 
U -*#*' 1^ 
"*Tf 
* OF 
* 
LC L REEVE -z CO., KI 
--._ .
- 
I I 11 
\ 
1 *t, 
V 
4il * 
EXTR AC rs 
FROM REVIEWS, 
- 
exec: 
B : 
>£ t .
ke a 
.V 
^." * 
eir »i 
1 - 
; 
> * 
foo»: is a most vaftcabie cotitribtitsVn z   lY;;^ 
1 
?ia -e e sas 
1 
"  T-*l — '   V *• 
-*    • ' 
*» : £%*  
& 
I 
L 
ft£ 
«— * 
1 -   - T - 
a 
1 : ' 
-r 
**'*ri .
v 
f \ft_* **.
^ 
A+' 
1 
y  - 
>- 
J. 
;' I 
.-.?
. 
NATURAL SCIENCE 
IONTHLY RE ?
: 
:• \r 
Contains Nates.
Articles an 
views fev the most eminent Nature %zs» 
-•' 1  {    |Hii ill|Hi 
^-^fc^ 
^*T*ff  >.
4m Vj »> — 
A5D New ' k 
vr 
&   
4* * 
# T 
^# * 
f 
r 
b ^i#^l^ : 
*. 
THE NATUEALIST.
During the ue.
it is h ed to insert t fottowtng articles: 
Neighbourhood 
^ .
Hodgson.
A.L.S 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes.— Hue t Dacre.
Beport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— C.
P, Hobkirk, F.L.S., and P.
F. Lee 
Yorkshire Mosses and 
M. B.
Slater.
F.T..
A New Species of Lombricus— Rev. Hilderic Friend, F.L.S 
A. Woodland Tragedy.— Rev. W.
C. Hey, M.
A. 
/ heap xto, "rations* Price is, % post free Is.
$d.
THE 
GEOLOGY 
OF 
WIRRAL 
f 
AND OTHER PAPER 
By 
OSMUND W.
JEFFS.
Liverpc i : B.
HARAM & CO., 12, Preesox's Row, 
MADAGASCAR!
Pic of NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS is at the service 
of he wori 
gratis 
ad post - fre 
Prices a ierably reduced 
Com vice in French and German (I h not under- L 
F. SIKORA 
atu ra 
- 
I 
V 
t 
55?- .
En 
-   
Annanarivo, Madagascar 
9 
• Fra 
. 
f 
p 
j 
a 
* 
Marseil 
i 
TU 
f 
r* 
No, L — List of Land and Fresh 
**   M <wv to C J- 
BloUnsca c^ Lancashire 
I*** V^ "%** 
.-v 
No- 1 1 .— Bird-notes from H ig-oland for the year i886 ?
I Hei 
I : 
% 
C 
at 
1 
4 
.O.
. 
1 
" " 
auto iatc f 
1 v 
~ Vertebra 5 of the Wes .-rn Ainsty 
AIT- f..K..
Ed I 
3 E E 
1CT 
T 
I rr-~» 
F EE 
Fr n 
*<*» 
** 
*~* 
fc * 
T : - aral »t' I.
n 
( : ;r .
? 
. - 
* 
J 
e 1 c 
Ci 
* 
\ 
HIT!
• -\   
<\ " At 
& 
Q 
~-i V 
.-- 
' 
s. 
!fc.# : 
D 
. !
>- 
^ 
3 
.. x 
OCTOBER 1893.
1 
rONTHLY JOURIS L OF 
Natural History for t!
North of England.
EDITED I 
Wife DENISON ROEBUCK, F.L.S., 
r^n 
?ISTA 
Leec 
ial D 
LI FJR.
F.R.
! r c 
\V.
EA .ECL fcKl 
ALFRED HARKE U F*< 
CHAS.
P. HOBKIRK, F,L.
GEO.
T. PORRITT, F-L.> BA, 
W. B.TURNER.
FA F * 
<Eontents: 
Yorkshire Naturalists at Askern .— 
Re, ew— British Jurassic Gasteropod 
A New Species of Lumbricus.
...
~~ 
Bibliograph Neuroptera and Trtchoptera.
1888 389,1890,18 & 1892.
. 
r e 
• * 
-* t ^ 
L 
Jn Memoriam : J.
W. Davis, F.L. F.G.S., F.S.A., Etc, - 
Disappearance of the Great Bustard in Lincolnshire.—/* 
L lira Naturalists at WoodhaH Spa 
Tr MoHusca of Pe stone, Sc West > —2 
Yc shire Natura fcs at K kby Moors fde.
\ 
. 
' 
Note.
>d Ne** 
* i 
>. 
-Diptera.
. - 
- 
fc es 
-Cofeoptera.
. .
. .;.
— Fi sites.
. .
• - .
: N 
the 
T ~ 
r * 
* * * 
. .
....
- 
- 
Note 
fVk sea 
t — , 
• - 
< 
H 
• 
; 
L - 
f 
Nc 
-L .
- ajpterj 
* r 
^ 
. 
*• £** 
/ j* --< .
* -*- 
ii;~ 
* * 
i r 
- ?
a - 
* * 
* * 
y 
» 
* # 
289-293 
29* 
29£ 30 
301-303 
305-307 
308 
309 * 
m 
20 
31 
30* 
304 
,v-a.
307, 303 ;: * 
A 
* 
be ^ 
' 
i 
*  i^ 
N.* 
!*'.'   
s & a.
5, 
•^ • 
J   
t 
F > f 
, I 
f 
.. > .flcm* 
- 
4^^ 
A 
^****#F 
im « '** 
- 
. 
^ *MHH<> .w^ 
hb,^ 
The 
NA TURA LIS!
mm 
s. 
The Ed ors venture to remind Subscribers that the 31st of March w e 
latest d t which Subscriptions for the current year could be r the 
prepaid rate of 5 post free.
scriptions sent now can y be accepted at that 
by the >u ption for the foil rig year.
♦ 
te if iccompani 
It other cases the Subscrr on is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Ail Exchanges and Books sent for Review should be addressed : 
'The Editors of the Naturalist, c/o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
49, Fenton Street, Leeds/ as he will assist the Editors in th: 
r 
a ^ 
1 mtilus, Vol. r ; .
No. 5, -pt I 
Natural en , Vol. 3, N .
19, rept.
1893.
Grevil [ua y record of Cr .
Bot, f No. ioi, Sept* 1 893.
[Mr. i.
pti ^>8, 31L1: >93, [Dr. Dav: Lev: forenc Re 
> Hist*j irn, .
1 50 15, 1 >j„ | EL f others, 
F .id N —Report an Proceed for 1 2, f.
The .
md Natural i , Vol 16, 189, Sept.
3 [Bir: ngha> H.S.
[H.
A. Pi 
[>i cm .an & >., I .
. rs.
r: >mol Re a.
of riati< , Vol. 4.
Xo, 5 Sept.
1 18 r.
Naturae Novitates, i${.
k r6, Aug.
[Fri • inder & n*\ 
The Bi b N< si, Part 1893, [Jol .
. R >n, e 
1 e Zoo ries oL 7 Xo, 20 1, Sept.
i£ ?
? .
(J.
E. H inf 
Nati es, Vol- 4 1S93.
* - l T ^ e Ibonie S 
~^- — - ' s r '" ' ' "   -~— The Editors, I 
[Camb.
Ent. CI., I A.
[Orr, Ver :is in en.
[T 5 Trustee 
The 
.   
T e I: i ralist, Vol. 2, 9 r.
12593.
I of* torn., .
6, No, pt.
1893 
I iw£ j !?, No. 9, 16, 1 13, 
vlaseum, ydxtey, A Report f 
V on Bota al Exchange CI .— c inn, 
lurassic Gasteroooda.
— ^ I H 
** 
'W <  
-3 
ilsom Dulau 
wp 
Lond 
joV • Geo - ifDerb} : —I.
Mage o 
an 
Botar?
The Natural 
J ,   * Carr 
**w p 
Club o-i 
r *t.
, M.A., F.J ., and £dw 
[The A 
Ion B )s« 
The Ai 
1 
Repo r 1892.
rt* 
Jes, 
, 1.-15, Lc a: Elliot Stoc H, K* -warm, e c 
the Nat H .
of X 
t. T 
a: Devon 
- 
- f 
II.
P 
rhe ' .
:. .
- — Ai   an 
he 
— 
r 
. 
. 250.
/V    12 -   
-' £*#>-> 
4 
CTI 
' 
: 
T 
TO 
7 
.«# 
-r -r r * 
.-, 
s^   
I A' 
> J 
V' T 
A. 
:A Mf » 
LIOG-BAPHY 
3 
*WP 
. i 
i* 
r : 
M ** 
*» 
^ 
i _ 
- 
;. * 
j y ^ ^ 
^-- 
4" 
iK* 
-.- - -J 
*tr ^* 
*. 'i 
. 
•*.* t 
^ », 
, 
A I 
<+m 
.ie 
j '3 * 
* ** 
i ' 
ft 
* *- *  
|J F bi 
I 
*s 
f - i >r r* : » * 
4 
. 
-~ 
\ "-* 
:- *  
-^ 
T 
^ 
,- - i 
^* 
. 
X 
-- "    
mj 
w 
L *^ 
niTi^ 
E « ^Mf 
P : : - H 
The British Noetuae and their 
In 4 " Is. i in C 
By J.
VIT.
TUTT, F.E.S 
Pric 
7S.
per \ .
to e v 
5 to, !
Hi 5.] 
Rai 
e for   
4+ \l 
MELANISM & MELANOCHROIS I IN LEPI 
R 
v- 
• .
^ 
or.
I 
. 
ur 
J 
..F 
*W-« 
r".
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS I " LEPIDOPTERA 
iND TRAY I )TES THE 
* F* 
>^ 
THE INTERNATIONAL 
F 
U I 
i~ 
I 
U f 
K 
17 
A I 
i 1 
Published Quarterly, Price € Shilling and Sixpe ce 
i 
her • 
wn i 
: 
- 
* * V 
- 
*  * 
v ™ 
•^ 
London: BAELLIEBE, TXNDAIJL & COX, 2€> r Kizg \ m St an, W.C 
.?.
-  &/ 
• 
Mr 
,. 
^*" , "^T^ 
4 r 
i 
w 
12 
I 
*  / 
RD 
OF 
LA 
A 
f 
I F.
* — ** * 
d* .^rtdlllMin^*^' L , .
EC01*I> EDITIO 
. -=y 
D 
[ 
♦ *   
*V 
'V 
WP 
J, H " a- 
^. >.
a 
* .
*- 
. 
** 
. 
e 
3ON, «.
a — .-  - 
rt 
* 
tf' 
r : 
*l 
A 
I 
: 
# 
f^ mt M tftw.1 i f i wr ^ in i %, .
-V 
A * W 
NATURAL HISTORY OBJECTS 
i 
ff 1 
X- m 
fc 
' 
.   
VfJ 
„ ?
' 1 
C* 
«- 
» *  V* 
-  
^ 
. 
' 
* ta 
'. 
F 1 
# 
K C3* JH£ 
J 
rf 
: 
* 
fxi * 
J?- 
,"V : 
j^^i^ 
* £  "*  
1 
-l 
r -* 
** -.- 
Annanarivo.
Madagascar 
.-!* 
,' 
a* 
TTTE 1ST AT U EALIS T.
I I 
t feit *fo.
artich 
oms of :h K»r Plants found around Spilsby, Lines 
Flor 
\J *- 
igb rhood c £ 
TJllswater.—-" 
The " ..." lire Derwen id — I 
Dac 
4- — 
for IS ).— C .
Hob 
Heport : T re ±so ^^^^^^^^^^^ 
ReDOr shir Mo id Hep ics f.
r 
M. 
X « A + .
F I 
A iod Praeredy.
-I C.
as .
*v.
i 
& Btu :y of Seed-Dispersion in Lb ealnahire.
— Rev. I .
A. 
T7 T 
\c 
» & 
«-> 
i * 
/ 
T r 
v" * 
NATURAL SCIENCE: 
rfLY 
IEVV ( 
J 7 
FIC PRi R 
Cor is f >tes, Articles and Reviews by the most eminent Naturalists 
L 
A N E W 
M LAN A> Co.
I IE ( HOLOGIC ,L SOCIETY'S LIST OF 
British Land and Freshwater Mollusca 
i 
1892 
;EL >N, "  DENl N' ROEBUCK, F.L.S.
AND T.
W. TAY , F.L.
>«4 
rice 2d, each, by post 2d.
; or is.
6d- per doz.
past free 
^ "  ^fcfc*^ 
15, 
MP 
This L >e o td of the H ' y 1 r< r (Li .
E. Al 
%m 
\ 
rt 
. 
nay 
r of the Honorary of 
he F :al IlalU I 
C t 
J, B.A.* 
i 
±H 
*» 
r* 
IV 
I 
Jt Jk .
JL 
RAL 
Y. 
AMIM 
' **» f 
m 
. 
e 
/ 
* iH  * 
H 
F.L 
io ; 
: li I litfid by 
C cle% by w X;-iu 
- of Q 
;,ar .
Price I jr.
- 
.   
1 
3 ; 
b 
* 
I? 
: ' 
a: ; .
. v i 
Br h B 
i v S-i f 
uf ^- 
. 
- 
: 
. - r*   
. 
< 
- .
n 
** 
^* 
L 
-. — 
\ 
pr i 
i 
,.   
a Ml * ~ 
. .
1 
* if 
1 
Q1 
WEST, KE 
4'o- 
N CO.
9 
54, He toa Gard 3.
3 
-/ & 
I 
wr 
*m 
fr^ 
A CONTRIBUTION TO 
flps t 
I 
-*" :*.
% A 
fi 
,* W .
a 
j 
f 
1 1 
T 
- ^ 
«Jf' 
r 
" 
Jt_/ A.
i 
r 
ft* 
,--.
.-- 
- 
A- 
\ of 
1 L.
• 
. 
-v r 
? i.
"  
I 
r 
. .....
S r r 
1 
* - 
♦ 
> 
y/stt^+r^ 
NOVEMBER 1893.
^^THE 
No. 220.
MO THLY JO NAL OF 
History t r the worth of En land.
EDI D HY 
DEN I SO ROEBUCK, F.L 
" - .
f Mm* 
T- 
. : 
J. Gil AK • , F.I 
V, CLARK F.
F.I 
El) H ;KF MF.
F.G.
. 
C 
t 
T 7 \ 
*- 
IRK, F 
M 
W. r 
f C F S Q 
?. .
F.J 5.
ontcut 
s> ; 
Yorkshire Naturalists at kb> Moo 
J- 
"5 
Review; Newton's Die *narY of Birds.
324 
A Account of some of the Rarer Plants fo ^d in and arc i Sp risky, 
? 
i * * 
«. 
.* *- 
* 
+- 
j a - 
• P 
5 - 3 
In Mem i ; George Re t Vine 
^ a 
* 
: .
George V% i am Shi 
* » 
. FC 
iWH 
18-344 
ev'urw : A New List * 
HP 
sh Be* 
i 
p ,V 
* 
34- $42 
Desm Not* 
- v 
*C 
* * 
- 
34 34 
Re- • ; r ".;£ Lepidop ^a of the B ih I 
- 
*  A 
3 Rev on ie trbr 1 
f 
Note C tithology- 
m * 
a 
«&.
w 
Notes ---Lepidc -era 
*• * 
*   * 
>i ^ 
33'.: 
E__ 
: 
- 
i, - 
lb 
\ 
' 1 
*  * T 
d ..
^ f 
- 
F I 
Notes and t ^s 
«« * 
c 33: 
Z. 34T ; 34 
?" 
Tux f 
be ac ess* 
SAT '•- ..
. 
;  ft 
nam**"" 
64; b\ tittt, ?
* * 
^ 
. .
'< 
. V 
*3St EP€% 
r 
* 
rf 
A. 
X 
^ 
"*  r 
k. .
^--i 
.i 
E 
: 
'. * 
a~te 
i 
- 
. 
*- 
u 
6 • 
*v 
•MtAMI 
The NATURALIST.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The titor:- enture to remind Subscribers that the 31st of March was the 
latest date at which Subscriptions for the current year could be received a the 
prepaid ra 5  ?
po free.
Subscriptions sent now can only be accepted at chat rate if accompanied 
by be subscript n for the \ lowing year.
In ail other cases the Subscription is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
Ail Exchanges and Books sent for Review should be 
4 The Editors of the Naturalist, c/'o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
49, Fenton Street, Leeds,' as he will assist the Editors in this 
Department.
lifTNat.
— Report ai Tran cti ol, art I, I >2- [The ciety 
leC chol " .
~ >93- [W.
E, ' ollsnge, e toi 
el fast Nat. Fie I Or .
— m.
Rep. and Pro for 1892-3.
[The Clul 
Nova Institute.
— Pro; :on' eries.
oh I, part 91-92.
[Inst?
Z ogi I Re rd — VoL 29, 18* [Z ^ical ciety of Loi 
Hertfordshire Nat. Hist.
- c.
— Trans., 6, July- .
1893.
[Soc 
Revue Ei giquc 3 Lnne, I )j, N >.
4. [M.
T. Husnot, re ear, ( ban.
mo!
ca, J No ay-July 1895.
[Mr. N.
F. Dobre .
ia,.
1893.
« -4* [^ r - d Levi- &, K 
Yc Oct. 1S93.
[J.
Horsf \ Turner, € or, 
Tl s of ira o.
. Oct. 1S9 [T irs.
. , \ >L 9, N .
i-< Jan-June, 1893, [S y.
in j 8 ;o logi .
[Dr. evi-Morenr .
re<.
re, 
Nat. H ourn., o.
15 tet 15, 1893.
[J- E.
C thers.
> ?
The p VoL 16 90, cfc 1S93.
[Birmingh N.H.S.
1 >t.
J, No, 6 t H.
A. Pil xiitorSi 
Err: [og I ec.
n. of iria n, V 4.
No. 1 .
Oct.
.5.
[I 
. - [ rit oh.
- pubs..
Tl : art 34, C .
1893.
[ R< ; - *• 
The 17 >.
202, Oct 1.893/ 0* E Harting, editor.
K .
1893.
LThe k le Sode 
T 10, ( .
1 [Tl •, Dublin.
&€ >m.> .
6 y 2 ).
Oct. 1S93.
( amb.
Ent* C r t 
I : S .
e, J a 1 rang 1 :t, t6, 1 93.
[Orn. Verein - in ten.
'eterb ag Hi st , Rep. 1893.
E e So y.
f \ I.
2. .
it;.
189 I L IC Swans, editor.
Tie r, \ I, No. l ,.
: Stock, ] 
The Prai G S ti< i \ .
Bulletin 
. 4.
Yen I Dei ( - ** e * 
efiyti's ha el Barber.
Lend*, r.
t 
11 of 5©c Vol. 7, iS [ ociel 
S ©ol I c — I do 1 J: [The sociel 
T* „ „1_ 
ki 1 
«M 
r~ 
i 
« 
'   "   - 
logy.-- T: ren ections of f i *s a 
5 of F Q the 
fr ti v a -w 
Apply, J AS.
SPENCER, 8 ?
Salisb y F , Ha; ax.
II III !
I .
I III II 
EXCHANG 
eoptera : Duplicates,- coo ax 
* 
1 -5 ." 
I 
1 
.^" i 
.   
- 
py, .
-" .
. .
....
» •   
" -   - ; • — * -•  v ../.
...
£ 
* • 1 - 4 J 
- 
- 
* *"* 
a 
, Pi 
" 1 
o 
m W 
NATURAL SCIENCE: 
A MONTHLY RJ EW OF SCIENTIFIC PR' R 
Contains Notes, Articles and Reviews by the most eminent Naturalists.
I dox and York 
1 1 
* I* * 
r* 
NO 
ENCLATURE 
OF COLOU 
FOR THE USE OF NATURALISTS, 
AND 0E1TITH0L0GIST 
COMPENDIUM 
By ROBERT R/DGWAY, of the Smith, man Institution 
PRICE 17s.
OST FREE.
WAY BE HAD OF THE ED!
3RS OF THE ' NATURAUS 
LIT!
.1 
c ( 
J 
B< TOX, M IL-.A 
./^ .
?, '  .
fr i 
: i ' I 
LOGY 
OF 
* 
AND OTHER PAPERS, 
I O D 
-c l * 
- .
F F 
Ll\ F XPOOL : 
IA1 :'" & < - I 
*. *   A 
hJz / A £ -'  
"^ 
^ 4* 
i ,*l - 
. -.
• i *' t - - r 
- 
LIST OF 
i 
rt 
TJTQ 
Hi W p\JI 
ft s 
u 
* 
. 
Q7 
T* 
' "i\~r 
Dart 
-- ^V 
*** -- 
4 .1 
' ' r   -     
.-.
. .
sfeed 
* u   t 
I 
. I 
w * 
A 
j * 
-*  ' 
Pr Oct* 
3 Tt 
£3 
pos 
; t 
H 
wt* I 
To 've had om the P* Ushers of the *$ .
*••- 
Hin-w 
A 
• 
mm* 
****** 
-+.
ft *   
i 
I* f 
r* 
**~ 
A '<£ 
. 
** 
^ 
. 
y- - 
I- 
-V ** "*- iV*^ 
-  :-\ 
v 
k a 
- 
*, 1 
I 
(till 
pip 
^ 
C 
1 ?
? 
- *- £, 
*^F 
Ufl 
THE NATUEALIST.
D g : * next fezv ; ; // is hafed to i zrt the f allowing articles',— 
Flora of the Neighbourhood of Lake Uilswater.- -W.m. Hodg- V.I 
The Yorkshire Derwent and its Fishes.— Hi Dacre.
Bepoi on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.— C.
P. Hobkii \ F.L.S., and P.
F. Lee.
Resort on Yorkshire Mosses and Hepatics for 1892.— M.
H. Slati FJ 5.
A Woodland Tragedy.
-Rev. W.
C. H A.
A Study of Seed-Dispersion in Lincolnshire.— 1 .
W- fe-Peacoc 
THE ENTOMOLOGIST'S RECORD 
AND JOURNAL OF VARIATION.
J. W.
TUTT, F.E.S 
Vol. III.
commenced Jan. 15th, 1892.
Subscription 6s.
post free.
An Illustrated M01 Journal of General Entomology, ily 
a the ere British v % Lepidopterists, published 15th of each 11 h.
Vol III, cc iced i;:h, 1892.
S eription, < post free, m to 
he Editor, c/o Mr. E.
Knight, 18 and 19.
Mi lie Uders ite, E, 
t       
INDISPENSABLE TO STUDENTS AND COLLECTORS 
JOTJBNAL OF' 
Edi I .- ;.
• vVL ., 
* i"I> iv - f > Spe and 
Lists, and dealing v -par e, 1 the 
lea C f 1 : e day -\ VI.
c 1 fg.
V 
I., II.
EI ' \ I!
i .: ha ' 
Th r.
[. W.
c/o Taylor 
Br icrs, E lid : 1 Prii >rt : 
xe in 1 ara 
n r- 
Forms Jtl of new • h a; ty ?
may 
at 
jt  *!
f * *r 
\ 
\ 
- 
T of YORKSHIRE LEPIDOPT 
* 
G. T, PORRiTT, F.L.S.
. ., t!
.- 1,3 -.j e ii 
and icr :    
Ir specie v.
.all ot3 
Vf\ .
I 
T • I 
. .
* 1  "- ..
* 1 - j   - ~ m j 
f 
y, I 
THE »rJ^LTUJElAJDISTS , «J O *J J* 1ST ii X, 
* V > 
1 
: 
- .
v. 
'; ' if- 
'\ ; \ " > 'i X 
** * " * • A * „ .^ iifcB 
. 
* 
* \ V ^ .
' L., 
1 ^j.
^ 1 
'* 1 J [ 
, .
, 
T% * 
r • *-r -  *r v* 
1 f J ^ ; -.
-J 
.. -  i...
...._ 
DECEMBER 1893.
--- 
_rf«Pr^ 
*r 
,' "' 
THE 
/J?3 
No. 221.
M 
-1ST 
* 
<  
V- 
i^: 
w c 
*** 
i 
-:„' - 
--" 
rf^ 
ifcf" 
w 
rrW 
N al History 
THJ L 0F 
r the North 
. - .
U 
:*> 
an 
ETEB 
i 
- -"I T 
*-.
D i ON RQEBUi K, 
.* 
^ 
v- 
^ 
IP 
m 
- 
A *R 
J. GIL til K - f 
RSI 
-' I 
* * 
l * * 
i 
D' 
:..
mm ^ -» 
r.i 
W 
1> *s 
*> 
^ *» 
» 
«* 
|0« ?fttS 
In Memo ?m : G- ge Broc F.tA- 
Bird*N i from t I H «**r Dis tct, Su 
9+h*t 
I 
«td £ 
i^.
I I ' 
1 J * '  
« t 
'""he Yorks!
isufder Con".
1 | ^ 
. 
f - - 
a ,< 
;-• 
.*-  u 
*-^ 
8G 
L 
369^ 
* * 
-v" 
.«* 
Re -• a .w : 
of Man.
«*  ¥* 
~™e 
I 
$ mm 
I 
( 
: -.*<   .- <  * - 
• 
3 • 
r» 
; 
«* 
f 1 
* T 
;->\ 
*r-- 
r- 
Kotg   i .
/ 
,. * 
c«-.
ic< 
* »' 
*4 
37 : 
.*- » 
St 
**» 
—  * 
,3*** 
fc* 
.— 
a i 
i 
* 
. 
T 
-a : pre aftd fn 
• i 
j 
BVl 
--M 
% 
Li 
.* 
T 
.. 
/"^ 
*-*• * - 
r# 
;& 
'  
T 
The NATURALIST 
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The Editors venture to remind Subscribers that the 3tst of March was the 
latest date at which Subscriptions for the current year could be received at the 
prepaid rate of 5/-, post free.
Sul iptioiis sent now can only be accepted at that rate if accompanied 
by the ibscription for the following year.
I ail other cases the Subscription is 6/6, post free.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
All Exchanges and Books sent for Review should be addressed : 
4 The Editors of the Naturalist, e/o Mr. Leonard Hawkesworth, 
49, Fentoa Street, Leeds/ as he will assist the Editors in this 
Department.
The Journal of Marine Zoology and Micro copy, Vol. I, No. 1, Nov. 1893.
[James Hornell, editor.
rtfa reNat. Field Club Ann. Rep.
and Trans.
^ i.27 93.
[TheClul 
Practical Observat on Agricultural Grasses.
2nd Edition.
Wm. Wiis n, Jr.
[The Author.
T American Monthly Microscopical Journal.
Vol. 14, Nos. i-2 ?
Jan.
-Feb., 
1893.
" [Cha>.
W. Smile} \ publisher.
mssex and Hants Naturalist, Nov. 1893.
[Elliot lock, publisher.
Fungus Flora.
Vol. 3.
Geo. M ee.
[Geo. Bell & Son, publishers.
lanch er Geol.
>c.
Trans.
Part 12, Vol. 22, 1892-3.
[The S ciety.
Nuova risia, Agosto 1893.
[Dr. G.
B. deToni, redattore, Padovr 1.
Australian M urn, Sydney.
— Records, Vol. 2, No. 5.
[The Tn ees.
'I e C :h oL 2, No. 8, Oct. 31, 1893.
V. E.
Collinge, edi r.
Revue E >gique, 20* Anne, 1893, No. 5.
[M.
T isnot, 5 iacteur, Cahan* 
Vat. H u 152, 3v, 15, 1893.
[J- E- Clari ieis, edit , Yorks.
T Midla aura a," 1.
i6 r No. 191, Nov. 1893.
[Birmingham N", H.S, 
he Nautilus, \ i.
7, No. 7, ov.
1893.
[H.
A. , e 
Natural nee, Vol -.
No. 21, Nc 1893.
[Macmillan & Co., pub rs.
1 m- .
^gists' Rec. u of Variation oL 4, .11, 1893.
t. 
\alura N< i t at .
19-20, Oct.
[Friedlander & Sol 3.
: Hi h \i\   .
Pa. 35.
No*, 1S93.
U £  Robson, t tor.
The Zc es, ij 3 f j, Nov. it I.E. Halting, ** 
Ni es : ' .
4, S 4 189 [ .
e Selborne S 
Th Natural t, L z, .
ir, Nov. 1893.
[The Editors, 1 -Hi 
I irn.
ofer.
11.,^ 6, ' 211 Nov. 1S93.
.?.
Ent, C1-, U i- 
Die .
Jah r gar No. 11, »v, 16.
1893.
Verei s in V in.
ura ma 2, No, 17, f» /.
1893.
. K* Swann, editor.
ol Biological Soc Proc., f : [Th< 5 iet 
pamNiwm 
The late Mr. James Batty.— The e Jei d is request 11 te'frmi 
. tte Mr. 3 tty to ask ae having a: claims for tx , etc, ' I 
1 red to — A, :' ix, N wry, Sheffield- 
**r 
Lcro-Geoiog£ — Trail en ctk 5 of various k 1 of : Liferous and 
other icks, % ; > •- Coal Plan s from e Halifax 
Hard Bed (..
tn to 2/6 each.
Fare cm a{ I to 1 vn 
pply, JAS.
SPENCER, 8, Salisbury Place, Halifax, 
j * 
of ~ : - I .
Price is.
: i p't* U* 3* 
*** 
AND OTHER PAPERS, 
v OS JKD W.
JEFFS.
L : h HARA CO., 12, I J*— 
In Demy few., Cloth, pp.
250.
Price 12U {U.S.A. y$o)* a 
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE 
BMP 
TOMACEJE 
7 
By FREDERICK WE [ILLS, F.R.M 
Author of l Photography Applied to / Mia .•/ el 
By JULIEN 3DEBY, RR.M.S.
London : Iliffe & Son, 3, St. Bride Street, Ludgate Circi 
Washington, D.C.
: Th [icr scopical Pi lishing Company 
WOR 
^BBBBP 
ON NATURAL HISTORY.
THE ZOOLOGIST : A Journal of Natural History.
Edi d by 
J. E.
Hartin , F.L.vS.
Original articles, by well-known Natural , on 
every branch of Zoo gy, notes on the hat s b I occurrenc of Quad rap <, 
Birds.
Reptiles, Fishes, Molluscs, and Insects.
Pr 2 is.
BIRD \ESTING AND BIRD KX vl G : A ( mplete Descripta e 
Nests and 1 of Bird vhich Bre i in Britain.
Ay Edward Ne iN.
Second E tjon, — With Directions for Collecting : d Pr m ; and a 
O r on Bird-skin ng.
By R OiR Y.
Cloth extra, I Svo, price is* 
Yery good indeed, 1 can be lyrecor Aed.'— tkeruntm.
o 
the oologist am in our kools.
The arr *eroent — - J 
A won I shil worth.
No wonder a secon for.' — ( 
London: WEST, NEWMAN & CO., 54, Hatton Gardeu 
THE BRITISH NATURALIST.
A ?
M izine of iral History, con- 
Hart L , with 'he as nee in va 
i 
\*r 
Joi 
- 
E 
G. C.
BJGNELL, Plymouth.
G, COVERDALE, London.
Or, ELLIS, Liverpool 
Q, EL1SHA, London, 
iOHN GARDNER, Hartlept 
C 3, GREGSOM, Liverpool.
P. SOUTTEF?, Bishop Auckland.
SYDNEY WEBB, Dover.
Price Six Sh ings 
per annum, post free.
f 
m 
racx » are 
at i 
U c references i .
L > - - - * - -   ; * • .
^ .
- :.
jr..
:..' :  v 
. "..- an ac    ...
. - :   .
. 
te Entomc 
:. .
.. 
JC £.
ROBSON pool.
£ JOUR 
a 
OF 
*m 
& 
m 
Jt vlainlx} worbtb TSiolo al 12:..
ex 
OPY 
i 
£ ;!
v 
LI 
p 
* *» 
r I 
Zoological t a cti on : — 
.. 
*  4 _ 
«  ^ 
Microscofritti 
-r * 
il 
^^^ 
^   
e 
u 
* 
* 
Studies 
i 
- 
•ftn^A 
* ' « 
. i 
. 
dp 
I I 
! 
1 
'4 I 
- 
fne 
- 
- ^ h 
...
— 
: \ 
.^^ ^ 
. * >  * ^_>- 
Ma) j«h 
JHbTA 
. 
; .
;- ...
] 
ree.
is 
*  
:- 
'- 
* i 
: ' 
5&A-   
*# v.
1. .
-* 
-V 
: 
tfp 
iflPV d"W 
^t * 
9 
' 
V v 
a:n • :.,.
-   
E 
.-.* 
, 4 * 
I 
THE NATUEALI8T.
£ ing the next /ew i Ktfis " to insert i tg ar — 
Flora of the ISTeighbourhood of Xiake UIl*^ H 
J* 
* « 
\ T S 
The Yorkshire Derwe 
and its Fishes.
— H n D 
Beport on Yorkshire Botany for 1890.—C.
P. Hobkii F.L.S., and P.
F. Lf 
Beport on Yorkshire Mosses and Hepaties for 1892.- 3.
Sl >.
FA - 
A Woodland Tragedy, -Rev. W.
C. 
A Study of See" Disper m in Lincolnshire.—!
W h-P 
:k 
)/ / / ers.
Pi Sh; 
NATURAL SCIEN 
*~* 
JE; 
A HLY REVP- OF SCI XTIFIC PROOF 
Contains Notes, Articles and Reviews by the most eminent Naturalists 
LON'I D YORS 
* * 
¥ * 
IACMIU \%'D C 
me- 
Entomologist's Monthly Magazine 
PRICE SIXPENCE, MONTHLY.
G. T G, C.
C 
** - 
* * l\ » * 3 * * -E-* , 
" 
- 
• r.
I 
W \ Fov F 
Th ie t cuiiik in iSC jn tains 
on al conn t th En mo!
1 especial] on the li eef of 
the I 
S* 
> Aj 
Shill pe 
1 * 
Lou JB1 & JACKSON V- ec* iors^ I.
P 
*5Ii 
r Ran 
. 
.  »  
S, 
* lb 
or S nme wit: N .>.
/» t 
v A • 
. 
Enzr 
f ' - 
rate 
aa 
o 
S \I Dl 
5! 
*"* .^P T* , *V» 
I 
Z 
4 n 
2? 
. 
-V 
* 
r ** f 
*, JK 
AV 
* 
J *" 
*« 
***'T >* 5 
:- * 
£*• 
fa 
•>r* 
—-• -— •*—--» 
iem DSPi rtr 
— r— 
- mm m 
nx 
ATIC 
A 
- 
! 
* '" 
- X 
% A.
4 
*, *  ^f- 
I .j 
- 
ifl -' 
;   
St- 
,*v - - 
* |» 
" 
«fi 
V 
I 
* 
.V--.- 
* » % v 
r 
r 
& *   - 
c 
.' * 
.   
•r « 
. y 
- 4 
-j k 
o 
*  .
^ 
-   
w-* ^t»» ** 
LA 
r j 
« v- 
- 
iuU 
&^ 
i*' 
j 
r > fc 
it" 
C 
r> 
•*»r -pfa* 
' 
-* ;-f J *v I 
i 
; 
B 
LXi- 
r 
** * 
rU- 
M 
, v- n 
*•'.