ON JUNCUS TENUIS AS A BEITISH PLANT.
By H.
N. Eidley, M.A., F.L.S.
(Tab. 253.) 
The first time that we hear of this plant as a native of the 
British Isles is in ' English Botany,' t.
2174, published in 1816, 
where it is described by Sir J.
E. Smith as a new species under the 
name of Juncus gracilis.
Later, Mr. Smith altered Juncus Tenuis, Dicravoiceissia cirrhata.
Later, Smith (Engl.
Flora, ii.
167) altered 
the name to J.
Gesneri, as the name J.
;/mcilis was previously in use.
The specimens from which it was described were stated to have 
been collected by George Don in Forfar in 1795 or 1796, and in 
the mountains of Scotland by Dickson.
In Gardiner's ' Flora of 
Forfar,' p.
183, it is recorded thus : — " By a rivulet in marshy 
ground among the mountains of Clova, near their summits.
Mr.
G. Don and Mr. D.
Don." 
There are two specimens of the plant in flower in a collection of 
Grasses, Cyperacece, and Juncacea made by George Don, preserved 
in the Natural History Museum, and specimens are stated by Mr.
G. C.
Druce (' Scottish Naturalist,' Oct., 1884, p.
264) to exist in 
two other collections made by Don. The plant is not localised in 
the British Museum collection, but in one of those seen by Mr.
Druce it is labelled Clova.
From that time till 1883 the plant has 
never been rediscovered in Britain, and has long dropped out of the 
botanical books, it being supposed that Don distributed the plant 
by mistake, having either cultivated it in his garden or obtained it 
from abroad, as was confessedly the case in certain of his reputed 
discoveries.
The other plants, however, in his collection in the 
British Museum are natives of Britain, although some were certainly 
not obtained from Forfar.
In this Journal for 1884, p.
91, is a note from Mr. E.
F. 
Towndrow announcing his discovery of the plant in a rough and 
rushy pasture in the parish of Cradley, in Herefordshire.
He found 
there but a single tuft.
The plant was verified by Mr. Baker, and 
specimens were also sent to the Natural History Museum.
These 
specimens are in flower, and, it is interesting to note, bear a great 
Journal of Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[jANUAiiY, 1885.] u 
2 ON .TUNCUS TENUIS AS A BRITISH PLANT.
similarity to those of Don, being rather more weak and gracile than 
most of the continental specimens.
The distribution of the plant has several points of interest.
It 
is common in North America, extending across the whole continent 
from Hudson's Bay to Mexico.
In Europe it is much rarer, occur- 
ring sporadically in Holland, between Auersfort and Nykerke 
(Boidninl); in Belgium, at Aerschot {Van Heurckl); in Schleswig- 
Holstein (Hansen !) ; in France, at Nantes {Billot !).
In Germany 
it seems more common, especially in Saxony : Gorlitz and Eoths- 
stein, at 1400 ft.
(Baenitz !) ; Herrnhut {Hans !) ; Tharand (Ueichen- 
bachl); Eostan [Martens \) ; also in Swabian Bavaria, near Mem- 
mingen {Koeherlin\) ; and in Bohemia.
It is also found in Madeira 
{Mandon\); in the Cape Verde Isles {R.
T. Lowe\); and in the 
Azores {Drouet !) ; and near Nelson, in the North Island of New 
Zealand [Chcesemcm !).
Thus it will be seen that as far as regards Europe it is strictly 
Western, and may be considered as a Germanic type.
It appears 
to prefer roadsides, especially in sandy places, such as paths across 
heaths or through pine-forests, and to avoid high ground and wet 
localities, facts which seem to throw doubt upon Don's habitat, 
which, if genuine, would be the most northern limit of the species 
in Europe.
It seems hardly necessary to state that there is no 
evidence that it is a recent introduction from North America, but 
possibly it may be a relic of the old land-connection with that con- 
tinent, like Kriocaulon septanijulare.
I subjoin a description of the plant, with its more important 
synonyms : — 
JuNcus TENUIS Willdcnow, Spec.
2, 214 (1799) ; Keichenbach, 
Ic. Flor.
Germ., pi, cccxcviii., fig.
887; Sturm, ' Deutschlands 
Flora,' vi., 1.
J. pallidus "Willdenow Herbarium, fide Buchenau.
J. bicornis Michaux, Flora bor.
Am. 1, 191 (1803).
J. gracilis Smith, Eug. Bot., No. 2176 (1816).
Bicheno, Trans.
Linn.
Soc. xii.
813.
J. Gcsneri Smith, Engl.
Flora, vol.
ii., p.
167 (1828).
J. secundus Beauvois, Encycl.
Meth.
Bot. Supplem.
iii., p.
160 
(1813).
J. macer S.
F. Gray, ' Natural Arrangement of British Plants,' 
ii., p.
164 (1821).
J. chlorvticuN Schultes, Eoem.
& Schultes, Syst.
Veg., vii.
i. 
p. 240 (1829).
J. Smithii Kunth, Enumeratio PL, vol.
iii., 349 (1841).
,7.
lucidiis Hochstetter in Seubert, ' Flora Azorica,' p.
24 (1848).
J. Gcntianorum Steudel, Syn. PL Glum.
ii.
305 (1855).
J. vacillans Steud., I.e.
J. compressus x e[fusHs 0.
Kuntze, Taschen-flora von Leipzig, 
p. 55, 1867.
A perennial plant with very short rhizome and numerous wiry 
roots.
Stems slender, several together in a tuft, one foot to a 
foot and a half in height, with narrow, flat, liiuar leaves, usually 
OXFORDSHIRE MOSSES.
3 
somewhat involute and channelled, six to nine inches long.
The 
panicle usually loose, erect, the last stem-leaf overtopping it 
generally considerably; petals and sepals pale, narrowly lanceolate, 
acuminate, 1|- to 2 lines in length, usually slightly spreading in 
fruit.
Stamens 6, Capsule ovate, oblong, shortly mucronate, 
yellowish and shining, usually shorter than the perianth.
Seeds 
minute, with a very short apiculus at each end.
It is most 
nearly allied to J.
Gerardi Lois.
Description of Plate.
— 1.
Juncm tenuix Willd., specimen from Germany 
(nat.
size).
'2.
Kipe fruit with perianth (enlarged).
3. Capsule dehiscing 
(enlarged).
4. Seeds (nat.
size and enlarged).
OXFOEDSHIKE MOSSES.
By Henry Boswell.
The period elapsed since the publication of the list of Mosses 
in this -Journal for 1872 (pp.
363-374) has been not altogether 
unproductive, rather more than a dozen additional sj)ecies having 
been discovered ; some new localities have been found for others, 
and a few of those only reported as barren have been obtained in 
fruit.
In recording these I take the opportunity of making one or 
two corrections of the previous list, and of enumerating the 
HepaticcB which have come under notice.
These latter are not 
numerous ; they require for the most part even a greater degree of 
shelter and atmospheric moisture than the mosses proper, and a 
drained and cultivated country is unfavourable to the growth of 
the majority of the species.
Mosses.
Dicravoiceissia cirrhata (Hedw.) Lindb.
[WeiHsia).
On thatch of 
an old shed at Ascott-under-Wychwood, in plenty, March, 1879.
The shed has subsequently been removed, and at present I know of 
no other Oxfordshire site for this moss, though it is comparatively 
frequent in the neighbouring county of Worcester, and westwards 
into Herefordshire.
March, A^n-il.
Dicranum majus Turn.
Fruits in the woods about Watlington, 
Stokeuchurch, and Wycombe.
Large but barren in Singe Wood, 
near Witney.
June, July.
Leucohrijuin (jlaucuin Hedw.
Woods near Goring.
Fissidcns jmsilhis Wils.
On both earth and stones in hedge- 
banks near Witney and Hailey.
November to February.
— F.
in- 
curims Sch. Tar Wood ; plentiful.
February, March.
— F.
cxilis 
Hedw.
Tar Wood, with the last ; and at Stockley, Wychwood 
Forest.
Winter.
— F.
inconstans Sch. Founded on my Sunning- 
well specimens, seems to be only a spart of F.
hnjoides, possessing 
no substantial characters.
It occurred in 1880 between Witney 
and Burlord, but 1 could never regard it as a good species.
4 OXFORDSHIRE MOSSES.
Kjihemcmm serration.
Hampe [Phasciwi Sclireb.).
Wychwood 
Forest, near Astlialleigh.
Phascwn muticum Sclireb.
Wychwood, near the last.
• Leptotrichum ftexicauie Hampe (Ditrichum).
— Burford Quarries, 
1873.
Stonesfield, 1874, 1878.
Trichostomum luridum {Dich/modon) Horusch.
On walls at 
Headington Hill and Cumnor Hill ; stones near Sandford Lasher ; 
near Witney ; Asthalleigh and Ascott.
— T.
tophaceiuii Brid.
In 
plentiful fruit on the new embankment by the reservoir at Head- 
ing Hill.
A small form resembling T.
luridum rather than the 
usual states of this plant.
December.
— T.
crispulum.
Bruch.
Holton Stone-pits, scattered among grass in single stems, not 
growing in tufts.
TortuUi aloides Br.
& Sell.
Scarce about Oxford ; more plenti- 
ful near Witney and Hailey.
Winter.
— T.fallax'H.edi^.
North 
side of Shotover Hill above the brick-yards ; near Islip, Bicester, 
and Witney.
November.
— T.
ru/idula Dicks {Didymodon H.
& T,), 
T. ri(jidiUum 13 densumWils., Bryol.
Brit., T.
neylectum Wils.
MS.
Walls and stones near Witney and Asthalleigh, 1877.
Wychwood 
Quarries and by Singe Wood, 1879.
Autumn.
— 1\ sinuosa [Dicra- 
nella) Wils.
MS.
; Didymodon Schpr., Synops.
Very scarce and 
small near Oxford; frequent about Witney, and larger.
Its favourite 
place seems to be the loose soil at foot of a wall, but it occurs also 
on stones, and on trees in watery places.
Wall at Han well, near 
Banbury ; sandy hedge-banks near Henley and Bagley Wood.
A 
singular moss, unknown as yet in fruit ; perhaps will prove even- 
tually merely a depauperated state of the next.
— T.
tortnosa L.
Fine but barren on stone walls at Asthalleigh, and Widford, near 
Bm-ford, 1876, 1879.
— T.
squarrosa Brid.
[Pleurochmte Lindberg).
Holton Stone-pits-, scattered in the same manner as Trichostomum 
crisptdum, and an equally unexpected find.
— T.
marginata Br.
& Sell.
Great Tew, near the church ; plentiful, 1874, H.
B. Magdalen 
College Groves ; scarce, 1884, liev.
H. E.
F. Garnsey.
— T.
latifolia 
Br.
& Scb. Plentiful by the Evenlode, near Ascott, but fruit scarce.
Side of the Cherwell, in Christchurch Meadow, growing on stone, 
and barren.
April.
— T.
papulosa, Wils.
Bare ; on trees near 
Witney, Oxon, and Kennington, Berks.
Zygodon viridisdmus Brid.
Fruit rare ; Bodicote, near Ban- 
bury, H.
B. ; Watereaton, Rev. H.
E. F.
Garnsey.
April.
Ulota intermedia Schpr.
Wychwood Forest ; Stokenchurch ; 
Bagley Wood.
To this belongs the [/.
Bruchii of my former list, 
and also many specimens passing as U.
crisjxi and Bruchii in 
herbaria, — for instance, Mr. Croall's specimens in the ' Plants of 
Braemar.' It appears the most widely sjn-ead of the group, grow- 
ing very much larger in the north : specimens that I gathered in 
Kosshire and Skye are the finest I have seen, but Mr. MacAndrew 
sends nearly as fine from Kirkcudbrightshire, where it grows in 
company v.'itli Bruchii, crispa, crispida, and Drummondii, the last 
two much less plentiful.
July.
Orthotrichum obtusijolium Sclirad.
On two ash trees near 
Wytham Wood, 1878.
Growing with 0.
tenellum and diaphanum.
OXFOEDSHIEE MOSSES.
5 
Bryum albicans Walil.
[Wehera Sell.).
Stone wall by the Cher- 
well, m Christchurch Meadow ; found by Mr. Garnsey.
— B.
incli- 
natum Br.
& Sch. Fine and plentiful on the side of the railway 
between Witney and Bampton.
Wall at Coombe.
May.
— B.
in- 
tennediiim W.
& M.
North side of Shotover Hill, 1883 ; scarce.
October to January.
— B.
enithrocarpum Schwg.
{sanf/uineumljndvf.).
North side of Shotover Hill, growing with B.
turbinatam.
May, 
June.
— B.
pallens Swartz.
North side of Shotover Hill, upon 
sandy ridges ; fine and plentiful, 1884.
July.
— B.
iurhinatum 
Hedw.
This rare species seems to have been destroyed in its old 
site at Bulliugdon, but has lately appeared in fine state at Shotover, 
near the last three species, on wet sandy soil.
May, June.
— B.
roseum Schreb.
Singe Wood, 1880 ; fine, but barren.
Aulacomnujn palustre.
Shotover, with the next.
Philonotis fontana (Bartmmia Brid.).
North side of Shotover 
Hill ; Eynsham Demesnes.
Pofjonatum nanum.
Eynsham Demesnes ; fine.
November.
Cnjphmi heteromalla Hedw.
This was accidentally omitted from 
the former list ; it occurs occasionally upon trees, but is not very 
common.
Bullingdon ; Stokeuchurch ; Kirtlington ; Wychwood ; 
&c.
Fine specimens at Buckland, Berks, in 18G1.
Spring.
Neckera complanata Hedw.
Fruit in Stokenchurch Woods ; 
and plentiful on a stone wall in Tully-bushes, Wychwood Forest.
November.
Brachythecium salebrosum Hoffm.
Hedge-bank between Witney 
and Ducidington, 1876.
December.
— B.
albicans Neck.
On 
thatched roofs about Eynsham, Witney, and Hailey ; more frequent 
than in the immediate neighbourhood of Oxford.
Winter.
— B.
populeum Hedw.
Still seems very scarce ; Mr. Garnsey finds it at 
Headington Copse.
Winter.
Eurhynchiam crassinerviiim Tayl.
Near Witney ; Asthalleigh ; 
Hanwell, near Banbury.
Winter.
Hypnum falcatuin Brid.
Still exists at Bullingdon, but under 
very precarious circumstances, the bog being for the most part 
drained and brought under a sort of cultivation.
H. Sendtneri is 
quite a different thing, and allied to revolvens.
It seems not to be 
found in this region, but is frequent enough in districts of a peaty 
and sandy character.
— H.
arcuatum Lindb.
(not Hedw.) ; H.
pratense 
Wils., Bryol.
Brit, (not Koch) ; H.
Patienticv Lindb.
On heavy 
loam, side of a ride in Coggs Wood.
It seems altogether a summer 
moss, disappearing in winter, when most of the Hypnoid mosses 
flourish.
Sphagnum subsecnndum Nees.
Powder Hill Copse, 1874.
Eams- 
den Heath, 1879.
Coggs Wood, 1880.
The small form usual 
on heaths.
The additional species here enumerated are sixteen in number, 
and_raise our total to 191.
Hepatic^.
Alicidaria scalaris Sclirad [Nardia).
Wychwood Forest, 1879.
Coggs Wood, 1882.
6 OXFORDSHIRK MOSSES.
PliKjlocJiUa asplenioides L.
Damp woods and copses ; frequent, 
and sometimes very large, but always barren.
Shotover ; Head- 
ington Wick Copse ; Wycliwood ; Stokencliurch ; &c.
I have 
fruit from Gloucestershire, and it may be found in the hilly district 
about Stokeuchurcli.
Scapania unduJata Dill., Nees, In a small stream at Coggs 
Wood.
A short, broad, bright green form, very different from those 
found in the mountains.
— S.
nemorosa L., Nees.
Shotover Hill ; 
near Buckland, Berks.
— S.
irrif/iia Nees.
Wet spots in Singe 
Wood, near Witney, January, 1880.
N.B.
— The figure under this 
name in " British Hepaticse," published with ' Science Gossip,' is 
altogether misleading, and seems to have been taken from some 
foreign species, but I cannot find what.
It is very like Gymnanthe 
Wilsoni.
Juw/ermannia albicans L.
Shotover Hill ; Stokeuchurch ; Wycli- 
wood ; Bagley Wood.
— J.
crenulnta Sm. Shotover Hill ; Eamsdeu, 
Wycliwood.
Fruiting in March.
— J.
graciUima Sm.
(<./.
tenerrima 
Radtli.).
Damp ride in a copse near Bagley Wood, with Fleuridlum 
nitidiDii. This seems nothing but a depauperated state of the last ; 
and J.
Genthiana Hueb.
the same.
— J.
spJuerocarpa Hook.
Shotover 
Hill ; Stokeuchurch ; Singe Wood ; Coggs Wood ; Buckland, Berks.
. — J.
pumihi With.
Shotover Hill.
— -/.
I)lciisiddata L.
{Cephalozia 
Dumort., Spruce).
Stokencliurch; Singe Wood; Wychwood 
Forest : and in Windsor Great Park.
LophocoJea hidentata L., Nees.
Frequent in damp woods and 
copses ; fruit occasionally abundant in spring ; Shotover ; Penny- 
well Wood, Elsfield ; Gravehill Wood ; &c.
— L.
heterophi/lla Sclirad., 
Ness.
Stockley Wood, in Wychwood Forest, 1869.
CaUjpogeia Tiicliomanis L., Nees.
Shotover Hill and Plantations ; 
Singe Wood.
lladida complanata L., Dumort.
On trees, not rare ; with 
Neckera compUmata, FrulUmia, &c.
Near Stow Wood ; Yaruton ; 
Noke ; Witney ; &c.
Madotheca platyphijUa L., Dumort.
Shady old walls, sometimes 
forming large patches, but barren.
Shotover; Noke; Hincksey ; 
Elsfield; &c.
FrnUania dilatata L., Nees.
Frequent on trunks of trees, and 
not rarely iu fruit ; Bullingdon ; Yarnton ; Wychwood ; Nune- 
ham, &c.
lilasia pusilla L.
Shotover Hill ; Headington Wick ; Stokeu- 
church.
I'elUa epiphi/lla L.
Bullingdon ; Headington Wick ; Shotover 
Plantations ; Bagley Wood.
Aneura pinguis L.
Bullingdon ; Headington Wick.
— A.
viuldfida 
Dum. North side of Shotover Hill, 1866.
Harpsden, near 
Henley, 1882.
Metzgeria fnrcata Nees.
Shotover ; Stokeuchurch ; Yarnton ; 
near Banbury; &c.
Not infrequent.
— Yax. jj (rniginosa.
Stokeu- 
church ; Goring and Streatley.
Murchantia polgiiiurp/ut L.
Common ; fruiting occasionally.
A 
very large form at Headington Wick, growing between tussocks of 
Canw panicuJata, June 1859 and 1867.
EUGENIAS QUATTUOR NOVAS SINENSES.
7 
Fegatella conica Eaddi { Conocephalns Neck.).
Wet places by 
springs ; fruit, Sliotover Plantations, April, 1859, 18G0.
Wycli- 
wood, 1870.
Lunuhiria vuh/aris Mich.
Sliotover, &c.
; no fruit.
The above are all the Hepaticm I have met with, but four other 
species are given by Sibthorp in the ' Flora Oxou.' as occurring at 
Shotover a century ago, viz., Chiloscijphus polyanthus, Saccogyna 
viticulosa, Lepidozia setacea, and L.
reptans.
EUGENIAS QUATTUOK NOVAS SINENSES 
OSTENDIT H.
F. HaNCE.
1. Eugenia (Syzygium) gracilenta.
— Eamis gracilibus sub- 
quadrangulatis cortice fusco obductis, foliis membranaceis ellipticis 
basi in petiolum bilinealem cuneatim attenuatis apice caudato- 
acuminatis supra parum nitentibus subtus pallidis costa tenui 
leviter prominula nervis pennatis iuconspicuis novellis cano-seri- 
ceis adultis glaberrimis 2:^ poll, longis 10-12 lin.
latis, cymis 
axillaribus bracteis folio homomorpliis prteditis laxe paucifloris 
di-tri-cliotomis tenuibus folio brevioribus, pedicellis filiformibus 2- 
linealibus, calycis cano-sericei tubo campanulato longitudinaliter 
4-sulcato ^ lin.
longo lobis orbiculatis tubo sequilongis, petalis 
orbiculari-ovatis liberis expansis ciliatis albis lineam longis.
Ad Sai-chii-shan, juxta 11.
North Eiver, prov.
Cantonensis, m.
Dec. 1883, coll.
rev.
B. C.
Henry.
(Herb, propr.
n. 22268).
Affinis E.
micranth(B Thw.
!, Syzijgio tenuifioro Brongn.
! e Nova 
Caledonia, specieique ex eadem insula, u.
2627 !
a cl.
Vieillard in- 
signitae.
Specimina cognatae speciei E.
acuminatissimm Kurz !
cum 
exemplaribus a b.
Heifer in Tenasserim lectis optime congruenti- 
bus, in ins.
Hong-Kong, a.
1879, invenit cl.
C. Ford.
2. Eugenia (Syzygium) tephrodes.
— Glaberrima, ramis ramu- 
lisque tetragonis marginatis cortice fibroso soluto pallido tectis, 
foliis coriaceis ovatis v.
ovato-lauceolatis obtusis v.
obtuse acumi- 
natis basi cordatis utrinque opacis subtus cinereo-albidis venis sub- 
tus tantum prominulis subsessilibus 10-18 lin.
longis 6-10 lin.
latis, cymis ramulos terminantibus multitloris erectis 2|- poll, 
longis, iioribus subsessilibus, calycis tubo clavato-oblongo corru- 
gato cinereo-albido 2^ lin, longo lobis semi-orbiculatis \ liuealibus, 
petalis orbiculatis lineam longis calyptratim secedeutibus quam 
stamina triplo brevioribus.
Juxta Ka-chik, ins.
Hai-nan, d.
30 Nov. 1882, invenit rev.
B. 
C. Henry.
(Herb, propr.
n. 22250).
Arte affinis Syzy<jio pseudo-caryophyUo Vieill.
! e Nova Caledonia ; 
quae reticulatione foliorum majorum, siccitate rubentium, pr£esertim 
differt.
3. Eugenia (Syzygium) Henryi.
— Glaberrima, cortice saturate 
cinereo, ramis toretibus, ramulis quadraugulatis, foliis coriaceis 
8 ON SENECIO SPATHULJEFOLIUS DC.
elliptico-lanceolatis obtusis v.
obtuse subacuminatis supra nitidis 
costa impressis nervis inconspicuis subtus pallentibus costa promi- 
nula venis tenuibus vix conspicuis 1^ poll, longis 5-B lin.
latis 
brevissime petiolatis, cymis tcrminalibus necuon ex axillis superi- 
oribus oriundis pancifloris, floribus brevissime pedicellatis, calycis 
subinfuudibularis tubo minute ruguloso v.
pustulate 3-lineali lobis 
minutis ad margincm truncatum recurvum fere reductis, petalis 
obovatis pellucido-punctatis calycem parum superantibus liberis, 
staminibus petalis longioribus a stylo superatis.
In ins Hai-nan, j)rope Wo-sbi, d.
31 Oct. 1882, leg.
rev.
B. C.
Henry.
(Herb, propr.
n. 222G3).
Juxta E.
Championi Bentb.
! collocanda, qu£e vero discedit 
foliis minoribus, distinctius veuosis, calycibusque duplo minoribus 
basi exquisitius attenuatis.
4. Eugenia (Syzygium) myrsinifolia.
— Prutex 12-pedalis, 
glaberrimus, ramis teretibus, ramulis compressis, foliis coriaceis 
oblongis obtusis basi in petiolum 1\ lin.
longum subangustatis 
utrinque opacis subtus pallidioribus costa supra impressa subtus 
prominente venis pennatis subtus magis conspicuis tenuibus densi- 
usculis vena intramarginali unitis 3-pollicaribus 7-10 lin.
latis, 
cymis terminalibus tricbotomis densis fastigiatis, pedicellis | lin.
longis, calycis tubo obconico 2 lin.
alto margine truncato, petalis 
calyptratim secedentibus, genitalibus e calyce longe exsertis, bacca 
ovoidea 4 lin.
diametro limbo calycino truncato conspicue coronata.
In tcrritorio indigenarum ins.
Hai-nan, Lai dictorum, d.
21 
Nov. 1882, leg.
rev.
B. G.
Henry.
(Herb, propr.
n. 22277).
Aftiuis Fj. cuneatm Wall.
! sed differt foliis duplo minoribus, 
cymis multifloris, fastigiatis.
Fructus edulis.
ON SENECIO SPATHUL.EFOLIUS DC.
By J.
G. Bakee, F.E.S.
My own impression with regard to Senecio spathulqfolius, if I 
may be excused for expressing a difference from the views of two 
such high authorities as Professor Babington and Sir J.
D. Hooker, 
is that the Holyhead plant is substantially the Senecio spathuhpfolius 
of DeCandolle, but that it is only a variety of S.-campestris, with the 
characters that Sir J.
D. Hooker has assigned to it in placing it as 
such.
Take the two plants in combination, and they extend over 
a geographical area reaching from Britain and Scandinavia in the 
north-west, through Central Europe to Spain, Italy, Croatia, 
Servia, and Transylvania, and crossing the Ural through the 
whole breadth of Siberia to Manchuria and Kamschatka.
This 
aggregate is represented in the Kew Herbarium by two large 
bundles, containing specimens of upwards of fifty different gather- 
ings from various countries through this wide area, and in 
attempting to sort out the spathuUifuliHs from the caiiipcstris I have 
utterly failed in drawing any clear line of demarcation between the 
two.
The types of the two are characterised excellently in Koch's 
Synopsis, but between campestris as figured in ' English Botany ' 
THE BOTANY OF THE BARROW.
9 
and spathulafoUus as figured in Reichenbach's ' Plantfe Criticae,' 
fig.
240, one finds eveiy intermediate gradation in robustness of 
habit, in the shape, texture and petiolation of tlie leaves, in the 
number and size of the capitula, and in the vestiture of the leaves 
and involucral bracts.
In Britain the genuine campestris, so far as 
I have had the opportunity of seeing it, grows on the dry turf of 
the top of our chalk downs, associated with such jjlants as Canlaus 
acaulis, Gentinna campestris, and Amarella and Chlora perfoliata.
Take a Composite from a station like this and place it for once on 
a sea-cliff, and a great difference in size and luxuriance may 
reasonably be expected.
I have not yet seen the Micklefell speci- 
mens, but shall be surprised if they agree with the Holyhead form.
Another point to be considered is that here, as in many other 
cases, making two species needlessly out of one lands us in a 
suppositious geographical anomaly.
According to Grenier and 
Godron, there is no campestris at all in France, but all the French 
plant is spatlinheJ'uUus. But cross the Channel, and immediately 
on the chalk downs of Sussex and the Isle of Wight campestris 
begins, and there is no spathidcBfuiius till the whole breadth of 
England and Wales is crossed.
Speaking from a geographical 
point of view, one would not care to believe in such an anomaly as 
this, unless there were very decided evidence in its favour.
I find 
that in ' Topographical Botany ' we made a mistake in registering 
both campestris and spathuUrfolius from Anglesea.
Campestris is 
given on the authority of Mr. John Ball, and I find on referring to 
his specimens in Mr. Watson's herbarium that it represents the 
ordinary Holyhead maritima.
In connection with the matter 
reference may also be made to Prof.
Babington's note in 'Loudon's 
Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
v., p.
88, where two extreme 
forms of the Cambridgeshire plant are figured, and to a note at 
page 43 of the ' Report of the Botanical Record Club for 1883.' 
Finally, Prof.
Babiugton is mistaken in supposing that DeCau- 
dolle nowhere quotes the name " Cineraria lanceolata, Lam. Fl.
Franc, ii.
125." He will find it duly cited in the 'Prodromus,' not 
in connection with spathido'/oHns, but as a synonym of S.
campestris 
j3.
vulyaris, and yet of course it refers to a plant native in France.
THE BOTANY OF THE BARROW.
By H.
C. Hart, B.A.
. The River BarroAv takes its rise on the north side of the Slieve 
Bloom Mountains, in the north-west of the Queen's County.
From here it runs north for a short distance, and then east to 
Monasterevan, on the borders of the same county.
From Monas- 
terevan the Barrow runs south, separating Kildare from Queen's 
County till it reaches Carlow, and subsequently it divides the 
latter county from Kilkenny, becoming tidal at St. Mullins.
A little 
loYv^er, having received the waters of the Nore, it becomes a wide 
estuary at New Ross.
Widening farther south it receives the Sun-, 
10 THE BOTANY OF THE BAEROW.
and helps to form the noble inlet of Waterford Harbour.
From its 
source to its union with the Nore the Barrow is about 110 miles in 
length, and from Millford, in Carlow, to New Ross, in Wexford, 
the scenery is in many places very lovely ; Graiguenamanagh and 
the wooded declivities along the reaches past Borris and St. Mullius 
are scenes of extreme beauty.
The upper half of the river, from the base of the Slieve Blooms 
to Atliy, is an uncertain wandering through a plain where the river 
frequently loses itself in a swampy fiat, to be converted into a 
shallow lake in winter — an undrained and undrainable region, 
rendered hopelessly so by the numerous weirs and mill-dams from 
Athy onwards.
This part of the river is rich in marsh species — 
many local ones abound ; and ducks and other aquatic birds breed 
here undisturbed in vast numbers.
Numerous ruins of castles, 
some noble, others merely picturesque, as well as several hand- 
somely castellated and imposing mills adorn the banks.
Wooded 
demesnes lie along, and sametimes, as at Garryhinch, lie under the 
water for a considerable distance.
Continually was I asked the 
all-important question, "Will the drainage be finished this year?
" 
and I found it useless to attempt to deny my coimection with a 
company said to exist for that purpose.
What could a man with 
neither gun, rod, nor dog otherwise be up to ?
For a considerable distance (from Athy to St. MuUins) there 
is a tow-path for canal-boats either actually on the bank of the 
Barrow or else a few perches from it, on the parallel canal, where 
the two arc not in combination.
I was always careful to follow 
that bank of the river which was not under this contaminating 
influence.
This of course was entirely m opposition to the common- 
sense views of occasional well-wishers and would-be guides along 
its course, and no doubt the labour would have been greatly 
reduced had I accepted advice ; but the natural and swampy side 
had undeniable claims on a botanist.
I spent 5^ days on this 
exploration, taking another day among the bogs, and up the Black 
or Figile river, near Monasterevan.
My travels lay chiefly in 
District III.
of the ' Cybele Hibernica,' but in the upper part of the 
river I started along Districts VII.
and V.
To the floras of these 
three districts I added upwards of seventy plants.
Amongst these 
species thus discovered in new localities are NasUirtium sylvestre.
Campanula Trachelinm, and Carex axillaris, the first two of which 
were previously known from a single Irish district apiece, while the 
latter has been authenticated from a single locality only — that of 
Kinsale, in Cork.
Again, it was very interesting to observe the 
striking abundance of some very local species in Ireland, such as 
Stellaria (jhiiica, Gbjceria aquatica, and Scirpus sijlraticiis ; while 
numerous uncommon plants were found in new habitats.
The River Barrow, it may be seen, has received little attention 
at the hands of botanists.
In the ' Cybele Hibernica,' under 
Butomns nmhcllatus, will be found the words, " Sent from the Barrow 
to Threlkeld." I was always on the look-out for this species, but 
without success.
Again, in the Supplement to the Cybele, we find 
under Glyceria aquatica, "In the Barrow, below Carlow; R.
Clayton 
THE BOTANY OF THE BAREOW.
11 
Browne." This species extends almost the entire length of the 
river.
One or two other less noteworthy references occur.
I will now enumerate the species I met with, which are not 
recorded from their respective districts in the ' Cybele Hibernica ' 
or its Hupplement : — 
District V.
Nasturtium sylvestre.
Sagittaria sagittifolia.
Carex vesicaria.
New localities were also found for Ch^rophtjllum teimdum, Ver- 
bena ojjicinalis, Stellaria (jlauca, liumex HydrolapatJmm, Glyceria 
aijuatica, MyyioplDjllum verticiUatmn, and other scarce plants.
District VII.
Eanunculus Lingua 
Stellaria glauca 
Cerastium glomeratum 
Lychnis vespertina 
(Enanthe fistulosa 
Helosciadium inundatum 
Daucus Carota 
Myriophyllum verticillatum 
Eosa arvensis 
Pyrus Aria 
Tragopogon pratense 
Apargia hispida 
Crepis paludosa 
Campanula Trachelium 
Potamogeton heterophyllus 
Juncus glaucus 
Scirpus sylvaticus 
Carex disticha 
C. vesicaria 
C. acuta 
C. remota 
Bromus commutatus 
Alopecurus geniculatus 
District III.
Eanunculus pseudo-fluitans 
Nasturtium amphibium 
N. sylvestre 
Stellaria glauca 
Sagina ciliata 
Lepigonum rubrum ?
Eosa tomentosa 
Eubus CEesius 
Pyrus Aucuparia 
P. Aria 
Myriophyllum verticillatum 
M. spicatum 
ffinanthe Phellandrium 
(E.
fistulosa 
Anthriscus vulgaris 
Hieracium boreale 
Crepis paludosa 
Veronica scutellata 
Eumex Hydrolapathum 
Salix jpeutandra 
S. repens 
Habenaria chlorantha 
Spargauium minimum 
S. simplex 
Lemna trisulca 
Potamogeton rufescens (?) 
P. perfoliatus 
P. j)ectinatus 
Scirpus sylvaticus 
Carex paniculata 
C. muricata 
C. axillaris 
C. acuta 
C. fulva 
C. stricta 
C. binervis 
C. pallescens 
C. pendula 
C. rip aria 
Bromus commutatus 
Festuca arundinacea 
F. myurus (?) 
Mihnm effiisum 
Melica uuitlora 
Trisetum fliavescens 
Equisetum palustre 
E. variegatum 
E. sylvaticum 
Cystopteris fragilis 
12 THE BOTANY OF THE BARROW.
Some of the foregoing have no doubt been recorded elsewhere, 
since the publication of the ' Cybele Hibernica,' from these districts.
A list of gaps like the above shows how much remains to be done 
in ascertaining the distribution of our Irish plants.
I will now 
give a running account of my exploration, so as to point out the 
habitats of the rarer plants.
On June 20th I made an excursion towards the Barrow from 
Graigavern, where I was experiencing the hospitality of some friends 
and relatives.
Graigavern lies about three miles south-west from 
Monasterevan, in the Queen's County, and abont two miles west of 
the river, which has here turned to its southern destination.
In 
its immediate neighbourhood Viola odorata, Listera ovata, Arum 
maculatioit, liijpericiim AmlroscRmum, and Viburnum Opidus were 
prominent species.
A couple of miles south of Graigavern, between 
Ballybrittas and the Barrow, is an extensive bog, which is inter- 
sected also by the Grand Canal, Here I spent some hours.
The 
species noted were Carduus jiratensis, Carex pulicaris, C.
paniculata, 
C. acuta, C.
fulva, Osmunda regalis, Drosera rotxindifolia, Potamogeton 
jnisilhis, Utricularia vulgaris, Sparganium yninimum, Catabrosa aqua- 
tica, Banunculus sclcratus, L'emna trisulca, Kiipatorium cannabinum, 
Bidens cernna, and commoner sorts.
This bog is a breeding resort 
for redshanks and teals, and many other aquatic birds.
Towards 
Ballybrittas, by the "Waterfall" river, I saw Juncus glaucus, 
(Enanthe Fhellandrium, ALisma ranunculoides, Silene infiata, and 
Ophioglossum imlgatum ; and near "Allan Yorks" Bridge Chlora 
perfoliata, Daucus Carota, Chelidoniiim majns, and Saponaria 
ojjicinalis.
About Ballybrittas Vibunnmi Opulus, Tragopogon pra- 
tense, and Exionymus eurojmus are frequent.
Near Graigavern 
Potamogeton crispus, Helosciadium inundatum, and Orchis incarnata 
occurred.
These remarks apply to District III., and several of 
the above are additions to its flora.
On June 21st I started from Monasterevan up the Kiver Barrow.
A little above the town were (Enanthe PhclJandrium , Klodea canadensis, 
Sium, nodiflorum, Nuphar lutea, Fianunculus pseudo-jiuitans, and the 
commoner pond-weeds occur.
A very conspicuous plant here is a 
large, rather wrinkle-leaved, reddish pond-weed, which had no trace 
of inflorescence, but is, I believe, P.
rnfescens.
The river here is 
about twenty yards across, deep, and sluggish.
The country round 
is so flat that after continuous rain the floods are sometimes so 
extensively spread as to drown large tracts.
An Englishman with 
utilitarian views, who visited this district recently under such cir- 
cumstances, remarked with becoming superiority that, had they 
such sheets of water in his neighbourhood, piers, boat-houses, 
steamers, and considerable traffic would be the natural and imme- 
diate consequence.
The plants last mentioned, with Lijchnis 
vespertina by the water's edge, in shady thickets of blackthorn, and 
Carex vesicaria, L'oa aquatica, Viburiinm Opulus, and Apargia hispida 
are frequent on both jjanks, north and sou.th, i.
e., District VII.
and 
District V., for the river here divides them.
At Baylough Bridge, a couple of miles west of Monasterevan, 
I crossed to the north bank of the river into District VII.
THE BOTANY OF THE BAREOW.
13 
Euonyvms and Viburnum are frequent and characteristic.
In heavy 
ditches parallel to the river Carex acuta, C.
stricta, C.
disticha, and 
M yriophijllum verticiUaUim are not unfrequent.
(-.
stricta forms 
large tussocks, from which the pale flowering stems spreads out as 
the fronds from the crown of a shield-fern.
In these wet meadows 
and ditches, swamps in winter, the plants noted were Carex fulva, 
which forms the main herbage, Juncns (jlaucus, Listera ovata, Samo- 
lus Valerandi, Geum rivale, CEnantlie Pliellandrium, Solanum Dulca- 
mara, Nuphar lutea, Fotamo(jeton pectinatus, and Stellaria glauca.
The latter is very local in Ireland, but it occurs in many places 
here and elsewhere along the Barrow.
Catahrosa aquatica and 
Botrychium Lunariu occurred along here also, and in the stream 
Nasturtium amphibium begins to be frequent.
Bromus commutatus 
also occurs.
Opposite Lea Castle Carex vesicaria is abundant, 
while Lysimacliia vulgaris, Myosotis palustris, Tlialictrum viajus, 
Hippuris, Alchemilla vulgaris, Fotaviogeto7i pectinatus, and P.
lucens 
are frequent.
Here I first met a very handsome species, Scirpus 
sylvaticus, which is very local in Ireland.
Twayblade is extra- 
ordinarily abundant along the riverside banks.
The Barrow here 
is only of ordinary beauty ; Lea Castle is, however, an imposing 
ruin.
Between it and Portarlington Pyrus Aria, Crepis jxdudosa, 
Alnus glutiiiosa, Epilobium, hirsutum, Alopecitrus geniculatus, Sym- 
phytum, vulyare, and Tragupugun pratense are prevailing species, and 
those previously mentioned mostly occur again.
At Portarlington 
I rested for lunch.
By the railway banks I noted Orchis jnjrami- 
dalis.
Here for a space the river lies entirely in District III.
; the 
county boundary and it part company for one mysterious mile.
Carex vesicaria, C.
acuta, Myriophyllum verticillatum, and Scirpus 
sylvaticus all still aj)pear.
The water-lily is all the yellow Xupkar.
The river is here much prettier, winding amongst timber and 
wooded slopes.
Elodea canadensis was noted, as well as Valeriana 
officinalis and Alliaria officinalis.
The abundance of Tragopogon 
pratense is quite unusual.
On the left bank of the river here, about 
a mile above Portarlington, I gathered Campanula Trachelium, one 
of the rarest Irish plants, and found elsewhere only by the Nore in 
Kilkenny.
There was not much of it here, where it occurs a few 
yards from the river on steep banks amongst brambles and under 
trees.
With it occurred Uanunculus auricomus.
The locality is 
near the point marked Barrow Bank House on the map.
Easj)berry 
occurs along here, and nearer to Kilnahown Bridge Sium angusti- 
folia, Carex ronota, and C.
sylvatica.
Dogwood is also abundantly 
established.
Here I gathered a sportive hose-in-hose Geum rivale, 
which produced a pretty effect.
I was now in Garryhinch, a 
beautiful place, but subjected evidently to extensive inundations.
Stagnant inlets and deep slime -pits abound near the water and 
amongst the trees, but the vegetation is most luxuriant, and here 
Scirpus sylvaticus grows in the greatest profusion with the Lysimachia, 
Thalictrum, and Myriophyllum already mentioned.
Here, too, 
Aquilegia vidgaris occurs as a native.
Rusa arvensis adorns these 
woods also, and a little past Garryhinch Leontodou hispidum is a 
prevalent weed.
Towards Mountmellick I met ^Eyupudium Poda- 
14 THE BOTANY OF THE BAKROW.
graria, Ribes Grossularia, Saponaria officinalis, Lychnis vesj)ertina, 
Knautia arvensis, Orifjcinuni vtih/are, and BromuH cownutatus again.
I found clean and comfortable accommodation at the inn at Mount- 
mellick.
On Thursday the 22nd June I drove to the eastern base of 
Clarnahinch Mountains, in the Slieve Blooms, and, having crossed 
the famous ridge of Capard, descended to the west at the head of 
Glenbarrow, where the river takes its rise.
I crossed this sandstone 
ridge at about IGOO feet, and the mountain and upland plants 
noted were Habenaria cldoruntha, Equisetum sylvaticum, Juncus 
squarrosus, Carcx binervis, Nartlieciimi Ossifragum, Kmpetrum nigrum, 
Scirpus cicspitosns ; and, by the source of river, Antennaria dioica.
A 
little down I met with Pyrm Aucuparia, Lycopodium Selago, Teucrium 
Scorodonia, Ajuga repens, Saruthamnus scoparius, Hieracium Pilosella, 
XJlex europaus, Carduus pratensis, Pinguicida vulgaris, and GratcBgus 
Oxyacantha, all above 1000 feet above sea-level.
At about this 
height Draba verna and Betida vidgaris occurred by the river, and a 
little lower Fragaria vesca and Aspidium aculeatum appeared also.
The upper limit of bracken [Pteris aqidlifia) was about 1051 feet, 
and between that and 950 feet were noticed Viburnum Opulus, 
Fraxinus excelsior, Epilobium montanuni , Corylus Avellana, Rosa tomen- 
tosa, Bunium Jiexuosum, Allium ursinum, Centaurea nigra, Scilla 
nutans.
Orchis mascula, Qucrcus Robur, Carex ovalis, (J.
fidva, and 
Listera ovata.
Between 950 and 800 feet I noted Briza media, Rubus 
saxatilis, Asperxda odorata, Carlina vulgaris and Cystopteris fragilis.
I have entered into some details here, as the subject of alti- 
tudinal range has occupied my attention much, and several of 
the above have not been recorded so high in Ireland elsewhere.
The characteristic plants of this part of the Barrow, which occu- 
pies a wide stony bed between banks of sand and gravel, are 
Aspidium aculeaUmi and Antennaria dioica, which occur in unusual 
plenty.
I was pleased to find also an abundant growth of 
Cystopteris fragilis ; a single plant somewhere in Carlow was not 
sufficient to entitle a fern to a place in the flora of District III.
From this headquarters, the station on the Barrow Bridge at 
Monasterevan, which I subsequently verified, has been no doubt 
derived.
This latter is the only one for District V.
A little lower 
I met with Frigenm acris, Anthyllis Vidneraria, and Samolus Valerandi ; 
and here I was fairly out of the mountains.
Eqmsetum^ maximum, 
Eupatorium cannabinum, Gymnadenia albida, and Carex pallescens 
occurred on the right bank a little above Tiunehinch Bridge.
Here 
are wide gravel beds, which are frequently under water, and several 
plants of interest occur, as EJqidsetiim.
variegatum, Lycopodium selagi- 
noides, Parnassia palustris, Ophrys apifera, Erythrcea Centaurium, 
Chlora  perfoliata, and Epipactis palustris.
Past the bridge, Salix 
repens, Carex hirta, Juncus glaucus, I^oa rigida, Festuca sciuroides, 
Arenaria serpyllifolia, and Draba verna vary the ground, while 
Carlina and Antennaria are still abundant on the limestone gravel.
The banks are enlivened along here by numbers of goldfinches ; it 
was delightful to see this scarce and diminishing species so common.
Black-headed gulls also were of common occurrence.
About a mile 
THE BOTANY OF THE BAEEOW.
15 
below Tinnehincli Bridge the river becomes somewhat satisfied 
witli its course, and flows between its banks.
From the mountains 
to the bridge is a lake after floods.
The Barrow now skirts the 
east edge of Monettia Bog, into which I made a slight detour.
Curlew, golden plover, and gulls abounded.
No plants of interest 
were seen, excepting Veronica ncutellata, but I made little way 
owing to the depth of the bog-holes.
From this point a noticeable 
feature is Salix pentandra, which is, however, a questionable native.
If it be introduced, it has now spread on to old bogs and unbroken 
ground in many places between this and Monasterevan, and I think 
it is very likely wrong to challenge it.
I have little doubt it is 
native in Donegal, Derry, and Antrim.
A more interesting species 
was, however, gathered here ; Carcx axillaris was discovered in its 
second Irish locality.
Mr. More, who saw my specimen, states that 
a salt-marsh near Kinsale is the only other habitat whence he has 
seen the true plant.
Sir J.
Hooker gives his opinion that it is 
probably a hybrid between C retitota and either C.
vtclpina or 
C'.
miiricata.
"When I gathered it I took it for granted it was 
a hybrid between C.
remota and C.
vuljrina, which both occurred 
with it.
I had not previously seen the plant.
In the water Pota- 
mogeton jjerfoliatns is common, and on its banks Kquisetum palustre 
occurred.
Some of these plants may be deemed unworthy of 
notice, but the botany of this part of Ireland has hardly been 
touched.
I noted Thrincia hirta, as well as Apargia hispida, here- 
abouts.
This river works along through a plain, above which it 
flows between artificial banks, which it can tear down and flood 
when so disposed, and which make walking a villainous torture and 
botany a fraud.
Viburnum Opuliis and Salix pentandra are the only 
objects of interest ; the former very pretty with its discs of white 
standing out above the foliage.
Somewhere about Two-mile Bridge 
I got dreadfully entangled in hawthorn thickets, and saw Carex 
acuta, which afterwards becomes frequent a little below the bridge.
Orchis Morio is very plentiful with commoner species, and along 
here Ehawnus catharticus is very common.
Thalictrum majus and 
Scirfus syhaticus have their upper limit here.
Adder's-tongue is 
remarkably common, and Bromus cummutatus frequent.
I reached 
Mountmellick before dusk, glad to have accomplished what I 
feared I should not be able to do in a day.
I had now done the 
river as far as Monasterevan ; it must be admitted in somewhat a 
rapid fashion, but river species have usually a lengthened extent, 
so that one is less likely to lose by rapidity than in other expeditions 
of the kind.
If a species be skipped along the banks it is most 
probable it will give another chance lower down.
Near Monasterevan the county boundaries of Kildare, King's 
County, and Queen's County are most confusing, being sometimes 
along the Barrow, sometimes along the FigileEiver, and occasionally 
scooping cantles from each other regardless of all order and of 
both rivers.
On the 23rd June I made an excursion up the Black Kiver 
northwards from Monasterevan.
This river is, I think, larger at 
this point than the Barrow, and is formed of three streams.
Cushina, 
16 THE BOTANY OF THE BARROW.
Slate, and Figile rivers.
In it I noticed Foa aquatica, Ranunculus 
Lingua, Potaningcton Iieterophyllus, P.
lucens and P.
rufescens (?), 
Sai/ittaria sagittifolia and Carex resicaria.
The Black Eiver is here 
the boundary between District V.
and VII.
In fields near I noted 
CardmiH jjycnocephalus, not often seen so far from the coast.
By 
the Grand Canal, which here complicates the geography still 
further, I gathered Potamor/eton densus, Q^nanthe PhelUmdrium var.
tinciatilis (a frequent and undistinguishable form), and Carex 
vmricatd.
By the Barrow, below Monasterevan, at Moore Abbey, 
ThaUctrum majus, Poa aquatica, and on the bridge Gystopteris 
//•rt//«7/s were observed.
Carex vesicaria, C.
acuta, Lysimachiainilgaris, 
Sparganiuin simplex, CEnanthe PlieUandrium, and Mgriophglhun verti- 
cillatum are frequent.
After about two miles I gathered Nasturtitmi 
sglvestre, which was common in low wet meadows on the right 
bank.
A single locality on the Suir and another on the Blackwater 
were its only known habitats in Ireland.
It is plentiful along this 
part of the Barrow.
N. pa lust re was also observed.
Klodea 
canadensis occurs occasionally.
"White water-lily first appears 
about here, appearing to like deeper and more stagnant water than 
its yellow relative.
Carex stricta occurs also, and Rhamnus cathar- 
ticus commonly below Kiverstone House.
I left the river for the 
day at Old Fort Bridge (Dunvally on the map).
Since the imion 
of the Black Eiver the Barrow has become a goodly stream, but its 
course here is through a dull county for a considerable distance.
On June 24th I kept the left bank from the Old Fort Bridge.
There appeared to be two considerable tributaries on the right 
bank and only one on the left, but this one when I came to it was 
quite unnegotiable, a deep stagnant trough of mud, weeds and 
water, which I could neither wade, jump, nor swim.
I was 
doubled back here to Cloney Bridge, and lost much time before I 
regained the Barrow.
Prior to the Cloney I had noticed no new 
plants.
Nasturtium amphibium, as well as the other two mentioned 
above were there, the N.
sglvestre being frequent.
Festuca arundi- 
nacea is also common.
At this contumacious tributary I first saw 
Rumex Hydrolapathum, and in the extended swamp I had to cross to 
reach Cloney I3ridge I saw it in several places.
Frequently I 
tried this treacherous stream, but had to desist.
Carex paniculata 
and C.
stricta were large and plentiful by its edges.
The place was 
horrible, and, judging from the multitude of i-edshauks and wild 
duck, is seldom disturbed.
Having at length got back to the 
Barrow, the great abundance of Poa aquatica was noticeable.
It 
forms a wide fringe on either side continuously, almost throughout 
the greater part of its course, and it appears to be highly valuable, 
for cattle wade out as far as they dare to browse on it.
A little 
before Athy I met with Stellaria glauca again, and on ditch banlvs 
leading down to the river ClicBrophylluni temulum was gathered in 
two or three places.
At Athy C/tenopodium Bomis-Henricus occurs, 
and close by, along the towing-path below the town, Verbena 
officinalis, rare except in the south, and probably brought up by the 
traffic.
From this point there is usually a tow-path belonging to the 
THE BOTANY OF THE BAEEOW.
17 
" Barrow Navigation Company " I believe, on one side or the other 
of the river, or along some canal close by.
This objectionable and 
injurious construction has banished many interesting plants from 
its side of the Barrow, and limited my choice of walking con- 
siderably, as I was of course compelled to follow the side of the 
river where the path did not lie.
Kind remarks were frequently 
addressed to me on the subject, but I paid them no attention.
On 
excursions like this, if there is anything whatever to be gained 
by asking a peasant the way, it is to learn which way he 
considers impossible and the worst, and to choose that without 
a moment's hesitation.
Below Athy I kept the right bank of 
the river in District III.
GeraniiDii pyrenaicum and Stellaria 
glauca were seen and most of the larger river plants already 
mentioned.
Myriophyllum spicatum was noticed, and the large 
dock has become abundant.
At Kilmoroney Crepis paludusa and 
the white Lychnis were the only novelties.
In consequence of 
my delay in the morning it was dusk when I reached Magauey 
Bridge, and I luckily caught a train to Carlow, where I slept that 
night.
On the 25tli I drove out to Maganey.
Between Carlow and 
Maganey I noted Orchis pyramidalis, Geranium pyrenaicum, Viola 
odorata, Lithospermum arvense, and Ch(BrophylLum teynuluin.
From 
Maganey Bridge to Carlow Carex acuta, C.
vesicaria, Thalictrwii, 
Poa, Lysimachia, Riimex, and Myriophyllum of the large river kinds, 
all occurred to Carlow.
Sagittaria was seen in one place, and by 
Mark's Grange, Polygonum Bistorta is a common weed in an old 
meadow, with Orchis pyramidalis and Chlora perfoliata.
About half- 
way between Maganey and Carlow I left Queen's County, and the 
Barrow lies entirely in Carlow and District III.
At Shrule Castle 
I noticed Car ex muricata for the second time.
Near Knockleg 
Stellaria glauca is common in a rushy field, and Nasturtium amphi- 
bium occurred again ; it had been absent for many miles.
Potamo- 
geton perfoliatus and P.
heterophyllus are common.
Back to lunch 
at Carlow in afternoon.
I noticed Avena Jiavescens close to the 
town.
After Carlow I saw Sagittaria once more, and near Milford 
Stellaria glauca, Carex acuta, and the large Rumex.
At Milford the 
Barrow begins to grow pretty, and its beauty here is much enhanced 
by the picturesque situation of some handsome mills amongst 
timber, by a lovely bridge with three high semicircular arches.
On the bridge I noticed Sagiiia ciliata.
There I crossed to the left 
bank to avoid the tow-path, and found in thickets Lycopus europceus.
A little farther down was a wonderful display of yellow Iris in full 
flower.
It formed an inland belt of about fifty yards for more than 
half a mile parallel to the river ; outside it an abundant growth of 
Caltha jyaliistris, a,t the water's edge and out as far as shallow Poa 
aquatica, and in the deep water Potamogeton lieterophyllus and Spar- 
ganium minimum form the predominant vegetation.
About two and 
a half miles below Milford, on hedge-banks down the Barrow, I 
gathered Clmrophyllum temulum again, and in plenty about three- 
quarters of a mile from Leighliu Bridge.
CEnanthe Phellandrium is 
always frequent.
At Leighlin Bridge Senehiera didyma, Sambucus 
Journal of Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[January, 1885.] o 
18 THE BOTANY OF THE BARROW.
Ebulus, and Anthriscus vulgaris occurred.
A little below, a rare 
grass, Festuca loliacea, was met with in rich meadows near the 
water's edge, on the right bank : it is a form of F.
pmtensis.
Along here the river is lovely, winding along in bold sweeps 
in a richly wooded country.
About a mile above Bagenals-town, 
where I stopped for the night, I gathered Stellaria rjlauca again, 
and opposite the village the great water dock [Humex llijdro- 
lapntliwii).
On the 26th I followed the river by the right bank from Bagenals- 
town to New Eoss.
A little way past Bagenals-town C/ucruphtjUiim 
temulum is abundant below the bridge.
Lijsimachia vub/aris, Poa 
aquutica, Carex acuta, C paludosa, Myriophylliim verticillatum, and 
the Stellaria and Rhdwx above mentioned occurred to Gores Bridge.
Between Gores Bridge and Ballytegelea Bridge Thalictrum majiis, 
Malva moschata, Euonymus europcRus, may be mentioned, and past the 
bridge Nasturtium amphibium and N.
sylvestre were seen again.
Here I passed through Borris demesne, still keeping the right 
bank.
In the woods by the water's edge the interesting species were 
Crepis paludosa, (Fnanthe crocata, and Milium efusum.
In these 
woods were a number of jays, which are scarce birds in Ireland.
A little below Borris I gathered in a thicket Carex hdvigata, Habcnaria 
chlorantha ; Carex fiilva and Rumex and Stellaria still occur.
Thalic- 
trum majus also turned up again, and here for the first time along 
the Barrow Scrophularia aquatica appeared.
At Graigueuamanagh, 
on the river wall on the right bank, Hieracium sahaudum grows.
Here I rested for afternoon tea, and following the same bank I 
came in for some very severe work, especially along the wooded 
cliffs opposite St. Mullins.
The tide reaches as far as St. MuUins 
and some species speedily disappear or keep well above the bed of 
the stream.
In the water, however, (Fnanthe Phellandrium, Alisma 
Plavtaijo, and Poa aquatica still hold their own.
(Fnanthe crocata 
becomes more abundant, as does also Elodea cafiadensis, since the 
water is more stagnant.
The first salt-marsh plant to appear is 
Scirpus maritimus.
Lower down Carex riparia is very abundant.
In the thicket opposite St. Mullins Carex pendula and Milium 
efusum both grow, the former beautiful species being very thinly 
distributed in Ireland.
The later part of this days' work was done 
in the dusk, and somewhere about Carranvor I had to leave the 
river and got completely bewildered as to my whereabouts, so that 
I have little to say about the vegetation of the lower reaches, which 
are of the nature of an estuary.
Just here the Nore flows in, and 
at New Ross the two streams in union form a glorious prospect.
Near New Ross I observed Fchium.
vuhjare, Dipsacus sijlcestris, and 
Scrophularia aquatica, along the road to Waterford.
The remainder 
of this herborization belongs to my report on the Cummeragh 
Mountains.
<> 
19 
A SYNOPSIS OP THE GENUS 8KLAGINELLA.
By J.
G. Bakee, F.R.S., &c.
(Continued from vol.
xxii., \>.
'^11).
197.
S. cuspiDATA Link Fil. Hort.
Berol.
158.
— S.
incana Spring 
Mon. ii.
157.
— S.
densi/olia, pallescens, and reticulata Klotzscli.
— 
Lycopodium cusjddatum Link.
— L.
pallescens Presl.
— Stems densely 
tufted, about half a foot long, branched nearly or quite from the 
base, the primary branching pinnate, the short rhomboid pinnae 
copiously compound with contiguous branchlets.
Leaves of the 
lower plane crowded, ascending, oblique ovate, cuspidate, dilated 
and ciliated on the upper side at the base, ^-1 lin.
long, pale green, 
white-edged, rigid in texture ; leaves of the upper plane nearly as 
long, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes square, ^-^ in.
long, f Tin.
diam.
; bracts ovate cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Var. elongata Spring Mon. ii.
67.
— 8.
salcangula Spring Mon.
ii.
163.
— Lycopodium cordifolium Hort.
— Stems reaching a foot or 
more in length, simple in the lower part, the primary branches 
more elongated and more pinnate.
Hab. Cuba, Mexico, Guatemala, Venezuela, and New Granada.
S. incana Spring differs from the type by its less crowded, less dis- 
tinctly cuspidate leaves.
A common species in cultivation.
Series IV.
— Sarmentos^.
198.
S. picTA A.
Br.
— Lycopodium pictum Griff.
— Stems flexu- 
ose, sarmentose, suberect, 1-2 ft.
long, regularly bipinnate ; pinnae 
oblong-lanceolate, caudate, ascending, ^ ft.
long, the erecto-patent 
contiguous branchlets always simple, 1-2 in.
long.
Leaves of the 
lower plane crowded, oblong-lanceolate, falcate, pointed at the 
upper corner, bright green, moderately firm in texture, l-5th to 
l-4th in.
long, obscurely petioled, not ciliated, cuneate on the 
upper, rounded on the lower side at the base, not at all imbricated 
over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblique 
oblong, minutely cuspidate, white in the upper half.
Spikes 
square, terminal on the branchlets, J-|- in.
long, f lin.
diam.
; 
bracts ovate cuspidate, acutely keeled.
Hab. Mishme and Patkaye Hills, East Himalayas, Griffith !
199.
S. Wallichii Spring Mon. ii.
143.
— S.
stipulata Spring 
Mon. ii.
144.
— S.
Gaudichaudiana Spring.
Mon. ii.
149.
— S.
cyatheoides, canalicidata, and amhoinensis Spring.
— 8.
velutina 
Cesati.
— Lycopodium Wallichii Hook.
& Grev.
— L.
mimosoides 
Eoxb.
— L.
ehvians Wall.
— L.
stipulatum Blume.
— Stems sarmentose, 
suberect, 2-3 ft.
long ; pinufB lanceolate, 6-9 in.
long, the in- 
variably simple crowded erecto-patent pinnules 1-1 i in.
long, the 
end one sometimes 3-4 in.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, 
oblong-lanceolate, slightly falcate, pointed at the upper corner, 
equal-sided, the lower ones of the pinnules l-8th to l-12th in.
long, 
the upper growing gradually smaller, dark bright green, firm in 
texture, obscurely petiolulate, not ciliated, truncate or slightly 
cordate on both sides at the base, not at all imbricated over the 
20 ^' A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
stem ; leaves of the upper plane one-quarter as long, oblique 
oblong, shortly cuspidate, much imbricated.
Spikes square, 
terminal on the pinnules, \-\ in.
long, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate 
cusj)idate, strongly keeled.
Hab. East Himalayas, Malay Peninsula, Philippines, Malay 
Islands, and New Guinea.
Common in cultivation, and one of the 
most ornamental of all the garden species.
200.
S. LoEBii Moore.
— Stems suberect, sarmentose, reaching 
a length of 3-4 ft.
; pinnas regular, lanceolate-deltoid, about half a 
foot long, cuneate at the base, the pinnules contiguous, erecto- 
pateut, the upper ones simple, the lower forked.
Leaves of the 
lower plane contiguous, oblong-lanceolate, falcate, acute, \ in.
long 
on the pinnules, 1-Gth to l-5th in.
on the pinnae, bright green, 
moderately firm in texture, truncate and rather dilated on both 
sides at the base, not imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the 
upper plane one-third as long, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes 
square, terminal on the branchlets, \-\ in.
long, f lin.
diam.
; 
bracts ovate cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Borneo, Lohh !
West Sumatra, Beccari 578 !
Rare in 
cultivation.
201.
S. VicTORiiE Moore in G-ard.
Chron.
1879, 74.
— S.
atro- 
viridis Bracken., non Spring.
— Stems suberect, sarmentose, 3-4 ft.
long ; pinnte lanceolate-deltoid, usually 6-9 in, long, caudate, the 
upper pinnules crecto-patent and simple, contiguous, the lower 
forked or slightly pinnate.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, 
oblong-lanceolate, falcate, acute, l-12th in.
long, dark bright green, 
firm in texture, equal-sided, obscurely petioled, truncate on both 
sides at the base, not ciliated, not imbricated over the stem; leaves 
of the upper plane one-quarter as long, oblique oblong, shortly 
cuspidate, much imbricated.
Spikes square, 1-2 in.
long, f-1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate cuspidate, acutely keeled.
Hab. Borneo, Loiv !
Gillolo, C.
Smith !
San Cristoval, J.
G. 
Vcitchl Fiji, Brackenridgel Da em el 186 I Milne 201.
Litermediate 
between Wallichii and canal iculata, but nearer the former.
Kare in 
cultivation.
202.
S. megastachya, n.
sp.
— Stems suberect, sarmentose, 
2-3 ft.
long; pinnre ascending, oblong-lanceolate, caudate, 6-9 in.
long, the distant ascending pinnules with a few distant ascending 
tertiary branchlets.
Leaves of the lower plane nearly contiguous 
on the branchlets, oblong-lanceolate, very falcate, acute, l-12th to 
l-8th in.
long, bright green, moderately firm in texture, equal- 
sided, not ciliated, truncate on both sides at the base, not at all 
imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane one-quarter as 
long, oblique oblong, acute, not cuspidate^ Spikes |— 1 in.
long, 
square, l-12th to l-8th in.
diam.; bracts ovate cuspidate, stra- 
mineous, J in.
long, acutely keeled.
Hab. New Caledonia, in damp woods at Balade and Wagap, 
Vieillard !
A near ally of S.
Victorian.
203.
S. iN^QUALiFOLiA Spring Mon. ii.
148.
— Lycopodium 
inaqualifolium Hook.
& Grev.
— Stems suberect, sarmentose, 
reaching a length of 3-4 ft.
; pinnae oblong-lanceolate, about ^ ft.
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA, 21 
long, the erecto-patent branchlets considerably compound with 
ascending contignous tertiary divisions.
Leaves of the lower plane 
contiguous, oblong-rhomboid, subacute, those of the branches ^ in., 
of the branchlets l-12th to l-8th in.
long, bright green, moderately 
firm in texture, not ciliated, dilated and rounded on the upper side 
at the base, not at all imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the 
upper plane one-half as long, oblique ovate-lanceolate, shortly 
cuspidate.
Spikes square, |— ^ in.
long, f lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate 
cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Var. S.
perelefians Moore.
— S.
bellula Moore in Grard.
Chron.
1879, 173, fig.
25, non Cesati.
— Stems dwarfy, not more than a 
foot long ; pinnae shorter, more deltoid, with more compound lower 
branches.
Spikes copious, often an inch long.
Hab. East Himalayas, and moimtaius of Birma and Peninsular 
India.
Spring's Javan plant must, I think, be referred to 8.
cayialicnlata .
A frequent species in cultivation, but scarcely more 
than a variety of S.
canalicnlata in a broad sense.
204.
S. CANALicuLATA Baker.
— 8.
caudata Spring Mon. ii.
139.
— 8.
Pouzohiana Spring Mon. ii.
142.
— 8.
Durvillei A.
Br.
; 
Kulm Fil. Nov.
Hebrid.
17.
— 8.
conferta Moore.
— 8.
viuricata 
Cesati.
— 8.
sinensis Hort.
— Lycopodium canalicidatmn Linn.
(Dill.
Muse.
tab.
65, fig.
6).
— L.
Durvillei Bory Voy. Coquille Crypt.
t. 25.
— L.
caudatum, planum, and nemonmi Desv.
— Stems suberect, 
sarmentose, reaching a length of 3-4 ft.
; pinnae deltoid, usually 
4-6 in.
i long, sometimes flexuose and more elongated ; lower 
branchlets copiously compound, the tertiary divisions more erecto- 
patent and not so close as inaqualifolia.
Leaves of the lower plane 
crowded, oblong-rhomboid, pointed at the upper corner, l-12th to 
l-8th in.
long on the branchlets, bright green, moderately firm in 
texture, not ciliated, cuneate-truncate on the upper, nearly square 
on the lower side at the base, not at all imbricated over the stem ; 
leaves of the upper plane ovate-lanceolate, acute, one-half as long.
Spikes square, |-1 in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate cuspidate, 
strongly keeled.
Hab. East Himalayas, Birma, South China, Philippines, 
Malay and Polynesian Islands.
Piare in cultivation.
205.
S. aneitense, n.
sp.
— Suberect, with the habit of 8.
canaliculata , but much dwarfer; pinnae patent, deltoid, 2-3 in.
long 
and broad, cuneate at the base, the lower pinnules with slightly 
compound tertiary segments, the divisions of all grades erecto- 
patent.
Leaves of the lower plane spaced even on the branchlets, 
ascending, ovate-lanceolate, acute, a line long on the main branches, 
much smaller on the ultimate segments, bright green, firm in 
texture, not ciliated, dilated and rounded on the upper side at the 
base, not imbricated over the stem; leaves of the upper plane 
nearly as long, oblique lanceolate, acute, not cuspidate.
Spikes 
square, J-^ in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate cuspidate, strongly 
keeled.
Hab. Aneitum, Dr. Turnbull !
A very distinct plant, most 
like 8.
canaliculata on a smaller scale.
206.
S. Hookeri, n.
sp.
— Habit of <S'.
iiicequalijolia and canalicu- 
22 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
lata; pinnfe deltoid, ^-1 ft.
long, each with several regularly 
pinnate lanceolate acuminate pinnules with as many as 20 erccto- 
patent contiguous simple tertiary segments, the longest reaching an 
inch in length on each side.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, 
rather ascending, oblong-lanceolate, subacute, bright green, mode- 
rately firm in texture, l-12th to l-8th in.
long, obscurely petioled, 
rounded on both sides at the base, more so on the lower, not 
ciliated, not imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane 
very small, obtuse, with a distinct cusp.
Spikes square, terminal 
on the tertiary divisions, ^-^ in.
long, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate- 
cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Khasia Mountains, Hook.
fil.
cO Thomson !
207.
S. viRiDANGULA Spring in Plant.
Herb.
Vanheurck.
i. 29.
— Stems suberect, sarmentose, 3-4 ft.
long; piuufe deltoid, reaching 
a foot in length, erccto-patent, the pinnules with simple upper and 
compound lower erecto-patent tertiary divisions, the ultimate seg- 
ments usually |-1 in.
long, the branches bright green at the base.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous or nearly so on the branchlets, 
lanceolate, falcate, acute, l-8th to l-5th in.
long {^ in.
long and 
much spaced on the pinnae), bright green, moderately firm in 
texture, not ciliated, truncate at the base, dilated, especially on the 
lower side, not at all imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper 
plane very small, oblong, with a distinct cusp.
Spikes square, 
1-2 in.
long, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Mountain forests of Fiji, Seemann 707 his, Daemel 187 !
Milne 196 !
545 !
208.
S. CHiLENSis Spring Mon. ii.
141.
— Lycopodixim.
chilense 
Willd.
— Stems sarmentose, suberect, 2-3 ft.
long ; pinnae lanceolate 
or lanceolate-deltoid, 3-6 in.
long, the lower pinnules with 8-10 
tertiary branchlets.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, oblong- 
lanceolate, cute, equal-sided, not ciliated, auricled on the upper 
side at the base, cut away on the lower side ; leaves of the upper 
plane one-third as long, oblong-lanceolate, very falcate.
Spikes 
square, -J in.
long ; bracts ovate cuspidate.
Hab. Mexico, Peru, and Chili.
May be conspecific with S.
canaUculata.
209.
S. SOANDENS, Spring Mon. ii.
192.
— Lycopoditim scandens 
Swartz ; Kunze Farrn.
t. 10.
— Stachygynandrum scandens P.
Beauv.
Fl. Owar.
t. 7.
— Stems slender, pale straw-coloured, polished, 
climbing indefinitely ; penultimate divisions lanceolate, with a 
flexuose axis, and spreading or ascending parallel- spaced simple 
ultimate divisions ^-1 in.
long.
Leaves of the lower plane con- 
tiguous on the ultimate branchlets, spreading, lanceolate, acute, 
^ in.
long, blue-green, rather thin in texture, slightly dilated on 
the upper side at the base, hardly at all imbricated over the stem ; 
leaves of the upper plane very small, oblong-lanceolate, cuspidate.
Spikes square, ^-1 in.
long ; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly 
keeled.
Hab. West Tropical Africa, from Senegambia southward along 
the coast to the Equator.
210.
S. WiLLDENovii Baker in Gard.
Chron.
1867, 950.
— S.
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
23 
IcBvigata Spring Men. ii.
137.
— Lycojwdimn IcBvigatum Willd., non 
Lam.
— L.
Willdenovii Desv.
; Hook.
& Grev.
Ic. Fil.
t. 57.
— L.
peUucUlum Desv.
— L.
hicolor and ciBsium-arhoreum Hort.
- — • Stems 
climbing to a lengtli of 12-20 ft.
or more ; pinnae spreading, 
deltoid, reacliing a length of 1-2 ft., the pinnules deltoid and 
decompound, the ultimate branchlets short and contiguous.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, ascending, ovate or oblong, 
l-12th to l-8th in.
long, green with a tint of blue, moderately firm 
in texture, not ciliated, obscurely petioled, cordate on both sides at 
the base, not imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane 
one-third as long, oblique oblong, acute, not cuspidate.
Spikes 
square, ^-1 in.
long, f lin.
diam.
; bracts suborbicular, with a 
short cusp, scarcely larger than the sporangia.
Hab. East Himalayas, Philippines, Cochin China, Malay 
Peninsula and Isles.
Well known in cixltivation.
I have not 
seen the Brazilian plant referred here by Spring ; his African 
locality refers to S.
scandens.
211.
S. EXALTATA Spring Mon. ii.
145.
— Lycopodium exaJtatiun 
Kunze.
— Stems climbing to a length of 50-GO ft.
; pinna; deltoid, 
reaching a length of 3-4 ft.
; pinnules lanceolate, with numerous 
erecto-patent simple parallel tertiary branchlets seldom above an 
inch long.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, oblong-lanceolate, 
falcate, acute, l-12tli to l-8th in.
long, bright green, moderately 
firm in texture, nearly equal-sided, not ciliated, nearly truncate at 
the base, not imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane 
very small, oblique oblong, shortly cuspidate.
Spikes square, 
^-1 in.
long, f lin.
diam.
; bracts broad ovate, little longer than 
the sporangia, strongly keeled.
Hab. Forests of Tropical America from Panama to Peru.
212.
S. usta Vieill., n.
sp.
— Stems 9-12 in.
long, erect, simple at 
the biise, compound in the upper three-quarters, the branches 
erecto-patent, the lower simple or little compound, the upper short, 
rhomboid, copiously compound.
Leaves of the lower plane 
crowded, erecto-patent, ovate or oblong, subacute, i lin.
long, 
bright green, rigid, dilated, cordate, serrulate, and imbricated over 
the stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane 
one-third as long, oblique oblong, acute, much imbricated.
Spikes 
square, J-^ in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, acutely 
keeled.
Hab. New Caledonia, on mountains near Wagap, Vieillardl 
Puncher !
213.
S. Arbuscula Spring Mon. ii.
283.
— Lycopodium Arbuscxda 
Kaulf.
— Stems 4-6 in.
long, erect, simple in the lower third or half, 
decompound iipwards, with deltoid crowded ascending branches, 
the ultimate branching midAvay between pinnate and flabellate.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, ascending, ovate-rhomboid, 
subacute, ^ lin.
long, bright green, firm in texture, rather pro- 
duced, broadly rounded, denticulate, and imbricated over the stem 
on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the lower plane one-third 
as long, oblique ovate, acute, much imbricated.
Spikes short, 
square, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, sharply keeled.
24 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
Hab. Mountains of the Sandwich Islands, 1000-5000 feet.
214.
S. CAULESCENS Spring Mon. ii.
158.
— S.
pcltata Presl.
— 
S, belLula and ininutifolia Cesati.
— Lycopodiun caulescens WalL — 
L. fruticulosum Bkime, non Bory.
— Stem generally i-1 ft.
long, 
stifHy erect, imbranched in the lower half, with spaced adpressed 
leaves, deltoid and decompound in the upper half; pinna; close, 
deltoid, with copiously subflabellately compound lower pinnules, 
with contiguous ascending final branchlets J-1 in.
long, ^ in.
broad, liable to curl up in drought.
Leaves of the lower plane 
crowded, ovate, falcate, acute, ^-1 liu.
long, bright green, firm in 
texture, rather unequal-sided, broadly rounded and shortly ciliated 
on the upper side at the base, and slightly imbricated over the 
stem ; leaves of the upper plane one-third to one-fourth as long, 
oblique ovate, cuspidate, much imbricated.
Si)ikes square, i-i in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate.
Var. S.
japonica Macnab in Trans.
Bot. Soc.
Edinb.
ix.
8. — 
Pinnae less crowded, and not so decompound.
Leaves of the 
lower plane broad ovate, those of the main stem and pinnae nearly 
as broad as long, those of the unbranched part of the stem rather 
spreading.
Var. S.
argentea Spring Mon. ii.
154.
— Lycopodium argenteum 
Wall.
— Larger and more compound, the banded portion often a 
foot long.
Leaves of the lower plane thinner in texture, ovate- 
lanceolate, bright green on the upper surface, whitish green beneath.
Var. hrachypoda Baker.- — Unbranched portion of the stem very 
short ; pinnae less compound than in the type ; leaves rather 
larger.
Hab. The type, Japan, China, East Lidies (ascending to 
6000 ft.
in Kumaon), Ceylon, Malay Peninsula and Isles, Philip- 
pines, and New Guinea.
Var. japonica, Japan.
Var. argentea, 
Malay Peninsula.
Var. hrachypoda, Java.
215.
S. Whitmeei, n.
sp.
— Stems stiffly erect, -^-l ft.
long, 
decompound and oblong or deltoid in the upper half, the erecto- 
patent pinnae with spaced erecto-patent simple and comj^ound 
lower pinnules, the ultimate branchlets l-li in.
long, ^ in.
diam.
; 
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, ascending, broad ovate, acute, 
^--1 liu.
long, bright green, rigid in texture, very unequal-sided, 
dilated, broadly rounded and much imbricated over the stem on the 
upper side at the base, not ciliated ; leaves of the upper plane one- 
half to one-third as long, oblique oblong, acute, much imbricated.
Spikes short, square, f lin.
diam.; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly 
keeled.
Hab. Mountains of Samoa, Whitmec 177 !
221 !
210.
S. Pennula Spring Mon. ii.
160.
— S.
qUiidranguJa Presl.
— 
S. PresJiana Spring.
— Lycopudium Fennnla Desv.
— Stems stiffly 
erect, 1-2 ft.
long, simple in the lower half, deltoid and decompound 
in the upper half, the lower pinnae deltoid, 3-4-pinnate, reaching a 
length of half a foot, the contiguous final branchlets not more than 
J-^ in.
long, -^-f lin.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, 
erecto-patent, oblong-lanceolate, acute, of the branchlets ^ lin.
long, of the pinnae 1 lin., dark green, moderately firm in texture, 
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
25 
nearly equal-sided, rounded, obscurely ciliated and a little imbri- 
cated over the stem on the upper side at the base, but not entirely 
hiding it ; leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblique 
oblong, acute, much imbricated.
Spikes short, copious, square, 
^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate, cuspidate.
Hab. Philippines, Cumiurj 2000 !
and, according to Spring, 
gathered in the Neilgherries by Perrottet.
Midway between 
caulescens and jiabellata in general habit, but more compound than 
either of them.
217.
S. PTERYPHYLLOs Spring Mon. ii.
162.
— (S', myosuroides 
Presl.
— Stem erect, about a foot long, simple in the lower half, 
deltoid and decompound in the upper half, the lower pinn« deltoid, 
the ultimate branchlets not more than \ in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
Leaves of the lower plane oblong-lanceolate, erecto-patent, I— 1 lin.
long, acute, contiguous only on the ultimate branchlets, dark green, 
moderately firm in texture, narrowed from the middle to the base, 
nearly equal-sided, hardly at all imbricated over the back of the 
stem ; leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblong, shortly 
cuspidate.
Spikes short, square, -^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate- 
cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Philippines, Cuming 2017 !
Perhaps not more than a 
variety of S.
Penn ula.
218.
S. Braunh Baker in Gard.
Chron.
1867, 1120.
— S.
pubescens A.
Br., non Spring.
— Stems 1-1^ ft.
long, erect, pale 
stramineous, simple in the lower half, decompound, deltoid and 
flexuose in the upper half, the pinnte erecto-patent and deltoid, 
the pinnules regular, short, deltoid, spaced, the ultimate branchlets 
not more than ^-J in.
long, 1 line broad.
Leaves of the lower 
plane contiguous only on the final branchlets, nearly spreading, 
ovate-rhomboid, subobtuse, ^ lin.
long, liable to be revolute at both 
edges, dark green, moderately firm in texture, narrowed to a trun- 
cate base, not imbricated over the back of the pubescent branches ; 
leaves of the upper plane one -third to one-half as long, oblique ob- 
long, shortly cuspidate.
Spikes short, square, ^ lin.
diam.; bracts 
suborbicular, cusj^idate, little longer than the sporangia.
Hab. West China, Blakiston !
A distinctly marked species, 
well known in cultivation, 
219.
S. GRiFFiTHn Spring Mon. ii.
151.
— S.
virescens Spring.
— 
S. brevipes A.
Br.' — Stems erect, ^-1 ft.
long, simple in the lower 
part, deltoid and decompound upwards, the root-fibres sometimes 
extending upwards to where the branching begins, the face 
bisulcate, the lower pinnte deltoid, 3 -pinnate, the branching of all 
grades pinnate, the ascending contiguous final branchlets ^-^ in.
long, ^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, more or 
less ascending, oblong-rhomboid, subacute, ^— ^ in.
long, thinner in 
texture than in jiabellata, spuriously 3-nerved, dilated, rounded, 
serrulate, and imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the 
base; leaves of the upper plane minute, obovate, with a large cusp.
Spikes square, ^-^ in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, 
strongly keeled.
Hab. Mountains of Mergui, Grij/ith !
sj^ (To be continued.) 
26 
SHORT NOTES.
A New Sparganium.
— lu October, 188B, I observed at Albury 
Ponds, near Guildford, a Span/anium resembling S.
rcwioswn 
Huds.
in habit, but differing from it in the partially mature fruits 
which were ail that the very depauperate specimens afforded.
This 
led to investigation during the past year, with the result that I find 
the plant, which I propose to call S.
vei/Iectiun, plentiful in various 
parts of Surrey.
The chief distinctive characters are found in the 
fruit, which is somewhat obovate-acuminate, with a long beak, 
instead of, as in ramosum, obversely conical, with a very truncate 
(or sometimes rounded) apex and short beak.
Eeichenbach's 
plate (Icon.
Fl. Ger.
751) of S.
erectum would seem to have been 
drawn from the present plant rather than from S.
ramosum Huds., 
which, however, is given as a synonym ; and in Leighton's ' Flora 
of Shropshire ' the fruit of nei/lectum is described as that of 
ramosum, suggesting that the former may be the common form in 
that county, I am, however, unable to find that the plants have 
ever been separated.
In Surrey S.
nq/lectiivi occurs in the basins 
of the Rivers Blackwater, Wey, Mole, and Arun ; it thins out, 
however, towards the east, and I have not observed it in the 
Medway basin ; also Mr. Alfred Fryer sends various gatherings of 
good ramosum from, the fens of Hunts and Cambs., but after 
" exploring many miles of Sjiarf/anium-fiiled ditches," is unable to 
find the subject of this note, which may therefore possibly prove 
absent from some of the eastern counties.
It is almost certain to 
be found in Sussex and Hants (and doubtless elsewhere), as it 
occurs close to the borders of the counties named, by streams 
flowing into them from Surrey.
— W.
H. Beeby.
New Records foe Northumberland.
— Fumaria confnsa Sond., in 
company with F.
densiflora DC, in sandy fields on Holy Island.
— 
Viola Curtisii Forst.
A few plants, but unmistakably the same as 
Lancashire specimens in my herbarium ; south end of Ross Links.
— SUene injiata Sm., /3.
piiber^da.
Holy Island.
— Arenaria ser- 
pyllifolia L.
A stout glandular form, agreeing as far as book 
description goes with A.
Lloydii.
Bamborough Links.
— Piadiola 
Milleyrana Sm. Ross Links ; abundantly.
Not reported in 
Baker's Flora, but known elsewhere m Northumberland to local 
botanists.
— Althaa ufficinaUs L.
Probably introduced.
Wayside 
near Fleetham.
— ISlelilotus arvensis Wallr.
Rubbish-heaps near 
Embleton.
— Mentha gentilis L.
By the mill-pond at Easington.
Belford.
— Centunculus minimus L.
Ross Links ; abundantly in one 
or two places.
Has not yet been recorded in either of the two 
northern counties.
— CoraJlorhiza innata Br. Several hundred 
plants, very vigorous, in a boggy wood on the borders of Cheviot- 
land.
I purposely refrain from specifying the locality more 
particularly.
— H.
E. Fox.
Myosotis alpestris in FoRFARsmRE.
— I uotico in the Report for 
1883 of the Botanical Record Club, that Mi/osotis rupicola Sm.
[al- 
pestris Schm.) has been gathered in Canlochan, Forfarshire, by the 
Revs.
H. E.
Fox and E.
F. Linton.
I fear, however, that plant is 
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
27 
not indigenous in this locality, as, unless my memory deceives me, 
I was told by a horticultural Mend that he had sown a quantity of 
the seed — derived from cultivated Ben Lawers plants — along with 
the seeds of other alpines, in Canlochan.
One result of this was 
the discovery there, by some members of the Edinburgh Botanical 
Society, in 1880, Myosotis aJpcstris var.
Krinus alpinns, Primula 
Auricula, and other aliens.
I quite believe that my friend was in 
no degree aware of the reprehensibility of his proceedings, or that 
if his name was revealed it would be held in execration by all 
British botanists.
I am sorry to say that he also sowed (unless I 
am mistaken) the seeds of various alpines on Ben Lawers, but so 
far as I can learn none of these have been found on that hill.
In 
hope that none of the plants thus sown would have established 
themselves, I did not mean to put the fact formally on record ; but 
now that Myosotis rupicola has been actually recorded, it seems 
necessary to mention it.
There is, however, one consolation for 
botanists, and that is that I believe all the seeds sown were of those 
plants which from their showy flowers are in common cultivation, 
and hence that no obscure-flowered species, as grasses, carices, &c., 
if discovered hereafter in these localities, need be looked upon with 
suspicion.
— F.
Buchanan White.
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
New Books.
— S.
Sirodot, ' Les Batrachospermes : organisation, 
fonctions, developpement, classification ' (Paris : 4to, pp.
299, 
tt.
50).
— H.
Coreevon, 'Les Plantes des Alpes ' (Geneva, Georg : 
8vo, pp.
264).
— W.
ZoPF, ' Die Pilzthiere oder Schleimpilze ' (Breslau, 
Trewendt : 8vo, pp.
viii.
174: 51 cuts).
— A.
Grisebach, ' Der 
Vegetation der Erde,' ed.
ii.
(Leipzig, Engelmann : 2 vols.
8vo, 
pp.
xvi.
567, xi.
694).
— 0.
J. Eichaed, ' L'Autonomie des Lichens, 
ou Eefutation du Schwendenerisme ' (Paris, Lechevalier : 8vo, 
pp.59).
— Pi. Kauffmann-Bayer, ' Schweizer Flora' (Frauenfeld, 
Huber : 12mo, pp.
viii.
203, tt.
4).
— W.
Voss, ' Versuch einer 
Geschichte der Botanik in Krain (1754-1883) ' (Laibach, Klein- 
mayr : 8vo, pp.
69).
Articles in Journals.
American Natu7-alist.
— E.
J. Goff, ' Eelation of colour to flavour 
in fruits and vegetables.' — A.
F. Foerste, ' Flowers of Zygadenus 
ylaucm.' — W.
J. Beal, Seeds burying themselves in the ground.
— 
J. B.
Ellis & G.
Martin, 'New N.
American Fungi' [PhyUosticta 
leucothues, P.
sinuosa, P.
corylina, P.
apocyni, Saciclium polygoyiati).
Bot. Centralblatt (No. 52).
— A.
Eothpletz, ' Zur Culmformation 
bei Hainichen in Sachsen.' 
Bot. ZeitWKj (Dec. 5, 12).
— H.
Solms-Laubach, ' Der botanische 
Garten zu Buitenzorg auf Java.' — (Dec. 12).
W. Detner, ' Unter- 
suchungen iiber Salzaurebildung in der Pflanze.' 
Botaniska Notiser (haft.
6).
— E.
Ljungstrom, ' Kleistogami hos 
Privnda sinensis.' — A.
L. Gronvall, ' Oni Lluta intcniiedia Sch. och 
28 
LINNKAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.
das normaste samsliigtingar.' — A.
Callmc, Polygonum tomentosum 
(lapatJiifolium) x P.
Hydropiper.
Bulletin of Torrey Bat. Club (Oct.).
— J.
Schreuk, The Haustoria 
of Gerardia (1 plate).
— J.
B. Ellis & W.
A. Kellermanu, ' Kansas 
Fungi.' 
Flora (Nov. 11).
— J.
Miiller, ' Liclieuologisclie Beitrage' 
{Pleurocybe, gen.
nov.).
— P.
Gr. Strobl, 'Flora der Nebroden ' 
(contd.).
— (Dec. 11).
J. Miiller, 'Eevisio Licheuum Escliweileria- 
norum.' — (Dec. 21).
J. Freyn, ' Phytograpliische Notizen ' (Viola 
adriatica, n.
sp.
vel subsp.
; MeUnnpynun catalaunicum n.
sp.
vel 
subsp.
; Euphrasia Willkommii, n.sp.).
Garden (Dec. 6).
— (Enothera marginata (ic.
pict.), — (Dec. 20).
Bignonia Cherere (ic.
pict.j.
Gardeners' Chronicle (Dec. 5).
— Rhododendron Toverence F.
von 
Muell., sp.
n. (fig.
127).
— W.
G. Smith, 'Disease of Parsnips' 
[Peronospora nivea Ung.), (figs.
124, 125).
— (Dec. 13).
A. J.
Wilson, ' The Potato Disease ' (figs.
130, 131).— (Dec. 20).
Smilax 
aspera var.
(fig.
13-1).
— (Dec. 27).
Coelogyne Rossiana Kchb.
f., 
sp.
n. ; Primula admontensis Gusmus (P.
Auricula x Clusiana) ; 
Heliotropiu7n incanum (?) var.
glabra (fig.
140).
— J.
D. Hooker, 
Pinus Jeffreyi (fig.
141).
Journ.
Royal Microscopical Soc.
— G.
Massee, ' Description and 
Life-history of a new Fungus ' {Milowia (gen.
nov.) nivea) ; 1 plate.
Midland ISfaturalist.
— W.
B. Grove, ' On the PilobolidtB (concl.).
— J.
E. Bagnall, ' A Fungus Foray in the Middleton District.' 
QHsterr.
Bot. Zeitschrift.
— H.
Braun, '  JSlelampyrum Moravicum, 
n. sp.' — J.
Velonovsky, ' Ziir bulgarischen Flora ' (Verbascum.
gtan- 
duligerum, Jasione glabra, spp.nn.).
— J.
Bubela, ' Teratologisches.' 
— B.
Blocki, ' Zur Flora von Galizien.' — E.
Formanek, ' Zur Flora 
Mahrens.' — E.
Preissmann, ' Zur Flora von Karnteu.' 
Pharmaceutical Journal (Dec. 13 & 20).
-- R.
Cross & W.
T. T.
Dyer, ' Eed Bark.' 
LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.
November 6, 1884.
— Sir John Lubbock, Bart., President, in the 
chair.
— A letter was read, intimating that the late President, 
Mr. George Beutham, had bequeathed by his will a legacy of £1000 
to the Society.
— Mr. W.
T. T.
Dyer exhibited the following plants and 
their products : — (1) Vaccinium ArctostajJiylos, from which the 
Trebizonde Tea (" Tlie-du-Bn-Dagh ") is prepared at Amassia and 
Tokat ; (2) Pueraria Thunbergiana from Corea, and the cloth made 
from it; (3) Pachyrhiza sinensis ("Ko-poo"), from the fibres 
of which the yellow and more expensive cloth is made ; (4) Den- 
drohium Phahrnopsis Fitz., a coloured drawing from a plant obtained 
by Mr. H.
0. Forbes, in Timor Laut.
— -Mr. E.
A. Eolfe afterwards 
exhibited examples of British oak-galls produced by cynipidean 
insects of the genus Neuroterus.
These were : — (1) The silk button 
LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.
29 
gall produced by N.
numismatis, exceptionally rare this season, 
and found on the common English oak, Quercus Ilohur, and on Q.
lusitanica, Q.
infectoria, and Q.
Tnrneri; (2) the globose gall, pro- 
duced by N.
ostreus, and got on Q.
Rohur and Q.
infectoria, on the 
leaves of which trees it is confined to the midrib on principal veins ; 
(3) the smooth spangle gall, of a greenish white or rose colour, 
flattish or saucer-shaped, destitute of hairs, produced by Xemoterus 
fiDnipemiis, and got on Q.
Rohur and Q.
lusitanica ; (4) the pale 
yellowish green scarce spangle gall, produced by N.
laiviuscitlus, and 
only got by Mr. Eolfe on the common oak ; (5) the common 
spangle gall, produced by N.
lenticiilaris, and found not only on Q.
Rohur, but also on Q.
Farnetto, Q.
Toza, Q.
lusitanica, Q.
infecturia 
and Q.
clentata, the latter a Japanese oak.
There was also shown 
a remarkable blackish purple common gall, found on a variety ot 
the common oak, Q.
Rohur var.
Granhyana.
This variety of the oak 
has deep purple leaves, but not so deep as in the var.
purpurea, a 
fact demonstrating that the colour of the gall depends considerably 
on the oak leaves and not entirely on the insect producer.
As a 
rule, the plan and details of the gall depend on the gall maker and 
the nature of the irritating fluid deposited by the insect, the gall 
itself merely representing the effort of the plant to remedy the 
injury done.
That the character of the gall is determined at the 
time the egg is laid may be inferred from the circumstance that 
when the larva is destroyed by parasites, at the very earliest stage 
of gall development, the nature of the gall is not changed, though 
occasionally dwarfed.
The galls found on the different species of 
oak above mentioned are all perfectly distinct from each other and 
from that of Quercus Rohur.
— The next communication was on a col- 
lection of plants made in Timor Laut, by Henry 0.
Forbes.
Therein 
a short account is given of the nature of the islands and the general 
character of the vegetation, after which follows a list of about 80 
plants.
Professor Oliver adds a note, that this collection, so far as 
it goes, is made up in great part of the more widely diffused species 
of the Indian Archipelago.
The most interesting plants appear to 
be, one in fruit only, referred to the meliaceous genus (Jwenia, 
probably O.
cerasifera, Muell., of Queensland; a fine Mucuna of the 
section Stizolohium ; Delarhrea, an araliaceous genus hitherto only 
received from New Caledonia ; and a fruit of possibly a Strombosia.
Mr. Forbes is inclined to regard the Timor Laut flora and fauna as 
having affinities with the Moluccan (Amboina) region.
— There 
followed a note on the reproduction of the heteroecismal Urediues, 
by Chas.
B. Plowright.
The author affirms that when the repro- 
duction of these fungi takes place without the intervention of 
ascidiospores, the resulting uredospores are far more abundant 
than in the case when they arise from the implantation upon the 
host-plant of the ascidiospores, this inference being supported by 
various detailed observations of the author.
November 20.
— Professor P.
Martin Duncan, F.E.S., Vice Presi- 
dent, in the chair.
— Mr. A.
Roope Hunt was elected a Fellow of the 
Society.
Mr. Francis B.
Forbes drew attention to specimens 
of pods and seeds used by the Chinese in the place of soap.
Ho 
80 LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.
stated that for ordinary detergent purposes, an impure earthy soda 
and a lye made from ashes are employed.
The leaves of llibiscus 
syridcHs and Giiujko biloha are occasionally used for cleansing the 
head.
The most favourite substance, however, seems to be the 
fruit of certain Lei/uminosa, chiefly what the Chinese call " fei- 
tsao-tow " (fat black beans).
Breitschneider has no doubt that this 
belongs to the Gymnocladns chincnsis, a plant originally described 
by Baillon only from pods received from Shanghai, and of which 
the leaves and flowers were for a long time unknown.
There is 
now a specimen at Kew, from Foochow in the province of Fokien, 
with fruit and flowers, but only young leaves, which have been 
lately figured in the ' Icones Plantarum.' The specimens were 
exhibited with fruits and fully developed leaves, from Ningpo in 
Cheidang, and Wa-hu in Au-whei province.
The pods of Gle- 
ditschia sinensis of Lamarck, called by the Chinese " tsao-chio," are 
used for the same purposes as those of the Gi/nmocladiis.
The 
specimens now exhibited are fi'om Peking and the Shanghai 
district.
One of them, which Mr. Forbes had always supposed to 
be Gleditschia sinensis, appears to come from the same tree as the 
type specimen of G.
xylocarpa Hance.
A tree common in South 
China was referred by Mr. Bentham, in the ' Flora Hongkongensis,' 
to G.
sinensis, but the flowers and fruits of this specimen, lately 
examined at Kew and the British Museum, seem to differ from the 
northern ones.
Lamarck founded his species on a tree growing in 
the Jardin des Plantes, from seeds sent from Peking by Pere Incar- 
ville 200 years ago ; and further inquiry seems needed as to the 
identity of the northern and southern plants.
The Gymnocladus ' 
pods are said by Dr. Porter Smith to be roasted and kneaded into 
balls as large as childrens' marbles, when they are used in washing 
clothes and in bathing, but on account of their unpleasant smell 
they are not allowed in the public baths.
The seeds are used in 
Peking by women in washing the head and hair.
In Shanghai the 
Gleditschia pods are broken in small bits and soaked in boiling 
water, until a considerable amount of oily substance is floated, 
when the water is ready for use.
The specimen exhibited of 
Sapindus niakwinsi, Gaert., was received from Mr. Clement Allen, 
British Consul at Ningpo, who stated that the Chinese there used 
the fruit as soap.
This is doubtless the " Soap tree," or " Frei- 
chu-tszo," mentioned by Dr. Porter Smith.
— Mr. H.
Groves 
exhibited specimens of — (1) Cham connicens, collected at Slapton, 
S. Devon, the only known British slation, for no trace of the plant is 
now to be found at Stokes Bay ; (2) Chara canescens (with the syno- 
nym C.
crinita), from a pool between Helston and the Lizard, and 
from Little Sea, Studland, Dorset.
— Mr. Geo.
Murray exhibited 
specimens, both dried and moistened, of a species of Glceocapsa 
found by Mr. Pryer, in bird's nest caves in North Borneo ; Mr. Murray 
also mentioned that he himself had found somewhat similar dried 
patches of Algae [Glaocapsa''- in leaves in Scotland, inhabited by 
pigeons.
— Mr. W.
T. T.
Dyer showed and made remarks on some 
sterile runners of Mentha piperita, and the remains of flowers of 
Epiluhium hirsutum, taken from a wreath found by Prof.
Maspero 
LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.
31 
in a tomb near Thebes, and supposed to be of the 20th or 26th 
Dynasty ; he also showed some fresh flowers of Ipomea purpureo- 
candea.
— A paper was read by Mr. E.
M. Holmes, on Cinchona 
Ledt/eriana as a species.
The author expressed the opinion that 
under the name of Cinchona Ledijeriana a number of varieties or 
forms, and probably some hybrids of Cinchona Calimija are now 
under cultivation in the British colonies.
He believed that if 
more attention were paid to the characters afforded by the Ijark of 
the trees, taken in conjunction with the other botanical characters 
of flower and fruit, these varieties and hybrids Avould be more 
easily defined and recognised.
He considers that the plant pub- 
lished under the name of Cinchona Ledgeriana by Dr. Trimen was 
probably referable to Weddell's Cinchona Calisaya var.
pallida 
as a horticultural form, for which the author proposed the name 
Trimeniana.
— Mr, E.
T. Druery read a paper on a singular mode 
of reproduction in Athyrium Filicc-fcemina var.
clarissima.
In a 
previous paper the author had shown that prothallia bearing 
antheridia and archegonia were developed on the apex of pear- 
shaped bodies with the larger end downward, in the place usually 
occupied by sori.
In the present paper he brought forward evidence 
to show that these pear-shaped bodies were not developed from 
sporangia, but from a previous formation of thread-like bodies, a 
few of which became thickened and developed into the pear-shaped 
bodies previously mentioned, the others remaining starved and un- 
developed.
December 4.
— William Carruthers, F.E.S., Vice-President, in 
the chair.
— The following gentlemen were elected Fellows of the 
Society: — the Hon. F.
0. Dobson, LL.D., of Victoria, Australia; 
William A.
Haswell, M.A., of Sydney, New South Wales; George 
W. Olfield, of London ; Dr. Geo.
W. Parker, of Honolulu ; Michael 
C. Potter, M.A., of Cambridge, Vet. Surg.; Thos.
J. Symonds, of 
the Madras Presidency; W.
A. Talbot, of Yellowpore, Bombay; 
and J.
H. Tompson, of Melbourne, Australia.
— Mr. W.
T. Tliisel- 
ton Dyer exhibited — (1) Examples of leaves of Sagittaria nionte- 
vidensis under different modes of cultivation ; the changes thus 
induced as regards size and general facies being most remark- 
able, so much so that they might be deemed widely separate 
genera.
The small leaves were from a plant raised from seeds 
collected in Chili by Mr. J.
Ball, and sent to Kew in 1883, and 
grown in a pot half submerged in the Nympha'a tank.
The 
enormously large leaf and spike were those of a plant raised from 
seeds ripened at Kew and sown in spring (1884).
When strong 
enough the plant was planted in a bed of muddy soil, kept 
saturated by means of a pipe running from the bed to the yymjdia-a 
tank.
(2) A special and peculiar instrument called a " ladanis- 
terion," from Crete, it being a kind of double rake with leathern 
thongs instead of teeth, and used in the collecting of gum- 
labdanum.
— A paper by Mr. Alfred Tyler, " On the Growth of 
Trees and Protoplasmic Continuity," was read.
December 18.
— Sir John Lubbock, Bart., F.R.S., President, in 
the chair.
— The following gentlemen were elected Fellows of the 
82 LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.
Society: — Lieut-Col. W.
E, Lewis, Dr. Chas.
B. Plowright, Messrs.
T. B.
Blow, H.
G. Greenish, A.
G. Howard, Lionel de Niceville, 
and F.
Shrivell.
— Mr. H.
Ling Roth showed some roots of sugar- 
cane grown in Queensland and preserved in spirit, and from which 
he infers that the plant possesses two sorts, viz., ordinary matted 
fihrous roots, and others of a supposed special kind.
The new 
Sparganium, a note on which appears on page 26, was exhibited 
by Mr. W.
H. Beeby.
Mr. Baker expressed his opinion that the 
plant was undoubtedly distinct from all described species.
— Mr. W.
T. T.
Dyer exhibited life-size photographs of cones of two species 
of Encephalartos from South Africa, viz., R.
loiif/if alius and E.
latifrom, neither hitherto figured in European books.
He also 
showed tubers of Ullucus tuberosus from Venezuela, which though 
esteemed as an esculent in South America, proved inedible when 
grown at Kew.
— A paper was read by Mr. Henry 0.
Forbes, " On 
Contrivances for ensuring Self-fertilization in some Tropical 
Orchids." In this paper the author referred to some Portuguese 
and other European orchids, and thereafter he described in detail 
the structural peculiarities of certain tropical OrchidacecB, which had 
been made the subject of study by him under favourable auspices.
He arrives at the conclusion that a number of orchids are not 
fertilized by insects, but are so constructed as to enable them to 
fertilize themselves.
This paper was illustrated by diagrams, 
referring more particularly to such forms as Phajus Blumei, Spatho- 
glottis 2)licaU(, Anmdina speciosa, Eria javensis, and genera allied to 
Chrysoglossum.
— Mr. F.
0. Bower read a paper " On Apospory in 
Ferns," this having special reference to Mr. Chas.
T. Druery's 
observations " On Athyrium Filix-fcemina var.
darissima," pre- 
viously communicated to the Society.
Mr. Bower's researches, 
made on the microscopical investigation and growth of sporophore 
generation to the prothallus, without the intervention of spores, 
confirms the statements of Mr. Druery.
He finds, moreover, the 
case in point to hold good in certain other ferns — for example, in 
Poli/stichnm angulare, where there is the formation of an expansion 
of undoubted prothalloid nature, bearing sexual organs by a process 
of purely vegetative outgrowth from the fern plant ; that is, there 
is a transition from the sporophore generation to the oospore by a 
vegetable growth, and without any connection either with spores or 
indeed with sporangia or sori.
The author goes on to point out 
the bearing of these observations and experiments on the general 
life-history of the fern, so far as the modifications of the genetic 
cycle are concerned, and further compares this new phenomenon of 
"apospory" in ferns with similar cases in other plants, while 
insisting on the importance of the cases at issue.
— A communica- 
tion " On the aerial and submerged leaves of Ranunculus Lingua L.," 
was read by Mr. Freeman Roper.
He shows from specimens 
obtained near Eastbourne, that the two sets of leaves in question 
differ so materially that they might not be suspected to belong to 
the same plant, the submerged being relatively much larger, 
greatly broader, ovate or cordate, and possessing abundance of 
stomata.
"West.Nev/m-a-n & C° 
W. Joshua dal.
R-Morqanlilk.
83 
ON SOME NEW AND EARE DESMIBIEM.
No. III.
By W.
Joshua, F.L.S.* 
(Tab. 254.) 
The following new and little-known species have recently 
occurred in collections received from foreign correspondents.
The 
plate and description of No. 1 I take from the valuable published 
series of Algte of Messrs.
Wittrock and Nordstedt.
This small 
FAMstrwii was collected from Sphagna;, by J.
Hart, Esq., in the 
Blue Mountains, Jamaica.
My first acquaintance with Canadian DesmidiecB, from a collection 
forwarded in the past summer by the kindness of Mr. A.
H. McKay, 
has brought to light a very distinct and beautiful new form of an 
old friend, Kuastnim remicosum Ehrenb.
; also Closterium Braunii 
Reinsch, Staurastrum polytrichum Perty f.
major, S.
lunatum Ralfs, 
Cosmarium TurpiniBveh, fi.
LundeUii, Staurastrum orbicidare (Ehrb.) 
Ralfs.
f. 7» mo?- Nordst., Cosmarium Qnasillus Lund., C.
Botrytisft.
sub- 
tumidum Witivv .
, Hyalotheca dissiliens f.
tridentula'^oi'dst.,Micrasterias 
americana Ralfs.
(cytioderm spinulose), Staurastrum polymorplium 
(four-rayed), C.
crenatum Ralfs.
f. hicrenatum Nordst., C.
Cordanum 
Breb.
= Colpopelta viridis Corda, Xanthidium antilopeum new var- 
canadense (a stout form with side spines in centre of semi-cell).
The new species from Rangoon are from a large collection, at 
present under examination, received from Dr. Romanis.
Penium spinospernuDii (Journ.
Bot. 1883, 293) was collected by 
the Rev. H.
W. Lett of Ardmore, Lurgan ; these zygospores much 
resemble those of C.
glohosmn Bulnh.
No. 11, with its singular 
spore, is a somewhat rare species, new to this country.
The 
drawings are made from specimens taken by me in the neighbour- 
hood of Cirencester.
I may here mention the valuable addition to 
our Desmid literature, entitled ' Desmids of the United States,' by 
the Rev. F.
Wolle, which has recently appeared in America, and 
would be a decided boon to any student of this class.
It is replete 
with a large amount of original information and excellent coloured 
plates.
Among the eleven hundred species figured, a vast number 
will be recognised as having a home in this country.
1. Euastrum incavatum Josh, et Nordst., nov.
spec; 
Wittrock & Nordstedt, Alg» exsiccatfe 657.
— E minimum incisura 
mediana lineari angusta [intra ostium x^auUulo dilatata ; semi- 
cellulse pyramidales e basi dilatata sensim in lobum polarem 
attenuatfe, lateribus Ifeviter latissimae retusis, angulis inferioribus 
oblique truncatis, lobo polari superue tantum laevissime dilatato, 
margine superiore late rotundato medio retuso] incavato, angulis 
subacutis ; a latere visae ovatae ; a verticte conspect® ellipticaa ; 
anguli superiores et inferiores oblique e vertice visi obtusi utrinque 
parvo ornati ; membrana glabra.
Long.
40-43 p ; lat.
24 fx, lat.
apic.
12 /x ; crass.
14-16 /x.
Habitu Micrasterias Integra Nordst., 
Euastrum ansatmn Ehrb.
Exi. cmieatum Jenn.
lianc speciei proxima 
* See Journ.
Bot. 1882, 300 ; 1883, 290.
Journal of Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[February, 1885.] d 
34 ON SOME NEW AND RARE DESMTDIE^.
sunt, a, cellula a fronte ; h, a latere; c, a vertice ; d, oblique; 
e, basi visa Jamaica iu Morces Gap ad Gordon Town.
Leg.
J. Hart, 1884.
2. EuASTRU.M vERRUcosuM Elu'enb.
/3.
simplex n.
var.
— Of stout 
habit, terminal lobe very short and with very shallow incision ; 
central inflation cither none or very small ; no other.
It is nearest 
to the Cosm.
in Reinsche's Coutrib.
xvi.
9 ; the verrucse are perhaps 
somewhat larger than in the typical plant.
Long.
85 fi, lat.
65 fi ; 
width of apical lobe 33 /x, thickness 25 /a.
3. CosMARiuM viRiDis Corda, Colopelta viridis Corda, in Alma- 
nach de Carlsbad, 1835, p, 206, T.
11, f.
28; Cosmariiim Cordanum 
(Breb.) Eabenh.
Fl. Europ.
Alg,, P.
iii.
page 177.
— It approaches 
nearly to a species figured by De Notaris among the forms of C.
palcmjula, fig.
34 c.
G. Notaris de Elementi per lo studie delle 
Desmidiace^e italiche ; also to the forms of C.
f/Iohosum and P.
curtum in Wille, Novaja-Semlja, Taf. xh.
f. 43 and 73.
In the 
absence of any definite knowledge of the size of Corda's plant I 
think it best to class it as above.
Pictou, Nova Scotia.
Length 
55 |M,, breadth 30-33 fi ; breadth of constriction 22 /u., 
4. Micrasterias ceratofera, n.
sp.
— Large, about one and a 
half times longer than broad, deeply constricted at middle, leaving a 
wide angle; semi-cells three-lobed, angles bifid, furnished with a 
strong spine.
Polar lobe much attenuated, and having the spines 
rather longer.
This distinct and remarkable species appears to 
bear the nearest relation to Micrasterias arcuataJisiii.
and M.
ascen- 
dens Nord., but at first sight I was in some doubt whether its true 
position might not be with the Staurastra.
Membrane smooth, 
length (s.
acul.) 27 /x, breadth (s.
acul.) 55 /a, thickness 27 /x, 
breadth of isthmus 20 /x, width of polar lobe (s.
acul.) 30 /x.
Rangoon, British Burmah, October, 1883.
5. Xanthidium antilopeum (Breb.) Kutz., new var.
canadense — 
Large cells much inflated, deeply constricted, truncate ; spines 
stout ; cytioderm minutely punctate, possessing no j)rotuberance or 
graniilation, resembling the var.
Minneapulcnse AVolle, Desmid.
U. States, L.
ii.
f. 16, in the possession of a fifth pair of spines, 
the extra pair in the centre of each semi-cell.
Pictou, Nova 
Scotia.
Length 77 /ix, breadth (s.
acul.) 63 /x (c.
acul.), 83.90 /x, 
breadth of isthmus 14 /x.
6. Arthrodesmus gibberulus, n.
sp.
— Medium size, cells 
elliptic with Strang convergent spines ; without spines about as 
long as wide, membrane smooth, cells with large inflation at the 
upper side, giving them in the end view an almost spherical 
appearance.
Rangoon, British Burmah, Length 36 /x, breadth 
(s.
acul.) 35 /x (c.
acul.) 54 ^, thickness 25 fx, breadth of isthmus 
13 /x.
7. Staurastrum minusculuin nov.
sp.
— Very minute, smooth, 
semi cells subcuneate with rounded ends, slightly convex ; angles 
produced laterally into straight diverging arms, rather longer than 
the diameter of cell, surmounted by four aculeate spines set at 
right angles.
Nearest to N.
gracile Rail's, but diflering in its 
smaller size and forked apices.
Length of arm 12.13 /x, diameter 
of cell 10 fj..
Rangoon, British Burmah.
A NEW CAKEX FEOM SUMATRA.
35 
8. CosMARiuM TuRPiNi Breb.
n. var.
cambricum.
— Rather 
smaller tliau the t,ypical form, more rotundate, less truncate ; basal 
angles less protruded ; form of central inflation two distinct ovals 
set obliquely ; composed of oblong granules.
Length GO /x, thick- 
ness including inflation 35 [x, width 50-60 p,, breadth of isthmus 
17 |tx.
Col. J.
E. Griffiths, F.L.S. Bangor, N.
Wales, 1881.
9. Closterium Braunii Reinscli., De speciebus generibusque, 
nomiullis novis Ex. Alg., P.
Reinsch, 1867, Tab. 1.
c. — Sparingly 
among other Algre.
Pictou, Nova Scotia, 1884.
10.
Penium spinospermum n.
sp.
— Small, about two and a 
quarter times longer than wide, subcylindrical, with a very slight 
median construction ; apices round, very slightly attenuated ; mem- 
brane smooth ; zygospores in young state globose and smooth, 
when mature thickly covered with obtuse projections.
Length 
33 fjL, breadth 25 /x, breadth of zygospore (s.
acul.) 23 /x, length of 
processes 7i i^..
Derrystrasna Bog, Co. Armagh, Ireland.
Rev.
H. W.
Lettf 
11.
Penium phymatosporum Nordst., Desmidiete et (EdogoniesB 
ab 0.
Nordstedt in Italia et Tyrolia collectae, Tab. xii.
f. 1., p.
26.
— Four or five specimens of the spore of this Desmid, with 
cells attached, occurred in a collection made by me at Minety, in 
September, 1881, from which my drawing was made.
New to 
Britain.
It bears a close resemblance in shape of plant and in 
form of the remarkable zygospore to the Italian specimens ; but I 
have not been able to detect the longitudinal strisae in the mem- 
brane which Nordstedst's specimens appear to possess, somewhat 
similar to P.
polymorphum Lund.
Explanation of Tab. 254.
— 1.
Euastrum incavatum Josh, et Nordstedt, from 
the fig.
in Wittr.
& Nordstedt's Alg. Exsic, x 570.
2. Euastrum verrucosum 
Ehrb.
f. simplex n.
var., x -±50.
3. Cosmarium viridis Corda, x 450.
4. Micr aster ias ceratophora, n.
sp., x 450.
a, front view; b, side view.
5. Xanthidium antilopeum Breb.
f. canadense ; front and end view, x 450.
6. Arthrodesmus gibberulus n.
sp., x (iOO.
a, front view; b, end view.
7. Staurastrum minicsculum, n, sp., x COO.
8. Cosmarium Turpini Breb., f.
cambricum n.
var., x 450.
9. Closterium Braunii Reinsch.
a, plant in front 
view, x 300 ; b, a portion of same enlarged, x 900 ; c, apex, x 900, 
10.
Penium spinospermum, n.
sp., x 450.
11.
Penium phymatosporum Nord- 
stedt, X 450.
/ 
/ A NEW CABEX FROM SUMATRA.
By H.
N. Ridley, M.A., F.L.S.
O Carex tartarea, n.
sp.
— Rhizomate brevi ; foliis glaucis copi- 
osis confertis rigidis, linearibus acumiuatis recurvis perscabris ; 
culmis crassiusculis pedalibus triquetris rigidis ; foliis caulinis 
4-5 ampliatis ; spiculis femineis uncialibus peduuculatis numerosis 
e vaginis inferioribus emergentibus ; spiculis masculis panels termi- 
nalibus ; squamis lanceolatis obtusis purpureis apice scariosis 
mucronatis carinatis, mucrone scabro ; utriculis rostratis elongatis 
excurvis utrinque angustatis, marginibus scabris nigris lucidis ; 
36 NOTKS ON MTODLESEX PLANTS.
rostro breviter bifido dentibus obtusis scabris ; stylo brevi trifido ; 
caryopsi obovata triquetra breviter apiculata.
Sumatra (Parsoemah Eegion), H.
0. Forbes, No. 2414 iu Herb.
Brit.
Mus.
This Carex belongs to the Bengaleusis section, with some 
affinity to 0.
baccans Nees.
It lias a close tuft of rough stiff 
recurved leaves, from which springs a short stout culm, bearing a 
somewhat compact panicle.
The spikelets are about an inch in 
length and slender ; they are borne on long peduncles, which are 
for the most part concealed in the swollen vaginre of the culm 
leaves, from the axils of which the spikelets spring.
The laminse 
of these leaves resemble those of the radical leaves ; the lower 
ones are three inches in length.
The lower spikelets are all female, 
the males being few in number in the upper part of the panicle.
The narrow long-beaked utricles, when ripe, are excurved, almost 
black, the beak shortly notched, scabrid.
The length of the mucro 
of the glume varies very much.
NOTES ON MIDDLESEX PLANTS.
By John Benbow.
A BRIEF notice of some plants gathered during the past summer 
in the north-western districts of the county may be of interest, 
although the ground covered has been too well worked to yield a 
very rich harvest.
My gleanings, however, show that many species 
find no place in the ' Flora of Middlesex' for these districts.
The 
search, moreover, has proved the absence of plants in numerous 
localities where they are stated to grow "abundantly."' Eecords 
from stations of limited, well-defined areas are in the majority of 
instances obsolete, and might well be placed within excluding 
brackets.
The following list — supplementary to several previous 
notes — includes a few only of the species thus omitted, or gathered 
in new stations : — 
Kanunciiliis circinatiis.
In many places from Southall to Hare- 
field.
Senebiera didyma.
Gravel-jpits, Dawley, near Hayes.
Reseda lutea.
Said to grow "only in Haretield chalk-i)its " ; is 
common about Springwell ; grows sparingly on a gravelly bank 
skirting Uxbridge Common, and in a meadow near Jack's Lock.
Silene nuctijiora.
West Drayton.
SteUaria (jlnuca.
Staines Moor (in addition to previous record 
of "Moor north of Uxbridge").
Malva burealis.
Near Uxbridge.
Geranium lucidum.
Cowley.
lUuoiinus catharticHS.
Said to grow "near Harefield, but just 
out of Middlesex"; is to be found in a meadow south of Harefield.
LotuH tenuiti.
In great profusion for a milo or two on railway- 
banks between Uxbridge and West Drayton.
NOTES ON MIDDLESEX PLANTS.
37 
Pyriis Aria.
Several fine trees skirt Old Park Wood on the 
north, — P.
torminalis.
Eecorded as "just out of the county, in 
Herts"; is to be found sparingly in hedgerows about Harefield.
Epilobium macrocarpum.
Very abundant in swampy copses from 
Uxbridge Common and Swakeleys to Ickenham.
— K.
ruseum.
Ditch by Warren Pond, Breakspeares ; and Old Park Wood.
— 
E. pnlustre.
Bog close to Moor Hall.
Mi/riophi/llum verticiUatum.
Uxbridge Moor, Harefield Moor , 
and elsewhere.
CJinjsospJenimn oppositifoJinm.
In a boggy corner of Old Park 
Wood, abundantly.
Torilis nodosa.
On a sandy bank, Uxbridge Moor.
Galium Cruciata.
Apparently very scarce ; I have met with 
only a single plant in Long Lane, Hillingdon.
Dipsacus pilosus.
Plentiful in a copse, and on banks near Den- 
ham Lock ; Harefield Road, near Moor Hall.
Inula Helenium.
Several plants in a wet meadow near North- 
wood (extinct in Blackstone's stations).
— I.
Conyza.
Several 
plants in an old pit in the meadow between Jack's Lock and the 
Copper Mills (extinct in the "old chalk-pit" as recorded by Black- 
stone).
Pulicaria vuhjans.
On the west side of Staines Common, close 
to the London Eoad, plentifully.
(Cannot find this in any of the 
stations recorded).
Serratula tinctoria.
This also seems very scarce ; I have met 
with it only at Pole Hill, Hillingdon.
Centaurea solstitialis.
Two or three plants in fields above 
Uxbridge (introduced).
Carduus tenuijiorus.
Staines Moor.
Gentiana AmareUa. This species, with Campanula TracheUum 
and Chlora perfoliata, appears to extend over a wider area than 
supposed ; it grows by the side of an old pit at Springwell ; 
abundantly on the steep slopes of the down beyond, and sparingly 
on chalky banks to the boundary.
Villarsia nymphccoidos.
Grows higher up the Thames than Wal- 
ton Bridge.
Cuscuta Trifolii.
Very abundant in clover-fields about Springwell.
EcMiim vuigare.
In the same fields.
Lithospervmm arvense.
About Colnbrook.
Hyoscyavms niger.
Near Uxbridge Common.
(Grew lately near 
Cowley, on waste ground by the Colne, but now extinct).
Mentha yentilis.
In some quantity in the marshy bottom of a 
heathy waste near Northwood.
(Mr. Arthur Bennett has kindly 
named this plant).
Calamintha officinalis.
In several places about Harefield, and 
evidently — as suggested by the authors of the ' Flora of Middlesex ' 
— the var.
Briggsii.
— C.
Acinos.
Mr. Newbould's record of "a 
single specimen in the old chalk-pit, Harefield" is somewhat 
misleading : it grows there plentifully, and is a troublesome weed 
in the fields above.
Nepeta Cataria.
About Harefield, in several places, sparingly.
38 LORANTHI SPECIEM NOVAM CHINENSEM.
Lmnium incisum.
Pottery-field on Uxbridge Common.
Anai/tillis arvensis var.
acrulea.
Two plants in a field by Ux- 
bridge Common.
EiDiicx vuiritimus and R.
palustris.
A few plants of each species 
still hold their ground this summer ; but the swamp is now filled 
up, and rows of cottages built upon the site.
FritiUaria Mclrafjn's.
Several patches in Swakeley's Park, near 
Uxbridge, but fast being rooted up for garden -culture.
Putamof/eton rufescens.
Abundant in ditches from junction of 
canal and river to Springwell Lock ; also sparingly in a ditch close 
to Denham Fishery, — P.
mucronatm.
Canal between Denham 
and Moor Locks, and in old docks at Southall, plentifully.
(Both 
these pondweeds have been verified by Mr. Arthur Bennett).
Other 
species, though common in the district, are omitted in the ' Flora 
of Middlesex, viz., P.
Incens, P.
jmsillus, and P.
JiaheUatua.
ScirpHs jhutans.
Pond by the Lodge leading to Swakeley's 
Park from Uxbridge Common (not on Harefield Common).
Carex palicaris.
Wet meadow near Bayhurst Wood.
— C.
disticha.
Not uncommon.
— C.
paniculata.
This sedge, quite 
common in District 1, is omitted from 1, 2, and 3.
It is very 
abundant from Uxbridge to Harefield, by sides of river, canal, and 
ditches adjoining.
— C.
axillaris.
Plentiful in a lane east of Ux- 
bridge Common ; sparingly in lanes about Blackenbury Farm, 
Ickenham Green, West Drayton, &c.
— G.
stellulata.
Moor below 
Dew's Farm ; by pond on Duck's Hil] Farm, Northwood.
— C.
pallescens.
Abundant in a wet meadow by Bayhurst Wood.
— 
C. striyosa.
Old Park AVood.
— C.
pendula.
Eastcott and district.
— C.
piluli/era.
Lane near Pinner Station (not on Harefield 
Common.
— C.
fiava.
Moor below Dew's Farm ; side of pond on 
Duck's Hill Farm, Northwood.
— C.
hinervis.
Harefield Common, 
sparingly (not on Paiislip Common).
— C.
Pseudo-cypenis.
Hare- 
field Moor, very sparingly.
Triticum canimun.
Plentiful in places on the wide hedge-banks 
between Dew's Farm and Moor Hall.
Nitella translucens.
Ruislip Reservoir.
On reference to the table of " comparison with adjacent counties" 
appended to the ' Flora of Middlesex ' it will be seen that four of 
the species found last summer are there said to be "wanting" in 
the county, viz., Avaijallis arvensis var.
aerulea, Centaurca solstitialis, 
Crepis hiemris, and PotaiiKu/etun rufescens ; whilst Sisi/mbrium Sophia, 
Mentha (jentilis, and Ojdinjs apij'era are excluded from the 'Flora' as 
extincts.
/ 
LORANTHI SPECIEM NOVAM CHINENSEM 
Pr;ebet H.
F. Hance, Ph.D.
'Loranthus (Mackosolen, racemulosi) Fordii, sp.
nov.
— 
Glabcrrimus, ramis ramulisque subtetragouis cortice cinereo sub- 
eroso valde leuticelloso tectis, foliis oppositis coriaceis oblongis vel 
lanceolatis obtusiuscnlis lucidulis penninerviis costa subtus modice 
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
89 
nervis parum promiuulis 3-3 J- poll, lougis 12-14 liu.
latis petiolo 
5-lineali, pecluuculis axillaribus solitariis 7 lin.
lougis apicem 
versus racemoso-paxicifloris, bi'acteis ?, bracteolis biuis ovatis, calyce 
sesquilineali margine traucato denticulato pedicello paulo longiore 
fulto, corollas rubr?e ?
subcyliiidracefe 4-5 liu.
longfe petalis 6 ad 
duas tertias lougitudiuis in tubum coalitis lobis oblougis reflexis 
iutus tomentellis, geuitalibus sub autliesi exsertis, autlieris basi- 
fixis, stigmate globoso.
Juxta Pu-koug, prov.
Cantoneusis ceutralis, m.
Aprili 1882, 
coU.
C. Ford (Herb, propr.
n. 22225.) 
Proximo accedit L.
subuvibcllato Bl.
(Fl. Jav.
Lorauth.
t. 18) 
qui, ex b.
Miquelii seutentia, L.
splmrocarpi Bl. tautum varietas.
A CONTEIBUTION TOWAEDS A FLOEA OF 
BEECONSHIEE.
By W.
Bowles Barrett, F.L.S.
There are still two or three Welsh couuties the flora of which 
is comparatively little known.
Amongst such, Breconshire (County 
42), held, till quite lately, a prominent place, passing almost un- 
noticed in ' Topographical Botany,' ed.
ii.
This fact led me to 
visit the county in August last, and I spent the closing three weeks 
of that mouth in examining the Breconshire flora.
I believe that, at the date of my visit, the total number of 
species actually recorded for the county amounted to 356 only ; for 
the larger number of these we were indebted to the Eev. Augustin 
Ley, M.A., who had made several botanical visits there between 
1873 and 1883, and who has an intimate acquaintance with the 
botany of the Black Mountain district.
Of the 356 species referred 
to, only 186 appeared in the 2nd edition of ' Topographical 
Botany,' 140 additional species were recorded by Mr. Ley, in the 
Eeport of the Botanical Eecord Club for 1881, and 22 were added by 
Miss Fryer in April last ( Journ.Bot. 1884, p.
124).
A further hst was 
published in December last, in the Eeport of the Botanical Eecord 
Club for 1883, of 129 new county records of plants observed by Mr.
Ley in that year; 105 additional new records for the county, of so- 
callled " species," and 24 of segregates and varieties, Avere made by 
me in August last, and are embodied in this paper.
Mr. Ley and 
Mr. H.
N. Eidley, F.L.S.
, have obligingly communicated the 
name's of eight additional species, either observed by them, or 
specimens of which are preserved in the Brit.
Mus. Herb.
The 
present census of Breconshire plants is thus brought up to 590 
species.
By far the larger portion of the county consists of old red 
saudstone, which is distinguished from that forming the subsoil of 
Herefordshire chiefly by its extraordinary elevation.
The upper 
portion of this formation, consisting of sandstone and conglo- 
merate, occupies the summits of the Vans (Beacons), and other 
lofty mountains, presenting some of the grandest exhibitiuus of the 
40 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
old red sandstone to be seen in England or Wales.
Silurian rocks 
occupy the extreme north of Brecoushire.
The coal and iron 
tract comprises a narrow district along the whole southern side of 
the county.
The western side is distinguished by greywacke 
slates.
The transition rocks are singularly devoid of limestone.
The county, in its general character, is distinguished by its ex- 
tensive valleys and continuous and lofty mountain tracts.
Only 
about two-thirds of it are under cultivation ; the southern portion 
is especially wild and elevated.
A semicircular range of moun- 
tains, compiising the Black Mountain group on the east, the 
Brecon Beacons towards the south-west, and Mount Capellante 
and the Brecoushire Van towards the west, attain altitudes of from 
2500 feet or thereabouts to 2862 feet, while a long barren chain, 
called Mynydd Epynt, stretches across the county in a north- 
easterly direction, between Trecastle and Builth.
The annual 
rainfall is large, especially in the mountain regions ; it may be 
averaged, throughout the county, at about forty inches.
The 
rivers are very numerous, each large stream possessing many 
tributaries.
The almost tropical heat, at the time of my visit, forbad much 
mountain work; moreover, the extraordinary drought had rendered 
the hills comparatively bare.
For the most part, therefore, my 
excursions were made in the basins of the Tawe, Taff-Vechan, 
Khymney, Usk, Llynvi, Wye, and Irvon rivers, and around Llan- 
gorse Lake.
The flora of Brecoushire is semi-montane in character, but, in 
consequence of the inland position of the county, the uniformity 
of soil, and the large tracts forming elevated moors or mountain 
ranges where the sm-face is still in a state of nature, the flora is by 
no means rich or varied.
Many plants, frequent in most parts of 
England, seem here to be scarce or absent, points to which I have 
drawn attention in the following list.
It is not unlikely that 
hereafter the flowering plants and ferns of the county may be 
brought up to about 670 ; that number, however, is small for a 
county 35 miles in length, with a breadth of 20 miles, and a surface 
presenting such great variations in altitude.
The most interesting ground to the botanist is to be found on 
the Brecon Beacons, in the Black Mountain district, the neighbour- 
hood of Pen-y-wyllt, the shores of Llangorse Lake, and the 
Khymney Valley, Among the rarer plants of the Brecon Beacons 
are Thaiictrum moiitanmn, Caltha minor, Cerastium alpestre, Alsine 
verna, Sediim lihuiiiola, S.
Forsterianum, Saxifnuja oppositifolia, 
Hi/i)i('no]/hijUum Wilsoni, and Asplenium viride.
In the Black 
Mountain district are found Meconopsis Camhrica, Viola lutea, 
Geranium st/lraticuni, Fi/nis rajdcola, Saxifruga Hpunhemica, S.
hyp- 
noides, ]\lyrrhis odorata, Hicraciwn prena}itJwides, Vacciniiim Vitis- 
idfca, (Jystopteris dentata, rolypodium rheyopteria, P.
Dryopteris, 
P. Piohertianum, and Lycopodiiiiii aljiimiiii.
I have collected in this paper all the records known to me of 
Brecoushire plants, hoping that thereby some little additional light 
may be thrown on plant distribution over the extensive inland 
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
41 
tracts of old red sandstone to be found in the subprovince of South- 
east Wales.
I am greatly indebted to the Eev. A.
Ley, who has most kindly 
allowed me to incorporate his extended observations with my own, 
and has communicated much valuable information relating to the 
botany of the county.
My grateful acknowledgments are also due 
to Mr. J.
G. Baker, F.E.S., the Eev. W.
W. Newbould, F.L.S., and 
the Eev. W.
Moyle Eogers, F.L.S., for kind assistance in iden- 
tifying some critical plants.
I am responsible for all the plants 
and stations against which no authority is attached.
The nomen- 
clature of the 7tli edition of the London Catalogue has been 
adopted in this paper.
Those plants which are new records for the 
county, in tlie sense of not having been recorded either in ' Topo- 
graphical Botany,' or in either of the lists before alluded to, are 
distinguished by the prefixed asterisk ; C stands for common, F for 
frequent.
Thalictrnm minus var.
b. montanum E.
B. Craig-y-gledsiau, 
Brecon Beacons ; A.
Ley.
— T.
majus var.
jiexuosum E.
teste; J.
G. 
Baker; Wye Banks, near Erwood ; A.
Ley.
— T.
flavum L., var.
a. spJmrocarpum.
On the Llynvi, Three Cocks Junction; A.
Ley.
In bushy stony places on both sides of Llangorse Lake.
A rare 
plant in S.
Wales.
Anemone nemorosa L.
P. in the valleys; A.
Ley.
Banuncuhis circmatus Sibth.
Llangorse Lake; A.
Ley.
— R.
penicillatus Dum.
(pseiido-fluitans Bab.) In the Llynvi, near Glas- 
bury ; A.
Ley.
— R.
Lenoriiiaiuli F.
Schultz.
Elan and Honddu 
Valleys; A.
Ley. Vale above Ehymney Bridge Station.
Moun- 
tain above Pentwyn.
Dolygaer Eeservoir.
— R.
hederacens L.
Near 
Capel Coelbren ; A.
Ley. Eare.
Bog, Epynt Hill, near Garth.
— 
*B.
scelemtus L.
Llangorse Lake, very sparingly.
— R.
Flanwiula 
L. C.
Widely distributed.
— R.
Lingua L.
Llangorse Lake, abun- 
dant (both the glabrous and hairy forms).
— R.
auricomus L.
Near 
Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
— R.
acris L.
C. Crag, under summit of 
Brecon Beacons, alt.
2700 ft.; A.
Ley.
— R.
repens Ij. C.
— R.
parvijiorus L.
In a turnip field.
Three Cocks Junction; A.
Ley.
— 
R. Ficaria L.
Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Caltha pal ustr is Ij. Frequent; yax.C. minor.
Brecon Beacons ; 
A. Ley. Vale above Ehymney Bridge Station.
Marshy ground, 
Brynmawr.
Epynt Hills.
TroUius europceus L.
At Upper Culhepshy ; E.
Foster, 1805, 
Herb.
Mus. Brit.
Eiverside, Pen-y-wyllt.
Bushy places near 
Llangorse Lake.
'-Berberis vulgaris L.
Eoadside hedge, Llanthetty, near Taly- 
bont ; Possibly introduced.
Nympluea alba L.
F. A.
Lees, ins., Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Llan- 
gorse Lake ; A.
Ley.
yuphar lutea Sm. Apparently rare.
Ditches adjoining Llan- 
gorse Lake.
Papaver Rhaas L.
(recorded by Eev. A.
Ley), and P.
Argemone 
L. nowhere seen ; in fact poppies are rather scarce in S.
Wales.
— 
*P.
Lamuttei Bor. Enclosed ground.
Three Cocks Junction.
— "P.
Lecoqii Lamot.
Talybont.
Three Cocks Junction.
42 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
Meconopds cambrica Vig. Eocky stream-sides at Ehydgocb, 
near Brecon ; Grwyue-faur Valley, Black Mountain district ; 
doubtful native at latter station; A.
Ley. Wood, Gilwcrn.
Eavine at Ffrwdgrecli Waterfall, near Brecon.
'^'Chclidonium majus h.] Frequent in and near villages; probably 
introduced.
Conjdalis clavicidata DC.
Top. Bot., ed.
ii.
*'Fumaria confnsa Jord.
The most frequent segregate.
Noted 
on shore of Usk, Talybont.
Eoadside, Llangorse.
Talgarth.
Three Cocks Junction, abundant.
Alltmawr, opposite Aberedw, 
near Builth, abundant.
{F.
Burrerl Jord.
appears in Bot. Eec.
Club.
Eep. 1883 as a new county record for Brecon, the specimen 
having been found by the Eev. A.
Ley. He has sent me a duplicate ; 
it must, I think, certainly go with conj'usa, although the fruit 
pedicels are somewhat reflexed).
— F.
ojficinalis L.
Uncommon.
Enclosed ground.
Three Cocks Junction.
Fallow ground near 
Builth.
Sinapis arvensis L.
C. — S.
alba L.
Waste land.
Three Cocks 
Junction; A.
Ley. Llauthetty, near Talybont ; Hay.
— S.niyrah.
Banks of Wye ; Hay.
Sisymbrium, officinale Scop.
C. — S.
All iaria iico^.
F. Noted 
at Gilwern, Builth, &c.
Brassica campestris ; A.
Ley.
'^Cheiranthus Cheiri L.
Old walls, Brecon.
Introduced.
Cardamine pratensis L.
; A.
Ley.
— *C'.
kirsuta L.
C. — ''"'C.
syl- 
vatica Link.
C. By river-sides, &c., throughout the county.
— C.
impatiens L.
Near Builth; A.
Ley.
Arabis thaliana L.
Walls at Llyswen ; H.
N. Fudley.
— A.
hir- 
suta Br. Limestone rocks, Pen-y-wyllt.
Barbarea vulgaris Br. F.
Nasturtium, officinale Br. C.
— N.
palustre DC.
Frequent in 
river-beds.
Shores of Usk, Talybont.
Llangorse Lake.
The 
Usk. Brecon, not common.
The Wye, Hay, plentiful.
•Jr-Draba verna L.
C. 
Thlaspi arvense L.
Not seen.
CapseUa Bursa-pastoris Moench.
C. 
Lepidium Smithii Hook.
Eailbauks, Newbridge ; A.
Ley. Pen- 
y-wyllt.
Talybont, near Builth.
— L.
campestre Br. Not seen.
Senebiera didyma Pers.
Plentifully by roadsides at Hay.
— S.
Coronopus Poir.
Not seen.
It is remarkable that this species has 
not been recorded for either of the three neighbouring counties of 
Eadnor, Montgomery, and Merioneth ; from some of these it is 
probably absent.
Lleseda Luteola L.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Not seen by Eev. A.
Ley 
or myself.
Helianthem7Wi valyare Gaert.
On limestone crag, Ehiwarth.
Pen-y-wyllt ; A.
Ley.
Viola palustris L.
Eare.
Near Pen-pont, about 2h miles north 
of Pont-nedd-fychan ; A.
Ley. Only seen in mountain bog, Pen- 
y-wyllt, sparingly.
— V.
hirta L.
Not seen.
— V.
odorata L.
Near 
Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Apparently scarce.
— V.
Fdiiniana Eeich.
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
43 
Very C : * for segregate.
— V.
Reichenbachiana Bor. Carefully 
searched for, but uot seen.
No canina seen.
— V.
tricolor L.
Near 
Nant-gwyllt, about five miles south-west of Ehayacler ; A.
Ley.
— 
Var. arcemh.
Partricio ; A.
Ley. Cultivated ground, Llangorse, 
Brecon, Three Cocks Junction.
— V.
lutca Huds., IK Turner ms.; 
Top.Bot. ed.
ii.
Eare.
One small patch at base of Black Mountain, 
three miles south of Hay ; A.
Ley, 
Drosera rotundifoUa L.
Hill-side near Nant-Gwyllt ; Honddu 
Valley, Black Mountain district, scarce ; at base of the hills, four 
miles above Llanthony Abbey; A.
Ley. Eare.
Only seen in 
moory swamp, Pen-y-wyllt.
— D.
intermedia Hayne.
Not seen.
Polyyala vidgaris L.
Appears to be uncommon in South 
Breconshire.
Frequent elsewhere.
— *P.
depressa Wender.
Taly- 
bont.
Builth.
'^'Silene injlata Sm. Pen-y-wyllt.
Brynmawr ; a few plants 
only.
Much less frequent than in South-west England.
— S.
maritima With., "2800 feet"; Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Northern 
precipice of Brecon Beacons, finer and more plentiful than I have 
ever seen it inland; A.
Ley.
Lychnis vespertina Sib. F.
— L.
diurna Sib. C.
The rare 
form with white flowers, by roadside between Talybont and 
Llanthetty.
— L, Flos-ciicidi L.
Cwm-Tarell Valley, five miles 
south-west of Brecon; .I. Ley. Dolygaer.
Llangorse.
Builth.
— 
L. Githago Lam. Not seen.
Cerastium glomeratmn Thuil.
and C.
trivialelj.
C. — C.
triviale\a,r.
d. alpestre.
Crag under head of Brecon Beacons.
New to the 
Principality; A.
Ley.
*Stellaria aquatica Scop.
Shores of Usk, Talybont.
Llan- 
gorse and neighbourhood.
— S.
media "With.
F. — S.
Holostea L.
C. — S.
graminea L.
F. — S.
uliginosa Murr.
Eiverbeds, &c.
Abundant in South Breconshire, less common towards north.
Arenaria trinervia L.
C. — A.
serpyUifolia L.
Near Brecon; 
A. Ley. Not very common.
Talyllyn.
— Var.
4eptocladus.
Sides 
of railway near Talyllyn.
Alsine verna Bartl.
Crag under head of Brecon Beacons, 
abundant.
Confirmation of queried record in Top. Bot.; A.
Ley.
Sagina apetala L.
Three Cocks Junction ; A.
Ley. Uncommon, 
except on arable lauds.
Talybont.
Near Brecon.
Hay.
— S.
ciliata Fr. Locality forgotten ; A.
Ley.
— S.
procumhens L.
Eemarkably abundant.
— */S'.
nodosa Meyer, var.
glandulosa.
Eare.
Several plants by mountain rivulets above Pentwyn.
Spergula arvensis Lt. Nant-gwyllt; Partricio, A.
Ley. Widely 
diistributed.
Noted at Brynmawr, Talybont, Hay, Garth.
Spergularia rubra Fenzl.
Casual on rail between Doldowlod and 
Ehayader; A.
Ley. Abundant on sandy swampy ground at 
Brynmawr, apparently native.
' "'SclerantJiHs annuus L.
Apparently uncommon.
Bed of Usk, 
Talybont, in some plenty.
Arable laud near Brecon.
Mantia fuiitana L.
Near Aber Elan ; A.
Ley. Vale above 
Ehymney Bridge Station.
Swampy ground, Brynmawr.
Builth.
LlypericiDii Androsfeimuii Lt. Eare.
Gilwern.
— IL perj'uratum 
44 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
L. Widely distributed.
— H.
dubitim Leers.
Top. Bot.
Ed. ii.
— 
H. tetrapteriim Fries.
Widely distributed.
— H.
humifusum L.
Nant-Gwyllt ; Newbridge; A.
Ley. Llaugorse ; H.
N. Kidlei/.
Apparently not common.
Gilwern.
Dolygaer.
Near Brecon.
Builtb.
— '" '•II.
pnkhrumh.
F. Pen-y-wyllt.
Gilwern.
Talybont.
Llangorse.
Brecon.
Builtb.
— ''•II.
hirsntum L.
Not common.
Llanbamlacb.
Llaugorse.
Brecon.
Hay.
— H.Flodesh.
Not seen.
Malva moschata L.
Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Koadsides 
and bedgo-banlvs, frequent and cbaracteristic.
Talybont, abundant.
Llangorse.
Tbree Cocks Junction.
Builtb.
— M.
sylvestris L.
F., but somewbat sparingly distributed.
— M.
rottmdifolia L.
Not 
seen.
Tilia intermedia DC.
Planted.
Brecon ; A.
Ley.
— T.
parvifolia 
L. " Native, E.
Lees," Top. Bot., ed.
ii.
Linum.
catharticum.
L. Generally distributed and remarkably 
abundant.
— L.
usitatissimum L.
Eailway bank, Doldowlod, intro- 
duced ; A.
Ley.
Geranium sylvaticum L.
Mountain rocks, Taren r' Esgob ; A.
Ley.
— G.
pratense L.
Usk, above Brecon, frequent; A.
Ley. Scarce.
Near Talybont.
Tbree Cocks Junction.
Builtb.
Always in small 
quantity.
— G.
molle L., G.
dissectum L., and G.
Robertianum L.
C. — -''G.
columbinnm L.
Koadside by Tbree Cocks Junction; 
H. N.
Ridley, 1884.
Bare.
Only seen in border of cornfield, 
Talybont.
— G.
lucidum.
L. In tbe sbeltered and warmer parts of 
tbe district.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Gilwern.
Alltmawr near Builtb.
'^'Er odium ciciitarium Herit.
Only seen once on shore of Wye, 
Builtb ; one plant.
Oxalis Acetosella L.
Generally distributed and exceedingly 
abundant.
'^•Ilex Aquifoliimi.
L. C.
Euonymus europmus L.
Not seen.
Bhamnus catharticxis L.
Limestone rocks, Kbiwartb, Pen-y- 
wyllt; A.
Ley.
Acer Pseudo-platanus L.
; A.
Ley.
— A.
campestre L.
C. 
"Ulea; europceus L.
C. — U.
Gallii Planch.
Abundant on 
hillsides, &c., and widely distributed.
' ^Genista tinctoria L.
Near Garth.
Hillside, Builtb.
— G.
anglica L.
Not seen.
Sarothamnus scoparius Koch.
Generally distributed ; abundant.
'^'Ononis arvensis Auct.
C. — Noted at Gilwern, Talybont, 
Brecon.
The form without spines alone seen.
Anthyllis Vulneraria L, Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley. Eailway bank, 
Pontsticil, probably a casual.
— Var.
''Dilloni.
Between Brecon 
and Trecastle ; Lady Wilson, 1808, Herb.
Brit.
Mies.
' i'Medicayo Inpulina L.
C. 
Melilotus officijialis YfiWd. Not seen.
. 1 
(To be continued.; 
45 
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS 8ELAGINELLA.
By J.
G. Baker, F.E.S., &c.
y - (Contiuued from p.
25.) 
j^QJUQ.
S. PENTAGONA Spring Mon. ii.
150.
— 8.
implexa Scott.
— 
Stems l-li ft.
long, ascending from a decumbent base, sometimes 
lengthened out and taking root at the tip, simple in lower half or 
third, deltoid and decompound upwards, with 2-3-pinnate deltoid 
lower pinna?, the contiguous ascending final branchlets |— 1 in.
long, 
^-^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, ascending, 
oblique ovate, acute, l-12tli to l-8th in.
long, bright green, 
moderately firm in texture, dilated, obscurely ciliated, broadly 
rounded, and much imbricated over the stem on the upper side at 
the base ; leaves of the lower plane one-third to one-quarter as 
long, oblong-lanceolate, acute.
Spikes square, short, ^f lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled, 
Hab. Eastern Himalayas, and Parasnatli.
Intermediate in 
habit between Jiahellata and vwnospora.
221.
S. Menziesii Spring Mon. ii.
185.
— S.
Sprmgii Spring 
Mon. ii.
184.
— Lycupodlum Menziesii Hook.
& Grev.
— L.
Arhnscula 
Hook.
& Grev.
Ic. t.
200, non Kaulf.
— Stems erect, -J-l ft.
long, 
simple in the lower half, with the leaves of the upper part 
spreading, deltoid and decompound in the upper half, the lower 
pianife copiously compound, the final branchlets J-J in.
long, ^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, oblique ovate, acute, 
ascending, falcate, l-12th to l-6th in.
long, bright green, mode- 
rately firm in texture, dilated, broadly rounded, obscurely ciliated, 
and a little imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the base ; 
leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblique ovate, with a 
large cusp.
Spikes short, square, | lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate- 
cuspidate, acutely keeled.
Hab. Polynesia, especially in the Sandwich Islands.
I find it 
difficult to draw the line between this species and 8.
Arbusciila on 
the one hand, and -S'.
Jiahellata on the other.
222.
S. breynioides, n.
sp.
— Stems above a foot long, erect, 
simple in lower part, with spreading leaves, deltoid and decompound 
in the upper three-quarters, the branches erecto-patent and sparingly 
subflal)ellately compound, the lower ones half a foot long, the final 
branchlets 1-2 in.
long, \-\ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane 
contiguous even on the main stem, spreading, oblong-rhomboid, 
obtuse, bright green, moderately firm in texture, ^-\ in.
long, 
obliquely inserted, broadly rounded, not ciliated, slightly imbricated 
over the stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper 
plane half as long, oblique ovate, with a large cusp, much imbri- 
cated.
Spikes short, terminal, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceo- 
late, acutely keeled.
Hab. Mountains of Navite, Lcvu, Fiji, Milne 198 !
334 !
Leaves of both planes in size, shape and insertion closely re- 
sembling those of >S'.
Breynii, but general habit of course very 
different.
46 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
serrulate, and imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the 
base; leaves of the upper plane minute, obovate, with a large cusp.
Spikes square, ^-^ in, long, i hn.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate,- 
strongly keeled.
Hab. Mountains of Mergui, GriffUh !
223.
S. obesa, n.
sp.
— • Stems erect, stramineous, under a foot 
long, the lower third simple, the upper two thirds deltoid, frond- 
like, decompound, the close primary pinnae lanceolate, copiously 
pinnate, with short sparingly compound ascending branchlets, the 
ultimate divisions ^^ in.
long, ^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower 
plane contiguous and patent on the branches, ascending on the 
branchlets, oblique ovate, obtuse, l-12th to l-8th in.
long, very 
broad at the base, much dilated on the upper side, where it is 
broadly rounded, obscurely ciliated and much imbricated over the 
stem, the margins above the dilated base revolute ; leaves of the 
upper plane half as long, ovate-lancealate, with a distinct cusp.
Spikes short, square, i lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly 
keeled.
Hab. North Borneo, Burbidge !
224.
S. FULCRATA Spring Mon. ii.
171.
— S.
pubescens Spring 
Mon. ii.
173.
— Lycopodium fulcratum Hamilt.
— L.
jmhescens Wall.
— 
Stems 1^-2 ft.
long, stiffly erect, simple in the lower half, with a 
few distant small adpressed leaves, deltoid and decompound in the 
upper half, the pinnae deltoid, the lower ones 3-4 -pinnate, the 
rachises pubescent, the final branchlets contiguous, J-i in.
long, 
l-12th to l-8th in.
diam.
Leaves of the lower plane rather spaced 
even on the branchlets, ascending, lanceolate, acute, l-12th to 
l-8th in, long, bright green, liable to be revolute at both margins, 
nearly equal-sided, truncate, and not at all imbricated over the 
stem at the base ; leaves of the upper plane half as long, lanceolate, 
incurved, not cuspidate.
Spikes square, ^-^ in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.; 
bracts orbicclar, with a small cusp, little longer than the sporangia.
Hab. East Himalayas, and mountains of Birma.
A well- 
marked species, allied only to the African S.
Vof/elii.
225.
S. GRANDis Moore in Gard.
Chron.
1882, vol.ii.
p. 40, t.
8. 
— S.
j)lati)phiiUa Hort.
Veitch.
— Stems erect, li^-2 ft.
long, simple 
in the lower half, deltoid and decompound in the upper half, the 
branching midway between flabellate and pinnate, the contiguous 
final branchlets f in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, 
lanceolate, very acute, \-\ in.
long, bright green, moderately firm 
in texture, equilateral except at the base, where they are more 
rounded on the anterior side, slightly ciliated on both margins ; 
leaves of the lower plane one-third as long, obtuse, ovate-lanceolate, 
very acute, ascending, much imbricated.
Spikes copious, square, 
tetragonal, 1-1^ in.
long, l-12th to l-8th in.
diam.
; bracts ovate- 
lanceolate, strongly ciliated.
Hab. Borneo, Curtis !
A very fine plant, recently introduced 
into cultivation by Messrs.
Veitch.
226.
S, LATiFOLiA Spring Mon. ii.
168.
— Lycopodium latifolium 
Hook.
& Grev.
— Stems erect, 1-H ft.
long, simple in the lower 
half, deltoid and decompound in the upper half, the branching 
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
47 
midway between flabellate and pinnate, the final branclilets 
reaching a length of 3-4 in., ^-^^ in.
broad.
Leaves of tlie lower 
plane contiguous, oblong-rhomboid, ascending, falcate, subacute at 
the upper corner, l-6th to l-5th in.
long, dark green, moderately 
firm in texture, very unequal-sided, broadly rounded, not ciliated, 
and hardly at all imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the 
base ; leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, broad-ovate, with 
a large cusp.
Spikes square, ^-1 in.
long, l-12th to l-8th in.
diam.
; 
bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Ceylon, New Guinea, Samoa, Fiji.
227.
S. FLABELLATA Spring Mon. ii.
174.
— S.
suhsplendens Presl.
— 8.
undulata Liebm.
— Lycopodium flahellatum Linn.
— L.
penni- 
forme Lam.
— L.
f/racile and micyostachi/um Desv.
— Stems 1-2 ft.
leng, erect, simple in the lower half, deltoid and decompound in 
the upper half, the pinnte deltoid, the lower 3-4-pinnate, the con- 
tiguous final branclilets ^-1 in.
long, ^-^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the 
lower plane contiguous, oblique ovate, acute, ascending, bright 
green, moderately firm in texture, abliquely inserted, much dilated, 
broadly rounded, ciliated, and much imbricated over the stem on 
the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane one-quarter 
to one-third as long, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes square, 
^-1 in.
long, f-j lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Universal in the tropical and subtropical regions of 
America, Asia, and Polynesia.
228.
S. FiRMULA A.
Br.
; Kuhn Fil. Nov.
Hebrid.
17.
— Stems 
above a foot long, stiffly erect, simple in the lower half, with 
distant adpressed leaves, deltoid and decompound in the upper 
half, the pmnae ascending, deltoid, the lower 3-4-pinnate, the final 
branclilets contiguous.
^-^ in.
long, 1 lin.
broad.
Leaves of the 
lower plane crowded on the branclilets, ascending, oblique ovate, 
l-12th to l-8tli in.
long, dark green, rather firm in texture, 
produced, broadly rounded and strongly ciliated on the upper side 
at the base, and imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper 
plane half as long, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes very copiaus, 
^-1 in.
long, f lin.
diam., square; bracts noarly uniform, erecto- 
patent, ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled, the sporangia confined to 
the axils of those of the lower plane, which are consequently more 
ventricose at the base.
Hab. Aneiteum, }[ilne !
J. G.
Veitch !
Ovalau and Augau, 
Fiji, Milne 345 !
Habit entirely of S.
flabeUata.
229.
S. hordeiformis, n.
sp.
— Stems 2 ft.
long, erect, simple 
111 the lower half, deltoid and decompound in the upper half, the 
lower piling deltoid and 3-4-pinnate, the contiguous final branch- 
lets ^-| ill.
long, under \ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane 
contiguous, sj)reading, oblong- or ovate-rhomboid, pointed at the 
upper corner, i-^ in, long, bright green, firm in texture, obliquely 
inserted, broadly rounded, serrulate, but little imbricated over the 
stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane 
oblong, with a cusp as long as the lamina.
Spikes copious, square, 
\-h in, long, ^ in, diam.
; bracts ovate, narrowed into a very large 
awn-like cusp.
Hab, Fiji Islands, Maeleay !
48 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
230.
S. nitens, n.
sp.
— Stems about a foot long, simple in the 
lower half, the leaves of its upper part spreading, deltoid and 
decompound in the upper half, the close pinnfe deltoid, the lower 
3-4-pinnate, the erecto-patent contiguous final divisions ^-^ in.
long, 1 in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous and 
ascending on the branchlets, spreading on the rachis and pinnae, 
deflexed and spaced on the main stem, oblong-lanceolate, acute, 
bright dark green, moderately firm in texture, ^-J in.
long, rather 
dilated, serrulate, and a little imbricated over the stem on the 
upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane small, oblique 
obovate, with a large cusp, Spilies short, terminal, square, | line 
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate, acuminate.
Hab. Fernando Po, Ma?(« !
Cameroon Mountains, Kalbreyerl 
A near ally of S.
/label lata.
231.
S. FEUTicuLosA Spring in Bot. Zeit.
1838, 202.
— S.
tereti- 
caulifi,7iie)nbranacea, deliquescens, falcata, and cataijJiracta Spring Mon.
ii.
158-182.
— Lycopopium fruticulosum Bory.
— L.
membranaceum, 
falcatioii, and tercticaulon Desv.
— Stems 1-2 ft.
long, erect, simple 
in the lower half or third with a few distant adpressed deciduous 
leaves, deltoid and decompound upwards, the branching midway 
between pinnate and flabellate, the lower pinnge often petioled, the 
erecto-patent final divisions i-1 in.
long, ^-\ in.
broad.
Leaves of 
the lower plane contiguous, rather ascending, oblong-lanceolate, 
falcate, acute, bright green, firm in texture, ^-^ in.
long, rather 
unequal-sided, rounded, shortly ciliated, and a little imbricated 
over the stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper 
plane minute, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes short, square, 
^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Mountains of Mauritius, Bourbon, and Madagascar.
I 
have failed to draw any clear line between Spring's five species 
above cited.
232.
S. VoGELii Spring Mon. ii.
169 ; Hook.
2 Cent.
t. 86.— 
8. Pervillei Spring.
— *S'.
africana and euhlepharis A.
Br.
— Stems 
1-2 ft.
long, erect, simple in the lower half, often pink-tinted, with 
a few distant small adpressed leaves, deltoid and decompound in 
the upper half, the lower pinnas deltoid, petioled, 3-4-pinnate, the 
contiguous erecto-patent final divisions J-f in.
long, | in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane spaced even on the branchlets, lanceolate 
or oblong-lanceolate, ascending, acute, l-12th to l-6th in.
long, 
bright green, both edges liable to be revolute, truncate at the base, 
inserted on the side of the stem, not at all imbricated over the 
pubescent branches ; leaves of the upper plane minute, oblique 
ovate, with a large cusp.
Spikes square, ^-h in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.; 
bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Guinea Coast, Cameroon Mountains, Zanzibar, Mada- 
gascar.
A near ally of the Himalayan S.
fulcrata.
Well known in 
cultivation.
(To be continued.) 
49 
SHOET NOTES.
A Correction.
— The Potamor/eton of the Eiver Barrow, which I 
named douhtfuUy P.
rufescens (ante, p.
12), is determined by Mr.
Arthur Bennett (to whom I sent specimens) to be P.
odteym Web., 
var.
latifulins Fr. P.
nitem must be a very variable phmt, as Mr, 
Bennett tehs me he has no fewer than twenty- six forms in his 
herbarium.
— H.
C. Hart.
Lysimachia ciliata in North Wales.
— I found this plant last 
September, among some bushes at the western end of a small lake 
(the easternmost of two), near Afon-Wen, not far from the railway- 
station.
Mr. Baker has seen my specimens.
— H.
C. Levinge.
Carex aquatilis in Ireland.
— AVe have still another instance of 
a high northern plant occurring at a low level in Ireland.
Whilst 
doing the required field-work to enable me to make a report to the 
Eoyal Irish Academy, on the botany of Lough Allen, a sedge was 
met with whose aspect differed from anything I had hitherto seen, 
and which I thought, at the time, might be a variety of C.
stricta.
Subsequently it was named by a Continental authority as C.
acuta 
var.
gracilis Uechtritz.
A specimen was sent to Mr. Bennett, of 
Croydon, and that gentleman, with his usual acuteness, saw cause 
to be dissatisfied with the name attached, and sent the plant to 
Sweden, to be compared with specimens in Fries's herbarium.
Dr. Almquist, who made the comparison, reports that our sedge is 
not C.
(/racilis, but C.
aquatilis Wahl.
In attempting to place my 
plant under C.
stricta, or C acuta, I had never taken C.
aquatilis 
into consideration, as, for geographical reasons, that species seemed 
altogether out of the field ; nevertheless it is quite apparent when 
pointed out.
I may add that Mr. A.
G. More, the recognised 
head of Irish botanists, has seen a specimen, and concurs in the 
determination.
C. aquatilis grows near Drumshambo, in a swampy 
thicket on that part of the shore of Lough Allen which lies in the 
County Eoscommon.
I saw three or four tufts, each bearing several 
flowering stems, two or three feet high.
Some stems were too far 
advanced, but the majority were in excellent condition for diagnosis.
The district, as regards rare plants, proved unusually poor, but the 
flora of Ben Bulben, some 25 miles north, presents the greatest 
assemblage of alpine and sub-alpine plants in Ireland.
The 
discovery of this sedge is associated in my memory with mournful 
recollections.
It was found on the 9th August, 1883, the same day 
and about the same hour when two young and ardent naturalists were 
being drowned, while botanising on Lough Gill, in the adjoining 
county of Sligo.
The furious gusts of wind and rain which drove 
me to seek the most sheltered spots, and thus compelled me to 
meet with this plant, were at the same time doing to death my 
young friend Corry, with his bright promise of future distinction, 
and his equally enthusiastic companion, Dickson.
— S.
A. Stewart.
Heterostyled Plants.
— The fact that, among the English 
members of the genus Primula, the long- styled plants are, on 
an average, decidedly more numerous than the short-styled plants 
Journal of Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[February, 1885.] e 
50 
SHORT NOTES.
{vide Trans.
Essex Field Club, vol.
iii., p.
157), naturally suggests 
the question.
Does this fecundity extend to other dimorphic and 
trimorphic heterostyled species ?
Not being aware of any observa- 
tions bearing upon the subject, I have lately seized such oppor- 
tunities as have presented themselves for examining heterostyled 
species, in order to endeavour to throw some light upon the matter.
Most of the observations given in the following table were made 
whilst travelling in the United States of Canada, twice when 
engines had broken down, and once whilst waiting for a train.
Observation No. 1 was made by Mr. John Gibbs, of Chelmsford 
(Proc.
Essex Field Club, vol.
ii., p.
6) ; the observations combined 
to form No. 9 were made by my friend, Mr. Ernest E.
T. Seton, of 
Toronto.
Tlie only conclusion that can be safely drawn from an 
examination of the tabular statement is that, so far as the details 
contained in it are concerned, no general statement can be made 
as to the preponderance of either one form or the other in the 
species already examined.
Species.
p-.S 
-a 
i 
Majority 
for 
Date.
Locality.
1 g 
o 
1" 
in 
§ 
hi 
1 
cc 
a 
o 
t4 
CO 
1. 
Lythrmn salicaria 
33 
12 
5 
16 
.\iig.
29, '81 
Chelmsford.
2. 
Do.
37 
13 
13 
11 
. 
Aug. 30, '84 
Do.
8. 
Oxalis violacea 
31 
17 
14 
3 
May 29, '84 
Ramsey, Minn.
4. 
Do.
26 
12 
14 
— 
— 
2 
June 14, '84 
Near the Falls 
of Minnehaha.
5. 
1 Lithospermum ] 
\ cane-cens j" 
57 
33 
24 
— 
9 
— 
May 29, '84 
Ramsey, Minn, 
0. 
Do.
41 
23 
18 
5 
_ 
May 30, '84 
RedWing,Minn.
7. 
Do.
17 
7 
10 
— 
— 
3 
June 14, '84 
j Near the Falls 
1 of Minnehana.
8. 
Do.
(J7 
32 
35 
— 
— 
3 
June 20, '84 
(May 29, '84 
Munitou, Man.
] 
9. 
Do.
•284* 
133 
151 
— 
— 
18 
to 
(June 30, 84 
I Manitoba.
10.
L. hir.sutum 
62 
32 
30 
— 
2 
— 
June 14, '84 
1 Prairie, nr.
Falls 
1 of Minnehaha.
11.
Do.
51 
26 
25 
— 
1 
— 
Do.
Do.
* This is the total result of eight different observations made around and 
between Fort Pelly, N.W.T., and Carberry, Manitoba.
EoBT.
Miller Christy.
New British and Irish Carices.
— 1.
Carex salina AVahlenberg 
0. Kattetiatemis Fries (sp.) !
Caithness, Scotland, August, 1883, 
./.
Grant, who writes that it is plentiful.- — 2.
C. stricta Good., var.
turjom Fries (sp.) !
Cambridgeshire, Fryer, 1884.
— 3.
C. acuta L.
var.
prolLva Fries (sp.).
Norfolk, J.
Priest, 1844, from H.
(t.
Olass- 
poole.
— 4.
C. acuta L., var.
qracilescens Almquist !
Shropshire, 
W.E. Beckivith, 1884; Cambridgeshire, Fri/er, 1884.— 5.
C. Good- 
enovii Gay, var.
junceUa Fr. Surrey, W.
H. Beehij and A.
Bennett!; NortJi Lincoln, H.
Searle, 1882!; Warwick, J.
E. 
NEW PHANEROGAMS PUBLISHED IN 1884.
51 
Bagnall; Isle of Skye, W.
R. S K.
L. Linton!.
— 6.
C. vesicaria 
L., var.
diochroa Auderss.
Ben Lawers, Perth, (jr.
C. Bruce.
— 
C. Goodenovii jimcella has of course been recorded, but with 
some uncertainty.
In the cases of those Carices, where a mark !
is 
given, it is witli the determination of Dr. Ahnquist, of Stockholm, 
or the names have been assented to by him.
In the other cases the 
specimens have been compared with the types of Fries and 
Andersson.
— Arthur Bennett.
Carex ligerica Gay in West Norfolk.
— Subsequent to finding 
this plant at Castle Kising, in West Norfolk, as recorded in the 
' Journal of Botany' for July last, I also found it growing sparingly 
in the adjoining parishes of North Wooten and Sandringham.
The former is about a mile west, and the latter three miles north, 
of the Castle Rising locahty, where it was growing somewhat 
plentifully.
I also searched the coast-line in several places, but 
did not find it.
— Alfred Balding.
NEW PHANEROGAMS PUBLISHED IN PERIODICALS IN BRITAIN 
DURING 1884.
The periodicals cited in this list are : ' Botanical Magazine,' 
' Gardeners' Chronicle,' ' Icones Plantarum,' ' Journal of Botany,' 
and the ' Journal ' and ' Transactions ' of the Linuean Society of 
London.
We have added in square brackets the publishers of certain 
names which are cited from the MS.
description or notes of those 
who stand as the authority for them — e.g., Cyperus actinostachys was 
so named in MS.
by Welwitsch, but the publication of the name 
is due to Mr. Ridley ; we therefore print it Cyperus actinostachys 
Welw.
MSS.
[Ridley] .
Primula dulomitis Hort.
Llewelyn stands 
as Primula dolomitis Hort.
Llewelyn [Baker] ; in this case we 
imagine all will agree in quoting the plant as P.
dolomitis Baker, 
although in the preceding instance there may be a difference of 
opinion.
New genera are indicated by a prefixed asterisk.
Acer Fabri Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 76.
Aerides Roebelenii Pichb.
f. Philippines.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
510.
— A.
Rohanianum Rchb.f. E.
Asia.
Id. xxi.
206.
— A.
Sand- 
erianum Rchb.f. Id. xxii.
134.
Agrostis simulans Hemsl.
St. Helena.
Ic. Plant, t.
1455.
Albuca Yerburyi Ridley.
Aden.
Journ.
Bot. 370.
Alepidea Woodii Oliv.
Natal.
Ic. Plant.
1452.
Aloe cryptopoda Baker.
Zambesi.
Journ.
Bot. 52.
Ammannia cryptantha Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
345.
Anthopteris Wardii Ball.
Columbia.
Ic. Plant, t.
1465.
Aponogeton Holubii Oliv.
Bechuana Country.
Ic. Plant, i.
1470.
— A.
natalense Oliv.
Natal.
Id. t.
1471.
— A.
Rehmannh 
Oliv.
Transvaal, Id.
52 NEW PHANRROGAMS PUBLISHED IN 1884.
Ardisia mamillata TIance.
China.
Joiirn.
Bot. 290.
Aris^ma fimbriatum Mast.
Philippines.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
681, 
fig.
119.
AscoLEPis pusiLLA RiilUij .
W. Trop.
Africa.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc.
2nd S.
ii.
164, t.
23.
Barkeria Barkeriola Rchh.f. Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
616.
Begonia Beddomei Hook.
f. Assam.
Bot. Mag.
t. 6767.
— B.
heteropoda linker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
347.
— B.
Lyncheana Hook./.
Mexico.
Bot. Mag.
t. 6758.
Beschorneria Decostkriana, Hort.
Leichtlin, [Ijaker.] Bot. Mag.
t. 6768.
Bravoa Bulliana Baker.
S. America.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
328.
BuLBOPHYLLUM SiLLEMiANUM Uchlj.
f. Birma.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
166.
C/ESALPiNiA MiNAx Hauce.
Chiua.
Journ.
Bot. 365.
Calanthe Curtisii Rchb.
f. Sunda.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
262.
— C.
DiPTERYx lichb.
f. Smida.
Id. xxii.
394.
— C.
probosgidea 
Rchh.f. Sunda Islands.
Id. xxi.
476.
Caraguata angustifolia Baker.
N. Granada.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
616.
Carionia triplinervia Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
310.
Carmichaelia Enysii T.
Kirk.
N. Zealand.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
512.
— C.
UNiFLORA T.
Kirk.
Id.
Castanopsis Fabri Haiice, C.
Fordii Hance, and C.
jucunda Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 230.
Chuquiraga Kingii Bull.
Patagonia.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi 225.
Cleisostoma formosanum Hance.
Formosa.
Journ.
Bot. 364.
Clematis edentata Baker.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
318.
— C.
laxi- 
FLORA Baker.
Id. 317.
— C.
microcuspis Baker.
Id. 317.
All 
from Madagascar.
Clerodendron illustre N.
E. Br. Celebes.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
424.
Coelogyne Dayana Rchh.f. Borneo.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
826.
— C.
Eossiana Rchb.
J. Birma.
Id. xxii.
808.
CoRDiA pedicellata Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
338.
* Creaghia fagr^aopsis Scortechini (Eubiaceae Cinchoneas).
Malaya.
Journ.
Bot. 370.
Crinum leucophyllum Baker.
Dammara-land.
Bot. Mag.
t. 6788.
C. Sanderianum Baher.
Sierra Leone.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
102.
Cuphocarpus inermis Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
350.
Cyperus actinostachys Welw.
MSS [Ridl.] .
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd 
S. ii.
140.— C.
;ethiops Welw.
MSS.
[Ridl.] .
Id. 129.— C.
albi- 
ceps Ridl.
Trop.
Africa.
Journ.
Bot. 16.
— C.
andongensis Ridl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
140.
— C.
apricus Ridl.
Id. 141.
— C.
ARGENTEUS Ridl.
Id. 133.
— C.
ARGENTiNus Clarke.
Argentine 
Republic.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
64.
— C.
Atkinsoni Clarke.
India.
Id. 109.
— C.
atractocarpus iiidl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd 
S. ii.
141.
— C.
BENGHALENsis Clarke.
Journ.
Linn, Soc. xxj.
161, 
NEW PHANEROGAMS PUBLISHED IN 1884.
53 
C. CALLisTus Ridl.
W. Trop.
Africa.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd 
S. ii.
143.
C. CANCELLATUS IluU...
Id. 131.
C. CUAZENSIS 
liidl.
Id. 128.
— C.
DAPH^Nus liidL Madagascar.
Journ.
Bot. 16.
— C.
DivuLsus Uidl.
Madagascar.
Id. 15.
— C.
eury- 
STACHYs Bidl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
143.
— C.
fluminalis 
Ridl.
Id. 127.
— C.
FULvus Uidl.
Id. 126.
— C.
gracilinux 
Clarke.
Central Africa.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
162.
— C.
huil- 
LENSis Ridl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd S.
139.
— C.
hyl^us Ridl.
Id. 134.
— C.
Lanceola Ridl.
Id. 134.
— 0.
melas Ridl.
Id.
127.
— C.
myrmecias Ridl.
Id. 144.
— C.
pedunculosus F.
Muell.
MS.
[Clarke] , Australia.
Journ.
Linn Soc. xxi.
131.
— 
C. PELOPHiLUs Ridl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
129.
— C.
SABULicoLUS Ridl.
Id. 136.
— • C.
Smithianus Ridl.
Trop.
Africa.
Journ.
Bot. 15.
— C.
sulcinux Clarke.
Asia.
Journ.
Lin. Soc.
xxi.
56.
— C.
sylvestris Ridl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc.
2nd S.
ii.
134.
— C.
tanyphyllus Ridl.
Id. 143.
The species 
in Trans.
Linn.
Soc. are all from W.
Trop.
Africa.
Dalbergia Baboni yjflA-e;-.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn, Soc. xxi.
337.
Dendrobium cruentum Rchb.
f. Gard.
Cliron.
xxi.
604.
— D.
DACTYLIFERUM Rchb.
f. Id. Xxi.
638.
D. PROFUSUM Rclll).
f. 
Philil^pines.
Id. xxi.
510.
— D.
signatum Rchb.
f. Siam.
Id. xxi.
306.
— D.
vexabile Rchb.
f. " n.
sp.
(?) liyb.
nat." 
Id. xxi.
270.
— D.
virgineum Rchb.f. Birma.
Id. xxii.
520.
Dendrochilum cucumerinum Rchb.f. Grard.
Chron.
xxii.
649.
Desmostachys acuminata Baker, and D.
deltoidea Baker.
Mada- 
gascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
332.
DicoMA ARGYROPHYLLA OHv. Natal.
Ic. Plant, t.
1461, 
Dillenia philippinensis Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Soc. xxi.
307.
Dombeya floribunda Baker.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
325.
— D.
MACRANTHA Baker.
Id.
— D.
eepanda Baker.
Id. 326.
All 
from Madagascar.
Deymonia marmorata, Hort.
Bidl.
[Hook.
/'.] Trop.
America.
Bot. Mag.
t. 6763.
Dyckia leptostachya Baker.
Paraguay.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
198.
EcHiNocARPus sinensis Hcince.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 108.
El^odendron griseum Baker.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
333.
— E.
NiTiDULUM Baker.
Id. 332.
— E.
trachycladum Baker.
Id.
— 
E. vAcciNioiDEs Baker.
Id. All from Madagascar.
*Eomecon chionantha Hance (Papaveraceae).
China.
Journ.
Bot.
346.
Epidendrum Christyanum Rchb.
f. Bolivia.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
38.
Epilobium oliganthum Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
345.
Eria bigibba Rchb.f. Borneo.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
681.
Erythoxylum firmum Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
327.
Eugenia loiseleurioides Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
341.
EuPATORiuM Ballii OUv .
Peruvian Andes.
Ic. Plant, t.
1462.
FiMBEiSTYLis APHYLLANTHOiDEs Welu.
MS.
[Ridlei/] .
Traiis.
Linu.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
155.
— F.
cardiocarpa Ridl, Id. 154.
— F.
54 NEW PHANEROGAMS PUBLISHED IN 1884.
coLLiNA Ridl.
Id. 154.
— F.
flexuosa Pddl.
Id. 155.
— F.
HuiLLENsis Eidl.
Id. 154.
— F.
macra Ridl.
Id. 150.
— F.
megastachys Ridl.
Id. 156.
— F.
melanocephala Ridl.
Id. 156.
F. oritrephes Ridl.
Id. 155.
— F, parva Ridl.
Id. 153.
— F.
QUATERNELLA Ridl.
Id. 152.
Fuirena chlorocarpa Ridl.
Africa.
Trans.
Liini.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
169.
— F.
PACHYRHizA Ridl.
W. Trop.
Africa.
Id. 161.
— F.
pygm^a Welw.
MS.
[Ridleij] .
Id. 160.
— F.
Welwitschh i^tVZL 
Id. 161.
Galium cryptanthum Hemsl.
Himalaya.
Ic. Plant, t.
1469.
Gastonia emirnensis Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
350.
Gleditschia xylocarpa Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 366.
Gomphia anceps Baker, G.
lanceolata Baker, and G.
perse^folia 
Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
330.
Gomphostemma chinense Oliv.
China.
Ic. Plant, t.
1468.
— G.
INSUAVE Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 231.
Gomphostigma incanum Oliv.
S. Africa.
Ic. Plant, t.
1462.
Grewia cuneifolia Baker, andG.
macrophylla Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
326.
Gymnocladus Williamsii Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 366.
Heleocharis anceps Ridl.
W. Trop.
Afr-ica.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc.
2nd S.
ii.
148, 
Hibiscus palmatifidus Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
324.
"'Holubia saccata Oliv.
(Pedalineffi).
Transvaal.
Ic. Plant, t.
1475.
Homalium confertum Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
341.
*Hyalocalyx setiferus Rolfe (Turneracefe).
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
258.
Hydrocotyle FiLicAULis Baker, and H.
superposita Baker.
Mada- 
gascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
348.
Hymenocallis eucharidifolia Baker.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
700.
Ilex Cumingiana Rolfe.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
308.
— I.
Lobbiana 
Rolfe.
Id. 309.
— I.
luzonica Rolfe.
Id. 309.
— I.
philippi- 
nensis Rolfe.
Id. 308.
All from the Philippines.
Ipom^a Shirensis Oliv.
Zambesi.
Ic. Plant, t.
1474.
Ismene Andreana Baker.
Ecuador.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
11.; 
Garden, May 31 (ic.
pict.).
KiTCHiNGiA schizophylla Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
340.
Kyllinga aromatica Ridl.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
146.
— K.
PAuciFLORA Ridl.
Id. 147, t.
23.
— K.
Welwitschu Ridl.
Id.
147.
All fr-om W.
Trop.
Africa.
Lachenalia fistulosa Baker.
Cape.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
669.
— L.
lilacina Baker.
Id.
— Lodoratissima Baker.
Id.
Lantana Clarazii Ball.
Patagonia.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
229.
LiPARis decursiva Rchb.
f. India.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
38.
— L.
grandiflora Ridl.
Borneo.
Journ.
Bot. 333.
LiPOCARPHA albiceps Ridl.
Traiis.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd.
S. ii.
163.
— L.
NEW PHANEROGAMS PUBLISHED IN 1884.
55 
ATRA Fddl.
Id. 162 L.
PULCHERRIMA Bi(U .
Id. 162.
L. 
PURPUREO-LUTEA lUdl. Id.
168.
All from W.
Trop.
Africa.
LoPHiocARPus TENUissiMus Hoolc.
f. Traiisvaal.
Ic. Plant, t.
1463.
LoRANTHus RUBRoviRiDis Ollv.
Zainbesi.
Ic. Plant, t.
1464.
Lycium Wilkesii Ball.
Patagonia.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
229.
Margyricarpus Clarazii Ball.
Patagonia.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
217.
Masdevallia anchorifera Rchb.
f. Costa Rica.
Gard.
Cliron.
xxi.
577.
— M.
flaveola Fichb.
f. Costa Ptica.
Id. xxi.
638.
— 
M. Mooreana Rchb.f. Id. xxi.
408.
— M.
pachyantha Vichh.
f, 
N. Granada.
Id. xxi.
174.
=:=Melanophylla alnifolia Baker (Cornaceae).
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
352.
— M.
AucuB^FOLiA Baker.
Id. 353.
Both from Mada- 
gascar.
Mimosa myriacantha Baker.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. 339.
— M.
dasy- 
PHYLLA Baker.
Id. 338.
Both from Madagascar.
Medinilla lanceolata Baker.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
344.
— M.
LEPTOPHYLLA Baker.
Id. 343.
— M.
lophoclada Baker.
Id.
844.
All from Madagascar.
Melothria emirnensis Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
346.
Memecylon ole^folium Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
343.
Modecoa peltata Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
345.
Myrica Vidaliana Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
316.
Myriophyllum axilliflorum Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
340.
-Neobaronia phyllanthoides Baker (Leguminosae, Dalbergiese).
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
337.
Nepenthes cincta Jias^.
Borneo.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
576 (fig.
110).
*NoRTHEA Seychellana /^ooA:.
/. (SapotacGfe) (Mimusops ?
Horneana 
Hartog).
Seychelles.
Ic. Plant, t.
1473.
Ochna sereatifolia Baker, and 0.
vaccinioides Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
329.
Odontoglossum Dormianum Rchh.
f. Columbia.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
11.
— 0.
lOPLOcoN Rchb.f. Id. xxi.
445.
Olax emirnensis Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
331.
Olearia macrodonta Baker.
(0.
dentata Hook.
f. non Moench).
N. Zealand.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
604.
Oncidium aurarium Rchb.f. Bolivia.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
394.
— 
0. endocharis RcJib. f.
Id. xxi.
206.
— 0.
tricuspidatum Bichb.
f. 
Id. xxii.
70.
Oncoba capre^folia Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
320.
Ornithochilus eublepharon Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 364.
Otiophora cupheoides A'.
I'j.
Br. Transvaal.
Ic. Plant.
1453.
OxALis macropoda Baker.
Madagascar.
Jouni.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
328.
Panax amplifolium Baker.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
351.
— P.
con- 
fertifolium Baker.
Id.
— P.
multibracteatum Baker.
Id.
— 
P. pentamerum Baker.
Id. 352.
All from Madagascar.
*Phellolophium madagascaeiense Baker (Umbellifers Seselineie).
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
349.
56 NEW PHANEROGAMS PUBLISHED IN 1884.
"^'Phornothamnus thymoides Baker ( MelastomacesB Oxysporeae).
Madagascar.
Jouna.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
342.
PiMPiNELLA LAXiFLORA Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
849.
Piper ornatum ^V.
E. Br. Gard.
Cliron.
xxii.
424.
PiTTospoRUM STENOPETALUM BakcT.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
820.
Pleurothallis elachopus Rchh.
f. Venezuela ?
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
108.
Polyalthia lucens Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
818.
PoLYGALA PiLosA Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
821.
Primula dolomitis Hurt.
LleiveUjn [Baker'] .
Tyi'ol.
Gard.
Cliron.
xxi.
577.
Prismatocarpus tenellus Oliv.
Cape.
Ic. Plant, t.
1460.
"^'Pseudocarapa Championii Hemsl.
(Meliaceae), (Amoora Championii 
Benth.
,(  Hook.).
Ceylon.
Ic. Plant, t.
1458.
PsoROSPERMUM CERAsiFERUM Baker.
Joum.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
324.
— 
discolor Baker.
Id. 323.
— P.
leptophyllum Baker.
Id.
— P.
TRicHOPHYLLUM Baker.
Id. All from Madagascar, 
Pterolobium subvestitum Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 365.
Pyrenacantha chlorantha Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
331.
QuERCus iTEAPHYLLA Hauce.
Joum.
Bot. 229.
— Q.
litseifolia 
Hance.
Id. 228.
— Q.
Naiadarum Hance.
Id. 229.
— Q.
siirvi- 
coLARUM Hance.
Id. 229.
— Q.
synbalanos Hance.
Id. 228.
— 
Q. uvARiiFOLiA Hance.
Id. 227.
All from China.
Ehipsalis horrida Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
347.
*Ehodoclada rhopaloides Baker (Linaceae ?).
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
328.
Ehododendron simiarum Hance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 22.
— E.
TovERN^ F.
Mnell.
N. Guinea.
Gard.
Chron.
xxii.
712, 
fig.
127.
Ehodol^na acutifolia Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
822.
Eourea platysepala Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
386.
EuBus aralioidks I lance.
China.
Journ.
Bot. 41.
Saccolabium bellinum Bu-hb.
f. Birma.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
174.
Salacia dentata Baker, and S.
oleoides Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
384.
Sarcanthus Lendy'anus Bchb.
f. Annam.
Gard.
Chron.
xxi.
44.
Schcenus erinaceus Bidl.
W. Trop.
Ah'ica.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc.
2iid S.
ii.
165, t.
23.
SciLLA Bellii Baker.
Laristan.
Gard.
Journ.
xxii.
488.
SciRPus NOBiLis Uidl.
Africa.
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
159.
— S.
Eehmanni Bidl.
Africa.
Id.
ScLERiA c.ESPiTosA Weill'.
^BSS.
[Bidl.] .
Trans.
Linu.
Soc. 2nd S.
ii.
167.
— S.
cervina Bidl.
Id. 171.
— S.
dumicola Bidl.
Id. 169.
— S.
erythrrorhiza /(/(//.
Id. 167.
— S.
Hilsenbkrgii 
/,'/ (//.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Bot. 16.
— S.
junciformis ll'elw.
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
57 
MSS.
[Ridl.] .
Trans.
Linn.
See. 2nd.
S. ii.
168.
— S.
pocEoiDES liidl.
Id. 173.
— S.
pulchella Ridl.
Id. 168 — S.
B.EMOTA Ridl.
Id. 169.
— S.
ustulata /itW/.
Id. 168.
All from 
W. Trop.
Africa.
Scutellaria luzonica Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
315.
Senecio Bolusii OLiv. S.
Africa.
Ic, Plant, t.
1456.
SiSYEiNCHiUM Clarazii Baker.
Patagonia.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
235.
SoNERiLA FoRDii OUv .
China.
Ic. Plant, t.
1457.
Sphacophyllum Kirku Oliv.
Zambesia.
Ic. Plant.
1451.
=:=Sph^rosepalum alternifolium Baker ( Guttifer^e ) .
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
321, 
Stereospermum Seemannii Rulfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
314.
Stipa Clarazii Ball.
Patagonia.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
237.
Streptocarpus Kirkii Hdok.
f. Trop.
Africa.
Bot. Mag.
t. 6782.
Symphonia acuminata Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
322.
Talauma Villariana Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
307.
Telephium madagascariense Baker, Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
347.
Thylacium laburnoides Baker, and T.
laurifolium Baker.
Mada- 
gascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
319.
Tina polyphylla Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
335.
Toddalia pilosa Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc xxi.
329.
Veprecella hispida Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn Soc. xxi.
342.
Vernonia philippinensis Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
312.
Viburnum luzonicum Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
310.
*ViLLARiA philippinensis Rolfe (Kubiaceffi Gardenieae).
Philip- 
pines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
311, t.
10.
Voacanga Cumingiana Rolfe.
Philippines.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
313.
Weihea sessiliflora Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
xxi.
341.
Weinmannia fraxinifolia Baker, and W.
minutiflora Baker.
Madagascar.
Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xxi.
339.
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
We have ou our table several volumes which call for notice.
Two or three of these we had put aside for more detailed exami- 
nation than the exigencies of our space will at present permit ; 
but it seems better to make some brief mention of them than to 
risk further and somewhat indefinite delay.
58 NOTICES OF BOOKS.
The Clarendon Press has issued a handsome volume on the 
' Comparative Anatomy of the Vegetative Organs of the Phanero- 
gams and Ferns,' a translation by Messrs.
F. 0.
Bower and D.
H. 
Scott of Prof.
De Bary's important work.
We hope at a future 
date to notice this at greater length, so will now content ourselves 
with this reference.
The translation of M.
DeCandolle's ' Origin of Cultivated Plants,' 
which has been for some time anxiously looked for, has been pub- 
lished by Messrs.
Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co. Probably no more 
valuable work, whether for reading or for reference, has appeared 
in the ' International Scientific Series,' of which it forms a volume.
When noticing the original French issue (Journ.
Bot. 1883, 50), we 
paid our tribute to the exhaustive nature of the work ; it only 
remains to add that the English version is even more complete, 
being enriched with additions by the author embodying some of the 
information given in the valuable papers published by Drs. Asa 
Gray and Trumball in the 'American Journal of Science ' since the 
issue of M.
DeCandolle's volume.
Mr. Murray issues a ' Dictionary of the English Names of 
Plants,' compiled by Mr. William Miller.
The book was originally 
advertised under the title of a ' Dictionary of English Plant-names,' 
but that title had already been employed by Messrs.
Britten and 
Holland for their work issued by the English Dialect Society.
It 
is perhaps not strange that such should have been the case, as the 
title must have been very familiar to the compiler, who has very 
freely availed himself of the Dialect Society's w^ork, although be 
makes no reference to the source from which many of his names 
are taken.
That this is the case can easily be shown : Mr. Miller 
on his first page, for example, under the heading "Adder," gives 
nine names, eight of which are to be found in the ' Dictionary of 
English Plant-names,' all of them cited or entered there on in- 
formation hitherto unpublished, or quoted from out-of-the-way 
sources.
On the same page the error by which Messrs.
Britten 
and Holland inadvertently cited "Affadil" as an equivalent for 
Nrnxissus Fseudu-narcisHUs is unhesitatingly followed.
The book is 
well printed and comprehensive ; we have no reason to doubt the 
prefatory statement that it contains 15,000 names, but on what 
ground these are styled "English" it is not easy to understand.
Under the heading " Stonecrop," for instance, are no less than 
fifty-three entries ; but we fail to see what advantage such titles as 
"Ditch Stonecrop of N.
America," " Ewers's Stonecrop," "Mee- 
han's Stonecrop," "Pale rose-coloured Stonecrop," "Variegated 
Japanese Stonecrop," "Wightmann's Stonecrop," and the like 
have over their Latin equivalents.
The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge has published 
a handsome volume of figures of all our British ferns, with 
text, under the title of ' The Fern Portfolio.' The author, Mr.
F. Gr. Heath, has, as is well known, published several volumes on 
this subject, but none have seemed to us so satisfactory as the 
present.
We think he a little over-estimates the amount of time 
and labour which the execution of the work has required ; but he 
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
69 
has certainly produced a volume which is likely to be useful, seeing 
how inexhaustible is the demand for works on this popular class 
of plants.
A handsome and important addition to our books on the folk- 
lore of plants is issued by Messrs.
Sampson Low & Co., under the 
title of ' Plant Lore, Legends, and Lyrics,' by Eichard Folkard, jun.
The work shows very great care and industry ; Mr. Folkard has 
appreciated at their true value the stores of information to be 
found in our old herbals ; and his quotations from them are varied 
and judicious, and somewhat out of the ordinary run.
His frontis- 
piece is a good representation of that of Parkinson's ' Paradisi in 
Sole,' and the other illustrations are quaint and appropriate.
The 
book is divided into two parts ; the first arranged in chapters 
dealmg with different branches of the subject, as " The World-trees 
of the Ancients," " The Trees of Paradise and the Tree of Adam," 
and so on ; the second being " An Encyclopaedia of Six Hundred 
Plants, English and Foreign, giving their Myths, Legends, 
Traditions, Folklore, Symbolism, and History." In this latter 
half much use, duly acknowledged, has been made of De Gubernatis' 
' La Mythologie des Plantes.' 
We have referred to the serial issue of ' The Illustrated Dictionary 
of Gardening' (L.
Upcott Gill), the first volume (A — E) of which 
is now before us, bearing Mr. George Nicholson's name on its title- 
page.
This would be a guarantee of the satisfactory quality of the 
work, so far as the letterpress is concerned ; the engravings, too, 
are for the most part good, but are clearly collected from very 
various sources.
There seems a certain want of proportion not 
only in the size of these, but in regard to their practical utility ; 
for example, pp.
434-438 are mainly occupied by figures of varieties 
of single Dahlia.
The references to published figures form a useful 
feature, but we regret that the abbreviations adopted are such as to 
necessitate constant reference to the table of explanations.
We 
would venture to say that no one would offhand imagine that 
" W.
0. A." stood for "Warner and Williams' Orchid Album," or 
that "B" represented Maund's ' Botanist.' 
Das hotanische Practicum ; von Eduard Strasburger (Jena, Gustav 
Fischer, 1884.
Das kleine botanishe Practicum fur An/anger; von Eduard Stras- 
burger (Jena, Gustav Fischer, 1884).
In these two books Prof.
Strasburger has suj^plied a very 
urgent want.
So many researches have been spoilt through 
ignorance of proper methods in carrying them out, that instruction 
on the subject must be a welcome contribution to literature.
In 
the former and larger of these two books, the course of practical 
work is designed for advanced students especially, tbough the 
sections in large type were originally intended to serve as ele- 
mentary lessons, while the details accompanying these in smaller 
type were for the use of those Avho proceed farther.
Thougli such 
an arrangement has many advantages, it is obvious that there is 
much to be said against it, and the author has at once answered 
60 NOTICES OF BOOKS.
such objections by the production of the latter book for the use of 
beginners.
This elementary book is an exceedingly lucid and 
serviceable reduction of the larger one, and is certain to prove 
of great benefit.
The ' Botanische Practicum ' itself will be of use, 
not only in fitting the advanced student for original research, but 
as a handbook for elementary teachers, who in practical demon- 
strations are sometimes in the dangerous position of knowing very 
little more than what they teach.
The book is divided into thirty- 
four lessons, prefaced by an introduction dealing with micro- 
scopes and all necessary apparatus, and containing advice of the 
most excellent kind.
The lessons are adapted to the progress 
of the student, beginning with simple subjects and proceeding to 
more complex.
Each lesson, it may be said, is sufficient to occupy 
even students of a very advanced type, for considerably longer 
than the term lesson commonly implies.
In the present position 
of microscopical research, a book of this kind has become neces- 
sary to the large class of " workers by themselves," to enable 
them to keep pace with the progress of science.
It is necessary now 
to bring so much more than mere microscopic vision to the work, 
that instruction in the various methods of preparation of objects 
(such as bacteria, &c.) will give this book an especial value in the 
eyes of those whose isolated position deprives them of the resources 
to which others have access.
G. M.
Vergleichende Morphologie und Biologie der Pilze, Mycetozoen tmd 
Bacterien; von A.
de Baky.
(Leipzig, Engelmann, 1884).
Those who take up this book with the expectation af finding 
in it a second edition of the author's ' Morphologie und Physiologie 
der Pilze, Flechten und Myxomyceten ' will be agreeably surprised 
to find that the progress of mycology during the last twenty years 
has been such as to necessitate the production of what is in point 
of fact a new book ; and, moreover, that Prof, de Bary has again 
undertaken the arduous labour of gathering in the materials thus 
furnished, and of providing from these a text-book worthy of the 
progress it chronicles.
To give any adequate idea of the contents 
and the manner of treatment of the great range of subjects would 
need wider bounds than those of a short notice.
Such a notice, 
however, would be incomplete without mention of the classifica- 
tion of Fungi adopted by Prof, de Bary, which though first 
sketched two years ago in the Beitrage zur Morph.
v. Physiol, der 
Pilze, now gains special importance from its employment in what 
will prove no doubt the standard text-book for a number of years 
to come.
Prof, de Bary thus classifies the Fungi, and no one can read 
the chapter dealing with the principles underlying the classifica- 
tion without feeling the force of the case made out for it : — 
I. The Ascomycetes Series.
1. Peronosporeas (with Ancylis- 4.
Entomophthoreaa.
tese and Monoblepharis).
5. Ascomycetes.
2. Saprolegniese.
6. Urediue^e.
3. Mucorini or Zygomycetes.
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
61 
II.
Groups diverging from the Ascomycetes Series or of doubtful 
position.
7. Chytridiere.
9. Doubtful Ascomycetes 
8. Protomyces and Ustila- (Saccharomyces, &c.).
ginete.
10.
Basidiomycetes.
Groups 1 — 4 are, from their approach to Algse, classed together 
as Phycomycctes.
Of those in Category II., 7 and 8 are to be regarded as standing 
in relation to the Phycomycetes ; 9 in relationship, of course, with 
5 ; and 10 with 6.
They can therefore be taken in linear series thus : — 
1. 
PeronosporeaB — 
a. Ancylistete.
5. 
6. 
Chytridieae.
Protomyces and Ustilagineae, 
2. 
3. 
h. Monoblepharis.
Saprolegniete.
Mucoriui.
7. 
8. 
9. 
Ascomycetes.
Doubtful Ascomycetes.
Uredineae.
4. Entomophthorefe.
10.
Basidiomycetes.
After dealing with the Fungi proper, the life-histories of the 
orders, their physiology, &c..
Prof, de Bary proceeds to the 
Mycetozoa and subsequently to the Bacteria, each of these great 
groups being considered in great detail and with striking lucidity.
One cannot say more of the book than that no serious worker at 
these interesting organisms can either dispense with it or consult 
it without profit.
G. M.
A Monograph of the Ah/cB of the Firth of Forth.
Illustrated with 
herbarium specimens of some of the rarer species.
By 
G. W.
Traill, Joppa, near Edinburgh.
1885.
4to.
At first sight this work would appear to be merely a list of the 
Algas of the Firth of Forth, illustrated with a few specimens.
It 
is, however, the result of the work of a true and enthusiastic 
naturalist, who, in spite of numerous difficulties, has for many years 
carefully observed and recorded the appearance, maturity and dis- 
appearance, year after year, of all the species here recorded.
It is 
therefore extremely valuable, as indicating just those points con- 
cerning Marine Algae to which too little attention has been paid by 
many authors.
The consequence of this neglect has hitherto been 
that in this country, at least, very few investigations of the 
fructification of this class of plants have been made, and in several 
common British species some forms of fruit are still unknown.
Mr. Traill, by constant searching during the most inclement 
weather, has discovered the unilocular sporangia of Sphdcelaria 
pliDiuijera, and has thus helped to prove that it belongs to the 
genus Sphacelarin and not to Chatopteris, with which it had pre- 
viously been confounded, the same discovery also showing that 
Chcetopteris should rightly be placed under Clddostrjihm.
He has 
also searched for and found several Scandinavian species which had 
been pointed out to him as likely to occur on the east coast of 
62 AKTICLES IN JOURNALS.
Scotland.
He has, moreover, rendered good service in recording 
the host plants upon which other Algfe grow parasitically.
The 
number of species enumerated, as found on the shores of the Firth 
of Forth, are 225, of which one-ninth of the whole number are new 
to Britain, having been found since the publication of Harvey's 
' Phycologia Britannica.' The observations which Mr. Traill has 
made and now published must therefore be regarded as a valuable 
contribution to our linowledge of the British Marine Flora, and to 
the life-history of nearly half the British species.
There are eight 
illustrations of the rarer species, varying in different copies, but 
Spluicelaria plumiyera, Callithamnion arbuscida, and Dictyosiphon 
Mesugloia occur in most of them, and Callithamnion harhatum in 
some.
The work should be in the hands of all lovers of this 
beautiful class of plants, and especially of those interested in the 
fructification of Marine Alga.
E. M.
H. 
Messrs.
W. H.
Allen & Co. send us a pretty little volume of 
Transatlantic origin, entitled ' The Wonders of Plant-life under the 
Microscope,' by Sophie Bledsoe Herrick.
The chapters are in 
part reprinted from ' Scribner's Monthly,' with several additional 
ones intended to render the series more connected.
Insectivorous 
plants come in for a large share of consideration.
There are 
numerous illustrations, many of them good and new.
New Books.
— 0.
Kirchner, ' Die Mikroscopische Pflanzenwelt 
des Siisswassers ' (Braunschweig, Hajring, 1885 (1884) ; 4to, pp.
x. 
56.
4 plates).
— M.
Gandoger, ' Eubus nouveaux ' (Paris, Savy : 
Svo, pp.
iv.
145).
— A.
Cariot, 'Etudes des Fleurs : Botanique Ele- 
nientaire, descriptive, et usuelle, renfermant la Flore du Bassin 
Moyen du Rhone et de la Loire' (Lyon, Vitte et Perrussel : 3 vols.
Svo, pp.
xvi.
440, tt.
23 ; pp.
viii.
892 ; pp.
xvu.
342).
— A.
Franchet, 
' Plantte Davidianse ex Siuarum imperio : pt.
i. Plantes de Mongolie ' 
(Paris, Massou : 4to, pp.
390, tt.
27).
— G.
Vasey, ' The Agricultural 
Grasses of the United States ' (Washington, Government Printing 
Ofdce: Svo, pp.
144, tt.
120).
Articles in Journals.
American Naturalist.
— J.
B. ElHs & G.
Martin, ' New N.
American Fungi ' [Septoria j^urpurascens, Pestalozzia scirpina, Cerco- 
spora racemusa, Ov alar ia monilio ides, Sphcerella platani, spp.
nn.).
Ann. d- Mag. Nat.
Hist.
— W.
Houghton, ' Notices of Fungi in 
Greek and Latin Authors.' 
Botanical Gazette (Dec).
— G.
Vasey & E.
L. Scribner, Eriochloa 
Lemmoni, sp.
n. (1 plate).
— F.
L. Scribner, ' Arizona Plants ' 
[Muehlenberyia depanperata, sp.
n.).
— T.
J. Burrill, ' New Uredinece.' 
A. Gattinger, Silphium brachiatum, n.
sp.
Uot. Centraiblatt (No. 1).
— H.
Bruchmann, 'Das Prothallium 
von Lycopodiniii' (1 tab.).
— (No. 2).
V. v.
Borbas, ' Arabis ape)inina 
Tausch.' — (Nos. 3 & 4).
E. Ihue, ' Karbe der Aufbliih zeit von 
Syrinya vidyaris in Europa.' 
ARTICLES IN JOURNALS.
68 
Bot. Zeitung (Dec. 19, 26).
— H.
Will, ' Zur Anatomie von 
Macrocystis luxurians' (1 plate).
— F.
Sclimitz, ' Erwiderung.' — 
(Jan. 2, 9).
H. de Vrics, ' Ueber die Bedeutung der Circulation 
and der Eotation des ProtojDlasma fiir den Stofftransport in der 
Pflauze,' — (Jan. 2).
L. Klein, ' Ueber die Ursachen der ausscb- 
liesslicb niicblicben Sporeubildung von Botnjtis cinerea.' — Jan. 16, 
23).
C. Fiscb, ' Ueber die Pilzgattung Ascomyces' (1 plate).
Bull.
Soc. But.
France (torn.
xxx.
: Session a Antibes, pt.
2).
— 
E. Maliuvaud, ' Les Melica du groupe ciliata.' — C.
Flabault, 
' Lithoderma fontanum' (1 plate).
— E.
Burnat, ' Botanistes qui ont 
contribue a faire connaitre la flore des Alpes-Mari times.' — (torn.
xxxi.
Comptes rendus, No. 6).
— G.
Rouy, 'Excursions botaniques 
en Espague.' — P.
van Tieghem, ' Developpement de I'amylobacter 
dans les jplantes a I'etat de vie normale.' — L.
du Sablon, ' Meca- 
nisme de la dehiscence des sporanges des cryptogames vasculaires.' 
— J.
de Seynes, ' Les Conidies myceliennes du Polypurus sulphureus.'' 
— P.
van Tieghem, ' Sur une anomalie des branches du Pinus 
Pinaster.' — Id., ' Coenonia, genre nouvean de myxomycetes a 
plasmode agrege.' — G.
Bonnier & L.
Mangin, ' Sur les variations 
de la respiration des graiues germant avec le developpement.' — P.
Sagot, ' Sur la vie et les travaux de J.
Lepine ' (1817-1884).
— C.
Flahault, ' Sur les collections botanique de la Faculte des Sciences de 
Montpellier.' — L.
Guignard, ' Sur la structure et la division du 
noyau cellulaire.' — F.
Gay, ' Sur les conjuguees du Midi de la 
France' (many new spp.).
— (No. 7).
A. Franchet, ' Sur quelques 
plautes de France ' [hoetes, Andropogon provincialis) .
— P.
van 
Tieghem, ' Culture et developpements du Pyronema confiuejis.' — 
Battandier, ' Plantes de la Flore d'Alger.' — A.
Franchet, 'Quelques 
especes de Gentiuna du Yunnan ' [G, rubicunda, fastigiata, alsi- 
noides, papillusa, lineolata, primulcEj'oUa, Serra, yunnanensis, Dclavayi, 
tenidjolia, spp.
nn.).
— P.
van Teighem, ' Structure et affinites des 
Pittosporees.' — Id., ' Structure et affinites des Masti.via.' — P.
Duchartre, ' Fleur double d'un Bouvardia.' — A.
Franchet, isoefes 
Savatierl, sp, n.
— E.
Prillieux, ' Sur le Peronospura Setarm.' 
Bulletin of Torreg Bot. Club (Nov.
& Dec).
— J.
B. ElHs & W.
A. Kellermann, ' New Kansas Fungi ' (new species of Cercospora, 
Ravmlana, and Splmrella).
— A.
F. Foerste, 'Nectar-glands of Apios 
tuberosa.' — G.
Vasey, 'New Grasses' [Stipa Scribneri, Festuca 
conjinis, Elymus Saundersii, spp.
nn.).
Garden (Jan. 3).
— Sagittaria montevidensis (ic.
pict.
& fig.).
— 
Portrait of John Lee.
— (Jan. 17).
Odontoglossum.
cordatum (ic.
pict.j.
Gardeners' Chronicle (Jan. 10).
— Abies religiosa (fig.
18).
— (Jan.
24).
Pimis patula (fig.
20).
Odontoglossum viminale Rchb.
f., n.
sp.
A. D.
Webster, Neottia Nidus-avis.
— Fasciated Medlars (fig.
21).
— 
(Jan. 31).
W. A.
Herdman, ' Coryanthes' (figs.
27-29).
Grevillea.
— H.
T. Wharton, ' On Fries' Nomenclature of Colours.' 
— M.
C. Cooke, ' Demerara Fungi.' — Id., ' New British Fungi.' — 
W. Phillips & C.
B. Plowright, ' New and rare British Fungi ' 
64 BOTANICAL NEWS.
(Agaricus hypoxanthus, Russula Duportii Phil., Cyj^hella hrunnea 
Phil., Myxotrichum cancellatum Phil., Puccinia perplexans Plowr., 
spp.
nn.).
Journal of Linnean Society [xxi., No. 135, Dee.).
— J.
M. Crombie, 
' On the Algo-Lichen Hypothesis' (tt.
2).
— R.
A. Rolfe, ' On the 
Flora of the Pliilippine Islands and its probable derivation ' (many 
new species : VilUtna, gen.
nov.
: t.
1 tab.).
— J.
G. Baker, 'Further 
Contributions to the Flora of Central Madagascar ' (many new 
species : Sphcerospalum, Ithudoclada, Neobaronia, Phoniothamnus, 
Phellolophium, Melanophylla, n.
gen.).
Magyar Norenytani Lapok (June).
— ' Collectiones Plantarum e 
quibus Herbarium Dris Ludovici Haynald Cardinalis et Archiepis- 
copi Colocensis coaluit.' — (Dec).
J. Schaarschmidt, ' Galanthus 
nivalis, Kchinopsis oxygena es az Euphorbiaceak spaerokrystalljairol.' 
Midland, Naturalist.
— J.
E. Baguall, ' Flora of Warwickshire ' 
[Cyperaceai).
Nuov.
Giornale Bot. Ital.
— A.
Goiran, ' Prodromus Florae Vero- 
nensis.' — F.
Tassi, ' Degli effetti anestesici nei fiori.' — G.
Cugini, 
' Descrizione anatomica dell' infiorescenza e del fiore femmineo del 
Dioon edule ' (1 plate).
QSsterr.
Bot. Zeitschrift.
— Von Hohenbiihel, Memoir of Wilhelm 
Voss (portrait).
— F.
Leithe, ' Kryptogamenflora von Tirol.' — V.
v. 
Borbas, ' Teratologisches.' — E.
Preissmaun, ' Zur Flora von 
Karnten.' — P.
G. Strobl, 'Flora des Etna' (cont.).
Pharmaceutical Journal (Jan. 24).
— C.
E. Stuart, 'How Plants 
grow.' — R.
Amory, ' Oil of Cade ' [Juniperus Oxycedrus).
Scottish Naturalist.
— C.
C. Babington, 'Naturalisation of Plants.' 
— G.
C. Druce, 'Botanical Work of G.
Don.' — J.
Stevenson, 
' Mycologica Scotica (supplement).' 
Trans.
Linn.
Soc. London (2nd ser.
ii.
8, Dec).
— T.
H. Corry, 
' Structure and development of gynostegium and on mode of 
fertilization in Asclepias Gornuti Dene ' (3 plates).
BOTANICAL NEWS.
We are glad to learn that the Woolhope Naturalists' Field 
Club has commenced the publication of the flora of the county of 
Hereford, and it is hoped tliat the volume will be in the hands 
of the members by the end of the summer.
A summary of the 
plants found in the county was published in the Transactions of 
the Club so far back as 1867, but the completion of the flora, for 
various reasons, was unavoidably postponed.
The work will be 
edited by the Rev. Augustin Ley. It will be brought up to the 
present time, and thus some amends be made to botanists by the 
greater completeness attained.
65 
HOMOLOGY OF THE FLORAL ENVELOPES IN 
GRAMINEM AND CYPERACE.E.
By F.
Townsend, M.A., F.L.S.
It is now more than ten years since I called attention, in the 
pages of this journal,* to " some points relating to the morphology 
of Carex and other Monocotyledons." In my paper on this subject 
I then stated that I hoped, on a future occasion, to shew " that 
there is a great similarity in the construction of grasses and 
sedges, and that the correlative position of their parts leads to the 
conclusion that the two-nerved or keeled inner pale of grasses is a 
single floral bract.
I propose now, in a measure, to fulfil that 
promise, in the first place by recording my notes on several 
species belonging to the orders Graminece and Ct/peracea;, and 
secondly, by stating the conclusions which may be drawn from the 
facts brought forward, and my present paper may be considered as 
supplementary to my former one.
I say in a measure, because I 
am aware that the subject might be better and more fully handled, 
but as time and opportunity might fail me, it seems better that my 
promise should be even imperfectly rather than not at all fulfilled.
Notes 011 several species belonf/mr/ to the order Ci/peraced, examined more 
particularly with the view of ascertaining the homology of the parts 
of the inflorescence.
Cabices : Heterostachya;.
(In all the following species the ochrea is short.) 
Carex riparia.
— The ochrea in this species is short, cloven to 
the base and dark-coloured (Tab. A., fig.
2).
The ochrea of the 
upper female spikes is swollen at the sides (Tab. A, figs.
2, and la), 
and approaches nearer to the form of the utriculus, shewing the 
passage of the ochrea into the utriculus.
At the base of every male spike will be found, universally 
present, a fertile flower with single open glume or utriculus situate 
next the main axis, alternate with and opposite to the primary 
bract from which the male spike springs.
There is an analogy between the bracts subtending the female 
and barren flowers and the utriculus, both being of the nature of a 
bract.
This analogy may be well traced in the bracts of this 
species, see Tab. A, figs.
3, 4, 5, 6.
I have met with several instances in which the bract subtending 
the utriculus has become bifid and three-nerved, also trifid and 
three-nerved (see Fig. 7, b and c).
These bracts had one utriculus 
within their axil.
It is easy to conceive this trifid bract as pointing 
to the true nature of the three stamens, viz., a single trifid organ, 
each division bearing one anther.
It was in the examination of this species that I first discovered 
the true nature of the ochrea and utriculus, and saw that the 
* Journ.
Bot. 1873, p.
10-2.
JouKNAii OF Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[March, 1885.] f 
m 
THE FLORAL ENVELOPES IN GRAMINE.T: AND CYPERACE^.
somewhat common abnormal growth of C.
f/lauca (in which the 
female spikes become componnd) exhibits the normal or universal 
law of the growth of the inflorescence of the whole genus (See 
paper already cited ; Journ.
Bot., June, 1873).
Tab. a.
— Form of ochrea and bracts in Carex riparia.
Fip:.
1. — a, leafy bract (partially removed) below a male spike ; b, bract-like 
utriculus at the base of of male spike ; c, stigmas of nut within h.
Fig. 2.
— Axillary biact oi- ochrea at the base of secondary axis of female 
spikes of C.
riparia ; the dotted or wavy line indicates the outline of the form 
which the bract takes at the base of the upper spikes, where it has already a 
tendency to inflate and assume the shape of the utriculus, and to form veins.
Fig. 3.
— The transformation of the Ijracts into the utriculus is well seen in 
the male spikes of Carex riparia.
This fig.
shews one of these bracts.
The 
lower portion of the bract is coloured and veined almost as in the perfectly- 
formed uti'iculus of the fertile spikes, and the sides lengthen for the teeth.
1 , ) (i 
Figs, i & ;').
— Scales of male catkin (jf Carex ripitnu.
Fig.
(j.
— Utricular bract (axillary bract) at the base of a male catkin of C.
riparia ; this bract was not clasping.
Fig. 7.
— n, this scale-like ochrea is situate at the base of a fertile spike; 
it shows tln^ commencement of the transformation of the ochrea (nxillary bract) 
into the utriculus; it is scale-like, with the exception of a fleshy green mass 
with side neiwes distinctly visible.
The central nerve of the scale has 
disappeared, h and c, forms not nnfrequently assumed by the outer bracts 
subti'uding the uliiculus in the female spikes.
THK FLORAL ENVELOPES IN GRAMINE.E AND CYPERACEiE.
07 
C, pvatcox.
— TliG ochrea is here a short, tubuhir, closely- fitting 
sheath, truncate, cloven on the anterior side (Tab. 13, fig.
11).
In 
this species I have met with an instance of a fertile spike becoming 
barren at the top, bearing a scale in the axis of which was a nut 
only, in the place of the three stamens, the utriculus being 
altogether suppressed ; the stigmas were perfect and three in 
number.
I have observed two similar instances in this species.
The scales bearing the nut were in both cases situate adjacent to the 
usual barren scales of the male flowers.
Tab. B.
— The figs, here show the ochreas and the development 
of the secondary axis in the lower flowers of the female spike, in 
the inflorescence of Carex pracox.
12 
10 
Fig. 8.
— a, folded leaf, tubular below, produced on the secondary axis of a 
fertile Hower, near the base of the female spike, the utriculus being removed ; 
6, the bract turned back and partially removed ; c, the nut.
Fig. 9.
— The folded leaf of fig, 8 a, removed; front and profile view.
Fig. 10.
— Setiform growth of the secondary axis in another flower near the 
base of the female spike.
In this instance the setiform growth was not accom- 
panied by any leaf development.
Fig. 11.
— Ochrese on the peduncles of the female spikes.
Fig. 12.
— This fig.
represents the base of the male spike of C.
prcecox ; the 
first bract, d, being turned back, shows a utriculus, b, the secondary axis of which 
is developed and bears bracts a.
The stigmas, c, protrude from the utriculus.
If in this specimen the secondary axis had developed more fully it would have 
become an upper spike of female flowers, whereas, in this instance, there wa8 
but one femde spike.
A second specimen of this species confirmed the above view, as the lowermost 
bract in the position of d, fig.
12, bore a very small spike of feuiale flowers, 
which might have escaped attention without close examination.
The ^pike 
issued, as above, from a utriculus, the stigmas of which protruded from its moutli, 
pushed rather on one side by the growth of the secondary branch.
It may be noted here that the upper bracts of the male spike 
are " surrounding," the last but one surrounding the last and 
terminal bract most completely.
The position of the three filaments 
68 
THE FLORAL ENVELOPES IN GRAMINE.E AND CYPERACE^.
of the stamens within the bracts is collateral in all but the terminal 
flower ; in the terminal flower, where the filaments are free from 
lateral pressure, they are placed in a triangular position.
C. panicca.
— The ochrea of the lowest female spike is short, 
2-8tlis in.
in length, and many times shorter than the peduncle.
It 
is sheathing, with a rounded, oblique, or truncate apex, convex 
in front, flattened on the back, keeled on either side.
C. 2)endula.
— The ochrea here is short, 
3-lGths in.
to 2-8ths in.
long, sheathing, but 
slit on ojie side nearly to the base, mem- 
branous, nerved, with truncate, erose, fus- 
cous apex, those of the upper peduncles with 
two distinct green nerves on either side.
C. hiiwrvis.- — Here the ochrea is short (but 
long as compared with that of C.
Umujata) 
2-8ths in.
in length, tubular, membranous, 
with slightly oblique truncate mouth.
0. heviijata.
— Here the ochrea is remark- 
ably short, sheathing, membranous, truncate, 
and aftbrds a good specific character by which 
this species may be at once distinguished from 
C. hincrvis.
The lowest bract of the barren 
spike in this species usually bears four sta- 
mens in its axil, and these are always placed 
collaterally.
In two or three instances I have 
found this bract bearing yii^e stamens.
Fig. 13.
— This represents the hase of a male spike 
of C.
Icevigata, the lowest bract of which bore iu its 
axil one stamen and two styles with stigmas, the two 
styles being approximate.
Fig. 14.
— This rejiresents an instance (recorded in 
1872, and drawings made at time of observation) in 
which one of the bracts, at the base of a male spike of 
C. Icevigata, bore one central stamen, and two styles, 
one on either side of the single stamen.* There was 
no appearance of any ovary, and the styles ended as 
abruptly below as the filaments of the stamens.
In this species I have, in one instance, 
found the lowest bract of a male spike, bearing, 
instead of stamens, a female flower with single 
nut and two stigmas and a bract-like, im- 
perfect utriculus, with a lateral position.
C. (jlauca.i 
C, jialudosa, C.
Pscudo <'>//ienis, 0.
limosa, 
0. montana, C.
pilnUfera.
— In all these species 
the ochrea is short.
Fig. 15.
— Axilliiry bract or ochrea at the base of the uppermost female spike 
of C.
pihilifera.
a, front view; b, back view.
* For an analogous case 'on record, see Journ.
Linn.
Soc. vii., p.
I'-il, and 
XX., p.
45.
t For notices of remarkable growth of the seta in this species see Journ.
Bot. 1863, p.
1G3, and Journ.
Linn.
Soc, xx., p.
45.
IHE P'LOKAL ENVELOPES IN GRAMlNE^ AND CYPERACE^.
69 
C. ricjida.
— Here the oclirea is very short and bract-like, dark 
coloured, with oblique mouth.
Carices : HeterostaclujcR.
(lu all the followiug species the ochrea is long.) 
Carex liirta.
— The ochrea on the peduncles of the lowest female 
spike is nearly half the length of the peduncle ; it is closely fitting, 
tubular, membranous, nerveless, erose-truncate, ciliate at its apex, 
cloven a little way down on its anterior side ; the ochrea of the 
peduncle of the uppermost female spike is as long as or even 
longer than the peduncle, and is more deeply cloven.
The 
peduncles of the lateral barren spikes bear an ochrea in the form 
of an open nerved utriculus without any nut.
C. sylvatica.
— The ochrea of the lower female spikes is a long, 
closed and closely-fitting, transparent, membranous sheath, slightly 
divided at the apex ; the ochrea of the upper spikes becomes 
swollen on one or both sides, and assumes more or less the form of 
the utriculus.
I have met with several instances, in this species, 
in which the ochrea is situate at some distance above the spring of 
the secondary axis ; in these cases the ochrea takes the form, more 
or less, of the utriculus, being only partially closed, and the nut 
being sometimes present, sometimes absent.
C. exttensa.
— The ochrea, from a long-stalked fertile spike from 
near the base of the stem, is long, tubular, sheathing, open only a 
short way down in front ; it is nerveless, membranous, fuscous.
At the base of all the fertile sessile spikes it is shorter, faintly 
nerved, and open in front.
C. flava.
— Here the ochrea is long, tubular, and sheathing, and 
similar in all respects to that of C.
extensa.
C. pedata.
— Here the ochrea is long (about one-third the whole 
length of the peduncle), rather loosely sheathing, tubular, mem- 
branous, its mouth oblique, its apex triangular, acute.
C. depmiperata.
— Here the ochrea is very long, delicately mem- 
branous, and sheathing.
C. digitata.
— Here the ochrea is long, delicately membranous, 
and sheathing.
C. (Bdipostyla.
— Here the ochrea is long, delicately membranous, 
and sheathmg.
Carices : HomostachyiE.
C. remota.
— Here the ochrea is ovate-orbicular, membranous, 
concave at the back, and keeled on either side, the keels being 
formed of the strong lateral nerves ; the apex is erose ; the form is 
therefore bract-like, and it encloses or surrounds the base of the 
spikes and lower flowers.
C. arenaria.
— The ochrea) of the lower fertile spikes are reduced 
to fuscous, many-veined bracts, angular at the base and some- 
times bifid at the apex, shewing a tendency to take the form of the 
utriculus.
There is no central green nerve, like that of the bracts 
of the fertile flowers.
70 THE FLORAL ENVELOPES IN GRAMINE^ AND CYPERACE/1':.
C. ovalis.
— The first bract on the secondary axis is placed 
somewhat laterally, and bears stamens, and is similar to the bracts 
of the other barren flowers, with the exception tliat it is more am- 
plexicaul.
It seems possible that this bract may represent the 
ochrea.
C. stellulata.
— Here there seems to be an absence of an ochrea, 
or of any bract that can be recognised as taking its place.
The 
first and lowest bract on the secondary axis is nsually placed 
laterally and contains stamens.
Carices : Monostachijcc.
C. eluwjata.
— The ochrea in this species appears to be absent, 
or its place is occupied by the bract of a normal male flower.
C. pulicaris.
— There appears here to be no bract which can 
be recognised as taking the place of the ochrea.
There are several 
sheathmg-bracts, Avith minute leafy appendage, on the stem, the 
innermost being alternate with the first bract of the spike.
Possibly the ochrea is represented by this innermost sheathing 
leaf or bract.
In tliis species I have met with a barren flower 
bearing two stamens with their filaments united, the 
anthers being free, while the filament of the third 
stamen was altogether free.
The accompanying fig.
shews the seta-like develop- 
ment of the secondary axis within the utriculus.
¥ig.
IB.
— Carex pulicaris : secondary axis at ibe base of the 
uut being acicular in form or bristle-like.
10 
SciRPUS.
Scirpus si/Jvaticus.
— In this plant every branch of 
the inflorescence is furnished with an ochrea, even up to the last 
simple spike.
Cladium.
Cladium MciriscKs.
— Here the ochrea is present at the base of 
all the branches of the inflorescence, but concealed by the sheath- 
ing outer bracts.
The homology of the barren glumes of grasses 
is here easily traced.
Every ultimate simple spike of the inflores- 
cence of this species is furnished with two bracts, similarly placed, 
as are the barren glumes of grasses, the upper bract subtending the 
lower one and alternate with it.
Cyperus.
Cyperus lovt/us.
— Here the ochrea is present, and the homology 
of the infloresence of the grasses is as beautifully seen as in 
Cladium Mariscns, the lower and upper barren glumes of grasses 
being represented by the two lower glumes of each spike of the 
flowers of Cyperus.
Kobresia.
Kohresia caricina.
— This plant, together with Klyna spicata, 
illustrates the structure of the spikelet in grasses very beautifully.
THE FLOEAL ENVELOPES IN GRAMINE^'; AND CYPKRACE^.
71 
Fig. 17.
— Kobreda caricina : the outer bract turned back and exposing' tlie 
ochrea or spatlial bract.
Gramine^.
I now go ou to record, in the Order 
Gramine(v, a few instances of abnormal de- 
velopment which are relevant to our present \ 
subject, and shall end my paper by giving \ 
the conclusions which I think may fairly be \^ 
drawn from the facts and reasoning brought 
forward.
Botanists are generally agreed that the 
terms "pale," "fertile glume," "upper and 
lower barren glumes," are more in accord- 
ance with the homology of the spikelet of 
grasses than the terms " inner or upper 
pale," "outer or lower pale," and "upper 
and outer" or "lower and inner glumes"; 1'^ 
and all deviation from the ordinary form or 
arrangement of parts, or, in other words, all instances of abnormal 
development are of special interest if they support these views.
I have, in my notes, the record of the occurrence, in 1873, in 
Hampshire, of a specimen of Lolium perenne, or common rye-grass, 
in which the upper, outer, single, and usually barren glume of one 
of the spikelets was transformed into a fertile one by the develop- 
ment of a bifid pale (exactly similar to the pale of a normal 
fertile floret) alternate with, i.e. subtending, the glume.
The 
ovary was, to all appearance, perfect, but there was only one 
stamen.
Both Babington and Koch call the suppressed glume in Lolium 
the " upper" glume, while Kunth calls it rightly the "inner" or 
" lower" glume.
It is evidently the lower barren glume which is 
wanting, as may be jn-oved by its position in Festuca loUacca, and 
also by the alternation of the florets, as well as by the homology 
of the spikelet.
Now this lower glume being the inner one, there 
niust be, normally, a suppressed outer and subtending leaf or 
bract at the base of each spikelet, and the evidence of its normal 
position and suppression may be distinctly seen, by the presence of 
a raised border extending transversely more than half way round 
the axis of the spikelet (it is seen more faintly at the base of the 
upper spikelets), and this bract sometimes becomes developed more 
or less.
The presence of a membranous border, in a similar position, in 
many grasses, is very evident, especially in Cynusurus ciistatu.s, and 
it occasionally becomes considerably developed, as in Scsleria 
carulea.
I have also specimens of Serrafalcus arvensis (fig.
18), and 
S. commutiitus, in which the bract is developed as a leafy setaceous 
appendage.
I once gathered a specimen of Festuca loliacea in which the 
upper barren glume of one of the upper spikelets was developed 
into a perfect flower, as in the case of Loliuw.
In some spikelets 
of F.
luliacea the inner or lower barren glume is wanting, or is 
72 THE FLORAL ENVELOPES IN GEAMINE;E AND CYPEKACE/E.
reditced to a very minute scale placed laterally ; and I have recorded 
an instance in which this inner glume was replaced hy two 
scales inserted symmetrically side by side, the two taken together 
Fig. 18.
— Panicle o( Serrafalcus arvensis with leaf-like srtaceous bracts.
occupying the position of the usual inner glume, thus shewing a 
tendency in the floral envelopes to become divided, which tendency 
may be seen in the axillary bract (ochrea of Duval Jouve) of Carex.
THE FLOKAL envelopes in (iKAMlNEA<; AND CYPERACEjE.
73 
The second bract beneath the uppermost flowers of lAizula cam- 
pestris is usually divided almost to the base.
In all cases where I have looked into the matter, it seems to me 
evident that the lower and inner barren glumes of the spikelets of 
grasses is next the rachis, i.e., on the inner side of the branch 
(spikelet), and therefore the position of the absent bract is (as has 
been already proved by its actual presence in instances just given) 
alternate with and anterior to the lower and inner barren glume.
Now the utriculus of Carex is also always next the rachis, and 
its subtended bract is alternate and anterior ; the position of the 
utriculus is therefore exactly that of the inner and lower barren 
glume of grasses, and the position of the subtending bract of the 
female spike of Canw is exactly that of the usually suppressed 
bract at the base of the spikelets of grasses.
I contend, therefore, that the homologue of the inner and lower 
barren glume of grasses is the ochrea or utriculus of Carex, while 
the homologue of the suppressed bract at the base of the spikelet 
in grasses is the subtending bract of the utriculus of Carex.
I have said that the tendency of the utriculus or ochrea (the 
ochrea being undoubtedly the homologue of the utriculus) is to 
become divided, and this division has been shewn to occur in the 
lower barren glume of Festuca ; the tendency also occurs in the 
pale of grasses generally, which is the homologue (in the upper and 
fertile florets) of the utriculus of Carex, as the fertile glume of the 
spikelet in grasses is the homologue of the subtending bract of the 
utriculus in Carex.
Pig. 19.— These drawings represent a branch from a panicle of Crypsis 
aadeata.
The second drawing shows the first one magnified.
The bract c, is 
alternate with the bract (not shown in the drawing) from which the branch a 
springs.
The secondary, clasping, two-nerved bract c, having been removed in 
the second drawing, exposes to view the rudiment c1, which occupies tlie same 
place within the axil of c as the rudiment within the utriculus of Carex.
This 
rudiment is usually present within the axils of all the secondary bracts of the 
panicle.
It is present within the nxil of the bract e.
I^-B.
— The small letters, a and b, refer to the same parts in both figures.
74 EXAMINATION OF MR.
STEPHEN WILSOn's " SCLEROTIA.'* 
The homology is not weakened by the fact that the lower barren 
glume is often situate high on the pedicel between it and the usually 
suppressed subtending bract below, for I have met with numerous 
cases, particularly in Carex si/lratica, in which the axillary bract, or 
ochrea, is situate some distance from the subtending bract, and in 
these cases the ochrea takes the form, more or less, of the 
utriculus, and the ovary is sometimes present, sometimes absent 
(Tab. A, Carex riparia.) 
The annexed figure (Fig. 19) of a branch of Cri/psis aculeata 
remarkably supports the views set forth in this paper, respecting 
the similarity of the construction of the parts of the infloresence 
in grasses and sedges.
The pale in this species is one-nerved.
Lastly, the seta which I have found to be more or less 
developed in so many species of the genus Carex, and which is so 
characteristic of the genus Uncinia, has been shown to be the 
rudimentary development of a secondary axis, while the " acicula " 
of Dumortier is the terminal portion of the rachilla or main axis 
of the spikelet ; the seta and the acicula are therefore analogous 
portions of two different axes.
I have endeavoured to prove that the pale in the floret of 
grasses is the homologue of the ochrea and utriculus in C((rcx, and 
that the latter is a single floral envelope; therefore, if my reasoning 
be correct, it necessarily follows that the pale is also single.
FURTHER EXAMINATION OF MR.
STEPHEN WILSON'S 
" SCLEROTIA." 
By George Murray, F.L.S.
When the examination of these bodies by Dr. Flight and the 
present writer was described (Journ.
Bot. 1883, p.
370), and it was 
made known that, so far from being resting states of the potato- 
fungus, they were no other than masses of oxalate of lime, it might 
have been expected that the controversy was ended.
However, 
Mr. Wilson's theory, unlike the subject of his speculations, has 
exhibited, after a period of rest and incubation, a return to the 
manifestations of life.
Mr. Wilson naturally set about testing the 
results arrived at by Dr. Flight and myself, and succeeded in 
finding not only the oxalate of lime, but after its removal, by means 
of nitric acid, another substance which resembled protoplasm.
He 
thereupon jumped to the conclusion that there was life in his 
" sclerotiets" and in his theory.
His paper describing his experi- 
ments and inferences appeared in the ' Gardeners' Chronicle' 
(Dec. 13th, 1884), and with it a statement that M-r.
Worthington 
Smith, working independently, had fully confirmed his observa- 
tions.
A sketch by Mr. Worthington Smith illustrates the gradual 
washing away by nitric acid of a coat of calcium oxalate from the 
inner mass, which resisted the action of the acid.* 
* Mr. Sniilli, it will be remembered, originally deteriiiiued tlie bodies in 
qiiestiou to be Frototnyccs !
EXAMINATION OF ME.
STEPHEN WILSOn's " SCLKROTIA." 75 
Mr. Greenwood Pirn (Gard.
Cliron,, Jan. 17th, 1885) also 
corroborated Mr. Stephen Wilson's results.
Lastly, Prof.
Trail, 
in two Eeports to the {Scientific Committee of the Koyal Horti- 
cultural Society (Gard.
Chron., Jan. 17th and Feb. lith, 1885), de- 
scribes a series of experhnents directly confirming Mr. Wilson's.
Prof.
Trail succeeded in staining the residuum with magenta, 
iodine, and other colouring matters, and stated that he had "no 
doubt that the sclerotioids are masses of protoplasm coated with 
calcium oxalate, probably in the form of minute raphides." He 
failed to discover any signs of a cell-wall, but supposes that " the 
outer surface" (of the residuum), "like a primordial utricle, must 
serve as a wall." 
The oxalate of lime, so far accepted, was thus used to render 
even more astonishing and unique what was sutticiently remarkable 
before.
The organism thus constructed by Prof.
Trail would take 
the place of Mr. Wilson's former mass of " hornified plasm," and, 
at least in the opinion of the latter, be destined to " plasmodiate," 
"myceliate," and eventually produce the potato disease.
In repeating these experiments of Messrs.
Wilson, Smith, Pirn, 
and Trail with isolated " sclerotiets," there is no difHculty whatever 
(beyond the ordinary one of manipulation) in discovering the sub- 
stance left after treatment with nitric acid, and none whatever in 
obtaining the same results from the various staining processes.
The difficulty lies in discovering any evidence of the truth of the 
statement that the protoplasm is contained witJiin a coat of calcium 
oxalate.
The above observers took no pains to prove it to be so, 
and trusted their case to the baldest assertion.
Obviously it suited 
Mr. Wilson's theory.
The possibility of the protoplasm being 
outside the oxalate of lime does not appear to have occurred to 
them — obviously that would suit my interpretation of the matter, 
and the theory would fall to the ground again.
It is extremely 
easy to prove that the "residuum" is outside.
If, instead of 
dissolving the calcium oxalate, the colouring matter (iodine 
solution, for example) be at once applied to an isolated " sclerotiet," 
the desired stain will be readily obtained.
This will appear as a 
delicate colouring, and not with the intensity that would result 
were the whole mass to take up the stain.
It is therefore apparent 
that the stained substance is outside the oxalate of lime, and the 
natural interpretation is that it is but the remains of the original 
cell- contents of the potato leaf-cell in which the oxalate of lime 
body was formed, adhering to the latter over the surface.
Mr. Carruthers recently placed in my hands a letter from Dean 
Buckland to Piobert Brown, enclosing leaves, &c., of a potato plant, 
and asking, " Is the enclosed the same affection of the potato 
leaves as that of the last two years?" The letter is dated July 
19th, 1847, and the Dean, no doubt, referred to the potato disease.
There is no sign of disease on the leaves, which, however, contain 
very abundantly Mr. Wilson's " sclerotiets." Mr. Wilson was thus 
anticipated in his idea that these bodies are connected with the 
potato disease.
Mr. Carruthers then suggested to me that the 
potato plants preserved in Sir Hans Sloane's Herbarmm should be 
76 Notes on the flora of buxtoN.
examined, and four plants were found which had evidently been 
healthy and vigorous when collected.
From each a very minute 
fragment was taken at random, — all four pieces could easily be 
placed under an ordinary cover-glass, — and in all cases the so-called 
" sclerotiets " were discovered.
The plants were (1) from the 
King's Garden, Montpellier, collected by Dr. Charleton (born 1619, 
died 1707) ; (2) a plant collected by Boerhaave (born 1668, died 
1738) ; (3) one of Plukenet's plants — Plukenet was born in 1642 
and died in 1706 ; and (4) a plant " collected about 1660," as 
labelled in Sir Hans Sloane's own handwriting.
The two first 
mentioned contain the bodies in question abundantly, and the 
remaining two not so plentifully.
These experiments and obser- 
vations appear to me sufficient to prove (1) that the organism 
constructed by Prof.
Trail is a wholly imaginary one ; and (2) that 
the bodies in question have no relation to the potato disease.
NOTES ON THE FLORA OF BUXTON.
By Rev. W.
Moyle Rogers, F.L.S.
The following notes are, I believe, strictly supplementary to 
those which have recently appeared in this Journal on the same 
siibject by the Rev. W.
H. Painter (1881) and Mr. J.
G. Baker 
(Jan. 1884).
If they contain, as I hope they will be found to do, 
additional records of some interest, this is due to the fact that my 
stay at Buxton extended fi'om August 8th to September 8th (1884), 
and that circumstances compelled me to confine my botanical 
rambles all that time to the immediate neighbourhood of Buxton, 
so enabling me to explore a very circumscribed district pretty 
thoroughly at the best season.
Such heights above sea-level as I 
am able to give I owe to the information on that point supplied in 
Mr. Baker's paper.
The few stations which will be found here, 
but not in either of the preceding papers, — viz., Chapel-en-le-Frith, 
Whaley Bridge, and Bugsworth, — lie to the north of Buxton, and 
are all, I believe, on millstone grit.
Piammcidns Lenormandi F.
Schultz.
On Axe Edge, in two places 
very near the top, over 550 yds.
; also in the hollow west of Buxton.
Trollms europmis L.
Rocks near Lover's Leap ; and near the 
top of the hill opposite the railway-station at Miller's Dale.
Aquilegia vulgaris L.
With the last, near the top of the hill 
above Miller's Dale, over 350 yds., in fair quantity, and undoubtedly 
native.
Sisymbrium officinale Scop.
Monsal Dale, 200 yds., two or 
three plants ; not seen about Buxton.
— *S'.
AUiaria Scop.
Rocks 
near Lover's Leap, 350 yds.
; Miller's Dale.
Cardamiiie flcruosa With.
Chapel-en-le-Frith; up to 350 yds.
about Buxton ; Ashwood Dale ; Miller's Dale.
Quite common.
Arabis TliaUana L.
In one spot on the rocks near Lover's 
Leap, 350 yds.
Viola palustris L.
Marshy ground near Buxton, both east and 
west of the town ; especially abundant near the Reservoir.
— 
NOTES ON THE FLORA OF BUXTON.
77 
V. odorata L.
Miller's Dale, but only near houses.
— Y.
lutea Huds.
Corbar Hill, north-east slope, over 350 yds.
; iu plenty, flowers 
mostly all yellow.
Folyi/ala oxijptera Reich.
Top of Corbar Hill, about 400 yds., 
very characteristic and plentiful.
To this segregate perhaps belongs 
most of the Fuliffjala in the limestone dales near Buxton and on 
Axe Edge ; though some of it, I think, and certainly all that I saw 
near Chapel-en-le-Frith, must be named P.
depressa Wender.
I 
saw nothing that I should name typical vnUjaris.
Sileue injiata Sm. Miller's Dale, in one place, over 800 yds., 
on the hill above the railway-station.
Stellaria Holostea L.
Ascends to 350 yds.
near Buxton.
Arenaria trinervia L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith ; up to 350 yds.
at 
Buxton.
— A.
leptoclados Guss.
Valley of the Wye, between Miller's 
Dale and Monsal Dale, in two or three spots, up to 250 yds.
Saghia apetala L.
Steps of the " Slopes " at Buxton.
— S.
ciliata 
Fries.
In one place (waste ground) near the Buxton Public 
Gardens.
— S.
nudosa Meyer.
Miller's Dale, 
Spergula arvensis L.
In one place at Buxton.
Hypericum tetrapterum Fries.
Chapel-en-le-Frith ; Wye Valley, 
below Miller's Dale.
Qeranium santinineum L.
Limestone ledges in the Wye Valley, 
a little east of Miller's Dale, with Silene nutans and Centaurea 
Scabiosa, np to nearly 300 yds.
Ulex Gallii Planchon.
Chapel-en-le-Frith, very abundant ; up 
to nearly 400 yds.
on Corbar Hill, Buxton.
Sarothamnus scoparius Koch.
Seen only on railway-banks at 
Cbapel-en-le-Frith.
Tri/oUum medium L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith ; Lover's Leap.
Yicia an(justifolia Roth.
Up to nearly 300 yds.
in Miller's Dale, 
but apparently scarce.
Orubus tuberusus L.
Between Bugsworth and River Goyt ; 
Chapel-en-le-Frith ; Miller's Dale.
Alchemilla arvensis Scop.
Chapel-en-le-Frith.
Seen nowhere 
else; while A.
vulgaris L.
is one of the commonest plants in all 
grassy places.
FutentiUa procumbens Sibth.
In the lane fi'om Bugsworth 
towards Whaley Bi'idge.
Fiubus a/finis W.
& N.
I give this name, on Mr. Baker's 
authority, to a luxuriant and very handsome bramble which I 
found in great quantity about "New Mills," on the Derbyshire 
side of River Goyt, near Whaley Bridge Railway-station.
He 
considers it the usual northern form of this species.
I had thought 
it nearer Fi. calvatus Blox., but I have seen nothing quite like it in 
S. England.
— F.
leucustaclujs Sm. In one place only, near the 
top of the hill above Monsal Dale, by the Cressbrook School 
Church, about 250 yds.
; very fine and characteristic.
— F.
discolor 
W. &N.
I searched for in vain.
Close to Buxton, the only bramble 
(except hlciius) that occurs in any quantity is F.
pallidus Weihe, and 
that nowhere iu the open ; but in one spot in Corbar Wood I found 
a small patch of another species growing in such deep shade as to 
78 NOTES ON THE FLORA OF BUXTON.
have lost all good distinctive characters ; and in Ashwood Dale, up 
to 300 yds., as in the Wye Valley generally, and at Chapel-en-le- 
Frith, &c., to the north of Buxton, the prevalence of li.
pallidm is 
rivalled hy that of the Pi. diunetonun vav.
concinnm mentioned in the 
'Notes on the Flora of Matlock' (Journ.
Bot. Nov.
1884), which, 
I believe, is not distinguishable from the R.
conjlifolius, y.
purpureus 
of Bab. Man.
and Lond.
Cat. The only other brambles that I saw 
in the district were R.
conjlifolius Sm.
(chiefly good R.
suhlitstris 
Lees), R.
ca;sias L.
(scarce), R.
ChcwKBinonis L.
(Axe Edge only), 
and a handsome nearly prostrate one on the hill above Miller's 
Dale Railway-station (350 yds.), which (especially in the foliage) 
reminded me of R.
[jindUianm Lees, though clearly distinct from 
it ; this Mr. Bagnall is inclined to name 7i.
Saltcrl, putting it with 
a similar plant which he finds in three of the Warwickshire woods, 
and which has been accepted by Prof.
Babington as the "i^.
Salteri 
of Bloxam " ; and also with another from Plympton St. Mary, 
Devon, which Mr. Bloxam named R.
Salteri for Mr. Briggs many 
years ago.
Rosa spinosissima L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith.
At Monsal Dale I 
found some plants with red fruit.
— R.
tomentosa Sm. Chapel-en- 
le-Frith, in good quantity.
— R.
scabriascida Sm. Wye Valley, 
east of Miller's Dale, one or two large bushes.
— R.
canina L., 
R. lutetiawi, and R.
dunialis.
Chapel-en-le-Frith.
— R.
biserrata 
and R.
urbica.
Wye Valley, between Miller's Dale and Monsal 
Dale.
— R.
arcatica.
Near the top of the hill between Bugsworth 
and Biver Groyt.
— R.
Renter ir In great abundance near Chapel- 
en-le-Frith, and (with R.
subcristata] at Monsal Dale.
— R.
coriifolia.
Hill above Cressbrook Dale.
— R.
Watsoni.
Monsal Dale.
— R.
vuiriiinata.
Plentiful in Miller's Dale, especially (with A', iiwllissima 
Willd.) on the hill opposite the railway-station.
— R.
arvensis Huds.
Bugsworth ; Miller's Dale.
Buxton itself seems too high or too 
exposed for any self-grown rose, though R.
coriifolia and R.
sub- 
cristata grow luxuriantly at as great a height (350 yds,) on the hill 
above Miller's Dale.
Epilobium palmtre L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith.
Ciraea lutetiana L.
Over 350 yds.
in Corbar Wood.
Callitriche rerna L.
In small artificial pond (deep water) near 
Chapel- en-le-Frith.
Saxifraija sponhonica Gmel.
Near Lover's Leap, and on hill 
above Miller's Dale ; abundant.
Chrijsospleniiun oppositifnlium.
L. Lover's Leap ; Wye Valley, 
below Miller's Dale.
Hijdrocoti/le vulgaris L.
Up to 350 yds.
just above Buxton.
Sanicula europica L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith ; over 350 yds.
in 
Corbar Wood.
JEijopodiam Podaijraria L.
Weed in Buxton Public Gardens.
Bunium Jiexuosum Witli.
Over 350 yds.
in Corbar Wood.
Lonicera Perichjmenwn L.
Roadside hedges at top of hill 
between Bugsworth and River Goyt.
Carduus palnstris L.
Up to 450 yds.
by Axe Edge.
Serratula tinctoria L.
Up to 250 yds.
in Miller's Dale.
NOTES ON THE FLORA OF BUXTON.
79 
Matricaria inodora L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith.
Anthemis Cotnla L.
Up to 250 yds.
iu a waste spot in Miller's 
Dale.
Artemisia Absinthium L.
At nearly 350 yds.
hy the roadside 
opposite a farm-house above the Miller's Dale Railway- station ; 
denizen.
— A.
vuhjaris L.
Buxton, very luxuriant at 850 yds., 
but only in gardens.
Inula dysentcrica L.
Only near Bugsworth.
Leontodon hirtus L.
Hill-side, Miller's Dale.
New record for 
the county.
Tra;/opo(jon pratensis L.
At about 400 yds., near the top of 
Diamond Hill.
Crepis paladosa Moencli.
Over 350 yds.
in Grin Wood, above 
Buxton.
Jasione montana L.
Up to about 350 yds.
in hollow to the west 
of Buxton.
Campanula fjlomcrata L.
Over 350 yds.
in woods on both sides 
of Buxton and at Lover's Leap, but sparingly.
— C.
Trachelium L.
Monsal Dale, 200 yds.
Vaccinium O.vijcoccos L.
Corbar Hill, north-east slope ; up to 
fully 550 yds.
on Axe Edge.
— V.
Vitis-idcea L.
With the last on 
Corbar Hill, as well as on Axe Edge ; also on Diamond Hill.
Andromeda polifolia L.
Up to over 500 yds.
on Axe Edge, in 
some quantity, but apparently local.
FJrica cinerea L.
Up to about 350 yds.
near Buxton.
Gentiana carnqjestris L.
On the top of Corbar Hill, with the 
commoner G.
Atnarella, 
. Linaria vidyaris L.
Up to 350 yds.
at Buxton.
Veronica hederifolia L.
At about 250 yds.
as a garden weed at 
Cressbrook, but seen nowhere else.
— V.
iiuxhaumii Ten. Only 
near the railway-station at Chapel-eu-le-Frith.
— V.
oificinalis L.
Up to about 400 yds.
above Buxton.
Mentha (jentiUs L.
By the Wye in Miller's Dale (250 yds.), two 
or three plants together.
New record fur the county.
Stachijs Betonica Benth.
Up to 350 yds.
on the hill above 
Miller's Dale Railway- station ; also near Buxton, but local.
Galeopsis Tetrahlt L.
At 250 yds.
iu one place in Miller's Dale.
Myosotis palustris With., /3.
strii/ulusa.
Abundant at 250 yds.
in 
the Wye Valley, at Miller's Dale, &c.
— M.
arcensis Hoffm., /3.
um- 
brosa.
Wye Valley, a little below Miller's Dale.
Amsinckia li/copsioides Lehm.
Waste ground in Miller's Dale, 
several plants, in flower.
Alien (Californian).
Sipiijihi/thm.
offirinalc L.
Li the ground by St. James's Church, 
Buxton, at 350 yds.
Denizen.
Primula oificinalis L.
Up to about 300 yds.
in Miller's Dale.
Lysimachia ncmorum L.
Chapcl-en-le-Frith.
Anayallis arcensis L.
At over 350 yds.
in one place by roadside 
on the hill above Miller's Dale Railway- station.
Plantayo media L.
A luxuriant variety with white filaments 
(turning pinkish when pressed), and leaves comparatively narrow, 
unusually green, and ascending — so approaching /'.
lanccolata iu 
80 A NEW HONGKONG CYPERACEA.
aspect.
Meadow above Buxton, in considerable quantity, with 
other fairly typical plants.
Chenopodium album L.
Up to 350 yds.
at Buxton.
Polyfionum lapathifolium L.
Up to nearly 400 yds.
by Corbar 
Wood.
— P.
Bistorta L.
Meadows near Bugsworth, apparently 
native.
Euphorbia Helioscopia L.
and E.
ex'ujua L.
Together at 350 yds.
in a corn-field above Miller's Dale.
Cannabis saliva L.
One plant (alien) by quarry at Corbar Wood.
Populus tretnula L.
At 250 yds, by the Wye in Miller's Dale.
Habenaria viridis Brown.
Up to about 400 yds.
on Diamond 
Hill, in plenty.
Listera ovata Brown.
From 300 to 400 yds.
in Ashwood Dale 
and on Diamond Hill.
Luzula pilosa Willd.
In Corbar Wood, and up to 550 yds.
on 
Axe Edge.
— L.
campestris DC.
Near Buxton.
Scirpus setaceus L.
Chapel-en-le-Frith ; hollow west of Buxton, 
350 yds.
Carex ovalis Good.
Over 550 yds.
near the top of Axe Edge.
— 
C. prcRcox Jacq.
Up to 850 yds.
near Buxton.
— C.
hirta L.
Up 
to 250 yds.
in Miller's Dale.
Agrostis vidgaris With., ./3.
piimila.
Over 550 yds.
on Axe Edge.
Triodia decumbens Beauv.
Very common up to nearly 550 yds.
on Axe Edge.
Poa nemoralis L.
Remarkably common on the limestone.
Lolium italicum Braun.
Frequent roadside casual.
— L.
temu- 
lentum L.
Corn-field casual at about 350 yds.
above Miller's Dale.
Aspleninm Trichomanes L.
Up to 300 yds.
on hill-sides in the 
Wye Valley at Miller's Dale, &c.
Nephrodium spinulosum Desv.
(small form).
In a slight hollow 
on the side of Axe Edge, at about 400 yds.
Equisetum sylvaticum L.
Near Chapel-en-le-Frith, in plenty ; 
near New Mills, a little above River Goyt.
A NEW HONGKONG CYPERACEA.
By H.
F. Hance, Ph.D., &c, 
^ Cladium (Baumea) ensigerum.
— Rhizomate horizoutali 
2-3 hn.
crasso squamis arte cquitantibus lanceolatis acuminatis 
scariosis griseo-fuscis G-8 lin.
longis tecto fibras crassiusculas 
edente, folhs omnibus radicalibus basi equitautibus rigidis com- 
plicatis inferioribus sensim deminutis infimis ad squamas reductis 
pallidc viridibus lineari-ensiformibus acuminatis multinerviis 
ecostatis inferne purpureo-marginatis margine minute scabri- 
denticulatis 1^-20 poll, longis 3-11 lin.
latis, culmis complauatis 
foliis circ.
iequilongis, vaginis inferioribus longis superioribus 
abbreviatis, pauiculae angustie ramis primariis plerumque ternis 
laxiusculis, spiculis 2-3 floris purpurascentibus 5-6 lin.
longis, 
NOTES ON THE BRITISH CHARACEiE FOR 1884.
81 
glumis ovato-lanceolatis in acumen exquisite attenuatis, nuce sub- 
drupacea ellipsoidea trisulcata styli basi crassa albo-squamulata 
coronata.
In ins.
Hongkong, juxta pagum Pok fu lum, fif.
Jan. frf.
Maio 
1883, detexit cl.
C. Ford.
(Herb, propr.
n. 22181.) 
This species, the discovery of which is due to Mr. Ford's 
untiring vigilance, is interesting, as affording additional evidence 
to that given by Gahnia trifitis Nees, and Lepidosperma Chinense 
Nees, of the affinity of the South Chinese Cyperaceous flora with 
that of the Australian continent.
Its nearest allies are, I believe, 
0. Preisui F.
Muell.
and C.
laxum Benth., both from Western 
Australia, of neither of which do I possess specimens.
The 
creeping rhizome, flat, non-spongiose leaves, and narrow panicle 
readily distinguish it from the Singalese Baumea crassa Thw.
! 
NOTES ON THE BRITISH CHARACKyE FOE 1884.
By Henry & James Groves.
Since the publication of the last instalment of our ' Notes ' we 
have had but little to record beyond additions to the account of the 
comital distribution of the species and varieties.
Lychnothamnus 
steLliger, from South Devon, Chara contraria var.
hispidula, from 
Cheshire, Tohjpella prolifera, from Cambs.
and Hunts, and T.
glomerata, from Sligo and Leitrim, are the most important records.
We have to thank our correspondents for the many specimens, 
both fresh and dried, which they have forwarded.
Chara fragilis, Desv.
— Berks, 1883, G.
C. Druce ; Bucks, 
1884, G.
C. Druce; Hunts, 1883, A.
Fryer; Northants, 1879, 
G, C.
Druce ; Derby, 1883, C.
Bailey ; Lanes.
S., 1882, H.
Searle 
{Hb. Arthur Bennett) ; Wigton, 1883, G.
C. Druce ; Lanark, 1875, 
A. Mackindor, comm.
A. Bennett; Easterness (Nairn), 1884, J.
G.; 
Westerness, 1884, E.
F. Linton (Hb. Bennett) ; Dumbarton, 1881, 
[Hb. Bennett); Boss W., 1883,^0.
Bailey; Waterford, 1882, G.
Nicholson; Clare, 1884, S.
A. Stewart; Sligo, 1884, R.
M. Barrington.
var.
harbata.
— Antrim, W.
Thompson (in Hb. S.
A. Stewart).
var.
capillacea.
— Galway W., 1875, A.
G. More.
\a,r.
Hedwigii.
— Cambs.
and Hunts, 1883, A.
Fryer; Oxon, 
1883, G.
C. Druce; Sligo, 1884, B.
M. Barrington.
var.
Sturrockii.
— By a clerical error the locality was omitted 
from our account of this variety (Journ.
Bot. 1884, p.
2).
It was 
collected in a small loch near Blairgowrie, Perth E., 1883, A.
Sturrock.
C. aspera, Willd.
— Hunts, Eamsey S.
Mary, 1884, A.
Fryer; 
York N.W., Wensley Dale, 1884, J.
Percival, comm.
C. Bailey; 
Isle of Man, 1881, R.
Wood {Hb. Bennett); Perth M., Ochtertyre 
Loch, near Crieff, 1884, A.
Sturrock ; Easterness, near Nairn, 
1884, J.
G. 
Journal of Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[March, 1885.] g 
82 NOTES ON THE BRITISH CHARACE^ FOR 1884.
var.
subinermis.
— Sligo, Lougligill R., 1884, LI.
M. Barrinyton ; 
Leitrim, GlenacTe Lake, 1884, R.
M. Barrinyton.
C. POLYACANTHA, Braun.
— Suffolk E., Bressinghan Fen, 1883, 
G. C.
Bruce.
C. coNTRARiA, Kuetz.
— Hunts, Earith, 1883, A.
Fryer ; North- 
ants, Peterborough, 1884, G.
C. Bruce ; Cheshh*e, New Brighton, 
1884, H.
Searle ; Westmoreland, 1863, W.
M. Hind (in Hb. Trin.
Coll.
Dublin); Ebucles, N., Bradford, Skye, 1884, E.F.Binton 
{Hb. Bennett) ; Dublin, Glasnevin, 1882, B.
McArdle (in Hb. Bot.
Garden, Dublin).
var.
hispidida, Braun, Schweiz.
Charac.
p. 16.
— Cheshire, New 
Brighton, 1884, H.
Searle.
This form is distinguished by its larger 
size and prominent spreading spine-cells.
C. HispiDA, L.— Hunts, 1883, A.
Fryer; Lanes.
S., 1884, H.
Searle; Easterness (Nairn), 1884, J.
G. ; Limerick and Clare, 
1884, S.
A. Stewart.
var.
rudis.
— Salop, Crosemere, 1884, H.
Franklin Parsons.
C. VULGARIS, L.
— Berks, 1882, G.
C. Bruce; Lincoln N., 1884, 
H. Searle (Hb. Bennett); Haddington, 1884, A.
Craig Christie; 
Easterness (Nairn), 1884, J.
G. ; Meath, 1879, C.
Bailey {Hb.
Bennett); Sligo, 1870, .4.
G. More.
var.
lonyibracteata.
— Essex S., 1884, J.
English; Oxon, 1883, 
G. C.
Bruce ; Bucks, 1884, B.
Piffard, comm.
J .
Saunders ; Hunts, 
1884, A.
Fryer ; Worcester, 1883, W.
F. Toxvndroiv ; Leicester, 
1843, J.
Brewin, jun.
(in Hb. F.
T. Mott) ; Lanes.
S., 1882, 
H. Searle ; York M.W., 1884, T.
Hebden ; Shgo, 1884, R.
M. Bar- 
rinyton ; Antrim, 1857, W.
M. Hind (in.
Hb. Trin.
Coll.
Dublin).
var.
papillata.
— Berks, 1882, G.
C. Bruce ; Oxon, G.
C. Bruce ; 
Bucks, 1884, B.
Piffard, comm.
J. Saunders ; Suffolk E., 1883, 
G. C.
Bruce d- Bolton Kiny ; Anglesea, 1884, C.
Bailey ; Lanes.
S., 
1883, H.
Searle ; Easterness (Nairn), 1884, J.
G. 
var.
crassicaulis.
— Derby, Monsal Dale, 1884, W.
Pullinyer.
C. CANESCENS, Loisel.
— Cornwall, W., pool between Helston and 
the Lizard, 1884, J.
Guardia d- H.
G. The rediscovery of this 
species in W.
Cornwall is very interesting, as it seems to have dis- 
appeared from the original Falmouth locality.
Lychnothamnus STELLiGER, Brauu.
— Devon S., pool, Slaj^ton 
Sands, 1884, H.
G. ; found growing sparingly with C.
frayilis var.
Hedu-iyii and C.
connivens.
ToLYPELLA glomerata, Leouli.
— Suffolk W., Lakenheath, 1880, 
G. C.
Bruce d Bolton Kiny ; Cheshire, New Brighton, 1884, H.
Searle, a form with extremely long sterile branchlets ; Sligo, Glen- 
car Lake, 1884, R.
M. Barrinyton ; Leitrim, Gleuade Lake, 1884, 
jR.
ilL Barrinyton, a few scraps in a specimen of C.
aspera.
T. prolifera, Leonh.
— Cambs.
and Hunts, near Benwick, 1884, 
A. Fryer.
In ' English Botany,' ed.
3, vol.
xh., p.
189, Mr. N.
E. Brown 
Avrites : — " The plant collected by Mr. D.
Moore in the grand 
canal, Glasnevin, Dublin, has been wrongly referred by Messrs.
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE, 83 
Groves to N.
prolifera ; it belongs to .V. intricata, as the sterile 
branclilets are branched, and not simple as in the var.
jn-oli/'era, 
which has not yet been found in Ireland." If Mr. Brown had taken 
the trouble to read further on the same page of our ' Review,' he 
would have found that both species occurred at Dublin, and 
would not have blundered into such a self-confident misstatement.
T. iNTRicATA, Leonh.
— Northampton, Yardley Gobion, 1879, 
G. C.
Druce.
NiTELLA TRANSLUCENs, Agai'dli.
— Comwall E., Lanlivery, 1884, 
R. V.
Tellam; Staffs., Eudyard Lake, 1884, //.
Seade; Kirkcud 
bright, Tongland, 1884, F.
R. Coles, a very stout form ; Stirling, 
Airthrey Loch, 1884, R.
Kidston.
N. FLExiLis, Agardh.
— Sussex E., Copthorn, 1883, A.
Bennett ; 
Stirling, Airthrey Loch, 1884, R.
Kidston ; Fermanagh, Eossford 
Point, 1837, W.
Thompson (in Eb. A.
G. More).
var.
crassa.
— Perth Mid., Ben-y-beg and Balloch Lochs and 
Blair Drummond Pond, 1884, R.
Kidston, A.
Sturrock, and F.
Buchanan White.
N. OPACA, Agardh.— Bucks, 1884, J.
G.; Suffolk E., 1799, 
D. Turner (in Linn.
Soc. Herb.) ; Suffolk W., 1883, G.
C. Druce; 
Westmoreland (Lake Lanes.), 1884, T.
Hebden ; Berwick, 1881, 
Renton (Hb. Bennett); Stirling, 1884, R.
Kidston; Ebudes N., 
1884, E.
F. Linton ; Eoss W.
and EossE.
(Cromarty), 1881, G.
C. 
Druce ; "Waterford, 1882, G.
Nicholson {Hb. Bennett) ; Armagh, 
1874, S.
A. Stewart (in Hb. More) ; Londonderry, 1839, W.
Thompson (in Hb. More).
We have received from Mr. Fryer 
specimens of a Nitella from Cambridgeshire, which is apparently a 
monoecious form of this species.
Mr. Fryer informs us that in early 
spring the plant only produced globules, later on both globules and 
nucules, and in the summer principally nucules.
We should be glad 
if our correspondents will examine any forms of N.
opaca that they 
may find, to see if this is an isolated case.
Correction.
— In our Eeview the bulbils of Chara fragilis and 
C. aspera are erroneously described as calcareous ; their principal 
contents are starch granules.
A CONTEIBUTION TOWAEDS A FLOEA OF 
BEECONSHIEE.
By W.
Bowles Barrett, F.L.S.
(Continued from p.
44:).
Trifolium pratense L., and T.
repens L.
C. — T.
medium L.
CwmTarell; A.
Lei/.
Bank, Pontsticil.
I also observed it near 
Ehymney Bridge Station, just over the county border.
*T.
arvense L.
Side of railway.
Three Cocks Junction.
— T.
hybridum L.
Near Newbridge, introduced; A.
Lei/.
— T.
fragifenm L.
Not 
84 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF RRKCONSHIRE, 
seen.
"^-T.
procumbenslj.
C. — T.
minus h.; A.
Ley.
—  '^T .
Jiliforme 
L. Mynydcl Troedd ; H.
N. Ridley.
Lotus corniculatas L., and L.
major Scop.
C. 
Vicia hirsitta Koch.
F. — V, tetrasjjerma Moench.
Railway 
bank, Doldowlod ; A.
Ley. Searched for, not seen by me.
— V.
Cracca 
L. C.
— V.
OrobusDG.
Trecastle Woods ; Herb.
Brit.
Mas. Brecon ; 
near Newbridge; .J, Le^.
— V.
sepium h.
C. "Widely distributed.
— 
V. sativa L.
Top. Bot., ed.
ii.
— V.
angustifolia Roth.
Not seen.
Var. b.
Bobartii.
Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
— V.
Bithynica var.
angustifolia.
Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Lathyrus pratensis L.
C. No other Lathyrus seen.
Orobus tubcrosns L.
Doldowlod ; A.
Ley. Priory Groves, 
Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Grilwern.
Near Garth.
— Var. b.
temdfolius.
Near Builth ; A Ley.
Prumis spinosa L.
Elan Valley; A.
Ley.
—  'P.
insititia L.
Near Llauhamlach.
— P.
domestica L.
Cwm Tarell; A.
Ley.
Near Builth, introduced.
— -P.
Avium L.
Wood near Vennyfach, 
If mile from Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
— P.
Padus L.
Elan Valley ; 
A. Ley.
SpircBa Ulmaria L.
C. 
Agrimonia Eupatoria L.
F. in lowlands.
Sanguisorba officinalis L.
A common weed ; noted at Pen-y- 
wyllt, Ehymney Bridge Vale, Dolygaer, Garth.
Poterium Sanguisorba L.
Pen-y-wyllt ; A.
Ley. Rare ; not 
seen by me.
AlchemiUa arvensis Scop.
Nant-gwyllt ; A.
Ley. Apparently 
uncommon, and confined to the lowlands.
Talybont.
Garth.
— 
A. vulgaris L.
Llanwrthwl ; A.
Ley. A common weed on the 
uplands, but less so in North-west Breconshire ; noted at Pen-y- 
wyllt, Ehymney Bridge Vale, Dolygaer, Talybont, Llangorse, 
Brecon, Garth, Builth.
— *Var. b.
montana.
Frequent.
Potentilla Frugariastrum Ehrh., P.
Tormentilla Schenk, P.
reptans L., and P.
Anserina L.
C. — P.
procumbens L.
Lower 
Elan Valley; A.
Ley.
Com arum palustre L.
Not seen.
Frag aria vesca L.
C. 
Paibus Idmis L.
Widely distributed.
— P.
suberectus Anders.
Near Capel Coelbren; A.
Ley.
— R.
plicatus W.
& N.
teste G.
C. 
Babington.
Wood near Pen-pont ; A.
Ley.
— R.
affnis W.
& N.
C. C.
Babinqton, Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
— R.
Lindleianus Lees.
Pen-y- 
wyllt.
Talyllyn.
Brecon.
Builth.
— *P.
discolor W.
& N.
C. 
— R.
leucostachys Sm. C.
C. Babington, Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
— R.
macrophyllus Weihe.
(J.
C. Babington, Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
— R.
Kcehlerl Weihe, var.
c. pallidus.
C. C.
Babington, Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
— Pi. c(Esius L.
C. C.
Babington, Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
— R.
saxatilis 
L. On limestone Crag-y-Rhiwarth, Pen-y-wyllt ; A.
Ley.
Geuni iirbanum L.
F. — G.
rivale L.
Tareus (cliffs) in the 
Honddu Valley, Black Mountain ; A.
Ley. Vennyfach Rocks ; 
Miss Fryer.
Rosa .y)ivosi.ssima L.
Rare.
Mountain Cliff's Taren r' Esgob, 
in the Honddu Valley ; only one or two bushes ; A.
Ley. Nowhere 
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A KLORA OK JiRKCONSHIRE.
85 
seen by me.
— R.
mollissima Willd.
Cwm Tarell.
Mountain clift's 
near Llanthony ; A.
Ley.
— Var. approaching caridea.
Near Capel 
Coelbren, and near Brecon; A.
Ley.
— H.
tomentosa Sm. Pen-y- 
wyllt, common and characteristic.
Dolygaer and Taff-Vechan, 
frequent.
Talyllyn, sparingly.
Garth, one bush observed.
Builth.
Apparently becomes scarcer towards north and north- 
west.
— R.
canina L., var.* a.
luteticma Leman.
F. — Var. d.
senticosa Ach., teste J.
G. Baker.
Near Brecon ; A.
Ley.
— Var.* 
e. dumalis Bechst.
Very C.
— Var. g.
urhica Leman.
Near 
Brecon; A.
Ley. Hay.
— Var. t.
Reuteri.
Godet.
By the Usk 
above Brecon; A.
Ley.
— Var.* u.
suhcristata Baker, teste W.
M. 
Eogers.
Near Dolygaer Keservoir.
— Var. x.
coriifolia Fr., teste 
J. G.
Baker.
Hedge near Brecon ; A.
Ley.
— Var.* y.
Watso7ii 
Baker, teste J.
G. Baker.
Bank of Wye, near Hay Church.
— '*R.
arvensis Huds.
Eemarkably common throughout the county.
— 
Var.* b.
hihrncteata Bast.
F. Noted at Brecon and Builth.
— R.
micrantha and stylosa searched for but not seen.
Cratagus vwnoyyna Jacq.
C* for segregate.
A form with 
slightly woolly fruit (perhaps C.
villosa Breb., Fl. de la Normandie), 
at Pen-y-wyllt.
Pyrus rupicola Syme, E.
B. Observed on only a single Taren 
in the Honddu Valley, just on the borders of Brecon and 
Monmouth ; A.
Ley.
— *P.
Aucxiparia Gaert.
C, and widely dis- 
tributed on the uplands.
— P.
Mains L., var.* b.
mitis.
F. 
Lythrum Salicaria L.
Capel Coelbren ; A.
Ley. Near Llan- 
gorse Lake.
Reported from all the adjoining counties, but rare in 
Breconshu-e.
Peplis not seen.
Epilobium anyustifoliuin L.
Lower Elan Valley; A.
Ley. F.
on railway banks, Dolygaer, &c.
— E.
hirsiitumlj.
C. — E.parvi- 
fiorum Schreb.
F. — E.
montamim L.
The commonest species : 
at Dolygaer with pure white flowers ; a similar variety has been 
reported from South Devon.
— E.
ohscurum Schreb.
Generally 
distributed both on lowlands and mountains.
— E.
tetrayonum L.
Not seen.
— E.
]mhistre L.
C. Widely distributed.
Circcea lutetianaJj. Widely distributed.
— C.
alpinaLi. By the 
Wye near Erwood ; A.
Ley.
Myrio2)hylhun spicatum L, Ditches near the Usk, Brecon.
The Wye at Hay.
— *il/.
alierniflorum DC.
The Usk, Brecon.
Callitriche staynalis Scop.
C. — *C'.
hamulata lultz.
Eiver at 
Dolygaer.
Llangorse.
Brecon.
Bryonia dioica Li. Near Three Cocks Junction; A.
Ley. Not 
seen by me.
*Liibes Grossularia L.
Wood near Gilwern.
Three Cocks 
Junction.
Probably introduced.
Sedum Rhodiola DC.
In abundance on the northern precipices 
of the Brecon Beacons, alt.
2800 feet.
Affirmative answer to 
query in Top. Bot.
; A.
Ley.
— H.
Telepldum L.
Bank near New- 
bridge; A.
Ley.
— Var.* a,, purpurascens.
Hedgebank, Pen-y-wyllt.
Stone bank AUtmawr, near Builth.
— S.
anglicum Huds.
lliver- 
side rocks, Erwood ; A.
Ley.
— S.
acre L.
Not seen, except rarely 
on garden-walls and other suspicious places : no other Scdum seen 
86 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
by me.
— 8.
refleximi L, ; A.
Ley. Not native.
— S.
Forsterianum 
Sm., var.
virescens.
Northern precipice of Brecon Beacons ; on 
rocks by the stream Cwm Serre, one and a-half miles north of 
the Beacons; A.
Lcij.
Cotyledon Umbilicus L, Lower Elan Valley; A.
Ley. Appa- 
rently rather scarce in extreme South Breconshire : F.
elsewhere.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Near Talybont, abundant.
Llangorse.
Brecon.
Builth.
Saxifraga oppositifolia L.
Craig-y-gledsiau in Cwm Tarell 
Valley, plentiful; northern precipices of Brecon Beacons, plen- 
tiful; A.
Ley.
— S.
tridactylites L.
Not common, and showing 
decided local tendencies.
Talyllyn.
Brecon.
Hay.
— S.
gramdata 
L. Vennyfach Rocks, near Brecon; Miss Fryer.
— S.
Sponhemica 
Gmel.
Taren r' Esgob Black Mountain, native, well-marked and 
plentiful; A.
Ley. Churchyard wall, Taff-Vechan, introduced.
— S.
hypnoides L.
Very frequent throughout the Black Mountain district, 
in various forms ; Craig-y-gledsiau, Brecon Beacons ; A.
Ley.
Chrysosplenium ojijjositifolium L.
C. throughout.
— C.
(dterni- 
ftorum, L.
Very frequent in the Honddu Valley, Black Mountain 
district, especially near Capel-y-ffin ; near Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley.
Priory Groves, Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
'^'Hydrocotyle vidgaris L.
Bogs above Ehymney Bridge Station.
Llangorse Lake.
Epynt Hills, near Grarth.
Sanicida europaa L.
C. and widely distributed.
Helosciadium nodijiorum Koch.
C. 
Carum verticillatum Koch.
Meadows near Coel Bren, abundant ; 
A. Ley.
jFgopodiiim Podagraria L.
Near Penteryn ; A.
Ley.
Buniinn flexuosum With.
Grwyne Valley; A.
Ley. Near 
Priory Groves, Brecon ; Mrs. Fryer.
Pimpinella Saxifraga L.
C. — Var,''' dissecta Retz.
F. : noted 
near Ehymney Bridge Station and at Builth.
Si7un angxistifoUuin L.
Llangorse Lake, abundant.
' ^'(Enanthe fistulosa L.
Llangorse Lake, plentifully.
This plant 
has not been recorded for South-west Wales subprovince, nor for 
Radnor nor Montgomery.
— (E.
crocata L.
C. 
^'/Ethusa Cynajmnn L.
Bank of Wye, Hay.
Silavs pratensis Bess.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Not seen by me.
Angelica sylvestris L.
C. 
Pastinaca sativa L.
Not seen.
Heracleum Sphondylium L.
C. 
Dancxis Carota L.
Remarkably scarce and local.
Field at 
north end of Talyllyn railway tunnel.
Field at Garth ; in both 
places abundant.
Torilis Anthrisciis Gaert.
C. and widely distributed.
— 1\ infesta 
Spr. recorded by Rev. A.
Ley, and T.
nodosa Gaert.
not seen.
ChcErophyllum sylvestre L.
Near Pen-pont ; A.
Ley. Priory 
Groves, Brecon; Miss Fryer.
— C temidum L.
C. 
Myrrhis odorata Scop.
In abundance in Grwyne-faur Valley, 
Black Mountain, and I believe a true native ; A.
Ley. Stream- 
side above Rhymney Bridge Station.
A Contribution towards a flora of bregonshire.
87 
Scanduv Pecten- Veneris L.
Eecorded by Eev. A.
Ley, not 
seen by me.
Conium maculatum.
L. Near Brecon ; .4.
Ley. Not seen by me 
in the county.
Hedera Helix L.
C. 
*Co7-nus sanguinea L.
F. Noted at Llangorse, Three Cocks 
Junction.
Adoxa Moschatellina L.
Frequent in the Honddu Valley, 
Black Mountain district ; near Brecon ; A.
Ley.
Samhucus nigra L.
F. — *S.
FAndus L.
Banks by the Wye 
at Hay, in plenty ; probably introduced.
Viburnum Opidus L.
Cwm Tarell ; A.
Ley. Llangorse, 
frequent.
Builth.
Lonicera Periclymenum L.
C. 
Oalium horeale L.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
; not seen by Eev. A.
Ley 
or myself.
— G.
Cruciata With.
C. throughout.
— --'G.
verum L.
Apparently scarce ; only seen at Peutwyn.
— *6^.
Mollugo L., 
var.
a. elation.
Talyllyn.
— G.
saxatile L.
C. — G.
sylvestre 
Poll.
Craig-y-Ehiwarth, Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley.
— G.
palustre L., 
var.
b. elongatum.
Near Brecon; A.
Ley.
— Var.* c.
Witheringii.
— G.
Aparine L.
Less common than in South-west England.
Asperula odorata L.
Near Builth ; A Ley. Apparently rare.
Sherardia arvensis L.
Partricio ; A.
Ley. Near Brecon ; Miss 
Fryer.
Valeriana dioica L.
Taren r' Esgob ; A.
Ley.
— V.
officinalis L., 
var.
b. sambiicifolia.
G. 
*Valerianella Auricula DC.
Eoadside, Builth.
No other Vale- 
rianella seen.
Dipsacus sylvestris L.
Not seen ; appears to be rare in Wales, 
except in the extreme southern and northern counties.
Scabiosa succisa L.
Very C.
— S.
columbaria L.
Craig-y- 
gledsiau ; Brecon Beacons (sandstone) ; Limestone rocks, Craig-y- 
Ehiwarth, Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley.
— *S.
arvensis L.
C. 
' ^'Carduus nutans L.
Only once seen, near the Usk, between 
Brecon and Dinas ; a single plant : rare in South-east and Mid 
Wales.
— C.
crispus L.
Scarce, and always in small quantity.
Talybont.
Near Llanhamlach.
Brecon.
Three Cocks Junction.
Hay.
— C.
lanceolata L.
C. — C.
palustris L.
Very C.
— C.
pratensis Huds.
E. Forster, MS., Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Moist moun- 
tain meadows east of Coel Bren, in abundance : one plant of a 
hybrid, pratense-palustris, with it ; A.
Ley.
— C.
arvensis Curt.
Very C.
Carlina vulgaris L.
Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley. Eare : only seen 
on hillside near Pen-y-wyllt Station, very sparingly.
Arctium minus Schkuhr.
Widely distributed, but less common 
than in South-west England.
— -^'A.
intermedium Lange.
F. about 
Talybont.
Hay. No majus seen.
Serratida tinctoria L.
Cwm Tarell ; A.
Ley. Local.
Pen-y- 
wyllt.
About Garth, abundant.
Centaurea nigra L.
The type remarkably abundant throughout 
the county.
The rayed form of the type, radiata, not seen.
I 
b» A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OP BRECONSHIRE.
carefully searched for var.
decipiejis, but failed to find a single 
specimen.
No other Centaurea seen.
Chrysanthemum sef/etum L.
Oatfield, Llanwrthwl ; A.
Ley.
Scarce.
Cornfield, Llanhamlach, in small quantity.
— C.
Leucan- 
themum L.
F. 
Matricaria Parthenium L.
F. about towns and villages : intro- 
duced.
— M.
inodora L.
Near cottage, near Nantgwyllt ; A.
Ley.
Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Not seen by me.
— iV.
Chamomilla L.
is probably absent 
*Ta7iacetum vulgare L.
Gilwern, By the Wye, Hay; abun- 
dant.
Banks of Wye opposite Aberedw.
'^Anthemis Cotida L.
F., but less common than in South-west 
England.
No other Anthemis seen.
Achillea Millefulium L.
C. — A.
Ptarmica L.
C, and in some 
parts abundant, but becoming scarcer in the South-west of the 
county.
Artemisia Absinthium h.
Near Three Cocks Junction.
Native?
A. Ley.
— *A.
vuhjuris L.
C, and widely distributed.
Filayo (/ermanica L.
Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
— F.
minima 
Fries.
Railbanks, Doldowlod, a casual; A.
Ley. I saw no Filayo 
in the county.
Gnaphalium, uliginosum L.
F., and widely distributed.
No 
other Gnaphalium seen.
— (r.
dioicwn L.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
In 
small quantity on the summit of Craig-y-Rhiwarth, Pen-y-wyllt ; 
A. Ley.
Senecio sylvaticus L.
Llanwrthwl; A.
Ley. Eare.
Hedge- 
bank, Dolygaer.
— S.
vidyaris L., S, Jacobcea L., and S.
aquaticm 
Huds., C.
No S.
erucifolius L.
seen.
"^'Bidens cernua L.
Llangorse Lake, remarkably abundant.
— 
*B.
tripartita L.
Llangorse Lake, abundant.
B. cernua and tri- 
partita seem to be rare in South-east and Mid Wales.
Inula Helenium L.
Near a cottage, Capel Coelbren, introduced ; 
A. Ley.
— *7.
dysenterica L.
F. Gilwern.
Llangorse, &c.
— 1.
Conyza DC.
Not seen.
Bell is perennis L.
C. 
Sulidayo Viryaurea L.
F., especially in South Breconshire.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Gilwern.
Brecon.
Hay. Garth.
Builth.
— Var.
anyustifolia.
Near Newbridge ; A.
Ley.
Tiissilayo Farfara L.
Priory Grove, Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Petasites vulgaris Desf.
Eemarkably abundant and widely 
distributed.
Eupatorium cannabinum L, F., and widely distributed.
Since the first portion of this paper was published ( Journ.
Bot.
Jan. 1885), Mr. Alfred Fryer has kindly communicated to me some 
additional plants, as also new localities, observed by Mrs. Fryer 
and Miss Fryer between 1882 and 1884 ; all the specimens have 
been examined by Mr. Fryer.
The total records for Breconshire 
are thus brouglit up to 595 species.
Except the following, which 
properly belong to the first part of this paper, Mr. Fryer's 
communications have been embodied in the text : — TroUius 
SSOET NOTES.
89 
europmis L.
Vennyfach Eocks, near Brecon.
— Fumaria confusa 
Jord.
Brecon.
—  ^'Raphanus Raphanistrum L.
Field by the Usk, 
Brecon.
— Cardamine pratensis L.
Priory Groves, Brecon.
— 
Arahis thaliana L.
On wall, Brecon.
— A.
hirsuta Br. On wall, 
Brecon.
— ^'- Xasturtium sylvestre Br. Vennyfach Rocks, 1884.
— 
Viola odorata L., var.
alba.
Vennyfach Rocks, probably an escape.
— Hypericum duhium Leers.
Crug Lane and field by the Usk, near 
Brecon.
— Geranium lucidum L.
Brecon.
(To be continued.; 
SHORT NOTES.
Hemerocallis flava naturalised in Wales.
— In one of the sea- 
coast woods at Penrliyn Castle this plant has now become quite 
naturalised, large patches of from 600 to over 1000 plants in each 
occurring in several parts of the wood and at considerable distances 
apart.
The wood in which they are found runs nearly at right 
angles to the Menai Strait, the first patch of the Hemerocallis being 
within 20 yards of the sea, the second 370 yards farther along, and 
the third, which contains the greatest number of plants, 200 yards 
from the second.
I am rather puzzled to account for the appear- 
ance and distribution of the plant, more particularly the latter, as, 
strange to say, although I have watched it carefully for the past 
seven years, no flowers have been produced, although the plants 
are remarkably strong and vigorous, so that its dissemination by 
seed is out of the question.
Previous to the formation of that part 
of the park in which the plant abounds (about 100 years ago), 
I see from an old map or plan that three farm-houses stood at or 
near where the clumps occur ; so that it is but reasonable to 
suppose that the plant was introduced to one of the gardens 
attached to the farm-houses, and from which roots would no doubt, 
as is very commonly the case even now, be distributed amongst 
the others.
This explanation is not at all improbable, as the plant 
was introduced from Siberia as early as 1596.
I am not aware 
that elsewhere in Britain has the Hemerocallis become established 
in such quantity ; indeed, in a letter from Sir Joseph Hooker he 
considers the case as very remarkable and well worth recording, 
although, as he says, considering what a vigorous rooter the plant 
is, it is a wonder it has not established itself elsewhere.
— A.
D. 
Webster.
Erica Tetralix in the Faroe Islands.
— Mr. J.
Backhouse, Jun., 
of York, during a short visit to the Faroes last September, gathered 
this heath at Trangisvaag, in Suderoe.
It is an addition to Rostrup's 
' Flora of the Islands,' and interesting, as all our three common 
heaths are now on record for these isles ; while E.
cinerea, although 
recorded for Iceland by Solander and Morck, is not admitted by 
Babiugtoii (Rev. Fl.
Iceland) or Grouluud (Fl. of Iceland).
Suderoe 
is the southernmost isle of the group, and Trangisvaag is at the 
head of a deep " fiord" of the sea.
— Arthur Bennett.
90 
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
PlantcB DavidiancR ex Sinarum Imperio.
Par. M.
A. Fkanchet, 
Attache a I'Herbier du Museum.
Premiere partie.
Plantes 
de Mongolie, du Nord et du Centre de la Chine.
Avec 27 
Planches.
Paris: G.
Massou, 1884.
4to,pp.
390.
Keprinted 
from the ' Nouvelles Archives du Museum.' 
After having lain for about ten years in the herbarium of the 
Paris Museum, the Chinese botanical collections of the Abbe 
Armand David have been at last taken in hand by M.
Franchet, 
and the name of the author of the ' Enumeratio plantarum in 
Japonia ' is a sufficient guarantee for excellent work in the pub- 
lication before us.
The Abbe David was for a long time attached to the Lazarist 
Mission in Peking, where he had an opportu.nity of collecting most 
of the species of North China and of adjacent Mongolia.
After- 
wards, under a commission from the French Minister of Public 
Instruction, he travelled widely through Central and Western 
China, and spent some nine months in Eastern Thibet.
During 
these explorations his attention was chiefly given to Zoology, but 
he botanized as well, although he says that his collections must 
be regarded only as samples of the rich flora of these regions.
The total collections, according to M.
Franchet, represent over 
1500 species.
The importance of the present volume, which deals 
exclusively with plants from Mongolia and Northern and Central 
China, is shown by its enumeration of 1143 species, of which 
about 950 are recorded from China proper, while 64 are new to 
science.
The enumeration is prefaced by a most interesting letter from 
the Abbe David, giving a rapid sketch of his travels from a 
botanical point of view, with some account of the relation of the 
flora to the geological structure of the country traversed.
For the purposes of natural history Abbe David divides the 
Chinese Empire into three great regions : — I.
North China, 
extending from the Yellow Eiver to the borders of Manchuria.
II.
Eastern Mongolia, adjoining the Great Wall.
III.
The whole 
of the generally mountainous country which forms South China, 
including the enormous basin of the Yangtsze Eiver.
The first and second regions are very similar in their fauna 
and flora, as well as in their climate, the characteristics of which 
are : — 1st, Great dryness, with some storms in summer, but with 
little rain or snow during the rest of the year, and without heavy 
dews until early July after the first showers.
2nd, A sky usually 
clear, with frequent and disagreeable northerly winds.
3rd, Kegu- 
larity of the seasons, the summer heat and winter cold being rarely 
disturbed by sudden changes of temperature.
4th, A long, very 
hot summer, and a rigorous winter.
At Peking the great cold sets 
in, almost without a transition, in November, and the river and sea- 
coast are closed by ice from early December to March.
In summer 
the thermometer often rises above 105^ Fahr.
in the shade, while 
PLANTS DAVIDIANiE, 91 
the minimum winter temperature oscillates between 20° and 10° 
Fahr.
It is, however, sometimes 15° lower, and in Mongolia cold 
of 25° below zero is not uncommon.
"While therefore no plants from warm countries can survive the 
Peking winter, many tropical annual species can be cultivated far 
to the north.
Bamboos, for instance, which thrive on all the 
mountains of South China, are not found in a wild state north of 
the Yellow Eiver ; and, on the otber hand, rice, sesame, cotton, 
sweet potatoes, &c., are successfully grown up to the borders 
of Manchuria.
Again, the two or three (doubtless introduced) 
varieties of the grape-vine, which are cultivated near Peking, have 
to be completely covered with earth every winter.
The climate of the provinces south of the Yangtsze Eiver is 
subtropical, with frequent rains throughout the year, less however, 
in winter than in summer.
Vegetation therefore is much more 
luxuriant than in the north, but without being varied.
Abbe 
David alludes to the close connection between the flora of Kiangsi, 
Kiangnan and Chekiang and that of Japan, a fact which has been 
already established, while the relations of the Southern provinces 
to Cochin China and India have yet to be worked out.
One of the greatest evils with which China has now to contend 
is the result of the forest devastation which has gone on for 
centuries, either for the purpose of clearing ground for agriculture 
or for the sake of the timber.
Abbe David further suggests 
that, as the tiger and the leopard once roamed through the 
forests, human life could not have been safe in their neigh- 
bourhood, especially for people who kept but few cattle ; and 
that the destruction of the haunts of these wild beasts may 
have been resorted to as a means of exterminating the pests.
At all events the timber has practically disappeared from the 
mountains and hills of China, and Abbe David says that it is only 
on almost inaccessible slopes that remains of old forests are to be 
found.
It must have been only from inadvertence that he has 
omitted to mention the neighbourhood of Buddhist monasteries 
and temples as among the few places where the native tree vegeta- 
tion of China is still preserved.
This fact has been j)ointed out by 
Dr. Hance in more than one place in this Journal,* and although 
more especially referring to the Southern provinces, his obser- 
vations are none the less true regarding other parts of China 
further north, as the writer of this notice is able to testify.
The Abbe David's preface contains a long and highly in- 
teresting account of Moupine, a small quasi-independent state 
of Eastern Thibet, where this zealous naturalist spent nine 
months and whence came his most remarkable zoological novelties.
The word "Moupine," according to Abbe David, signifies "wooded 
plain," a name which, he adds, must have been given ironically, as 
the whole district so bristles with mountain peaks that it must 
require an effort of imagination for the inhabitants to realize what 
a iDlain means.
In this range there are several snow-capped 
* Journ.
Bot. 1870, pp.
274, 275 ; 1878, pp.
6, 7, 8.
92 PLANTS DA VIDIANS.
mountains, loftier even than the one which he himself ascended, 
and which he fomid to be 16,500 feet in height.
The slopes here 
are still thickly wooded up to 11,500 feet.
The climate is hard 
and disagreeable, damp and very foggy.
The winters are cold, 
with much snow, which remains in sheltered valleys till May or 
June.
During the rest of the year it rains almost every day, and 
the atmosphere is so charged with moisture that, according to the 
inhabitants, a gun shot will bring on a shower in calm weather!
Such a climate is naturally favourable to the growth of plants 
like ferns, conifers, and rhododendrons.
The latter are the woody 
plants found at the greatest altitude, and fifteen to twenty species 
were observed, which with their magnificent flowers gave a charming 
aspect to the landscape from April to July.
At Moupine Abbe 
David saw a number of trees, unknown to him and probably new 
species, which with rhododendrons, box, aralias, and bamboos, 
form impenetrable thickets, the home of the Amherst Pheasant.
Here, at an altitude of 6500 feet, was found the curious tree 
named Davidia by Baillon,- growing with a fine species of cherry, 
a gigantic hazel, an oak with cork bark, and various LaurinecB.
Many species of Ficus were met with, some of them large trees, 
others tall climbers, and one a creeper, with good-sized, very sweet 
fruits, which are only produced on those parts of the plant that 
are hidden under the sand or stones.
It was here also that Abbe 
David found the pyramidal poplar, unknown in the rest of China, 
and the weeping willows are spoken of as the finest he had ever 
seen.
Besides the ordinary tea-plant, another species called 
" White Tea " is also cultivated at Moupine and in Szechuen.
It 
is a taller shrub than the common kind, with elongated and some- 
what downy leaves.
As to the herbaceous flora of Moupine, although proportionately 
less rich than the arborescent, it is far more interesting than in 
North China, where monotony is the prevailing characteristic.
It 
is also to be noted that the few European genera and species repre- 
sented in the northern flora no longer appear in Thibet, except as 
introduced plants.
To conclude this notice of Moupine, a curious 
circumstance mentioned by Abbe David may be quoted in his own 
words: — "When the virgin forests are burned to make agricultural 
clearances, the denuded land produces spontaneously, among other 
plants, a great quantity of Sinajds with oleaginous seeds, of which 
the natives gather two or three good crops without any trouble.
As 
this species of Sinajjis (which is largely cultivated throughout 
China) is never found in the woods, it may well be asked whence 
and when came these seeds which have retained their germinating 
power for an incalculable number of years ?
" 
Turning to the systematic part of the book, we have space only 
for a few notes that have suggested themselves during a cursory 
examination of its pages.
We observe with interest that Clematis Davidiana Dene, is con- 
sidered only a variety of 0.
tubulosa Turcz., which the present 
* Adansonia X.
114.
Placed by Baillon provisionally in Combretacece.
Hist.
des Plantes, vi.
282.
plant;e davidian;e.
98 
writer has shown to be reducible to C.
heradeifoUa DC* 
M. Franchet has followed M.
Maximowicz iu this decision, which 
he bases not only on the wild specimens brought home by Abbe 
David, but upon his own study of the plants under cultivation in 
Paris.
Ranunculus ternatus Thbg.
is a species about which there has 
been some confusion.
Thuuberg's original diagnosis (Fl. Jap., 
p. 241) was very meagre, but DeCaudolle, in 1817 (Syst.
i. p.
242), 
carefully described the plant, apparently after an authentic 
specimen in Delessert's herbarium.
In 1824 Wallstrom (Dissert.
PL Jap.) figured a plant, presumably from Thunberg's herbarium 
in Upsala, with the name of li.
ternatus, but without description.
The name, as applied by DeCandolle, was adopted by Prof.
Asa 
Gray (Bot. of Japan), by Siebold and Zuccarini (Fl. Jap.
Fam.
Nat.), by Miquel, who gave a detailed description (Prol.
p. 192), 
and by Franchet and Salvatier (Enum.
pi.
Jap. i.
7).
The latter 
authors further [I.
c. ii.
268) suggested that Wallstrom's figure was 
identical with R.
Zuccarinii Miq., but M.
Maximowicz (Fragmenta, 
p. 3), while confirming this, claimed that the plate must be taken 
to represent the true R.
ternatus of Thunberg, and that DeCan- 
doUe's description was referable to R.
japonicus Langsdorff (non 
Thbg.).
M. Franchet now sums up the discussion in a way that 
appears to me to set it at rest: — " Je ne puis partager I'avis de 
M. Maximowicz : de Candolle a tres suffisamment decrit la plante 
sur un specimen authentique, et il la compare au R.
aconitifolius, dont 
le jR.
Zuccarinii est tres different : il n'est pas admissible de faire 
prevaloir la figure de Wallstrom, assez mauvaise du reste et 
donnee sans description, contre le texte precis de I'auteur du 
' Sy sterna.' " 
Mijosoton aquaticum Moench, is the name under which M.
Franchet presents to us our old friend Malachium.
The genus 
here taken up is noticed neither in the ' Prodromus ' nor in the 
' Genera Plantarum,' although quoted as a synonym by both 
Endlicher and Steudel.
As Moench's name (Methodus, p.
225) 
dates from 1794, while Fries's Malachium was not established till 
1817, it would seem that M.
Franchet must be followed by those 
who are not satisfied with the Steltaria aquatica sanctioned by 
Bentham and Hooker.
In adopting (,'tnncUia theifera Griff, as the name for Thea sinensis 
Linn., 1 presume M.
Franchet has followed the authors of the 
' Flora Indica ' (vol.
i. p.
292), but I am at some loss to understand 
why, in both works, Link's earlier and better name of Camellia 
Thea should have been unnoticed and superseded.!
The beautiful Xanthoceras sorhifulia Bge., which is commonly 
cultivated about Peking, appears to have been found growing wild 
only on the rocky ranges of Ourato, in Mongolia, not far from the 
great northern bend of the Yellow Piiver.
Although it was 
reported to be wild near Jehol, Abbe David had only seen the tree 
* Journ.
Bot. 1884, p.
263.
t Camellia Thea Link, Enum.
Part II.
, p.
73 (1822).
C. theifera Griff.
Notul.
IV., p.
558 (1854).
94 PLANTS DAVIDIANiE.
in cultivation there.
From Southern Shensi a new variety of So- 
j)hora Moorcroftiana Beuth.
is described.
The typical form belongs 
to Northern India, and the species is remarkable in the genus for 
its habit, which approaches that of Carat/cma and Halimodendron.
Very few Kubi or roses appear to have been collected.
Among the 
latter are Rosa BanksicB K.
Br. from Southern Shensi, a plant with 
single flowers, but whose spontaneity appears doubtful, and 
B. xanthina Lindl.
from Mongoha.
Abbe David says : — " Ce joli 
rosier aux mille fleurs est excessivement abondant dans toute cette 
chaine de montagnes : j'en ai trouve une variete curieuse, ou 
toutes les antheres etaient reunies commo dans les Malvacees." 
There is a new Crassula from Jehol, this being, as far as we are 
aware, the first record of this genus from China ; and a sterile 
specimen of Ilamamelis from Kiukiang so resembles the Japanese 
plant that M.
Franchet refers it also to H.
virginiana L.
Of Com- 
positcB 115 species are enumerated, and among the seven new ones 
is a Petasites from Shensi, the first Chinese record of this genua.
The Indian Buddleia ixiniculata Wall, is reported as abundant in 
Shensi, where Thyrocarpus glochidiatus Maxim., known previously 
from Kansu, was also found.
Quercus mongolica Fisch.
is reduced to a variety of Q, sessiliflora 
Salisb., the numerous specimens collected by Abbe David having 
established this fact beyond doubt to M.
Franchet.
A new oak 
from Shensi is described by Abbe David as Q.
spinosa, and another 
specimen from the same country is doubtfully referred to Q.
phylli- 
roioides A.
Gray, which was known only from Japan and the 
Liuchu Islands.
Both specimens were sterile, and we should not 
be surprised to learn that, with further material in hand, both 
might be found referable to Q.
Ilex.
From Shensi there are 
specimens (unfortunately also sterile) referred to the long over- 
looked Q.
chinensis AbeP'' (not Kob. Brown, as the author's name 
has inadvertently been given).
A new Castanopsis is recorded from 
Kiangsi, making the eighth species peculiar to China.
About a 
dozen Coniferoi are enumerated from Western China, several of 
which are described as new, while the material for others hardly 
appears to have been sufficient for specific determination.
Among the Monocotyledons there is not much that is new, but, 
as they amount to only seventeen per cent, of the phanerogams, 
they must be considered as rather poorly represented in the 
collections.
The volume itself is published with all the luxury of paper, 
type and plates to which we have been accustomed in the 
' Nouvelles Archives du Museum.' Still, at the risk of seeming 
ungracious where so much is of the best, we may venture to regret 
that there is nothing in the way of ordinal or generic names at the 
tops of the pages, to guide the eye in a rapid search through the 
* One of these specimens, kindly communicated by M.
Franchet, agrees as 
far as it goes with Abel's description and figure.
It appears very distinct from 
Q. sclerophylla Lindl., which I had thought might be identical with Abel's 
species, by the form and peculiar glaucous under surface of the leaves, as well 
as by the much larger greyish silky buds.
Vide Journ.
Bot. 1884, p.
82.
ARTICLES IN JOURNALS.
05 
volume.
We may also remark that the types chosen to indicate 
specific names and varieties hardly appear distinct enougli along- 
side the beautiful large print used for the localities and critical 
notes.
One must also regret the absence of analytical keys to the 
larger genera, like the admirable ones which M.
Franchet compiled 
for his ' Japanese Flora.' But, after all, these are minor details, 
and for the rest the distinguished author may well be congratulated 
on having produced a book which is the most important contribution 
to Chinese botany since the appearance of Bentham's ' Flora 
Hougkongensis.' Francis Blackwell Forbes.
The Fourth Annual Keport of the Hampstead Naturalists' Club 
contains "a list of botanical species observed in the district," by 
Mr. Eoland Ellis, the times of flowering being given.
The list, 
however, is manifestly very incomplete.
The first number of a new botanical sei'ial, ' The Journal of 
Mycology,' edited by Messrs.
Kellerman, Ellis, and Everhart, to 
be published monthly at the low cost of one dollar per annum, 
comes to us from Manhattan, Kansas.
It contains papers on 
' New Kansas Fungi,' by Messrs.
J. B.
Ellis and W.
A. Kellerman; 
' New Fungi from Iowa,' by Messrs.
J. B.
Ellis and E.
W. Holwixy ; 
and ' North American Geasters,' by A.
P. Morgan ; besides notices 
of other kindred publications.
Mr. a.
E. Gibbs publishes a useful list of Hertfordshire Mosses 
in the Transactions of the Herts Nat. Hist.
Society (vol.
iii.
pt.
2), 
in which Mr. E.
A. Pryor's division of the county into river- 
districts has been followed.
We regret to learn that there seems 
little prospect of the publication of the new Flora of Hertfordshire, 
on which Mr. Pryor spent so much time and labour, and it seems 
right to state that the Editor of this Journal, to whom the work 
was originally entrusted, has for some time since been relieved of 
any responsibility for its production.
New Books.
— J.
Olmedilla, ' Curiosidades acerca de las 
Plantas ' (Madrid: 8vo.
pp.
vii.
159).
— V.
B. Brotheeus, ' iiitudes 
sur la distribution des Mousses au Caucase ' (Helsingfors, Frenckell : 
8vo, pp.
iv.
104).
— P.
A. Saccardo, ' Sylloge Fungorum' : vol.
iii., 
Sphceropsidea; and MeUmconiecc (Padua: 8vo, pp.
860: 54 yV.).
— 
C. V.
Nageli & A.
Peter, ' Die Hieracieu Mittel-Europas : Mono- 
graphische Bearbeitung der Piloselloiden der mitteleuropaischen 
Sippen ' (Munich, Oldenbourg : 8vo, pp.
xi.
932).
— A.
Meyer, 
' Beitrage zur vergleichenden Anatomic der Eanunculacecu ' 
(Marburg, Friedrich : 8vo, pp.
vi.
50, 1 tab.).
— E.
Dennert, 
' Beitrage zur vergleichenden Anatomic des Laubstengels der 
Cruciferen ' (Marburg, Friedrich : 8vo, pp.
vi.
40, 1 tab.).
Articles in Journals.
American Xaturalist.
— A.
F. Foerste, 'Ferojlisation of P/iysostri/ia 
virc/inica.' 
96 ABTICLES IN JOURNALS.
Botanical Gazette (Jan.).
— L.
H. Bailey, ' Notes ou Carex ' 
[C.
nervina, sp.
n.).
Bot. Zeitiinfi (Jan. 23).
— C.
Fisch, ' Ueber die Pilzgattung 
Ascomi/ces.' — (Jan. 30, Feb. 6, 13, 20).
J. Reinke, 'Die Zerstorung 
von CliloropbylUosiuigen diu'ch das Licht nud eine Metbode zur 
Erzengung des Normalspectrums.' — (Feb. 6).
A. Fiscber, ' Ueber 
ein abnormes Vorkonimen von Staskekornen in Gefassen.' — 
(Feb. 20).
A. Hansen, ' Antwort auf die Bericbtigung von 
Tscbirch.' 
Bot. C'entralblatt (No. 5).
— E.
Ibne, ' Karte der Aufbliibzeit von 
Synn;/a vulgaris in Europa.' — (No. 6).
E. C.
Hansen, 'Vorlaufige 
Mittbeilungen liber Gabrungspilze ' (1 tab.).
— (Nos. 7, 8).
C. 
Kraus, ' Ueber Blutung aus parencbymatiscben Geweben.' — 
(No. 8).
T. Sterzel, ' Zur Culmflora von Chemnitz -Hainicben.' 
Botaniska Notiser (Haft 1).
— S.
Murbeck, ' Nagra anteckningar 
till floran pa Norges sydvestra ocb sodra Kust.' 
Flora (Jan. 1).
— J.
Velenovsky, ' Ueber die Achselsprosse 
einiger Smilax- Avten ' (1 tab.).
— J.
Freyn, ' Pbytograpbische 
Notizen ' [3Iuscari stenanthum Freyn, ill.
Schliemanni Freyn & 
Ascbers., M.
cjranatense Freyn, M.
fulif/inosum Freyn, spp.nn.).
— 
— .
Eoll, 'Ueber den Standort von Bhynchostegium tenellum Dicks.' 
— (Jan, 11).
J, Freyn, ' Pbytograpbische Notizen ' [Muscari 
laxum Freyn, BeUevaUa Battandieri Freyn, B.
variahilis Freyn, 
spp.
nn.).
— (Jan. 21, Feb. 11, 21).
0. Markfeldt, ' Ueber das 
Verhalten der Blattspurstrixnge imniergriiner Pflanzen beim 
Dickenwachstum des Stammes oder Zweiges ' (1 tab.).
— W.
Nylander, 'Addenda nova ad Licbenographiam europ^eam.' — 
(Feb. 1).
F. Arnold, 'Die Licbenen des frankisehen Jura.' — 
(Feb. 11).
J. Freyn, ' Pbytograpbische Notizen ' (BellevaUa Bois- 
sieri, n.
sp.).
— (Feb. 21).
H. Braun, Bosa Borhasiana, n.
sp.
Garden (Feb. 21).
— Synopsis of the genus Lilium.
Gardeners' Chronicle (Feb. 7).
— H.
G. Reicbenbach, MasdevalHa 
acrochordonia.
— Peronosjjora Hgoscyami (fig.
33).
— J.
D, Hooker, 
' Cujn-essus macrocarpa ' (fig.
34).
— (Feb. 14).
W. O'Brien, 
' Aspleniiim [/ermaniciim.' — J.
O'Brien, ' Satyrinm nepalense' (fig.
38).
— (Feb. 21).
Maxillaria Kalhreyeri Rchb.
f., sp.
n. — Buds on ends 
of leaves in Curcidigo (fig.
49).
— (Feb. 28).
J. O'Brien, ' Crypto- 
stylis longi/olia' (fig.
53).
Midland Naturalist.
— J.
E. Bagnall, ' Flora of Warwickshire' 
(contd.
: Cyperacea; — Graminea;).
Nature (Feb. 26).— W.
Gardiner, ' The Continuity of the Proto- 
plasm in Plant-tissue.' 
(Esterr.
Bot. Zeitschrift.
— F.
Leithe, ' Kryptogamenflora von 
Tirol.' — R.
F. Solla, ' Pelagische Algen.
— F.
Strobl, ' Bluthen- 
zeitdauer mancher Pflanzen.' 
Pharmaceutical Journal (Feb. 14).
— W.
Kirkby, 'False Cubebs ' 
[Piper sp.).
T-Ah.Zbb.
RMorqanlitii.
Ascopkyllum.
nodos-am.
w..t,N.v.-„a« &c.
».p.
97 
PROTOPLASMIC CONTINUITY IN THE FUCACKA-l.
By Thomas Hick, B.A., B.bc.
(Tab. 255.) 
Previous researches* having shown that protoplasmic con- 
tinuity obtains very widely in the Floridece, the question very naturally 
suggested itself whether similar phenomena were to be met with in 
other groups of Marine Algfe, and especially in the Fucaceic.
To 
supply an answer to this question, a very careful investigation of 
the histology of the commoner Fucoids was iinder taken, and the 
results of this form the basis of the present communication.
I venture to think they conclusively establish the position that 
here too a continuity of protoplasm through the cell walls is in ex- 
istence, which, though of a different type from that described i]^ 
many of the Floridea, is not less certain and definite.
As in the case of the Floridem, the materials employed have 
been partly sun-dried and partly fresh, the former having been 
found in the majority of cases quite as demonstrative as the latter.
The methods of treatment adopted to render the arangements 
for continuity perceptible have varied somewhat, owing to the fact 
that the same treatment was not always equally successful with 
different plants.
In general terms, the trdtttment was such as would 
either dissolve out the protoplasm from the tissues, or else swell 
up, gelatise, or dissolve the cellulose framework.
Pigments of 
various kinds were also made use of for the usual purpose of 
differentiating and demonstrating different structures.
The dissolu- 
tion of the protoplasm was usually effected, without any difficulty, 
by dilute solution of common bleaching-poAvder.
Greater difficulty 
was at first experienced in swelling the sections sufficiently to 
make clear the relation between the protoplasts and their en- 
velopes.
Schultze's solution and sulphuric acid, of themselves, 
were found to be of little use for this purpose, though so valuable 
in the manipulation of tissues from other plants.
After a number 
of reagents had been experimented with, alkalies were found to be 
the most effective swelling reagents, and of these ammonia and 
carbonate of ammonia of various strengths were decidedly the most 
serviceable.
When a greater or less amount of disintegration of 
the tissues was desired, the sections were treated successively with 
moderately strong sulphuric acid and strong ammonia.
The 
various ways in which the reagents were employed need not be 
described in detail, but the following methods were so generally 
followed, and, as a rule, furnished such favourable results, that, for 
the guidance of those who may wish to verify the statements here 
set forth, they may be given in full.
A. To obtain a general view of the structure of the thallus of 
the plant under investigation, thin sections were placed in fresh 
* British Association Report, 188;}, p.
547.
' Jouinal of Botany,' February 
nnd Mnrch, lH84.
Journal of Botany.
— Vol.
'I'd.
[April, 1885.] it 
98 PROTOPLASMIC CONTINUITY IN THE FtJCACEiE.
"water for a few minutes and then stained with methyl green, 
acidulated with acetic acid.
After well washing with water or 
acetic acid, the sections were put for a short time — varying in 
different cases — into alum-carmine.
They were again well washed 
with water, swollen with strong ammonia and mounted in 
glycerine.
Sections prepared in this way turn out in a very 
pretty condition, the protoplasmic structures being coloured green, 
and the framework a pale pink or violet.
Before swelling with 
ammonia the sections must be thoroughly washed, to remove all 
traces of alum, as otherwise the ammonia will cause a precipitate 
of alumiuic hydrate to be thrown down.
B, For the determination of more refined details, the sections 
were treated as follows: — Having been washed with fresh water, 
they were stained with an aqueous solution of safl'ranine ; again 
washed with water and swollen with strong ammonia ; and finally 
mounted in glycerine.
Thus prepared, the sections showed the 
protoplasts of a pink colour and their envelopes yellow, deepening 
here and there to brown.
C. Still more satisfactory results were, however, obtained 
thus : — Sections were soaked for from 3 to 12 or 20 hours in a 
mixture of strong sulphuric acid, 1 part, and water, 3 parts.
They were then washed, stained with saffranine as in the preceding 
process, and mounted in a mixture of glycerine and ammonia.
If 
the ammonia is employed to swell the sections before mounting, 
they become so much disintegrated that it is then impossible 
to transfer them to a slide.
ASCOPHYLLUM NODOSUM Le Jolis.
FuCUS NODOSUS L.
The frond of this Fucoid is so common and abundant on British 
coasts, and its appearance is so well known, that there is no need 
to give any description of its general morphology.
It is only neces- 
sary to refer to the leading features of its histological structure.
In longitudinal sections of any part of the thallus, made 
perpendicular to the flattened surfaces and examined under the 
microscope, we may distinguish, with more or less clearness, an 
epidermis, a cortex, and a central or medullary tissue.
PI.
255, 
The epidermis is composed of a single layer of small cylindrical 
cells, averaging 0*0005 inch in breadth, and from 1^ times to twice 
this in length.
They are placed with the long diameter per- 
pendicular to the thallus, and are somewhat strongly cuticularised on 
the free surface.
In the fresh state the lumen of the cells is filled 
with a dense, granular, brown-coloured protoplasm, and the walls 
appear of no great thickness.
In the dried condition, the proto- 
plasm is contracted, and the true thickness of the walls is obvious.
The cortex consists of 3, 4, or more layers of cells, of a 
somewhat more irregular shape than those of the epidermis, — the 
cells of each layer forming a longitudinal series.
The cells in 
contact with the epidermis hardly measure more than 0"0005 inch 
by 0-0005 inch, but, passing from without inwards, the cells 
become larger and more elongated hi the longitudinal direction, 
PROTOPLASMIC CONTINUITY IN THE FUCACE^E.
99 
until they pass over iuto the filamentous tissue of the the centre.
The cell walls attain considerable thickness, and the protoplasm is 
granular and of a brown colour.
Towards the centre the colour 
becomes less pronounced, and almost or entirely disappears.
An important feature of the cortex is the presence of numerous 
lateral diverticula, which connect the cells of the successive layers 
transversely, so that the whole tissue forms a cell complex, whose 
elements are closely interconnected.
The outermost cortical layer 
is connected in a similar manner with the epidermis.
The Central Tissue.
— Towards the centre of the thallus the 
cortical cells pass over into long filaments with thick walls, which 
make up the major part of the central tissue.
There is, however, 
no distinct line of separation between the cortex and this tissue.
The filaments run for the most part longitudinally, and more or 
less parallel to one another.
They arc composed of cells, 0*001 
inch in breadth and 0.003 inch in length, on an average, joined 
end to end, whose outer boundaries are usually lost in a gelatinous 
or cartilaginous matrix.
The protoplasmic contents are very 
gaanular, but the brown colour of the outer parts of the thallus is 
nearly or altogether absent.
Numerous transverse diverticula 
connect the filaments laterally with one another, and the outermost 
with the cortex, so that the whole has more or less of a reticulated 
appearance.
Beside the filaments that run longitudinally, the central tissue 
contains other structures of a more fibrous character.
These 
arise from the cortical cells, curve inwards towards the centre of the 
thallus, and form a sort of " weft " to the filamentous " warp." 
They resemble the filaments in general appearance, but their walls 
are much thicker and the protoplasmic contents are correspond- 
ingly attenuated.
Though very fibrous in aspect, they are made 
up of cellular elements, the transverse petitions being very oblique 
and not perpendicular to the side walls as in the filaments.
PI.
255, Fig. 1 (a).
The walls of the fibres are very beautifully 
laminated, and exhibit a very peculiar annulation which the writer 
has not met with in any other group of plants.
As shown in 
Fig. 8, it presents itself as a number of ring-like ridges developed 
on the outer surface of the fibre.
It was at first imagined that 
these had some connection with the division of the cells, and the 
formation of the sieve-plates described below.
But the rings 
formed round the sieve-plates are formed on the inner surface 
of the wall, the outer surface taking no part in their formation.
Sometimes there are two, three, or more of these external rings 
pretty close together, but in others they are placed singly, at a 
distance from one another.
In good sections prepared by either of the methods A or B, or 
indeed by any process which ensures a slight contraction of the 
protoplasm, a suspicion of the existence of continuity will be 
created by the appearance of the cell-contents, both in the cortical 
and the central region.
For in typical cases the contraction is for 
the most part lateral and not Ivngitudinal, so that although the 
contents retire a little from the side walls of the cells, they usually 
100 PROTOPLASMIC CONTINUITY IN THE FUCACE^.
remain uncontracted at the ends.
Hence, in the cortical layers 
and in the filaments of the central tissue the protoplasm appears, 
under a half or quarter inch objective, to run uninterruptedly from 
cell to cell in the longitudinal direction.
PL 255, Fig. 2.
Similar phenomena are met with in the lateral diverticula 
which unite the filaments and cortical layers transversely, the 
protoplasm ajypccuiiKi to run across without a break.
The fibres too, which are interwoven with the central filaments, 
seem to have their contents continuous from one end to the other.
A mere suspicion of continuity, however, is not sufficient to 
satisfy the demands of scientific logic, and to be convinced that it 
actually exists the state of affairs at the ends of the cells must be 
more closely investigated.
For this purpose sections prepared by 
the third method described above must be made use of, and even 
these must be supplemented by others of a still more demon- 
strative character.
The latter may be obtained by slightly 
modifying the modes of treatment as follows : — 
1st.
Sections that are to be treated by the second method 
should be previously placed for a few moments in a weak solution 
of ordinary bleaching powder.
2nd.
Sections that have been treated by the third method 
should be warmed gently in a mixture of equal parts of glycerine 
and potash solution, before being mounted in glycerine and 
ammonia.
When thus dealt with, favourable preparations allow the follow- 
ing points to be demonstrated, both in the cortical and the central 
tissue.
{a) At the ends of the cells, i.
c, at the point where two 
adjacent cells are united, there is an annular thickening on the 
internal wall not unlike a strongly developed ring of an annular 
vessel.
The material of which the ring is composed differs from 
that of the cell walls in not dissolving or undergoing gelatinisation 
under the influence of reagents.
It seems to resist alike the 
action of the strongest acids and the strongest alkalies, as well as 
the disintegrating action of a solution of bleaching powder.
{b) Within this ring the arrangements are not the same in all 
cases, but for the most part they conform to one of four types.
(i.) In the first type the ring surrounds a comparatively wide 
and open pore, through which the protoplasm is continuous in a 
single thread.
This type is not very common, but isolated 
instances are here and there to be met with.
(PI.
255, Figs.
3 
and 4).
Grave doubts having been expressed respecting the exis- 
tence in other plants of this type of continuity, special care has 
been taken to prevent error on this point, which is admittedly of 
great importance.
The result is, that in the mind of the writer 
there is perfect conviction that the description is in strict accord- 
ance with the actual facts.
In one extremely favourable pre- 
paration, the thick ring is presented in section at both ends of a 
cell, and the connecting cord of protoplasm is seen in situ, running 
through the pores thus formed.
This is shown in PI.
255, Fig. 4.
(ii.) In the second type a delicate diaphragm stretches across 
PROTOPLASMIC CONTINUITY IN THE FUCACE.E. 101 
the space encloHed by the ring, and through this the protophism is 
coutiuuous, as through a sieve plate, by a number of dehcate 
threads.
This is perhaps the commonest form of continuity, and 
bears tlie closest possible resemblance to that met with in the 
sieve-tubes of higher plants.
(PL 255, Fig 5.) 
(in.) The third type agrees with the second, except that 
continuity is effected by a thin and delicate ribbon of protoplasm, 
which passes through a narrow slit in the diaphragm.
This form 
is not abundant, and appears to be an intermediate form between 
the preceding and the next to be described.
(PI.
255, Fig. 6.) 
(iv.) In the fourth type the diaphragm is complete and 
impervious, save at the centre, where is an extremely minute pore, 
through which a single delicate strand of protoplasm maintains the 
continuity.
(PL 255, Fig. 7.) 
Besides the cases in which continuity is more or less evident, 
there are numerous others, in which the protoplasm still comes well 
up to the ends of the cells, and so obscures the nature of the con- 
nection between the contiguous protoplasts.
This is worthy of 
note, as it shows the tenacity with which the protoplasm adheres to 
the end-plates, even after the roughest treatment, and though not 
demonstrative of continuity, is quite consistent with it and easily 
explicable by it.
A few cases, again, are met with, in which the ends are clear 
and the protoplasm has shrunk more or less in the longitudinal 
direction.
In some of these there are clear evidences of a 
previously existing continuity in the fimbriated appearance of the 
ends of the protoplasmic mass.
"With respect to the delicate diaphragm met with at the ends of 
the cells, the fact should be noted that it does not swell up under 
the action of reagents, nor does it stain like the rest of the walls.
The same may be said of the annular thickening which encloses it.
The various degrees of perforation exhibited by the diaphragm are 
doubtless indications of successive stages of development, the final 
term of which may be an imperforate diaphragm and a complete 
interruption of continuity.
This, however, seems only to occur 
when the life of the cell comes to a close and a barrier is needed 
between the living and the dead parts of the tissue.
Fucus.
Among the various forms of Fucus which have been sub- 
mitted to examination, with a view to determining the presence 
or absence of continuity, the chief are Fucus vesiculosus and F.
serratus.
The flattened, dichotomously-branched thallus of these plants 
has a minute structure, which very closely resembles that of Asco- 
phylluni nodosum.
In transverse and longitudinal sections, the 
epidermis, the cortex, and the central tissue, are readily dis- 
tinguishable, and both in appearance and histological composition 
are extremely similar to the corresponding tissues of the plant 
named.
The midrib, a feature not present in AscoplujUum, is 
formed by a greater development of the filamentous tissue of the 
central part of the frond.
102 FERNS COLLECTED IN NORTH FORMOSA BY MR.
WM.
HANCOCK.
As regards continuity the agreement is as close as in other 
respects.
Under the influence of contracting reagents the proto- 
plasm of the cells leaves the side walls, but it clings most 
tenaciously to the ends.
By the employment of the methods 
already detailed, however, the tissues may be sufficiently swollen 
and clarified to allow the connection between contiguous cells to be 
definitely determined.
When this is done, it is found that the 
cells of the central filaments have their protoplasts united, the 
union being efi'ected either through open pores at the ends, or, in- 
directly, through the intervention of one of the sieve-plate 
arrangements described under AscoplujJlum.
Continuity is also 
maintained in the layers of cortical cells, as well as in the fibres, 
which arise from them and curve inwards to interlace with the 
central filaments.
In a word, all that has been said respecting 
continuity in the previous paragraphs may be applied without 
error to the two species of Fucus now under consideration, and 
need not therefore be repeated.
Explanation of Plate 255.
— Ascophyllum nodosinn.
Fig. 1.
Longitudinal 
section througli a jDortion of the thallus, — emidiagrammatic.
2. Portion of 
central tissue after treatment with sulphuric acid and ammonia.
3. Filament 
from central tissue, showing the protoplasm continuous througli an open pore.
4. Ditto, showing the annular thickening in section.
5. Ditto, showing con- 
tinuity' by means of a sieve plate.
6. Ditto, by means of a slit.
7. Ditto, 
by means of a fine pore.
8. Fibres from the central tissue.
PEENS COLLECTED IN NOKTH FOKMOSA BY 
ME.
WILLIAM HANCOCK.
By J.
G. Baker, F.E.S.
The following is a list of the ferns contained in a collection 
which was made in 1881, by Mr. William Hancock, in the neigh- 
bourhood of Tamsui, at the northern extremity of the Island of 
Formosa.
Mr. Oldham and Prof.
Steere have previously made 
collections in the same district; but Mr. Hancock has both dis- 
covered several interesting new species and gathered several others 
not collected in the Island previously.
The numbers are Mr.
Hancock's collecting numbers, and those within brackets indicate 
the position of the novelties according to the sequence followed in 
' Synopsis Filicum.' 
61.
Glekhenia hmf/mima Blume.
75.
G. dichotoma Hook.
62.
AlsopJii/a ^ — Probably a new tree-fern, but not in fruit.
In 
cutting and texture it closely resembles AlsophUa lunuhita.
The 
rachis of the pinna) is muricatea throughout with raised points.
55.
(48=:=).
Alsophila denticulata, n.
sp.
— Stipe abottt a foot 
long, bright brown, clothed towards the base with abundant bright 
brown lanceolate paleae.
Frond moderately firm in texttire, green 
on both surfaces, densely hairy on the ribs above, glabrous, but 
FERNS COLLECTED IN NORTH FORAIOSA BY MR.
WM.
HANCOCK.
103 
clothed with copious minute ovate bullate scales on all the veins 
beneath, ovate-deltoid, H ft.
long, tripinnatifid, but fertile also in 
a bipinuate form.
Lower pinnaj of the tripinnatifid form the 
largest, distinctly petioled, lanceolate-deltoid, 4-5 in.
long, 1^-1^ in.
broad.
Lower pinnules distinct, sessile, lanceolate, pinnatifid, 
with oblong tertiary segments.
Final segments oblong, 1-1 2th in.
. broad, conspicuously inciso-crenate; veining pinnate in the final 
segments ; veinlets distinct, simple, erecto-patent.
Sori brown, 
i^ medial, superficial ; receptacle but little elevated.
10.
Hymenoplujlhtm Tunbridgcnse Sm.
9. H.
poUjanthos, Sw.
7. Trichomanes parvulum Poir.
11.
T. radicans Sw.
8. T.
Filicida Bory.
? No fruit and the segments more remote 
and less compound than in ordinary Filicida.
12.
T. javanicum Blume.
79.
Biclxsonia scabra Wall.
— Gathered lately by Dickins in 
Japan, but not known in China.
3. Davcdlia pedata Sm.
16 99.
D. strigosa Sw.
— Two forms.
63.
D. Griffithiana Hook.
64.
May be a new species near D.Jijiensis, but not in fruit and 
therefore not safe to describe.
44.
Onychium juponicuiii Kunze.
53.
Hypolepis tenidfoUa Bernh.
19.
Cheilanthes myswensis Wall.
6. Lindsaya cidtrata Sw.
70 71.
L. flahelliddta Brjciiid.
5. Adiantum Capdlus-venerls L.
36.
A. diaphanum Blume.
35.
A. Jlabelhdatum Li.
88.
Pteris ensifonnis Burm.
85.
P. semipinnata L.
' ' 83.
(16"^).
Pteris (Eupteris) formosana, n.
sp.
— Stipe yellow- 
^ brown, nearly naked, nearly a foot long.
Frond ovate-deltoid, 
bipinnate, 12-15 in.
long, moderately firm in texture, green on 
both surfaces, glabrous and without palese.
Upper pinnas simple, 
lanceolate ; many lower subequal, oblong-lanceolate, 5-6 in.
long, 
2-2|- in.
broad, cut away on the lower side at the base, with a long 
lanceolate entire tip and cut down nearly or quite to the rachis 
" into 3-4 pairs of non-contiguous erecto-patent lanceolate pinnules 
1^-2 in.
long, about i in.
broad, with an entire margin.
Veining 
copiously pinnate ; veins fine, erecto-patent, simple or forked.
Fruit not seen.
Allied to P.
semipinnata, and the Japanese 
1 P.
inaqualis Baker.
68.
P. quadriauyita Retz.
56.
P. aqidlina L.
57.
P. incisa Thunb.
/98.
Lomaria adnata Blume.
r. 39 (35^=).
Lomaria (Plagiogyria) concinna, n.
sp.
— Caudex 
erect.
Stipes tufted, greenish, nearly naked, those of tlie sterile 
J 
104 FERNS COLLECTED IN NORTH FORMOSA BY MR.
WM.
HANCOCK.
frond 4-5 in., of the fertile 8-10 in.
long.
Sterile frond oblong- 
lanceolate, simply pinnate, 8-9 in.
long, 2^--3 in.
broad, almost 
membranous in texture, green and glabrous on both surfaces.
Pinnfe about 20 on a side, lanceolate, contiguous, aduate by a 
dilated base, \ in.
broad, acute, minutely denticulate.
Veins very 
distinct, rather ascending, simple or forked.
Pinnae of fertile 
frond fewer, remote, linear.
Nearest the American L.
semicordata 
Baker.
87.
(14*).
Lomaria (Eulomaria) apodophylla, n.
sp.
— 
Caudex erect.
Basal scales dense, dark brown, large, linear, firm 
in texture.
Fronds tufted, sessile, the sterile ones oblanceolate- 
obloug, rather thick in texture, 6-9 in.
long, 1^-2 in.
broad, 
simply pinnate, narrowed gradually to the base, green and glabrous 
on both surfaces.
Pinnae about 25 on a side, lanceotftte, sub- 
obtuse, curving upwards, contiguous, adnate by a dilated base, 
entire, the central ones about an inch long, ^ in.
broad.
Veins 
quite hidden.
Fertile pinna3 remote, linear, ascending, the central 
ones f-1 in.
long, 1-12 in.
broad.
Indusium broad, firm, glabrous.
^v Allied to L.
Spicant and the Chilian L.
aspera Klotzsch.
74.
Woodwardia radicans Hm.
24.
Asplenium Xidus L.
42.
A. normale Don.
37.
A. resectum.
Smith.
' 34.
(106-'=).
Asplenium (Euasplenium) Hancockii, n.
sp.
— 
Stpes densely tufted, 1^-8 in.
long, greenish, clothed with minute 
linear- subulate ascending dark brown paleae.
Frond oblong-deltoid, 
subcoriaceous, 3-4 in.
long, IJ-l^ in.
broad, tripinnatifid, green 
and glabrous on both surfaces ; racliis slightly paleaceous.
Lower 
pinnae the largest, rhomboid, cut away cuneately on the lower side 
at the base \-\ in.
broad, with few cuneate pinnules confluent at 
the base and strongly toothed on the outer edge.
Veins distinct, 
very ascending.
Sori linear, falling a little short of both midrib 
and margin.
Indusium firm, persistent, glabrous.
Allied to 
\^A.
laciniatum and the small forms of affine.
88.
Asplenium davallioides Hook.
78.
A. nifjripes Blume.
var.
22.
A. lanceum Thunb.
46.
A. hantamense Baker.
-^ 34.
(106*).
Asplenium (Diplazium) chlorophyllum, n.
sp.
— Stipes tufted, dull grey-green, pubescent, as is also the rachis, 
•i- ft.
long.
Frond oblong-lanceolate, simply pinnate, a foot long, 
4-5 in.
broad, moderately firm in texture, green on both surfaces, 
minutely paleaceous over the lamina above, and densely clothed 
with minute linear-subulate scales on the veins beneath.
Pinnae 
aboi;t 20 on a side, close, lanceolate, sessile, acute, crenulate 
towards the tij), conspicuously auricled on the upper side at the 
base, the central ones 2-2^ in.
long, h-i in.
broad, the lowest 
strongly deflexed.
Veins distinct, erercto-patent, deeply forked.
Sori falling but little short of both midrib and margin, \-\ in.
long, 
rarely diplagioid.
Indusium crisped, narrow, moderately firm, pale 
-^ brown, glabrous, persistent.
Allied to A.
pallidKni Blume.
FEENS COLLECTED IN NORTH FORMOSA BY MR.
WM.
HANCOCK.
105 
9. Asplenium japonicum Thunb.
67.
A. M'icliHra' Mett.
— Now to Formosa, but gathered by 
Shearer m Kew-kiang.
86.
A. esculentum Presl.
84.
Aspidiiwi deltodon Baker.
— Mr. Hancock's specimen quite 
agrees with the original type collected by Maries in Central China.
65.
A. aculeattim Sw.
61.
A. amabile Blume.
41.
(29*).
Aspidium (Polystichum) reductum, n.
sp.
— Stipes 
densely tnfted, 3-5 in.
long, greenish, slightly scaly.
Frond 
. .
lanceolate, simply pinnate from a deltoid bipinnate base, 5-6 in.
' long, moderately firm in texture, green and glabrous on both 
surfaces.
Lower pinnre one on each side, as in A.
trifitcroii, ^-1 in.
long.
Central pinuffi f-J in.
broad ; segments subquadrate, 
attached by the lower corner, ^ in.
long, entire on the inner side 
and inner half of the lower, sharply dentate for the rest of the 
margin.
Veins ascending, the central ones forked, the lowest on 
the upper side pinnate.
Sori medial, in a single complete low and 
a very incomplete second one.
Indusium peltate, membranous, 
glabrous.
Very near A.
tripteron, but on a much reduced scale.
^"^ 14.
A.falcatum Sw.
13.
Nephrodium f/racilescens Hook.
93.
N. decursivo-pinnatuin Baker.
♦ 54.
N. setigerum Baker.
52.
N. Filicc-mas Piich., var.
17.
(134-).
Nephrodium (Lastrea) leucostipes, n.
sp.
— 
Stipes 9-12 in.
long, slender, whitish, densely clothed throughout, 
as is the rachis, with spreading subulate dark brown paleae.
Frond 
y,' deltoid, tripinnatifid, 12-15 in.
long, moderately firm in texture, 
green and finely pubescent on the veins on both sides.
Lower 
pinnee much the largest, deltoid, more produced on the lower side.
Pinules lanceolate, the lowest fully pinnate.
Tertiary segments 
linear-oblong, entire, the largest ^-^ in.
long, l-12th in.
broad.
Veining pinnate in the tertiary segments ; veinlets distinct, simple, 
erecto-patent.
Sori costal.
Indusium membranous, minute, 
fugacious.
Allied to N.
intermedmm Baker.
' 58, 59, 60.
.V. vwlle Desv.
90.
N. sophoroides Desv.
94.
N. decurrens Baker.
95.
iV.
variolosum Baker.
43.
Nephrolepis ramusa Moore.
73.
N. cordifoUa Presl.
80.
N. acuta Presl.
4. Polypodinm [Fhegdjiteris) ili.'itdm Don.
— New to China.
50.
(230-).
Polypodium (Goniophlebium) formosanum, n.
sp.
— Khizome wide-creeping, naked, glaucous, ^ in.
diaui.
Stipes 
. distant, brownish, naked, about ^ ft.
long.
Frond oblong-lan- 
ceolate, membranous, simply pinnate, 10-12 in.
long, 3-4 in.
broad, green on both sides, hairy on the main veins.
Pinnae 
20-30 on a side, crowded, dilated and slightly confluent at the 
base, those of the barren frond obtuse or subacute, I iu.
broad, the 
106 FERNS COLLECTED IN NORTH FORMOSA BY MR.
WM.
HANCOCK.
lowest rather reduced and a little deflexed.
Areola in two rows, 
only the inner row with an included free veinlet.
Pinn^ of fertile 
frond narrower and more acute.
Sori medial, uniserial, moderately 
large, superficial, 12-15 jugate.
Allied to P.
-a nmnum Wall, and 
P. niponicuin Mett.
The latter has been gathered in China both 
vvjby Shearer and Maries.
32.
P. [Niphobolus) Lingua Sw.
33.
P. pohjdactijlon Hance, Journ.
Bot. 1884, 269.
— A most 
distinct and interesting novelty.
69.
P. {Dnjiiaria) conjugatum Lam.
96.
P. (Phgniatodes) linear ifolium Hook.
30.
P. lineare Thunb.
25.
P. normale var.
P. chinense, Mett.
28.
P. normale var.
sumatranum Baker, in Journ.
Bot. 1880, 
p. 215.
— Only gathered before in Sumatra.
45.
P. hastatum Thunb.
49.
P. Dipteris Blume.
23.
P. jyterojnis Blume, 
31.
(298*).
Polypodium (Phymatodes) macrosorum, n.
sp.
— Rhizome wide-creeping, hypogaeous, ^-| in.
diam.
; paleiB small, 
dense, spreading, lanceolate, brown-black.
Sterile frond lan- 
^ ceolate, simple, coriaceous, glabrous, 4-8 in.
long, nearly an inch 
broad at the middle, narrowed gradually to both ends, its naked 
stipe 3-4 in, long.
Veins fine, immersed, indistinct.
Fertile 
frond usually much smaller.
Sori very large (^ in.
diam.), globose, 
superficial, uniserial, 4-10 on each side of the midrib, confined to 
the upper half or two-thirds of the frond.
Allied to P.
accedens 
Blume.
100.
(360-'=).
P. (Phymatodes) Hancockii, n.
sp.
— Rhizome 
short-creeping.
Pale® small, black, membranous, lanceolate, 
clathrate.
Stipes none, a narrow wing reaching down to the very 
\i base of the rachis.
Frond oblanceolate, simple or slightly com- 
pound in the upper third, |-1 ft.
long, with 2-3-jugate lanceolate 
pinnae an inch broad ; wing to the rachis ^ in.
broad halfway up 
the frond either in the simple or compound form, narrowed to the 
base very gradually ; texture thin, but moderately firm ; both 
surfaces green and glabrous.
Main veins indistinct.
Areolae 
copious, hexagonal, with abundant included free veinlets.
Sori 
small, copious, superficial, scattered irregularly.
Cutting of the 
less-divided forms of P.
Phymatodes.
Sori more like those of 
P. qlfine Blume.
21.
Gymnogramme Wrightii Hook.
82.
G. elUjJtica Baker.
20.
G. lanceolata Hook.
47.
G. Maingagi Baker.
— New to the Chinese area.
Known 
before only at Malacca and Penang.
2. Antrophgiim.
phtntagineiim Kaulf.
26, 27.
Vittaria elongata Sw.
77.
Menisciam.
triphyllum Sw.
20.
Drgmoglossum carnoswn var.
ohovntiun Harringt.
— Gathered 
previously only at the same place by Steere.
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRKCONSHIRE.
107 
40.
Hemionitis Griffiihii Hk. fil.
& Thorns.
1. Acrostlchuin sorhi folium L.
15.
A. repandum Blume.
48.
A. aureum L.
76.
A. hicuspe Hook, var.
integrifulium Eaton.
89.
Osmxinda javanica Blume.
72.
Li/f/odium japonicum Sw.
81.
Ani/lopteris ececta Hoffm.
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF 
BRECON SHIRE.
By W.
Bowles Barrett, F.L.S.
(Continued from p.
8f)).
Lapsana communis L.
Very common.
Hypochmris nidicata L.
C. 
Leontodon Jiirtus L., L.
hispiduii L., and L.
autiiinnalis L.
C. 
No Picris hieraciuides or Hehninthia cchioides seen.
'^'Tra(jop)(i(iou pratensis L.
Canal bank, Talybont.
Seemingly 
uncommon in South-east and Mid-Wales.
Tarcumeum.
officinale Wigg.
Near Newbridge ; A.
Ley.
— Var. c.
IcBvigatum.
Dry limestone rocks, Craig-y-Rliiwarth, Pen-y-wyllt ; 
A. Ley.
Lactuca muralis Fresen.
Remarkably common and generally 
distributed.
— L.
virosa L.
Not seen.
Sonchus oleraceus L.
F. Gilwern, Three Cocks Junction, &c.
— S.
asper Hoffm.
Near Newbridge ; A.
Ley.
— S.
arvensis L.
F. 
A. Ley.
Crepis virens L.
NantgwyUt ; A.
Ley. Crug Lane, near Brecon ; 
Mrs. Fryer.
— Var." ayrestis W.
& K.
Gilwern.
Hieracium Pilosella L.
C. — H.
pallidum Fr.
? Limestone 
rocks, Craig-y-Rhiwarth, Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley; (doubtful whether 
pallidum or ccBsium ; most likely a ccBsium form ; J.
G. B.) — H.
viurorum L., pt.
F. on the Tarens in the Honddu Valley, a large 
form ; A.
Ley. F.
Gilwern.
Brecon.
Ravine Ffrwdgrech 
Waterfall.
— H.
{cesium.
Fr., I think; J.
G. B.).
Craig-y- 
gledsiau, Brecon Beacons; A.
Ley.
— H.
vulf/atum Fr. F.
On 
the Tarens in the Honddu Valley ; by the Usk, above Brecon ; 
A. Ley. Rhymney Bridge Vale.
Gilwern.
— H.
' yothicum Fv.' ?
Stream side, Cwm Tarell ; Brecon Beacons; A.
Ley; ,^most 
likely a var.
of vulyatum, receding from type towards tridentatnm ; 
J. G.
B.).
— -'H.
trideyitatniv.
Fr. teste J.
G. Baker.
Rocks in 
vale above Rhymney Bridge Station.
— H.
prenanthoides Vill.
Mountain cliff at Taren r' Esgob near Llanthony, in plenty, though 
on a very restricted spot, about a rill of strongly petrifying water, 
alt.
1000 feet: affirmative answer to query in Top. Bot.
; A.
Ley.
— H.
U)iibellaiu)ii h.
Peu-y-wyllt, Near Dulygaer reservoir.
— H.
108 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
boreale Fr. Near Nantgwyllt ; J.
Ley. F.
"Widely distributed and 
characteristic : noted at Gilwern, Dolygaer, Talybout, Hay.
Jasioiie montana L.
Abundant near Ehayader ; A.
Ley.
Priory Groves, Brecon ; Mrs. Fnjer.
Sparsely distributed.
Heathy 
ground above Ehymney Bridge Station.
Torpautau.
''Campanula latifolia L.
F. on banks of the Usk above Brecon; 
A. Ley.
— C.
rottmcUfolia L.
C. No other Campanula seen by 
me.
— C.
patula L.
Gibson, MS., Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Llyswen 
and towards Boughrood, abundant along the roadsides, 1884 ; 
H. N.
Ridley.
Wuhlenberyia hederacea Eeich.
Lower part of Elan Valley; 
A. Ley. Bare.
Bog above Ehymney Bridge Station, sparingly.
Not seen elsewhere by Eev. A.
Ley or myself.
Vaccinium Oxycoccus L.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Not seen by Eev. A.
Ley or myself.
Mr. Ley believes it to be quite absent from the 
Black Mountain district.
— V.
Vitls-idaa L., " F.
A. Lees, sp.," 
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Eather C.
on the Black Mountain ; A.
Ley.
— V.
Myrtillus L.
Abundant, 
Erica Tetralix L.
F. Generally in small quantity, and I 
think not C, except on the hills of the Black Mountain district, 
where, according to Mr. Ley, no other Erica is found.
— E.
cinerea 
L. Very common.
Calluna vulgaris Salisb.
Very abundant on the hills of the 
Black Mountain district ; A.
Ley. Shewing local tendencies.
Fraxinus excelsior L.
F. 
Ligustrum vulgare L.
Not seen.
It has not yet been recorded 
for Eadnor.
Vinca major L.
Near a house ; not wild ; A.
Ley.
Erythraa Centaurium Pers.
Near Erwood ; A.
Ley. Not 
uncommon.
Talybont.
Llangorse.
Near Brecon.
Hay. No 
Gentiana seen.
Menyanthes trifoliata L.
Very rare in the Black Mountain 
District ; boggy meadows, Capel Coelbren ; Blaen-Taf-vechan 7 ; 
A, Ley. Eare.
Llangorse Lake.
Appears to be very sparingly 
distributed in South-east and Mid- Wales.
^'Co7ivolvulus arvcnsis L.
I saw this once, but did not note the 
locality, which was probably Gilweru.
The plant is, I think, quite 
rare ; it has not yet been reported from Eadnor.
— C.
sepium 
L. C.
Solarium Dulcamara L.
Near Three Cocks Junction ; A.
T^ey.
Uncommon.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Gilwern.
Only yet reported from one 
locality in Eadnor.
Verbascum.
It is noteworthy that no species of Verhascum has 
yet been recorded, either from Brecon or Eadnor.
Scrophularia InilbiHii Horn.
C. — 8.
nodusa L.
Pen-y-wyllt ; 
A. Ley.
Digitalis jnirpurea L.
Very common.
'Linaria Cymbalaria Mill.
F. Introduced.
— I^.
vulgaris M.\\\.
Llyswen, very abundant ; H.
N. llidley.
Talyllyn.
Brecon.
Hay.
L. minor Desf.
Eailway near Talyllyn Junction, plentiful.
Among vetches, Talyllyn.
Three Cocks Junction.
4 
CONTBIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIEE.
109 
•   -Muimhis litteus L.
Tborouglily established in river-bed above 
Ebymuey Bridge Station.
Veronica polita Fries.
F. — V.
a g restis 1j., V.
arvensis L., and 
V. serpijUifolia L.
F. — V.
BuxbaioniiTen. Cultivated land, Three 
Cocks Junction ; A.
Ley, 1883.
Not seen by me in the county.
— 
V. officinalis L.
Nant-gwyllt ; A.
Ley. Not uncommon.
Gilwern.
Brecon.
Alltmawr.
Builth.
— V.
Chanuidrys h.
C. — V.montana 
L. Priory Groves, Brecon ; il/m i'Vytv.
Eare.
Wood, Gilwern.
— V.
scutellata L., var.
imhescens Koch ( V.
parmularia Poit.).
Cwm 
Tarell ; A.
Ley.
— V.
Anayallis L.
Scarce.
Banks of Usk, 
Talybont.
Llangorse Lake, abundant.
— V.
Beccahunya L.
C. 
Euphrasia oljicinalis L.
Very common.
Bartsia Odontites Huds., vars.
a verna and b.
serotina.
Gene- 
rally distributed.
Pedicularis palustris L.
Boggy meadows, Capel Coelbren ; A.
Ley. Local.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Builth.
— P.
sylvatica L.
Nant- 
gywllt ; A.
Ley. Vennyfach Kocks ; Miss Fryer Local.
Near 
Ehymney Bridge Station.
Torpantau.
Bhinanthus Crista-Galli L.
C. 
Melampyrum pratense L.
Nant-gwyllt ; A .
Ley. Apparently 
uncommon in South Breconshire ; frequent elsewhere.
Pen-y- 
wyllt.
Abundant above Ffrwdgrech Waterfall, near Brecon.
Copse 
Garth, sparingly.
— Var.
montanum.
Coed-fenni, near Brecon ; A.
Ley.
Orohanche Hederct Duby.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
— 0.
minor L.
Top.
Bot. ed.
ii.
No Orohanche seen by Eev. A.
Ley or myself.
'''Verbena officinalis L.
Three Cocks Junction; H.
N. Bidley.
Gilwern.
Llangorse.
Hay.
' ^''Lycopvs exiropmis L.
Canal, Gilwern.
Llangorse Lake.
Hay.
Mentha sylvestris L.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
Eiverside, near Three 
Cocks Junction ; A.
Ley. Betwen the Usk and the Canal, Brecon; 
Miss Fryer.
Llangorse village, probably introduced.
— M.
Piperita 
Huds.
Near a house, Peuderyn ; A.
Ley. Llangorse village, 
probably introduced .
—   '21.
hirsvta L, C.
M. sativa L.
Top.
Bot. ed.
ii.
— Var.'' b.
paludosa.
Talybont.
—   'M.
arvensis L.
C. 
Widely distributed.
Thymus Serpylluni Fries.
F. on mountains, &c.
; less C.
than 
in most districts.
Oriyanum nilyare Ij. Newton Pool, near Brecon; j\Iiss Fryer.
Eare.
Wooded bank of the Wye above Hay Church, sparingly.
Calamintha (Jlinupodium, Spenn.
F. and widely distributed.
C. Acinos Clairv.
Not seen.
— C.
menthifolia Host.
C; Mrs. Far- 
quharson, Top. Bot.
ed, ii.
By the Usk, above Brecon ; A.
Ley.
Eare ; not seen by me.
'Nepeta Glechoma Benth.
C. 
Prunella vulyaris L.
C. 
- ' Scutellaria yalericulata L.
Llangorse Lake, east side ; H .
A'.
Ridley.
Not seen anywhere by me.
— .S'.
minor L.
Eecorded Top.
Bot. ed.
ii.
; not seen.
Balluta niyra L.
The absence or rarit}' of this plant in Brecon 
and Kadnor is reniarKable.
110 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
Stacliys Betonica.
L Lower Elan Valley ; A Ley. Brecon ; 
Miss Fryer.
F. Ehymney Bridge Vale.
Gilwern.
Garth.
Builth.
— */S.
palnstris L.
C. — 8.
ambujua Sm. Llangorse village.
— 
S. sylvatica L.
C. —  '' S.
arvcnsis L.
Scarce.
Llangorse.
Galeopsis versicolor Curt.
Llanwrthwl ; A.
Ley.
— G.
Tetrahit 
L. Cultivated ground.
F. Widely distributed.
No other 
Galeopsis seen by me.
*La)nium jmrpurenm L.
C. No other Lanmim seen by me.
— 
L, album Ij. Near Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Scarce.
— L.
Galeobdolon 
Crantz.
Top. Bot.
ed.
ii.
: Priory Groves, Brecon ; Miss Fryer.
Not seen by Kev. A.
Ley or myself.
Ajuga reptans L.
Near Brecon; Miss Fryer.
Teucrium Scorodonia L.
Nant-gwyllt ; A.
Ley. F.
Gilwern.
Brecon.
Builth.
No Echinm, Lithospermum, or Cynoglossum seen.
Myosotis ccBspitosa Schultz.
Pen-y-wyllt ; A.
Ley. The most 
frequent water Myosotis ; noted near Khymney Bridge Station, 
Gilwern, Talybont, Llangorse.
— M.
palitstris With.
Near Builth ; 
A. Ley. Brecon.
Hay.
— M.
repens Don. Cwm Tarell ; A.
Ley.
Dolygaer.
Epynt Hills, near Garth (about 2000 feet).
— M.
arvensis Hoffm.
C. — M.
versicolor Eeich.
Nant-gwyllt ; A.
Ley.
^Anclnisa arvensis Bieb.
Dry bed of Usk, Talybont.
Bare in 
Mid-Wales.
Symphytum officinale L.
Meadow near Newbridge; A.
Ley.
Not seen by me : the rarity of this plant in Brecon and Radnor 
is noteworthy.
Pingidcula vulgaris Ij. Cwm Tarell ; A.
Ley. C.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Dolygaer.
Torpantau.
Epynt Hills, near Garth.
"^-primula vulgaris Huds.
Very C.
— P.
officinalis L.
Abundant 
and fine at Pen-y-wyllt ; A.
Ley. Fields around Brecon ; Miss 
Fryer.
Scarce generally, only once seen by me, in ravine above 
Torpantau Station.
Lysimachia vulgaris L.
Near Erwood, A.
Ley. Bare.
Border 
of Llangorse Lake, east side.
— L.
Xummularia L.
Erwood ; 
A. Ley. Gilwern.
Llangorse.
— L.
nemorum L.
Lower Elan 
Valley ; A.
Ley. F.
Ehymney Bridge Vale.
Woods Gilwern.
Llanthetty.
Near Brecon.
Near Builth.
Anagallis tenella L.
Near Penderyn ; A.
Ley. F.
in bogs.
Pen-y-wyllt.
Ehymney Bridge Vale.
Dolygaer.
Mountain bog, 
Torpantau.
— A.
arvensis L.
Newbridge; A.
Ley. Near Llan- 
gorse Lake ; Miss Fryer.
Not seen by me ; rare.
Plantago major L., and P.
lanceolata L.
C. — P.
media L.
Not seen.
Chenopodium, album L., var.
'''a.
candicans.
C. — Var.
* b.
viride.
Talybont.
— Var. c.
paganum.
C. — -C.
rubrum L.
Ob- 
served one vigorous plant only, on east side of Llangorse Lake.
A very rare plant in inland Wales.
— '^'C.
Bonus- H en ricus L.
Generally distributed about villages ; doubtless introduced.
Still 
cultivated as a pot-herb in South Wales.
No Chenopodium.
seen, 
except the above.
Atriplex angustifolia Sm. C.
Widely distributed.
— -A.
serrata 
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIKE.
Ill 
Syme.
F. in cultivated ground.
Doubtless common throughout 
Wales, but, as yet, only recorded from two other Welsh counties.
— ^'A.
dcltuidea Bab. Very rare ; carefully searched for, but only 
four or five plants seen together, near Llangorse Lake.
Eecorded 
from no other inland county, and from only tAvo maritime counties 
in Wales.
— --A.
timitJiii Syme.
liemarkably rare.
One large plant 
on rock in Usk, between Brecon and Diuas.
liumex com/lomeratus Murr.
C. — H.
nemorosus Schrad.
Elan 
Valley ; A.
Ley.
— Var.
--a.
riridis.
C. — E.
marithmts L.
Very 
rare.
Observed one plant only on east side of Llangorse Lake.
A 
single plant had been previously found by this lake by Kev. A.
Ley.
I am not aware of any other record for Wales.
— R.
obtusif oliiis Anct., 
R. crispus L., and IL Acetosa L.
C. — E.
Acetosella L.
Kock at 
summit of Brecon Beacons, 2860 ft.
; A.
Ley. C.
Pohjgo7ium Convolvulus L.
Nant-gwyllt ; A.
Ley. Pen-y-wyllt, 
Talybont.
Builth.
— P.
aviculaie L.
C. Several forms.
— P.
Hydropiper L.
C. Widely distributed.
— P.
Persicana L.
Very C.
— P.
lapathi/olinm L.
Nant-gwyllt; A.
Ley. Bare.
Shores of 
Llangorse Lake, very sparingly.
The rarity of this plant is note- 
worthy.
— *P.
maculatum Trim.
& Dyer.
Shores of Llangorse 
Lake.
There is but one other record for AVales.
— P.
amphihium 
L.* (the type).
Canal, Talybont.
Eiver Lynvi.
Llangorse.
— 
Var. b.
terrestre.
Erwood; A.
Ley. Llauthetty, near Talybont.
Llangorse.
Empetrum niyrmn L.
Blaen Taf-vechan ; A.
Ley.
Euphorbia Helioscopia L.
Near Llanwrthwl ; A.
Ley. Near 
Builth.
E. Pejjlus L.
C. — E.
exigua L.
Partricio; A.
Ley.
Not C.
Llangorse.
Near Brecon.
— EL ainygdaloides L.
Not seen.
Mercurialis perennis L.
Eemarkably abundant throughout the 
county.
Parietaria diffusa Koch.
Scarce.
Old walls, Brecon; plentiful.
Urtica dioica Li. F.
— ^'-JJ.
urens Li. Apparentlj^ rather scarce, 
and only seen near houses.
Brynmawr.
Llangorse.
Builth.
Humidus Lupulus L.
Near Pen-y-wyllt ; A.
Ley. Gilwern.
Talybont.
Doubtless introduced.
Ulmus suberosa Ehrh.
Hedgerow, Grlyn Neath ; probably 
planted ; A.
Ley.
— TJ.
montuna Sm. F.
— Var. c.
nitida.
Near 
Builth ; planted ; A.
Ley.
Quercus sessiliflora L.
Old natural woods, hillside, Nant-gwyllt ; 
A. Ley.
Corylus Avellcma L.
Very common.
Alnus glutinosa L.
A. Ley.
Betula alba L.
C. — Var. b.
ybitinosa.
Near Pen-y-wyllt; A.
Ley.
Myrica Gcde L., and Junipems.
None seen.
Salix fragilis L.
A. Ley.
— S.
Smithiana Willd.
Near Brecon ; 
A. Ley.
— S.cinerealj.
Elan Valley.
Pen-pont ; A.
Ley.
— S.
aurita 
L. Cwm Tarell ; A.
Ley.
— -S'.
caprea L.
Nant-gwyllt; A.
Ley.
— S.
repens L.
Near Capel Coelbren ; A.
Ley.
— .S. Iwrbacea L.
On summit of northern precipice of Brecon Beacons, fine and in 
some plenty, 1883 ; A.
Ley.
'''Taxus baccata L.
F., especially in South and Mid Breconshire ; 
112 A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS A FLORA OF BRECONSHIRE.
in some cases possibly native.
The ycAv is now being extensively 
destroyed in the county, owing to the belief that its leaves are 
fatal to horses feeding on them.
'^'Typha latifoUa L.
Apparently rare.
Talyllyn.
— -''T.
anijusti- 
folia L.
Llangorse Lake, in some plenty.
The only record from 
an inland Welsh county.
*Sparganium ramosum Huds.
Uncommon.
Talybont.
Brecon.
— S.
simplex Huds.
Llangorse Lake.
Swamp near the Usk, 
east of Brecon.
*Arum maculatmn L.
F. 
*Lemna minor L.
C. 
'^' Potamogeton natans L.
Apparently scarce.
Llangorse Lake.
— 
P. polygonifoJiiis Pourr.
Junction of Kivers Wye and Elan ; A.
Ley.
Only seen near Aberbran, and in bogs, Epynt Hills.
— ' 'P.
per- 
foUatus L.
Wye near Builtli Wells.
— *P.
crisjms L.
Canal, 
Talybont.
Brecon.
Wye at Hay.
— P.
densus L., searched for 
unsuccessfully.
Appears to be scarce in Wales ; the Rev. A.
Ley 
informs me that it is very scarce in Herefordshire.
— P.
jnisillus 
L., teste Arthur Bennett.
Li a brook near Hirwain, dividing the 
counties of Brecon and Glamorgan ; A.
Ley.
*}\vppia rostellata Koch.
Canal about 1^ miles south of Taly- 
bont, in some plenty.
The occurrence of this maritime plant, at 
a distance of about 35 miles (by canalj from the sea, is remarkable.
"^-Triglochin palustre L.
F. in swamps.
Peu-y-wyllt.
Mountain 
above Torpantau Station, about 1700 ft.
Canal, Talybont.
Llangorse Lake.
"^'Alisma Plantago L.
Canal, Gilwern.
Llangorse Lake.
— Var.
*b.
lanceolatum With.
Llangorse Lake, but less frequent than the 
type.
*'Butomus timhellatus L.
Llangorse Lake, east side ; H.
N. 
Ridley.
"^•Elodea canadensis Mich.
Canal at Gilwern and Talybont.
Llangorse.
^Orchis mascula h.
Hay road, Brecon.
Vennyfach ; Miss Fryer.
— 0.
incarnata L.
Meadow near Gludy Lake ; a slender form, 
teste A.
Ljennett; Miss Fryer.
— 0.
macidata L.
Cwm Tarell ; A.
Ley. Near Brecon; Miss Fryer.
F. Near Dolygaer.
Torpantau.
Near Llangorse Lake.
Near Garth.
'^'Gymnadenia conopseaJir. F.
in the Black Mountain District; 
A. Ley.
Habenaria viridis Br. Top.
Bot. cd.
ii.
Not seen by Eev.
A. Ley or myself.
— H.
bijolia Bab. Man.
Grwyue-faur Valley ; 
A. Ley. Opkrys and Spiranthes not seen.
Listera ovata Br. Eough meadows by the Usk, Brecon ; A.
Ley.
Apparently scarce.
Not seen by me.
r-Neottia Nidus-avis L.
Near Pont-nedd-vechan, on the way to 
Llynvach.
Soicerhy in Herb.
Brit.
Mus. Is just inside the county 
borders, I believe ; H.
N. Ridley.
(To be coutimicd.; 
113 
NOTES ON CEETAIN PASSIFLOBE.E FEOM WESTERN 
TROPICAL AMERICA.
By Maxwell T.
Masters, M.D., F.R.S.
The following notes refer to a small collection of Passijiorea^ 
made by Mr. Lehmanu when travelling in various parts of Central 
America and New Granada.
They comprise the description of two 
previously undescribed forms, and they may serve to extend our 
knowledge of certain species and their distribution.
In drawing up 
the list I have availed myself of the careful notes made by Mr.
Lehmann.
Throughout I have cited my monograph of the order 
in Martius and Eichler's 'Flora Brasiliensis,' vol.
xiii., part 1, 
March, 1872, in which full synonymy and references to the 
literature will be found.
I have also quoted, where necessary, the 
monograph of New Granadan species by Messrs.
Triana and 
Planchon in the 'Annales des Sciences Naturelles,' 5me ser., 
t. xvii.
(1873), p.
121 ; and my own paper relating to the species 
collected by M.
Andre in the ' Journal of the Linnean Society,' 
vol.
XX., p.
25 (1882).
Tacsonia Juss.
"^ T.
pinnatistipula Juss.; Mast, ni Flor.
Brasil.
/. f .
537; Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xx.
p. 26.
— " Grows in the western mountains of the 
Savana de Bogota, alt.
2500 metres.
State of Cundinamarca, fl.
January, of a most beautiful rose-colour." — Lchniann n.
2509.
T. MIXTA Juss.
; Mast, in Flor.
Brasil.
/. c.
— Var. quitcnsis Mast.
I.e. 541; et in Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xx.
p. 28.
— '-Curubo or Curubita 
incol.
Bogotens.
Stems much branched, attaining a length of 
8 metres.
Leaves of robust texture, pubescent, opaque, dark green.
Flowers light flesh-red.
Fruit elliptic, as large as a partridge-egg, 
eatable.
Grows on fences about Fontibon, on the Savana de 
Bogota, alt.
2500-2800 metres, January, 1883.
State of Cundina 
marca." — Lehmann n.
2489.
Triana and Planchon, p.
132, prefer to 
place this under P.
tomentosa of Lamarck.
T. MIXTA Juss.
— Var. speciuaa Mast.
I.e. 541.
— P.
mixta Triana 
et Planchon /.
c. 128.
— " Flowers light flesh-red.
Open woods near 
Paisbamba, on the western slopes of the volcano of Sotara, alt.
2800 metres, May, 1883.
State of Cauca, Colombia." — Lehmann 
n. 2480.
In a former communication I have alluded to the different 
arrangement of certain forms of Tacsonia, and to the difl'erent views 
as to the synonymy of the species taken by Messrs.
Triana and 
Planchon from those I have adopted.
The species, so-called, 
I)robably intercross freely, and the fruit is rarely preserved in 
herbaria, so that there is ample room for difl'erence of opinion.
Messrs.
Triana and Planchon speak of the fi'uits of P.
tomentosa, 
under which they include T.
qiiitensis and T.
mollissima, as "deux 
fois gros comme un oeuf de poulc," yellow, velvetj^ with a pulpy 
aril to the seed, of a yellow colour, a pleasant odour, and agreeable 
taste.
The fruit of T.
mollissima in English gardens answers fairly 
Journal of Botany.
— Vol. 23.
[April, 1885.
J i 
114 NOTES ON CERTAIN PASSIFLORE^ FROM W.
TROPICAL AMERICA.
to this description, but is more elongated and ellipsoidal in form.
The fruits of P.
mixta, according to Messrs.
Triana and Planchon, 
are smaller, glabrous, always of a green colour, with a brittle 
pericarp, and with less fragrant and agreeable pulp.
Mr.
Lehmann's observation has been already cited, and it serves to 
show — of which, indeed, there is other evidence — that the ver- 
nacular names, Curuba, &c., are applied to different forms.
Under No. 2624 Lehmann collected a remarkable specimen, the 
flowers of which were in a monstrous condition.
As the specimen 
seems to combine in some degree the characters of the foliage of 
T. mollissima with the floral structure of T.
pimiatistipula, especially 
the faucial corona, which consists of numerous long threads, I am 
disposed to think the specimen in question to be of hybrid origin.
The stamens originated from a fleshy longitudinally ribbed cup 
emerging from above the centre of the gynophore, and were pro- 
longed into long stalks terminating in flat petaloid dilatations of a 
spear-head shape and representing the anthers.
The conformation 
of the ovary was normal.
Mr. Lehmann says of this specimen : — 
" Curubita, in col.
Bogotens Flowers lilac-red.
Grows in 
open woods on the Savana de Bogota, Jan. 1883.
State of Cundi- 
namarca, Colombia." 
Passiflora Linn.
P. suBERosA Linn.
; Mast.
/. c.
578 ; et in Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xx.
p. 34 ; Triana et Planchon /.
c. 157.
— Isthmus of Panama, Lehmann 
1849.
P. SEXFLORA Juss.
; Mast.
/,.
c. 548.
— " Grows in open places in 
damp luxuriant woods in the Baja-Verapaz Mountains, near 
Purula, 1500 metres, April, 1882.
Guatemala." — Lehmann 1419.
Not previously recorded from Guatemala.
P. lancearia (§ Decaloba) Mast., sp.u.
Glabra, ramis teretibus striatis ; foliis 8 cm.
long.
4 cm.
lat.
membranaceis ovato-oblongis basi apiceque angustatis margine 
supra medium utrinque obscure lobulatis, trinerviis, basi inter 
nervos glanduloso-ocellatis ; petiolis 10-15 mm.
egiandulosis ; 
stipulis parvis lineari-subulatis deciduis ; pedunculis geminis 
1-floris petiolos suba3quantibus ; bracteis minutissimis dissitis ; 
floribus diametro 3 cm.
tubo late expanso vix umbilicato ; sepalis 
oblongis obtusis aurantiacis ; petalis paulo brevioribus albidis ; 
corona fauciali e filis petaloideis 1-scrialibus falcato-spatulatis 
petalis parum brevioribus constante ; corona media membranacea 
breve-tubiilata plicata inflexa margine dontata ; corona basilari 
annulari basin gynandrophori gracilis cingente ; ovario ellipsoideo 
glabro supra stamiuum insertionem longiuscule stipitato.
Li montem iguivomem Tranzu Costa Kica ad alt.
1500-1600 
met.
legit Lehmann 1255 !
A distinct-looking species, growing, according to Lehmann, in 
light but very damp woods near La Palma and San Isedro, on the 
slopes of the volcano of Tranzu, at an elevation of 1500-1600 metres.
" The stem is much branched, reaching a length of 8 metres.
Leaves 
NOTES ON CERTAIN PASSIFLORE^ FROM W.
TROPICAL AMERICA.
115 
of good texture, pale green; flowers white" (orange-coloured when 
dry — M.
T. M.).
The foliage is like that of F.
mollis var.
subintajra, 
but the flowers are quite difl'ereut.
P. Lehmanni (§ Decaloba) Mast., sp.
n. 
Glabra, ramis gracilibus subangulatis striatis ; foliis distantibus 
ad 10 cm.
long.
13 cm.
lat.
subcoriaceis cordatis profunde trisectis, 
segmentis anguste lanceolatis basi ad margines glandulis luajusculis 
instructis, segmento medio vix longiore, petiolis 3 cm.
long, 
gracilibus glandulis paucis dissitis remotis pniiditis ; stipulis 3 cm.
long, foliaceis oblique reniformibus mucronulatis ; pedunculis 
10 cm.
long, gracilibus ; bracteis parvis foliaceis dissitis munitis ; 
floribus diametro 3 cm.; tubo brevi late cupulari basi umbilicato ; 
sepalis lineari-oblongis obtusis dorso sub apice vix corniculatis ; 
petalis sepalis subfequilongis conformibus albidis ; corona fauciali 
filamentosa fills externis albidis lineari-clavatis petalis suba^quanti- 
bus, fills interioribus multo brevioribus numerosissimis capitatcllis, 
corona media membranacea inflexa subulata apice lacerO-lobulato ; 
corona infra mediana annulari crassiuscula Integra ; corona basilari 
gynandrophori basin cingente cupulari crenulata; ovario ellipsoideo 
glabro, stylis teretibus stigmatibus reniformibus.
Prope Viotam, Nov. Granat.
legit cl.
Andre 1713 (folia tan- 
tum) !
; in prov.
Cundinamarca prope Fusagasuga alt.
2000 met.
Lehmami 2524 !
A distinct and remarkable species, of which Andre collected the 
leaves only (Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xx.
p. 43).
Lehmann, however, 
met with flowering specimens in the locality above-mentioned, 
which allow of a more complete description being drawn up.
The 
last-named collector speaks of it as attaining a length of 6 metres, 
"leaves opaque sap-green, of good texture; flowers greenish-white.
Grows in very luxuriantly-developed woods in openings near 
Fusagasug^." 
P. ALNiFOLiA H., B.
et K.
; Mast.
I.e. p.
549 (excl.
syn.
P. bogo- 
tensis) ; Journ.
Linn, Soc. xx.
p. 35 ; Triana et Planchon I.
c. 
p. 164.
— Grows in open woods near Juntas, on the banks of the 
Rio Dagua, 300-800 metres.
March.
State of Cauca, Colombia.
— Lehmann 2758.
P. bogotensis Bentham; Triana et Planchon /.
c. p.
163; Mast, 
in Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xx.
p. 36.
— " Grows in open localities near 
the Salto de Tequendama, 2400 metres.
February.
State of 
Cundinamarca." — Lehmann 2538.
P. MOLLIS H.
B. et K.
— Var. subinter/ra Triana et P(anchon /.
c. 
p. 164 ; Mast, in Flor.
Brasil.
/. c.
p. 550.
— " Flowers white, sweet- 
scented.
Fruits globose, the size of a gooseberry, dark blue.
Grows in wood-openings near Fusagasuga, 2200 metres.
February.
State of Cundinamarca, Colombia." — Lehmann 2525.
P. LUNATA Willd.
; Mast.
/. e.
p. 552 ; et in Journ.
Linn.
Soc.
XX.
p. 38.
— " Grows in woods in the Kancha Mountains, between 
Tactic and San Juan de Chamelco, 1800 metres.
May. Guatemala." 
— Lehmann 1422.
P. (subgen.
Murncuia) bicuspidata Mast.
Lc. p.
558; Triana et 
116 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
Plaiichon Z.
c. 179.
— "Leaves pale glaucous green.
Flowers 
cojjper-red.
Grows in dense mountain-woods between Sibate and 
Fusagasugii, 2600-3000 metres.
February.
State of Cundi- 
namarca, Colombia." — Lehvumn 2498.
P. (subgen.
Granadilla) ligularis Juss.
; Mast.
I.e. p.
659; 
et in Journ.
Linn.
Soc. xx, p.
40 ; Triana et Planchon /.
c. p.
150.
— " Granadilla in col.
Flowers greenish white, filaments light 
violet-blue.
Fruit as large as a goose's egg, edible.
Woods about 
Pasca, 2600 metres.
February.
State of Cundinamarca, Colombia." 
— Lthnann 2518.
P. viTiFOLiA H.
B. et K.
; Mast.
/. c.
p, 607 ; et in Journ.
Linn.
Soc. XX.
p. 41 ; Triana et Planchon /.
c. p.
143.
— "Flowers glowing 
blood-red, often produced on the old wood near the base.
Damp 
woods on the north-east slope of the volcano of Turrialba, 0-600 
metres.
February.
Costa Kica." — Lehmann 1268.
P. PULCHELLA H.
B. et K.
; Mast.
/. c.
p. 570 ; Triana et 
Planchon I.
c. 167.
— " Leaves pale glaiicous green.
Flowers light 
violet.
Grows in thorny bushes about Punta Arenas.
July.
Costa Kica." — Lehvumn 1735.
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
By J.
G. Baker, F.K.S., &c.
(Continued from p.
48.) 
O 283.
S. LAEVIGATA Baker in Gard.
Chron.
1867, 1190.
— S.
pectinata Spring.
— Lycopodium l(En'(jatHm Lam.
— L.
jicctinatum 
Willd.
— Stems erect, 1-1 i- ft.
long, simple in lower half, the leaves 
small, distant and soon deciduous, deltoid in the upper half, with 
petioled deltoid 1-2-pinnate pinnae, the erecto-patent final divisions 
reaching 2-3 in.
long, ^-^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane 
crowded, oblong-lanceolate, subpatent, very falcate, acute, ^— J in.
long, bright green, firm in texture, adnate by a broad base, decurrent 
on the lower side, cuneate on the upper, not imbricated over the stem ; 
leaves of the upper plane minute, lanceolate, recurved, acute.
Spikes square, ^-1 in.
long, i-1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate, acute, 
strongly keeled.
Var. S.
Lyallii Spring Mon. ii.
168.
— More compound ; lower 
pinnfe bipinnate, with final divisions ^-1 in.
long, -J-^ in.
broad.
Hab. Madagascar.
The two varieties are connected by 
gradual intermediates.
234.
S. microdendron, n.
sp.
— Stems erect, a span long, 
simple in the lower third or quarter, with the leaves adpressed, 
stramineous, compound upwards, the pinnje erecto-patent, lanceo- 
late or deltoid, 1-2-pinnate, the ultimate segments erecto-patent, 
not contiguous, J—^ in, long, 1 hn.
broad.
Leaves of the lower 
plane crowded, erecto-patent, ovate, acute, ^ lin.
long, bright green, 
rigid, dilated on the upper side at the base, broadly rounded, 
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
117 
shortly ciliated, and much imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the 
upper plane miuiito, oblique ovate, with a short cusp.
Spikes 
short, square, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, acutely keeled.
Hab. Cuba, Wn'i/ht 3910 !
A near ally of S.
caulescens.
235.
S. PULCHERRiMA Liebui.
— Stems above a foot long, 
stramineous, erect, simple, with adpressed leaves in the lower 
two-thirds, deltoid and decompound in the upper third, with 
3-4-pinnate close deltoid pinnae, with ascending contiguous ultimate 
segments ^-1^ in.
long, 1 lin.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane 
crowded, ascending, ovate, falcate, acute, bright green, rigid, 
-| lin.
long, not ciliated, dilated, broadly rounded, and imbricated 
over the stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper 
plane minute, oblique ovate, cuspidate, incurved.
Spikes square, 
\-^ in.
long, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Hacienda de Java, Mexico, Liehmann !
Midway between 
caulescens and Jiahellatu.
236.
S. coARCTATA Spring Mon. ii.
164.
— Stems stiffly erect, 
stramineous, about a foot long, simple and nearly leafless in the 
lower part, compound and pubescent upwards ; pinnae petioled, 
ascending, conduplicate ; pinnules subflabellately compound.
Leaves of the lower plane very crowded, ascending, falcate, ovate, 
acute, ^ lin.
long, rigid, minutely serrulate, with an obscure midrib 
and revolute edges ; leaves of the upper plane scarcely smaller, very 
crowded, ovate, mucronate.
Spikes very short ; bracts ovate- 
lanceolate, squarrose.
Hab. On the Rio Negro, at Mount Aracoara, Martias.
Easily 
marked in the group by the leaves of both planes being nearly 
uniform in shape and size.
237.
S. rionegrensis, n.
sp.
— Stems about a foot long, stra- 
mineous, stiffly erect, unbranched in the lower half, the upper 
leaves of this part slightly spreading, deltoid and decompound in 
the upper half, the branching of the 2-3-pinnate deltoid ascending 
pinnae between flabellate and compound, the ultimate divisions 
reaching 2-3 in.
long, ^-^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane 
crowded, ascending, ovate, acute, ^-1 lin.
long, bright green, rigid, 
slightly dilated on the upper side at the base, broadly rounded, 
obscurely ciliated, much imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the 
upper plane one-third as long, oblique ovate, not cuspidate.
Spikes 
square, i-l^ in.
long, f-1 lin.
diam.
; bracts rigid, lanceolate - 
deltoid, acuminate, strongly keeled.
Hab. On the Rio Negro, near San Carlos, Spruce 2501 !
238.
S. PUBEKULA Spring Mon. ii.
165.
• — - Stems erect, stra- 
mineous, reaching a length of 2-3 ft., simple towards the base, 
branched upwards, pubescent; pinnfe short, erecto-patent, sparingly 
compound ; pinnules few, distant.
Leaves of the lower plane ovate, 
contiguous, ascending, falcate, very acute, bright green, rigid, 
^-1 lin.
long, dilated on the upper side at the base, distinctly 
ciliated, and imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane 
half as long, oblique ovate, serrulate, cuspidate.
Spikes short, 
square, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. British Guiana, Rkkd.
Schomburyh 979 !
Padauiri 
118 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
Kiver, Amazon Valley, Traill 1417 !
Mount Griiayrapurina, 
Eastern Peru, Spnicc 4054 !
239.
S. Haenkeana Spring Mon. ii.
187.
— 'S'.
dimorpha Klotzsch.
— Stems about a foot long, erect, simple near the base, with 
spreading leaves, deltoici and decompound in the upper three- 
quarters, the lower pinna} 3-4-pinnate, the contiguous ascending 
final segments \-\ in.
long, l-12th to l-8th in.
broad.
Leaves of 
the lower plane contiguous, ascending, oblong-lanceolate or oblique 
ovate, acute, l-12th to l-8th in.
long, bright green, membranous, 
dilated, strongly ciliated, much rounded, and imbricated over the 
stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane 
small, oblique obovate, with a cusp as long as the lamina.
Spikes 
shoi't, square, ^ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled.
Hab. French Guiana, and, according to Spring, also Bolivia 
and Chili.
A near ally of 8.
fiabellata.
240.
S. viTicuLosA Klotzsch in Linnrea xviii.
524.
— Stems about 
a span long, stramineous, simple in the lower part, deltoid and 
decompound upwards, the pinnte deltoid, 2-3-pinnate, the root- 
fibres sometimes extending to the axils of the lowest pinnas, the 
contiguous ascending final segments ^-1 in.
long, l-12th to l-8th in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, ascending, lanceolate 
or oblique ovate, acute, l-12th to l-8th in.
long, bright green, 
moderately firm in texture, broadly rounded, shortly ciliated, and 
much imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the base ; 
leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes square, \ lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly 
keeled.
Hab. Central America and Venezuela.
A near ally of S.
fiabellata.
241.
S. Hartwegiana Spring Mon. ii.
188.
— Stems about a foot 
long, erect, stramineous, simple in the lower half or third, with 
adpressed leaves, deltoid and decompound upwards, the deltoid 
pinnae 3-4-pinnate, the ascending contiguous final segments -J-l in.
long, l-12th to l-8th in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane con- 
tiguous, ascending, ovate, falcate, very acute, l-12th to l-8th in.
long, bright green, moderately firm in texture, nearly equal-sided, 
broadly rounded, shortly ciliated, and a little imbricated over the 
stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane one- 
third as long, broad ovate, cuspidate.
Sj^ikes short, square, f lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled.
Viir.
8. li'jitohU'pharis A.
Br. in Crypt.
Nov. Gran.
3G3.
— Less 
compound, with the leaves of the upper portion of the unbranched 
part of the stem spreading.
Hab. Andes of New Granada and Ecuador.
242.
S. ERYTHROPUs Spring Mon. ii.
155.—Lyc()poiUum eri/thropus 
Mart.
Icon.
Crypt, tab.
20, fig.
3. — Stems about a span long, bright 
crimson, simple in the lower half or third, deltoid and decompound 
upwards, the lower pinna; deltoid 3-pinnate, the ascending con- 
tiguous final branchlets ^-1 lin.
long, l-12th to l-8th in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, ascending, oblong- or ovate- 
lanceolate, acute, l-12th to l-8tli in.
long, bright green, moderately 
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
119 
firm ill texture, unequal-sided, broadly rounded, strongly ciliated, 
and imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the base; leaves 
of the upper plane half as long, oblique ovate, cuspidate.
Spikes 
square, \ lin.
diam ; bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Var. major Spring.
— More compound, the unbranched part of 
the stem longer, and all its leaves adpressed.
Hab. Tropical America, from the West Indies and Guatemala 
to Chili and Central Brazil.
S. setosa Hort.
is a starved small 
form of this species.
243.
S. H^MATODEs Spring Mon. ii.
156.
— S.
Jilicina Spring 
Mou. ii.
189.
— Lycopodium luEmatodes Kunze Farn.
t. 80.
— Stems 
1-2 ft.
long, bright crimson, unbranched in the lower half, with 
its leaves much spaced and adpressed, deltoid and decompound in 
the upper half, the deltoid pinnae 3-4-pinnate, the contiguous 
erecto-patent ultimate divisions J-l in.
long, ^-^ in.
broad.
Leaves 
of the lower plane contiguous, ascending, ovate- or oblong-rhomboid, 
acute, ^-\ in.
long, bright green, moderately firm in texture, 
dilated on the upper side at the base, not ciliated, broadly rounded, 
and a little imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane 
minute, oblique oblong, with a large cusp.
Spikes square, reaching 
1-1^ in.
long, \-^i in.
diam.
; bracts ovate-lanceolate.
Hab. Andes of Venezuela, Ecuador, and Peru.
One of the 
handsomest of all the known species.
Frequent in cultivation.
244.
S. AMAZONicA Spring Mon. ii.
17G.
— S.
amazonum Spring 
in Mart.
Fl. Bras.
i. 124, t.
6. — Stems 2 ft.
or more long, stra- 
mineous, erect, simple in the lower half, with adpressed leaves, 
deltoid and decompound in the upper half, with long closely 
regularly pinnate piiinte, with contiguous erecto-patent simple or 
slightly compound pinnules, the ultimate divisions reaching 1-2 in.
long, 1 in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, erecto- 
patent, lanceolate- or oblong-rhomboid, subacute, l-12th to l-6th in.
long, bright green, moderately firm in texture, nearly equal-sided, 
rounded on the upper side at the base and a little imbricated over 
the stem, cuiieatc-truncate on the lower ; leaves of the upper plane 
one-third as long, oblique ovate, acute.
Spikes square, ^-1 in.
long, 1 lin.
diam ; bracts ovate-lanceolate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Amazon Valley, Martius, Spruce 2053 !
2358 !
245.
S. oAXACANA Spring Mon. ii.
177.
— Stems 1^-2 ft.
long, 
erect, stramineous, simple in the lower half, with adpressed leaves, 
deltoid and docompound in the upper half, the leaves of the main 
stem ovate-oblong, obtuse, very ascending, the pinnae elongated, 
closely 3-4-piiinate, the contiguous erecto-patent final divisions 
^~1^ in.
long, |-^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane sub- 
contiguous, erecto-patent, lanceolate-rhomboid, subacute, l-12th to 
l-6tli in.
long, dark green, moderately firm in texture, dilated, 
broadly rounded, not ciliated, imbricated over the stem on the 
upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, 
oblong, shortly cuspidate.
Spikes short, square, ^ lin.
diam.
; 
bracts ovate-cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Mexico, in the Province of Oaxaca, Galeotti 6808 bis 
Chiapas, Gheishrecht G02 !
A near ally of <S'.
/labellata.
120 A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
246.
S. ANCEPs A.
Br. in Fil. Nov.
Gran.
362.
— .S'.
Spnicei 
A. Br., loc.
cit.
— S.
flahellata Spring, ex parte.
— Lycopodiwn anceps 
Presl.
— Stems 1-2 ft.
long, erect, stramineous, simple in the lower 
half, with entirely adpressed leaves, deltoid and 2-3-pinnate in the 
upper half, the contiguous erecto-patent ultimate segments reaching 
2-3 in.
long, \-^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane crowded, 
ascending, lanceolate-rhomboid, acute, ^-^ in.
long, bright green, 
moderately firm in texture, dilated, cordate, shortly ciliated, and 
nmch imbricated over the stem on the upper side at the base ; 
leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblique ovate, acute.
Spikes square, reaching 1-1|- in.
long, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate- 
lanceolate, strongly keeled.
Hab. Andes of Venezuela, New Granada, Ecuador, and Peru.
Habit less compound than in jlahcUata , and leaves much larger.
Series VI.
— Caulescentes.
Group 2.
— Geniculatje.
247.
S. Parkeri Spring Mon. ii.
226.
— S.
hicidinervia Spring.
— Lj/copodiuin Parkeri Hook.
& Grev.
— L.
plumosum Aublet !
— 
Stems 1-lf ft.
long, simple in the lower half or two-thirds, 
articulated, stramineous, distinctly articulated, deltoid and decom- 
pound in the upper part, with petioled bipinnate deltoid lower 
piunfe, long lanceolate penultimate divisions with a flexuose rachis, 
and contiguous erecto-patent final divisions 4—1 in.
long, \-\ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower plane contiguous, lanceolate-rhomboid, 
ascending, pointed at the upper corner, ^-\ in.
long, bright green, 
moderately firm in texture, auricled on both sides of the narrow 
base, unequal-sided, broadly rounded on the upper side at the base, 
and a little imbricated over the stem ; leaves of the upper plane 
one-third to one-quarter as long, lanceolate, acute.
Spikes short, 
square, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, acutely keeled.
Var. 8.
pedata Klotzsch in Linnfea xviii.
521.
— S.
nodosa 
Kunze.
— Branched portion of the stem more compound, with 
narrower divisions, shorter leaves of the lower plane, and longer 
more slender spikes.
Var. N.
steUata Spring Mon. ii.
228.
— S.
calcarata A.
Br. in 
Crypt.
Nov. Gran.
389.
— UiDper part of stem copiously compound, 
lengthened out, and taking root at the tip.
Var. iS'.
Vaiilieurchidna Spring.
— S.
frcujilis K.ljv.m Crypt.
Nov.
Gran.
389.
— Stems slender and trailing, bipinnate above the 
simple base, gradually lengthened out upwards with a long whip- 
like radicant end.
Hab. Guiana and the Amazon Valley.
This is probably the 
" planta muscosa et plumosa guayanensis perelegans minor" of 
Breynius Ic. t.
101, cited by Linua^us under his L.
jdiiniusuiii.
248.
S. ASPERtTLA Spring Mon. ii.
225.
— Li/co]iodiuin a.spenilum 
Mart.
— Stems about a foot long, erect, articulated, stramineous, 
simple in the lower half with adpressed leaves, compound in the 
upper half with broad erecto-patent pinn?e 2-4 in.
long, with 
distant sparingly sn1)flube]lately compound erecto-patent pinnules.
A SYNOPSIS OF THE GENUS SELAGINELLA.
121 
the final divisions ^-1 in.
long, l-12tli in.
diam.
Leaves of the 
lower plane crowded, ascending, ovate, acute, ^-1 lin.
long, bright 
green, firm in texture, broadly rounded and shortly rigidly ciliated 
on the upper side at the base, and a little imbricated over the stem; 
leaves of the upper plane one-third as long, oblique ovate, acute.
Spikes short, square, f-1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, 
sharply keeled.
Hab. Amazon Valley, Spruce 1317 !
Traill 1420 !
1421 !
Ceara, iianlner.
Bahia, Martins !
249.
S. GENicuLATA Spring Mon. ii.
227.
— S.
fernuninata and 
conduplicata Spring Mon. ii.
229-230.
— S.
eIou(/ata Klotzsch.
— 
Ijycojxnlium [/('nicuJatani Presl.
— Stems 2-3 ft.
long, simple, stra- 
mineous and very distinctly jointed in lower two-thirds or three- 
quarters, deltoid and decompound npwards, with 3-piunate lower 
pinna?, all the divisions ascending and pinnately arranged, the 
final ones contiguous, 1-2 in.
long, ^-^ in.
broad, their rachis also, 
like the main stem, conspicuously articulated.
Leaves of the lower 
plane contiguous, ascending, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acute, 
l-12th to l-6tli in.
long, bright green, moderately firm in texture, 
truncate at the base, not at all imbricated over the stem, entire or 
obscurely serrulate ; leaves of the upper plane one- third as long, 
ovate-lanceolate.
Spikes square, |^-f lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate- 
cuspidate, strongly keeled.
Var. S.
tomentosa Spring Mon. ii.
231.
— Branches pubescent, 
divisions ^-^ in.
broad.
Hab. Costa Kica and Nicaragua to the Amazon Valley and 
Peru.
250.
S. suBAKBORESCENs Hook.
2 Cent.
Ferns, t.
84.
— 8.
eury- 
clada A.
Br. in Crypt.
Nov. Gran.
388.
— Stems reaching a height 
of 4-5 ft., simple and unbranched in the lower three-quarters, 
stramineous, distinctly articulated, deltoid and frond-like at the 
top, with long- stalked ascending lower bipinnate pinnae, with the 
branching midway between fiabellate and pinnate, the final 
divisions reaching 4-6 in.
long, ^ in.
broad.
Leaves of the lower 
plane contiguous, lanceolate-rhomboid, patent with a falcate acute 
tip, J-^ in.
long, bright green, moderately firm in texture, nearly 
equal-sided, not imbricated over the stem at the base, cut away on 
the upper, produced and square on the lower side ; leaves of the 
upper plane one-quarter as long, lanceolate, acute, much imbricated.
Spikes short, square, 1 lin.
diam.
; bracts ovate-cuspidate, acutely 
keeled.
Hab. Amazon Valley, in forests of the Kio Uapes, Spruce 
2540 !
Subgenus III.
— Homostachys.
251.
S. ciLiARis Spring Mon. ii.
233, excl.
syn.
— Li/copodium 
ciliare Eetz.
— Habit of S.
serpens.
Stems trailing, reaching h ft.
in length, pinnate, the branches erecto-patent, the lower copiously 
compound.
Leaves of the lower plane spaced below the tip of the 
branchlets, spreading, ovate-oblong, subobtuse, -^ in.
long, very 
unequal sided, cordate and conspicuously ciliated, and imbricated 
over the stem on the upper side at the base ; leaves of the upper 
122 
A NEW SELAGINELIiA FROM NEW GUINEA.
plane much smaller, cordate-ovate, aristate.
Spikes short, not 
resupmate ; bracts of both planes resemblmg the leaves m shape 
and arrangement.
Hab.
. Ceylon, Krow/.
I have not found this amongst our 
large set of Ceylon specimens.
Of the synonyms cited by Spring 
Lamarck's plant is our -S'.
jironijlora, and Hooker & Greville's is 
S. ten era.
252, S.
PALLiDissiMA Spring Mon. ii.
234.
— Stems 3-6 in.
long, 
much intermatted, forked low down and pinnate, the branches 
simple or sparingly compound.
Leaves of the lower plane spaced 
below the tip of the branches, spreading, ovate, acute, a line long.
j)ale green, membranous, very unequal-sided, very cordate on the 
upper side at the base, shortly ciliated, much imbricated over the 
stem ; leaves of the upper plane half as long, ovate, shortly 
cuspidate.
Spikes not resupinate, -1—1 in.
long, ^ in.
broad, some- 
times forked ; bracts of the lower plane ovate, acute, erecto-patent, 
slightly imbricated ; of the upper plane little smaller, suberect, 
much imbricated.
Hab. Temperate region of the Central Himalayas, ascending in 
Kumaon to 8000-9000 ft.
^^ (To be coutinuecl.) 
A NEW SELAGINELLA FEOM NEW GUINEA.
By J.
G. Baker, F.R.S.
I AM just too late to have intercalated in its proper place in my 
synopsis the following new species, from New Guinea, of which we 
have received, through the kindness of Baron von Mueller, four 
specimens, three of them collected near Port Moresby by Edelfeldt, 
and a fourth on the islands of the south-east coast by Armit.
It 
belongs to the Caulescentes group of the subgenus StacJujj/i/nandrum, 
and much resembles a dwarf edition of the widely-spread and 
well-knovfn S.
J^abel lata.
213"'' S.
Muelleri, Baker, n.
sp.
— Stem erect, 6-8 inches long, 
simple in the lower half or third, decompound upwards ; pinnae 
crowded, deltoid ; final branches close, erecto-patent, ^-J lin.
diam.
Leaves of the lower plane ovate-lanceolate, ^-f lin.
long, 
ascending, rather imbricated on the branchlets, bright green, 
moderately firm in texture ; base rounded on both sides ; midrib 
central; margin white, denticulate, not anywhere distinctly 
ciliated.
Leaves of the upper plane oblique ovate-cuspidate, 
about half as long, much imbricated.
Spikes short ; bracts ovate- 
cuspidate, bright green, as long as the leaves of the lower plane.
123 
A NEW DENDROBIUM FEOM SIA.M.
By H.
N. Eidley, M.A., F.L.S.
Dendrobium atractodes, n.
sp.
— Aff. T).
aureo laudley, 
pseudobulbis pluribus fusiformibus paullo complanatis, sub- 
pedalibus ; floribus iis D.
aurel tequantibus ; sepalis anguste lan- 
ceolatis obtusis petalis latioribus, omnibiTS cereis labello ovato 
rotundato minute pnbescenti, margine minute fimbriato, stramiueo 
versus basin obscuriore, maculis duabus purpureis ; columna brevi, 
viridi ; antliera roseo-tincta.
Siam : introduced by Mr. Thomas 
Christy, F.L.S.
This phint is remarkable for the shape of the pseudobulbs, 
which are narrowed at the base and apex, swelhug out in the 
middle so as to be fusiform and slightly fiexuous.
There were ten 
on the plant, the longest about nine inches long and half an inch 
thick.
The only flower Avhich I have seen differs from that of 
1).
anreio)), not only in colouring, but in the more open shape of 
the lip.
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
The Botanical Record Club : pJianerogamic and cri/ptof/amic.
Report 
for the year 1883.
By the Referees and Editor.
Man- 
chester: printed by James Collins & Co. 1884.
8vo, 
pp.
1-76, 253-255.
Tms Report contains, like its predecessors, much that is 
interesting.
Now that the "voucher-specimens" of the Club 
have been transferred to the British Museum, and are thus easily 
available for reference, the semi-private nature of these reports has 
to a great extent been done away with, and the drawback to the 
general usefulness of the work of the Club has been removed.
The editor is, we believe, Mr. F.
A. Lees, although we find no 
statement to that effect in the report itself.
The preface contains 
a reasonable complaint that the new county records of preceding 
reports were not incorporated into the new edition of ' Topo- 
graphical Botany.' In some cases, however, the work referred to 
appears to have been carelessly consulted, as in the section 
headed "Record of species not considered worthy of comital 
enumeration in ' Topographical Botany," where, of the first six 
plants mentioned, the distribution of four is duly recorded in 
' Topographical Botany,' 
A large number of the more interesting " new county records " 
have already been published in this Journal.
The occurrence of 
Erica vayans in Bulmershe Park, Earley, Berks, " in which park 
are many planted conifers," should hardly appear under this 
heading.
The differences of opinion upon certain plants finds 
plentiful illustration : thus, in the Uaniinculus coxfercuidcs of 
Rescobie Loch (see Journ.
Bot. 1880, p.
344), Mr. Druce sees only 
" a depauperated form of II.
circi)i(itus.'' Mr. Baker contents 
124 NOTICES OF BOOKS.
himself by saying " not circinatiis," and Mr. Lees thinks it a 
" starved alpine state of trichophyllus.'" The Malvern Rose, found 
by Mr. Towndrow (see Journ.
Bot. 1883, 219), appears as " Rosa 
sempervircits L., var.
Melvinl Towndrow," without any description.
Mr. Baker "expects it is a strange stylosa form:" Mr. Lees "does 
not see the difficulty in regarding this as a long-leaved form of the 
Continental semper oirens," and " considers it a nurseryman's 
variety and a stray." We suspect some confusion in the various 
records given for Orchis incarnata.
The " new station " given for 
Dentaria will be found at page 185 of this Journal for 1882.
The circumstances of the addition of Mijosotis rupicola " to the 
flora of the field botanists' classic county " have already been 
given in our pages (Journ.
Bot. 1875, p.
26).
In connection with 
the recent discussion in this Journal as to the position of the 
Holyhead Senecio, it is interesting to note that a South Lincoln 
form of S.
campestn's is described as " tall, 18 inches to 2 feet high, 
lower leaves spathulate on longish stalks, upper spathulate- 
lanceolate, sessile, all cottony, most below, slightly decurrent, 
slightly branched above, with from 5 to 10 long peduncled heads." 
Mr. Lees has " not seen the early radical leaves, but in faces this 
comes very close to the Holyhead plant." If Mr. Lees is correct 
in believing that " the station whence the above variety was 
gathered was the very same as that in which the Rev. G.
S. 
Streatfeild first gathered the plant " in 1873, we do not see why it 
is included in the " New Locality List." Indeed we are strongly 
of opinion that a careful examination of this list would greatly 
diminish its extent.
As the name of Mr. W.
W. Reeves occurs 
among the " deaths," it may be desirable, as it is pleasant, to say 
that this statement is incorrect.
Sylloge Fungorum omnium hucasque cognitorum.
Digessit P.
A. 
Sagcardo.
Vol. iii.
Sphferopsides et Melanconieae.
Patavii, 
XV Decembris, 1884, sumptibus Auctoris typis Seminarii.
8vo, pp.
860.
We are glad to announce the issue of the third volume of this 
work, for although confessedly only a compilation, it is exceedingly 
useful for collecting together into one focus all the stray scintilla- 
tions of mycological genius in the direction of species -making, 
which have hitherto been too much diffused to enlighten anyone, 
save at the cost of great labour.
The present volume of 860 pages is devoted to the SpJueropsidece 
and MelanconiecB, including 4212 species, or at least so-called 
species.
The only drawback is that — of the majority at least — no 
sane mycologist believes them to be autonomous species.
In many 
cases whole genera are known to be only imperfect conditions of 
other Fungi ; hence we must be permitted to doubt whether it 
would not have been Aviser to have referred them to their proper 
species, and not have continued to perpetuate spurious genera or 
species, such as (.'gti.spora, and many others.
The present volume 
will greatly assist any future reformer, who, instead of dealing with 
names, will work at the things themselves, and transfer the im- 
NOTICES OF BOOKS.
125 
perfect forms to the species to which they belong.
We even venture 
to think that in some instances Prof.
Saccardo might have reduced 
bulk by reducing species, as, for instance, at page 108, where 
No. 260, Fhoma vLrvisibilis, and No. 264, Phovia mnumerahUu, are 
evidently the same species, growing on the same host, in the same 
locality, and differ only in name.
There is a bulky index of 43 pages, which, if accurate, is always 
a great boon, deserving of commendation.
Unfortunately, practice 
has proved that the Index to the previous portion of the work was 
not so accurate as it might have been, and even in this we fail to 
see the advantage of an alphabetical arrangement which places 
U, V, Y, K, X, W, and Z in sequence.
Not being well acquainted 
with the Italian alphabet, we cannot say if such a sequence is 
usually adopted.
At the risk of increasing the bulk we woul,d also 
have been glad to have found more synonyms in the Index, as we 
have sought in vain for something to correspond to Crehella andro- 
pogonis, described and figured by Berkeley many years ago.
Diplodia salicina Lev., though alluded to under No. 2009, has 
escaped us.
Spharopsis Mujipce Cke.
(Grevillea, x., 123) makes no 
sign in the Index, and Hendersonia ele(jans Berk, is not to be found 
either there or in the genus Stctf/anospura.
We would also be glad to learn what benefit accrues to botany 
by the pedantic alteration of the orthography of generic names, 
such as Cytospora for L'ytispora, Ncewospot-a for Nariiaspora, and 
Stecjanosporium for Stegonusporium , especially after having been in 
use for about half a century in their original form.
The total change of specific names is also made in some 
instances without apparent justification.
Under No. 2275 the 
original Diplodia Injaluspora C.
& E.
is changed to Diplodina ElUsii 
Sacc, and no cause is assigned, although lujalospora does not 
appear in the same genus.
On the other hand, by means of 
changed specific names in Asteroma, we get two (Nos. 6 and 56) 
that are identical in one genus.
Changes are also made in generic names, to which we take a 
strong objection.
Why is Tupospura, Fries Fl. Scan, 1835, set aside, 
and Mastoiiiyces, Mont.
1848, adopted ; although, by the way, jlJdsto- 
myces is omitted from the alphabetical index to the genera ?
Again, 
for what reason has T/iyrfu'diuni, Mont.
1836, been adopted, to the 
exclusion of Cheiruspura, Fries Syst.
Orb. Veg.
(1825) ?
Surely not 
for any petty personal reason, we hope, although under strong 
suspicion.
Already there is a genus Thyridiuin -'' in the second 
volume, and it is manifestly impolitic to employ two names which 
only differ in a single letter.
Why should an author with so fertile 
an imagination give us such genera as the following : — L'ytuspura, 
Cytospurina, L'ytosporeUa, and (Jytosporium ; as well as Thyridhivi, Thy' 
ridaria,QM(\.Thy)sidiuvi; or Calosplueria and Ccelospharia ; oi'Massaria, 
]\Jas!iaiiclla, Mtissaruia, and Massuriuvalsa ; or Cryptospharia, CryjAo- 
aphierclla, L'ryptospora, and C'ryptoapurella !
And in specific names 
in the same genus [PIuniKi), why have we (169) tamaricaria, (172) 
tumaricella, (173) tumaricina, and (174) Tamarisci ' 
* Thyridiuin is also a genus of Mosses.
126 NOTICES OF BOOKS.
In the "Laws of Botanical Nomenclature" the two following 
paragraphs are well deserving of notice: — "Avoid in the same 
genus names too similar in form — above all, those that only differ 
in their last letters" (p.
27).
"The essential point in nomenclature is to avoid or reject the 
use of forms or names that may create error or ambiguity, or throw 
confusion into Science.
Next in importance is the avoidance of 
any useless introduction of new names." And yet, without any 
assigned reason, the genus Schizothyrium Libert, is changed to the 
more recent Schizothurella Thum.
Another appeal to law gives us this caution : " To avoid taking 
up names that have already been used, but have not been approved, 
and applying them to genera different from the former" (p.
25).
It is undoubted that this has been done in the case of Aposplueria, 
Fuckiiia, and Cnjptostktis (called Cyptosticis in Index).
In the first 
instance the original type- species is excluded, in the second the 
name is already employed in Pyrenomycetes (see Grevillea, xii.
50), 
and in the last instance the external characters, which justified the 
name, are expunged, and half the original generic characters only 
accepted, under the same name as the whole, in order to avoid 
accepting another name, proposed in 1878, for the genus as now 
adopted.
"Perithecia elliptica, innata, cum rima oblongo-lineari 
dehiscentia ; disco carnoso, excavato" — this portion is excluded, 
and in place thereof the following is adopted : — " Perithecia 
erumpentia, globosa vel depressa, pertusa, subinde spuria." 
We contend, therefore, that the alteration is no more nor less than 
the construction of a 7ieiv genus, and applying the old name ; and 
that the name of Dochmolopha, proposed in 1878, has the precedence.
Nevertheless we are not prepared to contest so strongly the 
principles of classification adopted, as applied to the species 
included in this volume, as in those devoted to the Pyrenomycetes.
Some exceptions might be taken, without doubt on very plausible 
grounds, to certain of the genera which are made to include too 
much {Phoma, for instance), and others too little.
We observe that the Hyphomycetes are in progress, and it is 
hoped during next year to produce the first volume of the Hymeno- 
mycetes.
With 6100 Pyrenomycetes, 4212 Spharopsidccr and 
Melavconiecc, and the Discomycetes, the Hyphomycetes, the Hymen- 
omycetes, and the iEcidiomycetes and Schizomycetes still to come, 
we cannot fail to contemplate the total in prospect with dismay.
Perhaps after all this there may remain some work of reform to be 
accomplished.
The publication of the present work will at least 
prepare the way, and no mycologist can consider his library 
complete without it.
M. C.
C. 
New Books.
— F.
Hueppe, ' Die Methoden der Bakterien- 
forschung' (8vo, pp.
viii,, 174, tt.
2, Wiesbaden, Kriedel).
— W.
Gkohmann, ' Ueber die Einwirkung des zellenfreien Blutplasma ' 
8vo, pp.
32: Dorpat, Kriiger.
— C.
Mylixjs, 'Das Aniegen von 
Herbarien ' (8vo, pp.
vi., 108 : Stuttgart, Hoffman ).
— J.
Weisnek, 
' Ekmente der Anatomie und Physiologie der Pflanzen,' ed.
2 
ARTICLES IN JOURNALS.
127 
(8vo, pp.
X., 316, 125 cuts ; Wieu, Holder.) — A.
Gravis, 
Keclierclies Anatomiques sur les organes vegotatifs cle VUrtica 
dioica ' (Ato, pp.
x., 250, tt.
23: Bruxelles, Maiiceaux).
— F.
0. 
Bower & S.
H. Vines, ' A Course of practical instruction iii 
Botany ' (Part i., Phauerogamaj — Pteridophyta.
8vo, pp.
vii, 220: 
Macmillan, Os.).
— J.
Vesque, ' Traite de Botanique agricole et in- 
dustrielle ' (8vo, pp.
xvi., 976; 697 cuts; Paris, Bailliere).
— 
D. Cauvet, ' Cours ji,lemeiitaire de Botanique : i., Anatomic et 
Physiologic Vegetales ' (pp.
viii., 468; 404 cuts), ii., ' Les Families 
des Plantes' (pp.
468; 373 cuts) (8vo, Paris, Bailliere).
— H.
Correvon, ' Les Plantes des Alpes ' (8vo, pp.
264 : Geneve, Carey).
Articles in Journals.
American Naturalist.
— E.
L. Sturtevaut, ' Indian Corn and the 
Indian.' 
Bot. Centralhlatt (Nos. 9, 12).
— C.
Kraus, ' Ueber Blutung aus 
parenchymatischen Geweben.' — (Nos. 9-11).
T. Sterzel, ' Zur 
Culmtlora von Chemintz-Hainichen.' — (No. 10).
H. Bruchmann, 
'Das Prothallium von Lijcopodium.' — (No, 11).
M. M.
Hartog, 
' Organogenic Notes.' 
Botanical Gazette (Feb.).
— W.
G. Farlow, ' Notes on Fungi.' 
— M.
S. Bebb, ' Salix macrocarpa Nutt., not of Audersson.' — G.
Vasey, ' New Grasses ' [Bromiis Siiksdorjii, B.
Orcuttianus, Deyeuxia 
Cusickii, Deschampsia gracilis, spp.
nn.).
— (Mar.).
W. G.
Farlow, 
' The Synchytria of the United States ' [Synchytrium Holwayi, 
S. innominatum, spp.
nn.).
Botanisclie Jahrbiicher.
— F.
Buchenau, ' Die Juncaceen aus 
Indien ' (Jxmcus chrysocarpus, J.
leptospermus, J.
Clarkei, J.
bracteatus, J.
sphowstcmon, spp.
nn.
; 2 plates).
— E.
Hackel, 'Die 
auf der Expedition ' Gazelle ' von Dr. Naumann gesammelteu 
Gram in e en ' {Panicum tahnlatum, Chavuiraphis gracilis, Andropogon 
superciliatus, Anadelphia (gen.
nov.) virgata, Agrostis paucinodis, 
Chloris pallida, spp.
nn.).
— H.
Dingier, 'Der Aufbau des Wein- 
stockes' (1 plate).
— A.
Engler, 'Aracese Lehmanniante ' [Anthurium 
pidchellum, A.
popayanense, A.
cancamim, A.
carinatum, A.
trunca- 
tidum, A.
hygrophilum, A.
lactijiormn, A.
tolimense, A.
cupreum, 
A. sanguineuvi, A.
subtriangidare, A.
denudatum, Philodendron 
cuneatum, P.
Lehrnanni, P.montanum, Dieffenhachia daguensis, D.
Enderi, Caladium.
steudnericr/olinw, spp.
nn.).
— Id., Schinopsis 
BalanscB, sp.
n. (Paraguay, Balausa, 3188).
Bot. Zeitung (Feb. 27).
— J.
Eeinke, 'Die Zerstiirung von 
Chlorophyllosungcn durch das Licht uud eiue neue Methode zur 
Erzengung des Normalspectrums.' — (Mar. 6, 13).
H. Hoffmann, 
' Ueber Sexualitat.' — (Mar. 20).
M. Woronin, ' Notiz iiber die 
Structur der Blatter von Statice monopetcda L.' (1 plate).
Bull.
Bot. Sue.
P^rance (xxxii., pt.
i.).
— A.
Franchet, 'Plantes 
du Yun-nan recoltees par M.
I'Abbe Delavay ' [Anemone cidestina, 
lUotuiiculus yunnanensis, Guldenstaedtia Delavayi, Sa.vijraga Delavayi, 
Chrysosphnium yunnanense, C.
Delavayi, Morina P)elavayi, Cyanan- 
thus barhatua, tihodendron cepJtalaiitliuin, II.
campy lugynutii, Androsace 
128 ARTICLES IN JOURNALS.
strigillosa, Cypripedium plectrochilwn, Asplenhivi ytmnanense, Scolo- 
pendrmm Delavoi/i, Asjiidiiim acanthopJn/Ilwn, Polypodiuvi yiinnanense, 
F. ylancopsis, spp.
nn.).
— P- Van Tieglieni, ' Sur les canaux a 
gomme des Sterculiacees.' — E.
Prillieux, ' Sur les fruits de Stipa 
qui percent la peau des moutons russes.' — E.
Bornet, ' Algues de 
Madagascar recoltees par M.
Ch.Tliiebaut' {Cunstantinea?
Thiehauti, 
sp.
n.).
— K.
Zeiller, ' Sur les affinites du genre Laccopteris.'' — 
L. du Sablon, ' Sur le sporogone des Hepatiques et le role des 
elateres.' — G.
Rouy, ' Deuxieme note sur le Melica ciliata.' — J.
Poisson, ' Sur le genre nouveau Heniiecartia de la faniille des 
Monimiacees ' {H.
oviphalandra, sp.
unica), Paraguay, Balansa, 
2342).
— N.
Patouillard, ' FistiUaria hulhosa, sp.
n,' — J.
Vallot, 
* Plantes rares de Cauterets.' 
Gardeners'' Chronicle (Mar. 14, 21).
— Cattleya Laurenciana 
Echb.
f., sp.
n. (figs.
68 & 69).
— (Mar. 14).
C. T.
Druery, 
' Discovery of Aposnory in Ferns.' — Finns Tlmnhcrqii (fig.
63).
— 
J.W.H. Trail, A.^S.
Wilson, & W.
G. Smith, ' Sclerotioids of 
Potato Disease ' (fig.
64).— (Mar. 28).
Finns Coulteri (figs.
73, 74).
Journal of Mycoloyy (Feb.).
— J.
B. Ellis & B.
M. Everbart, 
' Enumeration of North American Cercospora;.'' — W.
Trelease, 
' Heteroecismal UredinecB.' 
Journal of Fioyal Microscopical Soc.
(Feb.).
— G.
F. Dowdeswell, 
' On the Occurrence of Variations in the Development of a Saccha- 
romyces.' 
Magyar Novenytani Lapok.
(Jan.).
— J.
Csato, ' The Flora of the 
Mluha Sea.' — (Feb.).
L. Simkovics, ' Erroneous notes in Koch's 
• Synopsis.' ' 
Midland Naturalist.
— M.
C. Cooke, • Life-history of a filiform 
Alga (CEdogonium.).' — J.
E. Bagnall, 'Flora of Warwickshire' 
[Gi'aminecB).
Nature (Feb. 19).
— M.
M. Hartog, ' On the Nature of Lichens.' 
— (Mar. 26).
M. T.
Masters, ' On Petalody of the Ovules, and 
other changes in a double flowered form of Dianella caridea.' 
(Esterr.
Bot. Zeitschrift.
— E.
v. Weltstein, Folyporns laccatiis, 
sp.
n. — W.
Voss, ' Bildungs abweichung au der Leucojnm vermun.' 
— V.
V. Borbas, ' Flora von Buccari.' — F.
Leithe, ' Kryptogamen- 
flora von Tirol.' — E.
Fick, ' Streifzuge in Eussland.' 
Fharwacentical Journal (Mar. 21).
— W.
T. T.
Dyer, 'Tea made 
fi'om Vaccinium Arctostaphylos.' 
Froc.
JAnnean Soc. N.
S. Wales (Nov. 29).
— E.
Havilaud, 
'Notes on Plants of Sydney' (Goodenia).
— W.
Woolls, 'The 
Myrtacea of Australia.' 
Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science.
— F.
0. Bower, * On 
the apex of the root in Osmunda and Todea' (2 plates).
— C.
B. 
Plowright, ' On the Life-History of certain British Heteroecismal 
Uredines ' (The Eanunculi Jllcidia, and Fuccinia Schoeleriana, 
sp.
n.).
Science-Gossip.
— G.
Holmes & E.
J. Elliott, ' Mosses and 
Hepaticse of Forest of Dean.' 
Talb .256.
R. .Mopgan litji .
We6t,NowIM«U3 ftCoTMip.
129 